SIX Centuries OF SELECT HYMNS AND SPIRITUAL SONGS Collected out of the Holy
Bible. TOGETHER With a Catechism, the Canticles, and a Catalogue of Virtuous
Women. By William Barton, A. M. late Minister of St. Martins in Leicester.

The Fourth Edition Corrected, with above a third part of Additions.

LONDON, Printed by J. Heptinstall, for William Cooper at the Pelican in Little
Britain. 1688.

TO The Right Honorable Sir Matthew Hale, Knight. Lord Chief Justice of England.
Right Honorable,
WHEN this Labor lay obstructed by the injuriousness of others, and partly by
my own inability, a word of your Lordship, in favor of this Work, did
instantly excite the Right Worshipful, the Mayor and Aldermen of Leicester,
and soon after some Honorable Personages and Worthy Gentlemen of our Town and
County to promote the Printing of this Book of Hymns: and had not fraud and
injury inevitably prevented, I had e're this presented this little Volume into
your Honorable Hands in humble Gratulation of your Lordship's Favors: hoping
also to leave it as a lasting monument of your attested Piety and the
Liberality of the Benefactors and of your Honorable Protection of,

My LORD, Your Honors Most obliged and humbly devoted Servant, William Barton.

THE Author's EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
BE pleased to understand that I was sent to and requested by Mr. Richard
Baxter to translate that famous Hymn, composed by St. Ambrose and St.
Augustine, called Te Deum, if I thought good, and so good I thought it,
(harping upon Scripture all along) that I did it in double Meter, both to the
Chapter-Hymns and to the Psalm-Hymns, and to the former I prefixed the Proofs,
as you may find in page 2, etc. and to render it as near as possibly I could to
the Prose-translation by variety of Metres, and the same correspondency I have
generally aimed at in all the work, the main design whereof is to propagate and
promote Godliness, without which the Notions and Contests of Knowledge are but
mere shadows, and (as the Apostle says of Genealogies) vain janglings; Now how
far Spiritual Songs and Psalmody tend to true Godliness, we may gather from the
Holy Scriptures, Col. 3.16. where the Apostle says, Let the word of Christ
dwell richly in you, in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing one another in
Psalms and Hymns and spiritual Songs, etc.

For in the use of such as these Christians may truly say, that they do teach
and admonish one another. For certainly the most pressing passages of Holy
Scriptures being put into smooth and familiar Verse, (keeping also the order,
and, as much as may be, the words of the Prose-translation) will fix good
Lessons in our mind and memory, so as to edify the understanding, and kindle
the affection, and do excellently instruct a Christian unto prayer and
Meditation, Ministering abundant hints and helps thereto: And is no innovation
or induction, but a renovation and reduction (rather) to Primitive use and
Order.

(And) how frequent, famous and familiar was the use of Hymns in the ancient
Churches is both attested by the Ancients themselves, and applauded by worthy
Writers of the later times. For the former see Justin Martyr in his 107th.
Answer to the Orthodox (here following) touching Songs used in the Church:
Tertullian in his Apology against the Gentiles, Chap. 2. and 39. Eusebius de
praeparatione Evangelica. lib. 12. cap. 14. where he says That by good right
and reason, Christians did train up their Children in Godliness, by the use of
Songs and Hymns. And in his Ecclesiastical History, Lib. 5. Cap. 25. of the
English Translation, page 94. lin. 1. we have these words: How many Psalms and
Hymns and Canticles were written from the beginning by faithful Christians,
which do celebrate the praise of Christ, etc.

And for the late Writers, the Reverend Bishop Davenant on Col. 3.16. says,
That it is apparent by ancient Writers, that the ancient Churches did use Hymns.

Comenius, in a little Book dedicated to his Majesty, says, that among the
Bohemian Brethren they had above 700 Hymns in use, besides the Psalms of David.
But if we do reckon the Hymns, Aliters, several Parts, and double Metres,
together with the Prefatory Hymns, now published, these do in all amount to the
number of 778.

Learned Dr. Hammond gives this Paraphrase upon Ephesians. 5.19. And let all your
Mirth and Jollity be expressed in several kinds of Hymns, etc. that are used
among Christians in a pious manner.

Aretius upon that excellent Scripture, 1 Timothy 1.15. This is a faithful
saying, etc. has these words, Sententia -- digna quae Scribatur aureis,
literis, ac public decantetur. i. e.
A Saying worthy of a GOLDEN PEN,
And to be sung in the Church by Christian Men.


Wherefore I shall plead no further at present, but only to present my honest
aim and purpose in these few Disticks following.

To fix choice Scriptures firmly in our mind,
And show us where we shall those Scriptures find:
To move the mind to meditate and pray,
And train up Children in a Godly way.
To plant the Doctrine of our Catechism,
And root up Errors, Heresy and Schism.
To purge profaneness, and create an Ocean
Of Love and Loyalty, and due Devotion.
This Third or New Century of Chapter-Hymns is composed (for the most part) of
Context Scriptures, seldom fetching in any other save for a Doxology, and
therefore one quotation at the beginning does commonly serve for all; yet I
dislike not the conjunction of parallel places but may say with holy Herbert,
This Verse, Notes That, And both do make a motion
Unto a third, that ten leafs off do lie:
Then as dispersed Herbs do make a Potion,
These there make up a Christian's Destiny.
And of the usefulness of these Hymns I may say again with him, A Verse may
find him who a Sermon flies,
And turn Delight into a Sacrifice.


Hymns were accounted Sacred and Divine, even among the ancient Heathen Poets,
who the Apostle, Titus, Chap. 1. Verse. 12. calls Prophets, witness that of
Hesiod in the beginning of his Book.

(...),
(...).
Come, famous Muses, which from Pierus spring,
Call God your Father while your Hymns you sing.
Of what account then should Hymns be among Christians? Hymns especially taken
out of the Holy Scriptures? Scripture-Hymns then may challenge the
pre-eminence, for St. Paul calls it the Sword of the Spirit, for it is the
Word of God; whereby we may gather that the Hymns used anciently were composed
out of the Sacred Scriptures, and certainly such as are thence aptly composed
and keep nearest to the original Text are the most spiritual and fittest to be
sung in God's worship.

But if any shall think it far inferior, for these ends, to the accustomed
Psalmody; I hope I have now, in the regulation of the Psalm-Hymns, given
further satisfaction; having retained none but such pressing parts and passages
as are generally suitable to the condition of all good Christians, and shall be
of easy apprehension for application: I shall say no more, but that if these
twenty short Hymns following, prefixed for Preface, (being supernumerary to the
Centuries, and consisting most-what of History and Crimination) be thought by
some not so suitable for Song, yet, for Apology-sake, I would have the
Judicious consider, that some Psalms consist of the same Subjects. The 104th.
Psalm (as learned Dr. Roberts says) is a Narrative of the first five days
Creation, and of Man (for whom all things were made) as is showed throughout
the Psalm. The 105th. and 106th. Psalms are Narrative, and Criminatory also, as
some other Psalms are, as Psalm 50. and Psalm 78. and many others: Neither are
such Psalms without great use for Edification; and Edification is a matter of
such importance, that the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 15.5.26. Let all things be done
to edifying: and, Greater is he that prophesies than he that speaks with
tongues, that the Church may receive edifying.

So that if these twenty following Hymns touching the Creation, etc. were but
frequently read, though not sung, it might (by imprinting in the memory)
conduce much to Edification, which is the design of the whole,

By Thy Servant, For Jesus sake, William Barton.
The Author has finished all that ever he intended both Hymns and Psalm-Book.
AN ADVERTISEMENT Concerning this Posthumous Edition OF THE HYMN-BOOK.
Courteous Reader,
BE pleased to understand that the Author of these Hymns, having a natural
Propensity to Divine Poesy, and being conversant in the Hebrew Tongue, took
great delight in the study and frequent Meditation of David's Psalms, which at
last did incline him to set upon a new Translation thereof into English Meter,
(finding withal that the ancient usage of our Speech in Sternhold and Hopkins
Translation was become obsoletely contemptuous to many people of this Age)
which pious and laborious undertaking he having happily effected caused it to
be published in the year of our Lord 1644. which Impression selling off
quickly, he set forth a second Edition in the year 1645. and it was again
reprinted An. 1654. in 12o. (besides the Piracies which some committed upon
him) afterward finding himself at leisure, in his Meditations upon several
parts of Sacred Scripture, he collected 100 Hymns and published them under the
Title of a Century of Select Hymns collected out of S. Scripture and Printed
Anno 1659. in 12o. and finding in a little time that this single Century was
very acceptable to the people, it did much encourage him to proceed, as he did
in collecting another Century of Chapter-Hymns (for so he called them to
distinguish them from the Psalm-Hymns which he afterward published) for after
he had finished his second Century of Chapter-Hymns, he took occasion to
overlook the multiplicity of Aliters which he had made in his Translation of
the Psalms, wherein he found that many of those which he had refused at first
were not inferior to those which he had published in his Psalm-Book, but were
far too many to insert in that Book, therefore not willing that any of his
Labors should be lost, he composed out of them two Centuries more of
Psalm-Hymns, which four Centuries unpollished and as yet not Methodized, to use
the Author's own words in his Epistle to the Reader before the Psalm-Hymns
Section 5. [Because these Centuries were formerly put forth Anno Dom. 1668
against my will by an imperfect Copy and in great disorder, I have put them
into a handsome method, passing by no Psalm of common use, but have in whole or
in part, inserted it, and have put the whole Psalms together in double Metres,]
and having reviewed the four Centuries which were surreptitiously printed
without the knowledge or consent of the Author, but after that he did then
methodize and polish them at his leisure to render them as near the Hebrew, and
yet as smooth and acceptable as was possible to mean Capacities, and in the
year 1670. he published the two Centuries of Chapter-Hymns; and in the year
1672. he set forth the two Centuries of Psalm-Hymns at his own proper cost and
charges, and all in order according to his own desire and design; but since
that time it pleasing God to prolong his days he collected a third Century more
out of the Chapters of the Old and New Testament, and another out of the
Psalms, which he completed, together with a Catechism, the Book of Canticles,
and a Catalogue of the Virtuous Women mentioned in Holy Writ, all in Meter,
with the last Additions and Corrections of the Author's own hand writing, and
his twenty Prefatory Hymns, besides his Replenishings with various Metres, as
also completing it with diverse excellent Aliters, with his last supervising,
and then declared to his Children, Relations and Friends that he had finished
all he designed, returning thanks to Almighty God that had spared him to finish
his Work, and hoped he should survive to see both his Psalm-book and Hymn-book
(so at large completed) to be printed, but within a short time after he
sickened, and upon the 14th day of May, 1678. it pleased God to call him out of
this life to his Heavenly Kingdom being aged about 74, or 75; and since his
death, his last Revise of the Psalm-book was printed Anno 1682. and Now this
present year 1688. is published the rest of his Works carefully preserved ever
since his death, viz. The Complete Hymn-Book in Six Centuries, besides Aliters,
double Metres and distinct Parts, which together with the Prefatory Hymns
amounts to the number of 778 Hymns, besides the Catechism, the Book of
Canticles, and a Catalogue of Virtuous Women enlarged, all in Meter, and
thoroughly corrected by his own hand a little before his Death. The Third
Century of Chapter-Hymns are wholly New, and the last Century that he made of
Psalm-Hymns (which though mixed for Method sake are distinguishable by the
Poetical Arguments) were never before printed: And though the Psalm-Hymns in
this Edition follow in order, yet you may not expect here a Psalm-Book; for
here is never a Hymn composed upon any of these 29 following Psalms; viz. the
5.10.13.17.18.22.26.27.28.35.38.40.56.57.58.59.60.64.71.75.76.78.88.94.109.116.118.140.143. for these you may see his Psalm-Book printed 1682. in 12o. which with this Hymn-Book makes up the Author's Divine Works complete.

I need say no more concerning this Posthumous Edition of the Hymn-Book, it
will sufficiently manifest its excellency in the perusal; but this only I do
assure the Reader that all the care imaginable has been taken that no Injustice
might be done to the Memory of the Worthy Author (through any considerable
Errata's) not only by the Circumspection of the Printer and Corrector but by
sending the Sheets of the whole Work to be Corrected by his Son, And

Your Servant in Christ Jesus, Edward Barton, Minister of Welford in
Northamptonshire.

Justin Martyr of the use and Excellency of Spiritual Songs in the Church. In
his 107. Answer to the Orthodox.
IT moves the mind and makes affections strong
To that which is so taking in the SONG.
The fleshly motions are by it suppressed,
And vicious thoughts which foes unseen suggest.
The mind it moistens (as a fruitful field)
Abundance of divine good things to yield.
It makes Religious men (such power it brings)
Champions for patience in all adverse things.
It cures the Godly man of worldly cares.
It is the Spirits Sword, as Paul declares.
Which acts and arms a Christian Soldier so
That he may grapple with his ghostly foe;
For it is the word of God, which while revolved
And sung aloud, the Devils are dissolved
And driven away: yea, it has power so great
The mind to perfect, and to make complete
With Christian virtues, whiles (in sacred throngs)
The Saints set on with these spiritual Songs.
ERRATA.
PAge 214. Line 10. for stock read flock. p. 244. l. 20. for mensounder r.
each founder.) p. 246. l. 9. for breaks r. baketh. p. 300. l. 1. for known r.
know. p. 423. l. 4. for blessed r. blasted. p. 428. l. 13. after right add
hand. p. 447. for Psalm 23. r. Psalm 50.14, 15, 23. (1. M.) p. 477. l. 11. for
fruit r. bruit. p. 500. l. 10. for the r. thy. p. 583. l. 11. for he r. be. p.
627. l. 13. after and add that. p. 637. l. 26. after grieved add because.

TWENTY Prefatory Hymns.
HYMN 1. Creation.
First Day.
All People, etc.
Genesis 1.1.
IN the beginning is set forth
How God created Heaven and Earth
Earth did lie void, and darkness keep
Upon the face of all the Deep.
Then said the Lord of sovereign might
Let there be light, and there was light:
And God saw light, a glorious spark,
And God divided light from dark.
And for the light, he called it day,
And darkness night, thus named were they,
Evening and Morning set and rose,
And these the First Day did compose.
Rev. 4.11.
Lord thou art worthy of the Crown
Of Glory, Honor, and Renown;
For Thou, O Lord, did all things make,
And made they were for thy Will sake.
2. PART. Second Day.
v. 6, 7.
A Firmament did God provide,
Waters from Waters to divide:
The Firmament which God had framed
He called Heaven, and so 'twas named.
And let, said God, the Firmament
Divide the Watery Element:
Waters above from these below
Let be distinct, and it was so.
Evening and Morning set and rose
And did the Second Day compose:
Let Israel's God be praised therefore
From first to last for evermore.
3. PART. Third Day.
v. 9.
And this Command from God was given
Touching the Waters under Heaven,
That all should gather to a place,
And the dry Land should show her face.
v. 10.
And God did call the dry Land Earth,
The Waters Seas, which he set forth:
And God beheld that heaped Flood,
And saw that it was very good.
Then was the Earth of God enjoined
To bring forth Herbs of every kind,
The Grass and Trees to yield their Fruit,
And Seed which in it self had Root.
And God commanded all to grow
Upon the Earth, and it was so;
Evening and Morning set and rose,
And these the Third Day did compose.
Let Israel's God be praised therefore
From first to last for evermore;
And let all faithful people then
Say cheerfully, Amen, Amen.
4. PART. Fourth Day.
v. 14, 15.
And, said the Lord, let there be lights
Distinguishing the Days and Nights:
And let them shine within the Spheres
For signs, for seasons, days and years.
And God made two for greater light
The Son for Day, the Moon for Night:
All sorts of Stars he made beside,
The light from darkness to divide.
And God beheld that all was good
Which he had made, and so it stood*
Evening and Morning set and rose
And these the Fourth Day did compose.
Let Israel's God be praised therefore
From first to last for evermore:
And blessed be the King of Kings
Who does alone such wondrous things.
5. PART. Fifth Day.
v. 20.
And God did give the Waters charge
To bring forth moving things at large;
The living Creatures, Works most rare,
And Fowl to fly 'ith open air.
And God created mighty Whales,
And living Creatures that had Scales,
And winged Fowl of every kind,
And all was good, and to his mind.
And then God blessed them and said
A great increase by you be made,
Let Fishes fill the Sea, so wide;
And Fowl on Earth be multiplied.
Evening and Morning set and rose
And these the Fifth day did compose:
Let Israel's God be praised therefore
From first to last for evermore.
6. PART. Sixth Day.
v. 24.
And God enjoined the Earth to bring
And to produce each kind of thing,
Cattle and creeping things, and Beasts
Each in his kind to make increase.
Then said the Lord, now let us make
Man in his kind for our own sake:
And let us make and form him, thus,
In our own Image like to us.
And let them have Dominion over
The Fish, the Fowl, the Sea, the Shore:
And every Creature that is found
To swim in Sea, or go on Ground.
So God made Man's original Stem
Both Male and Female made he them:
And, blessing them, said God most high
Be fruitful now, and multiply:
And fill the Earth, and it subdue,
I give the Lordship all to you:
And ye shall rule as Sovereign king
Over Fish and Fowl and every thing.
And lo! said God, I give you meat,
The Herbs, and Fruits of Trees to eat;
To Birds and Beasts the Herbs that grow,
I give for food, and it was so.
And God beheld how all things stood
And all he made was very good.
Evening and Morning set and rose
And these the Sixth Day did compose.
Lord thou art worthy of the Crown
Of Glory, Honor and Renown,
For thou, O Lord, did all things make
For thine own will and pleasure sake.
HYMN 2. The Sabbath.
Our Father, etc.
Genesis 2.1.
THUS Heaven and Earth were set in place
With all their Hosts in six days space;
The Seventh Day the Lord did rest
Which day he sanctified and blessed
Because thereon the Lord had stayed
From all the Work which he had made.
Heb. 11.3.
And thus by faith we understand
The Worlds were made by God's command,
So that the things which now we see
Were not composed of things that be;
Something of nothing God did call,
And of that something God made all.
Thus also we are put in mind
That there is a Rest remains behind,
An Everlasting Heavenly Rest
Whereof God's people are possessed,
And we that do believe in him,
At the hour of death shall enter in.
Let Israel's God be praised therefore
From first to last for evermore:
And let the People all proclaim
The praises of his holy Name,
And all of us with one accord
Say here Amen, praise ye the Lord.
HYMN 3. Marriage.
Our Father, etc.
Gen 2.7.18, 21. etc.
AND God the Lord did man compound
Of Dust he gathered off the Ground,
Breathed in his breast a lively flame,
So man a living Soul-became:
Yet it is not good, said the Holy One,
Not good that man should be alone.
Now will I make a helper meet
For him, as his companion sweet;
Then God made Adam fall asleep:
And so he slept a sleep full deep:
Then took the Lord a Rib most fit,
And closed up flesh instead of it.
And of that Rib a Woman made
And brought her to the man, who said
Bone of my bone is this to me,
And flesh of mine own flesh is she:
Woman she shall be called, because
Took out of Man, himself she was.
Therefore a man shall leave behind
Father and Mother never so kind,
And cleave unto his Wife alone,
And they shall be one flesh and bone:
And both were naked fairly framed*
Man and his Wife, and not ashamed.
Psalm. 106. ult. Psalm. 67.3.
Let Israel's God be praised therefore
From first to last for evermore,
And let the people all proclaim,
The praises of his holy Name;
And let us all with one accord
Say here Amen: praise ye the Lord.
HYMN 4. Paradise.
All People, etc.
Genesis 3.8.
AND God did plant his Garden trees
Eastward in Eden full of these:
All that was pleasant to the sight,
And good for food or for delight.
And into Eden thus adorned
He brought the man whom he had formed;
And made all Paradise his seat
To dress it and to keep it neat.
The tree of Life, of greatest price,
Was in the midst of Paradise.
And there the Tree of Knowledge stood,
Knowledge of evil and of good.
And God did bring each Bird and Beast
(Even from the greatest to the least)
For Man to name, and by his Word
Was named every Beast and Bird.
Let Israel's God be praised therefore
From first to last for evermore:
And let all sorts of people then,
Say cheerfully Amen, Amen.
HYMN 5. The Covenant of Works.
All People, etc.
Genesis 2.16.
AND God the Lord did give command
To Adam, saying, understand
Of every tree this ground does bear
Thou may eat freely any where.
But of the tree of Knowledge (still)
Knowledge, I say, of Good and Ill,
To eat thereof be not enticed,
For if thou eat thereof thou dy'st.
This tree, I say, which I so call
Thou shall not eat of it at all:
For in the Day that thou shall try
To eat thereof, thou sure shall die.
All Glory to the Holy One
That sits upon the Sovereign Throne,
And to the Son and Holy Ghost
Be Glory to the uttermost.
HYMN 6. Man's shameful Fall.
Our Father, etc.
Genesis 3.1.
BUT now the Serpent was more deep
Than any Beast the field did keep,
Subtler than all that God had made,
And to the Woman thus he said
Yea, has God said ye shall not eat
Of all the Garden-trees for meat?
Fear not, ye shall not surely die,
For God does know assuredly
That when ye both thereof have eat,
Your eyes it shall illuminate;
And ye as glorious Gods shall be,
Knowing both good and ill, as he.
And when the Woman (having viewed)
Saw that the tree was good for food,
And very pleasant to the eyes,
And to be wished to make one wise,
She took the fruit thereof and ate,
And of it did communicate.
She gave her Husband of the meat,
And he did also take and eat:
Then were the eyes of both awaked,
And saw that they were wholly naked;
And then they sewed fig leaves together
Aprons to hide their shame however.
Then hear the voice of God did they
There walking in the cool of day:
And in the Garden (got aside)
They sought where they might closely hide,
Thinking from him, that all things sees,
To hide themselves among the trees.
HYMN VII. Adam's Arraignment and Excuse.
Our Father, etc.
Genesis 3.9.11.
THEN God called Adam, And, said he,
Adam where art thou? answer me.
I heard thy voice then Adam said*
In The Garden and I was afraid,
And hid my self because that I
Was naked thus opprobriously.
v. 11.
Then said the Lord, how did thou know
That thou wast naked? Who told thee so?
What! have thou eaten of the tree
Which flatly was forbidden thee?
Whereof with penalty so great
I charged thee that thou should not eat?
The Woman, Lord, then said the man*
Thou gav'st for my Companion,
She gave me of it; it was she
That offered that unhappy tree;
She gave to me of that dear meat,
And I unwittingly did eat.
HYMN 8. Eve's Arraignment and Excuse.
Genesis 3.13. 1 Timothy 2.14. Romans 5.12.
THEN to the Woman, who was first
In the Transgression most accursed,
Thus said the Lord, what thing is this
That thou have done so much amiss?
For thou have done, as thou shall find,
To the Destruction of Mankind.
Then said the Woman, that foul fiend,
The Serpent, whom I thought my friend,
The Subtle Serpent, it was he
That cousned and beguiled me;
And I, beguiled by his deceit,
Was so unhappy as to eat.
HYMN 9. The Serpent's Censure, and the Covenant of Grace intimated to his
Sorrow.
Gen 3.14, 15.
THEN to the Serpent, said the Lord,
Since thou have done this thing abhorred,
Above all beasts to thee be woe;
Upon thy belly shall thou go,
And Dust to thy extreme disgrace,
Shall be thy food all thy life space.
Between thee and the Womankind
I will put enmity of mind:
Also between thy seed and hers
There shall be everlasting Wars:
To bruise thy head, as thou shall feel,
And thou shall also bruise his heel.
HYMN 10. The Woman's Censure and the Man's.
Genesis 3.16, 17, 18, 19.
AND to the Woman God said thus,
Thy sorrows shall be numerous,
And also thy conceptions;
In sorrow shall thou bring forth Sons,
Thy mind shall to thy husband be,
And he shall Lord it over thee.
17.
And unto Adam thus he said,
Because that thou have disobeyed,
Harkening to what thy Wife did say,
And her suggestion did obey,
And so have eaten of the tree
Which flatly was forbidden thee:
The ground is cursed for thy sake,
With grief, thereof thou shall partake;
In sorrow thou shall eat thy bread
As long as thou on Earth do tread:
Thistles and thorns to thee 't shall yield,
And thou shall eat the herb of the field.
With sad and sweaty face shall thou
Eat careful bread, got by the plow,
Till thou return unto the Earth
Whence also thou wast taken forth:
For by Creation, Dust thou wast,
And shall return to Dust at last.
HYMN 11. Adam's Expulsion from Paradise.
Genesis 3.21, to ult.
AND unto Adam and his Wife
(Now in a mortal state of life)
Did God the Lord make coats of skin
To cloth their naked bodies in:
Then said the Lord Almighty, thus,
The Man's become as one of us.
Behold, said God his deeper skill
How well he knows both good and ill!
And now lest he put forth his hand
To the tree of life, and think to stand,
And eat thereof and never die
(As he may think presumptuously)
Therefore the Lord deprived him quite
Of that sweet garden of delight:
And to confute his fond device,
He put him out of Paradise;
And sent him forth, with open shame,
To till the ground from whence he came:
So God drove out the man, disgraced,
And at the East of Eden placed
The Cherubins with flaming sword
On every side that turned and stirred,
To keep the way from all access
To the tree of Life and Blessedness.
Romans 5.12.
And thus by one man entered sin
Into the World; so Death came in:
And Death has passed over all,
Since all have sinned by the fall;
And as from Adam, all along,
Death reigned over old and young.
Romans 5.18.
So by one man's obedience
Are many cleared from offense;
That as sin reigned to Death and pain,
So grace to righteousness might reign:
Through Jesus Christ our only Lord,
Wherefore praise him with one accord.
HYMN 12. The World degenerate.
To the tune of the Ten Commandments: Or, All People, etc.
Genesis 6.1.
IT came to pass when men began
to multiply upon the Earth,
And Daughters born to many a man
were fair and beauteous from their birth;
That then the Sons of godly seed
did see the Daughters sprung from those
That practiced many a wicked Deed,
and took them Wives of all they chose.
Then said the Lord, my spirit no more
shall strive with man that is but flesh;
Yet shall his years be twice threescore
to wait repentance and redress.
And God did see Man's works were naught,
and full of foul Iniquity:
Each motion of his heart and thought
was only ill continually.
And God repented, for his part,
for making man upon the ground:
And lo: it grieved him at his heart
that man so monstrous should be found.
I will destroy (the Lord then said)
both man and beast and creeping thing,
And fowl, and all that I have made,
for I repent their fashioning.
HYMN 13. The Ark Ordered.
Genesis 6.8.
BUT Noah with the Lord found grace,
(a perfect man without offense)
While all the Earth before his face,
was filled with fraud and violence.
And unto Noah God said thus
make thee an Ark of Gopher Wood,
For the Earth is most flagitious
and I will drown it with a flood.
But thou into the Ark shall come
thou and thy Wife, thy Sons their Wives:
Two of each sort of Creatures dumb
thou shall bring in to save their lives.
Of clean ones thou shall take thee seven,
and likewise food for them and thee:
Both beasts and fowl from under heaven,
both male and female shall they be.
Heb. 11.7.
Thus faithful Noah, moved with fear
prepared an Ark (as Scripture says)
To save his House, and proved an heir
of righteousness which is by faith.
To God the Father and the Son
and to the Holy Ghost therefore,
Be Glory done as first begun,
is now, and shall be evermore.
HYMN 14. The Flood rising.
IN the six hundredth year it was
of Noah's life; the seventeenth Day,
And second Month, it came to pass
that Noah's Flood swept all away.
Then all the Fountains of the Deep
were broken up beneath the Sky:
And Windows in the Clouds that keep,
were opened universally.
The Rain unmeasurably fell
full forty Days and forty Nights:
The Waters did prevail and swell
unto the most excessive heights.
The Ark was born above the Earth
no less than fifteen cubits high:
And all the Hills which now stand forth,
did underneath the Waters lie.
And all that moved upon the Ground,
all Fowl and Beasts (name what you can)
And every living thing was drowned,
whatever breathed; and every man.
HYMN 15. Eight Souls saved in the Ark.
1 Pet. 3.20.
ONLY was Noah saved alive,
and those few souls that did imbark,
With Noah (whiles the Flood let drive)
and were preserved in the Ark.
All were destroyed, save such as sailed
in Noah's Ark, which escaped however;
And still the Watery Floods prevailed,
for almost half a year together.
Let Israel's God be praised therefore,
a God of Judgment, sure is he:
And let the whole Earth evermore
give praise to him: Amen say we.
HYMN 16. The Flood falling.
AND God remembered Noah then,
and every living thing with him;
The Cattle also, and the Men,
that to the Ark were entered in.
And God did make a drying Wind
pass over the Earth where floods had raged,
Which for that purpose was designed,
and so the Waters were asswag'd.
The Fountains also of the Deep
and Heavens Windows, whence it rained,
Were stopped, and made all close to keep,
and Rain from Heaven was restrained.
And waters from the Earth always
were going off: to leave it dry,
And in an hundred fifty days
they were abated wondrously.
And in the seventh Month that Year
and on the seventeenth Day of that,
The Ark did rest and plain appear
upon the Hills of ARARAT.
And still the waters did decay
until the tenth Month did ensue;
And in that Month on its first Day,
the tops of mountains were in view.
HYMN 17. The Raven and Dove sent out.
Then Noah sent a Raven out
which went and passed to and fro,
Until the waters all about
were dried from the Earth below.
Then also sent he forth a Dove
to see if waters did abate,
From off the Earth and all above,
but they were still at too much height.
And the poor Dove could find no place
whereon her weary foot might stand,
So she returned to the Ark apace,
and he received her with his hand.
Let Israel's God be praised therefore,
and with his glory Earth be filled
And let the People evermore,
to him all praise and glory yield.
HYMN 18. The Dove with the Olive leaf.
Gen 8.
AND seven Days more did Noah stay,
then sends the Dove from the Ark again,
Thereby to make a fresh assay
how clear the Earth was of the rain.
And in the Evening comes she,
brings in her mouth (good news to tell)
An Olive-leaf plukt off the tree;
so Noah knew the waters fell.
Then staid he yet seven other Days,
and freshly sends the Dove ashore;
And, finding place, the Dove there stays,
and came not at him any more.
Then Noah did remove strait way
the covering of the Ark, to spy,
And lo! that Year, first Month and Day,
the face of all the Earth was dry.
Let Israel's God, the King of Kings,
be ever blessed and praised then,
Whose mercies are above all things;
and let all people say Amen.
HYMN 19. The Covenant signed by the Rainbow.
Genesis 8.15, etc. Chap. 9.11, etc.
God spoke to Noah then, and said,
Thy house and harbor now resign,
And let the Creatures be conveyed
Out of the Ark with thee and thine.
And let them breed abundantly
In all the Earth, and fruitful be,
And ye shall greatly multiply,
And I will covenant with thee.
And I will make my Covenant sure,
And there shall never more be flood,
To drown the Earth while Days endure;
For I will make my Covenant good.
And when I bring a Cloud on Earth,
Therein there shall be seen my Bow*
And that shall set my Covenant forth,
And I will look upon it so.
That I may call to mind, afresh,
The Everlasting Covenant made
Between the Lord and mortal flesh
In all the Earth, as I have said.
O let the God of Israel
Be praised and magnified therefore,
And people all on Earth that dwell
Give thanks to him for evermore.
HYMN 20. Noah's Sacrifice.
The Mighty God, etc.
Genesis 8.20.
AND Noah built an Altar to the Lord
And of clean beasts and fowl he offered two:
And with these Offerings was Gods Altar stored,
And God well pleased that Noah so should do;
And so the Lord resented a sweet savor,
And Noah for this Act was in his favor.
And thus said God, whose bowels yern'd within
I will no more for man's sake curse the ground,
For man's imaginations are but sin,
And such by Nature from his youth are found:
Neither will I for ever any more,
Smite all things living, as I did before.
And while the Earth and Mountains shall remain
Seeds-time and Harvest ever shall abide:
And cold and heat shall never fail again;
Summer and winter shall retain their tide;
And Day and Night (increasing or decreasing)
Shall keep their seasons without fail or ceasing.
Genesis 9.12.
And this shall be the Covenant which I make,
And this the Seal betwixt my self and you
And every living Creature, for your sake,
And all the Generations that ensue:
I Will set my Bow in the Cloud, to be a token
Between me and the Earth, as I have spoken
Doxology.
Rev. 1.4, 5. Chap. 4.8. 1 John 5.7.
To him that was and is, and is to come,
To God Almighty the most Holy One,
And unto Jesus Christ his only Son,
And to the seven Spirits before the Throne,
To Father, Son and Holy Ghost together,
Be Kingdom, Glory, Power and Praise for ever.
The Table of the Prefatory Hymns.
Hymn 1. CReation. The First Day. i. The Second Day. ii. The Third Day. Ibid.
The Fourth Day. iii. The Fifth Day. iv. The Sixth Day. Ibid.
2. The Sabbath. vi. 3. Marriage. vii. 4. Paradise. viii. 5. The Covenant of
Works. ix. 6. Man's shameful Fall. Ibid. 7. Adam's Arraignment and Excuse. xi.
8. Eve's Arraignment and Excuse Ibid. 9. The Serpents Censure, and the Covenant
in Christ intimated. xii. 10. The Woman's Censure and the Man's. Ibid. 11. Man's
Expulsion from Paradise. xiii. 12. The World degenerate. xv. 13. The Ark
ordered. xvi. 14. The Deluge, or Flood rising. xvii. 15. Eight Souls saved in
the Ark. Ibid. 16. The Deluge ceasing. xviii. 17. The Raven sent forth and the
Dove. xix. 18. The Dove with the Olive-leaf. xx. 19. Noah Coming out of the
Ark, and the Covenant of the Rainbow. Ibid. 20. Noah's Sacrifice. xxii.
The First Century.
Hymn I. Access to the Throne of Grace at our awaking.
1 Timothy 4.10. 2 Cor. 1.10. Psalm. 119.133. Jude 21. Psalm. 73.24. Rev. 22.8.
Tune. Ye Children, etc.
O God the Savior of all men,
And most especially of them
That faithfully believe in thee.
Who have preserved us all times past,
And wilt preserve us to the last
As still our trust and hope shall be.
Order our steps in thy good word,
And let no sin reign in us, Lord,
But keep us ever in thy love;
And let thy Counsels be our guide
Till thou receiv'st us to abide
In glory with thy Saints above.
Psalm. 28.9.115. 1. Mat. 6.13. Psalm. 123.3.33.22.31.1.
Lord, save thy Church in every Age,
Govern and bless thine Heritage,
And lift them up for evermore.
We daily magnify thy fame,
And thy most high and holy Name
World without end we still adore.
Vouchsafe us, Lord, thy grace herein
To keep us clear this day from sin,
Show mercy, Lord, show mercy free:
Show mercy, Lord, as we confide
On thee, O Lord, have I reli'd,
Confounded let me never be.
The second Meter. The Mighty God.
O God the Savior of all sorts of men,
Especially of them that do believe;
Author and finisher of the faith of them
Whose sure salvation, Lo^d, thou will atchieve.
Who have preserved us always heretofore
And wilt, we trust, preserve us evermore.
Order our steps in thy good word, O God,
And let no wickedness in us bear sway;
But Sin and Satan let be under-trod,
And all our steps upholden in thy way:
And let thy Counsels guide and never leave us,
Till to thy glory, Lord, thou shall receive us.
Hymn II. Acclamations of Praise, or Te Deum Laudamus. Exemplifi'd with proofs
of Holy Scripture.
Romans 15.6. Rev. 11.17.
All people, etc.
WE praise thee, O God, with one accord,
We acknowledge thee to be the Lord,
All the whole Earth adores thy Name,
Father of everlasting fame.
Rev. 7.11.5.11. Isa. 6.2.
To Thee aloud all Angels cry,
The Heavens and all the Powers on high,
Both Cherubin and Seraphin bright
Continual cries of praise recite.
Isa. 6.3. Rev. 5.11.4.8.
O Holy, Holy, Holy LORD,
Great God of Sabbath (they record)
With splendour of thy glory spread
In Heaven and Earth replenished.
2. Part.
Rev. 4.10.
The Apostles glorious Company
Praise Thee, O God, perpetually,
The Prophets goodly fellowship
Praise Thee, and let no moment slip.
Rev. 7.7, 9, 10.
The noble and victorious Host
Of Martyrs do thy praises boast,
The Holy Church throughout the Earth
Acknowledge and extol thy Worth.
Isa. 9.6. Joh. 14.36.
The Father of boundless Majesty,
Thy true and only Son most high,
Also that sweet Remembrancer
The Holy Ghost the Comforter.
3. Part.
Psalm. 34.10.2.7.
Thou art, O Christ, King of renown
Invested with a Glorious Crown.
Thou art (before all time begun)
The Fathers everlasting Son.
1 Pet. 3.18. Gal. 4.4. Heb. 9.15.
Thou undertaking in our room
Did not abhor the Virgins Womb.
The pains of Death overcome by Thee
Made Heaven to all Believers free.
Heb. 1.3. John 5.22.
At God's right hand Thou have thy Seat,
And in the Fathers glory great.
We do believe that Thou shall come
To judge us at the Day of Doom.
4. Part.
Rev. 5.9. Mat. 8.11.
Lord, help thy Servants whom (when lost)
Thy blood redeemed at so great cost.
Place them on Everlasting Thrones
Of glory with thy Holy Ones.
Psalm. 28.9.
Thy People, Lord, do Thou protect,
And bless thine Heritage Elect,
Govern thy Church, and, Lord, advance
For ever thine Inheritance.
Psalm. 145.1, 2.
From day to day, O Lord, do We
Highly exalt and honor Thee:
Thy Name we worship and adore
World without end for evermore.
5. Part.
Mat. 6.13. Psalm. 123.3.
Vouchsafe, O Lord, we humbly pray,
To keep us safe from sin this day:
O Lord, have mercy on us all,
Have mercy on us when we call.
Psalm 33.22 31.1.
Thy mercy Lord to us dispense
According to our confidence:
Lord, I have put my trust in Thee,
Confounded let me never be.
The second Meter.
Romans 15.6. Rev. 11.17.7.11.
Ye Children, etc.
O God we praise thy Holy Name,
Thy Sovereign Lordship we proclaim,
Confessing Thee the Lord alone;
All the whole Earth does worship Thee
The Father from ETERNITY,
The true and Everlasting One.
Angels loud voices join with ours,
The Heavens and all the Heavenly Powers,
do ever magnify thy fame;
To thee the winged Cherubim
And the bright burn^ng Seraphim,
Continual acclamations frame.
2. Part.
Isa. 6.3. Rev. 5.11.4.10.7.7.
Thrice Holy Lord, they jointly say,
Whose royal Power all Hosts obey,
thy glory bright fills Heaven and Earth:
The Apostles glorious Company,
And Prophets sweet SOCIETY,
perpetual praises do pour forth.
The Noble Host of Martyrs stout,
The Holy Church the World throughout,
thy power profess, thy praise prefer,
The Father of endless Majesty,
Thine only Son most true, most high,
with the Holy Ghost the Comforter.
3. Part.
Psalm. 24.10.2.7. Gal. 4.4. Heb. 9.15.
Thou art the King of glory, O Christ,
The King of glory in the highest,
the Fathers everlasting Son.
Thou freely did our flesh assume,
And not abhor the Virgins Womb,
for Man's redemption to be done.
When thou had overcome the pains
Of sharpest death which sadly reigns
over all mankind because of sin;
Thou did set open (in thy Love)
The Kingdom (there) of Heaven above,
that all Believers might come in.
4. Part.
Heb. 1.3. Joh. 5.22. Mat. 8.11.19.28.
O Savior Christ, Thou art set down
At God's right hand, in high renown,
and in thy Fathers glory bright;
We do believe it, Lord, of thee,
That thou shall come our judge to be,
who have the sole and Sovereign right.
We humbly pray Thee, Lord, therefore,
Assist thy servants evermore,
those whom thy precious blood did buy:
Make them be numbered on the Thrones
Of glory, with the Holy Ones,
in Everlasting dignity.
5. Part.
Psalm. 28.9.115.1. Mat. 6.13. Psalm. 123.3.33.22.31.1.
Thy people, Lord, thine heritage,
Preserve and bless from age to age,
govern and lift them up for ever.
We daily magnify thy Name,
We worship and adore the same
World without end, surceasing never.
Thy grace and favor Lord give in,
To keep us safe this day from sin:
Show mercy, Lord, show mercy free,
Show mercy, Lord, as we confide,
On thee, O Lord, have I relied,
confounded let me never be.
The third Meter.
To the Common-Tune.
WE praise thee, God, we acknowledge thee
the only Lord to be:
O Father, the Eternal One!
the whole Earth worships Thee.
To thee all Angels cry aloud,
the Heavens and all therein:
Continually to thee do cry
Cherube and Seraphin.
O Holy, Holy, Holy Lord,
the Lord the God of Hosts:
In Heaven and Earth thy praise is spread,
throughout the Sky and Coasts.
The Apostles glorious Company,
and Prophets goodly train:
And Noble Host of Martyrs blessed
thy praises do proclaim.
The Holy Church confesses Thee
throughout the spacious Earth:
The Father of a Majesty
that cannot be set forth.
Also thine Honorable true,
thy dear and only Son:
And Holy Ghost the Comforter
of every faithful one.
Of glory thou, O Christ, art King,
(that Title is thy due:)
Thou art the Everlasting Son
Of God the Father true.
When sinful man's deliverance
was that thou came for:
To be enclosed in Virgins Womb,
Thou did not abhor.
The sharp and cruel pains of death
when thou had conquered whole:
Thou did set open Heavens gate
to every faithful soul.
Thou in thy Fathers glory great
at God's right hand do sit:
We trust that thou shall come to be
our Judge, to set us quit.
Help then thy servants whom Thou have
bought with thy precious blood:
In endless glory reckon them
among thy Saints so good.
Do thou, O Lord, thy people save,
bless thine inheritance:
Govern them, Lord, by thy good grace,
and ever them advance.
We magnify thee day by day,
thy Name we do adore:
World without end continually,
vouchsafe thy grace therefore.
And keep us, Lord, this day from sin
lest we offend and fall:
Have mercy on us, O good Lord,
have mercy on us all.
Lord, let thy mercy light on us
as we do trust in thee:
In thee I trust, Lord, let me not
confounded ever be.
Fourth Meter.
To the Tune of the 50th. Psalm. The mighty God, etc.
WE give thee praise,
O God, with one accord,
We all acknowledge
thee to be the Lord:
All the whole Earth
adores thee, O most high,
The blessed Father
from Eternity.
Angels loud Voices
join their praise with ours,
The Heavens on high,
and all the Heavenly Powers.
Both Cherubin
and Seraphin so bright.
Continual cries
of praise to thee recite:
O Holy, Holy,
Holy Lord, they say,
Lord God of Sabbath,
whom all Hosts obey,
Both Heaven and Earth
are filled every where
With thy Majestic
glory shining there.
The blessed Apostles
glorious Company
Do praise thy Holy
Name harmoniously:
The Prophets goodly
fellowship proclaim
The constant praises
of thy glorious Name:
The Noble Hosts
of Martyrs also bless thee,
The Holy Church
through all the Earth confess thee.
The Father of
a Majesty unknown,
Thine Honorable
true and only Son:
Also the Holy
Ghost they do confess
The Comforter
of thine in their distress.
The King of Glory
thou, O Christ, art Crowned,
The Fathers everlasting
Son renowned.
When thou took'st on
thee (what none other can)
Namely to work
deliverance for man:
The Virgins Womb
thou did not abhor
To enter on
the Work thou came for.
When thou had quelled
the pains of death so grievous,
Thou openedst Heaven
gate to all Believers.
At God's right hand
thou have thy seat on high,
And in the Fathers
glorious dignity:
We do believe
that thou shall have the Throne,
And (one day) come
to judge us every one.
O therefore help
thy servants so esteemed,
That them (when lost)
thy precious blood redeemed.
O make them to
be numbered with thy Saints
In endless Glory,
where no fullness wants:
Lord, save thy people,
bless thine Heritage,
Govern and lift
them up from age to age.
We magnify
Thee daily evermore,
World without end
Thy Name we do adore*
Vouchsafe to keep
us, Lord, this day from sin,
Have mercy on
us, and thy grace give in.
O Let thy mercy,
Lord, upon us light,
As we have ever
trusted in thy might:
O Lord, in Thee
my confidence is grounded:
O therefore let
me never be confounded.
Hymn III. Adventus Christi; or Accomplishment of the first Promise.
Joh. 1.14.
THe eternal word took humane flesh,
and dwelt amongst us here;
And men beheld his gloriousness
most plainly to appear.
As of the alone begotten one
of God the Father, true;
So also full of grace He sho'n,
and glorious in our view.
And of his fullness from on high
we have, in every place,
Received Universally
and (richly) grace for grace:
For lo! the Law Man's bound unto,
by Moses was made known,
But grace and truth to know and do,
by Jesus Christ alone.
To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
all glory be therefore;
As was, and is to the uttermost,
and shall be evermore.
Hymn IV. A faithful saying.
1 Timothy 1.15. John 11.25.5.24.
THIS is a saying verified,
and worthy all esteem:
That Jesus Christ came down and di'd,
poor sinners to redeem.
His Name whoever trusts upon,
shall live, although he die;
And free from Condemnation,
shall live, Eternally.
To him that thus has loved us,
and cancelled all our score:
With that pure flood of his own blood,
be praise for evermore.
Hymn V. A joyful Death, or the Song of Holy Simeon.
Luke 2.29.
NOW let thou thy servant, Lord,
depart in perfect peace,
According to thy faithful Word,
concerning his decease.
For now mine eyes have seen declared
(ere death shall end my race)
The saving health Thou have prepared
before all peoples face.
31. Rev. 1.4. --
A light to lighten clear enough
the Gentiles where they dwell,
And to be made the glory of
thy People Israel.
To God the Father and the Son
and Holy Ghost therefore,
Be glory done as first begun,
and shall be evermore.
Hymn VI. A Morning Exercise.
All People, etc.
Lam. 3.22.
IT IS of God's mercies infinite,
That we are not consumed quite;
Because indeed they still prevail,
And his compassions never fail.
23, 24.
Each morning brings a fresh supply,
So great is God's fidelity:
The Lord's my portion, says my soul,
Therefore my hopes on him shall roll.
26.
The Lord is very nigh to those
That wait on him at his dispose:
Good to the Soul empowered with grace,
Unfainedly to seek his face.
27.
And it is good in every strait,
Both quietly to hope and wait,
For that salvation to attend,
Which God in his good time shall send..
Hymn VII. A Promise of sending the Holy Ghost, and of the Miracles at
Pentecost.
Luke 24.49.
THUS spoke our Savior Christ to his,
behold! I send, said he,
To you my Father's PROMISES,
which ye have heard of me.
Luke 24.49.
But stay ye at Jerusalem
until the day draw nigh,
And ye shall be endued then
with power from on high.
Acts 2.1.
And when full fifty days were come
(thus hinted by our Lord)
They all were gathered in a room
and all with one accord.
And suddenly a sound from Heaven,
like mighty rustling wind,
Filled all the house, where sat the Eleven
with other Brethren joined.
And there appeared to the men,
tongues cloven, as of fire,
And sat upon each one of them,
and did their hearts inspire.
And then began they to advance
their speech in Languages,
The Spirit giving utterance
as He himself did please.
And Jews were present there in throngs,
from Nations all abroad,
And heard them speak in several tongues
the wondrous works of God.
Rev. 1.4.
To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
all Glory be therefore.
As was, and is, to the uttermost,
and shall be evermore.
Hymn VIII. Arraignment of Ambition, Covetousness, and Cruelty.
Hab. 2.9, to 12.
WOE be to him (must all confess)
that with a greedy eye,
Covets an evil covetousness,
unto his Family.
That he may set his nest on high,
and there to keep him warm,
And sit with great security
from fear of future harm.
Thou have consulted shame enough,
unto thy house this day,
And cutting many people off,
have sinned thy soul away.
For lo! the very stone shall cry
out of the wall to Me,
And thereto shall the Beam reply,
out of the Timber tree.
Woe be to him, to him be woe
that builds a Town with blood,
And stablisheth a City so,
by ways abhorred of God.
Hymn IX. A Song to celebrate the restoration of the CHVRCH.
Have mercy, etc.
Isa. 54.11.
O Thou afflicted Church,
and tossed with tempest great,
Left comfortless in thy distress,
while all those storms did beat.
Behold! I lay thy stones
with colors very fair,
Thy corner stones most curious ones
with Sapphires to compare.
13, 14.
And great shall be the peace,
thy Children are to see,
And thou, no less, in righteousness
established shall be.
Oppression shall be far,
because thou shall not fear,
No Tyranny shall terrify,
nor unto thee come near.
7. Rev. 15.6.
Though, for a little while,
I hid from thee my face,
My care shall be to gather thee
with everlasting Grace.
To God in Trinity
all glory be therefore:
As has been done, since time begun,
and shall be evermore.
2. PART.
Isa. 60.15, 16.
Arise, O Church, and shine,
thy light comes in and springs:
Thy Savior now, has said, that thou
shall suck the breast of Kings.
And they shall be designed
for nursing Fathers kind,
And unto thee their Queens shall be
for nursing Mothers joined.
chapter 33.17.65.16.
Thine eyes shall see the King
in all his beauty bright,
And God shall crown thee with Renown
and everlasting Light.
That such as bless themselves
(and each man that so does)
May bless themselves in nothing else
but in the God of truth.
Because the former times
of trouble are forgot;
And what men did is past and hid,
mine eyes behold it not.
To God in Trinity
all glory be therefore:
As was and is and shall be his
henceforth for evermore.
Hymn X. Astonishing Judgments, or AEGYPTS ten PLAGVES, for Nov. 5.
Psalm. 135.9.
THE Lord sent tokens most severe,
and let great Judgments fall
On Egypt: Upon Pharaoh there,
and on his Servants all.
PLAGVE I.
Exodus 7.20, 21.
He turned their waters into blood,
so that they could not drink:
Their fishes died within the flood,
and made the River stink.
PLAGVE II.
Exodus 8.6. Psalm. 105.30.
Their Land brought forth from Brooks hard-by,
from Rivers, Ponds and Springs,
A brood of Frogs Abundantly,
in Chambers of their Kings.
PLAGVE III.
Exodus 8.17, 19.
He smote the dust of Aegypt-Land,
and loathsome vermin crawled
On man and beast: 'Twas God's own hand,
and so confessed and called.
PLAGVE IV.
Exodus 8.24.
He sent them diverse sort of flies
in Pharaoh's house to swarm,
Which sore annoyed all Families,
and did the Land much harm.
PLAGVE V.
Exodus 9.3, 6.
A grievous Murrain he designed,
their Cattle to betide,
That sundry beasts of several kind
of this strange Murrain died.
2. PART.
PLAGVE VI.
Exodus 9.10.
Handfuls of Ashes He ordains,
whereby their Plagues increast,
By breaking forth in Boils and Blains,
both upon Man and Beast.
PLAGVE VII.
Psalm. 78.47, 48.
The Hail destroyed their tender Vines,
and wealth of their quick stocks,
The Frost destroyed their Sycamines
hot Thunderbolts their Flocks.
PLAGVE VIII.
Exodus 10.14, 15.
Locusts went over all the Land,
such as were never seen,
And spoiled the trees that yet did stand;
and all things that were green.
PLAGVE IX.
Exodus 10.21.
A darkness such as might be felt,
for three whole days, did cover
The Land where Lordly Pharaoh dwelt,
they saw not one another.
PLAGVE X.
Psalm. 78.51.
All the firstborn which Egypt bore
He smote with dreadful hand,
The chief of all their strength and store,
in Cham's accursed Land.
Exodus 12.13.
Then was there a most doleful cry,
in Egypt heard with dread,
For there was not a Family,
where some One was not dead.
Ps. 72.18. Rev. 19.16.
Let Israel's God the King of Kings,
be magnified therefore,
Who only does such wondrous things,
Praise him for evermore.
Hymn XI. A Testimony Prophetical of the Birth and Kingdom of CHRIST.
Isa. 9.3, 6.
NOW, Lord, before thee we rejoice,
as in a Harvest-day:
As Conquerors lift up their voice,
when they divide the prey,
For unto us a Child is born,
to us a Son is given,
And on his shoulder shall be worn
the badge of power from Heaven.
His Name entit'led Wonderful
shall faithful Saints so call,
Our Counselor, our Oracle,
God mighty over all.
The Everlasting Father, and
the Sovereign Prince of Peace.
Of whose sweet peace, and sole command
shall endless be the increase.
The Throne of David to possess,
and order it full sure,
With Judgment and with Righteousness
for ever to endure.
To God the Father and the Son,
and Holy Ghost therefore,
Be glory as at first was done
and shall be evermore.
2. PART. On the Birth, Kingdom, and Conquests of CHRIST.
Isa. 9.3, 4.
NOW, Lord, before thee we rejoice,
as men in Harvest-while,
As Conquerors lift up their voice
when they divide the spoil.
For thou have broke the burd'nous yoke,
the Staff that bare the sway,
The Rod of our Oppressors Power,
as once in Midian's day.
For every battle generally
of Warriors prime and good
Is with confused noise and cry,
and Garments rolled in blood.
But this of Christ's against his Foes,
that spightfully conspire,
Shall be with burning where it goes.
and Fuel mixed with Fire.
The day does come, as God assures,
that like an Oven shall burn,
And all the proud and wicked doers
that day shall overturn.
But unto them that fear my Name
there shall arise and spring
The Sun of Peace and Righteousness
with healing in his wing.
To God the Father and the Son,
and Holy Ghost therefore,
Be glory done as first begun,
and shall be evermore.
Hymn XII. At FVNERALS to mitigate Mourning.
Job 1.21.
NAked we go unto the Grave,
as from the womb we came,
God gives and takes but what he gave,
and blessed be his Name.
For he shall wipe off tears one day,
and make all faces free,
And our rebuke quite take away,
and no more death shall be.
No sorrow shall, nor crying last,
nor any further pain,
Because the former things are past,
and never come again.
Hymn XIII. At Funerals to press Patience.
1 Timothy 6.7. Job 1.21.
NOthing we brought into this world,
and it is out of doubt,
That we (from hence whenever called)
can carry nothing out.
The Lord of his good pleasure gave,
the Lord does take away,
And let his Name the honor have,
and bless him day by day.
Hymn XIV. At Funerals touching the preciousness of the Saints death.
Psalm. 116.15. Romans 14.8.
A Thing of price unparalleled
in God our Soviour's eyes
The death of all his Saints is held,
when any of them dies.
For while we live, we live to God,
to God we also die,
And live or die, we are indeed
the Lords peculiarly.
Hymn XV. At Funerals touching the Resurrection.
Job 19.25.
I Know that my Redemeer lives,
I know he lives always,
And shall appear and stand up here
on earth at Judgment day.
And though my skin, and next to that
my body turn to dust,
Yet in my flesh restored afresh
I shall see God, I trust.
Whom I shall perfectly behold,
when I from dust recover,
Not otherwise but with these eyes,
my self, and not another.
Hymn 16. At Funerals touching the Saints safety in Death.
John 11.25, 26.
THE Resurrection and the Life,
says Christ our Lord, am I,
And he that has in me belief
shall live, although he die.
And whosoever here he be,
that draws this mortal breath,
And steadfastly believes in Me,
shall never more see death
Hymn 17. At Funerals touching the Saints sweet Rest.
Rev. 14.13.
I Heard a voice that spoke, and said
to me, from Heaven on high,
Write, blessed henceforth are the dead
that in the Lord do die.
Yea, says the Spirit, that such men,
may leave their labors hard,
Their works likewise do follow them
to reap a full reward.
Hymn 18. A Thanksgiving at, or after the Sacrament.
All People, etc.
Luke 2.13.
GLory to God in Highest Place,
On Earth be peace, to Men free grace:
We praise, we bless thee, we adore
And glorify thee evermore.
Romans 11.17.
We thank thee for thy glory great,
Lord God, that have the Sovereign seat:
O heavenly King, and God alone,
The Father, the Almighty One.
John 1.14, 29. Acts 2.36.
O God the true begotten Word,
Son of the Father, Christ and Lord,
O Lamb of God, that take away
The worlds great sin, thy grace display.
2 Cor. 5.21. 1 Pet. 2.24.
Thou that wast made sin for our sake,
(Who knew'st no sin) some pity take.
Thou that did in thy body bear
The sins of all, receive our prayer.
Ephesians. 1.20, 21. Job 10.30.
Thou that do sit at God's right hand,
One with the Father in Command,
Above all Angels having place.
Have mercy on us, and show grace.
Acts 2.27, 33, 36.
For Thou art Christ the Holy One,
The only LORD, and Thou alone
Art with the Holy Ghost most high
In God the Father's Dignity.
Hymn 19. Atonement sought upon Humiliation, or, a woeful bewailing of our
Corruptions and Calamities.
Dan. 9.4, 5.
O God that great and dreadful art,
who keep truth and grace,
To them that love thee in their heart,
and do thy Laws embrace.
O we have sinned, we confess,
we have done wickedly,
We have rebelled by wickedness,
and great Apostasy.
6, 7, 9.
Not harkening to thy Messengers,
who spoke by thy command
To Princes, Kings and Ancestors,
and People of our Land.
But, Lord, to thee belongs grace,
to us, contrary way,
Belongs confusion of the face,
as at this present day.
14.12.
Therefore the Lord has watched the stroke,
and brought it on us all,
And has confirmed the Word he spoke
against us so to fall.
Our Judges too, that judged us,
on them the Lord has brought
The evil so prodigious
for sins which we have wrought.
12, 13.
For under the whole Heavens of God,
among all sorts of men,
The like has not been done abroad,
as to Jerusalem.
Yet sought we not to know the truth,
nor for repentance prayed,
But God is just in all he does,
for we have not obeyed.
2. PART.
Dan 9.8, 11.
Confusion of the face pertains
to us and to our Kings,
Our Peers, and Parents for our pains
in doing wicked things.
For all have broke thy Law, O Lord,
revolting worse, and worse:
That we might not obey thy Word,
which pours out all this curse.
9.16.
But mercy and forgivenesses
belong, O Lord, to thee,
Though our rebellious Trespasses,
grow to a high degree.
O Lord, according unto all
thy righteousness, we pray,
Let not thy dreadful fury fall,
but turn thy wrath away.
18.19.
For we present not our address,
before thy Mercy-Seat,
For any of our righteousness,
but for thy mercies great.
Lord, hear, forgive, and pity take,
hearken, O Lord, and do,
Defer not for thine own dear sake,
now thou art prayed unto.
18.17.
Incline thine ear, O Lord, and hear,
open thine eyes and see
Our desolations, and the place
relating unto thee.
And let thy face behold with grace
thy Sanctuaries seat,
Whose present state is desolate,
for Christ's sake, we entreat.
Hymn 20. A woeful Lamentation (or David's Elegy) for Saul and Jonathan.
2 Samuel 1.19.
THY beauty is, O Israel,
in thy high places slain,
O how those mighty Champions fell,
and we the loss sustain!
O tell it not to any one,
nor publish it in Gath,
Nor in the streets of Askalon,
that Israel bears such wrath
20.21.
The Daughters of the Philistines,
lest they therein rejoice,
And those uncircumcised ones,
lest they lift up their voice.
Ye mountains great of Gilboa,
let neither Rain nor Dew,
Nor fields of Offerings, from that day
for ever fall on you.
21.
For there the shield of Sovereignty
was vilely cast away:
The shield of Saul, as if that He
had known no Unction-day.
2. PART.
Verse 22, 23.
From fat of many a mighty Man,
and blood of enemies slain,
Went not the bow of Jonathan,
nor Sword of Saul in vain.
Lovely were Saul and Jonathan,
and living pleased us well,
Division in their death was none,
for both together fell.
23, 25.
Swifter upon the chase they were
than Eagles in their flight:
And stronger than the Lions are,
although they fell in fight:
Daughters of Israel mourn for Saul,
who decked you gorgeously,
With Gems of Gold, and clothed you all
in cloth of scarlet-die.
27.
How are the mighty fallen then,
as we may sigh and say,
Weapons of War and warlike men
how perished in a day!
Hymn 21. A zealous applause of Christian Conquests.
All People, etc.
1 John 5.4, 5.
WHatever soul is born of God,
o'recomes the World effectually,
And thus the World is under-trod
by Faith, which gets the victory.
For who is he that can atchieve
the conquest of the world abroad,
But he alone that does believe
that Jesus is the Son of God?
Col. 2.15. 1 John 4.4.
Who spoiling Principalities
and Powers of hell that durst oppose,
Made show of them in open wise,
triumphing over all his foes.
And ye have overcome them too;
ye little Children that are his;
For greater is the Lord in you,
than he that in these worldlings is.
Rev. 1.4.
To God the Father, and the Son;
and to the Holy Ghost therefore,
Eternal honor let be done,
from first to last for evermore.
Hymn 22. A zealous Invective against Hypocrisy.
Luke 12.1.
WHen as a mighty multitude,
were gathered on a day.
Our Lord to his Disciples showed
what things he had to say.
Beware of first (said he) to these,
and shun most heedfully
The leaven of Scribes and Pharisees,
which is Hypocrisy.
Mat. 23.4.7.3.
Most grievous burdens do they bind
wherewith to load another:
But cannot one small finger find
to bear it with their Brother.
They spy a mote, when small or none,
within their Brothers eye:
Whenas a beam is in their own,
but that they never spy.
23.13, 15.
The Kingdom where God's glory dwells,
is so shut up by them,
They neither enter in themselves,
nor suffer other men.
They coast and compass Sea and Shore,
to make one of their sect,
A Child of Hell made twofold more,
than they, by this effect.
24. Luke 11.42. Joh. 21.8.
They tithe their Mint and Anniseed,
(what every Garden has)
But weightier things they never heed,
as Mercy, Judgment, Faith.
Demurely at a Gnat they strain,
a Camel swallowing whole,
But what is their hope, although they gain,
when God requires their soul!
20.5.
For the triumphing jollity
of sinners soon goes over:
The joy of Hypocrites shall be
a moment, and no more.
2. PART.
Mat. 5.20, 23, 25.
Unless your righteousness exceed
the Scribes and Pharisees,
Ye can in no case hope to speed
of Heaven, more than these:
Which make the outside of the Cup
and Platter clean enough,
But leave the inside all filled up
with vile and odious stuff.
Luke 11 39. Mat. 23.14.
The outside (Hypocritical)
they finely scour and dress,
But leave the inside full of all
extortion and excess.
Poor Widows houses they devour,
and for to seem sincere,
Out of their lips long Prayers they pour,
these greater wrath shall bear.
Mat. 15.8. Jam. 3.11.
The approach to God with mouth alone,
and honor him with their lips:
But what their mouth and lips do own,
their heart quite over-slips.
But, first, the w^sedom from above
is pure without deceit,
Then peaceable, and full of love,
and easy to entreat.
Jam. 3.17.1.27.
It Is full of liberality,
and fruits of mercy kind:
It Is void of partiality,
and of a double mind.
Religion pure and undefiled
with God and with the Father,
Is to relieve the Orphan-child
with what estate we gather.
To visit Widows (with our wealth)
from habitation hurled:
And for a man to keep himself
unspotted of the world.
3. PART.
Prove. 30.11. Mat. 23.27.
There is a generation vile,
yet pure in their own eyes,
But are not cleansed all the while
from their impurities:
They are like Tombs, those painted ones,
that glister to the eye,
When full within of dead men's bones,
and all impurity.
Luke 16.15.18.9.
They justify themselves to men,
as if they had no sin:
But God well knows the hearts of them,
and what does lodge within.
They trust upon themselves likewise
to be a righteous sort,
But other people they despise
as altogether short.
Isa. 65.5. Luke 16.15.
They say, stand by thy self apart,
and come not near to me,
For I am holier than thou art,
but God knows what they be.
These are a smoke, says God most high,
within my Nose too strong,
And as a fire of Jealousy,
that burns all day long.
Job 36.13, 14.
For lo! the Hypocrite in heart,
shall heap up wrath extreme,
They often in their youth depart,
whose life's among the unclean,
The company of Hypocrites
shall come to desolation,
And fire shall quite consume the gates
of bribe -- abomination.
Rev. 1.4.
To God the Father and the Son,
and Holy Ghost therefore,
Be glory as at first was done,
and shall be evermore.
Hymn 23. Blessed Angels Attendance.
Psalm. 34.7.91.11.
BEhold the Angel of the Lord
encampeth round about
All that fear God, and is their guard
to keep all dangers out
For he has given his Angels charge
to keep thee day by day,
That thou may walk abroad at large
with safety in thy way.
Psalm. 91.12. Heb. 1.14.
And they this charge must execute,
And bear thee in their Arm,
Lest ever thou should dash thy foot
against a stone for harm.
For are not all these Ministers
sent forth for ministration,
In their behalf that shall be heirs
of God's assured Salvation?
Hymn 24. Blessedness of Pardon.
Romans 4.6.
MAN's blessedness most absolute,
thus David does express,
Whose faith alone God does impute
to him for righteousness.
7.
For blessed is the man, says He,
whose pardon is brought in,
To clear him of Iniquity,
and cover all his sin.
8.3.
Blessed is He to whom the Lord
imputes none offense:
And thus the scripture does record
man's blessedness from hence.
24.3.
And unto us does so remain.
if we in Him do trust,
Who died for sin, and rose again,
to justify the unjust.
Rev. 1.4.5.11.
To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
all glory be therefore,
As was and is to the uttermost,
and shall be evermore.
Hymn 25. Boasting Corrected.
Have mercy, etc.
Jer. 9.23.
THUS says the Lord of Hosts,
let not the man most wise
Glory at all, or make his boasts
what wisdom in him lies.
The mighty in his might,
the rich man in his wealth,
Though he should have it to the height,
let him not boast himself.
24.
But all man's boast must be
to boast in this alone,
In knowing and discerning me
the Lord and gracious one.
I exercise kind love,
judgment and doing right,
Toward all men, says the Lord above,
for therein I delight.
Hymn 26. Charity and Piety extended.
Prove. 3.9, 10. 2 Cor. 9.7.
Honor the Lord with all thy store,
give thy first fruits to him:
So shall thy Barns be filled with more,
the Press with Wine shall swim.
Let each man give as moved in mind,
not grudgingly however:
Nor of constraint, for this we find,
God loves a cheerful giver.
Mat. 1.14.
But cursed the Deceiver is
that has in's flock a Male,
And yet does vow and sacrifice
a thing corrupt and stale.
For I Am a King most highly crowned,
says God, the Lord of Hosts:
And dreadfully my Name does sound
in all the Heathen coasts.
Hymn 27. Circumcision of the Heart.
Jer. 9.25.
BEhold, says God, the time draws nigh,
that I will punish a^l
The uncircumcised generally,
and circumcised shall fall.
26.
For just as all the Gentiles were
uncircumsised in skin,
So all the house of Israel are
uncircumsised within.
Deuteronomy. 10.16.
The foreskin of your hearts therefore
be sure to Circumcise:
And be not henceforth any more
stiff-neck'd in any wise.
Hymn 28. Confession of Sin.
All People, etc.
Joh. 7.20. Isa. 3.8.
O Thou Preserver of mankind,
what shall we say or do to thee?
Or what excuse, Lord, can we find?
for we have sinned in great degree.
Our ways and doings still have been
Against the Lord by grievous sin,
So to provoke the glorious eyes,
Of God, by our Iniquities.
Job 40.4.42.5. Isa. 55.9.
O we are vile in every part,
with self abhorring we relent:
And from the bottom of our heart
in dust and ashes we repent!
But, Lord, thy ways and thoughts of grace,
Are not as ours, of narrow space:
Thy thoughts transcend our thoughts as far
As Heaven and Earth in distance are.
Hymn 29. Constant seeking of God, by the Meek.
Have mercy, etc.
Zeph. 2.3.
SEEK, seek the Lord most high,
O all ye meek on earth,
Ye that have wrought most faithfully
the Judgments he set forth:
Seek Righteousness, I say,
seek meekness, it may be
Ye shall be hid in the evil day,
and from God's Wrath go free.
Hymn 30. Correction of Anger.
Jam. 1.19, 20.
LET every man be swift to hear,
but slow to speech and wrath:
Because man's wrath goes nothing near
to God's most righteous path.
3.16.
For wheresoever strife takes place,
and lusts of envy lurk,
There is confusion in such case,
and every evil work.
Prove. 21.24. Eccles. 7.9.
Proud haughty scorner is his Name,
in whom proud passion rules:
And anger rests not in the flame,
but in the breast of fools.
16.32.
Whereas the slow to wrath excel
a Champion in renown,
And he that rules his spirit well,
the man that takes a Town:
1 Pet. 3.4.
Put on therefore the Ornament
of meek and quiet minds,
Which in God's sight is eminent,
and great acceptance finds.
Hymn 31. Danger of heinous Sins, and dehortation from them.
2. Pet. 2.9.
THE Lord of our Salvation,
knows well how to deliver
The godly from Temptation,
how perilous soever.
And to reserve ungodly men,
unto the dreadful day
Of Judgment, to be punished then
for their ungodly way.
And those men more especially
that wickedly transgress,
By practice of impurity
and fleshly filthiness.
Acts. 3.19.
Repent, and be ye all therefore,
converted from your crimes,
To get your sins wiped off the score,
against refreshing times.
Rev. 21.7.
He that o'recomes this world impure,
shall gain the world to come,
And God will be his God, be sure,
and he shall be his Son.
8. Heb. 6.8.
But faithless ones, and fooled with fears,
vile persons (thorns and briers)
Whoremongers, Murd'rers, Sorcerers,
Idolaters and Liars,
Shall have their portion in the Lake,
that burns with sulfurous breath
Of fire and brimstone (for their sake)
which is the second death.
2. PART. The Adulterers Peril and Penance.
Prove. 6.32.
Whosoever commits Adultery
with women, is not wise:
For he that does so wickedly,
his own dear soul destroys.
33.
A wound he gets, a brand of shame,
that is sure to stick and stay:
And the dishonor of his Name,
is never done away.
23.27.22.14.
He falls as in some nar^ow pit,
or in a ditch most deep:
Designed for him to fall in it,
whom God abhors to keep.
6.26.
It brings a man of good estate
unto a bit of bread:
And the Adultress lies in wait,
the precious blood to shed.
2.18.5.18.
Her house inclines to theirs that dye,
her paths to death's dark shade:
Yea, it goes down to hell hard by,
and there her guests are laid.
2.19.
They seldom turn that are so bold
as to go in to her,
Nor on the paths of life take hold
who e're so lewdly err.
7.24, 25.
Hearken therefore to my advice,
attend to what I say:
Let not her paths thy heart entice
to wander in her way.
3. PART. The seven Abominations.
Prove. 6.16.
Six things there are, and here expressed,
which God almighty hates:
Yea, seven things are manifest,
which he abominates.
A lofty look, a lying tongue,
are both abhord of God:
And hands that act so great a wrong,
as shedding guiltless blood.
A heart that harbors Wickedness
lewd projects to pursue:
And feet that press with eagerness
mischievous deeds to do.
A slanderous witness speaking lies,
and Him that discord sows,
To make kind Brethren Enemies,
and feiends to be as foes.
1 Pet. 3.10.
Let him that loves life therefore,
and longs to see good days,
Eschew all evil evermore,
and follow all good ways.
Let him refrain his tongue from ill,
his lips from speaking guile:
Let him seek peace with great good will,
and follow it all the while.
For the eyes of God are bent with care,
the righteous to secure:
His ears He opens to their prayer,
but frowns on the evil doer.
4. PART. The flying Roll for Swearers and Cursers.
James 5.12.
But above all things, this I say,
my Brethren, do not swear,
But let your words be yea and nay,
And every Oath forbear.
Because a Curse prodigious
shall pass on every side,
And seize upon the Swearers house,
and there it shall abide.
And from that house shall not depart
the Curse, the Flying-Roll,
Till Stone and Timber it subvert,
and so consume it whole.
Yea, Swearing makes a Land to Mourn,
and pleasant places dry,
When Men to such ill courses turn,
and so impetuously.
Be careful that thou do not then
God's Holy Name profane:
For God will not acquit such Men,
as take his Name in vain.
Romans 3.16.14.
Destruction (too) and misery
do all their paths possess,
Whose mouths are full of blasphemy,
Cursing and bitterness.
Col. 3.8.
Cease anger, then, and wrath likewise,
and put off altogether:
Oaths, Cursing, and Scurrilities,
out of your Mouths for ever.
Hymn 32. Deceitfulness of the Heart.
Jer. 17.9, 10.
Deceitful is the heart of man,
above all things that are,
And desperately carried on
to sin, who knows how far?
I, says the Lord, do search the heart,
and try the reins within,
And deal to each man his due part,
just as his works have been.
Hymn 33. Deliverance from shipwreck, or of the Prophet Jonah.
All People, etc.
Jonah 2.
BY reason of our grief and fear
We cried to God, and he gave ear:
Out of the depths of hell we cried,
And he unto our Prayer replied.
For thou had plunged us in the deep,
In midst of Seas, where waters keep
Surrounding floods with waters vast,
And all thy Billows over us passed.
We are cast out, then did we say,
Out of thy sight, quite cast away:
Yet one look more we will afford
Toward thy holy Temple, Lord.
The waters compassed us about,
Even to the soul they lanched out:
The depths had us encompassed,
The weeds were wrapped about our head.
To the bottom of the Seas we went,
'Twixt endless Bars of mountains pent:
Yet was our life when under trod,
Brought up by thee, O Lord our God!
When as our soul within did faint,
We thought on thee in our complaint,
And then to thee came in our prayers,
As by thy holy Temple stayrs.
They that observe deceitful Lies,
And trust to Idol-vanities:
Forsake the tenders of thy Grace,
Which as their own they might embrace*
But we will sacrifice to thee,
With thankful songs of melody:
And pay our Vows besides our Songs
Salvation to the Lord belongs.
Hymn 34. Descending of the Spirit.
Numb. 11.29. 2 Cor. 3.18.
O That the people of the Lord
were Prophets every one,
Such as the Lord of's own accord,
would pour his Sp'rit upon!
That we might all with open face
behold, as in a glass,
The glorious image of his grace,
upon our souls to pass.
And by degrees of Glory thus
be changed, as still we shall,
Even by the Sp'rit of God in us,
that works all in all.
To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
all glory be therefore,
As was and is to the uttermost,
and shall be evermore.
Hymn 35. Drunkard's Cup and Calamities.
Prove. 23.31.
LOOK not upon the Wine filled up,
when sparkling red and bright,
It gives his color in the Cup,
and moves it self aright.
For in the end that pleasant thing,
which did so much entice,
Bites as a Serpent, and shall sting
like to the Cockatrice.
Strange women shall thine eyes behold,
strange words thou shall rehearse,
And lust shall make thy heart full bold
to utter things perverse.
As one that floats upon the Sea,
and sleeps exceeding fast,
Such shall thou be: Or just as they
that sleep upon the mast.
Thou shall discern the strokes set on,
and blows, but all in vain,
For when the fit is past and gone,
thou seek'st it yet again.
Hymn 36. Due fear of God and the King.
Prove 24.21, 22.
FEar God my Son, and fear the King,
and shun their courses strange,
That love a factious meddleing,
and are so apt to change.
For surely their calamity
shall suddenly arise,
And who can tell what misery
shall both of them surprise?
Hymn 37. Duty to Magistrates.
Prove 8.15.
BY me (says God) Kings reign on Earth,
and Justice they decree:
Princes, and all of Noble Birth,
and Judges rule by Me.
1 Pet. 2.13.
Submit therefore with one consent,
and for the Lord's dear sake,
Yield to each form of Government,
which God himself did make.
1 Timothy 2.1, 2.
And pray for Kings especially,
and all those men that be
In places of Authority,
or eminent degree.
That we may spend our days in peace,
without the storms of strife,
In all good ways of Godliness
and honesty of life.
8.
Let men therefore (as God commands)
pray every where in faith,
Lifting up pure and holy hands
without distrust or wrath.
2. PART.
1 Pet. 2.13.
Submit your selves in every thing
to the Ordinance of Men,
Whether it be unto the King
as the Supreme of them:
Or to inferior Governors,
whom his commissions raise
For punishment of evil doers,
or for well doers praise.
For so's the sacred will of God,
that ye, by doing well,
May silence foolish tongues abroad,
and all men's clamours quell.
As free with freedom from offense,
and not to cloak thereby
Rebellious Disobedience,
but serving the most high.
Have all men in esteem so good,
that no reproach may spring:
Fear God, and love the Brotherhood,
and honor much the King.
3. PART.
Romans 13.1.
Let every Soul be subjugate
unto the higher Powers,
For all these Powers did God create,
it is his Decree, not Ours.
Whoever then resists the Power,
against God's Law rebels.
And the resisters shall procure
damnation to themselves.
5.1.
And ye must needs be subject then
(to Laws which rulers make)
Not only for the wrath of men,
but most for conscience sake.
7.
Render therefore to all their dues,
Tribute where Tribute's due,
Custom, and fear, and honor use,
to those ye owe it to.
8.
And leave behind no duty owed,
but each one love another:
For he fulfills the Law of God
that truly loves his Brother.
4. PART.
Tit. 3.1.
Of duty to Superior Powers
put Christians still in mind,
Subject to be to Governors,
to all good works inclined.
Romans 13.3.
For rulers are not terrible
to good works but to bad:
Would thou not fear the power? do well,
and praise shall thence be had.
4.
But if thou do an evil thing,
then fear and fear again,
Because the person governing
bears not the sword in vain.
Ibidem.
For he is God's chief Minister
to execute his will,
With wrath upon the trespasser,
whoever does ill.
Ibidem.
For he is God's minister to thee
for thy great good and gain,
But fear to offend because that he
bears not the sword in vain.
Prove. 20.8, 26.
A King that sits on the Throne
of judgment, and is wise,
Scatt'reth away (as clouds o'reblown)
all evil with his eyes.
HYMN 38. Esaie's Commination.
Isa. 5.8.
WOE's them that draw Iniquity
with cords of vanity,
And, as it were with Cart-ropes, dare
draw sin most eagerly.
21.
Woe to the wise in their own eyes,
prudent in their own sight,
Whom draughts of wine and mixed strong drink
commend for men of might.
11.
That early in the morning rise,
to follow drink so good:
And there they stay to drink all day,
till wine inflame their blood.
8.
That (covetous) join house to house,
and land they lay to land,
Until no place be left on earth,
but in their griping hand.
20.
Good evil, evil good that call,
that darkness put for light,
Bitter for sweet, and sweet for gall,
the wrong way for the right.
23.
That justify iniquity,
for base reward and pay,
And take the blessed righteousness
of righteous men away.
chapter 3.10, 11.
Yet must we tell how safe and well
with just men it shall go:
But woe again to wicked men,
for all reap as they sow.
HYMN 39. Exaltation of Humility.
1 Pet. 5.5.
BE clothed with Humility,
and lowliness embrace:
For God resists the proud and high,
but gives the humble grace.
Prove. 15.33.16.18.
Humility shall honor find,
but Pride destroys all,
For sure the proud and haughty mind
goes still before a fall.
Luke 14.11.
For he that prides himself, must know
that God will pluck him down,
But the self humbled sitting low,
shall thereby get renown.
HYMN 40. Exalting a Nation.
Prove. 14*34.
THE exercise of righteousness
exalts a Nation high:
And sin is a reproach no less
to any Family.
Psalm. 107.34.
A fruitful Land does God expose
to barrenness for sin,
And for the wickedness of those
that live and dwell therein.
Job 22. ult.
But God does save the smallest Land
of the innocent and pure,
And by the pureness of thy hand
it is delivered sure.
HYMN 41. Excellent Counsel of Wisdom.
Prove. 8.1.33.1, 32, 33.
WIsdom puts forth her voice and cries,
and such like words does use,
Hear ye instruction, and be wise,
and do not now refuse.
For ease shall slay those simple souls,
that let devotion dye,
And the prosperity of fools
destroys them utterly.
But whosoever hearkneth unto me
shall dwell in safety still,
And shall be quiet safe and free,
from fear of any ill,
2. PART. 8.34, 35, 36.
Blessed is he that hears me,
says Wisdom to her friends,
That at my Gate does daily wait,
and at my door attends.
For surely he that finds me,
finds life, and shall obtain
The favor of the Lord above,
to his eternal gain.
But he that sins against such things
wrongs his own soul thereby,
And all that hate on me to wait
love death, and so shall dye.
HYMN 42. Fallow Ground to be dressed.
Hos. 10.12.
SOW to your selves in righteousness,
and reap in mercy sweet,
Your fallow ground break up and dress
for seed to make it meet.
For it is time to seek the Lord,
till he (descending on you)
Shall come, and of his own accord,
rain righteousness upon you.
HYMN 43. Gods Covenant for us with the Creatures.
Hos. 2.18, 19, 21.
THUS says the Lord above,
I have betrothed thee,
In mercy, truth, and tender love,
for ever unto me.
And in that day will I
a faithful Covenant make
With all my Creatures generally,
for thy sweet safeties sake.
The heavens shall hear the earth,
the earth shall hear the corn,
The corn and wine that thence come forth,
shall hear my Church new born.
HYMN 44. Gods Jealousy for Jerusalem.
Zach 1.14.
THUS says the Lord of Hosts,
a Jealous God am I,
For Sion and for Salems Coasts,
with eager Jealousy.
15.
And I am unappeas'd
toward Heathens yet unscourg'd;
For I was but a while displeased,
and they the affliction urged.
16.
Therefore (says God) I am
returned (for all their sin)
With mercies to Jerusalem,
to build my house therein.
HYMN 45. Humble Supplications and Confessions.
All People, etc.
Deuteronomy. 32.4. Romans 7.12, 14.
O Thou most just and righteous God!
Thy Law is holy, just, and good:
But we are carnal of our selves,
As sold to sin, and nothing else.
Romans 3.23 Psalm. 15.5.
For all have sinned of every sort,
And of thy glory are come short:
Our shape in sin we did assume,
And are transgressors from the womb.
Romans 7.18, 19.
We from polluted Parents spring,
And in our flesh dwells no good thing:
The good we would do, that we bate,
And do the evil that we hate.
Hos. 14.2.
Take off all our iniquity,
And Lord receive us graciously:
So shall we sacrifice to thee
The Fatlings of our lips most free.
HYMN 46. Humble Supplications in time of Drought.
All People, etc.
Jer. 14.20.
LORD, we acknowledge and confess
Our grievous sins and wickedness,
Our Fathers faults we do deplore,
For we have sinned against thee sore.
21.
For thy Name sake loath not thine own,
Do not disgrace thy glorious Throne:
Remember and do not infringe
Thy Covenant with us for our sins.
22.
Can any of the Idol Powers
Cause rain, or can the heavens give showers?
O Lord our God, art not thou he?
And therefore will we wait on thee.
Chron. 6.27.
Send rain, O Lord, upon this Land,
Put here into thy peoples hand:
Lest Britain be one dried Strand,
And all our Earth be turned to Sand.
And teach us that good way to know,
Wherein we always ought to go.
HYMN 47. Humble Supplications in time of Sickness.
All People, etc.
Jer. 10.24.
COrrect us but in Judgment, Lord,
Not in thy wrath with sharpened Sword,
Lest thou should bring us down thereby
To dust and ruin utterly.
9.21.
Death climbs our windows, by disease,
Enters into our PALACES,
Cuts off the Children from without,
And from the streets the young and stout.
14.7. Isa. 38.9.
O Lord, though our Iniquities
As witness-clouds against us rise,
Our help and healing undertake,
And do it for thine own Names sake.
HYMN 48. Humble Supplications in times of Tempest.
All People, etc.
Psalm. 103.19. Isa. 64.6.
O Thou that do in Heaven Reign!
We all are as a thing unclean;
And all our righteousnesses are
As filthy rags, unfit to wear.
And therefore are we justly made
Like as a Leaf, to fall and fade:
And our transgressions, bearing sway,
As wind have taken us away.
Psalm. 107.25.77.17, 18.
At thy command big storms arise,
Thunder and lightning fill the Skies;
The Clouds pour down their watery load,
Thy flaming Arrows fly abroad.
Joel 2.17. Isa. 64.9. Hab. 3.2.
O spare thy People, gracious God!
Redeemed with thy precious Blood:
Keep not our sins upon record,
In wrath remember mercy, Lord.
HYMN 49. Humble Supplication in times of Transgression and Revolt.
All People, etc.
Isa. 43.27.
OUR Father, Our first Father, Lord,
Has sinned, and disobeyed thy Word:
And all our Teachers, at the best,
Against thee greatly have transgressed.
Isa. 64.9.
Lord, be not angry very sore,
Nor mind our faults for evermore:
See, we beseech thee, and behold,
How we are all thy Flock and Fold.
8.
Thou art our Father at this day,
Thou art the Potter, we the Clay:
And we are all and every one*
Thy handiwork, O Lord, alone.
HYMN 50. Humble Supplication in time of War.
All People, etc.
Isa. 64.1.
O That thou would the Heavens rend,
And in thy Glorious power descend;
And that the mountains might flow down
At presence of thy face and frown.
2.
As when the melting fire does flame,
It makes the waters boil a main,
To make thine enemies know thy might,
And Nations tremble at thy sight.
3.
When dreadful things were done by thee,
Such as we never looked to see,
Then at thy presence and thy frown
The mighty Mountains flowed down.
Lam. 3.42. Isa. 64.5.
But we have sinned, and for our crimes
Thou have not spared, but scourged the times:
But in thy mercies is ingrav'd
CONTINVANCE, and we shall be saved.
HYMN 51. Judgment waited for.
Luke 21.19. Jam. 5 7. Hab. 2.3. Heb. 10.37.
POssess your Souls with patience,
and wait unweariedly
Until the coming of the Lord,
for lo! the day draws ^^gh.
For yet a little while endure,
(The account shall not miscarry)
And he that shall come will be sure
to come, and will not tarry.
Heb. 10.38, 39. Hab. 2.4.
Now then the Just shall live by Faith,
but if a man draw back,
My soul shall have no joy in him
that true belief does lack.
But we are not of those that do
draw back to condemnation,
But those that do believe unto
the Souls assured Salvation.
HYMN 52. Judgment upon the Proud and Scornful.
All People, etc.
Prove. 8.13.
THE fear of God is seen in this,
To hate the Paths that lead amiss,
Pride, Arrogance, and all the rest
Of evil ways, does God detest.
13.10.
The froward mouth (says he) I hate,
Only by pride comes all debate:
And sure God scorns the scornful race*
But to the lowly gives his grace.
Luke 14.11.
He then that does himself exalt,
Shall be debased by's own default;
But the self-humbling soul shall be
Exalted in a high degree.
HYMN 53. Kind love of God, in Christ.
1 John 3.2.
BEhold, dear Saints, what kind of love
the Father grants to us!
To be the Sons of God above,
and he to style us thus.
Therefore the World discerns us not,
because it knew not him:
And we are Sons of God begot,
though yet with eyes so dim.
3. Mat. 25.31.
Not seeing what we once shall see,
but this we know most clear,
That like unto him we shall be,
when he shall next appear.
For we shall see him as he is
in glorified estate:
And sitting on that Throne of his,
where all the world must wait.
Heb. 6.19. 1 John 3.3.
This hope we have whereon to roll,
as that which cannot fail,
A steadfast Anchor of the soul,
Entering within the Veil.
And he that has this hope on high
established in him sure,
Does purify himself thereby,
as God himself is pure.
Rev. 1.4.
To God the Father and the Son,
and Holy Ghost therefore;
Eternal honor let be done,
henceforth for evermore.
2. PART.
Romans 8.35, 36.
WHO can take off Christ's love from us
can trouble or distress,
Or Persecution perilous,
or need, or nakedness?
Can Famine do it, or the Sword?
(as David has his Song)
For thy sake are we slain, O Lord,
and killed all day long.
37, 38.
Counted as sheep for butchery,
nay, we (though martyred thus)
Triumph in all these gloriously,
through him that loved us.
I am persuaded on this wise,
that neither Death nor Life,
Nor Angels, Principalities,
nor Powers, with us at strife.
39.
Nor present things, nor things to come*
nor height nor depth together,
Nor any thing that can be done
by Creatures whatsoever,
Shall separate us from the love
which (of his own accord)
Is born to us by God above,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Rev. 1.4.
To God the Father, and the Son,
and Holy Ghost therefore,
Be glory as at first was done,
and shall be evermore.
HYMN 54. King David's EXALTATION, in type of Christ.
Give land, etc.
1* Pet. 2.6. Mat. 21.42. Psalm. 118.22, 23.
LO here the stone Elect,
and which (as ye have read)
The Builders did reject,
now made the Corner's head:
This work most wise
God wrought for us, and mavelous
in all our eyes.
24.25.
This is the day so sweet
which God himself has made,
We will rejoice in it,
and be exceeding glad.
I earnestly
Beseech thee, Lord, now to afford
Prosperity.
26, 27.
Blessed is he that does come
in God's good Name to us,
And we have sent you home,
blessed from his Holy House:
God is the Lord
That has so bright and clear a light
this day restored,
Heb 13.16.
Come bind the Sacrifice
with Cords yet never worn,
Bind it before our eyes
unto the Altars horn:
Show charity,
That Sacrifice the Lord does prize
exceedingly.
Psalm 69.30.
Now will I praise God's Name
with a delightful Song:
And magnify his Fame
with thankful heart and tongue.
And this likewise,
Beyond the proof of horn or hoof,
the Lord shall prize.
Psalm. 118.28.29.
O God, thou art my God,
thou art my God, I say:
Thy Name I will applaud,
thy praise I will display:
Give thanks to God,
Whose goodness flows, whose mercy knows
no period.
HYMN 55. Large Mercies Corporal.
All People, etc.
Psalm. 68.21, 22.
BLessed be God Our Saving health,
Who daily loads us with his wealth;
The Issues of assayling death
Belong to God, who gives us breath.
He sends us Rain and fruitful Years,
Our hearts with Food and gladness cheers;
And gives us with a rich supply
All things in plenty to enjoy.
Psalm. 44.8. Joel 2. Psalm. 46.9. 2 Cor. 9.10.
He saved us from our enemies hand,
And has done great things for our Land:
Wars over the Earth he soon does cease,
Blessing the Fruits of our increase.
Psalm. 115.1.
Not unto us, O Lord, therefore,
Not unto us on any score,
But to thy Name the glory take,
For thy sweet truth and mercy sake.
HYMN 56. Large Mercies Spiritual.
Ephesians. 3 -- 7.
BLessed be God, that of his grace
has us so richly stored;
With Spiritual gifts in heavenly place,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.
As he has chosen us in him
before the World began,
To be without the blame of Sin,
with Love to God and Man.
Having predestined Us,
adopted Children dear,
Of his good pleasure chosen thus,
and now by Christ brought near.
To praise the glory of his grace,
wherein he has so done:
His Saints with Favor to embrace
through Jesus Christ his Son.
Rev 1.4.
In whom we have Redemption free
through his most precious blood,
Pardon of our Iniquity
by that rich grace of God.
To God the Father and the Son
and Holy Ghost therefore
Be glory done, as first begun,
and shall be evermore.
HYMN 57. Large Mercies Temporal implored, to make Jerusalem a praise in the
Earth.
Isa. 62.1.
FOR Sions sake I undertake,
and will not hold my peace;
And for Jerusalems dear sake
I will not rest or cease.
Until her righteousness appear
as glorious as the light,
And her Salvation shine as clear
as does a lamp by night.
Till Gentiles see thy righteousness,
thy glory Kings proclaim;
And a new Name shall Sion bless,
which God's own mouth shall Name.
4.6.3.1.
Thou shall no more (as heretofore)
be in forlorn estate
Nor shall thy Borders any more
be termed desolate.
Ye that make mention of the Lord,
resolve within your breast,
And keep not silence, nor afford
the great Jehovah rest,
Till Sion be a Diadem
by God's own hand held forth:
And till he make Jerusalem
a praise in all the Earth.
HYMN 58. Large Mercies through Christ in things Eternal.
Ephesians. 1.8.
BLessed be God who does display
abundant grace to us,
In depth of Wisdom every way,
and Prudence mavelous.
Having to us discovered
the mystery of his will,
As his good pleasure purposed
toward us to fulfill.
That in the full appointed time
he might Collect in one
All things in Heaven and Earth, to join
in Him, and him alone:
In whom we also have obtained
the inheritance above,
Predestined and Ordained
unto it, of his Love.
According to the purposes
which he performs still,
That works all things as he please
by Counsel of his will.
To Father Son and Holy Ghost
all glory be therefore.
As was and is to the uttermost,
and shall be evermore.
HYMN 59. Life and Conversation Conscientious.
Isa. 33.15.
THE man that walks, as God prescribes,
in paths of Justice plain,
That speaks the truth, and scorneth bribes,
and all oppressive gain:
That stops his ear from hearing Blood,
from evil shuts his Eye;
That man shall have a safe abode,
and he shall dwell on high.
16. Psalm. 84.11.
Munitions of the Rocks shall be
his resting place secure,
Store of Provision He shall see,
his waters shall be sure.
For God that is both Sun and Shield,
will grace and glory give,
And all good blessings freely yield
to them that purely live.
Psalm. 106.48.
Let Israel's God, the Lord most high
be ever blessed therefore,
From time to time eternally,
Amen, for evermore.
HYMN 60. Light and Darkness discovered.
1 John 2.9.
HE that shall say he is in light,
and does his Brother hate,
That man does yet in darkness sit,
in unregenerate state.
But he that loves abides in light,
and not in darkness dim;
And there is none occasion
of stumbling found in him.
But he that does his Brother hate,
in depths of darkness lies:
And whither he goes he never knows,
for darkness blinds his eyes.
HYMN 61. Looking and longing for the general dissolution.
2 Pet. 3.12.
THe coming of the day of Christ
we look for, and desire;
Whenas the Heavens shall be dissolved,
and the Elements melt with fire,
Yet, as his promise holds it forth,
we Christians (ne'retheless)
Expect new Heavens and new Earth,
wherein dwells righteousness.
Wherefore (Beloved) give diligence
to keep in such a frame,
As to be found of him in peace,
without offense or blame.
Because we look for such a thing
as this Worlds new Creation:
Accounting God's long suffering,
to aim at our Salvation.
HYMN 62. Love in deed and truth.
All People, etc.
1 John 3.18.
MY little Children every one,
Let us not love in word alone;
Neither in tongue and only so,
But deed and truth our love must show.
And this a confidence will breed,
That we are of the truth indeed:
And that by this we may assure
Our hearts before him to be pure.
For if our hearts do us condemn,
God's greater far who searches them:
But if our hearts be pure and clear,
Boldly may we to God draw near.
And whatsoever thing we crave
Of him, we shall be sure to have:
Because we keep his Laws aright,
And do things pleasing in his sight.
HYMN 63. Loves Link, or the Golden Chain of God's Mercy.
Romans 8.28.
WE know that all shall work for good
to those that love the Lord:
That (as his Holy purpose stood)
are called by his word.
For his foreknown he pre-ordain'd
before all time begun,
That they might be conformable
to the image of his Son.
The blessed firstborn that he might be
of many Brethren dear:
Moreover, whom he pre-ordain'd
he called, and brought them near.
And whom he called he justified
from their iniquities:
And whom he freely justified
he gloryfi'd likewise.
Rev. 1.4.
To God the Father and the Son
and Holy Ghost therefore,
Be Glory as at first was done,
and shall be evermore.
HYMN 64. Memorial of God's Mercies.
Ye Children, etc.
Isa. 63 7.
NOW will I mention and record
The Loving Kindness of the Lord:
and praises of the Lord above:
Answering to all He has bestowed,
And his great goodness sweetly showed
to the House of Israel in his love.
According to the multitude
Of his compassions still renewed;
for thus He said, they are my flock,
They are my people certainly,
Children that will not falsify,
So He became their saving rock.
9. Chap. 50.1. Neh. 5.8. Psalm. 72.19.
In all their grievance He was grieved,
And the Angel of his eyes relieved,
and saved them (when to Enemies sold)
In's love and pity he redeemed,
And saved them as his high esteemed,
and bare them all the days of old.
Let Israel's God, the Lord most high,
Be honored to ETERNITY,
with everlasting praise therefore:
And let his glittering glory then
Replenish all the Earth, Amen,
Amen, say we, for evermore.
HYMN 65. Ministerial Gifts conferred.
All People, etc.
Ephesians. 4.11. 2 Cor. 9.15.
CHrist has ascended up on high,
And Captive led Captivity:
And streightway gave his gifts to men,
Ordaining some Apostles then.
Some Prophets, some Evangelists,
Some Pastors, and some Teaching Priests*
For making of the Saints complete,
And Ministerial work so great.
And for upbuilding by the word
The Sacred Body of our Lord:
To him that gave these gifts therefore
Be Praise and Honor evermore.
HYMN 66. Our Savior's call to the Nations.
Isa. 45.22.
LOOK unto me, O all ye Lands,
and be ye saved thereby;
For I am God who so commands,
and there is none but I.
And by my self, and none beside,
shall all the faithful Seed
Of Israel's house be justified,
and glory in my deed.
HYMN 67. Our thorough Sanctification prayed for.
1 These. 5.23.
AND now the very God of peace
sanctify you throughout,
And grant that such a rich increase
of grace may be powered out.
That your whole spirit regenerate,
body and soul (I pray)
May be preserved immaculate
till Christ our Savior's day.
Faithful is he that calls you,
and he will do it sure;
To whom be praise as i^ most due
for ever to endure.
HYMN 68. Passover slain for us and preparation thereunto.
1. Cor. 5.7.
LO! Christ our Blessed Passover
is sacrificed for us,
Now let us keep the Feast therefore,
Subduing all our lusts.
So, not with leaven inveterate
of the unregenerate flesh:
Nor with the leaven of debate
of spite or wickedness.
8. Col. 3.17.
But let us keep it carefully,
(conforming to our head)
With Sanctified Sincerity,
and Truth's unleavened bread.
And in the name of Christ always
do every work and word;
To God the Father giving praise
through Jesus Christ our Lord.
HYMN 69. Perpetuity and Power of Christ's Resurrection.
Romans 6.9.
CHrist being risen from the dead,
now never dies again:
No longer over Christ our Head
may death for ever reign.
For dying he took sin away,
at once and altogether:
But living is without decay,
and lives to God for ever.
So count your selves as dead to sin,
But yet to life restored,
To live to God through grace brought in
By Jesus Christ our Lord.
To God the Father and the Son
and Holy Ghost therefore,
Be Glory as at first was done,
and shall be evermore.
HYMN 70. Power and prevalency of Christ's Resurrection.
1 Cor. 15.20.
NOW Christ is risen from the dead,
the hope that Christians have:
And is to be acknowledged
the first fruits from the Grave.
For as by man's defection
Came sin and death to reign,
So came the Resurrection
by man to live again.
Rev. 1.4.
For as by Adam all men dye,
So all by Christ revive:
And in the twinkling of an eye
must all be made alive.
To God the Father and the Son
and Holy Ghost therefore,
Be Glory done as first begun,
and shall be evermore.
HYMN 71. Praise to the Creator.
Have mercy, etc.
Rev. 4.11.
WOrthy art thou, O Lord,
to wear the glorious Crown:
All honor we ascribe to thee,
All power and all renown.
For thou, O Lord, alone
did all the Creatures make,
Even all that are, and made they were
for thy good pleasure sake.
Luke 2.14.
Glory to God on high,
on earth be plenteous peace:
And great good will extended still
among men to increase.
HYMN 72. Praise to the giver of Grace.
Ephesians. 3.20.
TO him whose mighty Power exceeds
our asking and our thought,
According to his mighty deeds
which he in us has wrought.
To him let all God's Heritage
give Glory yet again,
By Jesus Christ, from age to age,
world without end, Amen.
HYMN 73. Praise to the Prince of Potentates.
O Lord Consider, etc.
1 Timothy 6.15.
THE blessed and only Potentate,
The King of Kings and Lord of Lords,
Who only has immortal state,
in Light that no access affords.
Whom no man yet did ever see,
nor can behold with mortal eye:
To him all Praise and Honor be,
for ever to Eternity.
HYMN 74. Praise to the Redeemer.
Ye Children, etc.
Rev. 1.5, 6. Ephesians. 5.27.
ALL praise to him whose grace so good
washed off our sin with his own blood,
So to present us pure and clean:
The faithful witness (Christ our head)
The first begotten from the dead,
and Prince of princes here that reign.
Heb 10.14. Rev. 1.6.
Who dying fully cleared the score
Of all his saints for evermore,
By one oblation offered then:
And made us Kings and Priests to God,
And to the Father, O give laud,
and praise to him for ever, Amen.
HYMN 75. Praise to the Trinity.
Give laud, etc.
1 John 5.7. Rev. 1.4.
UNTO the Three in One
that bear Record above,
The Father and the Son,
and holy Spirit of Love,
Be Glory then,
As first begun, and shall be done
for Ever, Amen.
HYMN 76. Remission of Sin.
1 John 1.5.
THIS message have we heard from God,
and showed to great and small,
That God is light, in whom no cloud
of darkness is at all.
If then we say we know the Lord,
and walk without the light,
We plainly falsify our word,
and do not what is right.
But we that walk with him in light
have fellowship together,
And Christ his blood shall wash us white
from all sins whatsoever.
To God the Father and the Son
and holy Ghost therefore
Be Glory as at first was done,
and shall be evermore.
HYMN 77. Renewings of Joy.
Isa. 65.18.
Rejoice, says God, as Joyful men,
in that which I create;
For I create Jerusalem
a joyful happy State.
And they shall build their houses new,
and dwell in what they build:
And plant them Vineyards thereunto,
and with the fruits be filled.
They shall not build and others take
their Habitation seat:
Nor plant (as for a strangers sake)
for other men to eat.
As Trees stand long before they die,
my peoples time so stands:
And mine Elect shall long enjoy
the labors of their hands.
HYMN 78. Restraining of fleshly lusts.
All People, etc.
1 Pet. 2.11.
NOW we beseech You, Brethren dear,
As Strangers, and as Pilgrims here,
Ye would all fleshly lusts control,
As foes that fight against the Soul.
Phil. 2.15.
That pure and blameless ye may be,
The Sons of God, from blemish free,
Amidst a Cross and Crooked race,
Shining as lights in every place.
Phil. 1.10.
That ye may give a full assent
To those things which are excellent:
And also be sincere, and clear
From all offense, till Christ appear.
HYMN 79. Right reasoning of Temptation.
Jam. 1.13.
LET no man say, when drawn by Sin
some evil deed to do,
That it was God that tempted him,
and led him thereunto.
For God Almighty neither can
be tempted unto ill,
Nor ever tempts he any man
to so corrupt a will.
But every man is tempted then,
when his own lust bears sway,
And lust conceived brings guilt on men,
And guilt of sin does slay.
Watch ye therefore, and evermore
pray hard against Temptation:
And with sincere and awful fear
wo^k out your own salvation.
HYMN 80. Sobriety, Prayer and Charity enjoined.
1 Pet. 4.7, 8.
THE end of all things is at hand,
let us therefore have care
To walk in all Sobriety,
and watch to earnest prayer.
And specially let charity
on all sides be kept in;
For Charity helps mightily,
and hides many a sin.
HYMN 81. Solemn ascension of Christ, and leading Captivity captive.
Psalm. 68.18. Ephesians. 4.10.
THOU did, O Christ, ascend on high,
and by almighty power,
Lead captive our Captivity,
in that triumphant hour.
Thou gave then thy gifts to men,
to them that did rebel,
That God the Lord, (the eternal Word)
might with the Gentiles dwell.
To God the Father and the Son
and Holy Ghost therefore,
Be glory done as first begun,
and shall be evermore.
HYMN 82. Spirit of God dwelling in us.
1 These. 3.23, 24.
THIS is the Lord's Commandment,
and chiefly to be done:
That every one should trust upon
the Name of Christ his Son.
And that we should love mutually,
as his Commandment ties,
And doing thus, God dwells in us,
and we in him likewise.
And that the Lord abides in us
hereby a Christian knows,
Namely by his good Spirit it is
which he on us bestows.
HYMN 83. The Benediction from the God of Peace.
Heb. 13.20, 21.
AND now the very God of peace
that brought back Christ (our head)
Even Jesus our sweet Savior,
and raised him from the dead;
That Shepherd of the Sheep so great,
by whose most precious blood
The Lord did grant a Covenant
to our eternal good.
He perfect you in all good works
to do his will aright,
Working in you to act and do
things pleasing in his sight.
Through Jesus Christ our Savior,
who died and rose again,
To whom always be given praise
World without end, Amen.
HYMN 84. The Children of light exhorted*
1 These. 5.4. -- 9.
BRethren, ye are not of the dark,
but children of the light,
Children, I say, of lightsome day,
and not of darksome night.
Let us not sleep in sin therefore,
as others (ill inclined)
But Brethren, we must watchful be,
and of a sober mind.
For they that sleep, do sleep by night,
and drunkards light eschew:
But Christians! they are of the day,
and fear not open view.
Be sober then, and putting on
brest-plates of faith and love:
And take with you that helmet too,
the hope of life above.
For God ordained not us to wrath,
which is for sinners stored,
But to obtain Salvation
through Jesus Christ our Lord.
To Father Son and Holy Ghost
all Glory be therefore,
As first begun and shall be done
henceforth for evermore.
HYMN 85. The Confidence accursed.
Jerem 17.5, 6. Psalm. 106. ult.
CUrsed is man that trusts in man,
to keep him safe from harm;
And lets his heart from God depart,
to make proud flesh his arm.
He shall be like the desert heath,
not seeing future good:
But shall possess the Wilderness,
not having friend or food.
Let Israel's God, the Lord most high,
be magnified therefore:
From first to last, till time be past,
Amen, for evermore.
HYMN 86. The Confidence applauded and blessed.
Isa. 30.18. Jer. 17.7.
Blessed is the man that waits on God,
and does in him confide:
For he shall be like fruitful tree
set by the water side.
Whose leaf (still green) shall feel no heat,
but keep a spreading root,
And shall not fear the droughty year,
nor cease from yielding fruit.
Psalm. 106.48.
Let Israel's God, the Lord most high*
be magnified therefore,
And people then, say all, Amen,
Amen, for evermore.
HYMN 87. The day of grace proclaimed.
2 Cor. 6.2. Romans 10.10, 11.
LO! I have heard thee, says the Lord,
in an accepted time:
And in the day which does display
Salvation unto mine.
Behold (says he) I succored thee,
when Gospel-time took place:
This is that prime appointed time,
this is that day of grace.
And every one that calls upon,
the Name of God most high,
And call's in faith (as Scripture says)
shall sure be saved thereby.
To God the Father and the Son
and Holy Ghost therefore:
Be glory done, as first begun,
and shall be evermore.
HYMN 88. The great Condemnation.
1 John 3.19. Ephesians. 5.13.
THIS is the Condemnation great,
that light to men is brought,
And men loved darkness more than light
because their deeds were naught.
For evil doers hate the light,
nor come they thereunto,
Lest that their deeds should be reproved,
which light is sure to do.
But he that does the works of truth
comes to the light abroad,
Whereby his deeds are manifest
that they are wrought in God.
HYMN 89. The Lively Hope.
Give laud, etc.
1 Pet. 1.3 --
BLessed be God above
the Father of Christ our Lord,
Who, in abundant love,
begat us by his Word
To' a lively hope,
By Christ (our head) raised from the dead,
to raise us up.
To an inheritance new,
pure, endless, incorrupt,
Reserved in Heaven for you,
who by his power are kept,
Through faith to ascend
God's blessed abode, sure to be showed
when time shall end.
Wherein ye much rejoice
though now (if need so press)
The season be for sighs,
and groans of heaviness:
Which sighs and groans
On you take hold, through manifold
temptations.
The trial of your faith
which is of price far higher
Than gold that perishes,
though it be tried with fire:
That then it may
Great glory, praise, and honor raise
at Christ his day.
HYMN 90. The Sluggard rouz^d.
Prove. 6.6.10.4, 5.
GO to the Ant, thou slothful one,
learn of her, and be wise,
Who having Guide or Ruler none
to order or advise,
Provides her meat in Summers heat,
in harvest stores her food;
While thou art deep in sloth and sleep,
and still in that dull mood.
Whereby thy want and poverty
comes fast and fiercely on,
As travaylers come suddenly,
or like an armed man.
For he is sure to grow full poor
that lets his business slack;
But (understand) the diligent hand
makes rich, and feels no lack.
A prudent son is he therefore,
and that shall be his style,
That labors hard, and lays up store
in heat and harvest^ while.
But he that keeps his bed, and sleeps*
in harvest, is to blame,
And fitly shall be styled of all
a son that causes shame.
HYMN 91. The true fast.
Isa. 58.6.
THIS is the fast, and none but this,
chosen, says God, by me,
To loose the bands of wickedness,
and let the oppressed go free.
The heavy burdens to unbind,
all injuries to redress,
To deal thy bread to the hunger-pind*
and house the harbourless.
To cloth the naked, when thou see
in what great need he ^^ood,
And not to hide thy self (in the least)
from thine own flesh and blood.
Then shall thy light break forth as day,
thy health shall soon appear,
Thy righteousness shall lead the way,
God's glory be thy rear.
And thou unto the Lord shall pray,
and answer shall be made:
And thou shall cry, and he shall say,
Lo! here am I thine aid.
If thou shall take away from thee
the yoke of Tyranny,
The beckning fingers mockery,
and speaking vanity.
2. PART.
10, 11, 12.
If thou draw out thy tender soul,
the hungry to relieve,
And with the afflicted do condole
to satiate souls that grieve.
Then shall thy light arise to thee
in thine obscurest night:
And all thy darkness then shall be
as noontide shining bright.
The Lord shall guide thee evermore,
suffice thy soul in drought,
And make thee fat with plenteous store
of blessings poured out.
Thou shall be like the watered soil
within the garden pale,
And as a spring, whose waters boil,
break forth, and never fail.
And they that be produced of thee
shall build the old decays:
And ground-works laid for many an age
thy buildings shall up-raise.
And thou shall then be called of men
repairer of the breach,
Restorer of the dwelling-paths;
so far thy fame shall reach.
HYMN 92. The vile bodies change.
Phil. 3.20. Mat. 24.31.
OUR Conversation is in Heaven,
from whence we do expect
The Lord our Savior Christ to come,
and gather his elect.
And he shall change our body vile,
how vile soever it is,
For to be fashioned (in a while)
a glorious one like his.
His mighty working power to show,
whereby the Holy One
Is able all things to subdue
unto himself alone.
HYMN 93. Warning of Judgment by beginning at God's house.
1 Pet. 4.17.
THE time is come that Judgment must
at God's own house begin:
And if it first attack the just,
what case are sinners in?
And if the righteous scarce go free
from judgment so severe,
What shall the end of sinners be?
or where shall they appear?
Let him therefore that bears distress
according to God's will,
Commit his soul in uprightness
to God's protection still.
As knowing that he does commit
his Soul to him alone,
Who by his power created it,
and is the faithful One.
HYMN 94. Warning of the general dissolution.
2 Pet. 3.9.
THE Lord is not of promise slack,
as some men slackness call,
But is indeed long-suffering,
and patient toward all
Not willing any should be lost,
but all should turn and live,
Because the day of Christ shall come,
and shall no warning give.
When Heaven shall pass away with noise,
the Elements melt with heat,
The Earth and all its works likewise
burn up with fire so great.
Since all things then must be dissolved
what manner of men should we
(With grace and godliness resolved)
in all points aim to be?
HYMN 95. Well approved hearers.
Jam. 1.25 and verse. 22.
THE perfect law of liberty
whoever looks into,
Continuing in it constantly
the same to know and do;
Not being a forgetful one,
but hearing with good heed,
To do the work, that man alone
is blessed in his deed.
Be doers of the word therefore,
and not as nothing else,
But hearers merely, and no more,
deceiving your own selves.
HYMN 96. Whirlwind of God's Wrath.
Jer. 23.19. Romans 1.18.
BEhold a whirlwind of the Lord
with fury over spread,
A grievous whirlwind falling hard
upon the sinners head.
Because the wrath of God most high
from Heaven is revealed
Against lewd men's Iniquity
that truth have so concealed.
Romans 1.19, 25.
For that which may be known of God
is manifest in them,
For God has made it understood,
the^r doings to condemn.
Who changed the truth of God to lies,
and creatures did adore,
And the Creator did despise,
who is blessed for evermore.
26.28.32.
The lusts therefore of vilest kind
God gave them up unto,
And to a Reprobated mind,
unseemly things to do.
Who knowing well God's Judgment just
what death such men deserve,
Both do such things, and please their lust
in liking those that swerve.
To Father Son and Holy Ghost
all glory be therefore,
As was and is to the uttermost,
and shall be evermore.
HYMN 97. Winking at the times of ignorance.
Act. 17.30.1.7. Mat. 24.36.
GOD winked at the times that were
in former blindness spent,
But now are all men every where
commanded to repent.
Because the Lord (whose power's no less)
has set the day (unknown)
To judge the world in righteousness,
by his appointed one.
Act. 17.31. Romans 6.9.
Whereof he has sufficiently
informed us all before,
By raising him miraculously
from death to die no more.
To Father Son and Holy One
be all the glory then,
As has been done since time begun,
World without end, Amen.
HYMN 98. Works, Words and Thoughts for the Lord's Day.
All People, etc.
Mark 2.27. Rev. 1.10.
THIS is the day God made for man
To Spiritualize a Christian;
This is the day, upon record,
Whereof the Son of Man is Lord.
Isa. 58.13.48.17.
Lord, make thy day my dear delight
To think, and speak, and act aright;
For Thou alone art God most high,
That teach us to edify.
Ibidem. Psalm. 139. ult.
Thou art our guide, and thou do show
The way wherein we ought to go:
Cause us to take the path most blessed
That leads to everlasting rest.
Heb. 4.9.3.
For such a rest there does remain
For God's own People to obtain,
And all that are believers true
Are sure to enter thereinto.
Rev. 4.13.
All glory to the Holy One
That sits upon the Sovereign Throne,
And to the Lamb of God therefore
Be Praise and Honor evermore.
2. PART.
2 These. 3.1. Psalm. 51.13.
LORD, give thy Gospel a free course,
And crown it with effectual force,
That converts may come in to Thee,
And Saints, this day, built up may be.
Col. 4.3. Rev. 3.8. John 5.25.
A door of Utterance open, Lord,
To him that speaks thy Holy Word:
A door of Entrance also give,
That thy dead men may hear and live.
Rev. 3.7.
O thou that have at thy command
The Keys of David in thy hand,
Thou only openest or can shut
Into whose hands those Keys are put.
Luke 24.45. Psalm. 51.15.
Open our hearts to apprehend
The Scriptures which thy Prophets penned:
And open, Lord, our lips always
To make our mouth show forth thy praise.
Rev. 4.13.
All glory to the Holy One
That sits upon the Sovereign Throne,
And to the Lamb of God most high
Be given praise perpetually.
HYMN 99. Wrongs to be remitted, or a Lesson of true Charity.
Mat. 18.21. Heb. 12.25.
THUS Peter to our Savior spoke;
How often, O Lord, said he,
Must I forgive my Brothers faults?
Till seven times must it be?
Our Savior made him this reply,
I, that do speak from Heaven,
Say not to thee till seven times,
but times full seventy seven.
For if ye pardon faults to men,
this Charity assures,
That God your heavenly Father then
will also pardon yours.
But if ye do not, from your heart,
forgive, as ye should do,
Your heavenly Father will impart
no pardon unto you.
Rev. 1.4 --
To God the Father and the Son
and Holy Ghost therefore,
Be glory done as first begun,
and shall be evermore.
HYMN 100. Worldly CARES forbidden.
Mat. 6.31, 25, 32.
O Take no thought solicitous
what you shall eat or drink:
And wherewithal you should be clothed
be never toiled to think.
Is not the life much more than meat,
the body than the clothes?
And that your need of these is great
your heavenly Father knows.
26, 28, 29.
The fowls that neither sow nor reap,
nor into Barns do gather,
Consider how they are supplied
by your celestial Father.
Think how, in fields, the Lilies grow,
that neither toil nor spin:
Yet made that glory no such show
that Solomon lived in.
30, 25.
And, sure, if God so cloth the grass,
(cut down when at the height)
Shall he not then much more cloth you,
O ye of little faith?
Take ye therefore no thoughtfull care
for present life, I say,
What ye should eat, or drink, or wear,
for bodily array.
32. 1 Pet. 5.7. Jude 25.
For after all these things abroad,
the Gentiles do pursue:
But cast ye all your care on God,
for he takes care for you.
God only wise our Savior
have all the glory (then)
Dominion, Majesty and Power,
both now, and ever, Amen.
2. PART. Phil. 4.6.
Be careful for no worldly thing,
but (still) in all distress
Your Prayers and Supplications bring
to God, with thankfulness.
7.
And then the peace which God imparts,
past all that can be known,
Shall sweetly keep your minds and hearts
through Christ, the Holy One.
Jude 25.
God only wise our Savior,
have all the glory (then)
Dominion, Majesty and Power,
world without end, Amen.
The end of the First Century.
The Second Century.
Hymn CI.
Acclamations of Praise for Babylon's Fall.
Rev. 14.8.16.5.
NOW Babylon is fallen and sunk, drunk
that City great in state:
Because she made the Nations
with wine adulterate.
And Thou, O Lord, art righteous,
who art, and always wast,
And art to come most glorious,
for judging as thou have.
6, 7.
For thy Saints blood hangs on the score,
thy Prophets blood they shed:
And blood to drink thou gav'st them store,
as they have merited.
Even so, Lord God omnipotent,
we gladly do confess,
Thy Judgments are most eminent
for truth and righteousness.
19.3, 1, 7.
Now Allelujah sing aloud,
Salvation, Glory, Fame,
Be given to the Lord our God,
and Honor to his Name.
Be glad in God (for this just doom)
rejoice and honor Him:
The Marriage of the Lamb is come,
his Wife has made her trim.
HYMN 102. ALLELVJAH for the same.
Give laud, etc.
Rev. 19.5, 6.
PRaise to our God proclaim,
O ye his Servants all,
And ye that fear his Name,
together, great and small.
Allelu-jah,
For God supreme with power does reign,
and bears the sway.
9.1.
O they be ever blessed,
that shall be called unto
The Lambs great Marriage Feast,
These are God's words most true:
Allelu-jah,
Strength, Glory, Power, and Fame to our
Lord God always.
2.
For thou have powered forth
thy wrath on that great whore,
That did corrupt the earth
with all her acts impure:
And have, this day,
Avenged the flood of thy Saints blo^d,
Allelu-jah.
11.15.
The Kingdoms of this world
are every one become
The Kingdoms of our Lord,
and of his Christ (his Son)
And he, always,
Shall reign on high, with Majesty,
Allelu-jah.
HYMN 103. ALMS-DEEDS.
Isa. 32.8. Psalm. 112.9.
THE Just devises liberal things,
and by such things shall stand:
He has dispersed his Charity,
and with a liberal hand.
With honor and with dignity
his horn shall sure be raised:
And these his deeds of piety
for ever shall be praised.
2 Cor. 9.6. Ecc. 11.1.
For he that sows liberally
shall gather many a heap:
And he that sows sparingly,
but sparingly shall reap:
Then, on the waters cast thy bread,
it shall not be in vain:
For when long times accomplished,
it shall be found again.
Prove. 19.17.
For he that gives to the poor
does lend unto the Lord,
And, trusting him, he shall be sure
to have it all restored.
HYMN 104. Blessed Death.
Rev. 14.13.
BLessed, O blessed are the dead
that in the Lord do die:
Thus has the Spirit witnessed,
and most assuredly.
For from their toils that were extreme,
they are in quiet re^^:
Their works likewise do follow them,
to make them truly blessed.
Isa 57.2.
Thus shall they enter into peace,
and quiet rest possess,
In blessed beds, each one of these
that walk in uprightness.
HYMN 105. Blessings of Obedience.
Prove. 3.1, 2, 3.
MY Son, keep my Commandments,
forget not my decree,
For length of days, long life and peace
shall these things add to thee.
Then let not truth and mercy kind
forsake thee and depart,
About thy neck my Precepts bind,
and write them in thy heart.
4. Chap. 2.5, 6.
So shall thou find a good respect
and understanding, then,
Approved in the sight of God,
and in the sight of men.
Then shall thou understand and know,
his wisdom and his fear:
For from his mouth does wisdom flow,
and he gives knowledge clear.
10, 11.9.
When Wisdom enters in thy heart,
and is thy souls delight,
Discretion shall preserve thee then,
and knowledge keep thee right.
Then righteousness shall readily
by thee be understood:
Judgment likewise and equity
and every path that is good.
Mat. 25.29. Prove. 4.18.
For unto every one that has
there shall be given more:
And he shall have abundant grace
still to increase his store.
For like unto the shining light
is every good man's way,
Which more and more shines clear and bright,
unto the perfect day.
2. PART.
Deuteronomy. 28.1, 2, 3, 4.
If thou shall hearken diligently
To all that God commands,
The Lord thy God shall set thee high
above all other Lands.
And all these blessings shall come on,
and overtake thee soon:
The blessings of the Town and Field,
and blessings of the Womb.
5, 6, 27.
The Lord shall bless thee mightily
with Fruits upon thy Ground:
Thy Flocks of Sheep shall multiply,
thy Cattle shall abound.
The Lord shall take away from thee
all sickness and disease,
And lay upon thee no such Plague
as did on Egypt seize.
7, 12.
The Lord shall smite thine enemies
that rise up in thy sight,
One way against thee shall they rise,
and seven ways take their flight.
The Lord shall make the Heavens give rain
in season on thy Land:
And prosper thee in all thy works
which thou shall take in hand.
9. 1 Samuel 15.22.
The Lord shall then establish thee
A people of his praise:
If thou shall keep to his decree:
and walk in all his ways.
For better is Obedience
than Bullocks, Goats and Lambs,
And harkening to the will of God,
than all the fat of Rams.
HYMN 106. Blessings on the Mount, or Blessed Qualifications.
Mat. 5.3. to the 10.
BLessed, O blessed are the poor,
the poor, I say, in spirit:
For they shall have the Kingdom, sure,
of Heaven, to inherit.
And blessed they that mourn and weep,
for they shall meet with mirth:
And blessed also are the meek,
for theirs is all the earth.
Blessed are they that hunger much,
and thirst for righteousness,
For God shall satisfy all such,
with comforts that refresh.
And blessed are the merciful,
for God will show them Grace:
And blessed are the pure in soul,
for they shall see his face.
Blessed are they that strive for peace*
to make men to accord:
For we must call all such as these
the Children of the Lord.
And blessed are the sufferers
for love of righteousness:
Because a Kingdom shall be theirs
in Heaven to possess.
HYMN 107. Call out of Babylon.
Have mercy, etc.
Rev. 18.4, -- 8.
COme out of Babylon,
my people, at my Call:
Lest, for her sake, ye should partake
her sins and plagues withal.
Because her sins have reached
unto the Heavens high:
And God does find, and call to mind
all her iniquity.
Reward her to the full,
as she rewarded you:
And fill her cup twice double up,
as she was wont to do.
Look how much she has been
a proud Luxurious Liver,
So much inflict her torments strict,
and so much sorrow give her.
For thus, within her heart,
I sit a Queen, says she:
No desolate poor widows state,
nor sorrow shall I see.
And therefore shall her plagues
come on her in one day:
Famine, and death, and mournful breath
to make her pine away.
And she shall utterly
be burnt with fire at length,
For God the Lord, that does reward
and judge her, has such strength.
HYMN 108. Charities Qualifications.
1 Cor. 13.4, 5.
LOng-suffering is Charity:
and most exceeding kind:
It envies not, nor vaunts it self,
nor is puffed up in mind*
Does not unseemly bear it self,
it seeks not its own:
Is not provoked easily,
and evil it thinks none.
6, 7, 8.
It Joys not in iniquity,
but in the truth takes joy:
Believes, and bears, indures and hopes
in all things patiently.
And Charity fails not at all,
but Prophecies shall fail:
And Tongues shall cease, and Knowledge fade,
but Love shall still prevail.
13.
And now do Faith and Hope abide,
and Charity, these three:
But that which is most magnified,
is Love and Charity.
HYMN 109. Chastisement.
Heb. 12.5, 6.
THE castigation of thy God,
my Son do not despise:
And when rebuked by his Rod
faint not in any wise.
For whom he loves he never leaves
without chastisement fit:
And every Son whom he receives
must to his scourge submit.
7, 8.
By his chastisement if he bleed,
Son-l^ke you have your lot:
For what Son is there whom indeed,
the Father chast'neth not.
But if ye no chastisement bear,
which all partake of here:
Then Bastards verily ye are,
and not his Children dear.
11.
And now, indeed, no chastening
does, for the present, seem
A joyou^, but a grievous thing,
as usually we deem.
But afterward, it, ne'rtheless,
does yield us evidently
The peaceful fruits of righteousness,
when exercised thereby.
HYMN 110. Christ his Benefits.
Ephesians 1.3. 1 Cor. 1.30.
BLessed be God that of his grace
has us so richly stored
With spiritual gifts in heavenly place,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Made to us wisdom, righteousness,
and sanctifying grace;
Redemption also, to possess
the purchased heavenly place.
2 Cor. 5.21. Joh. 14.6. Ephesians. 2.18.
Made also to be sin for us,
who from all sin was free,
That we the perfect righteousness
of God, in Christ, might be.
The way, the truth, and life he is,
and tho^ow him alone
We, by one Spirit, have access
unto the Holy One.
Col. 3.11.
Where there is neither Greek nor Jew;
nor Sex of great or small,
Barbarian, Scythian, bond or free,
but Christ is all in all.
2 PART. Romans 8.1, 2.
There is no condemnation now
to them that are in Christ:
Who by the Spirit walk with God,
not as by flesh enti^'d.
Because the Law of Spirit and Life,
which is in Christ our Lord,
Has made us free from force of sin,
and us from death restored.
3. Gal. 4.4. 1* Pet. 1.8.
For when the Law was weak through Flesh,
and had no strength to save,
God sent his Son of Virgin-seed,
and him to us he gave:
Whom having never seen we love,
and through bel^ef (no less)
Rejoice with joy uns^eakable,
and full of gloriousness.
Jude 25. Rev. 4.13.
God only wise our Savior,
that on the Throne does sit,
Have honor, glory, praise and power,
for ever, so be it.
HYMN 111. Christ's Commission.
Mat. 10.1, 8.
WHenas our Lord had called his twelve
he gave them power at large
Against all Devils and Disease;
and thus he gave them charge:
Go heal the sick, the Leaprous cleanse,
the dead men cause to live:
Cast Devils out, your grant is free,
and therefore freely give.
14, 15, 16.
Whosoever receives or he^rs you not,
it shall be far more ease
For Sodom, and Gomorrah's Land,
at judgment than for these.
Behold as Sheep in midst of Wolves,
I send you forth, says he:
The Serpents wisdom therefore use,
and Doves simplicity.
2. PART.
Mat 28.18, 19.
Behold all power is given me
in Heaven, and Earth likewise:
Go therefore into all the world,
and Nations gospe^ize.
Baptize them in the Fathers Name,
in every Land and Coast:
And in the Name of God the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost.
20. Rev. 19.16. Gal. 1.5.
And teach them to observe and do
whatever I command:
And I, behold, am now with you,
and while the world does stand.
To Christ the King of Kings therefore,
and Lord of Lords most high,
Be praise, and glory evermore
to all eternity.
HYMN 112. Communion of Saints.
Heb. 12.22, 23.
NOW are we come to Sion Mount,
the City of abode,
The Heavenly Jerusalem,
where dwells the living God.
To Hosts of Angels numberless,
and to the assembly there,
The General Church of God's first born,
whose names in Heaven appear.
24. Mat. 25.32.
And unto God the Judge of all
(on whom the world must wait)
And to the Spirits of all just men,
made perfect in that State.
To Jesus Mediator of
the covenant now made new,
Who^e sprinkled blood speaks better things
than Abel^s blood could do.
Rev. 5.13.
Blessing, and glory, and renown,
then give we altogether,
To him that on the Throne sits down,
and to the Lamb for ever.
HYMN 113. Confession of Christ.
Mat. 10.32. Romans 10.10.
HIM that confesses me to men,
will I, says Christ, record,
And will acknowledge him again,
before my heavenly Lord.
For man believes to righteousness,
with humble heart alone:
And with the tongue does man confess
unto Salvation.
1 Timothy 3.16.
This Mystery of Godliness
is very great and high*
God manifested in the flesh,
the Spirit did justify.
The blessed Angels saw his face,
his word the Gentiles heard:
Believed on in the world he was,
to God's right hand preferred.
HYMN 114. Confession of Sin.
All People, etc.
Heb. 1.13. Dan. 9.6.
O Lord that art of purer eye
than to behold iniquity:
We all have sinned, we confess,
and have committed wickedness.
Isa. 59.12. Ezr. 9.6.
Our trespasses against us show,
our sins we cannot choose but know:
For they are swollen above our head,
and are unto the Heavens spread.
Luke 15.18.
O Father we have grievously
offended Thee, that dwell'st on high;
Unworthy to be owned therefore,
as thy dear Children any more.
Ezra 9.13. Ezekiel. 18.32.
Yet have thou never punished sin,
so much as our deserts have been:
Nor is the death of him that dies
a matter pleasing in thine eyes.
Neh. 9.27. Ezekiel. 13.32.
For thou art unto anger slow,
and do with grace and mercy flow:
Thou art most ready to forgive,
therefore let us return and live.
HYMN 115. Confidence in God.
O Lord consider, etc.
Hab. 3.17, 18.
ALthough the fig tree shall not spring,
although the Vine no grape shall yield,
The Olive fail her fruit to bring,
nor any food be in the field.
The flock be cut off from the fold,
no beasts can in the stalls be had:
Yet in the Lord my joys shall hold,
in God my Savior I^le be glad.
HYMN 116. The Conquest.
All People, etc.
Deuteronomy. 33.26, to the end.
THere is not one ('it is truly said)
like Jeshurun's great God on high,
Who rides on heaven for thy aid,
with excellency on the sky.
The eternal God thy refuge is,
his everlasting Arms thy stay:
He will thrust out thine enemies:
before thee, saying, kill and slay.
Then Israel shall dwell safe, unmixt,
and on a Land of Corn and Wine;
There Jacob's Fountain shall he fixed,
the Heavens dropping on his Vine.
O happy Israel! we record,
whom like to thee does God advance?
O people saved by the Lord!
the shield of thy deliverance.
Thy excellency's Sword is he,
and all thy foes of foreign Powers
Shall be found liars unto thee,
and thou shall tread on their high Towers.
HYMN 117. Conscience.
2 Timothy 1.5. Prove. 4.23. Act. 21.16.
THE end of all the Law is Love,
out of an heart unstained:
A conscience that we can approve,
and out of Faith unfeigned.
Keep, then, your heart with diligence
with all the care you can:
A Conscience void of all offense,
both toward God and Man.
Heb. 10.22. 2 Cor. 1.12. 1 John 3.21.
And so draw near with upright heart,
with faith both full and sure,
Our Conscience cleans'd, our Bodies washed
with Baptism-water pure.
And our rejoicing shall be this,
our consciences attest:
For if our hearts condemn us not,
on God we boldly rest.
HYMN 118. Contentation.
Prove. 30.8, 9.
LORD give me neither poverty,
nor too abundant store:
Give me to live conveniently,
and I desire no more.
Not riches, Lord, too largely deal,
lest pride should be my bane:
Nor poverty, lest I should steal,
and take God's Name in vain.
Phil. 4.11, 12. Heb. 13.5.
And teach me, if my state be scant,
or if I fullness find,
To know how to abound, or want,
with a contented mind.
And let my conversation still
be void of covetousness:
For God has said, I never will
forsake thee in distress.
HYMN 119. Covenant-Grace.
Give laud, etc.
Isa. 55.1, 2, 3.
HO, all that thirst and pine,
come to the waters here:
And, ye that have no coin
Come buy, and eat good cheer:
O Come, I say,
Buy milk and wine, without your coin,
without your pay.
Why do ye money spend
for that which is not bread,
And labor to no end,
not b^ing filled or fed?
Hark diligently,
And eat ye food, both fat and good,
to your souls joy.
Incline your ear, and come
hear, and your soul shall live,
And I will make you room,
and I to you will give
My Covenant-grace:
The mercies sure, which shall endure
to David's race.
2. PART.
Give laud, etc.
Ezekiel. 36.25.
Besprinkle you will I,
wi^h water that shall cleanse:
And I will purify
your conscience by this means
from Idols then,
And all excess of filthiness
I Will make you clean.
26.
I will in you create
a heart with grace refined:
I will regenerate
the Spirit of your mind:
your heart of stone
I will remove, and make it prove
a tender one.
27.
My Spirit I will place
within you, and will cause
That you shall (by my grace)
walk in my Statute-Laws;
so that ye shall
Observe with trust my judgments just,
and do them all.
3. PART.
Give laud, etc.
Heb. 10, 11.
And this shall be (in sum)
the Covenant of my word*
Made good, in days to come,
to Israel, says the Lord:
My Laws will I
Put in their hearts, and inward parts,
effectually.
12.
And they shall all know me,
together great and small:
And gracious I will be
to their offenses all.
Their sins therefore
And doings ill, I never will
remember more.
Jer. 32.40.
My people then shall they
be styled, and I their God,
Nor will I turn away
from doing of them good:
My fear shall be
In them so put, that they shall not
depart from me:
4. PART.
Jer. 50.5.
They shall enquire the way
with faces Sion-ward,
Come, join ye, shall they say,
in Covenant with the Lord,
such as shall bind
Perpetually, and never be
put out of mind.
32, 39.
And I will give them all
one heart, and way, says God,
And fear me then they shall,
for ever, for their good:
Their good always,
And of their Sons and little ones
in after days.
Ezekiel. 34.23. Zech. 14.9.
One Shepherd I will place
over my pasture stock
(A King of David's race)
and he shall feed my Flock:
Then shall there be
One Lord alone, and his name one,
in midst of thee.
HYMN 120. Counsel of Christ.
Rev. 3.18.
I Counsel thee to buy of me
Gold tried in the fire:
And white array to make thee rich,
and trim in thine attire.
That in this dress, thy nakedness
and shame may not appear:
With eye salve then anoint thine eyes,
to make thy eyesight clear.
19, 20.
All whom I love I do reprove
with wholesome chastisement:
Be zealous therefore in my way,
and of thy sloth repent.
Behold how I, most graciously,
stand at the door and knock,
If any man attend to me,
and will the door unlock,
21, 22.
I will come in and sup with him,
and he with me* alone,
And he that overcomes with me,
shall sit upon my Throne.
Who has an ear, now let him hear,
what things the Spirit says
Unto the Churches, every where,
to keep them in their Faith.
HYMN 121. CREED.
All People, etc. Or, O Lord consider.
Gal. 1.8. 1 Cor. 3.11. Ephesians. 2.20.
SHould we another Gospel preach,
or if a glorious Angel durst
Contrary to our Doctrine teach,
let him be holden as accursed.
Other foundation none can lay,
than what is laid, to build upon,
Namely what Holy Scriptures say,
Christ that is made chief cornerstone.
Ephesians. 4.4, 5. 1 Co. 8.7. Ephesians. 1.7. To. 4. ult. 25.
One Body, and one Spirit free,
one hope, whereto we have our Call:
One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism,
one God, and Father of us all.
One Jesus Christ, in whom we have
redemption, through his precious blood,
Who died for us, from sin to save,
and rose to make the assurance good.
To. 8.34 Jo. 2.3. Luke 24.47* Act. 26.18. Heb. 1.3.
Who by the word of his command
made and upholds whatever is:
Who sits enthroned at God's right hand,
and intercedeth there for his.
Repentance preached in his Name,
and free remission of our sin:
That we the inheritance might claim,
among the Saints by faith in him.
Heb. 6.1. Act. 3.19. Mat. 24.35. Luk* 1.45.
The Resurrection of the Flesh,
and the eternal Judgment Day:
When Christ his Presence shall refresh,
and Heaven and Earth shall pass away.
Blessed are they that have believed,
for every thing, and every word
Shall be accomplished, and achieved,
that has been spoken by the Lord.
HYMN 122. Deborah's Song.
Judge. 5.2, 3.
SIng praise, O Israel, to the Lord,
that has avenged thee:
When as the people went to fight,
offering themselves so free.
Ye Kings give ear, ye Princes hear,
I, even I will sing,
And sweetly raise my voice in praise,
to Israel's mighty King.
8.6, 7, 10.
My heart is toward the Governors
that did their help afford:
Offering themselves so willingly,
wherefore bless ye the Lord.
Ye travelers, and passengers,
and ye that ride in state,
And ye that yet in judgment sit
now speak it in the Gate.
11.6, 7.
They that are freed from frightfull noise
of Archers at the Well,
Shall often rehearse God's righteous Acts,
his Acts to Israel.
The Passengers were wanderers
in bypath up and down:
And none could dwell in Israel,
but in a walled Town.
2. PART.
12, 19.
Awake, awake, O Deborah!
rise, Barak, sing a Song:
Abinoam's Son, thy captives lead;
thy captives lead along.
There fought the Kings, hard by the springs,
of great Megiddoes plain:
But brought away no prize nor prey,
to glory of their gain.
30, 20.
Curse Meroz (said God's Angel then)
curse Meroz bitterly:
That would not help the Lord against
a potent Enemy.
But there were those against our foes
that fought from Heaven that day:
The Stars in course, did fight with force
against keen Sisera.
27, 31.
At Jael's feet he bowed, he fell;
he bowed and fell down dead:
She smote and pierced his temples through,
and then cut off his head.
So perish those that are thy foes,
but, Lord, let all thy Lovers
Be like the Sun, when he (at noon)
his brightest beams discovers.
HYMN 123. Diligence in Duties.
Phil. 2.12. 2 Pet. 1.8, 10.
WORK out your own salvation
with trembling and with fear,
That barren ye may neither be,
nor fruitless plants appear.
But use all circumspection
that ye may so find out
Your Calling and Election,
to make it out of doubt.
5, 6.
Add to your Faith the Virtuous Path,
to Virtue Knowledge knit:
With this advance sweet Temperance,
and Patience join to it.
To Patience add true Piety,
with Piety express
The Kindness that is Brotherly,
and Charitableness.
5, 10, 11.
Besides all this ye may not miss
of Diligence in all:
For if ye do these things pursue,
then can ye never fall.
Opening a door of large extent
(by this devout behavior)
Into the Kingdom permanent
of Christ our Lord and Savior.
HYMN 124. Dragon's Downfall.
Ye Children, etc.
Rev. 12.10, 11.
NOW is salvation come abroad,
The strength and Kingdom of our God:
now has his Christ extolled his might,
For the Accusers made to fall,
He that accused our Brethren all,
before our God, both day and night:
And him they quelled and overcame
By the pure blood of Christ the Lamb
and by their testimony true:
For by that double-edged Sword
(The witness of their faithful word)
this enemy they overthrew.
12.
Nor did they spare their utmost breath,
Nor love their lives unto the death,
but boldly laid down all at stake:
Therefore, ye Heavens, lift up your voice,
And ye that dwell in them rejoice,
in this Salvation to partake.
But woe to you, to you, O Sirs,
The Earth and Seas inhabiters,
guilty of our Accuser's Crime:
For Satan is come down to you,
Having great wrath, because he knew
he now must have but little time.
11.17.7.10, 12.
We give thee thanks with one consent:
O Lord, our God omnipotent,
Which art, and wast, and art to come:
For thou have taken unto thee
Thy great power and Authority
and reigned with Jesus Christ thy Son.
Salvation to our God therefore,
Wisdom, and blessing evermore
to him that on the Throne does sit:
And to the Lamb be glory bright,
Thanksgiving, honor, power, and might:
Amen, say we, and so be it.
HYMN 125. Easy Yoke.
Have mercy, etc.
Mat. 11.28.
COME to me, says the Lord,
All ye that are oppressed,
And grieved within, by weight of sin,
and I will give you rest.
Take on you my sweet yoke,
and learn of me this Art,
How meek to be and like to me,
that am of humble heart.
So shall your souls find rest,
not to be had elsewhere:
My yoke alone's an easy one,
my burden light to bear.
HYMN 126. Errors and Heresies to be avoided.
Gal. 5.1. Ephesians. 4.14.
STand steadfastly in liberty,
wherewith ye are made free:
And in the yoke which Christ has broke
no more entangled be.
Nor childishly transported by
loose Doctrines various wind:
Through their deceit that lie in wait,
beguiled souls to blind.
15. 1 These. 5.21, 24.
But speaking truth in love thereof,
(and not by error led)
Grow up and spring in every thing,
in him which is the Head.
Prove all (be sure) keep what is pure,
shun all that seems ill:
Faithful is he that calls thee,
who also will fulfill.
2. PART.
Col. 2.8. 2 Cor. 11.19.
Beware lest by Philosophy,
and vain deceit enticed,
Ye follow men's traditions,
which are not after Christ.
For Heresies must needs arise,
and Sects with you be found,
That such as be from error free
may be approved sound.
2 Pet. 3.17, 18.
Be careful then lest wicked men
should draw you to digress,
And there withal you strangely fall
from your own stedfastness.
But grow apace in Heavenly Grace
and knowledge of our Lord:
To whom always be given praise
of all with one accord.
HYMN 127. Esaies Song of Thanksgiving.
O Lord Consider. Or, All People, etc.
Isa. chapter 12.
LORD, I will praise thee now this day,
though thou wast angry with me sore,
Thine anger now thou turn'st away,
and all my comforts do restore.
Behold, God is my Savior strong,
I will confide, as not afraid:
For great Jehovah is my Song,
also my strength and saving aid.
Therefore by means of this supply,
possessed with joy and great delight,
Ye shall draw water plenteously
out of the wells of saving might.
Then shall ye say, O praise the Lord,
call on his Name, declare his deeds
Among the people, and record
how far his noble Fame exceeds.
Sing to the Lord the sweetest Hymns
of solemn praise with joy and mirth,
For he has done most excellent things,
this is well known in all the Earth.
Oh thou that do in Sion dwell,
cry out and shout, for thou do see
The Holy one of Israel
is mighty in the midst of thee.
HYMN 128. Esaie's Triumphant Song.
Ye Children, etc.
Isa. 26.1, 2, 4, 5.
WE have a City very strong,
God sets Salvation all along,
for Walls and Bulwarks every where:
Now open ye the Gates for them
Of righteous Jerusalem,
which keep the truth, to enter there.
And since the Lord Jehovah is
The eternal Rock of strength to his,
in his great Name for ever trust:
He gives the proud the overthrow,
He lays the lofty City low,
flat to the ground, and to the dust.
8, 10, 11.
Yea, Lord, in thine own judgments way,
We waited for thee every day,
our Souls desire is to thy Name:
But let thy favor be declared
To wicked men, they will not regard,
nor learn Religion by the same:
But most unjustly will transgress,
Here in the Land of uprightness,
and will not see God's Majesty:
But they shall see, and see with shame,
And feel, as foes, thy fiery flame,
for envying our felicity.
2. PART.
Isa* 16.18, 19,
Lord, we have been with child in vain,
And we have been in grievous pain,
and as it were, brought forth the wind:
For by our power we have not wrought,
The least deliverance can be thought,
in all the Earth in any kind.
Nor have the dwellers on the earth
Fallen by the powers that we put forth,
but by thy strength are under trod.
For, Lord, thou will ordain, at last,
True peace for us, because thou have
wrought all our work in us, O God.
20, 21.
O come, my people, enter thou,
Into thy secret chambers now,
and shut thy doors about thee fast:
And hide thy self now as it were
But for a little moment there,
until the wrath be over-past.
For lo the Lord comes from his place,
To punish this ungodly race
for wickedness that they maintain:
The Earth shall also now disclose
The bloodshed of our barbarous foes,
and shall no more conceal her slain.
HYMN 129. Example of Saints.
Ephesians. 5.1, 2. Heb. 6.12.
BRethren, be followers of the Lord,
as Children dear and true:
And walk in love with one accord,
as Christ has loved you.
And be not slack through negligence,
but followers of their spirit
That thorough Faith and Patience
the Promises inherit.
13.7. Mat. 5.16.
Whose Faith likewise do ye pursue,
considering the end,
And blessed issue whereunto
Their conversations tend.
And let your light so shine to men,
by what good works they see,
That God your heavenly Father then
much glorified may be.
HYMN 130. Ezekiel's Infant.
Ye Children, etc.
Ezekiel. 16.3, 5, 6.
THUS says the Lord to Israel,
Thy birth and birthplace know I well,
of Canaan's cursed Land to be:
And in the day when thou wast born,
Thou wast cast out to open scorn,
there was no eye to pity thee.
And when I saw thee (passing by)
Polluted in thy blood to lie:
behold it was the time of love,
When in thy blood thou did remain,
I said to thee, and said again,
Live, Infant, Live, blessed from above.
8.11, 14.
Then over thee my skirt I spread,
Thy nakedness I covered,
I swear to thee, and made thee mine:
With ornaments I did thee deck,
I put a Chain upon thy neck,
and Bracelets on those hands of thine:
And thy renown for beauty, then,
Went forth among the heathen men,
that praised it with one accord:
For, true, it was a perfect dress,
Through my exceeding comeliness,
which I put on thee, says the Lord*
HYMN 131. Faith praised.
Heb. 11.1, 2, 13.
FAith is the substance of those things
which once we hope to get:
And the assured evidence
of things not seen as yet.
By it the Elders have obtained
a good report and fame:
And died boldly in this Faith,
before the Promise came.
6. Romans 4.3.
But without Faith and Confidence,
as Scriptures clearly say,
It is a thing impossible
to please God any way.
For he that comes to God must trust
that God is God most high:
And the rewarder of them all
that seek him diligently.
Gal. 3.7, 9.
Know then that they that are of Faith,
are all of Abraham's seed,
And blessed with faithful Abraham,
that are of faith indeed.
HYMN 132. Faith Proved.
Jam. 1.14, 20.
WHAT profits it, my Brethren dear,
if any person says
That he has faith, and has not works,
is that a saving Faith?
But will thou know, O thou vain man,
that Faith by Works unknown,
Is not a living Faith, but dead,
it being all alone.
26. Gal. 5.6.
For as that body is but dead
the which no breath supplies:
So Faith that is not perfected
by Works, is dead likewise.
And neither circumcision,
avails with God above:
Nor yet uncircumcision,
but Faith that works by Love.
HYMN 133. God's Glittering Sword.
Deuteronomy. 32.39, -- 43.
I Kill, says God, and make alive,
I wound, and heal, alone;
And there is none with me can strive,
to rescue any one.
For I lift up my hand on high
to heaven above, and say,
Behold I live eternally,
and am without decay.
If once my hand with Judgment close,
and whets my glittering Sword,
With vengeance on my hateful Foes,
I Will execute my Word:
I Will make mine Arrows drunk with blood,
my Sword shall flesh devour,
The slain and captives shall be food
from the revenging hour.
Rejoice ye Nations with his Land
to whom he will be good:
And (while his foes shall feel his hand)
avenge his Servants blood.
HYMN 134. Government.
2 Samuel 23.1. Deuteronomy. 16.20. 2 Cor. 4.4.1.17. 2 Chr. 19.6. Psalm. 82.1.
THE Prince that Rules over men
must be exceeding just:
And govern in the fear of God
that puts him in trust.
Because the judgment is not man's
but God's (the judge on high)
Who sits among these earthly Gods,
to judge most righteously.
Romans 13.1.5. 1 Timothy 2.2.
And every soul must needs submit
unto the powers supreme:
And, not for wrath, but conscience sake,
be subject unto them.
And pray for Kings and Rulers all,
that we, through their defense,
May live in Peace, and Godliness,
with all good conscience.
2 Cor. 5.10.
For we must every one appear,
and personally come
Before the Judgment seat of Christ,
there to receive our doom.
As has been in the body done
by each man (bond or free)
And as the work is good or bad,
so shall his sentence be.
2. PART.
1 These. 5.12, 13. 1 Pet. 4.10.
Obey those Rulers over you
that warn you in the Lord:
And, for their work-sake prize them much
that preach to you the Word.
As each man has received the gift
let him discharge his place:
As good and faithful Ministers
of God's abundant grace.
1 Th. 5.14. 2 Th. 3.6, 14. 1 Timothy 5.22.
Warn the unruly, help the weak,
support them lest they fall:
Comfort the feeble-minded ones,
be patient toward all.
Withdraw from the inordinate,
to shame them from their sin:
And no way be partakers of
the sins that such live in.
Heb. 12.15, 16. 1 Cor. 14.26, 33.
And let no root of bitterness,
no person vain and vile,
Spring up with you to trouble you,
and many to defile.
Let all be done to edify,
for God's the God of peace,
In all the Churches of the Saints,
to make disorders cease.
2 Cor. 13.11. Romans 13.8.
And live in peace and holiness,
whereto ye have your call:
And then the God of love and Peace
shall still be with you all.
And owe to no man any thing,
but one to love another,
For it is the Laws accomplishing,
to be a perfect Lover.
3. PART.
Ephesians. 6.1, 2, 4.
Obey your Parents in the Lord,
ye Children, as it is fit:
This is the first Commandment,
with Promise made to it.
Parents, provoke not unto wrath
your Children, in their youth:
But bring them up in fear of God,
and nurture of his Truth.
5.6, 9.
Servants, obey your Masters will
with reverential fear:
Not with eye-service, pleasing men,
but as Christ's servants dear.
And, Masters, do your Servants right
knowing ye have on high
A Master who has no respect
of Persons partially.
Rev. 1.7.22.12.
Behold, he comes in the Clouds,
whom every eye shall see:
And every man shall have reward
so as his works shall be.
HYMN 135. Government of the Tongue.
Jam. 1.26. Mat. 12.36.
IF he that seems religious
does not his tongue refrain,
That man's Religion, verily,
is altogether vain.
For, sure, of every idle word
that any man shall say,
He is to give account thereof
at God's great Judgment day.
5.22. Jam. 3.2.
Rash anger shall be judged a sin,
contemptuous speech goes higher:
And he that says, thou fool, shall be
in danger of hell fire.
But not to sin in Word or Tongue
does testify and tell
A perfect man, and one that can
rule all the body well.
HYMN 136. Harvest.
Have mercy, etc.
Mat. 9.37, 38.
THE Harvest, truly Sirs,
is very great to view:
But lo, the faithful Laborers
are but a very few:
Pray ye the Lord therefore,
whose own the Harvest is,
To send out Laborers good store
into this field of his.
Joh. 4.35, 36. Phil. 4.17.
That he that does engage
to sow and reap, or either,
May have eternal life for wage,
and both rejoice together.
And that our fruit amount
(as we desire and pray)
Abundantly to our account,
in that great Harvest-day.
HYMN 137. High and lofty One.
O Lord Consider, etc.
Isa. 57.15.
THUS says the high and lofty One,
inhabiting Eternity,
Whose Name is Holy; be it known,
I dwell in Holy place on high.
Also with him that is contrite,
whose humble Spirit sighs and groans,
To cheer the humbled in my sight,
to cheer the heart of contrite ones.
16.66.2.
For, still, contending with the frail,
and keeping anger unallay'd,
The Spirits would before me fail,
and those poor souls which I have made.
But unto him will I be sure
to look with favor, says the Lord,
That is in Spirit meek, and poor,
and trembles at my Holy Word.
HYMN 138. Humiliation.
Hos. 6.1.
COme now, and let us search and try
the ways that we have trod:
And turn again unfeignedly
unto the Lord our God:
For he has torn and put to pain,
and he has made the wound;
And he will bind it up again,
and make us whole and sound.
3. Jam. 4.9.
After two days he will revive,
and raise us up the third:
And set us in his sight alive,
that felt so sharp a Sword.
Be then afflicted, weep and mourn,
(repentance to express)
Your laughter into mourning turn,
your joy to heaviness.
10. Mic. 6.9. Joel 2.13.
Hear him that smites and the Rod,
humble your selves and stoop:
Cast down your selves in sight of God,
and he shall raise you up.
For he is gracious, merciful,
and unto anger slack:
Of kindness great, and one that will
his judgments soon call back.
HYMN 139. Idolatry Forbidden.
1 Cor. 10.14.22. 2 Cor. 6.14.
FLEE fast from all Idolatry,
from Idols keep you free:
Provoke we God to Jealousy?
are we more strong than he?
With Belial can Christ accord?
or can these things unite
The house of Idols and our Lord,
the darkness and the light?
15, 16, 17, 18.
Unrighteousness, can that combine
with righteousness to dwell?
Or can the true believer join
with any Infidel?
Be therefore separate and clear,
and all uncleanness flee:
And ye my Sons and Daughters dear,
and I your God shall be.
Rev. 3.4.
For but a few do walk aright,
and keep their Garments fair:
And these shall walk with me in white,
for worthy Saints they are.
HYMN 140. Jew and Gentiles Call.
Romans 11.26.15.
THERE comes a Deliverer
from Sion hill on high,
To turn away ungodliness
from Jacob's Family.
For if the World be reconciled
by casting them away,
Much more shall their return be styled
life from the dead that day.
26, 27.16.
And then all Israel shall be saved,
(as Scripture does declare)
Because the Gifts and Calls of God
without repentance are.
For if the first fruits Holy be,
the lump is Holy too:
And if the root yield sanctity,
so shall the branches do.
2. PART.
Romans 11.32, 33.
Yet now has God adjudg'd the Jews
by unbelief to fall,
That he might this occasion choose,
to show his grace to all.
O depth of riches infinite!
and wisdom of our God!
His Judgments O how past our sight!
his Tracks O how untrod!
34, 35, 36.
For who has known the mind of God,
or lent his counsels aid?
Or who has given unto him,
and it shall be repaid?
For of, and thorough him are all,
and pass to him again:
To whom be praise of great and small
for evermore, Amen.
HYMN 141. Jew and Gentiles fullness held out in many Promises.
Ye Children, etc.
Isa. 66.8.
OH who has heard of such a thing,
As now God's power to pass does bring?
or who has seen such things as these?
For shall a Land (can any say)
Be made to bring forth in a day?
are Nations born at once with ease?
Before that Sion traveled,
She presently was brought to bed,
and brought forth Sons by heavenly aid,
Before she traveled she brought forth,
Before her pain she brought the birth,
and of a sweet Man-child was laid.
54.1.66.9.
Break out, O barren Church, and sing
Thou that did (once) no Children bring,
let joyful Songs take up thy life:
Thus says the Lord of thine estate,
The Children of the desolate
are more than of the married Wife.
For shall I bring it to the birth,
And then not bring the Children forth,
says the Almighty Sovereign Lord?
Or shall I cause to bring forth some,
And then untimely shut the womb,
thy God, O Sion, spoke this word.
2. PART.
Isa. 66.10, 11, 12.
Rejoice ye with Jerusalem,
And let her lovers (all of them)
in her spiritual joys partake:
Rejoice, I say, lift up your voice,
Be glad with her, and much rejoice,
all ye that mourned for her sake.
That ye may suck, and take your fill
Of Consolations, which distill
in plenty, from your Mothers breast:
Then shall ye suck (danced on Her knee)
Milk out, and much delighted be
with her abundant gloriousness.
54.7, 8, 60.18.
Though for a very little space,
Angry I was* and hid my face,
and thou wast termed desolate:
Yet will I gather thee again
With kindnesses that shall remain,
and bear an everlasting date.
Destruction shall no more be heard
Within thy Land, nor wasting feared,
nor violence be in thy ways:
But thorowout thy borders all,
Thy Walls Salvation they shall call,
and give thy Gates the Name of praise.
3 PART.
Isa. 51.1, 5.54.2.2. chapter 4.
Hearken, O people, and give ear,
My Righteousness is drawing near,
my saving health I will disclose;
My Arm shall judge the heathen men,
The Isles shall wait upon me then,
and on my power shall they repose.
Enlarge and spread thy Tents apace,
(And Curtains of thy dwelling place)
lengthen thy Cords, and stretch them far:
And men shall break their Swords and Spears
To pruning hooks and Plowing shares,
nor shall they any more learn War.
11.6.49.23.60.20, 22, 23.
The Wolf and Lamb shall jointly feed,
The Leopard with the Calf and Kid,
the Lion and the Youngling fat:
Thy Nursing-Fathers Kings shall be,
Queens Nursing-Mothers unto thee,
they shall bow down before thee flat.
Thy Sun shall never more decline,
Nor yet thy Moon desist to shine,
for God's thy everlasting light:
A little one shall thousands bring,
Strong Nations from a small one spring,
and all thy people shall be right.
4. PART.
Isa. 66.12.60.4.66.13.
Behold (says God) I will extend
The peace of Israel far-an-end,
that like a River it shall seem:
Then shall the glorious Dignity
Of the converted Gentiles be
like to an overflowing stream.
Thy Sons shall come from far and wide,
And (to be nursed at thy side)
thy Daughters from the earths far ends.
Then will I sweetly comfort them,
That dwell in my Jerusalem,
as one whom his dear Mother tends.
14, 24. Psalm. 149.5. Isa. 35.10.
Which when ye see, your heart shall joy,
Your bones shall flourish wonderously,
like a sweet herb that freshly grows.
Then shall the hand of God be known,
Toward his Servants every one,
and his displeasure toward his foes:
For lo, their worm shall never dye,
Their fire shall burn perpetually,
and not be quenched night nor day:
But Saints shall shout upon their beds,
Eternal joy shall crown their heads,
sorrow and sighs shall flee away.
HYMN 142. Imperfection.
Eccl. 7.20. Jam 3.2. 1 Cor. 10.12.
THere is not any in the earth,
(through all the coasts of it)
A righteous man, that still does good,
and does no sin commit.
For, verily, in many things,
we sin, and trespass, all:
Let him therefore that thinks he stands
be careful lest he fall.
Gal. 6.1. Ephesians. 4.32.
And if by imperfection,
ye see a man transgress,
Restore him, ye spiritual ones
with love, and gentleness;
And kind and tenderhearted be,
forgiving mutually,
As God for Christ his sake forgave
all your iniquity.
2. PART.
Gal. 5.17. Romans 7.23.
The Spirit wars against the Flesh,
and this with that does fight:
So that ye cannot do such things
as ye would do, aright:
We, in our members find a Law
averse to that within:
And bringing in captivity
unto the Law of sin.
Jam. 5.16, 20.
Confess your faults, then, mutually,
And pray for one another:
That so ye may be healed thereby,
and grace afresh recover.
Who turns a sinner from the path
wherein he went aside,
Shall thereby save a soul from wrath,
and numerous sins shall hide.
HYMN 143. Joys of Heaven.
Rev. 22.14.3.
BLessed are they whose only strife
is God's good Law to do:
That they may taste the tree of Life,
and have a right thereto.
And that they may have entrance all
into the City Gate,
There, where no curse can ever fall
to alter their Estate.
4,
But there the Throne of God shall be,
and Christ the Lamb's high Throne:
And there his Servants shall be free
to serve the holy One.
And they shall see his blessed face,
and bear his glorious Name,
Which on their foreheads shall have place,
his Image to proclaim.
5.
And there, there shall ensue no night,
(as if their day were done:)
Nor have they need of candlelight,
or shining of the Sun.
For God the Lord (^^om whom it springs)
shall give them light on high:
And they shall reign, as crowned Kings
to all Eternity.
HYMN 144. Judgment-Day Forewarned.
Joh. 5 28, 29.
THE day and hour is drawing nigh,
when all the dead must hear
The voice of him that is most high,
and shall forthwith appear.
All they to sure Salvation
whose works are good and right:
And they to condemnation
in evil that delight.
Prove. 12.28. Romans 6.23. Gal. 6.8.
For life is found in righteous ways,
no death can be therein:
But death the certain wages pays
of all unpardoned sin.
All they that sow to sinful flesh
corruption shall inherit:
But endless life shall them refresh
that sow unto the Spirit.
1 Cor. 15.58.
Be steadfast, Brethren, now therefore,
and always be unmoved;
Abounding now and evermore,
in works of God approved.
Because ye know his Holy Word
does make the Promise plain,
So that your labor in the Lord,
can never be in vain.
2. PART.
Luke 21.34.
Be careful, lest at any time,
you should, by your excess,
Surcharge your souls with surfeiting,
or shameful drunkenness.
And lest your heart be overcome
with weight of worldly cares:
And so, that day, the day of Doom,
overtake you unawares.
1 These. 5.2, 3. Luke 12.47.
Because the day of Christ will come
like as a Thief by night:
And when they say, Peace, Peace, will be,
shall sudden vengeance light.
He that did know his Masters will,
and not himself prepare
To do according to his skill,
full many a stripe shall bear.
37, 38, 44.
But blessed are those Servants all
that watch with wakefull mind:
Whom Christ shall at his coming call
and in this posture find.
He shall come forth assuredly,
and set them at his board:
And make them partners in the Joy
of their advanced Lord.
HYMN 145. Justification.
Romans 8.33, 34.
IT is the Lord that justifies,
who therefore shall condemn?
It is our Savior Christ that died,
or rather rose again.
Who also is at God's right hand
ascended up on high:
And makes intercession there
for us continually.
Heb. 4.16. Col 3.17.
Now therefore let us boldly come
(in certain hope to speed)
Unto the Throne of grace, for grace
to help in time of need.
And let all things we speak or do
be in the name of one,
To God the Father giving thanks
through Christ our Lord alone.
HYMN 146. Laud and Praise for God's Judgments, or the Lambs Song.
Rev. 15.3, 4.
THY works are great and mavelous,
Lord God the Almighty one:
Thy ways are true and righteous,
thou King of Saints alone.
Who shall not fear thee, O most high,
and glorify thy Name;
For thou alone for sanctity
deservest laud and fame*
For all the Nations of the earth
shall come and worship thee:
Because thy judgments are set forth
so plain for us to see.
HYMN 147. Longing after Christ.
Ye Children, etc.
Joh. 6.32, 35. Chap. 7.38.
THE bread of God (so truly called)
That gives life unto the world,
is he that down from Heaven came:
And with this sweet celestial bread,
Lord, let us be replenished,
and give us ever of the same.
For he that (as the Scripture says)
Lays hold on Christ by lively Faith
shall never thirst or hunger more:
For by that Faith, and feeding so,
Out of his belly there shall flow
of living waters plenteous store.
Rev. 22.17, 20. Cant. 8.14. Jam. 5.8.
Come say the Spirit and the Bride,
And so of all let be replied
that hear the Lamb and his dear Wife,
Come all that thirst, and take your fill,
Take freely whosoever will
the water of eternal life.
Make have, my love, and be not slow,
Be like the nimble Heart or Row
tracing upon the Mountains spic'd:
And I, behold, come speedily,
The coming of the Lord draws nigh,
Amen, so come, Lord Jesus Christ.
HYMN 148. Love of God.
Joh. 3.16. 1 John 4 9. Joh. 3.17.
SO greatly God did love the world
that freely he did give
His only and begotten Son,
that we through him might live.
God sent him not into the world
the world for to condemn,
But that he might be manifest
a Savior unto men.
Rev. 1.5. Joh. 3.16. Rev. 21.24.
Who loved us, and gave himself
for our eternal good,
And washed away our scarlet sins
in his own precious blood.
And whosoever trusts in him
shall never perish quite,
But he shall have eternal life,
and live in endless light.
Luke 2.24.
To God therefore that dwells on high
be praise and glory still:
On earth be true tranquillity,
and unto men good will.
2. PART.
1 John 2.3. c. 5.3.
Hereby we know undoubtedly
that we do love the Lord,
By keeping with fidelity
the Precepts of his Word,
And this is sure God's love in us,
that we his Laws fulfill;
Nor do we count them burdenous,
but do them with good will.
4.19. Ephesians. 1.4. 1 John 4.10, 19.
The perfect Love of God most high
is manifested thus,
And we love him so perfectly
because He first loved us.
Herein is love, not ours it is,
but his for our dear sake,
In sending that sweet son of his
our debts to undertake.
Rev. 5.13.
To him that sits upon the Throne,
and to the Lamb therefore
Be glory, strength, dominion,
and honor evermore.
HYMN 149. Love of the World forbidden.
Mat. 16.26. Col. 3.2.
WHAT shall it profit any man
the world to purchase whole,
And thereby miss the certain bliss
of his immortal soul?
Oh set your strong affections then
on things that are above!
And let no worth of things on earth
be motives of your Love.
1 John 2.16.15.
All in the world is pride of Life,
and lusts of flesh and eyes:
Which do not from the Father come,
but from the world they rise.
Love not the world nor things thereof;
if any love so low,
The perfect Love of God above
in him can never flow.
17.
These worldly things all pass away
and peri^h altogether,
But to fulfill God's holy will
makes to abide for ever.
HYMN 150. Marriage.
Heb. 13.4.
THE due estate of Marriage
(as Scripture does assure)
Is honorable every where
(the bed preserved pure:)
But Harlots and Adulterers
that violate this thing,
By practice of unchastity,
will God to Judgment bring.
1 These. 4.4. Col. 3.19, 20.
Then let us every one know how
his vessel to possess
In honorable dignity,
and spotless holiness.
And Husbands dearly love your Wives,
giving no bitter word:
And Wives, submit obediently
to them, as to the Lord.
1 Pet. 3.3, 4.
And your adorning let not be
in any pompous way,
Of pl^ited hair, and wearing gold,
or putting on array.
But of the heart and hidden man,
where no corruption lies,
And of a meek and quiet soul,
which God does highly prize.
1 Cor. 7.39. 1 Pet. 3.7.
And be not yoakt unequally,
but joined in the Lord;
Honoring the Wife (the weaker Sex)
according to the Word.
And live together lovingly,
as heirs of Grace, of Life:
That disagreements hinder not
the prayers of Man and Wife.
Mat. 22.30.
And in the Resurrection, where
none are in Marriage given,
Ye shall be like the Angels there,
Triumphant Saints in Heaven.
HYMN 151. Mediator.
All People, etc.
1 Timothy 2.5.
ONE God there is, and one alone,
and Mediator none but one;
The man whom we Christ Jesus call,
who gave himself full price for all.
1 John 2.1, 3.
If any sin, we have on high
an Advocate to qualify,
Jesus the Just, whose blood was spilt
to expiate our heinous guilt.
Rev. 5.13.
Blessing and glory and renown
to him that on the Throne sits down,
And to the Lamb of God therefore
be praise and honor evermore.
HYMN 152. Mercies.
All People, etc.
Mic. 6.18, to the end.
WHO is a God like unto thee
that pardons all Iniquity;
And from their sins does disengage
the remnant of his heritage?
This wrath he does not long excite,
for mercy is his dear delight:
He will return again, he will,
and have compassion on us still.
Isa. 43.25.
He will subdue our trespasses,
as drowned in the deepest Seas:
And for his own Name sake on high,
he blots them out of memory.
Thou will perform thy Truth and Grace,
to Abraham and Jacob's race.
As thou have to our Fathers told,
and sworn it from the days of old.
HYMN 153. Mercy and Terror mixed.
All People, etc.
Nah. 1.2,
JEalous is God's avenging eye,
the Lord avengeth furiously,
He will take vengeance on his foes,
and he reserveth wrath for those.
3,
Yet is the Lord to anger slow,
but of great power to overthrow:
And he will not at all acquit
the wicked that repent no whit.
6. Hab. 3.5.
Before his fury who can stand?
who can abide his angry hand?
The Pestilence before him rolls,
beneath his feet are burning coals.
Nah. 1.5.
The Mountains quake, the Hills do melt
when as his presence is but felt,
The earth is burnt at sight of him
the world and all that dwell therein.
Isa. 14.27. Neh. 9.17.
His judgments none can disanul;
but yet our God is merciful;
Thine anger, Lord, is slow of pace:
thy kindness great, and rich thy grace*
2 PART.
All People, etc.
Nah. 1.7, 8.
The Lord is good* a Tower to his
when as the day of trouble is:
And them that trust in him he knows,
but darkness shall pursue his foes.
8.6.
He will with overrunning flood:
consume the Palaces that stood:
Like fire his fury pours down,
the rocks by him are overthrown.
9.
Against him what do ye intend?
the Lord will make an utter end:
Affliction (for so great a crime)
shall not rise up the second time.
10.
Folden as thorns, although they be,
and drunken with prosperity,
They shall be very suddenly
devoured as stubble fully dry.
15.
O Judah! keep thy solemn feasts,
thy Mountains bring good news of peace
No more shall sinners pass through thee,
but utterly cut off shall be.
HYMN 154. Merit disclaimed.
Luke 17.10. Phil. 2.13.
WHen you have done the best ye can,
say thus with humble thought,
Unprofitable Servants all
we do but what we ought.
For it is God that works in you,
he works both will and deed,
And of his mere good pleasure too,
does all your power proceed.
Ephesians. 2.8, 9. Chap. 3.21.
And ye are saved by grace, through faith,
wrought by the Holy Ghost:
Not of your selves, nor of your works,
lest any man should boast.
To him let all the Church therefore
ascribe, with one accord,
All praise and honor evermore,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.
HYMN 155. Moral Precepts.
Pressed with Arguments.
Mic. 6.8. Psalm. 37.28. Col. 3.25.
THe Lord has showed thee, O man,
what God requires as good:
Do justly, love compassion,
walk humbly with thy God.
Because the Lord loves equity,
his Saints he will not leave:
And he that deals injuriously,
shall suitably receive.
Mat. 5.7. Jam. 2.13. Luke 14.11.
And mercy to the merciful,
the Lord will still express:
But Judgment shall with rigor fall
upon the merciless.
And God does still resist the proud,
but gives the humble grace,
Self-humbling, then, shall honor men,
self-honouring shall abase.
2. PART.
Jam. 5.12, Ephesians. 4.25. Rev. 21.8.
Swear not by heaven, nor by earth,
nor any oath at all:
Lest into condemnation,
by such offense, ye fall.
Put Lies away and speak the Truth,
for every wilful Liar
Must sure partake of that broad Lake
which burns with brimstone-fire.
Romans 13.13. Heb. 12.14.
Shun surfeiting and drunkenness,
and do not lead your Life
In chambering and wantonness,
in envy, or in strife.
And ever follow peace withal,
and holiness together:
Without which grace there is no man shall
behold God's face for ever.
3. PART.
Ephesians. 4.31, 29. Romans 12.21.
All malice, wrath, and bitterness,
and clamor put away:
And be not overcome with ill,
but let the good bear sway.
And let no talk come from your mouth^
corrupt in any case:
But such as serves to edify,
and teach the hearers grace.
Ephesians. 5.3, 4.
But fornication, avarice,
and what pollutes or taints,
Amongst you, let not once be named,
as it becomes Saints.
Nor filthiness, nor foolish talk,
nor unbeseeming jests
(Which things are not convenient)
but rather thankfulness.
4. PART.
Romans 12.10, 15. Ephesians. 2.4. Gal. 6.
By kind affection mutually
the Love of Brethren keep:
Rejoice with them that do rejoice,
and weep with them that weep.
And heed not your own things alone,
but each for other care:
And to fulfill the Law of Christ,
each others burden bear.
Romans 12.16. Mat. 7.1, 2.
Mind not high things, but condescend
to men of low estate:
And be not wise in your own eyes
puffed up with self-conceit.
And judge not, that you be not judged,
for as you mete to men,
Accordingly shall God reply,
and deal to you again.
5. PART.
Mat. 7.12. Romans 13.7. Chap. 12.17. T. 3.2. 1 These. 4.7.
Do as you would be done unto,
and give to all their right:
Of no man ever speak amiss,
not ill with ill requite.
Let none defraud or go beyond
his brother any way:
For God avengeth all such things,
and will the wrong repay.
Jam. 5.9. Joh. 7.24. Phil. 4.5. Romans 14.4.
And, Brethren, let no one of you
against another grudge:
Nor judge ye by appearances,
but righteous judgment judge.
And let your moderation
be manifest to all:
The Lord our Master is at hand,
to whom we stand or fall.
6. PART.
Eccles. 5.4, 5. Heb. 13.16.
When thou have vowed a vow to God
defer not then, to pay:
For God has no delight in Fools,
that mock him with delay.
And to do good and distribute
forget ye in no wise:
For God is pleased exceedingly
with such like sacrifice.
Phil. 4.8. 1 Cor. 4.5.
And all things honest, just and true,
and such as sweetly please,
For virtue, praise, and good report,
think on such things as these.
Until the secrets of all hearts
be published all abroad:
And then shall every one of us
have his due praise of God.
HYMN 156. More spiritual Precepts.
Prove. 3.5, 6. Mat. 22.37. 1 These. 5.15, 16.
TRust in the Lord with all thy heart,
love him with all thy might:
In all thy ways acknowledge him,
and make him thy delight.
Pursue good things, rejoicing still,
and pray continually:
Quench not the Spirit any way,
despise not prophecy.
Walk after God's Commandments,
fear him, obey his Voice:
Rejoice in him continually,
and still I say rejoice.
Romans 12.11. Heb. 12.28. Joh. 6.27.
With fervent spirit serve the Lord,
and (having grace) draw near
To worship God with reverence,
and Godly filial fear.
And for the food that perishes
be not at any Strife:
But for the food that does endure
to everlasting life.
Mat. 6.33.
And seek God's Kingdom first of all,
his righteousness pursue:
And then shall all the other things
be added unto you.
HYMN 157. Mortality and Immortality.
Isa. 40.6, 7.
All flesh is grass, and soon must yield,
for all the goodly show,
Which is but as a flower in field
that some short time does grow.
The grass does wither and is gone,
the flower does fade and pass:
Because God's Spirit blows thereon;
the people sure is grass.
8. 1 Cor. 15.53.
The grass does change, the flower does fade
at one rebuking blast;
But lo! the word our Lord has said
for ever stands fast.
The corruptible must put on
a state that cannot die;
The mortal must be clothed upon
with immortality.
54, 56, 57.
The Scriptures sayings then shall be
fulfilled for Saints to sing,
O Grave! where is thy Victory?
O Death! where is thy Sting?
The Sting of Death Sin needs must be,
the Law the strength of Sin,
But thanks to God for Victory
through Christ our Lord herein.
HYMN 158. Mortification.
Col. 3.5. Romans 6.12. c. 8.13.
YOUR earthly members mortify,
and let no sin bear sway,
Or in your mortal body reign
while ye the lusts obey.
For if ye serve the flesh ye dye,
but if that by the Spirit,
The bodies lusts ye mortify,
then shall ye life inherit.
Chap. 6.16. Chap. 13.14.
For his ye are, whom ye obey,
whether of sin to death;
Or else of righteousness to life,
after this mortal breath.
Put on, then, Jesus Christ the Lord,
and for the fleshes ease
Make no provision, nor regard
the lusts thereof to please.
2. PART.
Romans 8 7. Chap. 12.2.
The carnal mind is enmity
against the living Lord:
Not subject, neither can it be
to his revealed word.
Be changed therefore by minds renewed,
that ye may understand
What pleasing good and perfect things
the Lord does here command.
Chap. 8.6. Chap. 6.11, 8.
Because to be of carnal mind
is death without release:
But if Spiritually inclined,
it savours Life and Peace.
Then count your selves as dead to sin,
to God (in Christ) alive:
Because if we be dead with him
we trust we shall revive.
HYMN 159. Mose's Song.
All People, etc.
Exodus 15.1.
NOw sing unto the Lord will I,
for he has triumphed gloriously:
The Horse and Rider (both of these)
his hand has cast into the Seas.
5, 6.
The depths devoured them every one,
they sank to the bottom as a stone
Lord thy right hand with power shines bright,
thy right hand crushed the enemy quite.
7,
In thy great excellence, O God,
thou have those Rebels under-trod.
Thou sent^^t forth thy wrath whereby
they were consumed as stubble dry.
9,
The enemy thus proudly spoke,
I will pursue, and overtake,
The spoil ^saith he) I will divide,
my Lust shall so be satisfied.
10,
Then did thou blow with blustering force,
the Sea returned to its course;
And (covering them) became their graves,
they sank as Lead in mighty Waves.
11.
Among the Gods, who is like to thee?
who like thee shines in sanctity?
Fearful in praises, as exceeds,
and doing rare and wondrous deeds.
HYMN 160. Oppression and Rapine dissuaded.
Prove. 4.14, 15, 16.
GO not with wicked men, my Son,
go not with them, I say;
Their crooked paths avoid and shun,
and come not near their way.
For if they do no wicked deed,
they take no rest at all:
Their sleep departs, unless they speed
of making some to fall.
Mic. 22. Prove. 4.17.2.13.
They covet fields, and violently
they take them for a prey,
Oppressing Town and Family,
because they bear the sway.
They eat the bread of wickedness,
and drink the wine of strife;
They leave the paths of Righteousness
to lead a brutish life.
Isa. 59.7, 8.
Destruction and unhappiness
are ever in their ways;
Nor do they know the way of peace;
for still their Judgment straies.
They make them crooked paths of sin,
form which they cannot cease:
And whosoever walks therein
shall never know true peace.
2. PART.
Prove. 1.10, 11, 13.
My Son, let sinners ticing thee
be constantly withstood;
If they say, come, let us agree,
let us lay wait for blood:
All precious substance we shall find,
to make us rich and great;
And with the spoil of every kind
shall fill our house complete.
14, 15, 16, 18.
Cast in thy Lot among us now,
let us have all one purse.
Refrain, my Son, and go not thou
with them in this lewd course:
For unto rapine they run fast,
but lo their laying wait
Shall be for their own lives at last,
and their own blood the bait.
19, 31.
The projects which they prosecute
shall pay them home one day:
And they shall eat the bitter fruit,
of their own cursed way.
Such ways are his, whoever strives
his hands with blood to stain,
To take away the owners lives
for greediness of gain.
HYMN 161. Passion and Compassion of Christ.
1 Pet. 3.18. Chap. 2.24.
LO Christ has suffered once for sin,
the Just for wicked men;
That he might bring us unto God
now reconciled again:
Who bare our sins in his own flesh
upon that cursed Tree,
That we should live to righteousness
and dead to sin should be.
Isa. 53.6.3.
All we like sheep have gone astray,
each took his course to fall:
And God has laid the Load on him,
to answer for us all.
A man of sorrows sure he was,
and he has born our grief:
Mean while we hid our face from him,
And gave him no relief.
Joh. 10.11.
Lo, this is that sweet Shepherd, then
so infinitely good,
That for his sheep laid down his Life,
and spilt his precious blood.
2 PART.
Joh. 15.13. Romans 5.7.
A greater Love than this has none,
to act or apprehend,
Than that a man should stake his life,
and lose it for his friend:
For scarce will any dye for him
that lives most righteously,
Yet happily for a special friend
some one might dare to dye.
18. Chap. 14.9.
But God commends his tender Love
to us ward in this wise:
In that Christ Jesus died for us
when we were enemies.
And therefore did our Savior die,
recover and revive,
To be the Lord both of the dead,
and those that are alive.
Heb. 13.15.
By him therefore give we to God
the sacrifice of praise,
(The grateful fruit of thankful lips)
blessing his name always.
HYMN 162. Patience.
Jam. 1.4. Heb. 10.36.
LET Patience have her perfect work,
that ye may be entire,
And nothing wanting in your grace
which God does here require.
For ye have need of Patience,
that having done his Will,
Ye may receive the Promises
which God shall then fulfill.
Chap. 6.19. Romans 5.4, 5. 2 Co. 4.17.
For Patience works experience,
experience hope does gain:
And hope shall never make ashamed
whatever we sustain.
And lo! our light affliction,
which is but transitory,
Works for us a more excellent
eternal weight of glory.
2 Timothy 2.12. Jam. 5.72.
For they that suffer with the Lord
shall reign with him full sure:
Therefore, behold, we count them blessed
whoever do endure.
HYMN 163. The Peace of God, and Prayer.
All People, etc. Or, O Lord Consider, etc.
Phil. 4.6, 7.
IN nothing be perplexed with care,
but call on God for every thing:
And with thanksgiving in your prayer
to him your supplications bring.
And lo! the peace which God imparts,
past understanding to make known,
Shall safely keep your minds and hearts,
through Jesus Christ the Holy One.
HYMN 164. Perseverance.
Heb. 3.12, 13.
TAKE heed, my brethren, lest there be
in any of you all
An heart of infidelity,
whereby from God to fall.
But still exhort with mutual heed,
while it is called to day,
Lest any one be hardened
by sins deceitful way.
14. Chap. 10.23 1 These. 5 24.
For we partake of Christ (be sure)
if we by faith hold fast,
So that our confidence endure
unshaken to the last.
Let Us hold profession firm therefore,
not wavering in our faith,
For faithful is the promiser,
and will do what he says.
Rev. 2.10.
Be faithful to the death, (says he)
persisting in my way,
And I will surely give to thee
a Crown of Life that day.
HYMN 165. Portion of the little Flock.
Luke 12.32. 1 Cor. 2.9.
FEAR not, O little Flock and few!
for it is your Father's pleasure.
To give the Kingdom unto you,
that has eternal treasure.
Eye has not seen, nor Ear has heard
what things God has above,
Beyond the thoughts of man, prepared
for them that do him love.
1 Timothy 4.8.
For godliness avails to all,
having the Promise sure
Of this Life which is temporal,
and that which does endure.
To God the Father and the Son,
and Holy Ghost therefore,
Eternal honor let be done,
henceforth for evermore.
HYMN 166. Power of Prayer.
Jam. 1.5. Mat. 7.11.
IF any of you wisdom wants,
ask of the Lord alone,
Who liberally to all men grants,
and yet upbraideth none.
For if that ye, which evil are,
can give good things to yours,
Much more your heavenly Father's care
his suppliants assures.
7. Jam. 1.6. Joh. 16.24.
Ask therefore and be sure to have,
and seek and ye shall find:
But ask in Faith what-ere ye crave,
and not with wavering mind.
But if ye ask and shall believe:
God will thereto agree:
Ask therefore that ye may receive,
that full your joy may be.
HYMN 167. Reasonable Service.
Romans 12.1. 1 Cor. 6.19.
PResent your bodies to the Lord
a living Sacrifice:
A holy offering unto him,
and pleasing in his eyes.
This is a service which ye owe,
and reasonably due:
For ye are not your own, ye know,
but Christ has purchased you.
20. Chap. 10.31.
Now therefore glorify the Lord
(dear brethren every one)
Both in your bodies and your souls.
for they are God's alone.
And whether eat or drink ye do,
or ought else, all your days.
Let all be done, by each of you
to God's renown and praise.
Vide Cent. I. Hymn 55. Psalm. 68. HYMN 168. Recovery of the Church.
Have mercy, etc.
Mic. 17.8, 9.
Rejoice not over me,
O thou mine enemy!
For, when I fall, the boast is small,
so soon arise shall I.
And when I sit me down
in darkness desolate,
The Lord will be a light to me,
in that distressed estate.
And I will therefore bear
the Lords most just displeasure:
Since I have been enticed to sin
against him in such measure.
Until the Lord be pleased
my cause to undertake:
And, at my suit, shall execute
his judgment for my sake.
For verily, the Lord
will bring me forth to light,
And will express his righteousness
apparent in my sight.
HYMN 169. Redeeming of Time.
Eccles. 12.1, 7.
REmember thy Creator now,
in these thy younger days:
Before the year and day draw near
when pleasure quite decays.
Then shall the dust return to earth,
to earth from whence it came:
The spirit then goes back again
to God that gave the same.
13, 14.
Now let us hear the end of all,
that Scripture does declare,
Oh fear the Lord, and keep his word,
which should be all our care.
For every work, both good and bad,
with every secret thing,
That here have past, from first to last,
will God to judgment bring.
Ephesians. 5.15, 16.
See that ye walk exactly then,
and not as fools, but wise;
And still redeem your precious time
because ill days arise.
HYMN 170. Redemption. Out of the Songs of the Blessed Virgin Mary, of
Zacharias and Old Simeon.
Luke 1.46.47, -- 50.
MY soul does highly magnify
the Lord of Sovereign power:
My spirit joys exceedingly,
in God my Savior.
For holy is that Name of his,
and lets great grace to fall
On them that fear him, every where,
through Generations all.
51, 52.
The things that his right arm has wrought
have showed his strength full well:
Scattering the proud in that high thought
wherewith their hearts did swell.
Yea, he dethrones the mighty ones,
and plucks them from their seat:
And them that be of low degree
he has made high and great.
53, 54, 55.48 -- 2.11.
He fills the hungry with good things,
the rich sends empty away:
And to his Servant Israel brings
Soul-saving help this day,
Calling to mind his mercies kind,
to our Forefathers told,
With Abraham, and his seed to stand
for ever, as of old.
2. PART.
Out of the Song of Zachary.
Luke 1.1.68, 69.
The Lord the God of Israel,
we praise with one accord:
For visiting and redeeming us
the people of the Lord.
For he has thus raised up for us
salvations surest horn:
Which in his servant David's house,
is of a Virgin born.
70, 71, 72.
As holy Prophets all foretold
should come to pass for man:
And by their mouth he spoke of old,
since first the world began.
From hands of those our hateful foes
that he would set us clear:
And so perform the mercy sworn
unto our Fathers dear.
73, 74, 75.
His holy Covenant (still the same)
He has remembered thus:
His oath to Father Abraham,
that he would grant to us.
That safely we (from foes set free)
might walk in fearless ways
Of holiness and righteousness,
before him, all your days.
3. PART.
Out of the Songs of Simeon and Zachary.
Luke 2.30, 31, 32.
And now, O Lord, our eyes have seen,
thy saving health and grace,
By power divine prepared to shine
before all peoples face.
And as a light to shine full bright
where blindfold Gentiles dwell:
And to be made the glory of
thy people Israel.
Chap. 1.77, 78.
The knowledge of salvation,
that God might thus give in:
Unto his people making known
the pardon of their sin.
All through the love of God above,
so tenderly let fall:
Whereby the dayspring from on high
has visited us all.
79. Chap. 2.14.
From darkness and the shade of death
to grant us glad release:
And give us light to guide our feet
into the paths of peace.
To God be glory now therefore,
in heaven's highest place:
Let peace on earth be poured forth,
to men good will and grace.
HYMN 171. Reformation.
Give laud, etc.
Hag. 2.6.
THUS says the Lord of Hosts,
but yet a little while,
And I will shake all Coasts,
yea, every Land and Isle,
Yet once again,
I shake all these, heaven, earth, and seas,
and all the main.
7.
All Nations I will shake
the Long desired day,
Which does all Nations take,
lo, that shall come, I say,
And (for all Coasts)
This house I will with glory fill,
says God of Hoasts.
9.
The glory of this last
far greater shall it grow,
Than of the Temple past,
the Lord of Hosts says so,
And in this place,
Will I (the Lord of Hosts) afford
sweet peace and grace.
Zach 4.6, 7. H. 2.22.
Yet not by might nor power,
but by my Spirit alone:
Says God of Hosts our Tower,
The strength of all in one:
For who art thou
O Mountain great (the Empires seat)
to hinder now?
Zach. 4.7.
Before Zerubbabel
thou shall become a plain:
The stone that does excel
(The head-stone of the same)
His hand shall fit,
And bring it out with general shout,
grace, grace to it.
9. Hag. 2.22.
The hand of that same Man
that laid the groundwork low,
Shall end what he began
and I will overthrow
The Heathen Kings;
Who then are they that slight the day
of smaller things.
HYMN 172. Regeneration.
Joh. 3.5. Gal. 6.15.
EXcept a man be born again
of water and the spirit,
He cannot any way attain
salvation to inherit.
For circumcision serves none
(the privilege is small)
Nor serves uncircumcision,
but a new creature's all.
2 Cor. 5.17. Jam. 1.18.
Behold a man in Christ, therefore,
and a new creature view:
Old things are past, and come no more,
and all things are made new.
By his own will and word has he
wrought our regeneration,
A kind of first ripe fruit to be
of all his whole Creation.
HYMN 173. Repentance.
Isa. 59.1, 2.
GOD's arm is never shortened,
but it can reach to save:
His ear not dull, or wearied
to hear us what we crave.
But from you, do your sins divide
your God that was so near,
And cause the Lord his face to hide,
so that he will not hear.
Ezekiel. 18.13. 2 Cor. 30.9.
Lay therefore your transgressions by,
repent and turn says he,
And so your great iniquity
your ruin shall not be.
Because the Lord is full of grace,
ready to pardon sin:
And will not hide away his face,
if ye return to him.
Luke 15.7, 10.
One sinner that returns again
makes Angels joy exceed,
More than do ninety nine just men
that no repentance need.
2. PART.
Jer. 3.13. 1 John 1.9.
Acknowledge how ye have transgrest
against the Lord your God:
And only let it be confessed
what bypath ye have trod.
For if we do our sins confess,
faithful and just is he,
From sin and all unrighteousness
to cleanse and set us free.
Prove 28.13. Joel 2.13. Neh. 9.17. Ez. 18.32.
For he that hides his sins shall fall,
(they prosper but a space:)
But to confess and leave them all
shall with the Lord find grace.
For he is unto anger slow,
and ready to forgive:
And does abundant kindness show.
wherefore return and live.
Exodus 34.7.
For he reserves compassion
for thousands that come in:
Remitting all transgression,
iniquity and sin.
3. PART.
Isa. 55.6, 7.
Seek ye the Lord unfeignedly,
now while he may be found;
Oh call on him while he is nigh,
with mercies that abound!
Oh let the wicked leave his Lusts
(the way that sinners take)
And let the man unrighteous
his sinful thoughts forsake.
-- Chap. 1.18.
And turn again unto the Lord,
while mercy now takes place,
And to our God so richly stored
with gifts of pardoning Grace.
For though your sins were crimson-like,
as red as scarlet (full)
I (says the Lord) will make them white,
as white as snow or wool.
Rev. 1.5, 6.
To him that thus has loved us,
and washed off all our score,
With that pure flood of his own blood*
be praise for evermore.
HYMN 174. Reproach for Christ, and Imitation of him.
1 Pet. 4.14, 16.
IF that ye be reproacht for Christ,
happy are ye, and blessed:
The Spirit of God and glory great
upon your souls shall rest.
On their parts he is ill spoken of,
but glorified on yours:
Therefore let no man be ashamed
that Christianly endures.
Mat. 5.11, 12.
Blessed are ye when men revile,
and speak each evil word
Against you falsely, for the sake
of Christ your Sovereign Lord.
Rejoice and be exceeding glad,
considering the reward,
How great it is in heaven above,
for suffering Saints prepared.
2. PART.
Phil. 2.5, 7.
Let that good mind be in you all
that was in Christ our Lord:
Who being in the form of God,
the true eternal Word,
Yet made himself of no repute,
to death did condescend,
And came not to be tended on,
but to observe and tend.
Phil. 2.9, 10. Heb. 9.28.
Therefore God gave to him a Name,
above all Names, most high:
That every knee should bow to him,
and every tongue comply.
Who came to take our sins away,
once, by his own oblation:
And shall appear the second time,
without sin, to salvation.
HYMN 175. Resurrection.
All People, etc. or, O Lord consider, etc.
1 Cor. 15.20, 21, 22.
NOW Christ is risen from the dead,
as whom no bands of death could keep:
And is to be acknowledged
as the first fruits of those that sleep,
For as by man came death to reign,
so by a man to rise again:
And as by Adam, all men die,
by Christ came immortality.
Col. 3.1, 2, 3, 4*
If ye be risen then with Christ
set all your heart on things above:
And be not any way enticed
on earthly things to set your love.
For ye are dead to things abroad,
and your life hid with Christ in God:
When Christ who is our Life appears
ye must shine with him in the Spheres:
HYMN 176. Revenge forbidden.
Romans 12.19. Luke 6.27. Mat. 5.44.
DEAR Saints avenge not your own selves,
nor let fierce wrath incense:
For vengeance, says the Lord, is mine
and I will recompense.
Love ye your very enemies,
and them that curse you, bless:
Do good to them that use you ill,
with hate and spightfulness.
45.
And people persecuting you
curse not, but bless them rather:
That ye may be the children true,
of your celestial Father.
For he does cause his rain to fall,
and lets his Sun to rise
On good and bad in general,
just and unjust likewise.
HYMN 177. Sabbath.
Isa. 58.13.
IF from my holy Sabbath Day
thou turn away thy foot:
And do not by thy pleasures stray,
my Sabbath to pollute.
But call the Sabbath a delight,
the holy of the Lord:
And thine own carnal pleasure slight
in thought, in deed, and word.
14.
Then shall thou joy in God alone,
with sweet and sacred mirth:
And he shall make thee ride upon
high places of the earth.
With Father Jacob's heritage
the Lord shall feed thee fat:
For thus does God's own mouth engage,
and thou may trust to that.
HYMN 178. Sacrament of the Supper.
Cant. 1.1, 2. Chap. 2.5.
LET those life-breathing lips of thine
be joined, O Christ, to me!
Because thy love excels wine,
and all thy Saints love thee.
With flagons of refreshing joy,
and comforts from above,
Stay me, O stay me powerfully,
for I am sick of Love!
2.4.3.
Into the house of Banqueting
he brought me to be fed:
Love was his banner flourishing
with honor over my head.
Beneath his shadow I was placed
with very great content:
His fruit was sweet unto my taste
(his Word and Sacrament.)
5.1.
O friends, said he, (preferred on high)
eat well of my good cheer:
And drink, yea, drink abundantly,
my guests to me, most dear.
2 PART.
Cant. 5.16 2 Cor. 5.20.
My Savior, my beloved one
is mine, and I am his:
Chief of Ten Thousand he alone,
pure red and white he is.
Made sin for us that knew no sin,
that so we might be made
The righteousness of God in him,
by whom the price was paid.
Cant. 8.7. Chap. 1.4.
Stronger than death his love is found,
not to be bought with goods:
Nor quenched with waters, nor be drowned
with whatsoever floods.
O draw me, my dear Savior,
with those strong cords of Love,
And then will we go after thee
as fast as we can move.
2, 3.
We will record thy Love, O Lord,
above the joy of Wine:
The Virgins fair that spotless are
do love thy Name Divine.
3 PART.
1 Cor. 5.7.11.
Lo Christ is sacrificed for us,
(our Passover from Heaven)
Now therefore let us keep the feast,
not with old lumps of Leaven:
Not with the Leaven of wickedness,
or Leaven of malice led:
But keep it with sincerity,
and truths unleavened bread.
Chap. 11.29, 28.
Who eat and drink unworthily
their own damnation earn:
Because they want a spiritual eye
his body to discern.
Our hearts (with care) examined,
let us be stirred up
To eat of this celestial bread,
and drink this sacred cup.
26.
To eat this bread and drink this cup
holds forth a Savior slain,
So often as we celebrate,
until he come again.
4 PART.
1 Cor. 10.16.
The cup of blessing which we bless,
is it not understood
The sweet communion to express
of Christ our Savior's blood:
The bread we break (the Holy Loaf)
do we not all accord
To call it the Communion of
the body of our Lord?
17.
For we though many, are one bread,
and in one body join:
For all of us are jointly fed
with that one bread divine.
The living bread is he on high
that down from heaven came;
And he shall live and never dye
that eats of the same.
Mat. 26.28.
The blood of the new Testament,
we sweetly taste herein,
Which was for us and many spent,
for pardon of our sin.
5. PART.
1 John 4.10. Chap. 5.6.
Herein is love, not ours to God,
but his to us most large:
In sending down his only Son
our great debts to discharge.
Lo! this is he that came to us
by water, and by blood,
And not by one of them alone,
but both ways to our good.
Joh. 17.17. Acts 13.39.
Therefore he sanctified himself,
to lead us into truth:
That he thereby might sanctify
us also, as he does.
By whom we may be justified
from sins both great and small,
From which set free we could not be
by Moses Laws at all.
1 These. 1.10.
He saved us from the wrath to come,
at that most dreadful day:
And was so good to shed his blood
to wash our sins away.
6. PART.
Mat. 21.9. Rev. 5.9.
Hosanna to King David's Son,
Hosanna to the Christ,
That in the Almighty's Name does come,
Hosanna in the Highest.
For thou wast slain, and art alive,
redeeming us to God,
From every Nation, Kingdom, Tongue,
by thy most precious blood.
1 Pet. 1.18. 1 These. 1.10. Rev. 1.5.
Corruptive things as silver is,
and gold redeemed us not:
But the dear blood of Christ, our Lord,
a Lamb without a spot.
Even Jesus Christ, who saved us
from storms of future wrath:
Whose love to wash our sins away
made his own blood the bath.
5.13.
To him that on the Throne sits down
and Christ the Lamb, therefore,
Be blessing, glory and renown,
and power for evermore.
HYMN 179. Salvation Shining.
Tit. 2.11, 12.
GOD's grace that brings salvation
has shone to every eye:
Teaching us worldly lusts to shun,
and all impiety.
And that we should live soberly,
and in a godly way:
With righteousness, and equity,
while in this world we stay.
13, 14.
That blessed hope still looking for,
and glorious drawing near,
When that great God our Savior
Christ Jesus shall appear,
Who freely gave himself for us,
for our dear sakes to dye:
That we might be redeemed thus
from all iniquity.
-- 1 T. 6.17. Rev. 5.13.
To purify to his own Name
(from whom this grace proceeds)
A people of peculiar claim
and zealous of good deeds.
Unto the King of Kings therefore
that on the Throne does sit,
Be honor, glory, praise and power,
for ever, so be it.
HYMN 180. Sanctification.
Ephesians. 5.14. Chap 4.17, 18.
AWaken thou that sleep'st in sin,
and stand up from the dead:
And Christ shall let his light break in
whereby thou shall be led.
Then walk not as some Gentiles walk,
in vanity of mind:
Estranged from the life of God,
because their hearts were blind.
19, 20, 21.
Who being past the sense of sin,
let loose to all excess
Of wanton and unclean desires,
and that with greediness.
But ye have not so learned Christ,
if ye by him were taught:
And as the truth in Jesus is
have learnt him as ye ought.
22. Chap. 5.11.
The old man that ye do put off,
which is corrupt and vile,
In sinful Lusts of former life,
which did your souls beguile*
And have no fellowship at all
with works that shun the light:
But rather such unfruitful works
reprove in open sight.
2 PART.
Ephesians. 4.24, 23. Chap. 5.8.11.
Cast off the old man with his deeds,
and put ye on the new,
Made after God in righteousness,
and holiness most true.
And be renewed in heart and soul,
and walk as sons of light:
And prove what things the Lord allows
as pleasing in his sight.
2 Timothy 2, 19, 22, 21. Romans
And as it is meet, let every one
that names the Name of Christ
Depart from all iniquity,
and by no lust be tic'd.
The purging of our selves from these
will evidently produce
Vessels to honor sanctified,
meet for the Masters use.
Romans 6.22. 1 Timothy 1.17.
And being thus from sin made free,
God's Service to attend,
The fruit to holiness shall be
eternal Life the end
Now to the true eternal King
not seen with humane eye:
The immortal only wise true God
be praise perpetually.
HYMN 181. Scriptures.
Joh. 5.39.
SEarch Scriptures, for ye hope thereby
eternal Life to have:
And those are they that testify
of him that came to save.
Romans 15.4.
For what of old is registered,
was for our learning penned,
That we by Scriptures comforted,
might hope unto the end.
2 Pet. 1.21.
The prophecy came not of old
by man's own private will;
But holy men of God foretold,
by Heaven-inspired skill.
Isa. 8.20.
Then to the Law and Testament,
for they that speak not right,
And as this word does represent,
in them there is no light.
2 Timothy 3.16, 17.
For Scriptures sacred verities
came all by inspiration;
Able to perfect, and make wise
in all things to salvation.
HYMN 182. Secret revealed.
1 Cor. 2.7, 8, 14.
GOD's wisdom in a mystery
we speak to perfect men,
But not the wisdom of this world,
nor what is known to them.
For man while merely natural
receives not what we press,
The things of God spiritual
he counts foolishness.
-- Prove. 24.7. Mark 4.11.
Too hard for him to know or learn
(for natural men too high)
And such as nothing can discern
but a spiritual eye.
But unto you (dear Saints) it is,
touching the things of heaven,
To know that Kingdom's Mysteries,
to them it is not given.
2 PART.
John 1.18.
No man has seen Almighty God
since first the world began:
He that in heaven has blessed abode
declared him unto man:
The only and begotten Son
of God the Holy One,
Did from the Fathers bosom come
to make this Doctrine known.
John 3.32. Jude 25.
Attesting what he saw and heard,
yet faith appeared in few,
But whosoever believes his Word
has sealed that God is true.
To God our Savior only wise
be all the praise therefore.
Dominions, Thrones, and Dignities,
Amen, for evermore.
HYMN 183. Secrets unreveal'd.
Romans 12.3. Deuteronomy. 29 29.
BE wise unto sobriety,
as God has given faith,
And dealt to each man diversely
the measure that he has.
The secret things that are decreed
belong to God alone:
But to our selves and to our seed,
the things that are made known.
1 Timothy 6.17.
Now to the blessed Prince of might,
the chief of Kings and Lords,
Who only dwells in endless light,
which no access affords.
Whom no man can behold and see,
nor ever did see yet:
To him all praise and glory be
for ever; so be it.
HYMN 184. Souls under the Altar.
Give laud, etc.
Rev. 6.10.
HOw long, O Lord, how long
thou holy one, and true,
Ere thou avenge our wrong,
and judge, with judgment due
Them that have spilt
Our blood on earth, and pou^'d it forth,
with heinous guilt.
Luke 18.7, 8.
And shall not the most High
avenge his own Elect,
Which night and day do c^y,
and pray to that effect?
Though he bear long,
I tell you, he will speedily
avenge their wrong.
Romans 8.36. Psalm. 44.23, 24.
But we are killed thus
all day for thy dear sake,
As sheep they count of us
which they for slaughter take.
O God arise,
Why do thou yet our griefs forge^,
and our sad cries?
2 These. 1.6, 7.
But with the Lord, ye know,
the thing is just and due,
To render wrath and woe
to them that trouble you.
But ye, that thus
Afflicted are, shall surely share
sweet peace with us.
-- 8.
When Christ shall come abroad,
in flaming fire from Heaven:
And they that know not God,
shall have their portion given
Of Vengeance meet:
Because that they would not obey
his Gospel sweet.
HYMN 185. Spiritual Shepherds.
Acts 20.28. 1 Pet. 5.4.
TAKE heed you Shepherds to your charge,
to feed with wholesome food
The flock which God has purchased
with his own precious blood.
And the chief Shepherd, coming down
from heaven at his great day,
Shall crown you with a glorious Crown
that never fades away.
Zach. 11.17.
But to the Idol Shepherd woe,
a Sword will God assign
To cleave his arm and his right eye
that leaves the flock to pine.
(...) arm, to nothing withered,
^lean dried up shall be:
And his right eye so darkened
as not at all to see.
HYMN 186. Strait Gate.
Mat. 7.13, 14.
O Enter at the narrow Gate,
for wide is that of sin:
And broad the way that leads astray,
and many go therein.
Because the Gate to life is strait,
and all the way thereto:
Is (as I say) a narrow way.
and they that find it, few.
Luke 13 24, 30.
Strive then to hit the narrow Gate,
the right way to attain:
For not a few (I say to you)
shall seek, and seek in vain.
And there are first that prove the worst,
and last that first prepare:
For in this world are many called,
but few elected are.
HYMN 187. Suffering and Self-denial.
Mat 10.34, 21.
THink not (says Christ) that I am come
to send all peace on earth:
But through malicious minds of some)
a Sword must I send forth.
The Father shall the Son betray,
the Daughter her own Mother:
Brethren shall Brethren seek to slay,
set one against another.
26, 30, 28.
Yet fear not men in these affairs,
nor have them in such dread:
For God has numbered all the hairs
that grow upon your head.
Who kill the body, fear not them
that then no more can do:
But him that can to Hell condemn
both soul and body too.
2. PART.
Mat. 10.39, 38. Luke 14.27, 33.
He that does find his life, shall be
at loss of it thereby:
And he that loses it for me,
shall find it gainfully.
And he that leaves not all to loss,
to follow after me,
Nor for my sake takes up his Cross,
my follower cannot be.
Mark 10.29, 30.
But whosoever lays down all at stake,
forsaking Friends and Lands,
For me, and for my Gospel sake,
to follow my commands.
An hundred fold shall he regain,
although with persecution,
And afterward a life obtain
that fears no dissolution.
HYMN 188. Temptations succored.
Heb. 4*15.
SUCH an High Priest we have not now,
as is not touched at all
With sense of such infirmities
as on his Saints do fall.
But suffered such temptations
as we our selves fall in:
And was in all points like to us,
but yet excepting sin.
Chap. 2.18. 1 Cor. 12.13. Isa. 40.31.
In suffering such temptations,
the tempted he can aid:
And no temptation takes you,
But what on Saints is laid.
But God is faithful verily,
who will not suffer you
To be assailed above the strength
which ye shall still renew.
But will in all temptations,
provide and order so,
That ye may have a way to escape,
and strength to undergo.
HYMN 189. The Tree good.
Prove. 21.27. Mat. 7.16, 18.
THE sacrifice of wicked men
is hateful to the Lord:
And offered with a wicked mind
is then much more abhorred.
For figs of thistles cannot grow,
nor grapes of thorns be had:
A bad tree cannot bear good fruit,
nor yet a good tree bad.
Chap. 12.35, 33.
From the good treasure of the heart
good men bring forth good things:
And from the evil treasury
bad fruit the bad man brings.
Now therefore let the tree be good
the fruit will then be so:
And make the tree an evil one
the fruit the same will show.
3.10.
And now is the Ax laid to the root,
and therefore every tree
That brings not forth good wholesome fruit
cut down for fire shall be.
HYMN 190. Trinity.
1 John 1.7. Joh. 6.57. Luke 11.13.
THree witnesses there are above,
and all these three are one:
The Father, Son, and sacred Dove,
one Deity alone.
The living Father sent the Son,
who by the Father lives:
And unto them that ask of him
the Holy Ghost he gives.
1 Cor. 12.4, 5.
Diversities of gifts indeed
there are that he bestows:
But from one spirit all proceed,
who does them so dispose.
And his Administrations
great difference afford:
And diverse operations,
but one Almighty Lord.
6. 2 Cor. 13, 14.
All these in great variety
from his good hand do fall:
But one adored Deity
that works all in all.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and love of God, therefore,
And comforts of the Holy Ghost
be with you evermore.
HYMN 191. Vineyard of Israel.
Isa. 5.1, 2, 3.
NOW will I sing to my beloved
(although with mournful voice)
A Song of my Beloved one
touching his Vineyard choice.
A Vineyard my beloved had,
placed in a fruitful hill:
He fenced it, and pluckt^out the stones,
and planted it with skill.
Choice Vines he set, and built therein*
a Wine Press and a Tower:
Expecting it should bring sweet grapes
and lo it brought forth sower.
And now O ye inhabitants
of Salem pray you see:
And men of Judah, judge between
my Vineyard here and me.
What could be to my Vineyard done
more than I did to it,
Why therefore brought it forth sour Grapes*
when I expected sweet?
And now, go to, know what I Will do
to this my Vine-yard-soil:
I will break down the hedge therefore,
and leave it to the spoil.
I Will lay it waste, unprun'd, undig'd,
for Briars and Thorns alone,
I also will command the clouds
to rain no rain thereon.
7.
The Vineyard of the Lord of Hoasts
the house of Israel is:
The men of Judah are the plant,
that pleasant plant of his.
And when he looked for judgment done
behold great cruelty:
And when he looked for righteousness,
behold a doleful cry.
HYMN 192. Unity and love of Brethren.
Col. 3.12.13.
PUT on, Beloved, as Gods Elect,
bowels of mercies kind:
Long-suffering, meekness, sweet respect,
and humbleness of mind.
Forbearing one another long,
forgiving one another:
If any have received wrong
done by his Christian brother.
14. Ph. 2.2. Ephesians. 4.3.
As Christ forgave you so do ye
your brethren that transgress:
And chiefly put on charity,
the bond of perfectness.
Of one mind, and one judgment be,
and let all discord cease:
Keeping the Spirits unity
in sacred bonds of peace.
2. PART.
1 Pet. 1.22. Heb. 12.1. 1 John 1.16.
See that ye love with fervency
and with an heart most pure,
And let this love so brotherly
perpetually endure.
For God (we know) is perfect love,
and whosoever dwells herein.
He surely dwells in God above.
and God most high in him.
3.14. Romans 13.8.
And hence our change is understood
from death to life above,
Because we love the brotherhood
with true and perfect love.
Owe nothing then to any man
but love to one another:
For he is a perfect Christian
that is a perfect lover.
HYMN 193. Vocation.
1 Cor. 12.2. Tit. 3.3.
YE know that we were Gentiles once;
and carried away,
To Idols and dumb vanities,
as we were led astray:
And sometimes disobediently,
and foolishly we swerved,
By diverse lusts and vain delights,
which we our selves have served.
1 Pet. 2.9.
But a peculiar people now,
a chosen generation,
A Royal Priesthood are we made,
and called an holy Nation.
That we should show the praises forth
of him that called us
From darkness great to greater light,
that is most mavelous.
1.16.
As he therefore that called us
is holy; so must they
That are to this profession called,
be holy every way.
2. PART.
Ephesians. 2.11, 12, 19.
Remember ye were aliens
from Israel's Commonwealth:
And strangers from the Covenants
which promise saving health.
But now are ye that were far off
made nigh by Christ his blood:
And fellow Citizens with Saints,
and of the house of God.
20, 21, 22.
Built on the sure foundation
laid down in holy writ:
And Christ himself head cornerstone*
who makes the building knit,
In whom together built ye grow
into an holy place,
An habitation of the Lord
by his sweet spirit of grace.
Romans 8.16.
Which spirit witnesses with ours,
and testimony bears,
That we are made the Sons of God,
and if his Sons, then Heirs.
3 PART.
Jam. 2.5. 1 Cor. 1.26.
Hearken, beloved brethren dear,
your call ye plainly see,
How God has chose the poor on earth
full rich in faith to be.
Not many mighty men are called,
not many wise and learned,
Nor yet in many noble men
this calling is descern'd.
27. Matt. 11.26:
But God has chose weak foolish things,
and such as men despise,
To bring to naught, and to confound
the noble, great, and wise.
We thank thee, Father, Lord of all,
that have these things concealed
From many wise and prudent men,
and them to babes revealed.
1 Cor. 1.29, 31.
Even so, O Father, since it was
thy pleasure and decree*
That, in thy sight, no flesh on earth
might glory, but in thee.
HYMN 194. Whole Armor.
Ephesians. 6.10.13, 14.
BE strong, my brethren, in the Lord,
and in his powerful might:
Put on your soul his Armor whole,
to make you stand in fight.
Stand therefore, having girt your loins
with truth, which ye profess:
And having done the breast plate on
of perfect righteousness.
15, 16.
And with the preparation of
the Gospel of our God,
(The Gospel of his peace and love,)
let both your feet be shod.
And chiefly take the shield of faith,
that so your valiant hearts
May quench thereby, most powerfully,
the wickeds fiery darts.
17, 18.
The helmet of salvation take,
and that two-edged Sword:
(The Sword of his good Spirit it is,
to wit God's holy Word.
And always in the spirit pray,
with all requests and prayer:
And watch thereto (what e're ye do)
with constancy and care?
HYMN 195. Will for the Deed.
2 Cor. 8.12. Mat. 10.42.
IF there be first a willing heart,
the Lord the same accepts:
And what one has takes in good part,
and pardons our defects.
Cold water only, one small cup
to a Disciple spared
For that names sake, is sure summed up,
and shall not miss reward.
20. Romans 8.26. Ephesians. 3.20.
Nor will he quench the smoking flax,
nor break the bruised-reed:
Till judgment have a sure dispatch
with victory to speed.
And though we know not how or what
to pray for as we ought,
His spirit helps our wants in that,
beyond our speech or thought.
21.
To him in all the Church therefore
be glory yet again,
Through ages all for evermore,
by Jesus Christ, Amen.
HYMN 196. Wisdoms exhortation.
Have mercy, etc.
Prove. 1.20, 21.
LO, wisdom cries out,
she cries in the streets,
She utters her zealous breath
where all the concourse meets.
In opening of the gates
of Cities populous,
She calls, and cries, with words most wise,
exhorting sinners thus.
22, 23.
How long, ye simple ones,
will ye delight in folly;
And scorners in so vile a sin,
and fools hate knowledge wholly*
Turn you at my reproof
behold I will pour forth
My Spirit to take hold on you,
I Will show you words of worth.
2 PART.
Have mercy, etc.
Prove. 4.5.7, 8. Chap. 3.15.17.
Get wisdom, O my Son,
with all the care thou can:
She is of all things principal,
and most to be advanced.
Of greater price than pearls,
and all desired treasure:
Her paths and ways have all the praise
of perfect peace, and pleasure.
18, 14, 16, 18.
A tree of life to them
upon her that lay hold:
Her Merchandise of greater price,
than silver or than gold.
Her right hand, length of days,
her left bears wealth and honor:
And happy he (who e're he be)
that lays fast hold upon her.
HYMN 197. Word preached.
All people, etc.
2 Cor. 10.4. Heb. 4.12.
THe weapons of our warfare here
have nothing carnal placed therein:
But mighty through God they are,
to pull down all strong holds of sin.
God's Word is such a powerful one,
sharper than any two-edged sword:
It parts the marrow from the bone,
and is an heart-discerning Word.
1 Pet. 2.2. Jam. 1.20.
Then shunning guile and malice lewd
envy reproach hypocrisy.
As babes new born desire the food
of God's pure Word to grow thereby.
And let us set all sins apart,
with meekness to receive and have
God's Word ingrafted in our heart,
which is of power our souls to save.
2. PART. Work of mercy magnified, or The second part of mercies (forgot to be
inserted in its due place.)
2 Cor. 7.13.
If I shut heaven says the Lord
or leave the Land to be devoured
By Locusts, or if I dispense
some drought or dreadful pestilence.
If then my People whom I grace
with my great name shall seek my face,
Humble themselves and jointly pray,
And turn them from their evil way.
Then will I hear in heaven high
and pardon their Iniquity:
Most graciously I will forgive
and heal the land wherein they live.
Jam. 2.13. Psalm. 136.1.
Thus mercy with triumphant voice
against strict judgment does rejoice:
O thank the Lord of Heaven therefore
whose mercies last for evermore.
HYMN 198. Worker of Grace.
2 Cor. 3.5. Phil. 2.12.
WE have not the sufficiency
and power of our own,
To think so much as one good thought
as of our selves alone.
But all our whole sufficiency
does of the Lord proceed.
Who works in us most graciously
both the desire and deed.
Jam. 1.17. Romans 9.16.
For every good and perfect gift
proceeds from God above,
With whom there is no varying,
nor shadow of remove.
It is not then of him that wills,
nor him that runs the race,
But all our good on us distills
from God that shows Grace.
Jude 24, 25.
To God therefore the only wise,
our Savior, strength and stay,
Be Thrones, Dominions, Dignities,
for evermore, we pray.
HYMN 199. World and the Church.
1 John 5.19.
WE know we are of God most high,
for we are born of him,
And this whole world, most generally,
lies soaking in their sin.
And lo, the Son of God is come,
and we the same have known:
And he has thus instructed us,
to know the faithful one.
20. Rev. 5.13.
And we are in him that is true,
in Jesus Christ his Son:
This is the true God (known to you)
and endless life begun.
Blessing, and power, and praise, therefore
to him be altogether,
That sits upon the sacred Throne,
and to the Lamb for ever.
HYMN 200. Zealous Ejaculations at Evening or Bedtime.
Give laud, etc.
Psalm. 31.6. Rev. 1.5.
MY spirit, O God, do I
into thy hands commit:
Lord God of Verity,
Thou have redeemed it.
Thy grace so good
Washed off our sin, and bathed us in
our Savior's blood.
Psalm. 141.2.51.12. Mic. 7.19.
Now let my prayers be
as incense in thine eyes,
And hands up-lift to Thee
as the evening Sacrifice.
O cleanse my heart,
My sins subdue, and still renew
my inward part.
Romans 14.8.
That whiles I draw this breath,
I may live up to Thee;
And when I die the death,
to Thee, Lord, it may be.
That, live or die:
Whatever time, I may be thine
perpetually.
Psalm. 4.8. Rev. 1.4. --
And now my lying down
shall be both sweet and sure;
For thou, O Lord, alone
my dwelling do secure.
All glory then
To Father Son and Holy one;
forever, Amen.
The End of the Second Century.
THE Third and Last Century OF CHAPT. HYMNS. Newly Translated.
HYMN 201. The Covenant of Grace entered to Abraham.
[All people, or, O Lord consider, etc.]
Genesis 17.1.15.5.
THus said the Lord to Abraham
Lo! I the Lord Almighty am
Walk thou before me for thy part
Sincere and with a perfect heart.
And covenant with thee will I
And with thy seed successively:
Number the Stars, and thou shall tell
The Sum whereto thy seed shall swell.
And he believed in the Lord
Relying on his faithful Word,
And it was counted unto him,
For Righteousness to trust therein.
So all that are of faith indeed
Are blessed with Abraham as his seed;
To Abraham's God be praise therefore,
From first to last for evermore.
HYMN 202. The Test to the Covenant.
All people, etc.
Deuteronomy. 26.16.
THis day the Lord commands thee
Obedient to his Laws to be,
Keep them therefore in every part;
With all thy soul and all thy heart.
Thou have avoucht the Lord this day
To be thy God: To keep his way,
His Statutes, Laws, and Judgments choice,
And still to hearken to his voice.
And God this day avoucheth thee
His own peculiar stock to be,
As his most gracious promise stands
That thou should keep all his commands.
To Israel's God be praise therefore
From first to last for evermore,
And let all faithful people then
Say cheerfully, Amen, Amen.
HYMN 203. The Song of Moses the man of God, commanded to be learnt by heart of
all Israel. Deuteronomy. 32. to 44. v. 46. Moses's Title, Psalm 90.
To the Tune of the Ten Commandments.
GIve ear O heavens from on high,
and I will speak this present day:
And hear O Earth, attentively
the awful words which I shall say.
My doctrine shall drop down as showers,
my speech as dew shall gently pass:
And as small rain on herbs and flowers,
and as the showers upon the grass.
Because I will this day proclaim,
and publish fully all abroad,
The Lord our God's Almighty Name,
ascribe ye greatness to our God.
He is the Rock his work's complete,
and all his ways just judgment be,
A God of truth without deceit
exactly just and right is He.
2. PART.
v. 5.
They are corrupt, they bring a blot
upon themselves, of foul disgrace,
Their spot is not his Childrens spot,
they are a cross and crooked race.
Requite ye thus the Lord most high
ye foolish people? Is not He
Thy Father dear that did thee buy?
has he not made and stablisht thee?
Remember now the days of old,
the years of ages long ago,
Thy Father ask, thou shall be told,
and ask thine Elders they shall show.
When the most high did first divide
inheritances unto men,
And separated far and wide
all Adam's Sons, as he did then:
He set the people bounds complete,
but chiefly one that did excel
According to the Number great
of all his people Israel.
3. PART.
v. 9.
For lo! the Portion of the Lord
is Israel whom he does advance,
And Jacob's house is on record
the Lot of his inheritance.
He found him in a foreign Land
in howling deserts waste and dry,
Led him, and made him understand,
kept him as the apple of his eye.
As The Eagle stirs up her nest,
and flutters over her young ones there,
Spreads out her wings whereon they rest,
and on her wings she does them bear.
So God alone was then his guide,
and there was with him no strange God,
On Earths high place he made them ride,
and on those Palaces he trod.
That he might eat the increase of fields*
both of the fruits and of the flock,
And suck the honey which it yields
and oil out of the flinty rock.
Butter of Kine and Milk of Sheep
with fat of Lambs of Bashan-breed,
And Rams which Bashan hill did keep,
and goats which there likewise did feed.
With fat of kidneys of the wheat
which yields flower so passing good,
For thee, O Israel, to eat,
and thou did drink the grapes pure blood.
4. PART.
v. 15.
But Jeshurun waxt fat and kicked,
thou art grown fat, thou art grown thick,
Covered with fatness finely slick;
and this was it that made him kick.
Then he forsook his God on high
that made him and all other men,
And he esteemed but carelessly
the God of his Salvation then.
With strange Gods they did all the while
provoke Him unto jealousy:
And with abominations vile
moved Him to anger vehemently.
They sacrificed to Devils there,
and not to God: To Gods unknown,
New Gods, and new come up they were,
such as their Fathers did not own.
5. PART.
18.
Of that high God which thee begot
thou art unmindfull, and wilt be:
And (mindless) thou remembrest not
the mighty God that formed thee.
And when God saw it, He at once
abhorred them in his holy eyes,
For the provoking of his Sons
and of his Daughters in such wise.
I Will hide, said he, from them my face,
and see the end of their lewd path,
For it is a very froward race,
children in whom there is no faith.
They have provoked my jealous eyes
with that which is not God (they know)
And with their idol vanities
spurred on my anger which was slow.
And I Will move them to jealousy
with people that are next to none,
And I will vex them vehemently
with a most foolish Nation.
6. PART.
22.
For there is kindled in my wrath
fire that shall burn to hell below,
Consume the Earth and all it has,
and make the hills foundations glow.
An heap of mischiefs I will bring
upon their impious heads to fall:
And charge mine arrows on the string
and spend them freely on them all.
Burnt up with hunger they shall be,
and with a burning heat devoured:
A sad destruction they shall see
with bitterness upon them poured.
And I will send upon those men
the teeth of beasts (in vengeance just)
With poisons (as I threatened them)
of dreadful serpents of the dust.
The sword without shall pierce them through,
and fears within the young men slay;
The Virgin and the suckling too,
and the ancient man whose hairs are gray.
7 PART.
26.
I threat to scatter their increase,
and drive them into corners then;
And I would also make to cease
their memory from the Sons of men.
Were it not that I feared the wrath
of envious foes and nothing else,
Letting their Adversaries laugh,
and strangely to behave themselves.
Lest they should say, our hand is high,
and that the Lord did NOT all this:
For it is a Land puts Counsel by,
in whom no understanding is.
But O that they were wise indeed,
and did this matter apprehend.
And would consider, and take heed,
and think upon their latter end.
8. PART.
30.
How should one man a thousand chase
and two should make ten thousand flee?
Had not God sold them to disgrace
and their Rock shut them up, think ye!
For their Rock nothing so excells
as our Rock ( Israel's mighty King)
Our very Enemies themselves
being made Judges in the thing!
For Israel's Vine is worst of all
as Sodoms and Gomorrahs field,
Their grapes are very grapes of gall,
and bitter clusters do they yield.
A Wine of Dragons theirs must be,
and as the Asps in venomed cup:
Is not this safely stored with Me
among my treasures sealed up?
9. PART.
35.
Vengeance belongs unto me
and recompense to every crime,
Their foot shall slide and broken be,
but all in my appointed time.
For lo! the day, the day that brings
calamities which they must taste,
Is near at hand: And all those things
which come upon them shall make have.
For God shall judge his people known,
and for his Servants sake repent,
Whenas He sees their strength is gone,
and none shut up, or left unspent.
And He shall say, where are their Gods,
their Rock in whom they trusted so?
That eat the fat of all the goods
that to their Sacrifices go?
Which drank the Wine ye did allow,
the Wine of your drink offerings free;
Let them arise and help you now,
and let them your protection be.
10. PART.
39.
See now that I, even I am He
and there is no God with Me to stand,
I kill, I make alive to be,
I wound, I heal with powerful hand.
Nor is there any such power given
out of my hand that can deliver,
For I lift up my hand to heaven,
and say behold! I live for ever.
If once I whet my glittering sword
and that my hand with judgment close,
I Will render vengeance, says the Lord,
and will reward my hateful foes.
I Will make mine Arrows drunk with blood,
my Sword shall cut, and flesh devour:
The slain and captive shall be food
even from the first revenging hour.
Rejoice, ye Nations, with his land,
for He Will avenge his servants blood:
And, while his foes shall feel his hand,
he will to's Land and folk be good.
HYMN 204. The Song of Hanna.
The mighty God, etc.
1 Samuel 2.1.
MY Soul rejoices in the Lord most high
in Him my horn's exalted and my voice,
Is much enlarged over mine enemy
because in thy Salvation I rejoice.
None's holy as the Lord, there is none beside Thee
Nor is there any Rock like our Almighty.
Talk so exceeding proudly now no more,
no arrogance let from your mouth proceed,
For God's a God of knowledge, rich in store,
and He does weigh exactly every deed:
The bows of mighty men are broke asunder
And they that stumbled are with strength girt under.
They that were full, have hired themselves for bread;
and they that were an hungry quickly ceast,
So that the barren seven has numbered;
and with a goodly household is increast:
And she that had of children once so many
Is waxen feeble and not brought forth any.
2 PART.
The Lord does kill, the Lord does also save,
for He can make alive as well as kill,
He brings down unto the very grave,
and brings up again whenever He will:
The Lord makes poor, He also stores with treasure,
He brings low and lifts up at pleasure.
He raises up the poor out of the dust;
and lifts the beggar from the dungil base,
Sets them with Princes in high place of trust,
to inherit thrones of glory in their place:
For Earths strong Pillars God alone does own them
And He has stablisht all the World upon them.
He will preserve the feet of all his Saints,
as for the wicked silent they shall be
In utter darkness, where are sad restraints
from light and comfort in the least degree.
For by the strength of man (man's sole endeavor)
Shall no man in the World prevail for ever.
The Adversaries of the Lord shall be
broken in pieces by his power put forth:
Thunder upon them out of heaven shall He,
the Lord shall judge the ends of all the Earth:
He shall give strength unto his king appointed,
And will exalt the Horn of his anointed.
Let Israel's God that is the Lord most high
be ever blessed and magnified therefore:
And let the whole Earth universally
be filled with his renown for evermore.
And let the people rich and poor together
Say all Amen, and praise the Lord for ever.
HYMN 205. The Change.
Job 14.1.
MAN that is of a woman born
has but few days on Earth,
And with continual trouble worn
even from his very birth.
He comes up as a flower that dies,
and is cut down freightway,
And shadow-like he flits and flies,
and keeps no constant stay.
Until therefore the utmost date
and full appointed sum
Of all my days, here will I wait,
until my change shall come.
HYMN 206. Seeking God betimes.
All People, etc.
Job. 8.5.22, 23.
IF thou would seek to God betimes,
and to the Almighty prayers would make
If thou were pure, and free from crimes,
then would the Lord for thee awake.
Prosperity should still befall
thy Habitation, blessed with peace;
Though thy beginning were but small,
thy latter end should much increase.
Return thou then to God most high,
and He shall build thee up full sure;
And put away INIQUITY
far from thy House, and be secure.
HYMN 207. God's expostulation with Job.
All People, etc.
Job. 40.6.
THEN unto Job, God answer made
Out of the Whirlwind, and He said
Gird up thy Loins now like a man
And answer my demands who can?
Will thou my judgment disanull,
Will thou condemn me, as more full
More full of righteousness than I,
Have thou a stem like God most high?
Or can thou thunder all allowd
Like Him that rules the rattling Cloud:
Deck now thy self with Eminence
Of Majesty and Excellence.
Array thy self in glory bright
And beauty which is exquisite,
Cast thou abroad in every path
Cast thou the tokens of thy wrath.
Look upon every man that is proud,
And mask him with a dreadful Cloud:
Blast all the proud with foul disgrace,
Tread down the wicked in their place.
Hide them in dust at once to dye,
And bind their faces secretly:
And then will I confess to thee
Thine own right hand thy help can be.
HYMN 208. Job's Answer.
To the Tune of the Ten Commandments.
Job. 42.1.
THen answered Job to God and said,
I know thou can do every thing:
And there is no thought can be conveyed
Or hid from thy DISCOVERING.
Who Is this that does his counsel hide,
and void of knowledge, as do I?
I uttered words, exceeding wide,
things that I knew not, and too high.
Lord, I beseech thee, hear thou me,
and I will speak with awful care:
Instruction I must ask of thee,
and unto me do thou declare.
I heard of thee by hearsay, Lord,
but now I see thee, and relent,
Yea, and I have my self abhorred,
in dust and ashes I repent.
HYMN 209. Man's mortality minded.
To the Tune of the Ten Commandments.
Isa. 2. ult.
CEase ye from man, whose fading breath
Is in his Nostrils, near to death:
For wherein is he (since the fall)
To be accounted of at all?
Psalm. 39.9.144.3.
Man flourishing in all his wealth
Is like to vanity it self:
His days are as a slitting shade
Which daily does decline and fade.
Psalm. 90.12. Eccl. 11.8.12.1.
Lord, teach us how to count aright
Our days that have so long a night,
That we thereby may bring our heart
To wisdom, and betimes convert.
HYMN 210. A Vineyard of Red Wine.
Isa. 27.2.
A Vineyard of red sparkling wine
Sing to her in that day,
I, says the Lord, do keep that Vine,
I water it always.
Lest any hurt it I stand by
to keep it day and night:
And there is in me, verily,
no fury to affright.
But who would set the thorns and briers
against Me in array?
I would go through with flames and fires,
and burn them up streightway.
Or let him on my strength take hold
and make his peace with Me,
And if he seek it, as he should,
we surely shall agree.
And God shall cause all Jacob's Race
to take effectual root,
Blossom and bud, and fill the face
of all the world with fruit.
Let Israel's God the Lord most high
be ever blessed therefore
From first to last perpetually,
Amen, for evermore.
HYMN 211. Debate in measure.
Isa. 27.7.
DID ever God smite Israel
as He has smote his foes?
Or has it been with slaughter keen
as God has smitten those?
In measure when it shoots forth,
He shall therewith debate;
He stays the unkind rough Eastern Wind
when storms are at the height.
By this therefore shall Jacob's House
be purged and cleans'd within;
And all the fruit of this pursuit
to take away his sin.
Let Israel's God the Lord most high
be ever blessed therefore
And people then say all Amen,
Amen, for evermore.
HYMN 212. Commands for comfort.
Where righteousness, etc.
Isa. 40.1.
O Comfort, Comfort Ye
my people, all of them,
Speak comfortably, as may be,
unto Jerusalem.
Say to her (says your God)
now ends her Warfare here,
Her sins are as a darksome cloud
which God does fully clear.
For now received has she,
in Gods so kind account,
A payment double in degree
to what her sins amount.
And I will (says the Lord)
take off her heavy score,
And never at all will I record
her trespass any more.
HYMN 213. Jacob's sadness cheered.
All People, etc.
Isa. 40.27.
WHY do thou Jacob speak? and say
Hid from the Lord is my sad way,
My judgment also (undertrod)
Is passed over from my God?
Have thou not heard, have thou not known
That God the everlasting one,
Creator of the Earths far ends,
No weariness nor fainting spends?
His understanding none can search,
He gives power to his faint Church,
And unto them that have no might
He raises strength unto the height.
The youths shall faint, as wearied all,
The young men utterly shall fall,
But they that on the Lord do wait
Shall have their strength renewed straight.
They shall mount up on Eagles wings,
And run as do the nimblest things:
Of weariness make no complaint,
But they shall walk and shall not faint.
HYMN 214. Love engraven.
Isa. 49.14.
BUT Sion said (so sad was she)
The Lord has quite forsaken me:
And now the Lord has me forgot
As one whom he remembers not.
What? can a mother meek and mild
Ever forget her sucking child?
Can her compassions find no room
For the dear son of her own womb?
Yea, (says the Lord) they may forget
And not remember Natures debt:
Yet will not I forgetful be,
But always will remember thee.
Behold thy Name engraven stands
Upon the palms of both my hands:
Thy walls are ever in my sight
To keep them safely day and night.
Let Israel's God be blessed therefore
From first to last for evermore,
And let us all with one accord
Say here Amen, Praise ye the Lord.
HYMN 215. A Child of Light encouraged and instructed.
Isa. 50.10.
WHO is amongst you fearing God
His Servants voice that hears,
That in the darksome paths has trod,
and where no light appears?
Upon the Name of God most high
O let him trust full sure;
And on his God let him rely,
and he shall be secure.
Let Israel's mighty God therefore
for ever honored be
From first to last for evermore,
Amen, Amen, say we.
HYMN 216. Mourners comforted.
To the Tune of Ye Children, etc.
Isa. 51.7.
HEarken to me in all distress
Ye people that know righteousness,
and in whose heart my Law is placed:
Fear ye not the reproach of men
Nor the reviling speech of them
that dare reproach, where I have graced.
For lo! the much devouring moth
Shall eat them up like to a cloth,
the worm shall eat them up like wool:
But still my righteousness shall reign
And my salvation shall remain
from age to age, unto the full.
HYMN 217. Almighty Arm invoked.
The First Meter.
Isa. 51.9.
AWake, Awake, O Arm of God,
whose strength is uncontrolled,
Awake as in those ancient days,
and in the time of old.
Did thou not lay all Egypt low,
and that fell Dragon wound?
Dry'd^t Thou not up the Seas that flow
with Waters most profound?
Did Thou not in those mighty deeps
a plainer path discover?
And for the ransomed of the Lord
make way for getting over?
Therefore shall God's redeemed return
with Songs to Sion hill,
And endless joy crown them that mourn
while Songs their mouths do fill.
They shall obtain abundant joy
and gladness in that day,
Sorrow and sadness utterly
shall have, and flee away.
The God of Israel therefore
renowned and honored be,
From first to last for evermore,
Amen, Amen say we.
2. METER.
Ye Children, etc.
Awake, Awake, O Arm of God
And put on strength for the undertrod,
awake as in the days of old:
Art thou not it that rent and tore
Proud Rahab, and Thou woundest sore
the Dragon which those deeps did hold.
Art thou not it that dried the Sea
The Waters of the deep were they,
the Waters of the mighty deep:
In those great deeps of Seas, I say,
Thou made a passage and a way,
for thy redeemed and ransomed sheep.
Therefore the Lord's redeemed Ones
That were so filled with sighs and groans
shall have a time for to return:
And they shall come with songs of joy
To Sion hill unanimously
that formerly did sigh and mourn.
And everlasting joy shall be
Upon their heads in high degree
whom former griefs did oversway:
They shall undoubtedly obtain
Gladness and joy that shall remain,
sorrow and sighs shall flee away.
HYMN 218. The Preachers Lips.
Have mercy, etc.
Isa. 57.19.
I (Says the Lord) create
The fruit of lips that preach
For peace to men disconsolate,
and far and near to reach.
And I will give them ease:
But wicked ^en (unblest)
Are like un^^ the troubled Seas
whose waters cannot rest.
But still it casts abroad
Both mire and dirt at once:
There is no peace, as says my God,
unto the wicked Ones.
HYMN 219. Robes of Righteousness.
Have mercy, etc.
1. METER.
Isa. 61.10.
I greatly will rejoice
In God that is so good;
My soul shall sing with cheerful voice
unto the Lord my God.
For he has clothed me
With that delightful dress
Of saving health and sanctity
and Robes of Righteousness.
As Bride-grooms, that have wealth,
With ornaments are decked;
And as a Bride adorns her self
with jewels most select.
Or as the bud that springs
Out of the pregnant earth,
And gardens sowed with choicest things
does richly bring them forth:
So God will make, likewise,
His righteousness and praise
Spring forth in all the Nations eyes
now in the latter days.
Let Israel's God therefore
be praised perpetually:
And let us all for evermore
give praise to God most high.
2. METER.
The mighty God, etc.
Greatly will I rejoice in thee, O Lord,
and in my God I will triumph, and shout:
For He has clothed me of his own accord,
with garments of salvation thoroughout.
And with the robes of righteousness attested
By His free grace: He has my soul invested.
Just as a Bridegroom does himself array
with Ornaments most priestly to be worn:
And as a Bride upon her Wedding day
with Orient Jewels does her self adorn,
So has the Lord with his spiritual beauty
Arraid my soul to serve my God in duty.
And as the teeming Earth puts forth her bud
and as a garden makes the things to grow,
As when the seed, and where the soil is good,
it makes the seed to prosper which we sow,
So God the Lord will cause his sure salvations
And praise to spring afresh before all Nations.
Psalm. 106. ult.
Let Isreal's God that is the Lord most high
be ever blessed and magnified therefore,
And let the whole Earth universally
be filled with his renown for evermore,
And let the people rich and poor together
Say all Amen, and praise the Lord for ever.
HYMN 220. Treading the Winepress alone.
To the Third New Tune.
Isa. 63.1.
WHO IS He that comes from Edom side
With scarlet clothes of Bosrah died
in his apparel brave:
Trav'lling in greatness of his might,
I that speak righteousness most right,
and mighty am to save.
Why art thou read in thine array?
Thy garments like to him this day
that does the Wine fat tread?
I trod the Winepress, I alone,
And of the people there was none
that followed me, or led.
Nahum 1.2.
For I will tread them in my wrath,
And trample on them in the path;
letting my fury reign.
Their blood likewise that war with Me
Shall on my garments sprinkled be
and all my raiment stain.
2. PART. v. 4.
For lo! the days of vengeance due
O Sion, my revenge for you!
the day is in my heart!
The year of my redeemed is come
I looked, but looked in vain for some
salvation to impart.
I wondered then that there was none
None to support, indeed not one
brought any help or aid:
Therefore mine Arm, in high degree
Did bring Salvation unto Me,
and thereby was I stayed.
And I will tread the people down
In my great wrath and furious frown,
and make them drunk thereby:
And I will all their strength confound
And bring it down unto the ground
so low their power shall lie.
HYMN 221. Mercies recorded and requested.
Isa. 63.7.
I Will make mention of the love
and kindness of the Lord,
The praises of the Lord above
I surely will record.
According to his gifts most free
and loving kindness showed
With love and liberality
on Jacob's house bestowed.
According to his grace renewed
which at his hands we find,
According to the multitude
of his compassions kind.
For sure, said he, they are my flock,
children that will not lie;
Therefore he was their saving Rock
in their adversity.
In all their grievances that were
himself was grieved sore:
And the Angel of his presence, there,
preserved them evermore.
He in his love and pity then
redeemed his flock and fold:
He bare them and he carried them
even all the days of old.
2. PART.
v. 10.
But they rebelled and vexed so
his holy Spirit of might
That he was turned to be their foe
and did against them fight.
Then thought he on those ancient days,
Moses and Israel's stock:
Where Is He that brought them from the Seas
with Shepherds of his flock?
O where is He, said God most high,
that did within him place
In ancient times so powerfully
his holy Spirit of grace?
By Moses's hand that led them right,
with glorious Arm and Name;
Dividing Waters in their sight
to get eternal fame?
That led them through the deeper Seas,
until to Land they got,
As Horses in the Wilderness,
that stumble they might not?
As Beasts go down into the dale
God's Spirit made them rest,
Thou led'st thy people not to fail,
Thy Great Name to attest.
3. PART.
v. 15.
Look down from Heaven and behold
from that thy dwelling seat
Of Holiness prepared of old,
and of thy glory great.
Where is the zeal and strength in Thee?
thy bowels moved and pained,
And of thy mercies toward me,
are they, O Lord, restrained?
Doubtless thou art our Father dear,
though Abraham has forgot;
Or ignorant of us appear,
and Israel knows us not.
Thou art our Father, still the same,
thou did us, Lord, redeem:
From Everlasting is thy Name,
a stranger do not seem.
O Lord why have thou made us err
from thy most holy path?
Hardening our hearts from thy true fear,
in thy provoked wrath?
Return, and have rememberance,
for thy dear servants sake,
The Tribes of thine Inheritance
which thou did choose and take!
HYMN 222. Idolatry exploded.
Jer. 2.11.5.23.16.20.
HAS ever any Nation changed
their Gods which yet were none?
Yet have my people been estranged
from me, and wholly gone.
And they have changed their glory great
for Gods which they have got,
Mere Idols that are all deceit
and things that profit not.
O Heavens be amazed hereat
and horribly afraid;
And be ye very desolate,
as God the Lord has said.
For lo! my people Israel
have these two evils done,
Forsaking Me who am the Well
whence Living Waters run:
And hewed out Cisterns to themselves
too shameful to be told:
Mere broken Cisterns, and none else,
that can no water hold.
HYMN 223. Backsliders called back.
All people, etc.
Jer. 3.22.
REturn, backsliding Israel,
And I will your backslidings heal:
Behold we come with one accord
To Thee that art our God the Lord.
Truly in vain do men expect
Salvation for the hills to effect:
And from the mountains multitude
No safety sure can we conclude.
But truly in the Lord our God
Is sure Salvation to be had:
The saving health of Israel
Is all of Him, we know full well.
Let Israel's God be blessed therefore
From first to last for evermore:
And let all faithful people then
Give praise to God, and say Amen.
HYMN 224. The old good way.
Have mercy, etc.
Jer. 6.16.
THus says the Holy One
stand in the ways and see,
Inquire, I say, for the old good way,
the paths that ancient be.
And walk ye all therein,
and ye shall surely find
A very blessed Estate of rest
contenting to your mind.
To Israel's God most high
be all the praise therefore;
And people then say all Amen,
Amen, for evermore.
HYMN 225. False fears and false Deities derided.
Our Father, etc.
Jer. 10.1.
HEar ye the Word which God does say
to you O house of Israel,
Learn not, says He, the heathens way,
nor fear what they count terrible:
At signs of Heaven be not dismayed,
For so the Heathens are afraid.
For peoples Customs are but vain,
one from the Forest cuts a tree
(The work of workmen are they plain)
which with the Ax cut down must be:
Then decked with silver and with gold,
The nails and hammer make it hold.
Like a Palm Tree they stand upright,
but never can they speak a word;
And needs they must be born by might
that go no farther than they are stirred:
Let no man fear these Logs of Wood,
For they can do nor ill, nor good.
Since there is none like thee, O Lord,
for very great indeed thou art,
^reat is thy Name upon record,
who would not fear thee from their heart?
The King of Nations thou do reign,
And fear to thee does appertain.
2. PART.
v. 8, 10, 11.
But they that err and Idolize
are altogether brutes and fools:
The stock's a Book of vanities,
but the true God for ever rules.
He is the Lord the Living One
The King with everlasting Throne.
His Wrath shall cause the Earth to quake,
the Nations cannot bear his blow:
Tell them, that Gods which did not make
the Heavens above, and Earth below,
Even they shall perish from this Earth,
And from these Heavens which God set forth.
Each man is brutish in his skill,
men founder is confounded quite,
His graven Image fools him still,
his molten Image gives no light:
They have no breath, they are but vain,
The work of errors are they plain.
The workmen and these works of his
shall perish at God's visiting,
Unlike them Jacob's portion is
for he has formed every thing.
Israel's the lot which he does claim,
The Lord of Hosts is his great Name.
3. PART.
Isa. 44.9.
They that make graven Images
are all of them mere vanity,
They profit not however they please,
as they themselves can testify;
They see not neither do they know,
But may be shamed it should be so.
Who makes a God or who has framed
a molten Image good for naught?
Lo all his fellows shall be shamed,
they are but men that have them wrought:
Let all stand up and gather near
They shall be struck with shame and fear.
The Smith with Tongs does work it warm,
with Hammers does he fashion it,
He works it with his strength of arm,
he labors and is hunger-bit:
His strength must fail upon constraint,
He drinks no Water, and is faint.
The Carpenter extends his rule,
with lines he makes it as he please;
He fits it with his plaining tool,
he marks it out with compasses:
He forms it like a man complete,
To make a household God most neat.
4. PART.
He hews him down the Cedar-trees,
he takes the Cypress and the Oak,
He glories in the choice of these
which through the forest bear the stroke:
He plants an Ash as also fit,
And leaves the rain to nourish it.
With part thereof the fire is fed,
he warms his body at the flames,
He kindles it, He breaks bread,
yea, and a God thereof he frames:
A graven Image makes he new,
He worships and falls down thereto.
A part he burns in the fire,
with part thereof he eats flesh,
He rosteth roast to his desire,
and does with warmth himself refresh:
Aha, says he, well warmed am I,
I saw the fire burn cheerfully.
He makes of the residue
his God, his graven Image dear,
He worships it, and prays thereto,
he falls down with awful fear:
He says to it, Deliver me,
I for my God acknowledge thee.
5. PART.
v. 18.20.
They have not known nor understood,
for God has closed up their eyes,
They can not see their Gods are wood,
yea, he has shut their heart likewise,
So that they can not understand
That there is a lie in their right hand.
And none considers in his heart,
nor has he wit or skill to say,
I in the fire have burned part,
yea, I have baked bread this day:
Upon its Coals I baked my loaf,
I roasted flesh and ate thereof.
And shall I make the residue
abomination for to be,
Shall I fall down and kneel, think you,
unto the stock of any tree?
He feeds on ashes all that while,
An heart deceived does him beguile.
Isa. 44.21, 22.
O Jacob and O ISRAEL
my servant whom I formed of old,
As a thick Cloud I did dispell
thy sins and failings manifold;
Remember, and return to me,
For I alone redeemed thee.
6. PART.
v. 24.
Thus has the Lord thy Savior said,
that from the womb has formed thee,
I am the Lord that all things made,
Heaven is stretched out alone by ME.
I spread abroad the spacious Earth
And by my self I laid it forth.
The liars signs that nullifies,
and makes Diviners mad to be,
That turns back the worldly wise,
and makes their knowledge foolery.
That seals the Word of's Ministers
And counsels of his Messengers.
That to Jerus^lem does declare
thou shall have dwellers in thee placed,
And Judah's Cities I will rear,
and raise up all her places waste:
That says unto the deeps, be dry,
And dry thy Rivers up will I.
That said of Cyrus (yet unborn)
He is my Shepherd: it is He
That all my pleasure shall perform,
and says, Jerus^lem built shall be;
And to the Templ' of old He said,
Thy sure Foundation shall be laid.
HYMN 226. Humble Supplications in hard times.
To the Tune of the Ten Commandments.
Jer. 14.7.
O Lord though our INIQUITIES
As Witnesses against US rise,
Yet do it of thine own accord,
Save us for thy Names sake, O Lord.
For we confess our sins to thee,
And our backslidings many be:
And we have very oftentimes
Provoked thee by our heinous crimes.
O Thou the Hope of ISRAEL
That can assist and save so well,
The only Savior we confess
In time of trouble and distress:
Why should thou whom Nations dread,
Be as a man ASTONISHED?
And as a very MIGHTY MAN
That cannot save, for who then can?
And thou, although estranged thus,
Art in the very midst OF US:
And we are called by thy Name,
O leave us not to utter shame.
HYMN 227. The Glorious Throne.
Jer. 17.12.
A Glorious Throne exalted high
(since first it did begin)
Is that high place the Sanctuary,
which our God dwells in.
O God the Hope of ISRAEL
and worthily so named,
All that forsake thee, and rebel,
shall surely be ashamed!
Yea, all that do depart from ME
(in whom they ought to trust)
Says God the Lord, destroyed shall be,
and written in the dust.
Because they have forsook the Lord
the fountain and the spring
Of Living Waters richly stored
with every good thing.
Heal me, O Lord, as I have craved,
and healed I shall be:
O save me and I shall be saved,
my praise is all of Thee.
HYMN 228. Vanity of Idols.
Jer. 16.19.
O Lord that art my strength and fort,
my refuge in distress;
The Gentiles shall to Thee resort,
and thus they shall confess:
Surely Our Fathers (dull of sense)
have all inherited lies,
And Vanity, and things from whence
no profit can arise.
Shall men make Gods unto themselves
and Lo! no Gods they be?
Therefore, behold, my Soul resolves
this once to make them see.
And I will make them know my hand,
my might shall they record:
And they shall know and understand
that my Name is the LORD.
HYMN 229. The Partridge.
Jer. 17.11.
LIke as the Partridge gathers young
which are not of her own,
So he that gathers wealth by wrong,
but right thereto has none,
Shall leave them to another's Rule
in midst of all his years,
And at his end shall be a Fool
as by his work appears.
HYMN 230. Woe to Oppressors.
Jer. 22.13.
WOE be to him that builds his house
by wrong and injury.
And by such deeds injurious
his Chambers builds on high.
That does his neighbors service use
without the wages paid:
And does the recompense refuse
that should maintain his trade.
1 These. 4.6. Col. 3.25.
For God avengeth all such things
as we have told you true,
And testified with threatenings
beforehand warning you.
For the wrong-doer surely shall.
receive his just reward:
And there is no respect at all
of persons with the Lord.
HYMN 231. The LORD our Righteousness.
Jer. 23.6.
BEhold the days shall shortly come,
as says the Lord our God,
That I will raise to David's House
a righteous Branch and ROD.
And there shall reign and prosper much
a King of Royal birth,
And judgment He shall execute,
and justice in the Earth.
In His days Judah shall be saved,
and Israel dwell in peace:
And by this Name shall he be called,
THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS.
HYMN 232. Effectual Prayer of Captives.
All People, etc.
Jer. 29.11.
I Know the thoughts of my good Will
which toward you I, says God, intend
The thoughts of peace and not of ill
to give you an expected end.
And then unfeignedly shall ye
call on ME, and your Prayers pursue:
And ye shall go and pray to ME,
and I will hearken unto you.
And ye shall seek and find me then
when ye seek for me from your heart:
And I will bring you back again
from whence I caused you to depart.
And found I will be at your hands
and have your Captive-state restored,
And gather you from all the Lands
to which I drove you, says the Lord.
HYMN 223. Restoration of Israel:
Jer. 30.7.
ALAS! the Day is great and chief,
and none is like thereto,
It is the time of Jacob's grief,
but he shall well go through.
And it shall come to pass that day,
says God the Lord of hosts,
That I will take the yoke away
that binds his neck so close.
And I will burst their bonds that hour,
they shall not bind a limb:
And strangers shall no more have power
to serve themselves of him.
But they shall serve the Lord their God,
and David their good King,
Whom I Will raise up with ruling rod
for their good governing.
O let the God of Israel then
be praised with one accord,
And people then say all Amen,
Amen, praise ye the Lord.
HYMN 234. The constancy of God's covenant.
Jer. 33.20.
THUS says the Lord, if ye can break
my Covenant of the day,
My law of night if ye can check,
and take those times away.
My Covenant may be broken then
with David serving ME,
That he shall have no Son to reign,
or on his Throne to be.
The Levites, Priests and Ministers,
and Jacob's House may fail,
And Covenants with your Ancestors
no more at all avail.
But as the Hosts above our head
in Heaven, none can count;
Nor can the Seas be numbered
to what their sands amount.
So I Will increase and still prefer
my Servant David's seed,
And Levites that administer
to me, as I decreed.
Let Israel's God be praised therefore
of all, and all together;
From first to last for evermore
Amen, Amen for ever.
HYMN 235. Murmuring restrained.
To the Tune of the Ten Commandments.
Lam. 3.39.
WHY should a living man complain,
A man that sins to suffer pain?
For it is good in very truth
That man should bear his yoke in youth.
He sits alone with silent soul
Because He bears a just control:
He puts his mouth into the dust
If hope may be in whom to trust.
He gives his cheek to them that smite,
He Is filled with reproach and spite:
For thus he thinks God will restore,
And not cast off for evermore.
For though a while He causes grief
Yet will He surely send relief:
And in his mercies multitude
Shall his compassions be renewed.
HYMN 236. God afflicts not willingly.
Lam. 3.33.
THE Lord afflicts not willingly,
Nor grieves mankind with misery:
To crush with foot or cruel hand
All the poor prisoners of the Land.
Of man's just right to turn the stream,
Before the face of God Supreme;
And to subvert a man's just cause
The Lord approves not by his Laws.
Who Is he that says a thing shall be,
And it is come to pass says he,
When possibly God may permit,
But never He commanded it.
Psalm. 62. ult.
Out of the mouth of God most high
Comes evil and good with equity,
For both He censures what is naught,
And gives reward to works well wrought.
Let Israel's God be praised therefore
From first to last for evermore:
And people all with one accord
Say here Amen, praise ye the Lord.
HYMN 237. Exhortations to Repentance.
All people, etc. or, O Lord consider, etc. putting two Verses into a Staff.
Lament. 3.40.
COme, let us search and try our way;
And turn to God without delay:
Let us lift up our hearts and hands
To God in Heaven that commands.
We have transgrest, we have rebelled,
And thou thy pardon have withheld:
Thy cloud has hid us from thy view,
So that our prayer should not pass through.
Turn us, O God, turn us to Thee,
And truly turned we shall be:
Renew our days as 'twas of old
Thy face and favor to behold.
Psalm 79. ult.
So we thy flock and pasture-store
Shall give Thee thanks for evermore,
And will show forth to great and small
Thy praise to generations all.
HYMN 238. The Sins of Sodom recorded.
Tune of the Ten Commandments.
Ezekiel. 16.49.
REmember this was Sodom's sin
great pride and fullness of their bread:
And IDLENESS was much therein,
and in her Daughters whom she fed.
And also that she did not care
to strengthen the distressed hand
Of such as poor and needy were,
but waxed haughty in the Land:
Abominable deeds did they,
which were committed in my view:
Therefore I took them quite away
as I my self saw good to do.
Psalm. 106.
Let Israel's God the Lord most high
be praised and magnified therefore,
And let his glorious Majesty
fill all the Earth for evermore.
HYMN 239. Pacification by Repentance.
Ezekiel. 16.62.
I Will establish now with thee
the Covenant of my Word:
And thou shall know this thing of Me,
that I am God the Lord.
That thou may call to mind the same,
and be confounded sore,
And never speak a word for shame
of this thing any more.
When I am pacified in this
toward thee graciously
For all that thou have done amiss,
says God the Lord most high.
HYMN 240. The exact Doom.
Ezekiel. 18.4, 5, 9,
BEhold says God all souls are mine
and mine peculiarly:
The Fathers, Sons, and every ones,
the Soul that sins shall die.
But if a man be just and good,
and does things just and right,
The Lord will give that man to live
for ever in his sight.
10, 11, 14.
If he beget a wicked Son,
that Son shall surely die:
His blood I Will shed on his own head
for living wickedly.
Now lo! if he beget a Son
his Fathers sins that sees*
And shuns them quite, and does things right,
even he shall live in these.
24.
If he that seems a righteous man
forsakes good ways and true,
And takes a course to worse and worse,
as wicked people do.
The righteousness that he has done
no more shall mentioned be,
But in the sin he trespassed in
most surely die shall he.
21, 27, 22.
And when the wicked leaves his lusts,
and for my grace does strive:
And shall delight to walk aright,
he saves his soul alive:
All the transgressions he has done
no more shall mentioned be;
In his approved righteousness
most surely live shall he.
29. Psalm. 106. ult.
O House of Israel hearken then,
for needs confess ye must
My Ways to be pure Equity,
and your own ways unjust.
Let Israel's great and gracious God
have all the praise therefore,
And people then say all Amen,
Amen for evermore.
HYMN 241. Repentance urged.
Ezekiel. 18.30.
REpent and turn your selves from sin,
and all transgressions flee:
And so the sin ye lived in
your ruin shall not be.
Cast your transgressions quite away,
trespass no more thereby;
Make new your heart, and inward part,
for wherefore will ye die?
Why will ye die, O Israel's House,
when I such warning give?
Ill pleased am I that sinners die,
wherefore return and live.
HYMN 242. God's Oath of Grace.
Ezekiel. 33.10.
WHEN Israel speaks, as thinking thus,
the Lord will not forgive:
And we in our transgressions pine,
and how then shall we live?
Say to them, as I live says God,
I swear it solemnly,
I have no pleasure in the death
of wicked men that die.
But that the wicked man should turn
from his ungodly way,
That Is my desire and my delight,
thus therefore shall thou say.
O turn ye, turn ye speedily
from evil, and do well;
For wherefore will ye choose to die,
O House of Israel?
HYMN 243. The Sabbath.
Ezekiel. 20.12.
MOreover said the Lord to me,
I gave my Sabbaths signs to be
betwixt my self and them,
That they might know assuredly
I am the Lord that sanctify
and make them holy men.
But Israel's House rebelled no less
Against me in the Wilderness
than by their former sin:
And they despised my Judgments too
Which if a man with care shall do
he shall even live therein.
My Sabbaths they did much pollute,
Then threatened I to EXECUTE
my Wrath in great degree:
Yet for my Names sake wrought I then,
That it among the HEATHEN men
polluted might not be.
2. PART. v. 18, 20.
Thus to your children I did say,
Walk ye not in your Fathers way,
but let my paths be trod:
Hallow my Sabbaths which shall show
My Covenant, that ye may know
I am the Lord your God.
Yet did their whole posterity
Rebel against me wickedly,
and did my Laws transgress:
Wherefore I threatened to let fall
And power my wrath upon them all
within the Wilderness.
Yet shall the House of Israel
Serve me at home, and please me well,
and there will I require
Your First Fruits and your Offerings,
Your Odors and your holy things
and all that I desire.
3 PART. v. 42.15.
And ye shall know that I am God
That brought you to your own abode,
and gave into your hands
The Land of Israel which I swear
To you and to your Fathers there,
the glory of all Lands.
And there shall ye remember still
Your ways and all your doings ill
wherewith ye were defiled:
And loath your selves in your own sight
For all your deeds that were not right
when ye are reconciled.
And ye shall know that I am God
When I have wrought with you abroad
My Name for to record:
Not answering to your wicked ways,
Nor deeds corrupt in former days,
O Israel, says the Lord.
HYMN 244. Ezekiel's evil Hearers.
To the Tune of the Ten Commandments.
Ezekiel. 33.30.
O Son of man thy people (still)
Are talking of thee very ill;
They talk against thee by the wall
And doors of houses where they call.
To one another thus they talk,
Brother to Brother as they walk:
Come pray you let us hear the word
that now proceeds from the Lord.
And they come to thee, not a few,
And as the People use to do:
They sit intent before thy face
As People whom my Name does grace.
They hear thy Words as faithful men,
But never will they practice them,
For with their mouth much love they show,
But after gain their heart does go.
2. PART.
Moreover know, O Son of Man,
Thy people blame thee all they can,
They take the opportunity
To talk against thee secretly.
And whatsoever they profess
Their heart pursues their Covetousness:
And thou art as a Song most choice
Of one that has a pleasant Voice.
As one that gives great content
By playing on an Instrument;
For this is their perpetual spot
They hear thy Words but do them not.
And when the matters propheci'd
Are come to pass and verified,
And come they must: then shall they know
They had a Prophet told them so.
HYMN 245. Uniting the Nation.
Give laud, etc.
Ezekiel. 37.21.
BEhold now I will take
the Sons of Israel,
And them one Nation make
in Israel where they dwell:
And there they shall
In midst of thee divided be
no more at all.
Nor shall themselves defile
with Idols any more;
And their transgressions vile
I will take off the score:
And David there
Shall be my King for governing
my People dear.
Isa. 40.11.
And he shall lead his flock
as Shepherds that have care,
Gathering his Lambs whole stock,
them in his bosom bear:
And with mild hand
Lead those along that are with young
in all the land.
Ezekiel. 37.23.
And I will save them sure
out of their darksome dens,
Where they have dwelt impure,
and will their Conscience cleanse.
So their abode
Shall be with ME, and I will be
the Lord their God.
26.
Moreover I will make
a Covenant of peace
For Israel's dear sake
to stand and to increase.
I Will heap their store,
And fix my Name in midst of them
for evermore.
HYMN 246. Michael our Prince.
The mighty God, etc.
Dan. 12. from 1. to v. 5. and 10.
AT that time shall stand up Michael your Prince
for children of his people that shall stand:
And troub'lous times shall be as were not since
there was a Nation lived in any land.
Then shall thy people all obtain salvation
That in the book of life have nomination.
And many of them that sleep in dust forlorn
shall waken: some to everlasting light,
And some to shame and everlasting scorn:
the wise shall shine as firmament most bright:
And they that turn to righteousness great store
Shall shine as stars in heaven for evermore.
And many people shall be purified
from filthiness of their iniquity,
And many shall be white (as purely tried)
but still the wicked shall do wickedly;
And none shall understand that live profanely,
But wise and good men shall perceive most plainly.
Let Israel's God the Lord that is most high
be praised therefore and wear the sovereign Crown;
And let the whole Earth universally,
be filled with his glory and renown:
And let Gods chosen People, altogether,
Give praise to Him and say Amen for ever.
HYMN 247. Backslidings censured, or Isreal's Revolt.
Hos. 11.1.
WHEN Israel was a tender child
then did I bear him love,
And called my Son from Lands defiled;
from Egypt to remove.
But as they called they went from them,
and did their fancies please;
They sacrificed to Baalim then
and Graven Images.
And Ephraim too I taught to go
I took him by the Arm,
But they their healer did not know,
that cured them of their harm.
With cords of men I did them draw,
with cords of kindness great,
I took the yoke from off their jaw,
and laid before them meat.
HYMN 248. Aptness to backsliding helped by Grace.
Hos. 11.7.
MY Folk are to backsliding bent,
and it is their general fault,
And though they called them to repent,
none would his name exalt.
How shall I give thee up, O how
shall I to wrath deliver?
My heart is turned within me now,
my bowels yern together.
I will not execute my Wrath
with fury to annoy:
I will not take the angry path
to ruin and destroy.
O Ephraim look for grace from Me,
for I am God not man:
And, dwelling in the midst of thee,
the Holy One I am.
HYMN 249. The Calves of our Lips. Have mercy, etc.
Hos. 14.1.
O Israel return
unto the Lord thy God,
For thou by thy Iniquity
have many bypath trod.
Take with you humble Words,
and turn unto the Lord,
And to him say, now Lord we pray
to thee with one accord.
O take away from us
all our INIQUITY
And now that we draw nigh to thee
receive us graciously.
So shall we render soon
the Fatlings of the Lip:
The thanks that bind a grateful mind
no praise to overslip.
Nor will we have recourse
for ever any more
To the outward force of men or Horse,
as was done heretofore.
Nor to our handy Works
will say in any case
Our Gods are ye: for Lord in thee
the Fatherless find Grace.
2. METER.
Where Righteousness does, etc.
O Israel return
unto the Lord thy God;
For thou may well discern
what bypath thou have trod.
Take with you gracious Words,
and turn, unanimous,
Unto the Lord of Lords,
and say unto him thus.
Lord, take thou quite away
all our iniquity;
And as we humbly pray
receive us graciously.
So we whom grace absolves
and from our sins sets free,
Shall sacrifice the Calves
of these our lips to thee.
It is not outward force
which we shall trust unto,
Nor strength of man or horse
or any works we do.
Nor any more shall we
those Idol-Gods embrace,
For Lord alone in thee
the Fatherless find grace.
HYMN 250. Backslidings healed.
All People, etc.
Hos. 14.4.
I WILL heal backsliding Israel
and love him freely, as I say,
Because mine anger that did swell,
is ceast from him, and turned away.
My grace as dew I will bestow
on Israel that he may come on:
And he shall like a lilly grow,
and cast forth roots as Lebanon.
His branches shall grow forth full well,
his beauty as the Olive Tree;
As Lebanon shall be her smell,
and such his spreading out shall be.
And they that dwell beneath his shade,
shall then return from captive state:
They shall revive, as Corn in the blade,
and grow as Vines most delicate.
Ephraim shall say, what should I do
with shameful Idols any more?
I heard him and observed him too,
he will not do as heretofore.
Now am I like a green firr tree
that grows on the fertile ground:
And know, O Israel, that from Me
and me alone thy fruit is found.
Whosoever is wise and well inclined
even he shall understand these things,
And he that has a prudent mind
shall know whence all this blessing springs.
For all the Ways of God are right,
and all the just shall walk therein;
Yet shall transgressors deviate quite,
still running into farther sin.
HYMN 251. The Fast proclaimed.
Joel 2.15.
BLOW ye with Trumpets loudest blast
in Sion, warning all;
O sanctify a solemn Fast,
the great Assembly call.
The Congregation sanctify,
the people gather near;
Assemble the Elders generally,
gather the children dear.
O Let the Bridegroom (humbled low)
pass from his chamber door,
The Bride out of her closet go,
to humble them the more.
And let the Priests (the Courts that keep)
the Ministers of the Lord,
Between the Porch and Altar weep,
and say with one accord.
Lord, spare thy people, do not give
thine Heritage to reproach;
And under Heathen Lords to live
that on thy right encroach.
And then the Lord of Israel will
be jealous for his Land;
And they shall find most plentiful
compassions at his hand.
HYMN 252. Three and four Transgressions.
Amos 1.3, 6, etc.
THUS says the Lord, for three sad crimes
Damascus did, and four,
I Will take revenge in aftertimes,
and never quit their score.
Because they threshed Gilead
with iron flayls in wars
But fire shall burn up Benhadad,
and break Damascus bars.
Thus says the Lord, for three sad crimes
of Gaza, and for four,
I Will take revenge in aftertimes
and never quit their score.
Because they carried quite away
the whole captivity,
Delivering them to be a prey
unto the Enemy.
2. PART.
Amos 1.9, 11.
Thus says the Lord for three sad crimes
of Tyrus, and for four,
I Will take revenge in after times,
and never quit their score.
Because the whole captivity
of Edom they resigned,
The Covenant so brotherly
came not into their mind.
Thus says the Lord, for three sad crimes
of Edom, and for four,
I Will take revenge in after times
and never quit their score.
For hunting Jacob with the sword
(all pity cast aside)
His anger was extremely stirred,
and ever did abide.
3. PART.
Amos 1.13.
Thus says the Lord, for three sad crimes
of Ammon, and for four,
I Will take revenge in after times
and never quit their score.
For ripping up with cruel hand
the Women then with Child,
TO enlarge the borders of their Land
that was with blood defiled*
Chap. 2.1, 3.
Thus says the Lord, for three sad crimes
of MOAB, and for four,
I Will take revenge in after times
and never quit their score.
Because the King of Edom's bones
they burned into lime,
The Judge, the Prince, and their high Thrones
shall fall at some sad time.
4. PART.
Chap. 2. v. 4 and 6.
Thus says the Lord, for three sad crimes
of Judah, and for four,
I Will take revenge in after times
and not acquit their score.
Because they did God's Word despise
and did not as he bid,
And they were made to err by lies
as their Forefathers did.
Thus says the Lord, for three sad crimes
of Israel, and for four,
I Will be avenged in after times
and not acquit their score.
Because for silver they did sell
the just and righteous Jews,
And sold the poor of Israel
just for a payr of shoes.
5. PART.
Joel 2.12.
Now therefore turn to me, says God,
and with an heart sincere,
With fasting and with mourning loud,
and many a brinish tear.
And rent your hearts with one accord,
but keep your garments whole,
And turn unto the Lord your God
withal your heart and soul.
For He is gracious, merciful,
and unto anger slow;
Of kindness great, and sensible
of our excessive Woe.
Who knows if He will repent,
and blessings leave behind;
Meat and drink offerings to present
to your Lord God so kind?
HYMN 253. Heavy Judgments.
Our Father, etc.
Amos 4.5, 6.
O House of Israel, says the Lord,
I smote you at your dining board,
I gave you emptiness of teeth
In all your Cities to your grief:
And want of bread in every place,
Yet to repent ye had no grace.
The rain from you I have held back
When THREE Months did to Harvest lack;
One City I did rain upon,
And on another there was none:
One piece was rained upon and sped,
And that which was not withered.
I smote you with a blasting Dew
When Gardens, Vineyards, Figtrees grew;
And when increased your Olive Trees,
The Palmer-Worm devoured all these;
Yet turned ye not with one accord
To seek my favor, says the Lord.
I sent on you the Pestilence
As Egypt felt when ye went thence;
Your young men I with sword did slay,
Your Horses I did take away;
I made the savor of your Camp
Come to your Nostrils like a damp.
I have o're-throwen some of you
As God Gomorrah overthrew,
And Sodom: and by gracious hands
Ye were plucked forth as firebrarnds:
Yet turned ye not with one accord
To seek my favor, says the Lord.
Therefore will I do this to thee,
And am resolved it so shall be;
And since new judgments shall begin,
Greater than all that yet have been;
Against that time, prepare thou well
To meet thy God, O ISRAEL.
For he that did the Mountains form;
That did create the Wind and Storm;
That shows to man what is his thought,
That has the Morning Darkness wrought,
That treads on all the Earths high Coasts
His Name is called the Lord of Hosts.
Let Israel's God be praised therefore
From first to last for evermore,
And let the whole Earth, up and down,
Be filled with his bright renown:
And let all sorts of people then
Give praise to God, and say Amen.
HYMN 254. Grass-hoppers and Fire.
Amos 7.1.
WHEN God had formed Grass-hoppers,
(as once it came to pass)
And made them his Commissioners
to eat up all the Grass.
The time was at the latter growth
of shooting out the blade,
And I, to see the judgment loath,
on this wise spoke and said.
Forgive, Lord, our iniquities,
I humbly cry and call:
By whom shall Jacob's House arise,
for he is very small?
Then did the Lord repent for this,
and thus He said to me,
Though they have done so much amiss,
yet this thing shall not be.
Then called He to contend by fire,
devouring all the deep,
And eat a part though not the entire,
then did I pray and weep;
Lord cease these woeful miseries,
and hear my cry and call:
By whom shall Jacob's House arise,
for he is very small?
Then did the Lord repent for this,
and thus he said to me,
Though they have done so much amiss,
yet this thing shall not be.
Then showed he me a plummer line,
pointing at Israel's score:
To show that God would not incline
to pardon any more.
Lord spare thy flock, do not condemn,
thine Heritage to shame;
That Heathens should rule over them
dishonouring thy Name*
For wherefore should the Heathen say,
(while we are undertrod)
Now where is Israel's God (say they)
where Now is Israel's God?
Then will the Lord of 's own accord
be jealous for his Land,
And pity his own flock that is
under the Heathens hand.
Let us always give laud and praise,
to Israel's God therefore,
And people then say all Amen,
Amen, for evermore.
HYMN 255. Nonsufficient Sacrifices.
Now Israel may say, etc.
Micah 6.6.
WHerewith shall I, or any man be bold
to come before the Lord confidingly,
and bow my self before the Lord most high?
With Offerings shall I come of flock and fold,
Burnt Offerings or with calves a just year old?
Will God be pleased, and with our sins dispense
for thousands of fat Rams which we shall boil,
or for ten thousand Rivers full of oil:
Shall my firstborn my trespass recompense,
Fruit of my body for my souls offense?
But he has showed thee what is good, O man,
and what does God the Lord require of thee,
but to do justly and exact to be;
Mercy to love, and show it all we can,
Walk humbly with thy God, and so go on.
Let Israel's God the Lord that is most high
be ever blessed and magnified therefore,
and let the spacious Earth, the Sea and shore
Be filled with his glorious Majesty,
And people say Amen unanimously.
HYMN 256. The Treasures of deceit challenged.
The mighty God, etc.
Micah. 6.10. Deuteronomy. 25.14.
AND are there yet the treasures of deceit
in wicked Houses now so general?
And the scant measure, or the small and great,
which is abominable unto all:
Or shall I count them pure with wicked balance,
And of deceitful Weight which I can challenge?
For their rich men are full of violence,
and their inhabitants are full of lies,
Also their tongue is full of foul offense,
and of deceitful wicked treacheries:
Therefore I Will make thee sick in visitation,
And for thy sins to be a Desolation.
And thou shall eat and not be satisfied,
thy casting down shall be in midst of thee,
And thou shall take fast hold on every side,
but not deliver when thy siege shall be:
And that which thou deliverest Son or Daughter
I will give up unto the sword and slaughter.
And thou shall sow but shall not reap the crop,
and thou shall tread the Olive from the tree,
But not anoint thee with the Oil one drop,
and Wine to drink but none at all for thee:
Therefore, says God, return to Me, returning
Withal your heart, with fasting, tears and mourning.
And rent your heart, but keep your garment whole,
and turn unto your God so patient,
So gracious, great in kindness, merciful:
and soon repents him of our punishment:
Who knows if He will turn, and leave behind him
A blessing, that for ever we may find Him?
HYMN 257. The Priesthood.
The Mighty God, etc.
Zech. 3.1.
AND lo! He showed me Joshua God's High Priest
standing before the Angel of the Lord,
And Satan at His right Hand to resist;
then spoke the Lord to Satan this sharp Word,
The Lord that chose His Church check thy desire,
For is not this a BRAND plucked from the fire?
Now Joshua was clad in vile array,
and stood before the Angel of the Lord,
And God commanded, take those rags away,
and give him change of raiment at my Word,
So then they gave him change of raiment brighter,
And on his head they set a comely Mitre.
Then did the Angel of the Lord protest
if thou, O Joshua, wilt observe my charge,
Then will I give thee Walks among the rest,
to judge my House and keep my Courts at large:
Hear now, O Joshua, my Priest desired,
Thou, and thy fellows that are men admired.
2. PART.
Zec. 3.8, 9. Heb. 10.14.
Behold I will bring forth and will advance
my choice elected, the foundation stone,
My chosen servant who is called the Branch,
my Well-beloved, and the Holy one,
That is endowed above all mortal merit
With all the Graces of my Holy Spirit.
I will engrave with graving of my hand
concerning him the Lord of Hosts does say,
And those Iniquities of all the Land
I will remove and quit in one short day:
For by one Offering made by him that died
Perfect for ever are the sanctified.
And in that day, as says the Lord of Hosts,
such amity and unity shall be,
That they shall call their friends in all the Coasts
under the Vine and under the Fig Tree;
Let Israel's God be magnified therefore
And people say Amen, for evermore.
HYMN 258. The Brotherhood.
Give laud, etc.
Zech. 7.9.
THUS speaks the Lord of Hosts,
let every man of you,
In all the Lands and Coasts,
just judgment now pursue,
And mercy show,
Even all ye can, to every man;
both friend and foe.
And do not ye oppress
the Widow any more,
Nor wrong the Fatherless
the Stranger nor the Poor:
Let none of you
His Brother judge, nor bear him grudge
whatever ye do.
But they refused to hear,
and pulled their neck away,
And stopped their wilful ear
from all that I did say*
Yea every one
Did quite depart, and make their heart
as the Adamant Stone.
Lest they should hear the Law,
and Words which God had sent,
Which former Prophets saw,
and called them to repent:
Therefore there came
On Israel's Land by God's command
great Wrath to flame.
And therefore as He cried,
and yet they would not hear,
So was their cry denied,
and I would not give ear,
Says God of Hosts:
And thus alas! It came to pass
in Israel's Coasts.
So I did scatter them
as when fierce whirlwinds blow,
Among all Nations then,
and whom they did not know;
And thus their Land
And whole Estate lay desolate
by God's Command.
Thus was it with the Jew,
their Land was left forlorn,
That no man might pass through,
nor any might return:
For their own hand
Laid desolate that delicate
and pleasant Land.
HYMN 259. God's Jewels.
[Where righteousness does say, etc.]
Mal. 3.16.
THEN they that feared the Lord
spoke often to one another,
And God gave ear and heard
What each man told his brother
A Book then of record
was written of the same
For them that feared the Lord,
and thought upon his Name.
And they shall then be mine
in that appointed day
When I shall new refine
my Jewels, as I say.
And I will spare each one
of them, as some kind man
Spares his obedient Son
that serves him all he can.
And then shall ye return,
and difference shall be had:
That ye may well discern
betwixt the good and bad.
And ^t will be seen abroad
how different is the Lot,
'Twixt him that serves God,
and him that serves him not.
2. METER.
Have mercy, etc.
Then they that feared the Lord
spoke often to one another,
And God gave ear and (kindly) heard
what each man told his brother.
A Book then of record
was written of the same,
For them that (truly) feared the Lord,
and thought upon his Name.
And they shall then be mine
in that appointed day,
When I shall make up, and refine
my Jewels, as I say.
And I will spare each one
of them, as some kind man
Spares his obedient (humble) son
that serves him all he can.
And then shall ye return
and difference shall be had
That ye may well (and soon) discern
betwixt the good and bad.
And 'twill be seen abroad
how different is the lot
'Twixt him that (truly) serves God
and him that serves him not.
HYMN 260. The Son of Righteousness arising.
Mal. 4.1.
BEhold the day shall come, says God,
that like an Oven shall burn,
And all the Wicked and the Proud
shall God to Stubble turn.
And them into that Oven put
(his justice to advance)
The day that comes shall burn them up
not leaving root nor branch.
But unto you that fear my Name
the blessed Son shall spring,
Of righteousness, with shining flame
and healing in his Wing.
And ye, like fatlings of the stall,
shall go forth with renown,
And have the power wherewithal
to tread the Wicked down:
And they beneath your feet shall be
as ashes undertrod,
When this thing shall be done by Me,
says your Almighty God.
Let Israel's God, the Lord most High
have all the praise therefore
From first to last perpetually,
Amen for evermore.
Finis Hymnorum Veteris Testamenti.
HYMNS Out of the NEW TESTAMENT.
HYMN 261. The Fan of Judgment.
Mat. 3.12.
THE Lord, whose fan is in his hand,
shall one day purge his floor;
And he will purge it thoroughly,
that it shall need no more.
Into his glorious granary
gathering his wheat together:
But then will He burn up the chaff,
with fire that burns for ever.
HYMN 262. The Agreement necessary.
Mat. 5.25.
AGree thou with thy ENEMY,
while with him in the way
Lest he should hale thee to the judge,
that will compel to pay.
The Judge unto the Officer
commit thee by command;
And thou be made a Prisoner,
under the Sergeants hand.
For verily I tell thee right,
from thence thou shall not get:
Till thou have paid the utmost mite,
of all thy dreadful debt.
2. METER.
All People, etc.
Agree thou with thy Creditor,
In dues that he contendeth for;
Agree with him betimes I say,
While thou art with him in the way.
Lest thou be haled by the foe,
Before th'impartial Judge to go;
The Judge by his severe command,
Commit thee to the Sergeants hand.
And then the Sergeant that does wait,
Shall cast thee into Prison straight.
I tell thee thou shall not get thence
Till thou have paid both pounds and pence.
HYMN 263. The Cabinet.
Mat. 6.19.
LAY not your treasures upon Earth
where worldlings love to deal,
And where the moth and rust corrupt
and thieves break through and steal.
But heap in heaven treasures pure,
from all corruption free;
For where your treasure is, be sure
your hearts will also be.
HYMN 264. The wise builder.
Mat. 7.24.
WHoever hears these Words of mine
and does them (says the holy one)
Is like a wise man in's design,
that built his house on rocky stone.
And Rain and Floods and Winds, in course,
Did beat upon that House with force,
And it fell not for all the shock,
For it was founded on a Rock.
But he that hears without regard,
of doing that which I command:
To a foolish man shall be compared
that built his House upon the Sand:
Then Floods of Rain and Tempests great
Upon that House did fiercely beat;
And down it fell unto the ground,
And great the fall thereof was found.
HYMN 265. Our Savior's Rapture.
Our Father, etc.
Mat. 11.2, 25. Luke 10.20. John. 5.23.
WHen John the Baptist (free from doubt)
Sent two of his Disciples out,
To ask our Savior, and to know
If he were very Christ or no,
Tell John said Christ, what things they be
Which ye your selves do hear and see.
The Blind receive their cheerful sight,
The Lame are healed, and walk upright,
Deaf hear, and Lepers cleansed are;
The Dead raised up: these things declare;
And while by Worldly-Wise despised,
The poor are taught and gospeliz'd.
I thank thee, Father, from my heart
The Lord of Heaven and Earth that art:
Because thy wisdom has seen good
These things should not be understood:
But hid from wise and prudent men,
And have to babes revealed them.
Even so, O Father, let it be,
Since so it seemed good to Thee,
For what so seems in thy sight,
Must needs be holy, just and right.
God only wise have praise therefore,
From first to last for evermore.
HYMN 266. The Mustard Seed.
All People, etc.
Mat. 11.31.
THE Kingdom of our Lord, indeed,
Is like a grain of Mustard Seed:
Which sown, of all seeds is the least,
But when it is grown the most increast.
So grant us, Lord, in every place
That we may richly grow in grace:
And in the Knowledge of our Lord
Whose name we praise with one accord.
HYMN 267. The Leaven.
All People, etc.
Mat. 13.33.
THE Kingdom of God's Word from heaven
Is like unto a piece of Leaven,
Which in a mass of meal was hid:
Until the whole was leavened.
So grant our Body, Lord, and Soul
May be preserved entire and whole,
In holiness, until the day
Of Christ our Lord, Amen we pray.
HYMN 268. The wise Merchant.
Mat. 13.45. Prove. 2.6.
GOD'S Kingdom in a Christian
Is like unto a Merchant-man
that sought rich pearls of wealth:
Who having found a pearl of price
Sold all he had, and did rejoice
to buy it for himself.
So grant us, Lord, the truth to buy,
And not to sell it foolishly.
(for wisdom flows from thee)
Instruction, understanding too
Grant we may carefully pursue,
and rich to God may be.
2. METER.
To the Tune of the 113. Psalm.
God's Kingdom in a Christian
Is like unto a Merchant-man,
that sought rich pearls of worldly wealth:
Who having found a pearl of price
Sold all he had, and did rejoice
to buy it wholly for himself.
So grant us, Lord, the truth to buy,
And not to sell it foolishly.
(for purer wisdom flows from Thee)
Instruction; Understanding too
Grant we may carefully pursue
and wise to God thereby may be.
HYMN 269. The Draw-net.
Mat. 13.47. Pet. 12.3.
THE Kingdom of the Gospel here,
which is for grace designed:
Is like a net cast in the Sea,
gathering of every kind.
Which when 'twas full men drew to shore,
sat down to make survey;
In Vessels gathered up the good,
and cast the bad away.
So shall it be at this World's end,
the Angels shall come forth
Severing the wicked from the just
on all the Coasts on earth:
And they shall cast the wicked ones
into a furnace-flame.
There shall be weeping, gnashing teeth,
and everlasting shame.
HYMN 270. The Fool in grain.
Ye Children, etc.
Luke 12.16.
THere was a certain rich man's ground,
That plentifully did abound:
and made the wealthy owner say
What shall I now devise to do,
Because I want a barn or two,
wherein I might my harvest lay?
But now it comes into my mind,
There is a means that I shall find*
to lay up all my wealthy Crop:
I will pull down my barns, and build
Much greater barns, and have them filled
and heaped up unto the top.
And I will say unto my Soul,
Soul, live at ease, without control,
eat thou, and drink, and merry be:
For worldly goods enough thou have
Laid up for many years to last,
and there can come no want to thee:
Thou fool said God, this night shall they
Require thy Soul, and take 't away,
what then becomes of all thy store?
Such is the man that heaps up wealth,
And worldly treasures to himself
and is not rich to God, but poor.
HYMN 271. The best fear.
Mat. 10.23. Luke 12.4.
MY friends, said Christ, to you I say
fear ye not them that threaten you;
And can, perhaps, the body slay,
but after that no more can do.
But I will give you warning here,
and be ye warned by my word:
Whom ye should ever have in fear,
namely, the mighty Sovereign Lord.
Who after he has smote and slain
(having all power of life and limb:)
Can cast to hell, and endless pain,
yea I say to you, fear ye him.
HYMN 272. The best rejoicing.
Now Israel, etc.
Luke 10.17.
AND lo* the Seventy Disciples came*
As they returned from preaching of the word
And thus they spoke and said unto our Lord,
O Lord, we cannot but with joy proclaim
How Devils are subject to us through thy Name.
Our Savior said I know it must be so,
I saw proud Satan falling from on high
Like to a flash of lightning from the Sky.
For his power shall come down, but yours shall grow
And conquer all the forces of the Foe.
Nevertheless rejoice ye not in this
that Devils are subject unto your command,
But rather much rejoice to understand.
Your Names are written in the book of bliss,
And of Eternal life ye shall not miss.
To Him that sits upon the Throne therefore,
And unto Christ the Lamb, the Holy One,
And to the seven Spirits before the Throne,
Ascribe in heaven and earth, on sea and shore
Dominion, power and praise for evermore.
HYMN 273. Peace with all men
Romans 12.18.
AS far as it is possible
and in your power does fall,
Retain ye still this Principle,
to live at peace with all.
Because the fruit of righteousness
is sown of him in peace,
Whose quiet mind is still inclined
to make Contention cease.
And therefore follow peace with all
and holiness together:
Without which grace, none see the face
of God above for ever.
HYMN 274. Subsistence of God's Kingdom.
Romans 14.17.
GOD'S Kingdom is not meat and drink,
(the things desired of most)
But righteousness, and peace it is,
and joy in the Holy Ghost.
And he that in these things serves Christ
as all men ought to do,
Is much set by, of God most high
and men commend him too.
Let us therefore pursue the things
that make for mutual peace,
And things whereby to edify
and make true Love increase.
HYMN 275. Moderate affections. All People, etc.
1 Cor. 7.27.
BRethren, I say, the time is short
And this remains for every sort:
The Married so to lead their lives
As free, and not as having Wives.
The sad as sorrowing not too deep,
But weeping as they did not weep:
And they that joy in their fair lot
Should joy as if they joyed not.
The buyers free from carefulness,
As if not buying to possess:
Using the World as does befit,
And not at all abusing it.
For lo! the World does quite decay,
The fashion of it fades away,
But he that does the Will of God
Has an Eternal blessed abode.
All Glory to the Holy One
That sits upon the sovereign Throne,
And to the Lamb of God therefore
Be praise and Honor evermore.
HYMN 276. Sowing to the Spirit.
Gal 6.7.
BE not deceived, my brethren dear,
God is not mocked, we know,
For all shall reap (for things done here)
according as they sow.
He, then, that sows to the flesh
corruption shall inherit:
And they eternal happiness
that sow unto the Spirit.
Unwearied, then, let us pursue
good Works, without complaint:
For we shall reap in season due
if that we do not faint.
And taking opportunity,
do good to every man,
But chiefly to the family
of Faith the best we can.
HYMN 277. Amity and Unity.
Phil. 2.1.
IF any Consolation
in Christ is to be had,
If any Delectation
in love to make us glad.
If any fellowship be felt
in God's sweet Spirit of grace,
If any bowels that can melt,
or mercies taking place.
Fulfill our joy, like-minded be,
in mutual love combined:
Having the self-same amity,
and unity of mind.
Let nothing out of strife be done,
or of vainglory wrought,
But others to themselves each one
preferring in his thought.
And look not every man of you
on his own things alone.
But on the things of others too,
to comfort every one.
HYMN 278. Our Savior's coming in the Clouds.
1 Thessalonians. 4.16.
THE Lord himself shall once descend
from Heaven with a shout,
And God's Archangel shall attend,
and his loud voice break out.
And then the Trump of God likewise
shall his alarm sound:
And first the dead in Christ shall rise
and stand upon the ground.
Then shall the living that remain
to Heaven in clouds repair:
And be caught up with all the train
to meet the Lord in the air.
And then shall we for ever joy
in presence of the Lord:
Comfort your selves then mutually
with this so sweet a Word.
HYMN 279. Charity charged upon the rich.
Now Israel, etc.
1 Timothy 6.17.
THE rich in this World charge thou solemnly
Not to be puffed up with secret pride,
Nor in uncertain riches to confide:
But on the living Lord that they rely,
Who gives us richly all things to enjoy.
That they do good, and largely give to th'poor*
Ready to distribute of their estate,
And to be willing to communicate:
A good foundation laying up in store
Of gaining life that lasts for evermore.
HYMN 280. The Call of Grace.
2 Timothy 1.9.
IT IS God that loved and called us
with an effectual call,
Of his good pleasure mavelous,
not for our Works at all.
But of his purpose and his grace
ordained to every man,
And by Christ Jesus given us
before the World began.
And now is made most manifest
in that which does appear
By coming of the ever-blest
the Lord our Savior dear.
Who has abolished death thereby,
and has, in every place,
Brought life and immortality
to light by Gospel grace.
To God the Father and the Son
and Holy Ghost therefore,
Be glory done as first begun,
and shall be evermore.
HYMN 281. The Cross and Crown.
All People, etc.
2 Timothy 2.11.
THIS is a very faithful Word,
If we be dead with Christ our Lord,
Then will he us to life restore
To live with him for evermore.
For if we suffer and sustain,
Then shall we with him also reign:
If we deny Him, then, I say,
He Will deny us another day.
If we believe not (wanting faith)
Yet is He true to what He says:
And howsoe'er we falsify
Yet can He not Himself deny.
All Glory to the Holy One
That sits upon the sovereign throne,
And to the Lamb of God therefore
Be glory now and evermore.
HYMN 282. Vessels to honor.
2 Timothy 2.19. Mat. 22.14. Ephesians. 5.3.
THE Lord's foundation steadfast is
having this seal thereto,
The Lord well knows who are his,
and they are but a few.
Therefore let all unanimously
that name Christ's Holy Name,
Depart from all iniquity
which is to Saints a shame.
But in a great House are at once
Vessels, as seems good,
Not only Gold and Silver ones.
but likewise Earth and Wood.
And unto Honor some are framed,
and to dishonor some:
If any shun the things here blamed,
and as refined do come.
A Vessel it shall him produce
of honor and regard,
A meet one for the masters use,
to all good Works prepared.
To him that sits upon the throne
and to the Lamb therefore
Be Glory and Dominion
and Honor evermore.
HYMN 283. Evil Times to be amended.
The Mighty God, etc.
2 Timothy 3.1.
THIS also known, as that which must be known,
that in the last days perilous times shall come,
Men shall be lovers of themselves alone,
proud, covetous, boasters, and blasphemers some,
Unthankful, yielding Parents no subjection,
Unholy, void of natural affection.
Truce Breakers, false accusers, violent,
Traitors, and disesteemers of the good,
Heady, highminded, and incontinent,
loving their pleasures, more than loving God;
Having a form of Godliness, denying
The power thereof: with these is no complying.
2 Timothy 2.22. 1 These 5.15.
But follow righteousness with one accord,
faith, charity, and peace unanimously,
With all the Saints that call upon the Lord,
out of an heart that savours purity.
And that which good is, follow altogether,
Among your selves, and all men whatsoever.
HYMN 284. Exhortations to good Works.
All people, etc.
Tit. 3.1.
PUT them in mind, all those of ours
Subject to be to higher Powers:
To Principalities and STATES,
And duteous to the MAGISTRATES.
To all good Works addicted still,
To speak of no man any ill:
To use no bitterness or gall,
But showing meekness unto all.
For we our selves, in former times,
Were much addicted to such crimes*
Foolish we were, to envy bent,
And very DISOBEDIENT.
Deceived, and serving diverse lusts,
And pleasures most pernicious:
Living in malice, and debate,
Hateful and given much to hate.
But when appeared the kinder love
Of God our Savior from above,
Not by the Works of Righteousness
Which we have acted more or less:
But saved by his grace from Wrath,
And his regenerating BATH,
And by the very innermost
Renewing of the Holy Ghost.
Which he shed on us plenteously
By Jesus Christ to justify,
Through grace which He toward us bears,
Of endless life to make us HEIRS.
HYMN 285. Dehortation from evil.
All People, etc.
Tit. 1.8.
THIS is a saying very true,
And always to be pressed on you,
That they that do in God believe
Should carefully good Works atchieve.
And let all ours learn to produce
Good Works for charitable use:
These things are good for us and them,
And profitable unto MEN.
But foolish Questions still avoid,
And Genealogies of pride,
And vain contentions of the Law,
Which from the Ways of Truth withdraw.
An Heretic of any SECT
When twice admonisht soon reject,
Knowing such are subverted quite,
And sin against their inward light.
And shun the Words that are profane,
And bablings which are all in vain,
For they will grow to more excess
Of error and ungodliness.
Beware therefore lest, led aside
By wicked errors, wandering wide,
And leaving truth which ye profess
Ye fall from your own stedfastness.
But have a care to grow a pace,
To grow in knowledge and in grace,
Knowledge of Jesus Christ our Lord,
Whose Name we praise with one accord.
HYMN 286. Pure and impure described.
Tit. 1.15. Rev. 3.4.
UNTO the pure are all things pure,
but to the faithless and defiled
Is nothing so, ye may be sure,
for mind and conscience both are soiled.
They still profess to know the Lord,
but in their deeds deny him straight,
Abominable, and untow'rd
and to every good Work reprobate.
But some are holy and upright,
and keep their garments clean and fair:
And these shall walk with God in White,
for worthy Saints esteemed they are.
HYMN 287. Fruitfulness blessed.
Heb. 6.7.
THE Earth which often drinks in the showers,
And brings forth sweet Herbs and Flowers,
Meet for his use by whom 't was dressed
Is blessed of God, and richly blessed.
But that which brings forth far worse
Rejected is, and near a curse:
Namely, that brings forth thorns and briers
Whose end is burning, flames and fires.
HYMN 288. Charity rewarded.
Heb. 6.10. Gal. 6.9.
THE Lord is not unrighteous,
your labors to forget:
Which ye have showed toward his Name^
with love so strongly set.
In that ye have administered
unto his Saints so dear;
And still ye do administer
unto his servants here.
And we desire each one of you
with diligence to attend
Unto the full assurances
of Hope unto the end.
And be not slack through negligence,
but followers of all these
That thorough Faith and Patience
obtained the Promises.
And let us all good Works pursue,
not fainting any jot,
For we shall reap in season due
if fainting hinder not.
To Father Son and Holy One
be praise and glory then,
As was and is and shall be his
World without end Amen.
HYMN 289. Benediction from the God of peace.
Heb. 13.20.
THE God of peace we now entreat
that brought our Savior from the dead,
That Shepherd of the Sheep so great
whose precious blood for us was shed:
And the everlasting Covenant sealed
through that dear blood which he did spill
Make you complete through grace revealed
in all good Works to do his will:
Working in you through Jesus Christ
things pleasing for the Lord to see,
To whom be glory in the highest
for evermore, Amen say we.
HYMN 290. Evenness of Spirit in all conditions.
Jam. 1.9.
LET Brethren of a low degree
be joyful to be raised,
But rich men's joy made low to be,
and say the Lord be praised.
For as the flower of the grass
so shall he fade away,
When sun with burning heat shall pass
unto the height of day.
The grass does fade, the flower decays,
its grace and fashion goes:
So shall the rich man in his ways
fade as the withering Rose.
HYMN 291. War with lusts.
Jam. 4.1.
FROM whence come Wars and Fightings keen
Come they not from your lusts unseen?
The lusts that in your members are
These are the causes of this War:
Ye lust and have not, ye are slain,
With strong desire, and cannot obtain.
Ye fight and war and cannot have
Because ye do not wisely crave,
Ye ask and have not that or this,
Because ye ask so much amiss;
For what ye ask ye aim it thus
That ye may spend it on your lusts.
O ye adulterers that while,
And ye Adulteresses vile,
Know ye not that the World abroad
Has friendship opposite to God?
Who then does with the World agree
The enemy of God shall be.
Think ye the Scripture says not well,
The Spririt that in us does dwell
Lusts to envy and disdain,
As apt to let such vices reign,
But yet does God more grace bestow
These wicked lusts to overthrow.
Job 40.11.
Who says, God does the proud abase,
But to the humble gives grace:
Submit your selves to God therefore,
Resist the Devil evermore:
And if ye do resist him so
He will flee from you as his foe.
HYMN 292. Our Advocate in Heaven.
1 John 2.1.
MY little ones, I write to you
that ye sin not at all,
But if by great infirmity
some into sin do fall:
We have a potent Advocate
with God the Father true,
Jesus the just to mediate,
and intercede for you.
A full PROPITIATION
for all our sins is He,
And not for our great sins alone
that pardoned they might be,
But also for them all he pleads
that penitently grieve,
And for the whole World intercedes
whoever in him believe.
HYMN 293. The Children of God and Satan described.
1 John 3.10.
IN this are manifestly known
the Sons of God most high,
And children of the Wicked One
are also known hereby.
Whoever does not righteousness
is not of God begot:
Nor he (whatever he profess)
his Brother that loves not.
And this command from God above
we have towered one another,
That he that bears to God true love,
should also love his brother.
HYMN 294. God's Children and Satan's distinguished.
1 John 3.10. Mat. 19.17.
BY this the Sons of God are known,
And Children of the Wicked One,
The man that does not righteousness
Is not of God we well may guess,
Neither is he of God above
That bears his brother no true love.
Mat. 19.17.
For this Commandment we have
From God, who all the precepts gave,
That he that loves God most high
Should love his brother accordingly*
God only good have praise therefore
From first to last for evermore.
HYMN 295. Want of Charity discovered and censured.
1 John 3.16.
THE love of God well know we thus
Because He lost his life for us,
And for our brethrens sake should we
Lay down our lives, if need should be.
But whosoever has this Worlds great store
And sees his brother very poor,
Yet no compassion stirs within
How dwells the love of God in him?
For thus, at judgment, Christ will say,
Since ye did show your love no way
To one oth' least that here ye see
Ye did it not, no, not to Me.
And this uncharitable Train
Shall pack away to endless pain,
But then the righteous (ye must know)
Into Eternal life shall go.
All glory to the Holy One
That sits upon the Sovereign Throne,
And to the Lamb of God therefore
Be praise and honor evermore.
HYMN 296. St. Judes Admonition, Exhortation and Benediction.
Ye Children, etc.
Behold as Holy Henoch said,
The Lord does come with power arrayed,
and millions of his Holy Ones;
To execute his judgment just
On Wicked men led by their Lust
to set them at his Judgment Thrones:
And to convince ungodly men
And all the multitudes of them
of all their Wicked Actions done:
Also of all their speeches hard
Which Wicked men without regard
have spoke against the Holy One.
But ye beloved edify
Your selves in Faith and Piety:
still praying in the Holy Ghost,
And keep your selves in God's true love,
Looking for mercy from above
to save you to the uttermost.
Now unto him whose power on high
Can keep you from Apostasy,
and with great joy present you then,
And set you faultless in his sight,
To him be Majesty and might,
and Honor evermore, Amen.
HYMN 297. The Joys of Heaven.
The mighty God, etc.
Rev. 7.13.
ONE of the Elders asked me, and said,
Who are these persons in White Robes arrayed?
And answered straight, to put me out of doubt,
These from great tribulations did come out;
And they have washed their Robes and white they made them
In Christ the Lambs pure blood, whose Robes arrayed them.
Wherefore they are before the Throne so bright,
And serve God in the Temple day and night,
And he that sits on the Throne on high
Shall dwell among them everlastingly:
And they shall never thirst nor hunger more,
Nor Sun nor Heat sustain, as heretofore.
For Christ the Lamb that sits on the Throne
With Heavenly Joys shall feed them every one,
And he shall lead them to the living springs
Where the pure Water flows with all good things;
And he shall wipe away scorns and disgraces,
And all sad tears from off his peoples faces.
To him that is and was and is to come,
To God Almighty and to Christ his Son,
And to the seven Spirits before the Throne,
The ever blessed and everlasting One,
To Father, Son and Holy Ghost together
Be Kingdom, Glory, Power and Praise for ever.
HYMN 298. The New Jerusalem.
Rev. 10.5.
BEhold I saw an Angel stand
Upon the Sea and on the Land,
to Heaven lifting up his hand,
And by the Everliving swore,
By him that made both Sea and Shore,
that shortly time should be no more.
Rev. 21.1.
New Heavens and new Earths, that day,
I saw, for the old was past away,
and no created Sea could stay,
I saw the Holy City then
The Heavenly Jerusalem
a coming down from God to men.
And as a Bride she did appear
Adorned for her Husband dear,
and Heaven's loud voices I did hear,
God's Tabernacle is with men
And lo! the Lord shall dwell with them
and they be his JERUSALEM.
All tears shall God wipe from their eyes,
And no more death nor grief nor cries
shall evermore the Saints surprise.
For former things are past away;
And thus I heard him (that same day)
that sat upon the Throne to say.
HYMN 299. The Coronation of Spiritual Conquerors, and reward of Carnal evil
doers.
Rev. 21.5, 6, 7, 8.
BEhold I make even all things new,
Write it said He, I 'monish you,
for faithful are these Words and true:
And said He, it is done and past,
I Am he that hastened it so fast,
Alph' and Omega, First and Last.
To him that is a-thirst will I,
Give of the Fountain never dry,
the Wat'r of Life gratuitously:
He shall have all the inheritance free
That overcomes: and shall have Me
his God: and he my Son shall be.
But daunted ones devoyd of grace,
And all the unbelieving Race,
and all the abominable base;
The murderers and whoremongers,
Inchanters, Witches, poysoners,
all liars, and Idolaters,
Shall have their part in that broad lake
Which coals of fire and brimstone make,
this after death must they partake:
Glory to God Almighty then,
As was of old, is now again,
and shall be evermore, Amen.
HYMN 300. The Celestial Paradise.
Our Father, etc.
Rev. 22.1.
AND after this, he showed me,
A River pure as pure might be,
A Crystal River very clear
Of Waters of life which did appear,
Proceeding from the throne of God,
And from the Lambs most blessed abode.
Rev. 22.2.
Amidst the Street of Salem new,
And on each side the River, grew
The tree of life most rich and rare,
Twelve sorts of fruit, each month, it bare*
And, lo! the leaves thereto designed,
Were for the healing of mankind.
Rev. 3.12.
To him that overcomes, said he,
I Will give to eat of that same tree
Of life: and he shall have abode
Within the Temple of my God:
A pillar there shall he persever,
And shall no more go forth for ever.
Rev. 1.4.
To God the Father and the Son,
Which is, and was, and is to come:
And to the seven Spirits of might,
Which are before the Throne so bright,
Be given all the praise therefore,
From first to last for evermore.
The End of the Hymns out of the New Testament.
A Brief Summary OF Christian Religion, Poetically drawn up. Showing, 1. What
things are to be Believed. 2. What things are to be Implored. 3. What things
are to be Performed.

A Christian must believe what Scripture says
Touching the Principles of Christian Faith.
One true, Eternal God, unchangeable,
Most holy, wise, just, mighty, merciful,
Invisible, immense, and infinite,
And having all things always in his sight.
Incomprehensible, in Persons three,
The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, they be.
The fountain of this Personality
Begets the Son, who works by his supply,
Both these produce the Spirit, which proceeds
And works from both, and they, by him, their deeds.
So none's before, but, in this order rare,
All coeternal, and coequal are.
Predestination, and foreseen decree
Now for God's glory every thing shall be.
Creation of the world in six days space,
All Angels first, Man in the latter place;
Perpetual providence, the helpless fall
Of sinning Angels, Some never sinned at all.
These were elect and praise their Maker still,
And with great quickness execute his will:
These wait on Saints and bear them in their arm,
Those (by permission) tempt, accuse, and harm.
Reserved in chains of darkness (which dismay)
Until the judgment of the general day.
Man's innocence and happiness at first,
That Covenant broke, and all therein accursed,
Original corruption, actual sin,
Transgression censured, and thus death came in:
The Law so plainly written in man's heart,
Obliterated for the greatest part;
The Earthly Paradise quite lost and gone,
And all mankind slain by the sin of one.
A better Covenant wrought man's Restoration;
By Christ the second Person's Incarnation;
Conceived in Virgin's Womb by Heavenly Powers,
His manhood (sin excepted) just like ours,
To the Second Person joined immediately,
And mediately to the rest thereby;
Making both Natures but one Person still,
Though having both divine and humane will,
Divine and Humane, Properties distinct,
Man-God, God-Man, both these together linkt.
Equal with God in his spiritual Nature;
Inferior to him as the Mediator;
Yet in both Natures (not in man's alone)
Far above Angels in the highest Throne.
His perfect life, and blessed Doctrines taught,
Backed with a world of wonders which he wrought.
His Judgment, Passion, Burial, Resurrection,
Ascension, Session, (in his bright perfection)
And Intercession there, at God's right hand,
And having all things under his command.
The universal Churches sure Election,
Calling, Adoption, Trial and Correction;
Redounding to their good, Justification,
Sanctification, and sure Preservation.
The seal of Baptism, and the sacred Cup,
With many an Ordinance to build them up,
All to be guided by the Scriptures light,
Which Saints did pen, and God's own Spirit indite.
The common call, and gifts of many a one,
Never built up unto perfection.
Immortal souls of Saints celestial bliss,
Imprisonment of theirs that lived amiss:
The Resurrection and the Judgment-day
Where Christ in chief, and all the Saints bear sway.
The world that was accursed (for man misled)
Purged by fire, and reestablished.
Then Reprobates must pack to endless pai^,
And Saints in endless Glory shall remain.
2. What things are to be implored.
The Preface of the Lord's Prayer.
[Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.]

First it sets forth God's glorious attributes
Of might and mercy, and their blessed fruits:
Assuring he can help that dwells above,
And will do, as a Father, out of love.
That we (through Christ who does this grace display)
With reverence and confidence may pray*
The First Petition.
[Hallowed be thy Name, etc.]

That worthy instruments may still be found
In Church and State, and God by them renowned,
Our hearts even filled with Heaven, our tongues applied
To edify, and God be glorified;
And that our lives before the World may shine
With glittering beams of Graces most Divine.
The Second Petition.
[Thy Kingdom come, etc.]

That Saints be kept and Satan's Kingdom quelled,
False Doctrines, Errors, Antichrists expelled,
The Gospel spread and prosper'd every where,
And Christians laboring (each man in his sphere)
For Jew and Gentiles call, and confirmation,
Our happy end, and final full Salvation.
The Third Petition.
[Thy will be done in Earth at it is in Heaven, etc.]

That we with wisdom may be all inspired
To know God's will in what he has required;
Our backward natures that are dark and dull,
Inflamed with zeal to do it to the full:
And what he pleases of himself to do,
We may contentedly submit unto.
The Fourth Petition.
[Giev us this day, etc.]

That we, depending on God's providence,
By lawful means and daily diligence,
Without ambition, avarice or strife,
May have all needful comforts of this life
For us and ours: not envying great or small,
But helping those that in affliction fall.
The Fifth Petition.
[Forgive us our trespasses, etc.]

That we confessing our vile sinful Nature,
Acts and neglects against our great Creator,
Not having ought to pay, or ought that is good,
But of his gift, may flee to Christ his blood
For Grace, and Peace, and Pardon while we live,
With peaceful minds, addicted to forgive.
The sixth Petition.
[And lead us not into temptation, etc.]

That we be never tried above our strength
By weal or woe, but may prevail at length,
That either the temptation time be missed,
Or we with Graces armed to resist.
That, ever watchful, we may never fall,
But grow in Grace, and be preserved in all.
The Conclusion.
[For thine is the Kingdom, etc.]

That we may ever praise our heavenly King,
From whom all blessings, friends and favors spring;
That all that hear may join with free consent,
And full assurance of accomplishment:
Waiting for answers as not begged in vain,
And so returning to our prayers again.
3. What things are to be performed.
Which are contained in the Decalogue or Ten Commandments.

The First Commandment.
MAKE God the sovereign object of thy fear,
Faith, love and joy; and service most sincere.
The Second Commandment.
Act always in Religion every thing
By Scripture warrant from the heavenly King.
The Third Commandment.
Thou may be short in duty never slight
Nor use a word of God that is vain or light.
The Fourth Commandment.
On Sabbaths always put thy soul to nurse,
Shun worldly thoughts, occasions and discourse.
The Fifth Commandment.
Be sure to carry well in thy relation,
For none are good without that commendation.
The sixth Commandment.
Live peaceably with all, shun wrath and strife,
By all good means preserve and succor life.
The Seventh Commandment.
Keep chastity, all wantonness eschew
In heart, in habit, touch, or talk, or view.
The Eighth Commandment.
Promote your neighbors and your own estate,
Sloth, riot, couz'nage and injustice hate.
The ninth Commandment.
Maintain thy Neighbors and thy own good Name,
Lies, flatteries, slanders, scoffs and brags disclaim.
The Tenth Commandment.
Grudge not thy neighbors good, quell fond desire,
And let thy heart to true content aspire.
A TABLE to the Three First Centuries, containing the Chapter-Hymns.
A.
ABominations seven, Page 43 Acclamations of Praise, or Te Deum Laudamus,
exemplified with proofs of Holy Scripture, 2 Acclamations for Babylon's Fall,
97 Access to the Throne of Grace at our awaking, 1 Admonition of St. Jude, 309
Adventus Christi, or the Accomplishment of the First Promise, 12 Advocate in
Heaven, 307 Adulterers Peril and Penance, 42 Affections moderate 294 Aegypt's
ten Plagues, for the fifth of November, 18 Agreement necessary 286 Allelujah
for Babylon's Fall, 98 Almighty Arm invoked, 232 Almsdeeds, 99 Amity and Unity,
296 Angels their blessed attendance, 35 Anger corrected, 39 Applause of
Christian Conquests, 30 Aptness to backsliding helped by Grace 267 Arraignment
of Ambition, Covetousness and Cruelty, 16 Arising of the Sun of Righteousness,
284 Ascension of Christ, and leading Captivity Captive, 81 Astonishing
Judgments, or Aegypt's ten Plagues, 18 Atonement sought upon humiliation, or a
woeful bewailing of our Corruptions and Calamities, 27 Attendance of blessed
Angels, 35
B.
BAbylon's Fall, 97 Backsliders called back, 242 Backslidings censured, or
Israel's Revolt, 266 Backslidings helped by Grace, 267 Backslidings healed, 269
Benediction from the God of Peace, 82 and 304 Best fear, 292 Best rejoicing,
293 Benediction of St. Jude, 309 Bewailing our corruptions and calamities, 27
Blessed Angels attendance, 35 Blessed death, 100 Blessings of obedience, Ibid.
Blessings on the Mount, or blessed Qualifications, 103 Blessedness of pardon,
36 Boasting corrected, 37 Bodies changed, 88 Brotherhood, 281
C.
CAbinet, 287 Call out of Babylon, 104 Call of Grace 298 Calves of our Lips 267
Captives Prayers effectual 252 Carnal and evil doers rewarded, 312 Change, 224
Charity and Piety extended, 37 Charity charged upon the rich, 297 Charity what
it is truly, 94 Charities qualifications, 105 Charity rewarded, 304
Chastisement, 105 Celestial Paradise, 313 Child of light encouraged and
instructed, 231 Children of light exhorted, 83 Children of God and Satan
described, 307 Christ's Birth, Kingdom and Conquests 21, 22 Christ's
commission, 108 Christ's Benefits, 106 Christ^s Passion and Compassion, 167
Christian Conquests applauded, 30 Circumcision of the Heart, 38 Comforting
mourners, 232 Commands for comfort, 229 Commination of Esaias 52 Communion of
Saints, 109 Compassion and Passion of Christ 167 Confession of Christ, 110
Confession of sin, 38, 110 Confessions and Supplications, 56 Confidence in God,
111 Confidence applauded and blessed, 84 Confidence accursed, 83 Conquest, 112
Conscience, Ibid. Constant seeking of God by the meek, 39 Constancy of God's
Covenant, 253 Contentation, 113 Conversation and life conscientious, 69
Correction of anger, 39 Correction of boasting, 37 Coronation of Spiritual
Conquerours, 312 Corruptions and Calamities bewailed, 27 Covenant of God
constant, 253 Covenant of Grace, 114 Covenant of God's Grace entered to Abraham,
213 Covenant of God for us with the Creature, 55 Counsel of Christ, 117 Counsel
of Wisdom excellent, 54 The Creed, 118 Cross and Crown, 298 Cup and Calamity
of Drunkards, 47
D.
DAngers of heinous sins, and dehortation from them, 40 David's Exaltation in
type of Christ, 64 David's Elegy for Saul and Jonathan, 29 Day of Grace
proclaimed, 84 Death blessed, 100 Debate in measure, 228 Deborah's Song, 119
Deceitfulness of the heart, 45 Descending of the Spirit, 47 Dehortation from
heinous sin, 40 Dehortation from evil, 302 Deliverance from shipwreck, or the
Prophet Jonah, 45 Diligence in duties, 121 Dissolution general longed for, 70
Dragons downfall, 122 Drawn Net, 291 Drunkards Cup and Calamities, 47 Due fear
of God and the King, 48 Duty to Magistrates, Ibid.
E.
EAsy yoke, 123 Effectual Prayers of Captives, 252 Errors and Heresies to be
avoided, 124 Esay's Commination, 52 Esay's Song of thanksgiving, 125 Esay's
triumphant Song, 126 Evenness of spirit in all conditions, 305 Evil times to be
amended, 300 Evil dehorted, 302 Evil doers rewarded, 312 Exalting a Nation, 53
Exaltation of Humility, Ibid* Example of Saints, 128 Exact doom, 258 Excellent
Counsel of Wisdom, 54 Exhortation to Repentance, 256 -- To good works, 301 --
Of St. Jude, 309 Expostulation with Job, 225 Extension of Charity and Piety, 37
Ezechiel's infant, 128 Ezechiel's evil hearers, 262
F.
FAith praised, 129 Faith proved, 130 Faithful Saying, 13 Fruitfulness
blessed, 303 Fallow Ground to be dressed, 55 False fears, and false Deities
derided, 243 Fan of Judgment, 286 Fast proclaimed, 270 Fear of God and the
King, 48 Fleshly lusts restrained, 80 Fire and Grasshoppers, 276 Flying Role
for Swearers and Cursers*, 44 Fool in grain, 291 Funerals to press Patience, 24
Funerals to mitigate mourning, 23 Funerals touching the pretiousness of the
Saints death, 24 Funerals touching the Resurrection, Ibid. Funerals touching
the Saints safety in death, 25 Funerals touching the Saints sweet rest, 25
G.
GEneral dissolution longed for, 70 Giver of Grace, 77 Glorious Throne, 249
God's Children described, 307 God's Covenant for us with the Creature, 55 God's
Children distinguished, 308 God's Covenant constant, 253 God's Oath of Grace,
260 God's glittering Sword, 131 God's jealousy for Jerusalem, 56 God^s jewels,
282 God's Expostulation with Job, 225 God's mercy, the golden chain thereof, or
loves link 71 Good works exhorted, 301 Government, 132 Government of the
Tongue, 135 Graces call, 298 Grasshoppers and fire, 276 Great condemnation, 85
Gifts ministerial conferred, 73
H.
Heinous sins dangerous, 40 Healing of Backsliders, 209 Heart Circumcised, 38
Heart deceitfulness, 45 Heavy Judgments, 274 High and Lofty one, 136 Humility
exalted, 53 Humiliation, 137 Humble Supplications and Confessions, 56 Humble
Supplications in time of drought, 57 Humble Supplications in time of sickness,
58 Humble Supplications in time of tempest, Ibid. Humble Supplications in time
of transgression and revolt, 59 Humble Supplications in time of war, 60 Humble
Supplications in hard times, 248
I.
JAcob's sadness cheered, 230 Idols, their vanity, 250 Idolatry forbidden, 138
Idolatry exploded, 241 Jerusalem, God's Jealousy for it, 56 Jew and Gentiles
call, 138 Jew and Gentiles fullness held out in many Promises, 140 Immortality
and Mortality, 162 Imperfection, 143 Impure and Pure described, 303 Invective
against Hypocrisy, 31 Job Expostulated by God, 225 Job's Answer, 226 Jonah's
Deliverance from Shipwreck, 45 Joys of Heaven, 145, 310 Joyful Death, or the
Song of holy Simeon, 13 Israel restored, 253 Israel's revolt, 266 St. Jude's
Admonition, Exhortation, and Benediction, 309 Judgment waited for, 60 Judgment
upon the proud and scornful, 61 Judgment day forewarned, 146 Judgments heavy,
274 Justification, 147
K.
KInd love of God in Christ, 62 King David's Exaltation and Type of Christ, 64
-- His Elegy of Saul and Jonathan, 29 -- His Lamentation for Saul and
Jonathan, Ibid.
L.
LArge Mercies Corporal, 65 Large Mercies Spiritual, 66 Large Mercies Temporal,
67 Large Mercies Eternal, 68 Laud and Praise for God's Judgments, or the Lambs
Song, 148 Leaven, 289 Lamentation of David for Saul and Jonathan, 29 Lesson of
true Charity, 94 Life and Conversation Conscientious, 69 Light and Darkness
discovered, Ibid. Lively Hope, 85 Longing after Christ, 148 Looking and longing
for the general Dissolution, 70 Lord our Righteousness, 251 Love of God, 149
Love of God in Christ, 62 Loves Link, or the Golden Chain of God's Mercies, 71
Love in Deed and in Truth, Ibid. Love of the World forbidden, 151 Love
Engraven, 231
M.
MAN's mortality minded, 227 Marriage, 152 Mediator, 153 Meek constantly
seeking of God, 39 Memorial of God's Mercies, 72 Mercies recorded and
requested, 238 Mercy and Terror mixed 155 Mercies, -- 154 -- The Second Part,
210 Mercies Corporal, 65 Mercies Spiritual, 66 Mercies Temporal, 67 Mercies
Eternal, 68 Merit disclaimed, 157 Michael our Prince, 265 Ministerial Gifts
conferred, 73 Miracles at Pentecost, 15 Mitigation of mourning at Funerals, 23
Mixture of Mercy and Terror, 155 Moral Precepts pressed with Arguments, 157
Moderate Affections, 294 More Spiritual Precepts, 161 Morning Exercise, 14
Mortality and Immortality, 162 Mortification, 163 Moses Song, 215 Mourners
comforted, 232 Murmuring Restrained, 254 Mustard Seed, 289
N.
NOnsufficient Sacrifices, 277 New Jerusalem, 311
O.
OATH of Grace, 260 Obedience blessed, 100 Old good way, 242 Oppressors, woe to
them, 251 Oppression and Rapine dissuaded, 165 Our Advocate in Heaven, 307 Our
Savior's call to the Nations, 74 Our Savior's Rapture, 288 Our Savior's
coming in the Clouds, 297 Our thorough Sanctification prayed for, 74
P.
PAcification by Repentance, 257 Pardon, the blessedness thereof, 36 Partridge,
250 Passion and Compassion of Christ, 167 Passover slain for us, and
preparation thereunto, 75 Patience, 169 Patience to press at Funerals, 24 Peace
of God and Prayer, 170 Peace with all men, 293 Peril and Penance of
Adulterers, 42 Perpetuity and Power of Christ's Resurrection, 75 Perseverance,
170 Portion of the little flock, 171 Power and prevalency of Christ's
Resurrection, 75 Power of prayer, 172 Praise to the Creator, 77 Praise to the
giver of grace, Ibid. Praise to the Prince of Potentates, Ibid. Praise to the
redeemer, 78 Praise to the Trinity, Ibid. Prayers of Captives Effectual, 252
Preachers lips, 234 Pretiousness of the Saints death, 24 Priesthood, 279 Prince
Michael, 265 Promise of sending the Holy Ghost, and of the Miracles of
Pentecost, 15 Prophet Jonah's deliverance, 45 Pure and impure described, 303
Q.
Qualifications of blessedness, 103 Qualifications of Charity, 105
R.
RApine and oppression dissuaded, 165 Rapture of our Savior, 288 Reasonable
Service, 172 Recovery of the Church, 173 Redeeming of Time, 174 Redemption out
of the Songs of the Blessed Virgin, of Zacharias and old Simeon, Ibid.
Reformation, 177 Regeneration, 179 Remission of sin, 79 Renewing of Joy, Ibid.
Repentance, 179 Repentance pacifies, 257 Repentance urged, 259 Reproach for
Christ, and imitation of him, 182 Restoration of Israel, 253 Restraining of
Fleshly lusts, 80 Resurrection, 24, 183 Revenge forbidden, 184 Reward of
Charity, 304 Rich Charged with Charity, 297 Right reasoning of Temptation, 80
Robes of righteousness, 235 Role for swearers and cursers, 44
S.
SAbbath, 184, 260 Sacrament of the Supper, 185 Sacrifices nonsufficient, 277
Saints Communion, 109 Saints, their safety in death, 25 Saints, the
pretiousness of their deaths, 24 Saints, their sweet rest, 25 Salvation
shining, 189 Sanctification, 190 Sanctification prayed for, 74 Satan's Children
described and distinguished, 307 Savior's Rapture, 288 Savior's Call, 74
Savior's call to the Nations, 74 Savior's coming in the Clouds, 297 Saul and
Jonathan lamented by David, 29 Scriptures, 192 Seven Abominations, 43 Secrets
revealed, 193 Secrets unrevealed, 194 Seeking God betimes, 225 Sin confessed,
38 Sins of Sodom recorded, 256 Sluggard rouzed, 86 Sobriety, Prayer and Charity
enjoined, 81 Solemn Ascension of Christ, and leading Captivity Captive, 81 Son
of righteousness arising, 284 Song of Holy Simeon, 13 Song of Deborah, 119 Song
to celebrate the Restoration of the Church, 17 Song of Zachary, 175 Song of
Simeon and Zachary, 176 Song of Hannah, 222 Song of Moses the man of God,
commanded to be learned by heart of all Israel, 215 Souls under the Altar, 195
Sowing to the Spirit, 295 Spirit of God dwelling in us, 82 Spiritual precepts,
161 Spiritual Shepherds, 196 Strait Gate 197 Subsistence of God's Kingdom, 294
Supplications and Confessions, 56 Supplications in time of Drought, 57
Supplications in hard times, 248 Suffering and self-denial, 197 Swearers and
Cursers their flying Role, 44
T.
TE Deum Laudamus, 2, 4, 7, 9 Testimony prophetical, of the Birth and Kingdom
of Christ, 21, 22 Temptations succored, 199 Terror and mercy mixed, 155 Test to
the Covenant, 214 Thanksgiving at or after the Sacrament, 26 Thorough
sanctification, Prayed for, 74 Three and four Transgressions, 271 Time of
Drought, Sickness, Tempest, Transgression, Revolt and War, Vide Humble
Supplications. Treading the Wine Press alone, 237 Treasures of deceit
challenged, 278 Tree good, 199 Trinity, 200 True Fast, 87
V.
Vanity of Idols, 250 Vessels of honor, 299 Vineyard of Israel, 201 Vineyard
of Red-Wine, 228 Vile-bodies changed 88 Unity and Amity, 296 Unity and love of
Brethren, 202 Uniting the Nation, 264 Vocation, 204
W.
WANT of Charity discovered and censured, 308 Warning of Judgment by beginning
at God's House, 89 Warning of the general Dissolution, Ibid. War with lusts,
305 Well approved hearers, 90 Whirlwind of God's wrath, Ibid. Whole Armor, 206
Will for the Deed, 207 Winking at the times of ignorance, 91 Wisedoms
Exhortation, 208 Wise builder, 287 Wise Merchant, 290 Woe to the oppressors,
251 Woeful bewailing our Corruptions and Calamities, 27 Woeful Lamentation for
Saul and Jonathan, 29 Word preached, 209 World and the Church, 211 Worldly
cares forbidden, 95 Work of Mercy magnified, 210 Work of grace, Ibid. Works,
Words and Thoughts for the Lord's Day, 92 Wrongs to be remitted, or a Lesson of
true Charity, 94
Z.
ZAchary's Song, 175 Zealous Ejaculations at Evening or Bedtime, 212 Zealous
applause of Christian Conquests, 30 Zealous invective against Hypocrisy, 31
FINIS.
The Three Last Centuries OF SELECT HYMNS Collected out of the Psalms of DAVID
By William Barton, A. M. late Minister of St. Martins in Leicester.

Col. 3.16. Teaching and admonishing one another in Psalms and Hymns and
Spiritual Songs, etc.

St. Chrysostom. Vol. 3. Hom. 3. The Holy Ghost descends not to our throngs,
At Sacraments alone, but at our Songs.
LONDON, Printed by J. Heptinstall, for William Cooper, at the Pelican in
Little Britain. 1688.

To the Right Worshipful the Mayor, Aldermen and Sheriffs of the Honorable
City of Coventry: And To the Right Worshipful Sir Richard Hopkins, Knight,
Steward of the said City: And To the Right Worshipful the Mayor, Recorder and
Aldermen of the Corporation of Leicester: And To the Right Worshipful the
Mayor, Recorder and Aldermen of the Corporation of Northampton.
Right Worshipful,
MY Birth, Breeding and Abode in your respective Corporations, together with
your kind encouragements and costs bestowed upon these long Labors of Psalm
and Hymn-Translations, (after my own excessive Charge and Detriments) have made
me excusably ambitious to Dedicate unto your Worships these Three ensuing
Centuries, accommodated with some variety of Tunes and Metres, hoping to leave
these as a living and lasting Monument of my respect and gratitude, and of your
Christian Love and Liberality. Having also finished the Psalm-Book it self with
like variety of Metres to most of the shorter Psalms and to some of the longer
sort.

The aim and end of all is to revive, increase, and promote Godliness, which is
profitable to all things; and has the promise of the life that now is, and of
that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. In hopes therefore of some good issue of
these Labors, and in humble apprecation of the flourishing Felicity of the
Corporations to which I stand engaged, I rest, and subscribe my self

Your Worships much obliged, and devoted humble Servant, William Barton.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Find no clear distinction in Scripture between Psalms and Hymns and
Spiritual Songs. Psalm 18 and 45. and Fifteen more beginning at the 120. are
called Songs. Psalm 92. is called (...) A Psalm or Song for the Sabbath day.
Psalm 145. is entitled (...) David's Hymn or Psalm of Praise: And from this
says learned Schindler the Title of the whole Book seems to be taken; for it
is entitled (...) The Book of Hymns or Praises; Quod major Psalmorum pars Dei
Lauds contineat; Because the greater part of the Psalms consist of the Praises
of God: And of such Psalms the major part of these Centuries is Composed.

As for the parts and parcels of Psalms conducing to this Composure, I find an
Example in the Holy Scripture, 1 Chr. 16. where from the 7th ver. to the 36th
are sundry parts and parcels of the 105.96.106. and 136 Psalms, collected into
a Psalm or Hymn; upon which consideration, I take more liberty to pick and
choose places, and put in parallel Scripture as it serves the purpose.

Now, for the great variety and plenty of them in these Centuries set out, I
have great variety of reasons to plead.

1. Because I know nothing so much excepted against in my Edition of the Psalms
1654. as that the variety of Metres was very much omitted; neither did the
Impression go off in five times the space that the former did.

2. Because many of these Psalms are done more elaborately than those of the
former Edition, till they were corrected and completed, and printed Anno 1682.
with Aliters to my mind as they are now finished.

3. Because I may gratify the Reader with examples to accommodate the choicer
old Tunes, whereof I have omitted none that I know; and have put in more
frequent examples for these two delicate and expeditious Tunes of the Old 50th,
and the 124th. As in the 320th, and 322d, and in the 338th, and 341st, Hymns of
the Fourth Century you may see Examples.

4. Because I might take liberty in some Hymns to Paraphrase for the Exposition
of some hard passages; for instance, it is said, Psalm 139.21. Do not I hate
them, O Lord, that hate thee, etc? which I think to be clearly interpreted in
Hymn 565. and more largely varied Psalm 139. of the last Edition thereof,
printed Anno 1682.

The latter end of the 51st Psalm I found very dark; for when he had said, Thou
desire not sacrifice, etc. Thou delightest not in burnt offering, etc. He
says presently, Then shall thou be pleased -- with burnt offering, and whole
burnt offering -- and Bullocks, which I think to be clearly interpreted in the
4.7. and 8. Metres of the 51st Psalm.

A passage in the 72. Psalm, verse. 17. I counted choicely done, and keeping the
Allusion which the Hebrew seems to hint, (...), Nomen ejus filiabitur, says
Montanus, His name shall be continued -- among the posterities says the Old
Translation: Yet I thought it needful to put it plainer by an Aliter, as you
may find it.

The 8th. Psalm was hardest of all to me to be explained, carrying a
construction of Christ our Savior, as the Apostle says, Heb. 2.6. Which Psalm
showing the glory of man in his Creation, intimates man's re-investing in his
Dominion by Redemption: I have annexed the Intepretation in a different
Character.

5. Because these Centuries were formerly put forth against my will, by an
imperfect Copy, and in great disorder, An. 1668. I have put them into a
handsome method, passing by no Psalm of common use, but have in whole or in
part inserted it, and have put the whole Psalms together in double Metres, and
in some more.

6. Finally, I have endeavored to do the Work so well, as that whosoever
approves of the Psalm Book (as it is now completed Anno 1682.) may not think
these Hymns unnecessary or unworthy (for Printing) to precede or follow them.

I might have annexed Scripture-Proofs to that famous Hymn Te Deum, (harping
upon Scripture all along) but having done that already in the Chapter-Hymns,
(wherein those that are well acquainted may readily find the most noted
Sentences of Holy Scripture, as by a Concordance) I let these go for a
demonstration, how much the old Version needs amendment, and how near the
Verse-Translation may come unto the Prose.

I aimed principally in all this pains to promote Godliness: I much affected
that Noble Sentence put out by the famous Dr. Cudworth, (...).
Be Godly, O my Son, for Godly men
Do Christianize it with the best of them.


And sure there is nothing more effectual to breed Godliness than Holy
Scripture, nothing will preach Scripture to us, or print Scripture in our minds
more than Scripture-Hymns.

Wherefore I conclude all with that precept of the Apostle, Col. 3.16. Let the
word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing one
another in Psalms and Hymns and Spiritual Songs, singing with grace in your
hearts to the Lord.

Your Servant for Jesus sake, William Barton.

Of the TUNES.
THE Tunes here set down are none of the common ones, except that of the 100
Psalm.

Note, That the Tune of the 51 Psalm, O Lord consider, etc. or any Tune of
eight Sillables in each Line, when four Lines make up the Verse, may be sung in
the Tune of the 100 Psalm.

Note, that the Tune called, Where Righteousness. etc. may be changed into the
usual Tune of the 67 Psalm, if you put in two Sillables more in the third Line
of every four.

Note, That the New Tune (set in Mr. Sandy's Psalm-Book by Mr. Henry Laws) for
the 531 Hymn, page 646. may be changed into the Tune of the 113 Psalm, Ye
Children, etc. if you put in two Sillables more into every third Line.

Note, That the old 127 Psalm, mentioned in the 564. Hymn, page 678. has no
proper Tune of its own, but in the old Psalm-Book is referred to the Tune of
the 112 Psalm, which is the proper Tune of the Lord's Prayer, as it is in the
old Psalm-Book.

Note, That the 111 Psalm, as it is in the old Psalm-Book, may be sung in the
Tune of the old 120 Psalm, which is a shorter Tune; And all these Tunes,
(except the New Tunes) are taken out of the old Psalm-Book rectified by Mr.
Ravenscroft.

The TUNES of several HYMNS in this Book.
PSALM 50. The mighty God, etc.
^ ^ ^ ^ ^

PSALM 51. O Lord consider, etc.
^ ^ ^ ^ ^

PSALM 100. All People, etc.
^ ^ ^

PSALM 111. With heart I do accord, etc.
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

PSALM 112. The man is blessed, etc.
^ ^ ^ ^

PSALM 113. Ye Children, etc.
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

Ps. 120. In trouble and in thrall, etc.
^ ^ ^

Psalm 121. I lift mine Eyes, etc.
^ ^ ^

Psalm 122. I did in heart rejoice, etc.
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

Psalm 124. Now Israel may say, etc.
^ ^ ^ ^

Psalm 125. Such as in God do put, etc.
^ ^ ^ ^

Psalm 126. When that the Lord, etc.
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

Psalm 130. Lord, to thee, etc.
^ ^ ^ ^

Psalm 148. Give laud, etc.
^ ^ ^

Complaint of a Sinner.
^ ^ ^ ^ ^

The New Tune for the 524. Hymn of the Sixth Century, Page 617.
^ ^ ^

The New Tune of the 532. Hymn of the Sixth Century, Page 646.
^ ^ ^ ^

Here follows an Example of turning the Tune, Where Righteousness does say,
into the plain Tune of the 67 Psalm. 6th Century, Hymn 526. p. 622. (2. M.)
Have mercy, etc.
TEach me, O Lord, the way
whereto thy Statutes tend,
So shall I never go astray,
but keep it to the end.
Give me to understand,
and then shall I endeavor
To act (O Lord) by thy command
with my whole heart for ever.
In paths of thy commands
Lord make me go aright,
For ver'ly my desire so stands,
and therein I delight.
Incline my heart, O Lord,
that I may not digress:
Incline it to thy holy word,
and not to covetousness.
Lord turn away mine eyes,
turn them, O Lord, I pray,
From viewing worldly vanities:
and quicken me in thy way.
Establish thou thy word
unto thy servant dear:
Who wholly is devoted, Lord,
unto thy faithful fear.
The obloquy I fear,
Lord turn away from me:
For I confess to thee how clear,
How good thy Judgments be.
Behold how my desires
do for thy precepts press:
O stir these heats, these holy fires
to show thy righteousness.
Here follows a perfect Praxis for the Tune of the old 111 Psalm, because those
Examples of p. 508. (2. M.) and of the 120 Psalm want Hypermeters to each
second Verse, and may well be sung in the proper Tune of the 120 Ps. but not in
the Tune of the old 111 Psalm.
Pardon of sin implored, the suit pursued, the mercy assured. Out of the 130
Psalm.
OUT of the dreadful deeps,
Where fear and horror keeps,
I cried to thee, O Lord;
Lord, hear my voice said I,
ATTEND unto my CRY,
And to my suits accord.
For should thou mark, O God,
What bypath we have trod,
By sinful Conversation:
Who then, O Lord, shall stand,
Or escape thy heavy hand,
Of righteous Condemnation.
But, Lord, there is with thee,
Forgiveness full and free,
That thou may be adored:
I wait upon the Lord,
My soul waits on his Word,
And there my hopes are stored.
My soul waits patiently
Upon the Lord most high.
And for his words performing:
More eagerly than they
That watch for break of day,
And dawning of the morning.
Yea, Lord, my soul and mind
Attends still to find
Free favor in thy sight:
Whereafter I enquire
With earnester desire
Than Watchman for the light.
Let Israel hope therefore
In God for evermore,
For with the Lord is mercy:
And plenteous grace with him
To pardon all our sin,
Which made the Controversy.
A Perfect Praxis for the Tune of the old 126 Psalm. Out of the 117 Psalm.
PRaise ye the Lord
O all ye Nations far and near,
His praise record,
O all ye people every where.
Because we find
How very great and mavelous
His mercies kind,
And his compassion is to us.
His Faithful Word
Endures for evermore:
Praise ye the Lord,
Praise ye the Lord therefore.
The Fourth Century. Beginning the PSALM-HYMNS.
HYMN 301. A blessed Man described.
Psalm 1.
THE man is blessed whose piety
forbids to turn aside,
In Counsel, or Society,
with men unsanctify'd:
That from those evil paths does keep,
wherein the wicked are.
And joins not in their fellowship
that sit in scorners chair.

he places his delight,
And meditateth on his Word
devoutly, Day and Night*

that near a River springs,
Which always, as his seasons be,
abundant fruit forth brings.

but flourish still and stand:
And prosperous shall his works be made,
what'ere he takes in hand.

far otherwise are they:
And like the chaff which boisterous winds
drive easily away.

in Judgment rise up clear;
Nor sinners in the Judgment Day
among the Saints appear.

the Godly Persons Path:
Whereas the way that sinners go
shall perish in his Wrath.
HYMN 302. (2. METER.)
Argument.
Good men and bad this first Hymn comprehends,
Discovering fully both their ways and ends.
Have mercy, etc.
Psalm 1.
A Blessed man is he
that is not led aside,
By counsels of impiety
to go where sinners guide.
Nor sits in scorners seat,
but in Gods Law delights,
And in this Law does meditate
continual Days and Nights.
He shall be like a plant
set by the Rivers side,
Whose boughs no timely fruit do want,
whose leaf shall fresh abide.
And well shall he succeed
in all good works designed,
Not so the ungodly; they shall speed
as chaff dispersed with wind.
Therefore ungodly men,
shall not stand justified;
Nor sinners with the righteous then,
when Judgment must be tried:
For ways of men upright
the Lord does kindly know;
But sinners paths shall perish quite,
with everlasting woe.
HYMN 303. A difference betwixt good and bad. 3. METER.
Psalm. 1.
THE Man is blessed that shuns the snare
of wicked men's advice:
Whom sinners paths, and scorners chair,
by no means can entice.
But his Delight both Day and Night
is in Gods Holy Law;
Whereon he waits and meditates
with constant care and awe.
Like planted tree by water-springs
shall such a man be made*
A tree that timely fruit forth brings,
whose leaf shall never fade.
And all he does is blessed of God,
the wicked are not so:
But are like chaff dispersed abroad
when stormy wind does blow.
Therefore the ungodly shall not stand
in judgment clear and quit:
Nor with the just at Christ's right hand
shall any sinner sit.
For men upright are God's delight,
their ways to him are known,
But sinners ways shall soon decay,
and quite be overthrown.
HYMN 304. (4. METER.)
Argument.
The good and bad are here compared,
Both in their Works and their reward.
The mighty God, etc.
Psalm. 1.
THE man is blessed that walks not astray
by evil counsels of ungodly men,
Nor does comply with sinners in their way,
nor comes high the scorners seat with them:
But with delight on God's good word he waits,
And Day and Night thereon he meditateth.
He shall be like a tree by the River side,
whose fruit is ripe and in his season, sure;
Whose leaf in youth and greeness shall abide,
and all he does shall prosperously endure:
Ungodly men may look for no such matter,
But are like chaff which stormy wind does scatter.
Therefore ungodly men shall never stand,
at Judgment Day (as righteous men may trust)
Nor any one of all the wicked band
come in the Congregation of the just:
For just men's ways the Lord does know and cherish,
But Days will come when sinners paths shall perish.
HYMN 305. ( Psalm 2.)
Argument.
Christ's Kingdom how opposed and hated
And how the wrong is vindicated.
All People, etc.
WHY do the Heathen rage and fret
and people plot a thing so vain?
They rise and are in council set
Rulers and Kings, on Earth that reign.
Against the Lord they proudly speak,
against his Christ, advising thus;
Their bonds asunder let us break,
and cast away their cords from us.
But he that does in Heaven dwell,
their wicked doings shall deride:
And laugh to scorn his foes that swell
with such presumptuous haughty pride.
Then in his wrath the most supreme
shall all his enemies control:
And in Displeasure most extreme,
shall he torment their guilty soul.
HYMN 306. (2. PART.)
Argument.
Christ's Kingdom how exalted high,
By type of David's sovereignty.
UPON my Sions sacred Hill
yet have I set my sovereign King;
Thou have decreed and wilt fulfill,
and I will now declare the thing.
The Lord has spoken thus to me
thou art my true and only son;
This Day have I begotten thee,
ask of me and it shall be done.
All Heathen Kingdoms I will make
to be the inheritance of thy birth:
And thou shall in possession take
the utmost parts of all the Earth.
Thine Iron Rod, of sovereign might,
shall dash thy foes and make them break:
Yea dash them into pieces quite,
As Potters Vessels that are weak.
HYMN 307. (3. PART.)
Argument.
Kings here are moved, the Psalmist says,
Christ's Kingdom to receive by Faith.
NOW therefore O ye Kings take care
that ye may truly understand;
Be well instructed ye that are
the Princely Judges of the Land.
See that the Lord have service done
with reverence and due respect:
Rejoice with trembling, kiss the Son;
lest in his wrath ye should be checked.
So should ye perish from the way,
for lo! if his least anger flame,
Blessed, O blessed then are they
that trust upon his Holy Name.
HYMN 308. ( Psalm 3.)
Argument.
The Enemies of Saints increase,
But God does still procure their peace.
Ye Children, etc.
LORD how the number multiplies
of my incensed enemies,
that daily do against me rise:
Many, O Lord, many are they
that of my soul presume to say
God cannot help him any way.
But Lord thou art a shield for me
my head is still upheld by thee
in Honor and in Dignity.
For when with voice so loud and shrill
I called on God, he pleased still
to hear me, from his holy hill.
2.
I laid me down and sweetly slept,
I waked and was in safety kept,
for God's good hand did me protect.
And though ten thousand of my foes
should me now round about enclose,
I would not be afraid of those.
Arise, O Lord, and plead my cause,
for thou have smote them on the Jaws,
and broke the teeth of all my foes.
Thus are the ungodly overthrown,
salvation is of God alone;
and thou, O Lord, do bless thine own.
HYMN 309. Felicity of God's protection.
Psalm 4.
PITY me, Lord, for well I know
I am beloved of thee,
I find it so because my foe
triumphs not over me.
I am upholden by thy grace
in my integrity,
Thou giv'st me place before thy face,
and that perpetually.
The Lord the God of Israel's Name
for ever day by day,
And all his fame let us proclaim.
Amen, Amen, I say.
HYMN 310. Affiance and repose in God.
Psalm. 4.6.
THE greater sort crave worldly wealth,
and riches they embrace:
But Lord grant us thy saving health,
and shining of thy face.

by those thy beams Divine:
Much more than they that had their part
of plenteous corn and wine.

and take my sleep secure:
For thou, O Lord, and thou alone
do make my dwelling sure.
HYMN 311. ( Psalm. 6.)
Argument.
He supplicates the Lord to spare
Those Chastisements he cannot bear.
Have mercy, etc.
IN thy incensed wrath,
O Lord, rebuke me not:
Nor on me lay thy chastning hand
in thy displeasure hot.

for I am wondrous weak:
Heal me, O Lord, because thou know
my bones with anguish break.

how long stay will thou make?

me, for thy mercies sake.

of thee remembrance have.
Who can give thanks to thee, O Lord,
when lying in the grave?

all night I make my bed
To swim in sorrows; and my couch
with tears I watered.

mine eye consumed is:
It waxes old, and that because,
of all mine enemies.

ye wicked workers all:
For lo, the Lord has heard my voice
when I did, weeping, call.

the Lord has kindly heard,
The Lord will graciously receive,
my Prayer, to him preferred.
Let all mine enemies
be shamed and vexed sore;
Let them return, and suddenly
be shamed evermore:
HYMN 312. Arraignment of Persecutors.
Psalm. 7.11.
GOD is a righteous Judge (be sure,)
and one that will repay;
And with the lewd and wicked doer,
God's angry every day.

and speedily repent:
He whets his sword, and strings his bow,
and has it ready bent.

to smite him unawares:
And for the persecutors pain
sharp arrows he prepares.
Let Israel's God the Lord most high
be ever praised therefore:
From first to last eternally,
Amen for evermore.
HYMN 313. Arraignment of Persecutors and their ruin.
Psalm. 7.14.
BEhold, how with iniquity
the wicked is in pain:
Conceiving mischief craftily,
and labors all in vain.

no pains at all he spared:
And now is fallen into the pit*
which he himself prepared.

his mischief shall be spread:
His violent dealing shall come down,
and light on his own head.

that judges righteously,
And with a Song, will praise the Name
of him that is most high.
HYMN 314. Babes and Sucklings setting forth God's praise. 1. METER.
Psalm 8.
O Lord our Lord, of how great worth*
is thy Name every where?
For thou have set thy glory forth
above the starry sphere.

thy mighty power to show:
And tongues of sucklings to restrain
the proud imperious foe.

the work of thine own hand:
The Moon and Stars that deck the Sky,
and in their order stand.

that he should be in mind:
Or any of the Sons of Men,
to whom thou art so kind?

than Angels in degree,
And crowned him with gloriousness,
and great Nobility.

of all thy works of wonder;
And at his feet all creatures cast,
that he should keep them under.

all that in fields do feed:

and all that therein breed.

of how exceeding fame,
And excellence in all the Earth
is thy most glorious Name!
HYMN 315. Babes and Sucklings shaming Atheists. 2. METER.
Psalm 8.
If you put in the Exposition in the lines of the Italian Character, you must
sing it to the Tune of The Lords Prayer; but if you leave the Exposition out,
you may sing it in the Tune of the 100 Psalm, or O Lord Consider, etc.
O Lord, our Lord, how excellent
in all the Earth, is thy great Name?
Above the Heavens Eminent
thou spread'st the splendour of thy fame.
Thy Wisdom, Might, and Majesty
Do far surpass both Earth and Sky.
From mouth of Babes and Sucklings young
thou have ordained strength to flow:
To still the scornful Enemies Tongue,
and silence the avengefull Foe.
Their Innocence and Infant grace
May shame such Atheists to their face.
When on the Heavens I fix mine eye,
the Moon, and Stars, thy Creatures rare:
Why should God visit man, think I,
or, for the Son of man should care?
An Heir of Heaven that should have bin;
But now is fallen from God by sin.
Next Angels once, Thou had him placed,
with Glory and with Honor crowned:
And him with high Dominion graced,
over all thy handy-works renowned.
His Dignity did then excel,
But sin made all things to rebel.
Thou gav'st him whatsoever went
through paths of Seas, or thence came forth:
O Lord, our Lord, how Excellent
is thy great Name in all the Earth!
Blessed be God, that, since the fall
Has thorough Christ restored all.
HYMN 316. (3. METER.)
Argument.
Man's glory shining in his first Creation,
And (thorough Christ) seen in his restoration.
The Mighty God, etc.
Psalm 8.
O Lord, our Lord: O how thy Name excells!
Over Heaven and Earth thy glittering glory dwells,
Out of the mouths of Babes and Infants young,
Thou have ordained strength against the strong;
For in these Weaklings, is thy strength ordained,
That our avengefull foe might be restrained.
When I consider in my serious thought
The glorious Heavens which thy fingers wrought,
The Moon and Stars, which were ordained by thee,
What Is Man think I, that he should minded be?
Or what is the Son of Man? what favor is it
That thou should honor him with so kind a Visit?
For thou have made him but a little lower,
Than glorious Angels that thy Name adore;
Than Cherubim and Seraphim so bright
That see thy face in unapproached light:
That thou might cloth him in a glorious manner,
With Robes of Royal Dignity and Honor.
Thou made him have Dominion and Command
Over all the works of thine Almighty hand,
And have put all things (as thou saw it) meet
In due subjection underneath his feet
All Sheep and Oxen (take them all together)
And Beasts belonging to the Field whatever.
All Fowl that fly thou gave unto him,
And all the Fishes in the Seas that swim:
With whatsoever sort among all these,
That have their passage over the deepest Seas;
O Lord, our Lord, with what great glory crowned
Is thy great Name over all the Earth renowned!
HYMN 317. Calamity of the wicked, or Remarkable Judgment.
Psalm 9.15.
SUNK down the wicked Heathen are
into the Pit they made:
Their foot is taken in the snare
which they themselves have laid

when wicked people fall
By handy-works, which are their own:
Remarkable to all.
Psalm 41.13.
Let Israel's mighty God therefore
be praised and praised again,
From age to age for evermore,
Amen, Amen, Amen.
HYMN 318. Chains of Darkness for the Wicked.
Psalm 9.17.
LEWD men shall into Hell be hurld',
where Chains of Darkness bind:
And all the people of the World
that have not God in mind.

for ever in their pain:
The patient people never look
for help from God in vain.

still to prevail by might:
And let the Heathen have their doom,
and judgment in thy sight.

and let the Nations find,
And know themselves to be no more
but men of mortal kind.
HYMN 319. Comforts for the Righteous. 1. METER.
Psalm 11.
I Make the Lord my trust and stay,
why therefore urge ye still,
My harmless soul to have away,
as birds unto the Hill?

their arrows they prepare:
That closely they may shoot at those
that upright-hearted are.

by you be taken away,
No comfort then the righteous has,
nor strength whereon to stay.

his Throne's in Heaven on high:
His eyes behold the Sons of men,
and them his eyelids try.

as unto him seems best,
But lewd men loving violence
his soul does much detest.

brimstone and balls of fire:
An horrid Tempest he prepares
to pay them home their hire.

in justice does delight:
His countenance with kind aspect,
beholds the upright.
HYMN 320. Confusion of the wicked. 2. METER.
The Mighty God, etc.
Psalm 11.
I Trust in God, why do ye daunt my soul?
have as a bird, unto your Hill, ye say:
The wicked bend their bows without control,
and string their shafts the upright soul to slay:
If Faith whereon we ground be not assured,
What can the righteous do to be secured?
The Lord is in his Holy Temple still,
his Throne's in Heaven, (he can see us then:)
His eyes behold all people good and ill,
his eyelids try the Childeren of men.
God trys the just man who in patience waits:
But wicked men, and cruel, his soul hates.
Upon the wicked, he shall rain down snares,
Brimstone and Fire, from which they cannot flee.
And a prodigious Tempest he prepares,
and this the portion of their cup shall be.
For God that is righteous, righteousness affects:
His grace so good all good men so respects.
HYMN 321. Corruption of the Times.
Psalm 12, 1, 2, 3.
HELP Lord, for godly men decay,
the faithful are but few:
Men lie, and flatter, and betray,
with tongue, and talk untrue.
But God will cut those lips away,
whence fraud and flattery springs:
And tongues that dare presume to say
such proud blasphemous things.
4, 5.
Our lips say they, shall lord it still,
and hold the upper hand:
Our Tongues are ours to speak our will.
what Lord shall countermand?
Now for the sighs of needy men,
and poor men's wrongs and woes;
I Will rise, says God, and rescue them
from proud oppressing Foes.
6, 7, 8.
Pure words, that will the test abide;
God's promises come forth
Like silver seven times purified
in Furnaces of Earth.
Lord thou shall keep thy Saints always,
from this ungodly Race,
Though every where they hunt their prey,
when vile men are in place.
Psalm 106.48.
O let the God of Israel then
be praised perpetually,
And let all people say Amen,
the Lord to magnify.
HYMN 322. Curbing of the Wicked* 2. METER.
The Mighty God, etc.
Psalm 12.
HELP, Lord, the Godly cease, there is few of them,
The faithful fail among the Sons of men:
Each man to's neighbor vanity imparts,
With flattering lips they speak, and double hearts.
But Godwill cut off every lip that flatters,
And tongues that speak such proud presumptuous matters.
Who thus have said our tongues shall bear the sway,
Our lips are ours, and who shall us gainsay?
Now for the poor men, under proud control,
And for the sighing of the needy soul,
I Will rise, says God, and be his sanctuary:
And set him safe from his proud adversary.
The Words of God are pure, as silver tried
In Earthen Furnace, seven times purified:
Thou shall preserve, O Lord, and keep the poor
From this lewd generation evermore.
The wicked walk on all sides to devour,
When Vilest men are set in place of power.
HYMN 323. Degenerate World described. 1. METER.
Psalm 14.1.
THere is no God the fool has thought,
they are corrupt and lewd:
Abominations have they wrought,
and none of them does good.
The Lord looked down from Heaven high,
mankind for to discern,
If any knew spiritually,
or sought God's Will to learn.
But all were wandered from the way,
defiled by the fall:
Not one did good, not one I say
did any good at all.
Are workers of iniquity,
so brutishly misled:
To eat my people greedily,
devouring them like bread?
Upon the Lord they never call,
yet greatly did they fear:
For God will surely be with all
the righteous every where.
The poor man's Counsel ye disdain,
whose trust on God is stayed:
But Oh, that Israel might obtain
from Sion saving aid.
When God turns our Captivity,
and sets poor Sion free,
Jacob shall joy triumphantly,
and glad shall Israel be.
HYMN 324. Degenerate World (through Atheism) described. 2. METER.
All People, etc.
Psalm 14.
FOOLS say in heart, there is no God,
and with such thoughts their fancy feeds:
Corrupt they are, and none does good,
but act abominable deeds.
The Lord from Heaven viewed all mankind,
to see who knew, or sought for God:
All were defiled, and far declined,
not one by Nature doing good.
Are wicked workers all so dead,
and void of knowledge since the fall,
To eat my People up like bread,
without regard of God at all?
Yet do their hearts with terror quake,
and guilty makes them to mistrust:
For God does in protection take
the Generation of the Just.
Ye shamed the Council of the poor,
because his hope on God was stayed:
But O that Israel might procure
from Sion Hill some saving aid.
When God brings back from captive state
the chosen flock of Sion Hill:
Then Jacob shall rejoice thereat,
and gladness Israel's heart shall fill.
HYMN 325. Description of true Christians.
Psalm 15.
THE Tabernacles of thy Grace,
Lord, who shall rest in still?
Or who shall have a dewlling place
in thy most Holy Hill?

whose works are just and straight:
Who speaks the truth from heart sincere,
who utters no deceit.

in body, goods, or name:
Nor takes up a false report
to prejudice his fame.

vile persons does contemn:
But whosoever fear the Lord most high,
he highly honors them.
His Oath and all his promises
that keeps faithfully,
Though he sustain the damages
that might accrue thereby.

the money that he lent:
Nor takes reward to testify
against the innocent.
He that shall do the will of God,
whereof this is the sum:
Shall never perish in this world,
nor in the world to come.
HYMN 326. Description of true Citizens of Sion. 2. METER.
All people, etc.
Psalm 15.
O Who shall have a blessed abode
Within thy sacred Tents, O God?
Thy Holy Hill who shall possess?
Sure he that walks in uprightness.
The works of righteousness that does,
And from his heart does speak the truth:
That slanders none with spightfull tongue,
Nor does his neighbor any wrong.
That takes not up an evil fame
Against his neighbors honest Name:
That does of vile men vilely deem,
But has the Saints in high esteem.
That changes not what once he swears,
Though he the loss and damage bears:
That puts not out his coin, whereby
To get his gain by usury.
That takes no bribes to circumvent,
Or prejudice the innocent:
He that does these things is approved,
And never shall that man be moved.
HYMN 327. Expectation of Resurrection.
Psalm 16.8.
I Set the Lord still in my sight,
and trust him over all:
Since he does stand at my right hand,
I know I shall not fall.

my glory joys in this,
My flesh shall rest in hope likewise,
in hope of endless bliss.

nor will thou, Lord, permit
Thy Holy One, (as lost and gone)
to perish in the pit.

to me, with joys full store:
And Lord at thy right hand there are
sweet pleasures evermore.
HYMN 328. Extolling of Scripture verity and virtue.
Psalm 19.7.
MOST perfect is the Law of God,
of Soul-converting might;
His Testimonies are most pure,
and give the simple light.

and fill the heart with joys:
The precepts of the Lord are pure,
inlightening the eyes.

and does endure for ever:
The Judgments of the Lord are true,
and righteous altogether.

to be embraced always:
The honey and the honeycomb
are not so sweet as they.

how he his life should frame:
And great reward's provided for's
if we observe the same.
HYMN 329. Faith seen in fear of Sin.
Psalm 19.12.
LORD who can all his Errors see?
O cleanse my heart within

from all presumptuous sin.
O let it have no power to reign
in me at any time:
And so shall I be free from stain,
and escape the greatest crime.

my thoughts and whole behavior,
Be acceptable in thy sight,
O Lord, my strength and Savior.
HYMN 330. Faith's Triumphant Banner.
Have mercy, etc.
Psalm 20.
THE Lord attend thy cry
in this distressfull hour;
Great Jacob's God most graciously
defend thee by his power.

out of the sanctuary:
And strengthen thee from Sion Hill
against the Adversary.

O let him have in mind:
And let thy whole burnt Sacrifice
a good acceptance find.

thy very hearts desire:
And let thy prudent councils be
accomplished all entire.

in thy assured defense:
And spread our banners in the Name
of God our Confidence.
The Lord now grant in love
whatever thou would have:

does his Anointed save.
And he will hear his King
from Heaven, his Holy Throne:
With saving strength which he shall bring
by his right hand alone:

of Chariots, some of Horse:
But in our God, the Lord of Hosts
we reckon all our force.

we rise and stand upright:
Save, Lord, and hear us when we call,
O King of Sovereign might!
HYMN 331. Faith's Victorious Banner. 2. METER.
O Lord Consider, etc.
Psalm 20.
LORD hear our King this troublous day,
the Name of Jacob's God defend:
Help from his holy place convey,
and succor out of Sion send:
Remember well, and highly prize
Thine Offerings and Burnt Sacrifice:
Thy hearts desire he grant thee still,
And all thy councils God fulfill.
In thy Salvation we will rejoice,
and in our God's great Name shall we
Our Banners raise with prayerfull voice,
all thy requests God grant to thee.
Now God, I know, will save from harm,
With saving strength of his right arm,
And hears his anointed one,
From Heaven, his high and Holy Throne.
Some hope in Chariots help to find,
and some in Horses hope the same:
But we will ever bear in mind
the Lord our God's all helpful Name:
They are brought down, and fallen quite,
But we are risen, and stand upright:
Save, Lord, O let the King give ear
Now when we pray, our prayer to hear.
HYMN 332. ( Psalm 21.)
Argument.
The King's supply and sure defense,
Obtained by Prayer and Confidence.
THE King rejoices to record
the comforts of thy might,
And in thy saving health, O Lord,
How much, shall he delight.
Thou gav'st him what his heart desired
and that important thing,
Which he with humble lips required
was not denied the King.
Blessings of goodness to be sure
thou have on him powered down,
And made a Crown of Gold most pure
his royal head to crown.
He asked thee life, and thou did please
to give it in such store,
That he might see the length of days,
and live for evermore.
Great is his glorious dignity
in this thy saving aid,
For honor and great majesty
thou have upon him laid,
For as one ever blessed of God
thou did thy King advance,
And thou have made him wondrous glad
with thy sweet countenance.
For on the Lord he does rely,
to see thy promise proved.
And through thy mercy, O most high,
he never shall be moved.
HYMN 333. (2. PART.)
Argument.
The sure destruction of rebellious men,
The Lord is praised for Judgments upon them.
THY hand shall find out all thy foes,
whoever, Lord, they be,
And thy right hand shall find out those
that bear ill will to thee.
And make them as the Ovens hot steam
what time thy wrath shall light:
The Lord in wrath shall swallow them,
and fire devour them quite.
Their fruit likewise shall thou destroy
from off the Earths increase,
And cut off their posterity,
and cause their seed to cease.
For they intended ill to thee,
and thought they should succeed
In their mischievous Tragedy,
but could not act the deed.
And thou shall make them for these things
to turn their backs apace,
Charging thine arrows on the strings
against their very face.
Be thou exalted, O most high,
in thine own strength therefore,
And so our Songs shall magnify
thy might for evermore.
HYMN 334. ( Psalm 23.)
Argument.
God's the good Shepherd of our lives and souls,
No danger need we fear nor foes controlls.
Have mercy, etc.
THE Lord my shepherd is,
and he that does me feed,
Since he is mine and I am his
what comfort can I need.
He makes me to lie down
on tender pasture grass,
Then to the streams he leads me on
where waters gently pass.
And when I go astray
he does my soul reclaim,
Conducting me in the right way
for his most holy name.
Yea though the paths I trod
in deaths dark vale should be,
would not fear, for there is my God
a staff of strength to me.
Thou make me sit and dine,
even in my enemies sight,
My head with Oil, my cup with Wine
run over day and night.
Thy goodness sure, and grace
shall measure all my days,
And thy house be my dwelling place,
to give thee endless praise.
HYMN 335. (2. METER.)
Argument.
God the Good Shepherd does supply,
No dangers need to terrify.
All People, etc.
Psalm 23.
MY Shepherd is the Lord most blessed,
I shall not want but be supplied;
In pastures green he makes me rest,
by sweet and silent waters side.
He does restore my soul that strays
the paths of truth he makes me take,
To walk in his most righteous ways,
and this he does for his Name sake.
Yea though I pass deaths dark abode,
afraid of ill I will not be,
For thou art with me, O my God,
thy rod and staff they comfort me.
In spite of foes thou do appoint
my Table spread and in their sight,
My head with Oil thou do anoint,
my cup runs over day and night.
Surely thy goodness and thy grace,
shall follow me throughout my days:
And thy house be my dwelling place,
where I will ever give thee praise.
HYMN 336. God our good Shepherd. 3. METER.
Psalm 23.
MY Shepherd is the living Lord,
and he that does me feed:
How can I but be richly stored
while he supplies my need?

he makes me to repose:
Hard by the silent water spring,
whose stream with pleasure flows.

a safer course to take:
Conducting me in his right way,
for his alone Name sake.

it shall me not dismay:
For thou art with me, and have made
thy rod and staff my stay.

in presence of my foe:
My head with Oil thou do anoint,
my cup does overflow.

shall measure all my days:
And in thy house, O God will I
for ever give thee praise.
HYMN 337. God our sure-Shepherd. 4. METER.
Give Laud, etc.
Psalm. 23.
THE Lord is evermore
my Shepherd to provide:
I shall be sure therefore
full well to be supplied.
For by this means,
In pasture green I couch between
the silent streams.
Most graciously does he
restore my soul that strays:
And also leads me
in those his righteous ways
Which I should take:
(The paths of truth) and this he does
for his Name sake.
Yea, though I walk on still
through deaths most darksome Vale,
Yet will I fear none ill,
nor shall my courage fail:
For there thou art
With me, O God, thy staff thy rod
uphold my heart.
My Table thou have spread
in all my foes despite:
And have it furnished
here, in mine enemies sight.
Thou 'nointst my head,
And fillest up my bounteous cup
until it shed.
The goodness, Lord, in thee,
and grace thou do display
Shall surely follow me
unto my dying day.
And I therefore
Will make abode in the house of God
for evermore.
HYMN 338. Good Christians described.
To the Tune of the 124. Psalm. Now Israel, etc.
1. METER. Psalm 24.3.
WHO shall ascend
into thine Hill on high?
And who shall dwell, Lord,
in thy palace pure?

pure of heart is sure:
That has not lift
his soul to vanity:
Nor sworn unjustly,
or deceitfully.

the blessing from the Lord,
And righteousness
(to him so pure in heart:)
The God of his
salvation shall impart.

that regard,
That seek, that seek
thy face, O Jacob's Lord.
HYMN 339. Devout and true Saints. 2. METER.
Psalm. 24.
THE Earth is God's and wholly his*
the World is all his own,
And whatsoever therein is,
belongs to him alone:
For he has firmly framed it so
above the Seas to stand,
And laid the liquid floods below
to flow within the Land.
Who shall ascend into thy Hill,
or who may make account
To stand, and to continue still,
within thy holy mount?
The man of spotless purity
in life and conscience too:
Whose soul affects not vanity
whose oaths are just and true.
For such a one the Lord shall bless,
and he shall have conveyed
The rich reward of righteousness
from God his saving aid:
For these be they that are indeed
true seekers of his grace,
O Jacob this is sure thy seed,
of them that seek thy face.
HYMN 340. Entrance of the King of Glory* 3. METER.
Psalm 24.
YE Everlasting Doors and Gates,
lift up your heads on high,
And then the Prince of Potentates,
shall enter in thereby:
Who is this King so glorious?
the mighty Lord and strong,
In battle still victorious;
to him these Names belong.
Ye Everlasting Doors and Gates,
lift up your heads on high,
And then the Prince of Potentates
shall enter in thereby:
Who may this King of Glory be?
his royal Name's set down,
The Lord of Hosts and none but he
is King of high renown.
HYMN 341. Good welcomers of the King of Glory. 4. METER.
To the preceding Tune. Now Israel, etc. In Paraphrase.
Psalm. 24.7. 1 Cor. 6.19. Isa 30.18.
LIFT up your heads
ye Everlasting Gates,
Ye living Temples
of the Holy Ghost,
Lift up your hearts
to him whose might is most,
To entertain
the Prince of Potentates,
And He shall enter
who in mercy waits.
Col. 2.15. Rev. 14.14.

of Princes (here set down)
that vanquished Principalities
and Powers?
It is this Sovereign
King, and Lord of ours,
That conquers all
our foes, and wears the Crown:
He is the King
of Glory and Renown.
1 Cor. 6.19. Isa. 30.18.

ye everlasting Gates,
Ye living Temples
of the Holy Ghost,
Lift up your hearts
to him whose might is most,
To entertain
the Prince of Potentates:
And he shall enter
who in mercy waits.
Rev. 20.11.14.14.

of Princes (here set down?)
It is the Sovereign Lord,
the Lord of Hosts,
That conquers Kingdoms,
Countries, Lands and Coasts.
That sits upon
the Throne, and wears the Crown:
He is the King
of Glory and Renown.
Psalm 106.48.
Blessed be God
whom Israel does adore,
From everlasting
let his Glorious Name,
To everlasting
have renown and fame.
And let all people
say Amen, therefore
Praise ye the Lord,
and praise him evermore.
HYMN 342. ( Psalm. 25. Ver. 8.)
Argument.
God guides the meek and soon imparts
His pardoning grace to penitent hearts.

and therefore takes delight,
To teach his way to them that stray
and sinners to set right.

to meek men hating pride,
The meek I say, shall know his way,
for God will be their guide.

are truth and mercy still,
To them that seek his Laws to keep
and Covenants to fulfill.

thy mercy, Lord, entreat,
To pardon my iniquity,
for it is very great.
HYMN 343. ( Psalm. 25. v. 12.)
Argument.
The Mysteries of God's free Grace
Revealed to such as seek his face.

to him he plainly shows,
What way to go, and how to know
the way that he shall choose.

in perfect peace and rest,
And it is decreed that by his seed
the Earth shall be possessed.

shall all that fear him know,
And unto them that fear his Name
His Covenant he will show.
Israel then do thou, O God,
thy sweet redemption send,
And bring all his adversities
unto an happy end.
HYMN 344. 2. METER.)
Psalm 25.
IN mercy, Lord, do thou regard,
the affliction I am in,
O see the pain that I sustain,
and pardon all my sin.
Consider those that are my foes
for many such there be:
And thou have seen how sharp and keen
their malice is to me.
O keep and save my soul, I crave,
and put me not to shame:
But keep me safe, because I have
believed in thy Name.
O Lord, let my integrity
and uprightness in me,
Preserve me still from every ill,
because I wait on thee.
To Israel now, O God, do thou
thy sweet redemption send,
And bring all his adversities
unto a happy end.
HYMN 345. Greatness of God seen in Tempests. 1. METER.
Psalm. 29.
GIVE to the Lord ye mighty men,
give glory, strength and fame:

as due to his great Name.
Worship the Lord with head down bowed
in beauties holy place,

makes rain pour down apace.
The Glorious God makes Thunder fly
from the Elements Watery Towr:

God's Voice is full of Power.

and breaks the Cedar-trees:
The Cedars of mount Lebanon,
the Lord breaks such as these.

or youngling Unicorn:
Mount Lebanon and Syrion too
with tottering Earthquakes torn:


And Parans Wilderness (by name)
by such concussion quakes.

and Hinds to calve compels:
And all his house his praise rehearse,
each tongue his glory tells.

his Kingdom shall not cease:

and bless his Church with peace.
HYMN 346. Greatness of God seen in Thunder. 2. METER.
Psalm 29.
YE mighty in your stock and tribe,
All Glory to the Lord ascribe:
In beauty of his holiness,
His Glorious Name adore and bless.
The Lord by his commanding power
Brings down the Clouds in many a shower:
The Glorious God the Thunder sends,
And many Watery Clouds he rends.
His Voice is powerful in the sky,
His Voice is full of Majesty:
His Voice when he in Thunder speaks
The high and lofty Cedars breaks.
Like sporting Calves, the Mountains trip,
Great Lebanon does leap and skip:
Syrion by his motion born,
Leaps as a youngling Unicorn.
God's Voice divides the flames of fire,
When Lightnings with the Clouds conspire:
At his rebuke the Desert shakes,
The Wilderness of Kadesh quakes.
He makes to calve the frighted Hinds,
He bares the Forest with his Winds,
And all that in the temple are
His Sovereign Glory must declare.
God sits above the Watery main,
This Glorious God does ever reign:
His Peoples strength he will increase,
And bless them with long lasting peace.
HYMN 347. ( Psalm 30.)
Argument.
Escape from Death his thoughts employ,
He tells the quick return of joy.
I Will advance thee, O most high,
that am advanced by thee,
Who have not left an enemy
to triumph over me.

and thou have made me whole,

brought back my gasping soul.
To me a new life thou did lend,
and would not permit
That I should hastily descend
into the dreadful pit.

and thankfully express,
How sweet the due remembrance is
of his pure holiness.

it quickly slacks again,
But in his favor and his grace
does constant life remain.
Though sorrows lodge with ^s a night,
and make us weep and mourn;
Yet joy comes in at mornings light,
making a quick return.
HYMN 348. (2. PART.)
Argument.
Prosperity puffs up, then Grace withdraws,
Prayer is excited, and gives God the applause.
Psalm 30.

I never shall be moved,

so free thy favor proved.
Thou did no sooner hide thy face,
But trouble did invade,

and supplication made.

when I to Grave go down?
Can Dust declare thy praise, O God,
can Dust thy truth renown?

and pity on me take:
O Lord unto my help draw near
for thy sweet mercy sake.

thou did for me convert:
My sackcloth thou have quite laid by
and me with gladness girt.

to thee and not give over:
O Lord my God I will applaud
thy Name for evermore.
HYMN 349. Happiness conferred on the Saints.
Psalm 31.19.
O God, how great felicity
have thou laid up in store,
For men affected faithfully
to fear thee evermore.
What goodness Lord, what recompense
is wrought by thee for them
That put their trust in thy defense,
before the sons of men?

shall those thy Servants hide,
And be their safety, and their guard
from man's insulting pride.
And thou shall keep them secretly,
in a Pavilion sure;
And save them by that secrecy,
from strife of tongues, secure.
Psalm 35.10. Psalm. 76.10.
And who, O Lord, is like to thee,
that sav'st the poor from spite
Of's over-potent enemy,
that seeks to crush him quite.
Surely the wrath in men that reigns
shall turn unto thy praise:
Remaining wrath thy power restrain^,
when passion oversways.
Psalm 72.18, 19.
O Let the Lord of Israel
be praised of rich and poor:
Whose works are such as do excel,
and he the only doer.
And let the whole earth generally
be filled and filled again
With his renown and Majesty,
Amen, Amen, Amen.
HYMN 350. Exceeding happiness of pardon^
All People, etc. Or, O Lord Consider, etc.
Psalm 32.
THE man is blessed whose sin's remitted,
Whose crimes are covered, and acquitted,
To whom the Lord imputes no fault,
Nor guile is harbored in his thought;
For while I no confession made,
My strength with daily grief decayed,
Thine anger burnt the day throughout,
My moisture turned to summers drought.
Then I confessed and kept not in,
But said, I will confess my sin:
And thou when I, Lord, did confess
Forgav'st my sinful wickedness:
For this cause, all the Godly Race
Shall seek thee in a time of Grace,
That when great floods of waters roll
No danger may come near their soul.
Thou art my hiding place from wrongs,
To close me round with safeties songs,
I Will tell and teach the faithful so,
Mine eye shall guide them how to go:
O be not like the Horse and Mule
Whom understanding does not rule;
Whose stubborn mouths we must restrain
From violence with bit and rean.
The wicked shall be curbed so,
And are reserved to many a woe,
But them that in the Lord confide
Shall mercy close on every side:
Be joyful therefore in the Lord
Ye righteous men, with one accord;
And shout for joy with great delight
All ye that are in heart upright.
HYMN 351. ( Psalm. 33. v. 13. to 21.)
Argument.
Protection and Provision from above
For those that fear the Lord, and trust in's love.
THE Lord looked down from Heaven high
beholding all abroad,
All mortal man's posterity
from place of his abode.
In all the Earth and all the parts
the dwellers he survays;
He fashioneth alike their hearts
and all their works he weighs.
No numerous Hosts can save a King,
the strength of limb saves none:
Nor can the Horse deliverance bring,
his great strength saves not one.
But lo! the eye of God above
is ever fixed on those
That fear his Name, and in his love
their confidence repose.
To save their souls from sharpest sword
of Famine that can be:
Wherefore our soul waits for the Lord,
our help and shield is he.
For in him shall our hearts be glad
because we can proclaim,
The confidence that we have had
in his most holy Name.
HYMN 352. Honoring God at all times.
Psalm. 34.1.
AT all times I will bless the Lord,
my mouth shall spread his fame:
Continually it shall record
the praises of his Name.
My soul shall make her boast in God,
the humble men shall hear:
And they shall gladly spread abroad
his praises every where.
O magnify the Lord with me,
and let us altogether
Exalt his Name in high degree,
and speak his praise for ever.
I sought the Lord with fervent cries,
and graciously he heard:
And did deliver me likewise.
from all the harms I feared.
The meek looked up and sought his Name,
and they enlightened were:
Their Faces did receive no shame,
that fled to him by Prayer.
This poor man cried unto the Lord,
the Lord did hear his call;
And saving health to him afford,
out of his troubles all.
HYMN 353. Holy Angels protecting Saints. And Exhortations to fear God.
Psalm. 34.7.
GOD'S Holy Angel does encamp
round about all those men
That have Rel^gions real stamp,
and he delivers them.
O taste and see that God is good,
O blessed men are they
That have that goodness understood,
and make it all their stay!
O, fear the Lord, ye Saints of his,
and on his care rely:
For they that fear him never miss
a competent supply.
Young Lions shall have meat full scant,
shall hunger, and lack food:
But they that fear the Lord shall want
for nothing that is good.
HYMN 354. How to fear God aright.
Psalm 34.11, 12
COme unto me, my Children dear,
and hearken to my word:
And I will teach you how to fear
the true and living Lord.
Who is the man that would live long,
and lead a blessed life?
See thou refrain thy lips and tongue
from all deceit and strife.
13, 14, 15.
Refrain thee still from doing ill,
and all good deeds embrace:
Inquire for peace and quietness,
and follow it apace.
Because the Lord's most gracious eye
upon the just is bent:
His ears are open to the cry
of all the innocent.
16, 17.
But he looks down with angry frown
upon the wicked train;
To cut their memory from the Earth,
that none of them remain*
But when the just do call and cry
the Lord does hear them so,
That out of pain and misery
he lets them timely go.
HYMN 355. Jewels of God's keeping.
Psalm. 34^19.
FUll many be the miseries
which on the just do fall:
But God does soon deliver them,
and help them out of all.
20.
He keeps every bone of theirs
by his Almighty Arm,
That not so much as one of them
is broken to their harm.
21.
Evil shall slay the wicked man,
for sin which he has wrought:
And such as hate the righteous man
shall quickly come to naught.
22.
But them that fear the living Lord
he keeps safe and sound:
And them that put their trust in him
no malice shall confound.
HYMN 356. ( Psalm 36.)
Argument.
Ill deeds describe the wicked sort,
God^s mercies are the Saints support.
The mighty God, etc.

that there is no fear of God before his eyes,

till all abhor his foul iniquities.

He has left off all wisdom, grace and goodness.

he sets himself to go in no good way,
No evil action does he hate or dread*
yet is thy mercy my sufficient stay.

Thy faithfulness unto the clouds extends.
HYMN 357. (2. PART.)
Argument.
God's mercies keep both man and beast,
His comforts make the Saints to feast.
Psalm. 36.

thy Judgments are a most unfathomed deep,
Thou Lord, art he that holds the sovereign seat,
thy preservation man and beast does keep:

Which makes mankind to trust to thy protection?

with fatness of thy house and holy place,
And thou shall make them drink pure streams of joy,
And pleasures there imparted by thy grace.

And in thy light shall we see light most pleasant.
HYMN 358. (3. PART.)
Argument.
God's mercies to the Saints secure.
Great woes attend the wicked doer.
Psalm 36.

to them that know thee by experience,
And let the upright hearted people find
thy righteousness for their assured defense.

Nor let the hand of lewd men dispossess me.

how often times they fall before our eyes.
Yea they shall be cast down eternally,
and never more be able to arise.
O let the God of Israel therefore
Be praised from first to last for evermore.
HYMN 359. Joys of Heaven. 2. METER.
Psalm 36.5.
THE Heavens, O Lord, thy mercy fills,
thy truth does reach the sky:

and deep thy judgments lie.
Thou do preserve both men and beasts,
for Lord thy grace excells:

mankind securely dwells.

replenished they shall be:
And drink the streams of pure delight,
imparted there by thee.

that gives light to thine:
And in thy light shall we disclose
our lasting light to shine.
HYMN 360. Just men's vindication, Protection, and Provision.
Psalm 37.3.
TRust confidently in the Lord,
to goodness give thy mind:
So shall thou dwell in Israel,
and sure provision find.

and he shall set thee have,
Yea grant entire thy hearts desire,
whatever thou do crave.

and rest in him secure:
And he shall bring to pass the thing,
and make the issue sure.

as manifest as light:
Thy ^udgment he shall make to be
as noontide, shining bright.
2. PART.

how far their trial goes:
And does engage an heritage
which they shall never lose.

when some are hard bestead:
And in the day of famine they
shall be sufficed with bread.

yet never saw Saints so poor;
Nor yet their seed in so much need
to beg from door to door.
Psalm. 55.22.
Then cast thy burden on the Lord,
and he shall well provide:
For not a whit will he permit
the righteous man to slide.
HYMN 361 Just men's sure safeguard and happy end.
Psalm. 37.37.
MARK and behold the perfect man,
for that man's end is peace*

be quite cut off and cease.

is of the Lord most high;
Their strength and stay m^th evil day
of their adversity.

and keep them life and limb;
Delivering them from wicked men,
because they trust in him.
HYMN 362. Knowledge, and acknowledgment of Mortality.
All People, etc.
Psalm 39.5.
WHAT is our life but as a span?
So mere a vanity is man:
And reckoned at his best estate
Is reckoned at no higher rate.

And toyls himself with needless pain:
He gathers wealth with wretched care*
And knows not who shall be his heir.

A sad condition he is in:
Thou make his beauty like a cloth,
fretted and eaten by the moth.
Surely every man how great soever,
Is vanity, yea, altogether:
And reckoned at no higher rate
When reckoned at his best estate.

Slight not my tears: for what am I,
A stranger and a Sojourner
With thee, as all my Fathers were.

That I may gather strength of grace,
Before I lose this mortal breath,
And shall be taken off by death.
HYMN 363. Lovers of Charity blessed. 1. METER.
Psalm 41.1.
THE man is blessed that minds the poor
that suffers sore distress:
The Lord will sure deliver him
when perils most oppress.

and bless him in the Land:
And he will not abandon him
unto his enemies hand.

the Lord will strengthen him,
And in his sickness make his bed
to ease each weary limb.

be gracious, Lord, to me:
And heal my sick and sinful soul
that has offended thee.
HYMN 364. Falseness of Persecutors. 2. METER.
Psalm. 41.5.
MINE enemies speak ill of me;
when comes his dying-day?
And when shall we survive to see
his blessed Name say they?
He visits me with complements,
his heart he fills with fraud,
And vile intents, all which he vents,
whene're he goes abroad.
My haters all lie whispering,
against my soul combined,
Some hurtful thing on me to bring,
devising in their mind:
An ill disease does him surprise,
and cleaves to him so fast,
That now he lies he shall not rise,
but breaths (say they) his last.
My trusted friend, fed at my board,
against me lifts his heel;
But help me, Lord, that when restored
they may my justice feel.
HYMN 365. ( Psalm 42.1. to 5.)
Argument.
The Saint, when from God's house confined,
In Sighs and Prayer, sets forth his mind.
All People, etc.
LIKE as the chased heart does pant
after the cooling water brooks:
So, Lord, my soul pursued and faint,
pants after thee with longing looks.

O when shall I come and draw near
The place of his most blessed abode,
and in his glorious courts appear?

my mournful tears have been my food:
While constantly my foes do say,
where now is thy most faithful God?

my grief of soul has much renewed,
Because I formerly had gone
among the zealous multitude.
I went with them to God's own house,
with cheerful voice of joy and praise,
Where multitudes did follow us
that kept the solemn Holy days.

so overwhelmed in thy distress?
O wherefore art thou moved in me,
and tossed with unquietness?
Hope still in God's deliverance,
for I shall surely, yet again,
Praise him for his sweet countenance,
and help I, shall thereby obtain.
HYMN 366. ( Psalm. 43.)
Argument.
When persecutions greatly grieve and grind,
God's Ordinances cheer the Godly mind.

against the ungodly train,
From subtle tyrants greedy jaws,
my righteous soul sustain.

why do thou leave me so?
And why walk I so heavily
oppressed by my foe?

and guide me with thy grace;
And so conduct me to thy hill,
and to thy dwelling place*

of God my hearts delight,
And on the harp, O God, my God,
thy praise I shall recite.

and fret'st thus in my breast?
O why art thou so troubled now
and taken off thy rest?
Hope still in God, and him applaud,
whom I shall yet record;
Who does advance my countenance,
and is my God, my Lord.
HYMN 367. (2. METER)
Argument.
He cheers his soul in God's free love,
And Comforts flowing from above.
Give Laud, etc.
Psalm 43.

and plead my needful case,
Against a Nation vain,
and destitute of grace.
O save thou me
From men unjust, and such as trust
in treachery.

my God, my strength and stay:
Why seem thou ^n such sort
to cast me clean away?
Why do I go
So mournfully, oppressed by
my cruel foe?

send out thy word most true;
And let them lead me right,
and let them bring me to
Thy holy Hill,
That dwelling place where thy sweet grace
abides still.

unto thine Altar go,
To God my wondrous joy,
from whom my comforts flow.
There I Will give laud,
And honor thee with Psaltery
O God, my God.

dejected O my soul?
Why do such waves of woe
within thy bosom roll?
And why art thou
With fear and dread disquieted
within me now?
O let thy hope be set
on God that helps thee:
For I shall praise him yet
for his great aid to me
When undertrod,
Who does advance my countenance
and is my God.
HYMN 368. (METER)
Argument.
Canaan the Type of Heaven fell,
By Gods free grace to Israel.
All People, etc.
( Psalm 44 v. 3.)
O God our Fathers have us told
What works thou did in days of old;
And we have heard it with our ears,
What works thou did in times of theirs.
How thou did drive out Heathen men
With thy strong hand, to plant in them;
How thou those people did afflict,
And cast them out in judgment strict.
For neither their own sword or hand
Did get possession of the L^nd,
Nor was it their own chivalry
That saved them from the enemy.
But thy right and powerful arm,
That kept them evermore from harm,
And Lord it was the lightsome glance,
Of thy sweet face and countenance.
Thou wast the aid of Israel still,
Because thou bear them great good will:
To Israel's God be praise therefore,
From first to last for evermore.
HYMN 369. Martyrdom, or slaughter of the sheep. (2. METER.)
Psalm 44.20.
IF we have now forgot the Name
of our Almighty One,
And stretched out our hands (in vain)
to Idol-Gods unknown:

and understand the whole?
For he does know undoubtedly
the secrets of our soul.

slain all day long indeed,
And counted as the sheep we be
which men for slaughter feed.

why sleep thou, O Lord?
Cast us not off for evermore,
as people quite abhorred.

and do our grief forget,
In this forlorn and woeful case
that has our souls beset?

our belly cleaves to the Earth:

to set thy mercy forth.
HYMN 370. (3. METER.)
All People, etc.
Psalm 44.20.
IF our God's name we have forgot,
or bowed to gods whom we knew not:
Should not our God the sin disclose,
the secrets of our hearts that knows?
Yea for thy sake thus ill we fare,
that killed all day long we are:
Counted as sheep, that have their life
exposed to the slaughtering knife.
Awake, why sleep'st thou, Lord, arise,
O do not quite cast off our cries:
Why do thou hide thy face so long,
forgetting all our grief and wrong?
For to the ground our soul is thrust,
our belly cleaves to the dust:
Arise our aid to undertake,
and save us for thy mercy sake.
So we thy flock and pasture-store
shall give thee thanks for evermore:
And as thy mercies do engage,
show forth thy praise from age to age.
HYMN 371. ( Psalm 45.)
Argument.
The praise of Christ who spoke as no man did.
His powerful word disclosing secrets hid.
Have mercy, etc.
MY heart indicts good words
To praise the Lord of Lords:
More swiftly than the Writers Pen,
My tongue his praise records.
O fairer than mankind
Thy Lips with grace have shined;
And God therefore for evermore
To bless thee has designed.
Thy sword gird on thy Thigh,
O mighty Majesty:
Ride on O King all conquering,
And ride on prosperously.
Because thou do express
Truth, meekness, righteousness;
And make that word thy conquering sword,
Thou shall have sure success.
HYMN 372. (2. PART.)
Argument.
The power of Christ converting Souls,
But stubborn Enemies he controuls.
Psalm 45.
THE right hand of thy might
Thine Enemies shall smite
With dreadful sense of Conscience,
Till yielding to thy right.
Full sharp shall be thy dart
In the King's enemies heart:
Nothing shall ease the Consciences,
Till they to thee convert.
As for the stubborn foe
Well shall thy right hand know,
To wound such hearts with dreadful darts,
And work their overthrow.
HYMN 373. (3. PART.)
Argument.
The Throne of Christ with justice decked
The Graces of his Saints elect.
Have mercy, etc.
Psalm 45.6.
THY throne, O God most high,
Abides perpetually;
Thy Government is excellent
For truth and equity.
Thou love righteousness,
And sin thou hat'st no less;
Therefore has God thy God bestowed
On thee such blessed success.
And has anointed thee
With gifts of grace so free,
And oil of joy transcendently
Above all saints that be.
Thy graces all divine
Which do from Heaven shine,
Like Cassia, Myrrh and Aloes are,
The joy of thee and thine.
Chief Saints in every place
Shall come before thy face,
At thy right hand shall Israel stand
All decked in robes of grace.
HYMN 374. (4. PART.)
Argument.
The Spouse of Christ he does exhort,
The Gentiles called to Sions Court.
Have mercy, etc.
Psalm 45. v. 10.
HEarken O spouse most dear,
consider and give ear,
Forget thy birth that sprung from earth,
And as new born appear.
So shall the King desire
Thy beauteous grace entire,
For none but he thy Lord must be
Pure worship to require.
And converts most complete
Shall come with gifts full great,
The Gentiles which are great and rich,
Thy favor shall entreat.
And I will cause thy Name
To be of endless fame,
And therefore all the people shall
Thy praises still proclaim.
HYMN 375. (5. PART.)
Argument.
The Churches inward beauty, her succession.
The Jew and Gentiles glory with confession
Of Christ our Savior's praise past all expression.
Have mercy, etc.
Psalm. 45. v. 13.
THE Kings dear spouse behold
Decked in her cloth of gold.
(The inward dress of Holiness
And graces manifold.)
Be brought to Christ shall she
In robes of sanctity,
Her Virgin mates (confederates)
Must all be brought to thee.
With joy shall they resort,
And in triumphant sort,
( Gentile and Jew) be brought into
The Kings celestial court.
And in the Fathers stead
Thou shall have children bred,
As Princes high for piety
The Earth to overspread.
And I will cause thy Name
To be of endless fame,
And therefore all the people shall
Thy praises still proclaim.
HYMN 376. ( Psalm 46.)
Argument.
The Lord proclaimed a present aid:
The foes with fear are much dismayed.
All People, etc.
GOD is our strength and present aid,
Our refuge in our need,
Therefore we will not be afraid,
Nor tottering earthquakes heed:
Though midst of Seas huge hills be hurled,
though troubled waters roar,
And swelling of the billows curld
make mountains tremble sore.
A River there with Crystal stream
shall glad that City of his,
The sacred tent of God supreme
the Lord amidst her is.
Right early God shall help her there,
she shall not once be moved,
The Heathen Kingdoms moved were,
and most outrageous proved.
He uttering then that voice of his
the earth did melt away,
The Lord of Hosts with Israel is,
and Jacob's God our stay.
Come see the work of God's own hand,
what desolation's made,
How wars are hushed in all the Land,
and how he breaks the blade.
He burns the Chariot, breaks the Bow,
be still and know, says he,
That I am God on earth below,
and there extolled will be.
Of Heathens I Will be magnified
in this my glorious power,
The Lord of Hosts is on our side,
and Jacob's God our tower.
HYMN 377. (2. METER.)
Argument.
A present refuge God appears,
Therefore the Saints should banish fears.
All People, etc.
Psalm 46.
GOD is our refuge and relief,
A very present help in grief,
Therefore we will not fear at all
Although the earth should flit or fall.
And though the mountains should be hurled
Amidst the Seas throughout the world.
Although the troubled waters rore
And swelling Seas should shake the shore.
There is a River whose sweet stream
Shall glad the City of God supreme,
The Glory of his holy place
Are the Ordinances of his Grace.
The Lord is in the midst of her,
She shall not once be made to stir,
God gives her help and soon performed
Though Heathens raged and Kingdoms stormed.
His voice he uttered soon 'twas felt,
And made the stubborn Earth to melt,
The Lord of hosts is with us still,
The God of Jacob's our high hill.
HYMN 378. (2. PART)
Argument.
God cease wars, proclaims his power,
Is Israel's refuge and high Tower.
Psalm 46.
THE works of God O come and see
How mild he makes the Earth to be;
He cease wars to earths far ends,
He breaks the bow, the spear he rends.
He breaks asunder steel entire,
He burns the Chariot in the fire,
Be still and know that I am God
To be exalted all abroad.
Heathens (says he) shall set me forth,
I Will be exalted in the Earth,
The Lord of hosts is with us still,
The God of Jacob our high hill.
Psalm 106.48.
Let Israel's God be blessed therefore
From first to last for evermore;
And let all people jointly then
Give him renown and say Amen.
HYMN 379. Mercies to the Church by our Savior's ascension. 1. METER.
Have mercy, etc.
Psalm 47.
O People clap your hands,
and shout unto the Lord
With Voice of Joy triumphantly,
and all with one accord.

with terror is set forth,
A mighty King in governing,
and ruling all the earth.

for us, as he thinks meet,
And make to fall the Nations all,
subjected at our feet.

a lot which does excel:
A glorious choice for Jacob's house*
which he has loved well.

ascending with a shout,
With Trumpets shrill to Sion-hill,
the Lord is thus gone out.
2. PART.

sing praises cheerfully:
Sweet praises sing unto our King,
sing praise with melody.

of Earths remotest parts:
Your Voices raise, to sing his praise
with understanding hearts.

which Heathen men possess:
God sits upon his sacred Throne
of perfect Holiness.

and people every one,
That are by Grace of Abraham's Race,
are gathered to his Throne.

belong unto the Lord:
So much must he exalted be
of all with one accord.
HYMN 380. Mercies to the Gentiles by Christ's ascension.
All People, etc. Or, O Lord Consider, etc.
2. METER. Psalm 47.
CLap hands ye people generally,
and shout to God with joy and mirth:
For dreadful is the Lord most high,
a mighty King in all the Earth.
The Heathen he for us subdues,
and Nations to our feet subjects:
A glorious portion he shall choose
for Jacob, whom he so affects.
God is ascended with a shout,
the Lord now while the Trumpet plays:
Sing praise to God, his praise sing out,
sing praises to our King sing praise:
The Lord is King, the Earth submits,
sing praise with understanding then:
Upon his Holy Throne he sits,
he rules over the Heathen men.
Exodus 3.14.
Hither the peoples Princes throng,
to him whose Name is called I AM:
The faithful people that belong
unto the God of Abraham.
Because the shields of all the Earth
belong unto the Lord alone:
For they are of that heavenly birth,
and he the high exalted One.
HYMN 381. ( Psalm. 48.)
Argument.
The Churches beauty highly praised,
Her walls besieged, the Siege is raised.
All people, etc.
GReat is the Lord, praised all abroad,
and greatly to be praised still,
Here in the City of our God,
and in his consecrated hill.
Mount Sion is a beauteous thing,
the only joy of all the Earth,
The City of the sovereign King,
is situated on her North.
God in her palaces is known
to be a refuge near at hand,
The assembled Kings were quickly gone,
with all the whole beleaguering band.
They saw it and they marvelled,
and troubled, hastened back again,
Surpised as women tortured,
with keenest pangs of Childbed pain.
Or like as when at thy command
the Eastern wind with fury roars,
And splits the Tharsian Ships by Land,
upon the naked rocks and shores*
Now have we seen in Israel's Coasts
what we have heard declared of old,
The City of our Lord of hosts
the Lord for ever shall uphold.
HYMN 382. (2. PART.)
Argument.
The Church records God's mercies past,
Her strength and safety to the last.
Psalm 48.
A Midst thy holy house, O God,
thy kindness to remembrance came,
Thy praise on earth is spread abroad,
according to thy Glorious Name.
Thy right hands full of righteousness,
therefore let Sion-mount rejoice,
And Judahs Towns their joys express,
to hear thy judgments awful voice.
Walk round about and Sion see,
her stately Towers distinctly tell,
Her palaces consider ye,
and mark ye all her bulwarks well:
That so to all posterity,
it may be truly testified,
This God (our God perpetually)
even unto death will be our guide.
HYMN 383. ( Psalm 49.)
Argument.
The Riddle of Worldlings peace summed up in this,
Death adds to Saints, but ends the Worldlings bliss.
HEAR this with care ye People all
that in the world do dwell,
Both rich and poor, both great and small
together hearken well.
My mouth the wisdom shall impart
of God's most holy will,
The meditation of my heart,
shall be of heavenly skill.
I will incline a ready ear
a Parable to mark,
And on my harp will make appear
the sayings that are dark.
Why should I fear what I may feel
when the evil day falls out,
And the iniquity of my heel
shall compass me about?
They that on wealth with pride depend
in heaping up thick clay,
None of them can redeem a friend,
none can his ransom pay.
The soul of man no price can buy,
such thoughts should cease to be,
That man should live immortally
and no corruption see.
For all alike does death surprise,
as knows all mankind,
The fool, the wise and brutish dies,
and leave their wealth behind.
HYMN 384. (2. PART.)
Argument.
The flattering World applauds and crowns her own,
But death and judgment makes Saints happiness known.
Psalm 49.
THese are the thoughts which inwardly
those worldlings entertain,
How that their house and family
for ever shall remain.
Their dwelling place to ages all
they think shall still endure,
Their Lands by their own Names they call
to make the matter sure.
Yet man in honor and renown
Has soon his honor ceast,
And quickly to the grave goes down,
to perish as the beast.
This way of worldlings verily
is but a foolish way,
Yet are they by posterity
approved in all they say.
Like sheep so are they laid in grave,
and death shall them devour:
And just men shall dominion have
at their awaking hour.
Mean while that outward pomp and grace,
whereof they did presume,
Shall perish from their dwelling place,
and in the Grave consume.
But God will sure my soul redeem,
from power of the grave,
For I shall be received to him
an heavenly house to have.
HYMN 385. (3. PART.)
Argument.
Envy not worldlings honor nor delight,
Which ends in horror and perpetual night.
Psalm 49.
O Be not thou solicitous,
when any is made rich,
And when the Glory of his house
gets to an higher pitch.
For when his time shall come to die,
naught with him shall he have,
His pomp shall not accompany
his person to the Grave.
Though while he lived he blessed his soul,
and men will much commend,
A man that lives without control,
and does himself befriend.
He shall go down to his own place,
into perpetual night,
Among his cursed Father's race,
and never more see light.
Thus man in honor and repute,
yet understanding not,
Is well compared to the fruit,
which soon must die and rot.
HYMN 386. True Thankfulness.
Have mercy, etc.
Psalm 23
OFFER to God each day
thanksgiving cheerfully,
And have a special care to pay
thy vows to God most high.
Then seek and sue to me,
when dangerous days do frame,
And I will sure deliver thee,
and thou shall praise my Name.
For whosoever offers praise,
he glorifieth me,
And he that goes in godly ways,
shall Gods salvation see.
HYMN 387. Mightiness of God in Judgment. (2. METER.)
Have mercy, etc.
Psalm. 50.
THE God of Glorious might,
the Lord has summoned all:
And called the Earth from Suns first light,
unto the furthest fall.
Sion's sacred mount
(beauties perfection right)
Will God appear to take account
in Glory shining bright.

and then shall he speak out:
Before him shall a fire devour,
with tempests round about.

and to the Earth below:
To judge his people openly,
that all may see and know.

be brought before mine eyes:
Those that have made a Covenant
with me by Sacrifice.
And Heaven shall express
how just his judgments be:
They shall declare his righteousness,
for none is Judge but he.
HYMN 388. Mightiness of God in Mercy*
Have mercy, etc.
2. METER. Psalm 50.7.
MY People hearken well,
I Will speak and testify,
Against even thee, O Israel,
thy God, thy God am I.

thy Cattle young or old:

nor Hee-goat from thy fold.

the Forest is mine own,
And Cattle on a thousand hills
belong to me alone.

what e're the mountains breed:
And all the Salvage beasts are mine
that in the field do feed.

I would not tell it thee:
For that the world and all in it
belongs alone to me.

or drink the blood of Goats?

and pay the highest thy votes.

when dangerous days do frame,
And I will sure deliver thee,
and thou shall praise my Name.
HYMN 389. Mightiness of God in punishing the wicked. 4. METER.
Have mercy, etc.
Psalm 50.16, 17.
AS for the wicked now
that speaks, but acts not fair,
To him says God, what right have thou
my statutes to declare?
Why should thy mouth relate
the Covenant which I taught,
When as thou do instruction hate,
and set my word at naught?

with him thou do consent:
And a Partaker thou have been
with men incontinent.

thy tongue deceit does frame:
Thou sit'st and speak with words at will,
to wound thy brothers Name.

thou sland'rest with thy tongue,
These things ungodly thou have done,
and I kept silence long.

that I was such as thou:
Yea altogether like to thee,
and would thy deeds allow.
But I Will put home reproof,
and set thy sins in place:
To stand in order plain enough
before thy guilty face.

the awful God forgot:
That I (when there is none to have)
in pieces tear you not.

he glorifieth me:
And he that goes in godly ways
shall God's salvation see.
HYMN 390. Mightiness of God in the day of Judgment. 5. METER.
To the old proper Tune.
Psalm 50.
THE God of might
Unto the earth did call:
From Suns first light
And rising to his fall:
From Sion fair
The Lord himself has shone.
God shall repair
In noise and terror known.
Ushered with flame,
Wrapped in a stormy shower,
And shall proclaim
All judgment, in his power.
Gather to me
My Saints in Covenant tied,
And Heaven shall see
His justice magnified.
My People, hear,
O Israel, I come in
And witness bear
Against thee for thy sin.
I will not blame
Thy Sacrifices slender:
Nor Bullocks claim,
Nor Goats for thee to render.
Mine is each beast
Which widest Forest feed:
Even to the least,
Which thousand hills do breed.
The Fowls I know
Which on the mountains fly:
Wild beasts also
Which in the deserts ly.
If I would eat,
To thee I would not show it:
For the Earth complete
Is mine, I Would have thee know it.
That I require
Bulls flesh, why should thou think?
Or have desire
The blood of Goats to drink?
Thanksgiving bring,
And pay to God thy Vows:
This Offering
He specially allows.
Then on me call
In time of thy temptation,
Save thee I shall,
And gain thy gratulation.
HYMN 391. Mightiness of God in Vengeance upon the Wicked. 6. METER.
Psalm. 50. v. 16.
BUT to the lewd
Says God, why should ye dare
Once to intrude
My statutes to declare?
Why do ye vaunt
With mouth for to relate
My Covenant,
Whose hearts instruction hate?
When thou have seen
A thief, thou have consented,
And with the unclean
To join thou wast contented.
Thou giv'st thy mouth
To utter what is naught,
To speak untruth
And guile thy tongue is taught.
Thou do backbite
To work thy brother blame,
And (full of spite)
Thy mothers son to shame.
This have thou done,
And my long silence finding,
Thou thought me one
Like thee, and never minding.
But I will haste
To set before thine eyes
(In order placed)
All these impieties.
Consider this
Ye that forget God's fear,
Lest piece by piece
Your helpless souls I tear.
But whosoever gives
Me praise shall glorify me,
And he that lives
A Saint, be saved by me.
Psalm. 106.48.
Let Israel's God
be ever blessed therefore,
And let us applaud
his Name for evermore.
And let the Earth
in all parts up and down
Sound out his worth,
his Glory and renown:
And let all People
say Amen together,
Amen, praise ye,
Praise ye the Lord for ever.
HYMN 392. New building of Sion: And the Sacrifices most acceptable to God. 1.
METER.
All People, etc. Or, O Lord Consider, etc.
Psalm. 51.18.
LORD cast a favorable eye
On Sion's sad calamity:
Jerusalem's low walls repair,
And build them up again more fair.
19, 16.
Then shall thou be when once appeased
With our devout oblations pleased:
But thou desir'st no Sacrifice,
Burnt Offerings take not in thine eyes.
17.
The Offerings of thy dear delight
Are trembling souls, and hearts contrite:
An humble heart that prostrate lies,
O God, thou never wilt despise.
10, 15.
Create in us, O God, therefore
An heart refined more and more:
And open thou our lips always
To make our mouth show forth thy praise.
HYMN 393. Pardon implored. (2. METER.)
Psalm 51.
HAVE mercy on me, O my God,
take pity, Lord, I pray;
And in thy mercies multitude
wipe all my sins away.
Wash me, O wash me thoroughly,
from filthiness within:
Blot out my fowl iniquity,
and cleanse me from my sin.
For I acknowledge and confess
transgressions done by me:
In horrid shapes of guiltiness
my sin I always see.
Against thee, Lord, and only thee,
the high and Holy One,
Have I transgrest in high degree,
as unto thee is known.
That when thou speak of my offense
thou may be justified:
And clear in all thou shall pronounce
when I am jud'gd and tried.
Behold how in iniquity
I did my shape assume;
My mother has conceived me,
a sinner from the womb.
But thou love truth in the inward part,
and wisdom put'st within:
Which makes me from my very heart
to loath my self for sin.
HYMN 394. Pardon, Justification and Sanctification implored. 3. METER.
Psalm 51.

for thou shall cleanse me so:
O wash me in my Savior's blood
whiter than any snow.

of joy and gladness sweet:
That so the bones which thou have broke
may with much comfort meet.

and frowning face refrain:
And blot out mine iniquities
that none of them remain.

unspotted in thy sight:
Renewing in my inward part
a spirit pure and right.

from presence of thy face:
Nor take from me (I humbly pray)
thy holy spirit of grace.

to me, O Lord, restore:
And thy free spirit, O grant me it,
to stay me evermore.

how to obtain thy grace:
And converts shall come in to thee,
and sinners seek thy face.
HYMN 395. Pardon of bloodshed, and prayers for Sion. 4. METER.
Psalm. 51.14.
ACquit me from bloud-guiltiness
Lord God, my Savior strong:
Then shall I sing thy righteousness,
with loud and joyful tongue.

my drooping soul to raise:
Then shall my mouth aloud record,
and show forth all thy praise.

else would I give it thee:
Burnt Offerings, Lord, thou do not prize,
nor take delight to see.

is God's chief Sacrifice:
A broken and a contrite heart
thou will not, Lord, despise.
Sion hill,
build up Jerusalems wall:

and please thee therewithal.
Pure Sacrifice of righteousness,
and bullocks then shall they,
With whole burnt Offerings numberless
upon thine Altar lay.
HYMN 396. Pardon of Sin implored. 5. METER.
All People, etc. Or, O Lord Consider, etc
Psalm. 51.
HAVE mercy on me, O good God,
Thy loving kindness shed abroad:
And in thy mercies multitude
O let my pardon be renewed.
O wash me thoroughly from my sin,
And cleanse my heart from filth within:
For I confess my foul offense,
With horror of my conscience.
Thee, thee alone have I set light,
And done this evil in thy sight;
That if I were condemned, I must
Confess thy judgment to be just.
And well have I deserved that doom,
That am a sinner from the Womb:
And thou love truth in the inward part,
And have put wisdom in my heart.
HYMN 397. Peace of Conscience implored: Also Justification, and
Sanctification. 6. METER.
Psalm 51.7.
PUrge me with that the Law does mean
By Hyssop, and I shall be clean:
Wash me in Christ his blood, and so
I shall be whiter than the snow.
Gladness and joy to me reveal,
The bones which thou have broke to heal:
From all my sins, Lord, hide thine eyes,
And blot out mine iniquities.
Create a clean heart in thy view,
And a right spirit in me renew:
Cast me not off for my demerit,
Nor take from me thy holy Spirit.
Thy saving joys to me restore,
And spiritualize me more and more:
Then shall transgressors learn of me,
And sinners shall convert to thee.
HYMN 398. Peace of Conscience and pardon of bloodshed implored. 7. METER.
Psalm 51.14.
FROM guilt of bloodshed make me clear,
O God of my salvation dear:
Then shall my tongue loud Songs express,
To magnify thy righteousness.
Wherefore I pray thee, O most high,
My lips to open powerfully;
And make my mouth aloud to raise
The acclamations of thy praise.
For thou desir'st not Sacrifice,
Else would I make such flames to rise:
Burnt Offering thou delight'st not in,
As an approved purge for sin.
The Sacrifices of the Lord,
Are hearts contrite, and self-abhorr'd:
A broken breast, and heart contrite
Surely, O God, thou will not slight.
HYMN 399. Prayers for Sions prosperity. (8. METER)
Psalm. 51.18.
DO good, O God, in thy good will
To Sion thy beloved hill:
Let it receive no detriment
By sinners falls that do repent.
But O build up for thee and them
The walls of thy Jerusalem:
Then shall our Sacrifices be
Pure righteousness well liked of thee.
Then shall we offer from our soul
Burnt Offerings, and burnt Offerings whole,
And in a more spiritual way,
We shall our Sacrifices pay.
And Bullocks taken from the Yoke
Shall make thy sacred Altar smoke:
Or rather purer flames shall dart
Sent from the Altar of our heart.
HYMN 400. Properties of Tale-bearers accused.
Psalm 52.
WHY do thou Tyrant take a pride
in doing mischief still?
Be sure God's goodness does abide,
and so it ever will.

and cuts as rasour keen,
It works all deceitfulness,
in secret and unseen.

with falsehood and with wrong;

O thou deceitful tongue!

and cut thee clean away:
And pluck thee from thy dwelling place,
both root and branch, I say.

and laugh at his disgrace:

his strength in God to place.
But trusted in his store of wealth
to save him from distress:
And thought to fortify himself
by works of wickedness.

in God's own house am I,
And trusting in God's mercies free
shall dwell perpetually.

for doing things so meet:
And wait upon thy Holy Name,
to all thy Saints so sweet.
The Fifth Century OF PSALM-HYMNS.
HYMN 401. Properties of Tale-bearers cursed; and the blessing conferred on
Saints.
Psalm 52.
WHY do thou boast of mischief most,
O man of worldly might?
God's goodness sure does still endure
to save me from thy spite.
Thou do incline that tongue of thine
to practice mischief great:
Yea, it has been a razer keen
in working of deceit.
A readier will thou have to ill
than good to entertain,
And righteousness thou love less
than for to lie and feign.
Thou love words as sharp as swords,
false tongue, that does betray;
Therefore the Lord shall bring a sword
to cut thee clean away.
He shall destroy thee utterly,
plucked from thy dwelling place:
And bring about to root thee out
from all the living race.
With terror then, shall righteous men
look on, and laugh, and say,
See what befell an Infidel
that made not God his stay:
But trusted more in worldly store,
and riches to possess:
And thus he fed and strengthened
himself in wickedness.
But I shall be an Olive Tree
in God's house growing still:
And in his grace my trust I place,
and so I ever will.
On thee will I wait constantly
for this thy deed Divine:
And spread the fame of thy great Name,
Which is so good to thine.
HYMN 402. Punishment of Atheists, and protection of Saints. 1. METER.
Psalm 53.
THE fool that is Atheistical
has spoke it (for his part)
There is not any God at all,
for so he thinks in heart.
Corrupt they are exceedingly,
and so is all the brood:
Have acted vile iniquity,
and none of them does good.

on sons of men below,
To see of whom the Lord was known
or who did seek to know.

defiled with filth of sin:
Not one did tread in virtues track
not one was skilled therein.

such bypath have they trod,
To eat my people up like bread?
they have not called on God.

where was no cause of fright,
For God has burst the bones of him
that did against thee fight.
And thou have put them all to shame,
(God blasting all their ways)

to Israel now a days.
When God brings back the captive state
of Sion now so sad:
Then Jacob shall rejoice thereat,
and Israel shall be glad.
HYMN 403. Punishment of Atheists, and protection of Saints. 2. METER.
All People, etc Or, O Lord Consider, etc.
Psalm. 53.
FOOLS say in heart, there is no God,
no God that humane actions heeds,
Corrupt they are, and none does good,
they do abominable deeds.
The Lord from his celestial throne
looked down on mortal men below,
To see if there were any one
that knew God's will, or sought to know.
But all were gone aside from grace,
wholly defiled and in their blood:
There was not one of all the race,
not one by nature doing good.
Have they no knowledge in their head?
these workers of iniquity,
Eating my people up like bread,
they never call on God most high.
They feared a fear, where no fear was,
for God has scattered all their bones
That durst encamp against thy cause,
and thou have shamed those guilty ones.
And therefore were they thus dismayed,
because despised of thy God:
And O that Israel's saving aid
were come from Sion all abroad.
When God shall once from bondage bring
the captive flock of Sion-hill:
Then Jacob shall triumph and sing,
and gladness Israel's heart shall fill.
HYMN 404. Judgments against Persecutors.
Psalm 54.
BY thy great Name, O God, defend
and judge me by thy might:

and do not set them light.

oppressors seek my soul:
They set not God before their eyes,
their actions to control.
But God my helper does abide,
the Lord does still take part
With those that gather on my side,
and do uphold my heart.

the ill that they have wrought:
Lord, in thy justice cut away,
and bring them all to naught.

my offering to present,
And I will praise thy Name O Lord,
for it is excellent.

from all my grief and woe:
Mine eye has seen accomplished
his will upon my foe.
Israel's God, and none but he,
from everlasting (then)
To everlasting praised be,
Amen, Amen, Amen.
HYMN 405. ( Psalm 55.17.)
Argument.
Frequent prayer prevalent,
Want of God^s fear destructive.
AT Morning, Noon, and Evening-tide
unto the Lord I pray:
When I so constantly have cried
he will not say me nay.

and vex mine enemies sore:
Even he that does of old remain,
and is for evermore.
Because they see no sudden change,
but find a fixed abode:
Therefore their courses are so strange,
therefore they fear not God.

that wicked works commit:
For thou will bring them down, O Cod,
into destructions pit.
The bloody and deceitful one,
shall not live half his days:
But I will trust in thee alone
and give thy Name the praise.
HYMN 406. Quieting of Cares, or repose in God. 1. METER.
Psalm. 61.
LORD hear my cry, my prayer attend,

Mine earnest cries to thee I send
when overwhelmed in heart,

Lord, lead me graciously:
For thou ^^st been my fort and tower.
against the enemy.

and dwelling to endure:
Beneath thy wings I know right well
I shall be safe and sure*

Lord, thou wast pleased to hear:
Thou gave me the heritage
of them that do thee fear.

thou will, O Lord, maintain:
As many a Generation
before thee to remain.

for ever to endure:
Prepare thy mercy, truth, and grace,
which may preserve him sure.

the praises of thy Name:
That all my vows I may fulfill,
and daily pay the same.
HYMN 407. Quieting of Cares, or the Rock of Refuge. 2. METER.
Ye Children, etc.
Psalm. 61.
LORD hear my cry, my prayers attend,
For from the very utmost end
of all the Earth to thee I cry,
When as my heart with sorrows weight
Is overwhelmed, O lead me straight
unto the rock that is higher than I.
For thou a shelter wast for me,
And a strong tower I have of thee,
against the adversaries face.
I will abide within thy tent,
And evermore be confident
under thy Wings most secret place.
For thou, O God, have heard my vows,
And thy free grace to me allows,
among thy Saints an h^ritage:
Thou will prolong upon the Throne
The life of thine Anointed one,
and make his years as many an age.
He shall abide before thy face
For ever, O prepare thy Grace
and truth which may preserve him still:
And I will sing due praise therefore
Unto thy Name for evermore,
and daily all my vows fulfill.
HYMN 408. Quieting Principles. Worldly Confidences condemned.
Psalm. 62.8, 9.
O Have your hope in God always
ye Saints with one accord:
Pour out your hearts to him, and say,
our refuge is the Lord.

the ignoble, mean and base,
And they no better than a ly
that are of higher place.
For lay them in the Balances
with all their pomp and pelf:
And lighter weighs the best of these
than vanity it self.
(2. PART.)
Psalm 62.10, 11, 12.
O Trust not in oppression,
in robbery be not vain:
If wealth increase rest not thereon,
nor set your heart on gain.
The Lord has spoken more than once,
and often have I heard
That God the Judgment must denounce,
for every man's reward.
The power belongs to him alone,
to punish and to spare:
And Lord thou giv'st to every one
just as his actions are.
Let Isreal's mighty God therefore
be praised perpetually:
From first to last for evermore,
Amen, Amen say I.
HYMN 409. King David's wicked Enemies destroyed.
Psalm 63.
WIth marrow fat and delicate,
my soul sufficed shall be,
My mouth always shall render praise
with joyful lips to thee.
When I record thy love, O Lord,
upon my bed at night:
And meditate upon thee late,
before the morning light.
Since thou alone art he from whom
my help proceeds and springs,
Therefore will I rest joyfully
beneath thy shady wings:
My soul does press with eagerness
to follow after thee:
And still I stand by thy right hand
for that upholdeth me.
But soon they must go down to dust,
that seek my soul to slay,
And falling by the sword shall die,
and be the foxes prey:
Yet shall the King God's praises sing,
from whom these Judgments come;
Who still prefers true worshippers
and lying lips strikes dumb.
Let Isreal's God be then set forth,
and praised and praised again,
His glory filling all the Earth,
Amen, Amen, Amen.
HYMN 410. ( Psalm 65.)
Argument.
Our silent praise awaits Gods holy place
For his sweet pardoning satisfying grace,
His wonders both by Sea and Land
Make all in admiration stand.
All people, etc.
Sion, Lord, praise waits for thee,
To thee the vow performed shall be:

To thee shall all mankind draw near.

But thou shall purge them clean away:

And whom thou make to approach to thee.
Within thy sacred Courts to dwell,
Where we are satisfied full well:
With goodness of thy holy house,
Even of thy Temple glorious.

Lord, thou will answer our requests:
O God our saving health at hand,
Our only hope by Sea and Land.
HYMN 411. (2 PART.)
Argument.
The blessings of a fruitful year,
Are sweetly celebrated here.
Psalm 65.

And (girt with power) the Seas he stills:

Of all the people multitude.

Thy signs affright, O Lord of Hosts:
Thou make the mornings early voice,
Likewise the Evenings to rejoice.
Thou visitest the spacious Earth,
And waterest it with rain poured forth:
Greatly thou do enrich each clod,
With the full watered River of God.
Thou do prepare them Corn to grow,
When thou have ordered for it so:

Its ridges which were parcht and dry.
Thou lay'st her furrows by thy power,
Thou make it soft with many a shower:
The springing of it thou do bless,


Upon the wildernesses top:
The little hills and deserts wide,
Greatly rejoice on every side.

The valleys do with Corn abound:
And covered over with what they bring,
They shout for joy, they also sing.
HYMN 412. ( Psalm 65.) Another Meter.
Argument.
Devotion, Pardon, true Vocation,
With answer of our supplication:
Strange providence are renowned.
A fruitful year with glory crowned.
The Mighty God, etc.
Sion hill
To thee the vow shall be performed still:

Gladly to thee shall all mankind repair.

But with far greater mercies thou prevent'st us.

TO approach to thee, and dwell within thy Courts,
With fatness of thy house we shall be filled,
Such goodness shall thy holy Temple yield:

Thou answerest us, O God of our salvation.
Thou art the confidence of Earths far ends,
And theirs the farthest Ocean comprehends:


The noise of all their billows he appeaseth,
And tumults of the people when he pleases.

Are with thy tokens frighted at their hearts:
Thou make the outgoings of the mornings voice,
And of the evenings greatly to rejoice:

And with God's River do enrich it greatly.
The River of God, with water does abound
Then thou prepar'st them Corn to sow the ground,

Thou waterest it, O God abundantly:
Thou lay'st her furrows, make it soft with showers,
Blessing her springing with her fruits and flowers.

Thy paths drop fatness, dropping far and near;

The little hills rejoice on every side:

Shouting for joy, and joy'd with cheerful singing.
HYMN 413. ( Psalm 66.)
Argument.
Great providence praised, great foes submit;
The Red Sea dried, and Israel passing it.

And make a joyful sound:

And make his praise renowned.

How dreadful lo! they be
Through thy great strength thy foes at length
Must all submit to thee.

Their songs thy praise shall spread:

To mortals full of dread.

And all the waters moist:
There went we through, and dry shod too,
there we in him rejoiced.
HYMN 414. (2. PART.)
Argument.
God's Sovereign Rule: He keeps our Soul alive,
Though we with trials and afflictions strive.
Psalm. 66. v. 7.

his eyes all Lands descry,
O let not then rebellious men
exalt themselves on high.

with earnest voices strive,
To sound the fame of his great Name

And suffers not on any side
our feet to be removed,

and us thy servants proved.
As silver in a furnace tried,
so througly tried were we:

and therein brought by thee.
HYMN 415. (3. PART.)
Argument.
Afflictions great imposed and allayed,
The vows of gratitude are sworn and paid.
Psalm 66. v. 11.
Afflictions sore and violent
thou made our loins abide,

over our heads to ride.
Through flames of fire, O Lord, we went,
and through the watery floods,
But surely thou have brought us now,
to places stored with goods.

those very vows to pay,

in my distressfull day.

my sold to thee devotes,
With Incense too, of Rams enough,
with Bullocks offering Goats.
HYMN 416. Release from Afflictions. (4. PART.)
Psalm 66.11.
LORD thou have brought us oftentimes
into a tangling strait:
And laid afflictions on our loins,
with an oppressing weight.

by thee on purpose sent,
And we distressed on every side,
through fire and water went.
But when we were thus under-trod,
and hopeless seemed our case:
Even then thou brought us out, O God,
into a wealthy place:

burnt offerings to bestow:
And I will pay thee all the vows
which my engagements owe.
HYMN 417. (5. PART.)
Argument.
Experience told stirs up to prayer and praise,
Sins kept, withhold true blessings in our ways.
2. METER. Psalm 66.16.

and I will let you know
What special Love the Lord above
to my dear Soul did show:

my tongue his praise preferred,

my prayer should not be heard.

and has been well content,
With willing ear my voice to hear,
and what I did present,

who turned not away;
Nor held from me his mercy free,
when I to him did pray.
HYMN 418. Revelation of the Gospel. 1. METER.
Have mercy, etc.
Psalm 67.

and bless us every one:
Thy face Divine on us let shine,
thy way on Earth make known

let people praise thy Name:
O let them all in general
thus see, thus spread thy fame.

because thou art set forth
A righteous King in governing
and judging all the Earth.

let all of them praise thee:

and great increase shall be.

abundant blessings send:
And men shall fear him every where,
to Earths remotest end.
HYMN 419. Revelation, and Riches of the Gospel. 2. METER.
Give laud, etc.
Psalm 67.
BE good, O God, to thine,
and pour thy blessings forth:
Thy face on us let shine;
and show thy way on Earth,
With such success,
That Nations all may see their call
To blessedness.
O let the people then
give praise, O God, to thee,
And let all sorts of men
in thy sweet praise agree:
Let them confess
Thy Holy Name, and spread thy fame
With thankfulness.
O make the Nations glad,
and let them sing for joy:
For thou shall judge, O God,
the people righteously.
Thy Rule shall bless
The Nations all in general
With happiness.
O let the people then
give praise to thee, O God,
And let all sorts of men
proclaim thy praise abroad:
Let all confess
Thy Holy Name, and spread thy fame
With cheerfulness.
Then shall the earth afford
a plentiful increase:
And our own God the Lord
to bless us shall not cease.
God shall us bless,
Earth far and near his Name shall fear,
With awfulness.
HYMN 420. Rising of the Ark, or, Exurgat Deus.
The mighty God, etc.
Psalm 68.1, 2.
LET God arise
and dissipate his foes,
Let those that hate him
flee before his face:
As smoke is driven away,
just so let those
Be driven away
and God pursue the chase.
As fire does melt the wax, and makes
it liquid,
So perish in God's presence let
the wicked.
3, 4.
But let the just
their joys in God proclaim,
And let them glory
in the Lord most high:
Sing to the Lord,
sing praises to his Name:
Exalt ye him
that rides on the sky.
By JAH his Name exalt him,
and adore him,
And most exceedingly rejoice
before him.
5, 6.
A tender Father
of the Fatherless,
A Judge of Widows
is Almighty God:
And so indeed
he does himself express
From's holy habitation
and abode.
He sets the desolate
in habitations
To dwell with their own households,
and relations.
6. Psalm 106.48.
He brings out
those that are bound with chains,
And frees the Prisoners
with a powerful hand:
But the rebellious
people he restrains,
And makes their dwelling
in a barren Land.
Let Israel's God be ever blessed
therefore,
And People say, Amen,
for evermore.
HYMN 421. Sanctuary Songs for the wonderful works of God.
Psalm. 68.32.
SING unto God with one accord,
ye Kingdoms of the earth:
O sing ye praises to the Lord,
and set his honor forth.

of Heavens framed of old:
And sends out his thunder there
most mighty to behold.

for that to him pertains:
Over Israel is his excellence,
and in the clouds he reigns.

and so thou make it known
From Heaven, which is thy blessed abode,
and Sion's sacred throne.
The God of Israel is our tower,
and it is only he
That gives his people strength and power,
and blessed his Name shall be.
HYMN 422. Sion's Reparations.
To the Tune of the old 130. Psalm.
Psalm 69.34.
LET the Heavens praise begin,
let the Earth pursue it:
Let the Sea and all therein
join their suffrage to it.
Sion save,
Judah's Cities rear:
Houses new that men may have,
and possessions there.
Psalm 106.48.

the heritage excelling:
There shall they that love his Name*
have perpetual dwelling.
Let the God of Israel then
have the praise for ever:
And the People say Amen,
joining all together.
HYMN 423. Speedy deliverance prayed for. 1. METER.
Have mercy, etc.
Psalm 70.
MAKE haste, O God, make haste,
my Savior now to be:
And let the time no longer waste
before thou succor me.

that seek my blood to spill:
Let flat confusion on them fall
who-ever wish me ill.

so to reward their shame,
That no disgraceful language lack
to taunt and to defame.

rejoice in thee always:
Let them that love thy saving grace,
say still, to God be praise.

and greatly stand in need:
O thou my God, draw nigh therefore,
and succor me with speed.
Thou art my only aid,
thou art my Savior strong:
Let not thy help be still delayed,
Lord make no tarrying long.
HYMN 424. Speedy deliverance urged. 2. METER.
All People, etc.
Psalm 70.
MAKE haste, O Lord, and help afford,
Make haste to help me, O my Lord:
Their practices with shame confound
That seek my harmless soul to wound.
With great disgrace let them retire,
Whoever do my hurt desire:
Let them that make my grief their game,
Be turned back with utter shame.
Most glad and joyful let them be
Who-ever do seek after thee:
And those that thy salvation love,
Say, ever-blest be God above.
But I am poor and under-trod,
Make haste to help me, O my God:
Thou art my hope, my help and stay,
Come, Lord, and make no more delay.
HYMN 425. Spiritual Government of Christ figured in Solomon, or, A prayer for
the King.
Psalm. 72.1, 2.
THE King, O God, the King's dear Son
instruct in thy Decrees:
That Justice may be duly done,
to men of all degrees.

and God shall also bless
The little Hills to yield increase,
by means of righteousness

that worldly comforts lack,
And he shall save poor needy men,
and break the oppressors back.

the people great and small,
So long as Sun and Moon endure,
to Generations all.

upon the mowen Grass,
As showers that water all the earth,
whatever way they pass.

and great the peace shall be:
Until the Moon surcease to shine,
Amen, Amen, say we.
HYMN 426. Strength and establishment of Christ his Kingdom.
Psalm. 72.11, 8.
ALL Kings shall worship Christ the Lord,
before him falling down:
All Nations shall with one accord
do homage to his Crown.
And his Dominion shall extend
from Sea to Sea, throughout:
And from the River to the end
of all the Earth about.
9, 10.
The dwellers in the deserts must
before him bow full low,
His enemies shall lick the dust,
and great submission show.
The farthest Kingdoms shall present
their offerings to this King;
The Islands and the Continent,
their Gifts to him shall bring.
15, 17.
And people then continually
shall pray for, and proclaim
His Kingdoms great felicity,
and daily praise his Name.
His Name shall shine from East to West,
as Sunbeams never dim:
And Nations all shall call him blessed,
as being blessed in him.
18, 19.
Now bless the Lord with one accord,
the God of Israel,
Who only brings to pass the things,
that every where excel.
And spread the fame of his Great Name
always and altogether;
And fill the Earth with his known worth,
Amen, Amen, for ever.
HYMN 427. (1. METER.)
Argument.
Temptation much assaults the pure in heart,
To see the wicked prosper, while they smart.
Psalm. 73.

and kind to Israel:
To every one that is clean of heart
and keeps his Conscience well.

my feet began to slide,
And through temptation unawares,
my steps were turned aside.

I was with envy grieved:
Beholding the prosperity
wherein the wicked lived.

and firm persuasions then,

nor plagued as other men.
HYMN 428. (2. METER.)
Argument.
The prosperous state the wicked men live in,
Provokes them to commit far greater sin.
Psalm 73.

the wicked as a chain:
And as with Garments they are wrapped
with Rapine and Disdain:

They have beyond desire;

to set oppression higher.

their tongue walks through the Earth:

and much grief it brings forth.

sees he that sits so high?

their riches multiply.
HYMN 429. (3. METER.)
Argument.
The pure in heart (sore scourged) are taught to know
That Worldlings joy soon ends in Worlds of woe.
Psalm. 73.

in vain my heart I purged;

and every morning scourged.

I rashly should condemn,
The Generation of thy Saints,
and judge amiss of them.

'twas hard to apprehend,

I understood their end.

upon a slippery seat;
And in a moment casts them down,
and make their ruin great.
HYMN 430. (4. METER.)
Argument.
The Worldlings joy is but a Dream,
The pure in heart have joys Supreme.
Psalm. 73.

to desolations path;
They are consumed utterly
with terrors of thy wrath:

so thou, O Lord most high,
When thou awak'st, thou shall despise,
their Image utterly.

my reins were pricked with pain,

a beast before thee plain:

thy right hand holds me fast,

to glory at the last.
HYMN 431. (5. METER.)
Argument.
God's the sure portion of the pure in heart,
Their sure destruction that from him depart.
Psalm 73.

but thee, in Heaven above:
Nor is there any one on earth
like thee that I can love.

but God does fail me never;
The strengthner of my heart is he,
and heritage for ever.

and unto Idols bow,
Shall their deserved ruin meet,
and utter overthrow,

and in the Lord I Will trust;
That I may show forth all his works
to be both good and just.
HYMN 432. Strength of sinners subdued. Or, Habitation of Cruelty suppressed. 1.
METER.
Psalm 74.11.
WHY do thou, Lord, thy judgments spare,
and thy right hand withdraw?
O pluck it from thy bosom bare
to keep thy foes in awe.

the turtle-doves dear soul:
Forget not thy poor flock, O God,
which bears too long control.

the Earth's a darksome Den,
And full of Habitations hard,
possessed by cruel men.

and blushing turn their back:
Nor let the poor to praise thy Name
a just occasion lack.

think how the fools defame,
And what contempt it daily draws
upon thy sacred Name.

forget not, Lord, to cease:
The tumults that against thee rise,
continually increase.
HYMN 433. (2. METER.)
Argument.
Strength of Leviathan subdued.
Pharaoh overthrown in the Wilderness.
Psalm. 74.12.
O God thou art my King of old,
and thou do still set forth
Thy saving mercies manifold
in midst of all the Earth.

by thy great strength and force,
Thou brok'st the Dragon's head in these
returning to their course.

were broken there by thee:
Which to thy flock in desert place,
was meat and drink to see.

from rocks both hard and high:
Thy powerful hand did make likewise
deep Rivers to be dry.

by thy decree does run:
Thou also have prepared the light,
and formed the brighter Sun.

of all the earth throughout:
Both Summer heat, and Winter frosts
thy hand did bring about.
Psalm. 72.18.
Let Israel's God, the King of Kings
be praised for evermore,
Who only does such wondrous things,
praise ye the Lord therefore.
HYMN 434. Temptations encountered and overcome.
All People, etc.
Psalm. 77.7, 8.
WILL God cast off eternally,
and is his favor clean removed?
Is mercy quite and clean set by,
his promise past, but never proved?
9,
Has God forgotten to be kind,
and wholly left compassions path?
His tender mercies all confined,
and has he shut them up in wrath?
10.
But this, said I, full well appears
to be mine own infirmity:
But I will call to mind the years
of his right hand that is most high.
11.
I will remember, and unfold
the mighty works of God the Lord:
The wonders which he wrought of old,
surely (said I) I will record.
HYMN 435. The Safe Conduct.
Psalm 77.15.
THOU have, O God, with powerful hand
redeemed thy people, Jacob's Race,
And Joseph's from proud Pharaoh's Land,
conducting them in desert place.
16.
The Waters, Lord, had sight of thee,
the Waters saw, and were afraid
Thy presence and thy power to see:
the depths of Seas were sore dismayed.
17.
The Clouds poured down their watery load,
the Skies a thundering sound forth sent:
Thine Arrows were dispersed abroad,
shot from the flaming Element.
18.
In Heaven was thy thunder heard,
thy lightnings did the world surround,
Earth shook and trembled sore afeard,
thy way was in the Seas profound.
19, 20.
Thy paths were in the waters deep,
thy footsteps now none understand:
Thou lead'st thy folk like flocks of sheep
by Moses and by Aaron's hand.
HYMN 436. The time of Trouble complained of.
Psalm 79.5.
HOW long will thou be angry, Lord?
for ever! till we die!
And shall thy jealousy b^ stirred
to burn perpetually?
9.
Help us, O God, Our strength and stay,
thy Glory to record:
Save us, and purge our sins away,
for thy Name sakes, O Lord.
8.
Our former foul iniquity
remember now no more:
Let Grace prevent us speedily,
for we are humbled sore.
2. PART.
Ibidem. Psalm. 79.8, 9.13.
DO not record against us, Lord,
our sins done long ago:
Draw nigh apace with tender Grace,
for we are very low.
O Lord, let some sweet comfort come,
for sorrows sharp and keen,
And for the years of sighs and tears
that we have lately seen.
So we thy flock, and Pasture-stock
shall praise thee evermore,
And pre-ingage each following age,
to keep like praise in store.
HYMN 437. The Vine of Israel prayed for.
Psalm 80.8, 9.
A Noble Vine of Israel,
thou did from Egypt bring:
The Heathen^folk thou did expel,
and plant it here to spring.
Sufficient room for it to shoot,
preparing by thy hand,
And when it once had taken root,
it filled all the Land.
10, 11, 12.
Her goodly boughs like Cedars sprout,
her shade the hills did hide:
Her boughs and branches were set out
from Sea to River side:
Why have thou then broke down of hers
the quick-set hedges so,
That all the transient passengers
do pluck her as they go?
13, 14, 15.
It Is wasted by the wood-land Boar,
wild Beasts from neighboring coasts
Devour thy Vine, return therefore
we pray thee, Lord of Hosts.
Look down from Heaven and behold,
and visit this thy Vine,
And Vineyard planted here of old
by that right hand of thine.
79.13.
So we thy flock and pasture-stock
shall praise thee evermore:
And shall engage each following age
to keep like praise in store.
HYMN 438. Throne of Israel re-established.
Psalm. 80.17.
UPhold the man of thy right hand,
the Son of man sustain:
Made strong by thee, for thee to stand,
Lord, make him strong again.
18.
So shall not we go back from thee,
O quicken us for this end:
And faithful suppliants we shall be
upon thee to attend.
19.
Lord God of Hosts our hearts incline,
and turn them unto thee:
Let Grace Divine upon us shine,
and safe our souls shall be.
HYMN 439. Trial of Loyalty, or Isreal's ingratitude.
Have mercy, etc.
Psalm 81.7.
NOW hearken and give ear
to me, my people dear:
O Israel, I will testify
to thy conviction clear.

be no strange God at all,
Nor evermore shall thou adore,
or on strange Gods shall call.

who brought thee graciously
With powerful hand from Egypt Land,
and servile tyranny.
Thy mouth now open wide
in prayer, to be supplied:
And sure I will thy prayers fulfill,
but Israel still denied.

even left them to their lust,
To walk as their own counsels were,
destructive to their trust.
HYMN 440. Trial of Israel, and attest of God's favor.
Have mercy, etc.
Psalm. 81.13.
MY people, O that ye
had hearkened unto me:
That Israel had walked so well,
as after my Decree.

their adversaries rude:
And turned my hand to clear the Land
of all their enemies lewd.

have bowed and been prostrate,
But Israel's time had been in prime,
and born eternal date.

the finest of the Wheat:
And made the Rock a hony-stock
distilling plenty great.
2. METER.
To the Tune of the old 111. or 120. Psalm.
Psalm. 81.13.
O That my people dear
Had bowed a willing ear
to that which I did say,
And O that Israel
Had sought to please me well
by walking in my way!
I should have soon subdued
Their adversaries rude:
and turned my powerful hand
Against their enemies,
Whoever durst arise
my people to withstand.
The haters of the Lord
Should all with one accord
have bowed and been prostrate:
But as for Israel's time
It should have been in prime,
and born eternal date.
I would have made them eat
The finest of the Wheat
that stands in the shock:
And in my favor free
Have satisfied thee
with Honey from the rock.
HYMN 441. Mighty men warned.
All people, etc.
Psalm. 82.
Among the Gods, God takes the room,
to judge among the great and high:

accepting persons partially?

do justice to the weak and poor;

and rid them from the evil doer.

nor will they better understand,
In wilful blindness on they go,
unto the ruin of the Land.
The Earths foundations are decayed,
all out of course and order runs:

are the most high Jehovah's Sons.

like former Princes ye shall fall:

for thine alone are Nations all.
HYMN 442. Tribulation and Woe to the wicked.
Psalm. 83.1.
LORD be not still, hold not thy tongue,
behold how furiously
Thy hateful foes in tumults throng,
and lift their heads on high.

or straw which winds disperse:

of fire that burns so fierce.
As kindling flames on Mountains vast
with fury all deform:

and fright them with thy storm.
That men may know that thou whose Name
is called Jehovah great,

and have the Sovereign seat.
HYMN 443. True love to Ordinances. 1. METER.
Psalm 84.1, 2.
HOW amiable are thy Tents,
Lord God of Hosts, to me?
My soul does long, yea even faints
thy Sacred Courts to see.
My heart and flesh cry out for thee,
the everliving God:
O when shall I come near and see
the place of thine abode!
4, 10.
O happy they that hold their place
within thy house to dwell:
For in thy Courts a days short space
a thousand does excel.
Much rather would I keep a door,
and in thy house remain,
Than dwell with all the pomp and store
in tents of the profane.
11.
For God a Sun and Shield will be,
with Grace* and Glory bright:
And no good thing withold will he
from them that walk upright.
Lord God of Hosts (whose Glory reigns)
how happy a man is he
That though debarred the outward means,
yet puts his trust in thee.
HYMN 444. Affection to Ordinances. 2. METER.
Psalm. 84.
LORD God of Hosts, how lovely fair,
thy Tabernacles be!
My longing Soul would fain repair,
thy sacred Courts to see.
My flesh and heart cry out amain
for thee the living God,
O when shall I come near and see
the place of thine abode!
Most happy therefore are those men
that dwell so nigh thy Courts,
And they whose zeal does carry them
to such Divine resorts.
From strength to strength they walk full fast,
through growth in Grace and Love:
Until they come to God at last,
in Sion (there) above.
2. PART.
One day, O Lord, of prayer and praise
spent in thy Courts of Grace,
Is better than a thousand days
in any other place.
Much rather would I keep a door
where God his Grace presents,
Than have my dwelling evermore,
in Sinners furnished Tents.
For God the Lord Jehovah is,
a constant Sun and Shield,
He will vouchsafe his Grace to his,
and Glory freely yield.
And no good thing withold will he
from them that walk upright,
Lord God of Hosts, so blessed they be
that trust upon thy might.
HYMN 445. (3. METER.)
Argument.
Zeal to the Temple quells their labors hard,
As they did take long journeys thither-ward.
Psalm. 84.

Lord God of Hosts, to me?

thy Sacred Courts to see.
My heart and flesh cry out for thee
the ever-living God,

to find that blessed abode.
The Swallow builds her nest full close,
her young ones there to bring;
Even to thine Altar, Lord of Hosts,
my God and Glorious King.

that still do give thee praise:

that minds thy Servants ways.
Baca-plain
do make thereof a Well;
Or use the pools there filled with rain,
and difficulties quell.

with an unwearied will,
Till all do come to God at last
in Sions Sacred Hill.
HYMN 446. (2. PART.)
Argument.
Church freedom Saints account their bliss,
And choicest blessings do not miss.
Psalm. 84.

O God of Jacob hear:

of thine anointed dear.

spent in thy Courts of Grace,
Is better than a thousand days
in any other place.
Much rather would I keep a door,
where God his Grace presents,
Than have my dwelling evermore
in sinners furnished Tents.

a constant Sun and Shield,
He will vouchsafe his Grace to his,
and Glory freely yield.
And no good thing withold will he
from them that walk upright:

that trust upon thy might.
DOXOLOGY.
Let Isreal's God the Lord most high
be ever blessed therefore,
From first to last perpetually,
Amen, for evermore.
HYMN 447. ( Psalm 85.10.)
Argument.
Truth springing out of the Earth,
Or our Blessed Savior's Birth.
(...).
MErcy and truth (now we may say)
are sweetly met together:
And righteousness and peace (this day)
have kindly kissed each other.

(by Christ a Savior given)
And righteousness (by his sweet birth)
has looked down from Heaven.

shall give us each good thing:
And make our Land a fruitful one,
and great increase to bring.

shall go before his face,
To guide us by example sure
in his good ways of Grace.
Psalm. 41.13.
Let Israel's God the Lord therefore
be praised altogether:
From first to last for evermore,
Amen, Amen, for ever.
HYMN 448. (2. METER.)
Argument.
The Church redeemed from Captive State is glad,
He prays that full deliverance may be had.
Psalm 85.
LORD thou have dealt most favorably
with Jacob's Land of late,
And turned our sad captivity
into a free estate.
Unto thy people thou did please
to seal a pardon free:
Their grievous sins and trespasses
are covered all by thee.
Thou have removed from the path
where all thine anger lay,
And from the fierceness of thy wrath,
have turned thy self away.
Turn us, O God, our Savior, thus
with thee for to comply:
And cause thine anger toward us
to cease perpetually.
Will thou be angry evermore
and not thy wrath recall?
Will thou draw out thy wrath so sore
to Generations all?
Will thou not quicken us again,
and so far set us free,
That we thy people which remain,
may much rejoice in thee?
HYMN 449. (2. PART.)
Argument.
The Church redeemed and warned gives God the praise,
He prophesies great good in Gospel Days.
NOW will I hear attentively
what God the Lord will say,
In hope of true tranquillity
to follow many a day.
For to his Saints and people dear
the Lord will utter peace,
But let them take a warning here
and former follies cease.
And sure the Lord's salvation is,
Nigh them that fear his Name,
That Glory may dwell here with his,
and fill our Land with fame.
Mercy and truth together meet
whilst Christ the Kingdom sways:
And righteousness and peace do meet
in Glorious Gospel-Days.
And truth shall spring from humane race
by Christ our Savior's Birth;
And righteousness looks down with Grace,
from Heaven to bless the Earth.
Yea God shall give us each good thing,
with righteousness and peace:
And he shall make our Land to bring
abundance of increase.
That sure example (for our sake)
the righteousness of God
Shall go before, and make us take
the way that he has trod.
( Psalm 86. to v. 7.)
HYMN 450.
Argument.
The Saints Calamity, and God's propensity, Strong Arguments of pity.

All People, etc.
LORD bow thine ear, attend my cry,
for I am poor and in the dust:
Preserve my righteous soul, for I
in thee, my God, do put my trust.
Thy mercy, Lord, to me extend,
and hearken to my mournful voice;
Daily my cries to thee ascend,
O make thy Servants soul rejoice.
Thou, Lord, art good for rvermore,
to pardon sins art still inclined;
And all that do thy grace implore,
shall thine abundant mercy find.
To thee I humbly make address,
Lord, hear my prayer, my voice attend;
I Will call on thee in my distress,
for thou will me an answer send.
HYMN 451. Turning, or conversion of the Gentiles. 2. METER.
All People, etc.
Psalm 86.8, 9.
AMong the Gods there is none like thee,
nor any works like thine, O Lord:
All Nations whom thou made to be,
shall come to thee with one accord.
10.
With Adoration they shall come
to glorify the Holy One:
For the great God, great things has done;
yea thou, O God, art God alone.
Psalm 106.48.
Let Israel's God the Lord therefore
be blessed and praised yet again:
And let all people evermore
say cheerfully, Amen, Amen.
HYMN 452. Turning the Gentiles, or Sions Glory. 1. METER.
Psalm 87.
IN Holy Hills the Groundwork lies
of Sion's Edifice:
Jacob's Land
the Lord does love and prize.

thy Converts are proclaimed:
Egypt for one, and Babylon,
I to my friends have named.
Philistia, Tire, and Ethiop' there
was born, and made an heir:
Sion, they shall point and say,
did this and that man bear.
And the most High shall stablish her,
and such men's birth refer
Sion Mount: so make his count
when he does register.
As well the voice of him that sings,
as he that tunes the strings

in thee are all my Springs.
HYMN 453. Turning the Gentiles to the Church. 2. METER.
All People, etc.
Psalm 87.
THE Church well built upon the word
is consecrated to the Lord:
Who bears to Sion great respect,
and chiefly to his own Elect.
Most Glorious things of her foretold
in Gospel-days we shall behold;
The Gentiles shall convert and dwell,
as heirs of life with Israel.
Tidings shall be of many a man
born there a famous Christian:
And God shall stablish them and theirs,
and count them his adopted heirs.
Then Lord our giving thanks to thee
the music of our souls shall be:
For all the Springs of Grace and Skill,
are made to flow from Sion-hill.
HYMN 454. Validity of promises, or faithfulness of God's Chastisements.
All People, etc.
Psalm 89.30, 31.
IF David's seed my Law forsake,
and do not execute my will:
If they infringe the Laws I make,
and do not my Commands fulfill.
32.
Then will I visit and chastise
their bold transgressions with the rod:
Correcting their Iniquities
with stripes and punishments (says God)
33.
But of my loving kindness yet
I will not wholly him bereave;
Nor will my faithfulness permit
to fail, and take a final leave.
34.
My Covenant with my faithful King
I Will not reverse, nor quite eclipse:
Nor will I alter any thing
that I have spoken with my lips.
Psalm 106.48.
Let Israel's God the Lord most high
be ever blessed and praised therefore:
And let all people magnify
his blessed Name for evermore.
HYMN 455. Vanishing of Life.
Psalm 90.10.5.
THE days of our determined years
are threescore years and ten,
And if at fourscore strength appears,
that strength is weakness then.
So speedily we pass away,
and we are quickly gone:
Just like a flood that makes no stay,
but hastily runs on.
6, 12.
Like Grass which in the morning grows,
but is cut down at night:
At morning fresh and fair it shows,
at evening withers quite.
LORD, let our frail mortality
be so well understood,
That we may wisely learn of thee
for our eternal good.
HYMN 456. Vanishing of Life, or the short age of man.
All People, etc.
Psalm 90.10.
THE common age of mortal men
is counted threescore years and ten:
And if to fourscore some attain,
Their life is but a lengthned pain.
So quickly comes it to decay,
And suddenly we drop away:
Lord teach the numbering of our days,
To bring our hearts to wisedoms ways.
HYMN 457. Wishing for good times.
Psalm. 90.13.
REturn, O Lord, how long a space
let it repent thee much,
Touching thy Servants woeful case,
whose sufferings have been such.
14.
O satisfy us speedily
with thy compassions kind,
That all our days may yield us joy,
and gladness cheer our mind.
15.
As thou have sent us sorrows keen,
so send us comforts glad,
For days and years that we have seen
so sorrowful and sad.
16.
O let thy work appear unto
thy servants every one,
Thy Glory to their Children show,
when we are dead and gone.
The Lord our God shine on his Church,
and grace our joint endeavor,
O prosper thou our handy-works,
and stablish them for ever.
HYMN 458. ( Psalm. 91.)
Argument.
Choice Saints preserved in pestilential times,
While Sinners smart for unrepented crimes.
All People, etc.

Rests in a safe and quiet seat;
For God's or'e-spreading providence
Shall shadow him for his defense.

He is my refuge, hope and stay,
My fortress where I safe abide;
My God, in him I will confide.

And noisome pestilential air;

His truth, thy buckler be, and shield.

For any terror of the night:
Nor for the arrow that makes way,
And flies with deadly stroke by day.

And round about with slaughter fills,
Walking in darkness, or noontide,
Thou shall not fear, nor be annoyed.

Yet thou shall not be hurt at all;

What wicked men's reward shall be.
HYMN 459. (2. PART.)
Argument.
The true believers tread the Dragon down,
Attain choice comforts, and at length the Crown.

Thy refuge and thy safe abode,

Nor plague thy dwelling shall annoy.

To keep thee in thy ways at large:

Lest thy foot stumble to thy hurt.

Tread the Asp and Dragon under feet;

I will from dangers set him free.
I Will set him high, protect and own,
Because that he my Name has known:

And in his trouble I Will stand by.
I Will send him safe deliverance,
And unto honor him advance:

Will show him my Salvation.
HYMN 460. ( Psalm 92.)
Argument.
The Ancient Sabbath celebrated here,
For providence to the Saints most dear.
All People, etc.

The Loving Kindness of the Lord,
And to sing praises cheerfully
Unto thy Name, O thou most high.

Thy Loving Kindness of such worth;
And every night for to express
The record of thy faithfulness.

With Psaltery and Songs consent,
And on the Harp with solemn sound
To make thy Glorious Name renowned.

With thy great works which I record:
And in thy handy-works will I
Triumph, O Lord, exceedingly.
HYMN 461. (2. PART.)
Argument.
God's Providence cannot be descried
By brutish men: but God is magnified.

Thy thoughts are far too deep to search;

Nor does a fool this thing discern.

And all ill doers in pomp surpass,
It is that they should altogether
Be blasted, and destroyed for ever.
DOXOLOGY.

For ever to ETERNITY:
Let Israel's God be praised therefore,
From first to last for evermore.
HYMN 462. Vertuousness or fruitfulness of the Saints in age. 2. METER.
All People, etc.
Psalm 92.12.
LIke to the Palm the Just shall be
(That ever-flourishing fruitful tree)
And spread abroad as he comes on
Like Cedars of Mount Lebanon.

Has planted in his Holy Place,
Shall flourish there, and spread abroad
Within the Courts of our Great God.

They shall be fat and flourishing:

In whom is no unrighteousness.
HYMN 463. Vertuousness or Victoriousness of God's Power. 1. METER.
Psalm. 93.
THE Lord as King aloft does reign,
in Glory shining bright:
His strength and power appears plain,
for he is girt with might:
The Lord likewise the Earth has made,
and settled it so sure,
No might can make it move and fade,
it ever does endure.
E're that the world was made or wrought
thy seat was set on high:
Before all time that can be thought
thou art eternally.
The floods, O Lord, the floods arise,
they swell against the shore:
They raise their waves unto the sky,
and make the waters roar.
Yet though the storms appear in sight,
though Seas do rage and swell,
The Lord is strong and more of might,
for he on high does dwell.
And sweetly reigns he over us,
keeping his Covenant sure:
And Holiness becomes thy house
for ever to endure.
HYMN 464. Vertuousness or Victoriousness of God's Power and Promises. 2. METER.
Psalm 93.
THE Lord does reign eternally
arrayed in beauty bright:
He is most high in Majesty,
and girts himself with might.
The world he stablish'd still to last,
thou have prepared thy Throne:
Of old thou have confirmed it fast,
thou art the eternal one.

the floods lift up their waves:
Up to the skies their uprore flies,
their voice with tumult raves.

far more of might than these,
Though numerous store of waters roar,
and mighty waves of seas.

are sure, and alter never:
Pure holiness does deck and dress
thy house, O Lord, for ever.
HYMN 465. Vocation to public Worship, or lowly Adoration.
Have mercy, etc.
Psalm 95.1 -- 7.
COME sing with cheerfulness
loud Songs of sweet delight,
With one accord, before the Lord,
our Rock of saving might.
Into his presence press,
hearts truly thankful bring,
And make a noise, exciting joys,
and Psalms unto him sing.
Because the Lord is known
a mighty God to be:
The Sovereign King in governing
above all Gods is he.
Within his hands alone
the earths foundation lies,
The strength and might and towering hight
of hills is his likewise.
The Sea is his deep Ford,
for he did make the same,
And by his hand the solid Land
received its form and frame.
O come bow to the Lord,
before him let us fall:
Let us adore and kneel before
the Lord that made us all.
HYMN 466. ( Psalm. 96.)
Argument.
The Psalmist celebrates sweet Gospel-Days,
Idols are slighted: God claims all the praise.
All People, etc.
NOW sing a new Song to the Lord
O all ye people of the Earth:
Bless ye the Lord, his Name record
in cheerful Songs of joy and mirth.
From age to age, O do not spare
his sweet and saving health to show:
His wonders rare and fame declare,
that Nations all on Earth may know.
For he excels in Sovereignty,
and infinitely has the odds;
And much must he exalted be,
and greatly feared above all Gods.
For Heathen Gods are vanity,
mere Idols are they every one:
But verily the Lord most high
created the Celestial Throne.
Before him honor stands in sight,
with Majesty that is Divine:
Adored might and beauty bright
do in his Sanctuary shine.
O give unto the Lord's great Name,
ye numerous Kindreds of mankind,
Both strength and fame to him proclaim,
for both in one must be conjoined.
HYMN 467. (2. PART.)
Argument.
God's Glory in his Temple shines forth,
All Creatures join with joyfulness and mirth,
To serve the Sovereign Judge of all the Earth.
GIVE to the Lord such Glory due
as his Almighty Name imports,
O bring with you an Offering new,
and come into his sacred Courts.
Adore the Lord in beauty clear
of his Divine and holy place:
From far and near O stand in fear
before his Glorious awful face.
Tell Heathen men Jehovah reigns,
the spacious world has he set fast;
And so sustains that it remains
unshaken ever to the last.
With Justice he shall judge the Earth,
O let the Heaven rejoice therefore,
And let the Earth be filled with mirth,
let Seas and all the billows roar.
Let fields and fruits show high degrees
of joy and mirth with one accord:
And then (with these) the woods and trees,
shall greatly joy before the Lord.
For lo! He comes, He comes afresh
with righteous judgment in his mouth,
To judge all flesh with righteousness,
and people with his sacred truth.
HYMN 468. ( Psalm 97. to v. 7.)
Argument.
Christ reigns and triumphs to his enemies dread;
The Convert Nations may be comforted.
To the Tune of the old 121. Psalm.
THE Lord of Israel does reign,
Let all the Earth rejoice
With high exalted voice:
The Lord his Kingdom does maintain.
Let multitude of Nations
Express their Gratulations.
Thick Clouds and Darkness (as it were)
At Sinai's sacred Hill
Are round about him still:
And righteousness and judgment are
The blessed Habitation
Of his high Throne and station.
A flame of fire that blazeth bright
Before his presence goes,
And burns up all his foes*
His Lightnings to the world gave light;
The Earth that was assembled
With terror saw and trembled.
The Hills did melt like heated Wax,
At presence of the Lord,
By all the Earth adored:
The Heavens declare his righteous Acts,
All people see his Glory,
For it is not transitory.
HYMN 469. Worship of Images accursed. 2. PART.
Psalm 97. v. 7.
COnfusion on them all shall come,
Who can their fancy please
With Graven Images:
That boast themselves of Idols dumb;
O all ye Gods adore him,
And humbly bow before him.
8, 9.
Mount Sion heard, and made great mirth,
And Judah's Daughters joy'd
To see thy Judgments tried:
For thou art high over all the Earth:
Exalted altogether
Above all Gods whatever.
10.
O ye whose love no malice taints,
But grows to Godward still
Hate all things that are ill:
He saves the souls of all his Saints,
And strongly them secures
From hands of evil doers.
11, 12.
And light is sown for righteous men,
And very great delight
For men of heart upright:
Rejoice in God, ye righteous then,
Give thanks to him in telling
His holiness excelling.
HYMN 470. Salvation of Saints. 2. METER.
Psalm 97.
YE lovers of the Lord
hate all that evil is,
For he the souls does guard
of all dear Saints of his:
And saves them
From cruel spite, and crushing might
Of wicked men.
For just men light is sown,
and gladness is up-stor'd,
For each pure hearted one;
ye just joy in the Lord:
Him praise and bless
At the memory of his so high
Pure holiness.
HYMN 471. Worship of the Sovereign Lord. 1. METER.
Psalm 98.
A New Song to the Lord now form,
for rare things he has done:
His right hand and his holy arm
the victory has wone.

his saving health and might:
The Lord his righteousness does show*
in all the Heathens sight.
Israel
he kindly does record:
And all the Earth has seen full well
the Glory of the Lord.

your joyful voices raise:
Make loudest noise with one accord,
and gladly sing his praise.

and Trumpets to him sing:

before the Lord the King.

and both roar out with noise:

clap hands, and join in joys.
Let Creatures all with one accord
rejoice with joy and mirth,

that comes to judge the Earth.
With righteousness and equity
then judge the world shall he,
And all the people generally
with truth and equity.
HYMN 472. Worship of the Supreme Judge. 2. METER.
Ye Children, etc.
Psalm. 98.
SING to the Lord a new made Song,
Whose holy arm, and right hand strong
has wrought rare things victoriously:
The Lord made known his saving might,
His righteousness in open sight
of Heathen men most gloriously.
He called to mind his Truth and Grace
To Israel's House, and every place
has seen the Lord's Salvation:
Make joyful noises to the Lord,
O all the Earth, with one accord
sing praise with acclamation.
Sing to the Lord with Music choice,
With Harp, With Harp, and with the Voice,
and some sweet Psalm-devotion:
Your Trumpets and your Cornets bring
To sound loud praise to Christ our King,
who rules the Earth and Ocean.
Let Seas and all their fullness roar,
The world and dwellers on the shore,
the hills and inundations
Before the Lord! for lo, he comes
With righteous decrees and dooms,
to judge the Lands and Nations.
HYMN 473. Worship performed by the Ancients. 1. METER.
Psalm 99.
THE mighty God his reign begins,
let foes with terror quake:
He sits between the Cherubins,
let Earths foundation shake.
Sion's Towers
is our most Glorious God;
But high above all humane powers,
in all the Earth abroad.

give him the honor wholly:
Extol his great and dreadful Name,
for it is purely holy.

and Judgments he loves well:
Thou do establish equity,
and truth in Israel.

that in his Courts have trod:
Before his footstool bend the knee,
for he is a holy God.
Moses and Aaron in the throng
of Priests, and men of fame:
And faithful Samuel was among
the seekers of his Name.

when they his favor sought:
He in the cloudy pillar spoke,
and they his Judgments wrought.

forgiving them likewise;
Though their inventions with thy rod
thou sorely did chastise.

give him the honor wholly:
And at his holy hill adore,
for our Lord God is holy.
HYMN 474. Worshippers of old, Moses, Aaron and Samuel. 2. METER.
Psalm. 99.
THE Lord the God of Israel reigns,
let Heathens quake to hear:
He sits between the Cherubins,
let the Earth be moved with fear.
The Lord is great in Sion Seat
above all people high:
Let them proclaim his dreadful Name
so full of sanctity..
This mighty King loves Judgmen^ well,
thou do establish right:
Thou execut'st in Israel
just Judgment by thy might.
O then applaud the Lord our God,
extol his Name alone:
And falling at his footstool flat
adore the holy one.
Moses and Aaron with his Priests,
and Samuel anciently
Among his suppliants made requests,
and he did make reply.
To them aloud, he in the Cloud
and fiery pillar spoke:
They kept with trust his Judgments just,
and laws which he did make.
Thou did them hear, O Lord our God,
a pardoning God wast thou:
Though thou did scourge them with thy rod;
and not their sins allow.
O then applaud the Lord our God,
and at his holy Throne,
His Name adore for evermore,
for he is a holy One.
HYMN 475. Zeal in public Worship. 1. METER.
Psalm. 100. Deuteronomy. 32.18.
SHout to the Lord in every place
O all ye lands and tongues:

with Gladness and with Songs.

he made us every one:
Not we our selves, we are his flock,
and pasture people known.

praise in his Courts proclaim:
Be thankful to him, and speak good
of his most holy Name.

his mercy never fades,
The truth of his eternal word
endures from age to age.
Rev. 1.5.
To God the Father and the Son
and holy Ghost therefore,
Be Glory as at first was done,
and shall be evermore.
HYMN 476. Zeal in the public Worship: 2. METER.
Psalm. 100.
MAKE joyful noises to the Lord,
O all ye Nations of the Earth:
Serve him with joy, his praise record,
come in his sight with Songs of mirth.
Know that the Lord is God alone,
we are the flock which he does keep:
His workmanship, and not our own,
his people and his Pasture-sheep.
Enter his Gates with thankfulness,
and come with joy into his Courts:
Great gratitude to him express,
and bless his Name in full^resorts.
For lo, the Lord is good and kind,
his mercy everlasting is:
His truth all Generations find
for evermore assured to his.
HYMN 477. A Pattern of Princely Government. 1. METER.
Psalm. 101.
LORD, I will sing of mercy sweet,
and judgment to thy praise:

in all thy perfect ways.
When will thou Lord fulfill thy word,
and I shall do my part;
To order my whole Family
with uprightness of heart.

before mine eyes to be;
I hate their work that turn aside,
it shall not cleave to me.

and have no more access,
And I will no such persons know
as practice wickedness.

I will cut off (be sure)
The stout in heart whose looks are high
I will not once endure.

that they may dwell with me:
And they that press for perfectness
my servants then shall be.

within my house to dwell:
Nor shall he in my sight remain
that loves lies to tell.

and evildoers condemn:
And quite suppress ungodliness
From God's Jerusalem.
HYMN 478. A Pious Prince described.
The mighty God, etc.
2. METER. Psalm 101.
OF Mercy and of Judgment I will sing,
and, Lord, my Song I dedicate to thee,
And Wisely will I walk in every thing:
when will thou come, Lord, and establish me?
I will not set before me a Temptation
To any ill, but ever shun the occasion.
I hate the work of them that turn aside,
there shall no such corruption cleave to me:
The froward heart with me shall not abide,
no wicked man my favorite shall be.
The secret sland'rer I will quite cashier,
Nor will permit proud men to domineer.
Mine eyes shall note the faithful of the Land,
my house and house-Communion to enjoy:
And he that walks after God's command
shall be my servant whom I will employ:
My house shall harbor none that craft conspire,
Nor will I suffer in my fight a Liar.
I will destroy the wicked of the Land,
and take a care to cut them off betimes:
And I will cleanse my Kingdom out of hand
of persons that commit notorious crimes.
Chiefly Jerusalem God's City pure
Shall soon be purged of every evil doer.
HYMN 479. Appearing of Hope, or Sion'^ Reparation.
Psalm 102.13.
THOU will arise in mercy yet,
and Grace to Sion send,
Because the time for favor set
is now come to an end.

thy servants take delight:
Her very dust is cause enough
of favor in their sight.

shall fear thy holy Name;
And all the kings on Earth shall fear
thy Glory and thy fame.

poor Sion's broken wall,
His Glory then shall shine so fair
it shall appear to all.

and not despise their prayer:
He will regard their humble suit,
with tender love and care.

for ages that succeed,
The people not created yet
shall praise him for this deed.
Israel then
be praised with one accord,
Henceforth for evermore, Amen,
Amen, praise ye the Lord.
HYMN 480. Stability of the Church.
All People, etc.
Psalm 102.25.
OF old, O Lord, thou have laid forth
The strong foundations of the earth:
The Heavens over our head that stand
Are all the works of thine own hand.
26.
And they shall perish (to be sure,)
But thou, O Lord, shall still endure:
And all these Orbs which we behold,
Like to a Garment shall wax old.
And as a Vesture old and worn
Thou shall invest them with new form:
And (from their former state estranged)
Shall change them, and they shall be changed.
27.
But thou, O God, art still the same,
Though Heaven and Earth do change their Frame:
And lo! Thy years shall have no end,
Though all things to corruption tend.
28.
And Lord thy faithful servants seed
Shall still remain (as it is decreed:)
And fixed before thee they shall stay,
When Heaven and Earth shall pass away.
Psalm. 72.19.
Let Israel's God be blessed therefore
From first to last for evermore:
And let the whole Earth ring again
With his renown, Amen, Amen.
HYMN 481. Applause of God's Mercies.
All People, etc. Or, O Lord Consider, etc.
1. METER. Psalm. 103.
O Praise the Lord, O praise his Name
my soul and all that in me is:

and mind those benefits of his.

who cured thy grief, and closed thy wound;

and thee with loving kindness crowned.

and Eagle-like, he makes thee young:

for every one that suffers wrong.
Moses he declared,
his deeds to Israel he did show:

to mercy prone, to anger slow.

nor evermore displeased is he:

as justly they deserve to be.

outreach the spreadings of the Sky:

as far as East from West does lie.
HYMN 482. (2. PART.)
All People, etc.
Verse. 13.
GOD pities them that fear his Name,
as Fathers pity their own Sons:

and whence our composition comes.

so fair and pleasant to the view;

and leaves no token where it grew.

does bear an everlasting date,
To them that tremble at his word,
and are the true regenerate.
His righteousness does still endure
to Childrens Children, great and small:

and mind his Laws to do them all.
HYMN 483. (2. METER.)
Argument.
God's pardoning Grace: he makes us to renew
Our youth in age, as Eagles use to do*
Psalm 103.

the Lord's most holy Name:
And let my hearts most inward parts
applaud and spread his fame.

my soul be not unkind:
As one that slights his benefits,
and puts them out of mind.

and cancels all thy score:
Who heals thy infirmity,
and does thy strength restore.

and crowned thee from above,
With mercies free enlarged to thee,
and with his tender love.

with blessings that are good:
Thy flower of youth (as the Eagles does)
he makes afresh to bud.
HYMN 484. (2. PART)
Argument.
God vindicates the oppressed, as Israel found.
His mercies far beyond our sins abound.
GOD does express his righteousness
and judgment to the blessed,
To vindicate the desolate
and all that are oppressed.
Moses he did show,
his acts to Israel's seed:

and merciful indeed.
To anger still inflexible,
but plentiful in Grace;

nor keep his wrath long space.

according to our sin:
Nor has he thus rewarded us
as our deserts have been.
HYMN 485. (3. PART.)
Argument.
God's mercies larger than from East to West,
Parents have no such pity in their breast.

Than Earths inferior Frame;
So ample his compassion is
to them that fear his Name.

a distance mavelous:
So far, I say, he puts away
our Trespasses from us.

is toward their Children dear;
So does the Lord much Grace afford
to them that do him fear.

how quickly we are crushed:
He calls to mind out brittle kind,
and knows we are but dust.
HYMN 486. (4. PART.)
Argument.
Man's frailty tendered by Gods clemency,
His goodness to the Saints posterity.

and quickly he must yield:
He spreads as the fading Grass,
and flower of the field.

upon it, it is gone:
And then must it for ever quit
the Ground it grew upon.

for them that fear his Name;
His righteousness so fathomless
may Childrens Children claim.

his Covenant to fulfill:
And think of his Divine Decrees,
to do them with good will.
HYMN 487. (5. PART.)
Argument.
God's Sovereign Throne where Hosts of Angels wait:
Each Faithful one his praise does celebrate.

a Throne without decay:
And over all in general
thy Kingdom bears the sway.

in strength that pass us all;
Ye that fulfill his holy will
still harkening to his call.

his Ministers on high,
That do what his good pleasure is
with all alacrity.

of his Dominion whole,
Bless ye the Lord with one accord,
O bless the Lord my soul.
HYMN 488. Applause of God's Greatness. 1. PART.
Psalm 104.
MY Soul, O bless, and magnify
the Lord thy God so Great,
Who decks himself with Dignity,
and Majesty complete.

and with a Garment fair:
Who stretches out the Heavens bright
as Curtains in the Air.

his Chamber beams he binds:
The Clouds his Charet represent,
he walks on winged Winds.

not like our mortal seed:
His Ministers a flame of fire
to pass his work with speed.
HYMN 489. Applause of the Creation. 2. PART.
Psalm. 104.5.
THE Lord by his Almighty hand
the Earths Foundation laid,
So sure that it shall ever stand,
although by nothing stayed.

was clothed with the deep:
The waters had their station
above the mountains steep.

and could no longer stay:
Thy thundering voice did so constrain,
that they made have away.

and down the dales apace:
Imbodying in the Ocean
which was their founded place.

by setting them a Bound,
That they may never turn again
to cover all the Ground.
HYMN 490. Blessings of Provision applauded. 3. PART.
Psalm. 104.10.
FResh Springs into the Vales he sends,
which run among the Hills:

here take and drink their fills.
Wild Asses here their thirst do slake,

And nests for habitations make,
and sing among the boughs.

the Earth with Rain has stored:
Thy works the whole Earth satisfy
with fruits which they afford.

and Herbs for man's own use:
Convenient food, with full increase
he makes the Earth produce.
Psalm. 41.13.

and Oil to slick the face,
And bread which strengthens every part,
the heart in chiefest place.
Let Israel's God the Lord most high
be blessed and praised therefore,
From time to time eternally
henceforth for evermore.
HYMN 491. Blessings of the Creatures, viz. Plants, Planets. 4. PART.
Psalm. 104.16.
THE trees of God no sap do want,
those goodly Cedar-trees
Which he in Lebanon did plant,

The Stork in stately fir-trees dwells,

The Conies in the hollow Cells
of stony Rocks do sit.

and thou ordain'st it so:
And when to set none tells the Sun,
for he the time does know.
Let Israel's God the Lord most high
be blessed and praised therefore:
From time to time eternally
henceforth for evermore.
HYMN 492. Blessings ordained for man. 5. PART.
Psalm 104.20.
THOU make darkness over the Earth,
and darkness makes the night:
And then the Forest-beasts creep forth
whom daytime did affright.

of God do seek their meat:

together make retreat.
In secret Dens they closely lurk,

To set upon and ply his work,
till evening calls him in.
Let Israel^s God the Lord most high
be magnified therefore,
From time to time eternally
henceforth for evermore.
HYMN 493. Blessings rich and plentiful by Land and Sea. 6. PART. 1. METER.
Psalm. 104.24.
HOW manifold, O Lord, are those,
the works of thine own hand?
All which thy wisdom did compose,
thy riches fill the Land.

wherein's a huge increase*
Of creeping things that seek their prey,
both small and greater beasts.

over the waters thin:
And here is that Leviathan
thou made to play therein.

for seasonable food:
Thy liberal hand thou do extend
and they are filled with good.
28, 29, 30.
They gather what thou do supply,
thou hid'st thy face, they mourn:
Thou take away their breath, they die,
and to their dust return.
Thy Spirit which a while withdrew,
anon thou sendest forth:
And by and by thou do renew
the face of all the Earth.
Let Israel's God the Lord most high
be magnified therefore:
At all times to eternity
Amen, for evermore.
HYMN 494. Blessings showing forth the Glory of God. 7. PART. 1. METER.
Psalm. 104.31.
GOD's Glory, in its perfect state
for evermore shall stand:
The Lord shall joy to contemplate
the works of his own hand.
Upon the Earth he casts his eye,
it trembles at his look:
And if he touch the hills on high,
they smoke at his rebuke.
I Will sing unto the Lord as long
as I escape the Grave:
I Will praise my God with cheerful Song
whilst I my being have.
My thoughts of him much joy shall add,
much joy, I say, to me:
And in the Lord I will be glad,
and great my joy shall be.
But sinners shall be swept away,
and perish from the Earth:
The ungodly shall no more bear sway
when judgment once comes forth.
But thou, my soul, with heart sincere
applaud and praise the Lord:
And let the faithful every where
his Glorious praise record.
HYMN 495. Creation applauded, or service of the Creator. 1. PART. 2. METER.
Give laud, etc.
Psalm 104.1.
NOW must I needs applaud
Jehovah from my heart,
And say, O Lord my God,
how very great thou art?
thou do thee cloth
Most Gloriously with Majesty
and honor both.
Thou coverest thee with light
as with a Garment fair:
Spreading the Heavens bright
as curtains in the air:
who lays likewise
His Chamber-beams in watery stream^
of Cloudy Skies.
Who also has assigned
the Clouds to be his Coach:
And on the winged wind
he walks, and makes approach:
his Angel-Quire
Spiritual Powers, his Ministers
a flame of fire.
HYMN 496. Creation applauded, or service of the Elements. 2. PART. 2. METER.
Give Laud, etc.
Psalm 104.5.
LORD thou have laid of old
the Earths foundation fast:
The Deeps did it enfold,
as with a Garment vast:
the watery flood
Did not remove, but far above
the mountains stood.
At thy rebuke they fled,
thy thundering voice began,
They climbed on mountains head,
and down the valleys ran,
hasting apace
Unto the Ground which thou did found
for their fit place.
Thou set them their bound,
which they shall not pass over,
The shore and solid Ground,
to compass any more:
in all the vale,
Springs run an end, which he did send
into the dale.
Abundant drink they yield
(where through the Hills they burst)
To every beast in field,
wild Asses quench their thirst:
and hard by these
The Birds of Spring do sit and sing
among the trees.
HYMN 497. Creation applauded, or service of the field. 3. PART. 2. METER.
Give laud, etc.
Psalm. 104.13.
JEHOVAH from on high
does water all the Hills:
From Chambers of the Sky,
and all the Earth he fills,
and satisfies
With fruits which thy great works supply,
in plenteous wise.
He does the Grass produce,
for Cattle in the field:
And herbs for man's own use
he makes the Earth to yield:
that he may bring
Out of the Ground food to be found
for every thing.
The heart of man to glad,
he gives generous wine,
And Oil from hence is had,
to make his face to shine:
and also bread,
Whereby man's heart in every part
is strengthened.
HYMN 498. Creation-work applauded, or service of the Fruits. 4. PART. 2. METER.
Give Laud, etc.
Verse. 16.
GOD's trees are full of juice,
those Cedars many a one,
Which he did plant for use
in hilly Lebanon:
where birds make nests,
The Stork to her takes trees of Fir
wherein she rests.
The hills that are on high
wild Goats for refuge climb,
In Rocks the Rabets lie:
the lights distinguish time:
he made the Moon
Seasons to show, the Sun does know
his going down.
Thou do the darkness make,
and darkness makes the Night;
Then all the beasts forsake
their dens that shade the light:
young Lions rore
After their prey, from God do they
seek all their store.
At rising of the Sun
they get together then,
And hastily they run
to hide them in their den:
man goes from home
To work, and ply his husbandry
till evening come.
HYMN 499. Creation work applauded, or service of the Seas. 2. METER. 5. PART.
Give laud, etc.
Psalm 104.24. to 31.
O Lord, how manifold
thy works are, great and small?
Thy wisdom we behold
in making of them all:
the Earth, O Lord,
Is filled with thy benignity,
and richly stored.
So is this spacious deep,
wherein a huge increase
Of countless Creatures keep,
both small and greater beasts:
the Ships here sail,
And (made to swim, and play therein)
that strong-set whale.
All these do wait on thee,
that thou may give them meat
When fitting seasons be:
and what thou giv'st they eat:
thy hand so good
Thou openest wide, they are supplied
and filled with food.
Thou hid'st thy face, they mourn.
thou take away their breath,
They dye, and soon return
unto their dust by death:
thy Spirit goes forth,
Comes a new race, and spreads the face
of all the Earth.
HYMN 500. Creator's Glory celebrated. 6. PART. 2. METER.
Give Laud, etc.
Psalm. 104.31.
THE Glory of the Lord
for ever shall abide:
And in his works well stored,
Jehovah shall be joy'd:
his looks provoke
The Earth to quake, his touch does make
the mountains smoke.
I Will sing unto the Lord
whilst breath prolongs my days,
And whilst I am, record
my God in Songs of praise:
each thought shall add
Sweet joy to me, and, Lord, in thee
I will be glad.
Let sinners be consumed
out of the Earth therefore,
And wicked men be doomed
to have no being more:
but O record
God's praise always, my soul, and say,
praise ye the Lord.
The End of the Fifth Century.
The Sixth Century. OF PSALM-HYMNS.
HYMN 501. Deliverance celebrated. 1. METER.
For the Fifth of November.
Psalm. 105.1, 2, 3.
GIVE thanks to God, call on his Name,
his deeds to men make known:
Sing Psalms to him, and O proclaim
his wonders every one.
Glory in God with cheerful voice,
his holy Name record:
And let the very heart rejoice
of them that seek the Lord.
4, 5, 6, 7.
O seek the Lord, his strength entreat,
for ever seek his face:
Remember well his wonders great
performed in every place.
O ye his servants, Abraham's seed
by your spiritual birth:
The Lord our God he is indeed
his Judgments fill the Earth.
Psalm 44.7. Psalm 57.6. Psalm 106.48.
He saved our Land from the Enemies hand,
and puts our foes to shame:
They dug a pit and fell in it,
themselves must bear the blame.
But Israel's God we must applaud
at all times evermore:
Ye people then say all Amen,
praise ye the Lord therefore.
HYMN 502. (2. METER.)
Argument.
All Israel's Seed and Holy Race
Are charged to seek God's Holy Face,
For Works and Judgments showed in every place.
All People, etc.
Psalm 105.

his mighty deeds to men make known:

and show his wonders every one.

boast in his holy Name always:

O seek him ever all your days.

the wondrous works that he has done;
His Miracles and Judgments rare
which from his holy mouth have come.
Abraham's seed,
his chosen Jacob's Sons by birth;

his Judgments are in all the Earth.
HYMN 503. (2. PART.)
Argument.
Canaan the type of Heaven promised,
His people through strong Kingdoms safely led,
A Princely people chiefly honored.

for evermore to stand full fast:
The faithful word which he designed
a thousand ages to outlast.
Abraham drew,
and next to faithful Isaac swore,

to Jacob as to them before.
An everlasting Covenant
firmly with Israel^s seed to stand:

All Canaans rich and fruitful Land.
An Heritage allotted you

The number was but very few,
and they were also strangers there.

and to another passed along:
From one to another Government

But Kings for their sakes he controlled,

Touch mine Anointed, nor be bold
to do my Prophets any harm.
HYMN 504. (3. PART.)
Argument.
Joseph reserved for many Lands relief,
In time of famine he is preferred in chief.
Psalm. 105.

that Famine should the Land o'respread:
A dreadful Dearth thereby to make,
and wholly break the staff of Bread.
Joseph he had sent before
whom for a slave his Brethren sold,

they lodged him in the irons cold.

the man was tried by God's decree:

to loose him and to set him free.

and Ruler of his Royal wealth;

and bind his Peers as pleased himself.
HYMN 505. (4. PART.)
Argument.
Israel in Egypt harbored: then oppres'd:
Moses sent in: and plagues their Land infest.
Israel into Egypt came,
and Jacob's household there found place
To sojourn in the Land of Ham,

He made them stronger than their foes,

And subtly they dealt with those
the faithful servants of the Lord.
Moses then,
and Aaron his own chosen man,

and wonders in the Land of Ham.

and it was dark, that none could see;
These were not disobedient
unto the word of his decree.
HYMN 506. (5. PART.)
Argument.
The plague of blood, of flies, of lice, of hail
And Caterpillars, Aegypt's Land assail.

and slew their fish; in ponds and springs,

filling the Chambers of their Kings.

in all their Coasts there did remain:

and flames of fire for showers of rain.

their trees in field and wilderness:

and Caterpillars numberless.

and did their dainty fruits devour:
Aegypts firstborn he smote dead
the chief of all their strength and power.
HYMN 507. (6. PART.
Argument.
Israel departs from Egypt Land,
And with an high and mighty hand.

both hired with Gold and Silver bribes;
And there was not a feeble soul
among the Israelitish Tribes.
Egypt when they went,
their terror did so sore affright;

and fire to light them all the night.

he brought them Quails to eat their fill:
And satisfied them with the bread
which he from Heaven did distill.

and thence the waters gushed out:
The deserts dry were over-flown,
as if a River ran about.

and on his Servant Abraham:

with joy and gladness every man.

upon his people he bestowed:
To keep his Laws and his commands,
O spread his praises all abroad.
HYMN 508. Felicity of the Church prayed for.
1. METER.
All People, etc. A Short Collect.
Psalm 106. v. 4.
REmember me with favor, Lord,
such as thou bear to thine own:
Visit me of thine own accord
with thy salvation here made known.

rejoicing with the present age:
And Nations happy neighborhood,
and glory with thine heritage*
6. and Ver. 43.
But we have sinned we must confess,
we have committed heinous crimes:
We have done grievous wickedness,
yet thou have saved us oftentimes.

and gather us from the Heathen Lands:
Thy Name with praises to applaud,
and raise to thee triumphant hands.
Israel's God be blessed then
from first to last for evermore:
And let all people say Amen,
praise ye the Lord our God therefore.
Psalm. 106. (2. METER.)
Argument.
God's praises are past all we can express,
Man's greatest praise is constant righteousness.
Have mercy, etc.

his goodness magnify:
Give thanks to God for he is good,
and good perpetually.

the mighty acts and rare
Of our great God; and show abroad
what all his praises are?

that walk in judgments way:
And he that does the works of truth,
and never goes astray.
Psalm 106. (2. PART.)
Argument.
He prays to find such favor showed
As is upon the Church bestowed.

with Grace and favor free,
Such as thine own have found and known,
vouchsafed to them by thee.
O show me thine own self,
and thy sweet saving health;
That I may he reserved to see
thy chosen peoples wealth.
And that I may rejoice
with glad and glorying voice,
In seeing this great Nations bliss
whereof thou have made choice.
Psalm 106. (3. PART.)
Argument.
Great sins scor'd on: great Mercies are forgot,
And yet through Mercy God destroyed them not.

we all of us, transgress;
Have swerved by, iniquity,
and have done wickedness.

performed in Egypt Land,
Our Fathers old did them behold
but did not understand.
Thy mercies many a one
they did not think upon,
But at the Sea, provoke did they
the Red Sea scor'd it on.

he saved them every one;
For his great Name to spread his fame
and make his power known.
Psalm 106. (4. PART.)
Argument.
The Red Sea dried: the Enemies drowned,
Israel believed, but not with faith so sound.

at his rebuke was dried:
Through deeps profound, as desert Ground,
he did his people guide.

against their haters hand,
And did redeem and rescue them
from the Enemies command.

that were their mortal foes,
And there was none, not any one
remaining to oppose.

for works which he achieved;
And sung his praise for some few days,
but soon their God they grieved.
Psalm. 106. (5. PART.)
Argument.
Israel forgets the Works of God most high;
They lust and surfeit, and by surfeit die.

they presently forgot:
His councils wise, they did despise,
and for them waited not.

within the wilderness:
And tempted God while they abode
in deserts harbourless.

what they desired to have:
But after all he sent their soul
with leanness to the Grave.
Psalm. 106. (6. PART.)
Argument.
Moses and Aaron (Israel's Lamp)
Are envied in the Camp,
The Rebels that against them strive
Are swallowed up alive:
Israel as brutish, more than half,
Adores a Golden-Calf.
Moses they envied
as they in Camps abide;
And envy drew on Aaron too,
whom God had sanctified.

and swallowed up the men
Of Dathan and Abiram's band
and shut her mouth on them.
Horeb they were bold
to make a Calf of Gold,
And worshipped an Image dead
which their own hands did mould.

into a molten Mass
Of Oxes rude similitude,
a Beast that eats Grass.
Psalm 106. (7. PART.)
Argument.
Moses while standing in the Gap
Saves Israel from God's Thunderclap.

of God their Savior's might,
Whose hand alone great things had done
in Egypt, in their ^ight.

in Cham's accursed Land:
Dread things were they at that Red Sea,
performed by his command.

he would those sinners slay
Had not alone his chosen one
been happ'ly in the way.
For when the breach was wide
there Moses did abide;
And turned away his wrath that day,
else had they been destroyed.
Psalm 106. (8. PART.)
Argument.
Israel believes not, but with murmurs base,
Provoke the Lord to the ruin of their Race.

that pleasant Land despise;
They entertain his words in vain,
as deeming them but lies.

and gave not their consents
With willing ear his voice to hear
in his Commandments.

but that he would suppress,
And overthrow them (as a foe)
within the Wilderness.

to overthrow their Seed
By Tyrants hands in Foreign Lands
where they were sure to bleed.
Psalm 106. (9. PART.)
Argument.
Spiritual uncleanness follows Corporal,
Phineas does justice, and was blessed in all.
Have mercy, etc.
Baal the God of Peor
themselves adjoined were:
And ate likewise the Sacrifice
of those dead Idols there.

to anger by their sin
Of new devised Idolatries
and so the plague broke in.
Phineas rose with zeal
just Judgment for to deal:
Which judgment made the plague be stayed,
and Isreal's wounds to heal.

which that act did express;
And Ages all for ever shall
esteem it for no less.
Psalm 106. (10. PART.)
Argument.
Murmuring at Meribah moves the meekest-man,
And Israel spares the worst of Canaan:
They mix with Heathens, learn Idolatry;
From their example are ensnared thereby.
Meribah they spoke,
and did much anger make,
That ill it went (through discontent)
with Moses for their sake.

that unadvised he spoke;
Such error slips from hasty lips
when passion has the stroke.

those Nations utterly,
But spared some, concerning whom
God charged that they should die.
And they were mingled then
among the Heathen men,
And works most vile which did defile,
they also learned of them.

the Idols that were carved,
Which also were to them a snare,
as justly they deserved.
Psalm 106. (11. PART.)
Argument.
Bloody Idolatries and inhumane,
The Land of Israel do most grossly stain;
For all which sins, the Lord most high
Commits them to their Enemy.
Have mercy, etc.

their little Girls and Boys,
Offering the necks of either sex
to Devil-Deities.

which their own Children bled,
Daughter nor Son blind zeal could shun,
for them they offered.
To Idols made of wood
they offered, and made good
The barbarous rites of Canaanites,
and stained the Land with blood.
Psalm 106. (12. PART.)
Argument.
The vile misdeeds of Israel he records,
For which their Enemies must rule as Lords.

with their own works profane
And (basely bent) a whoring went
with their inventions vain.

against them kindled sore,
So that the Lord his own abhorred,
such blame the heritage bore.

and under the commands,
Of Heathen men whose hatred then
they felt in foreign Lands.

oppressed and brought them low,
His people were subjected there
under a foreign foe.
Psalm 106. (13. PART.)
Argument.
The ^ries of Israel in their great distress
Move God to pity and to great redress.

though moved by their designs,
And were brought low (they vexed him so)
with their abhorred crimes.

he pityed their distress,
And gave regard whenas he heard
their cry in bitterness.

for those of Abraham's Race:
Made him repent their punishment
of his abundant Grace.

to use them favorably,
Even all those men that carried them
into captivity.
Psalm 106. (14. and ult. PART.)
Argument.
A prayer for Captives, and redemption free,
That God may have the praise, and none but he.

and gather us from abroad,
From Tyrants hands in foreign Lands,
where we have had abode.
To give thy holy Name
great thanks with laud and fame,
And with great joy triumphantly
thy praises to proclaim.
Israel's God most high
be praised perpetually,
And people then say all Amen,
his Name to magnify.
HYMN 509. Free favors to Captives.
1. PART.
All People, etc.
Psalm. 107.1, 2.
Extol the goodness of our God
whose mercies know no period:
Let God's redeemed ones say so,
whom he redeemed from the foe.
3.
And gathered them out of the Lands
From all their Cruel Enemies hands,
From East and West, from North and South,
O that his praise filled every mouth!
8.
O that all people would record
The gracious goodness of the Lord;
Declaring both with tongue and pen
His wonders done for sons of men.
Psalm 106.48.
Let Israel's God be praised therefore,
From first to last for evermore:
And let the Church with one accord
Resound, Amen; praise ye the Lord.
2. PART.
Free favors to Colonies or Planters.

Psalm 107.4.
THE praise of God let those express
That wandered in the wilderness,
In solitary desert Ground,
Where they no dwelling City found.
5, 6.
Hungry and thirsty by constraint,
Their very souls did in them faint;
Then cried they in their bitter grief
To God, who sent them sweet relief.
7, 8.
He led them forth by ways direct,
Fit Habitations to select:
O that men praised God's goodness then,
And wonders done for sons of men.
3. PART.
Free favors to distressed ones.

Psalm 107.9.10.
THE longing foul God satiates still,
His goodness hungry souls does fill:
Such as in darkness scarce draw breath,
All covered with the shade of death.
11.
Such as by his afflicting hand
Are bound (as with an iron band)
For they rebelled against the Lord,
And scorned the counsels of his word.
12.
Therefore did he bring down their heart
With labor, and they felt the smart:
Yea they fell down with loading pain*
And none could lift them up again.
13, 15.
Then to the Lord they made address,
And he released them from distress:
O that men praised God's goodness then,
And wonders done for Sons of men.
Psalm. 106.48.
Let Israel's God be praised therefore
From first to last, for evermore:
And let the Church with one accord,
Resound Amen, and praise the Lord.
4. PART.
Free favors to Prisoners.

Psalm 107.16.
OFten has God broke Gates of Brass
To let the woeful prisoner pass:
And often has he cut in two
The iron bars to let them through.
14, 15.
He brought them out of Dungeons deep
Whom shades of death did fold and keep:
He brake their bands asunder quite,
O that men prais^d him to the height.
O that all people would record
The gracious goodness of the Lord:
Expressing both with tongue and pen
His wonders done for sons of men.
5. PART.
Free favors to sick-men.

Psalm 107.17.
FULL often are foolish men surpised
With sicknesses, and sore chastis'd:
So high do their transgressions rise,
So foul are their iniquities.
18, 19.
Their souls abhor all kinds of food,
The Gates of death do them include:
Then cry they to the Lord in grief,
And soon he sends them sweet relief.
20, 21.
He sends his word to heal and save,
And keep them from the gaping Grave:
O that men praised God's goodness then*
And wonders done for sons of men.

The Sacrifices of his praise:
And with rejoicing tell abroad
The wonders of Almighty God.
6. PART.
Free favors to such as go to Sea.

Psalm* 107.23, 24.
THEY that go down to Sea in Ships,
And are employed upon the deeps:
These see the work of God most plain,
His wonders on the watery main.
25, 26.
For storms arise at his command,
And make the waves on tiptoes stand;
They mount to Heaven, then down they go,
Making men's souls to melt for woe.
25, 28.
They reel and stagger Drunkard-like,
And are as men whom terror strike:
Then in their grief to God they cry
Who brings them out of misery.
29, 30.
He makes the storm a calm of peace,
So that the raging waters cease:
Then are they glad (the storm blown over)
When Landed at the wished shore.
31.
O now that men would praise the Lord,
His goodness that they would record:
Declaring both with tongue and pen
His wonders to the sons of men.
Psalm 106.48.
Let them exalt his Name likewise
In Congregated Companies:
And in the assembled Elders seat
His praises let them now repeat.
7. PART.
Fruits of the Earth perish or prosper as men behave themselves to Godward.

Psalm 107.33.
SOmetimes does God for sins excess
Turn Rivers to a Wilderness:
And where fresh waters did abound
He turns it to a barren Ground.
34.
A delectable fruitful Land
He turns to heath, and heaps of sand:
And so he punishes the sin
Of wicked men that dwell therein.
35, 36.
And then again he turns and brings
The Wilderness to Water-springs:
And there he makes the hungry dwell
Cities and Towns to furnish well.
37, 38.
To sow their fields, and Vine-yards plant
To yield increase, and feel no want:
He blesses them, they greatly thrive,
And keep their Cattle all alive.
15.
O then that people would record
The loving kindness of the Lord:
And praise him both with tongue and pen
For wonders done for sons of men.
8. PART.
God's several dealings with good and bad men to be regarded.

Psalm 107.39, 40.
AGain they minish and grow less,
Through grief, oppression, and distress:
He pours on great ones great contempt,
From Dens and Deserts not exempt.
41, 42.
Yet sets the poor upon a rock,
And makes his family like a flock:
The just shall joy to see the sight,
And it shall silence envy quite.
43.
Whosoever is wise and will observe
The things that so much heed deserve:
Shall understand and well record
The loving kindness of the Lord.
Psalm 106.48.
Let Israel's God be blessed therefore
From first to last for evermore:
And let all faithful people then
Say cheerfully, Amen, Amen.
HYMN 510. Gratulations to God and supplications for the Church.
Have mercy, etc.
Psalm 108.1, 2.
MY heart, O God, most high,
is fixed steadfastly:
Now will I raise my voice in praise
with songs of melody.
My Glory now awake*
thy Harp and Psaltery take;
And I likewise will early rise,
sweet melody to make.
3, 4.
I Will praise thee with my Songs
amidst the thickest throngs,
That every Land may understand
what praise to thee belongs.
Because thy mercy great
does reach the Heaven's high seat:
Thy truth, O Lord, which we record,
is to the Clouds complete.
5.
Then, Lord, exalt thy fame
above the Heavens frame
And O set forth over all the Earth
thy Glory and thy fame.
2. PART.
Have mercy, etc.
Psalm 108.8, 11, 12.
THAT thy beloved may be
delivered and set free:
Lord save our Land by thy right hand,
and kindly answer me.
For wilt not thou again
lead out our martial train?
Thy help afford in trouble, Lord,
for man's help is but vain.
13. Psalm 106.48.
With God's assistance crowned,
we shall do acts renowned:
The power is his, and he it is
that shall our foes confound.
To Israel's God most high
be praise perpetually:
Ye people then, say all Amen
the Lord to magnify.
HYMN 511. Greatness of Christ's Kingdom. 1. METER.
Psalm 110.
THE Lord unto my Lord thus said,
here at my right hand sit,
Until thine enemies be made
a footstool for thy feet.
Sion bring
the Scepter of thy power:
Rule thou amidst thy foes O King,
in that successful hour.

(submitting to thy Grace)
As drops of dew from mornings womb
in beauties holy place.

thou art ordained, O Christ,
By order of Melchizedeck,
an everlasting Priest.

the Lord at thy right hand
Shall strike through Kings, and wound chief men,
in many a Heathen-Land.

with bodies of the dead:

and so lift up the head.
HYMN 511. Greatness of Christ's Kingdom expressed and explained. 2. METER.
Psalm 110.
THE Lord unto my Lord thus said,
sit thou at my right hand,
Till I thy foes a stool have made,
whereon thy feet shall stand.
The Lord shall out of Sion bring
the Scepter of his might:
Amidst thy foes be thou the King,
and ruler in their sight.
The people shall come willingly,
submitting to thy truth,
Yielding a fruitful progeny
of Converts in thy youth:
Thy beauteous spouse shall bring to thee,
(to fill the sacred room:)
As fruitful births, as dews can be,
that drops from mornings womb.
This word God swear, and will not break,
thou art the sacred one;
A Priest like to Melchisedech,
whose lineage was not known:
The Lord that is at thy right hand
(for thy support and stay,)
Shall strike through Kings that dare withstand
in his most wrathful day.
Among the Heathen he shall judge,
and all the places fill
With limbs of men that bare thee grudge,
whom thou shall slay and kill.
And as the war with fury spreads
to multiply the slain,
He shall proceed and wound the heads
over many Lands that reign.
Then shall he drink (that bitter cup,)
the torrent in the way:
Therefore shall he the head lift up
at's Resurrection day.
The God of Israel therefore
be praised altogether:
From first to last for evermore,
Amen, Amen, for ever.
HYMN 512. Priesthood and power of Christ. 3. METER.
THE Lord unto my Lord thus said
here at my right hand sit,
Until thine Enemies be made
a footstool for thy feet.
Sion bring
the Scepter of thy power:
Rule thou amidst thy foes, O King,
in that successful hour.

(submitting to thy Grace)
As drops of dew from mornings womb
in beauties holy place.

thou art ordained, O Christ,
By order of Melchisedeck,
an everlasting Priest.

the Lord at thy right hand,
Shall strike through Kings, and wound chief men,
in many a Heathen Land.

with bodies of the dead,

and so lift up the head.
HYMN 513. Great works of God celebrated. 1. METER.
Psalm 111.
PRaise ye the Lord, whom I record,
and praise with all my might:
In meetings where the just appear,
and in the Churches sight.

so great they still have been:
Sought out of all in general
that take delight therein.

a glorious work therefore:
His righteousness (renowned no less,)
indures for evermore.

retained in thankful mind;
The Lord is known a gracious one,
compassionate and kind.

that fear his holy Name:
He will record his faithful word
still to perform the same.
Israel's sight,
and did his power engage:
That he might so on them bestow
the Heathens Heritage.

his Laws are just and sure:

accomplished true and pure.

by him who did proclaim
His Covenant sure; so very pure,
and reverend is his Name.
Psalm 106.48.

of Wisdom, in our ways,
They want no skill that do his will,
perpetual is his praise.
Let all proclaim the blessed Name
of Israel's God therefore:
From first to last till time be past,
Amen for evermore.
HYMN 514. Great works of God for his Church. 2. METER.
All People, etc.
Psalm 111.
PRaise ye the Lord, (I for my part)
Will praise the Lord with all my heart
In the Assembly of the upright,
And in the Congregations sight.
God's works are great, and (as it is meet)
Sought out of all that find them sweet:
His work is glorious and renowned,
His righteousness for ever crowned.
His works of wonder he has wrought
To be for ever in our thought,
The Lord's a very gracious one,
And full of kind compassion.
He has (in plenty) given meat
To all that fear him (small and great:)
And he will ever bear in mind
The Covenant which he has signed.
Unto his people he has showed
The power of his works abroad:
That he might freely give to them
The Heritage of Heathen men.
His works are truth and judgment pure,
All his Commandments are sure:
They all stand fast perpetually,
All done in truth and equity.
He sent redemption to his own,
His Covenant he to his made known:
He binds it still to be the same,
Holy and reverend is his Name.
The fear of God is wisedoms Spring,
Good understanding does it bring:
To all that act as he commands,
His praise for ever firmly stands.
HYMN 515. Honor and happiness and virtues of the Saints. 1. METER.
Psalm 112.
PRaise ye the Lord, for blessed are they
that truly fear the Lord:
Delighting greatly to obey
the precepts of his word.

shall be in great request:
The righteous man's posterity
for ever shall be blessed.

and fill it in great store:
His righteousness continues still,
and lasts for evermore.

in darkness rises light:
Gracious he is, compassionate,
in justice exquisite.

and freely lends and spares:
And with discretion suitable
he guides his affairs.

be moved though times prove bad:
In everlasting memory
the righteous shall be had.

to make his heart afraid:
His heart is fixed, by faith within
trusting in God's good aid.

and fear he shall forgo,
Until he see accomplished
his will upon his foe.

his righteousness is praised
For ever: and for evermore
his horn with honor raised.

and fret and pine away:
And his desire shall perish quite,
the wicked man's, I say.
HYMN 516. Honor and Virtue of the Saints. 2. METER.
The mighty God, etc.
Psalm 112.
PRaise ye the Lord he is blessed that fears the Lord
Greatly delighting in his holy word:
His seed on Earth shall be among the best,
The just man's generation shall be blessed.
Riches and wealth he to his house procures,
His righteousness for evermore endures.
Unto the upright there does light arise
In darkest night of his adversities:
He is a gracious one you may be sure;
full of compassion, and a righteous doer.
A good man freely lends, and shows favor,
And all his actions of discretion savor.
He never shall be moved undoubtedly,
But had in everlasting memory:
With evil tidings he shall not be stirred,
His heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord.
His heart is fixed, he shall not be affrayed
Until he see his Enemies dismayed.
He has dispersed, and given to the poor,
His righteousness indures for evermore:
His horn shall be exalted with renown,
The wicked seeing that shall be cast down.
His teeth shall grate, his heart no joy shall cherish.
But pine away, and all his hopes shall perish.
HYMN 517. Lovers of Liberality. 3. METER.
All People, etc.
Psalm 112.5.37.
A Good man favor shows, and lends,
And with discretion spares and spends;
He freely lends to them that need,
And leaves a Blessing to his seed.

That has his wealth so well improved:
The righteous shall be had thereby
In everlasting memory.

And given plenty to the poor:
His righteousness is ever praised,
His horn with honor shall be raised.

Until he see his enemies cast:
The God of Israel therefore
Be blessed now and evermore.
HYMN 518. Honors and promotions of the poor* 1. METER.
Psalm 113.
PRaise ye the Lord, praise him I say,
ye servants of the Lord:

his greatness be adored.

must his great Name be praised:

above all Nations raised.

whose dwells in Heaven high?

both in the Earth and Sky.

whom from the dust he brings:

to sit enthroned with Kings.
The barren to keep house makes he,
that (having Children store)
A Parent she full glad may be:
praise ye the Lord therefore.
HYMN 519. Honors and promotions of the poor. 2. METER.
Give Laud, etc.
Psalm 113.
YE Servants of the Lord,
praise ye the Lord most high:
His blessed Name record
with praise perpetually;
from Sun to Sun,
And from the East unto the West
must this be done.
All Nations he excells,
his glory mounts the sky:
And what God is there else,
what other Lord so high?
yet stoops to know
The things that move in Heaven above,
and Earth below.
He lifts and raises high
the needy, poor, and base,
That in the dust did lie
on dunghills of disgrace;
and them he brings
To sit in seat with Princes great,
with Israel's Kings.
The barren women he
does wonderfully bless:
A Parent glad to be,
and households to possess;
and to be stored
With many Sons, and little ones,
praise ye the Lord.
HYMN 520. Jacob's safe Conduct. 1. METER.
Psalm 114.
WHEN Israel Aegypts bounds forsook,
and safely marched along:
And Jacob's house their journey took
from people strange of tongue.
Judah was his holy place,
in Israel he reigned:

and Jordan was restrained.

the Hillocks as young Sheep:
O Sea, what drove thee to depart?
why fled the liquid deep?
(Jordan) on a heap,
to rear thy water dams?

ye little Hills as Lambs?
Tremble O Earth, so justly awed
at presence of the Lord:
At presence of the mighty God,
whom Jacob there adored.
Who turns the Rock (that takes no dint)
into a standing Pool:
And flinty stones (the fiery flint)
to Springs of water cool.
HYMN 521. Jacob's safe Conduct from Egypt. 2. METER.
Ye Children, etc.
Psalm 114.
WHEN Israel out of Egypt went,
And Jacob's house with great content,
From them that used a tongue unknown:
Judah was then (when thus restored)
The Sanctuary of the Lord,
And Israel his Dominion.
The Sea saw that, and quickly fled,
And Jordan to his fountainhead
Was quickly turned back again:
The frighted Mountains skip'd like Rams,
The little Hills, like little Lambs,
Such awful terror did constrain.
What ailed thee, O thou Sea to fly?
O Jordan, what so hastily
Did force thy fleeting current back?
Ye Mountains that ye skip'd like Rams?
Ye little Hills, like little Lambs?
Some cause cumpulsive could not lack.
Tremble O Earth, and quake for fear
When God in presence does appear,
The mighty God, Of Jacob's Race:
Who made the Rock a standing pool,
And fiery Flint a Fountain cool,
For Israel in the Desert place.
HYMN 522. Idols derided.
Psalm 115.1, 2.
LORD not to us, Lord not to us
do thou the Glory take:
Yea for thy truth we praise thee thus,
and for thy mercies sake.
Why then, O Lord, endurest thou
the Heathen thus to say,
Where is your God, O Israel now,
where is he now say they?
3, 4.
But our God, be it known to you,
he is in Heaven on high:
And what it pleases him to do,
he does continually.
The Idol Gods of Heathen Lands
are Silver, Brass and Gold;
They are the work of work-mens hands,
and such as men did mold.
5, 6.
They have indeed both mouths and eyes,
such (take them) as they be:
But blind and speechless Deities,
and neither speak nor see.
Ears have they for the greater grace,
yet hear not what we tell:
And they have Noses on their Face,
but want the sense to smell.
7, 8.
On either side they have a hand,
and yet they handle not:
And they have feet whereon they stand,
but never stir a jot.
Their hollow throats no breath goes through,
their makers like them are:
The truster's like the trusted to,
the workman like the ware.
HYMN 523. Liberty of the Gospel. 1. METER.
Have mercy etc.
Psalm 117.
PRaise God ye Nations all,
let all the praise be his:
For great to us, and mavelous
his loving kindness is.
The Gospel Truth of God
endures for evermore:
In time to call the Nations all,
praise ye the Lord therefore.
HYMN 524. Liberty and latitude of the Gospel. 2. METER. To the New Tune.
PRaise God all Nations and all Lands,
Great mercy have we at his hands:
His praise record,
His truth is sure still to endure,
Praise ye the Lord.
HYMN 525. Liberty and latitude of the Gospel. 3. METER.
The mighty God, etc.
Psalm 117.
YE Nations all, O praise the Lord above,
O praise him all ye people here below:
For great toward us is his tender love,
and greatly ratified let all men know.
The Gospel truth of God endures for ever:
Praise ye the Lord, and praise him altogether.
HYMN 526. Life of Religion.
Psalm* 119. (1. PART.)
O Blessed are the innocent
and perfect in the way:
Who from the Lord's Commandment
do Never go astray.
2.
Blessed are they that care to keep
his Testaments entire:
And such as for the Lord do seek
with all their hearts desire.
3, 4.
They practice no iniquity,
but in God's ways they go:
And we must serve thee diligently
for thou have charged us so.
5, 6.
O that my ways were made direct,
and to thy Statutes framed:
Which when I generally respect,
I shall not be ashamed.
With upright heart I Will give thee praise,
and keep thy Laws aright:
When I have learned thy righteous ways,
O do not leave me quite.
(2. METER.)
Psalm 119.1. All People, etc.
BLessed, O blessed are the pure
that never from God's Laws depart:
That keep his Testimonies sure,
and seek him with a perfect heart.
They also do no wickedness,
but keep his Laws and never swerve:
So strict a precept thou do press,
that we with care thy Laws observe.
O that my ways were made direct,
and to thy Statutes rightly framed:
Which when I wholly do respect,
doubtless I shall not be ashamed:
With upright heart I Will give thee praise
when I have learned thy judgments right:
And I will surely keep thy ways,
O do not, Lord, forsake me quite.
The Corruption of youth bridled. 2. PART.
Psalm 119. v. 9, to 16.
HOW may a young man cleanse his way,
and curb the lusts of youth?
If that he mark what thou do say,
and keep the word of truth:
Lord I have sought thee all my days,
with heart unfeigned and free:
Let me not wander from thy ways,
through ignorance in me.
I hid thy word within my heart
that I might not transgress:
A blessed one, O Lord, thou art,
thy laws to me express.
The righteous Judgments of thy mouth
My lips have spoke with pleasure:
Rejoicing more to keep thy truth
than get the greatest treasure.
And I will study of thy Name,
and thereof frame my talk,
As at a mark so will I aim,
thy ways how I may walk:
And my delight upon thy Laws
shall be so surely set,
That I will not for any cause
thy holy word forget.
The Devotion of pious Pilgrims.
Psalm 119. from v. 17, to 24. (3. PART.)
DEAL largely with thy Servant, Lord,
That I may live and keep thy word:
Open mine eyes that I may see
What wonders in thy Laws there be.
I am a stranger here below,
Hide not the Laws which I should know;
My soul does break with longing sore,
After thy Statutes evermore.
Thou have rebuked the proud that durst
Err from thy Laws, and are accursed:
Remove from me reproach and shame,
For I have walked as free from blame.
Princes that sat, condemn^d my cause,
Yet did thy Servant mind thy Laws:
Thy Testaments are my delight,
And Counselors to set me right.
The dull and drooping Saints quickened.
Psalm 119. from v. 25, to 32. (4. PART.)
MY Spirit cleaves to the dust,
Lord quicken me as thou art just,
I have declared my ways to thee,
And thou have hearkened unto me.
Teach me thy Statutes I thee pray,
And let me know thy Precepts way,
So my discourse shall wholly tend,
Thy works and wonders to commend.
My heart does melt for very grief,
Lord for thy Word-sake send relief,
The way of lies from me withdraw,
And grant me graciously thy Law.
Lord I have chosen prudently
The way of truth and verity:
I laid thy judgments in my sight
That I might always do aright.
Thy Testaments I stuck unto,
Lord shame me not for what I do:
I Will run the way thou giv'st in charge
When as thou shall my heart enlarge.
5. PART. 1. METER. The faithfulness of Saints to the end.
Psalm 119. v. 33, to 40.
LORD teach me in thy Statutes way,
and I shall keep it to the end:
O give me knowledge that I may
with all my heart thy Law attend.
Yea I shall keep, and keep them sure,
make me therefore to go aright;
In paths of thy Commandments pure,
for therein only I delight.
Incline my heart unto thy Law,
and not to avarice I pray:
From vain delights mine eyes withdraw,
and quicken me in thy good way.
Thy promise to thy Servant prove,
who is devoted to thy fear:
My feared reproach from me remove,
for, Lord, thy judgments are sincere,
Lord, I have longed with earnestness
thy blessed Laws to know and do,
Vouchsafe then in thy righteousness,
to move and quicken me thereto.
5. PART. 2. METER.
Life of Religion in practice.

Psalm 119. v. 33, 34.
TEach me, O Lord, the way
whereto thy Statutes tend:
So shall I never stray
but keep it to the end.
Give me to understand,
and then shall I endeavor
To act by thy command
with my whole heart for ever.
35, 36.
In paths of thy Commands
Lord make me go aright;
For my desire so stands,
and therein I delight.
Incline my heart, O Lord,
that I may not digress:
Incline it to thy word,
and not to covetousness.
37, 38.
Lord, turn away mine eyes,
turn them, O Lord, I pray:
From viewing vanities,
and quick'n me in thy way.
Establish thou thy word
unto thy servant dear:
Who is devoted, Lord,
unto thy faithful fear.
39, 40.
The obloquy I fear,
Lord, turn away from me:
Eor I confess how clear,
how good thy judgments be.
Behold how my desires
do for thy precepts press,
O stir those holy fires
to show thy righteousness.
Psalm 119. v. 41, to 48^ (6. PART.)
The great freedom of the Godly.

LORD, let thy mercies come to me,
The saving health that flows from thee,
according to thy promise, Lord;
So shall I have to answer those
That are my most reproachful foes,
for I have trusted in thy word.
And take not, Lord, the word of truth,
Take it not quite out of my mouth,
for in thy judgments do I hope:
So shall I keep and not, and not give over
To keep thy Statutes evermore,
for that is all my aim and scope.
And I will walk at liberty,
Because I seek unfeignedly
the precepts which thou have proclaimed:
Thy Testimonies are such things,
That I will mention them to Kings,
and never be thereof ashamed:
And I will much delight my mind
In thy Commandments enjoined,
which I have loved to relate:
My hands likewise I will direct
To thy commands, which I affect,
and in thy Statutes meditate.
Psalm. 119. v. 49, to 56. (7. PART.)
Hearty comfort had in Godliness.

THY promise to thy servant mind
whereon thou made me rest:
This comfort in thy word I find,
it cheers me when distressed.
Though proud men have me greatly scoft,
thy laws I did not leave;
Thy judgments old I thought on often,
and comfort did receive.
Yet horror takes me for this age,
that leaves thy Statutes quite:
But in my house of Pilgrimage
thy laws were my delight.
Thy name in mind I have retained,
when night her curtain draws*
I kept thy word and thus I gained
because I kept thy laws.
Psalm 119. v. 57, to 64. (8. PART.)
The Just man's portion and practice.

THOU art my portion, O my Lord,
I said that I would keep thy word,
according to thy flat decree:
I beg thy favor from my heart,
Thy mercy, Lord, to me impart,
as thou have kindly promised me.
I thought upon my sinful way,
And turned my feet without delay
unto thy Testimonies true:
I hastened and have not delayed
To keep the word which thou have said
commanding our obedience due.
The wicked men by troops and bands
Have robbed me with injurious hands,
yet have I not forgot thy Laws:
But even at midnight I will rise,
To reader thanks in Sacrifice,
thy righteous Judgments give such cause*
A dear cumpanion, Lord, am I
To all that fear thee faithfully,
and of them all that keep thy way
The Earth, O Lord, is richly stored
With mercies which thou do afford,
teach me thy Statutes to obey.
Psalm 119. v. 65, to 72. (9. PART.)
The keenest affliction profitable.

ACcording to thy promise free,
Lord thou have dealt full well with me,
Who am thy Servant fearing thee:
Teach me good judgment, Lord, I pray,
And knowledge of thy word and way,
for I believe what thou do say.
While unchastised with thy rod
I went astray from thee, O God,
but in thy paths I since have trod:
Lord thou art good, thy nature's so,
And thou do good, thy works do show,
teach me, O Lord, thy Laws to know.
The proud against me forged a lie,
But my whole heart I will apply
to keep thy precepts faithfully:
As fat as grease their heart is grown,
But, Lord, the Law which thou do own
is my delight and that alone.
'Twas good for me to undergo
The afflicting hand of God, I know,
that I might keep thy Statutes so:
The Law of thy dear mouth I hold
Better to me a thousand fold,
than heaps of Silver and of Gold.
Psalm 119. v. 73, to 80. (10. PART.)
The love of Saints to Grace and Godliness.

I Am created, Lord,
and fashioned by thy hand,
O give me skill to know thy will,
and practice thy command:
All they that fear thy Name
to see me will be glad,
For I O Lord believed thy word,
and therein help I had.
Thy Judgments, Lord, are just,
I know them so to be,
And in thy fidel^ty
thou have afflicted me:
Let thy kind love I pray,
for my true comfort make;
According to thy promise do,
for thy dear servants sake.
O let thy tender love
come to me in thy sight,
That sweetly I may live thereby
who in thy Law delight:
Let proud men be ashamed,
for they without a cause
Have used me with injury,
but I will mind thy Laws.
Let those that fear thy Name,
turn in, O Lord, to me;
And every one to whom is known
thy precepts what they be.
O let my heart be sound,
and in thy Statutes true,
That no just blame may bring me shame
for any thing I do.
Psalm 119. v. 81, to 88. (11. PART.)
The making God our hope.

MY soul for thy salvation faints
with vehement desire,
Yet does thy word uphold my heart
with hope that cannot tire:
Mine eyes do fail for thy sweet word,
and thus they seem to say,
When will thou comfort me O Lord,
why do thou thus delay?
For I am like a bottle, Lord,
that in the smoke is set,
Yet do not I at any time
thy holy word forget*
But, Lord, how long must I compute
the time, to bear control?
When will thou Judgment execute
on them that hunt my soul?
The proud have dug pits for me,
far from thy Law they are:
Thy precepts and their practices
do differ very far.
But thy commandments, O most high,
are faithful, just, and true,
O help me, for most wrongfully
do they my soul pursue.
They had almost consumed me,
and sent me to the Grave,
Yet did not I forsake thy Law,
my very life to save:
Therefore in loving kindness, Lord,
now quicken me with speed:
So shall I keep the righteous word
which does from thee proceed.
Psalm 119. v. 89, to 96. (12. PART.)
The never failing of God's word.

FOR ever, Lord, thy word does last,
And is in Heaven fixed fast:
Thy faithfulness all ages see,
The Earth abides as fixed by thee.
They all continue to this day,
As thou appointest all obey:
Had not thy Law been my delight,
Affliction had o're-whelm'd me quite.
Never will I forgetful be
Of thy sweet Laws that quickened me:
Save me, O Lord, for I am thine,
And I have sought thy Laws divine.
The wicked have my death designed,
But I thy Testimonies mind:
I find the worlds perfections fail,
But above all thy Laws avail.
Psalm 119. v. 97, to 104. (13. PART.)
The power of Religion in practice.

THY Law O how I prise,
I mind it all the day:
Thereby thou make me wise,
yea wiser, Lord, than they
that are my foes:
For still with me thy precepts be,
whence wisdom flows.
I have attained more skill
than all my teachers have,
By studying on thy will:
and more than men more grave,
I understand:
Because I do keep close unto
thy strict command.
My feet I have refrained
from every evil way:
That I might keep unstained
the word which thou do say:
I have not gone
From thy decrees, for thou by these,
have led me on.
Thy Words how sweet they are,
how sweet unto my taste?
Yea sweeter, Lord, by far
than honey for repast:
thy precepts praise
It Is, that I get skill, and fly
from all false ways.
Psalm 119. v. 105, to 112. (14. PART.)
The pure Lamp of the word.

THY word's a Lamp unto my feet,
A light to guide my paths most meet,
that I may never go astray:
And I have made a solemn Oath,
And to perform it, am not loath,
that I will keep thy righteous way.
I am afflicted very sore,
Now quicken me, O Lord, therefore,
according to thy promise free:
The free will Offerings which I moved,
I pray thee, Lord, let ^e approved,
and teach thy judgments unto me.
My soul is ever in my hand,
My life does in such danger stand,
yet do I not forget thy Law:
The wicked laid a snare for me,
And yet I erred not from thee,
Nor from thy precepts did withdraw.
Thy Testimonies I have stored,
My heritage for ever, Lord,
for all my hearts delight they be:
I have inclined my heart therefore,
To keep thy Statutes evermore,
until I die and come to thee.
Psalm 119. v. 113, to 120. (15. PART.)
The renouncing of ill courses and companions.

I Hate vain thoughts, but love thy Law,
thou art my hiding place, O Lord:
My shield, when dangers near me draw,
and I have hoped in thy word.
Ye evil doers from me depart,
your company my course withstands;
For I am purposed in my heart
to serve my God, as he commands.
Uphold me, Lord, that I may live,
and, Lord, perform thy promise claimed;
That of the hope which thou do give,
I may at no time be ashamed.
Uphold me, for if thou protect,
I shall be very safe thereby;
And I will have a due respect
unto thy Laws continually.
Thou have in anger under-trod
all those that from thy Statutes stray:
For all their subtle shifts, O God;
is but a foul deceiving way.
For all the wicked of the Earth
as basest dross, thou turnest by,
Therefore as things of greatest worth,
I love thy precepts wondrously.
Yet when I find what judgments fall,
my flesh does quake for fear of thee,
Whose dreadful hand so acts them all,
as makes me sore afraid to see.
Psalm 119. v. 121, to 128. (16. PART.)
Supplication for deliverance and direction.

I Do what equity commands,
O leave me not to Tyrants hands,
that would oppress me out of spite:
Be surety for thy servants good,
Let proud oppressors be withstood,
and let them not overthrow my right:
Mine eyes for thy salvation fail,
I wait to see thy word prevail,
that rghteous word of thy decree.
Deal with thy Servant, I entreat,
According to thy mercy great,
and all thy Statutes teach to me.
I am thy Servant, give me skill,
That I may understand thy will.
and may thy Testimonies know;
And now it is a needful time,
For thee, O Lord, to work for thine,
for all thy Laws they overthrow:
Therefore do I thy Statutes love
Above bright Gold, yea far above
The Gold that goes at greatest rate:
Therefore I count all thy decrees,
In all things right and none but these,
and all false ways I truly hate.
Psalm 119. v. 127, to 136. (17. PART.)
The true Zeal and Charity of Christians.

THY Testimonies are most rare,
Therefore my souls delight they are:
The entrance of thy word gives light,
And makes the simple know aright.
I gaspt and panted very much,
My longing for thy Laws was such;
Look on me, Lord, and let me claim
Thy Grace, as one that loves thy Name.
Order my steps in thy good way,
And let no sin in me bear sway:
From man's oppression set me free,
So shall I keep to thy decree.
Thy face let on thy servant shine,
And teach to me thy Laws divine:
Rivers of tears run down mine eyes,
Because thy Statutes they despise.
Psalm. 119. v. 137, to 144. (18. PART.)
The true zeal and purity of Christians.

RIghteous art thou, O Lord,
thy judgments are upright,
The precepts of thy word
to which thou do excite
so earnestly,
Are most express for righteousness
and equity.
My zeal, Lord, after those,
made me consume and pine;
Because my wicked foes
forgot those words of thine:
but O most pure
Is thy sweet word, thy servant, Lord,
loves it therefore.
And though I am but small,
and of as small regard,
Yet mind I most of all
thy words which I have heard:
for ever does
Thy righteous word remain, O Lord,
thy Law's the truth.
And though adversity
in very deep degree,
And great perplexity
have taken hold on me:
yet (in this plight)
My comfort stands, in thy commands,
there is my delight.
The righteousness, O Lord,
Of thy Decrees Divine;
Does stand on sure record,
and never can decline:
to me O give
Compleater skill to do thy will,
and I shall live.
Psalm. 119. v. 145, to 152. (19. PART*)
The unwearied seeking of God.

WITH earnest voice I cry and call,
Lord hear the words which I let fall,
for I will keep thy Statutes all*
O save me, Lord, I cried to thee,
Thy Testimonies then shall be
most faithfully observed by me:
I did prevent the dawning day
In The morning I did cry and pray,
I made thy word my hope and stay:
Mine eyes prevent the watches late
That I might freely contemplate
and on thy word might meditate.
According as thy judgments be,
And after thy compassions free,
Lord hear my voice and quicken me:
Lo they draw nigh and near me press,
That follow after wickedness,
but from thy laws they far digress:
But thou, O Lord, art very nigh,
And thy commandments generally,
are perfect truth and equity:
Concerning thy decrees, behold,
I knew, O Lord, I knew of old,
that thou have founded them to hold.
Psalm 119. v. 153, to 160. (20. PART.)
The unworthiness of the wicked counterpoised.

THINK how I am beset,
and, Lord, deliver me:
For I do not forget
the word ordained by thee.
plead for me, Lord,
And set me free, and quicken me
by thy good word.
Thy saving health is far
from all ungodly men,
For what thy Statutes are
is not sought out by them:
thy mercies kind
Are great, O Lord, O let thy word
cheer up my mind.
Many, O Lord, are those,
(for they are not a few)
That are my utter foes,
and do my soul pursue
with ill intents,
Yet do not I decline from thy
Commandments.
Transgressors of thy laws
I saw, and seeing wept,
For I was grieved,
thy word they have not kept:
consider, Lord,
The love sincere which I do bear
unto thy word.
Lord quicken me anew
by thy kind love restored,
Because thy word is true
from the beginning, Lord;
it fails never:
And every clause of thy just laws,
abide for ever.
Psalm 119. v. 161, to 168. (21. PART)
The watchfulness of Saints.

PRinces have persecuted me
without a cause, O Lord,
Yet stands my heart in awe of thee,
and trembles at thy word.
And in that word, Lord, all the while
I did as much rejoice,
As he that finds the greatest spoil,
and bears away the choice.
But lying Doctrines of deceit
I ever have abhorred:
While my affection is full great
unto thy Law, O Lord:
And surely seven times a day
I will give thanks to thee,
Because thy judgments do display
such righteousness to me.
All they that love thy Law to find
such great content and peace,
That nothing shall offend their mind
to make their comforts cease:
And for thy sweet salvation,
Lord, I have waited still,
And led my conversation
according to thy will.
My soul has kept with constancy
thy laws in every part,
I love them so exceedingly,
and from my very heart.
Thy Testimonies I have kept,
thy precepts I pursue,
For thou beholdst me every step,
and see what 'ere I do.
Psalm 119. v. 169, to 172. (22. PART.)
The work of Grace permanent.

UNto the Lord let my cry come,
and near approach to thee:
Of understanding give me some,
as with thy words agree.
My humble supplication
before thee let appear;
For thou art my salvation,
my God, my Lord, most dear.
Then shall my lips applaud thy name
in holy Songs of praise:
And to thy Statutes my heart frame
when I am taught thy ways.
My tongue shall thy true word declare,
thy righteousness unfold:
Thy Commandments that are so rare,
shall to the Saints be told.
O help me, Lord, by thy right hand
because I trust in thee,
Thy chosen precepts shall command
me, with humility.
For thy salvation, Lord, I sought,
and longed very much:
Thy laws delight me wisdom taught,
I never pains did grutch.
Long live my soul the Lord to praise,
his Name to glorify,
And by thy judgments guide my ways
to all eternity.
Lord, like a sheep thy servant strayed,
in pity Lord seek me,
For of thy law I Am not afraid,
forgot never let me be.
HYMN 527. Living in quietness longed for.
Psalm. 120. (1. METER.)
I Cried to God in all my wrongs,
who heard me when I prayed:

Lord save my soul I said.

and what shall be thy hire?

and burning coals of fire.

in Meshech still to dwell:
And that I have so long remained
in Tents of Ishmael.

with them that peace oppose:

but they contention chose.
2. METER.
To the proper Tune.
IN my distressfull day
I to the Lord did pray:
and he redrest my wrong.
Lord save my soul, say I,
From lips inured to lie:
and from a double tongue.
O false tongue! what shall be
Awarded unto thee:
or what shall be thy hire?
Sharp Arrows such as go
Out of a Giants bow,
and burning coals of fire.
O woe is me! that I
Sojourn constrainedly
with men contentious;
And am enforced to dwell
So far from Israel,
among the barbarous.
My soul has dwelt too long
With him that likes of wrong,
and hates a quiet life:
I am to peace inclind,
But when I speak my mind
they are for war and strife.
HYMN 528. Looking up to God.
Psalm 121. (1. METER.)
UP to the hills I lift mine eye,
whence comes my help at need:

does all my help proceed.
He will not let thy foot be moved,
for still thy keeper wakes:

no sleep nor slumber takes.

thy shadow of defense:

no harmfull influence.
From evils all he keeps thee sure,
and guards thy soul about:
Henceforth for ever to secure
thy goings in and out.
2. METER.
Give laud, etc.
I Will lift up mine eyes
unto the hills on high,
From whence my sure supplies
do come continually:
my help comes forth
From God the Lord, whose powerful word
made heaven and earth.
And suffer he will not
thy foot once moved to be:
Nor slumbers he a jot
that watches over thee:
lo! he that keeps
His Saints each one, he slumbers none,
nor ever sleeps.
The Lord thy Keeper is,
the Lord's the shady Bowe^:
At the right hand of his,
by his right hand of power:
that neither shall
The Sun by light, nor Moon by night
hurt thee at all.
To keep thee safe from harm,
the Lord shall still provide:
The Lord thy soul shall arm,
and all thy goings guide:
thou have therefore
The guard of Heaven, henceforth and even
for evermore.
HYMN 529. Lovers of Sion.
Have mercy, etc.
Psalm 122. (1. METER.)
I Joy'd to hear them say,
to Sion take your way:

in God's own house to pray.
Jerusalems buildings are
like to a City fair:

whereto the Tribes repair.
To it God's people went,
to Israel's Testament:
That every Tribe might there ascribe
his praise with joint assent.

are there for David's stem:

from fair Jerusalem.

thy walls let peace possess:
Thy palaces the Lord shall please
to crown with happiness.

and brethren that partake:
Sion's good, and neighborhood
these constant prayers I make.
HYMN 530. Lovers of Sion blessed.
The mighty God, etc.
Psalm 122. (2. METER.)
FULL glad was I
when as they said to me,
Come let us hasten
to the house of God:
Our feet shall stand
where we desire to be,
Within thy Gates
O Salem's safe abode!
Jerusalem
is built up most completely,
Like to a City
joined together neatly.
Whither go up
the tribes whereof we tell,
The tribes of God
unto that stately frame;
Unto the Testament
of Israel,
To render thanks
to God's most holy Name:
For there are set
the thrones with grace engraved;
The thrones of Judgment
for the house of David.
Pray for the peace
of sweet Jerusalem,
Pray that its peace
may bear a lasting date:
For they shall prosper
every one of them
That love the good
of Sion's good estate.
Peace be within
thy walls with double blessing,
Prosperity
thy palaces possessing.
Yea, for my Brethrens
sake that shall have part,
And my Companions
every one of them:
Now will I say,
and say it from my heart,
Peace be within
thee, O Jerusalem:
And for the Lord
our God's most holy dwelling,
I^ll seek thy good,
as of a place excelling.
HYMN 531. Meekness of Captives.
Psalm 123. (1. METER)
O Thou that dwell'st above the skies,
I lift mine eyes to thee:

the Masters hands to see:
As handmaids on their Mistresses,
so do our eyes attend,
Until the Lord our God shall please
his succouring Grace to send.

and pity our sad case:
For we are filled exceedingly
with hatred and disgrace.

our souls do now abide:
Of such as have lift up the horn
with pampered ease and pride.
HYMN 532. Meekness and mourning of Captives. 2. METER.
To the new Tune.
O Thou that dwell'st above the spheres,
To thee thy humble servant rears
A meek and mournful eye:
Behold as servants mark the hands
Of Masters, under whose commands
They serve submissively.
And as a Maidens eyes erect
Upon her mistress with respect,
Compassion crave and love:
So on our God our eyes do wait
Till he shall us commiserate
With favor from above.
Have mercy on us, O good Lord,
Have mercy on us here abhorred,
And under miseries bowed:
Our soul is filled (even while they please)
With insolence of men at ease,
And scorning of the proud.
HYMN 533. Miracles of Mercy, or the snare broken.
Have mercy, etc.
Psalm 124. (1. METER.)
HAD not the Lord this day,
now Israel may say:
Had it not been that God came in
to be our strength and stay;

on our side firmly stood
When cruel foes against us rose,
like some impetuous flood:

but swallowed up alive:
When in such heat of fury great
they did against us strive.

the waters that did roll
With boisterous waves, had been our graves,
and gone quite over our soul.

that gave us not a prey
Into their teeth, to be therewith
devoured that same day.

as from the fowlers snare:
When (broke in two) the bird gets through,
so we escaped are.
Our help we now proclaim
to be in that great Name
Of God the Lord, whose powerful word
did Earth and Heaven frame.
HYMN 534. Miracles of Mercy, or the snare broken.
To the proper Tune.
Psalm 124. (2. METER.)
NOW may we say of Israel's Heritage,
Had not the Lord himself been on our side,
Had not the Lord himself opposed their pride
When wicked men against us did engage,
They had devoured us quick in their fierce rage.
Like foaming floods our foes incensed thus
Had overwhelmed our Souls without control,
Then the proud waters had gone over our soul:
Blessed be God that has not given us
To be a prey for cruel teeth to crush.
Our soul's escaped, just as does a bird:
Just as a bird out of the fowlers snare;
The snare is broke, and we delivered are:
Our help is in the Name of God the Lord,
Who made both Earth and Heaven by his Word.
HYMN 535. Mount Sion's sure standing.
Psalm 125. (1. METER)
WHoever on the Lord rely,
like Sion Mount are sure
To stand with all stability,
and ever to endure.
Jerusalem is
with mountains huge and high:
So does the Lord environ his
henceforth perpetually.

on just men's lot to rest:
Lest righteous men should fall from God
when overmuch oppressed.

and graciously impart
Thy love and favor unto them
that are upright in heart.
But wicked men that turn aside
perverseness to increase,
To share with sinners God shall guide,
but Israel shall have peace.
HYMN 536. Mount Sion's sure standing.
Give Laud, etc.
Psalm 125. (2. METER.)
ALL they that do confide,
and trust in God above,
So firmly shall abide
that nothing can remove
their station sure:
But steadfast still, like Sion hill,
they shall endure.
And as high mountains do
enclose Jerusalem,
So have God's people too
a safeguard sheltring them:
they have therefore
The God of Heaven henceforth and even
for evermore.
Because the righteous God
will not permit too long
The sinners scourge and rod
to do the righteous wrong:
lest it should force
Most righteous men to follow then
some wicked course.
Do good, Lord, to the good,
and to the pure in heart,
But those that to their lewd
and sinful ways depart,
God casts to hell
With evil doers, but peace assures
to Israel.
HYMN 537. Mourning turned to rejoicing for Israel's deliverance from Babylon.
Psalm 126. (1. METER.)
WHEN from his sad captivity
the Lord did Sion bring,
Like to a dream it seemed to be,
but proved a real thing.
Our mouth and tongue were sweetly filled
with joy and laughter then:

among the Heathen men.
Great things the Lord has done for them,
great things we do confess:
Jerusalem,
and stir up thankfulness.

and make a full return,
As flowing streams do change the soil
which parching heat did burn.

their seed do sadly sow:
The crops of Corn with full grown ears
shall gladly reap and mow.

it made the seeds-man mourn:
He shall no doubt bring whom his sheaves,
and make a glad return.
HYMN 538. Mourning turned to rejoicing, or the dream made real.
Give laud, etc.
Psalm 126. (2. METER.)
WHEN God had turned the stream
of our Captivity,
We were like them that dream,
affected doubtfully:
but when it proved,
Our mouths and tongues with joyful songs
were sweetly moved.
Thus also did they say
among the Gentiles then,
The Lord has done this day
great things for those poor men:
yea God has done
Great things for us which ravish us
to think upon.
Turn our Captivity
as Rivers in the South,
Which help the Deserts dry
against the parching drouth:
who sows in tears
(Through scarcity) shall reap in joy
their full grown ears.
He that goes weeping out*
and bears forth precious seed,
Returns with joy (no doubt)
and happily shall speed:
for he receives
A pledge to come well laden home
and brings his sheaves.
HYMN 539. Nativities blessed, or Blessings of the Womb. 1. METER.
Psalm 127.
UNless the Lord the house do build
vain pains the builder takes:
Unless the Lord the City shield
in vain the watchman wakes*

and eat of sorrows bread:
While God's beloved in their estate
sleep quietly in bed.

God only can bestow:

shot from a Giants Bow.

imports a happy state:
Such shall not be afraid to treat
with enemies in the Gate.
HYMN 540. Nativities blessed, or Blessings of the Womb.
All People, etc.
Psalm. 127. (2. METER.)
UNless the Lord the house sustain,
The builders labor but in vain:
In vain the watch abstain from sleep
Unless the Lord the City keep.
In vain ye rise before the light,
And break the slumbers of the night:
In vain ye eat the bread of care
While God's beloved the labor spare.
Lo Children are an heritage
That come from God, and grow to age,
As formidable to the foe
As Arrows from a Giants Bow.
Happy is he, and most renowned,
Whose quivers with such shafts abound:
It shall not shame him to debate
With adversaries in the gate.
HYMN 541. Olive Branches.
Psalm 128. (1. METER.)
BLessed are all that fear the Lord,
and walk in his good ways:

with comfort all thy days.

thy loving Wife shall be:
Thy Children round about thy board
as plants of Olive Tree.

is blessed in his ways:
Sion-hill
to bless thee all thy days.
The welfare of Jerusalem
to thy mature decease:

with Israel's stablish'd peace.
HYMN 542. Olive Branches.
Ye Children, etc.
Psalm 128. (2. METER.)
BLessed, O blessed on record
Is every one that fears the Lord,
and walks in his perfect way:
For thou shall have in store to eat
Of goods well got by thine own sweat,
O happy, happy thou I say.
Like to a Vine with fruitful boughs
On thy house side, such is thy spouse,
with goodly branches springing out:
Thy daughters and thy sons shall be
Like to the plants of Olive Tree,
decking thy Table round about.
Behold that thus above the rest
Shall such a man be surely blessed,
who fears the Lord unfeignedly:
The Lord shall plenteously distill
His blessings out of Sion-hill,
that thou may be enriched thereby.
Yea, all the days that thou do live
This blessing God to thee shall give,
to see Jerusalem do well:
And Childrens Children thou shall see
Of thine own loins, that spring from thee,
and likewise peace on Israel.
HYMN 543. Onsets upon Israel, or the Plowers defeated.
Psalm 129. (1. METER.)
EVEN from my tender infancy,
many a time have they

may Israel now say.
Many a time have they set on
with all their spite and power:
Yet have they failed and not prevailed
against me, to this hour.

long furrows did they make:

Yea, all their cords he brake.

turned back in their design;
And put to flight that Sion spite,
and bear ill will to thine.

upon the houses top:
Which gets no height but withers straight
before it comes to crop.

nor his that comes ^ehind,
To pluck and pull a bosom full
for sheaves and bands to bind.
Concerning which, the passengers
no benediction frame:
Nor never say along the Way,
we bless you in God's Name.
HYMN 544. Onsets upon Israel, or the Plowers defeated.
Give laud, etc.
Psalm 129. (2. METER.)
FULL often of a truth,
and many a time have they
Distressed me from my youth,
may Israel now say;
even from the first:
Yet could they not effect their plot,
and do their worst.
They plowed upon my back,
as plow-shares tear the Ground:
Long furrows did they make,
and many a grievous Wound
with wicked hands:
Just is the Lord, who cut their cord,
and brake their bands.
And, Lord, confound them all,
and bring it so to pass,
That Sion's foes may fall,
and all may be as Grass
on houses top,
Which withers straight before the height
of growing up.
Which never has the hap
to fill the mowers hand:
Nor lies in binders lap
so much as makes a band:
nor passengers
Along the Way do never say
God-speed you, sirs.
HYMN 545. Pardoning mercies.
Psalm. 130. (1. METER. (...).
O Lord to thee I make my moan
in these my depths of Grief*
I call, I cry, I sigh and groan,
trusting to find relief*

thy gracious ear incline:
And let it fully be possessed
with these desires of mine.

the sins that we have done^
Who should escape, or who could say
that he could answer one?

to tenderness and Grace:
That we might have encouragement
to fear before thy face.

does wait upon thy Will:
And on thy Word with confidence
my hope is fixed still.

does wait on God always:
More eager than the Watch for light,
the Watch for break of day.
Israel boldly trust upon
the Lords's free grace and love:
And plentiful redemption
that comes from God above.

of Grace which he supplies,
shall blot out all the heavy score
of our iniquities.
HYMN 546. Pardoning mercies implored.
Psalm 130. (2. METER)
OUT of the Depths I cried to thee,
Lord, let my voice be heard:
And let thine ears attentive be
unto my suits preferred.
Such are our sins, that none could stand
If thou should mark the same:
But there is forgiveness at thy hand,
that men may fear thy Name.
I wait on God, and on his Word
my soul does wait and stay:
I wait more earnest for the Lord,
than Watchmen for the day.
I say, more earnestly than those
that watch for morning light:
Let Israel thus on God repose
whose mercy's infinite.
Redemption in most plentious wise
with him is found to be:
And from all his iniquities
he shall set Israel free.
O render thanks to our great God,
the God of Heaven therefore:
Whose mercies know no period,
but last for evermore.
HYMN 547. Pardoning mercies plentiful.
All People, etc. Or, O Lord Consider, etc.
Out of Psalm 130. (3. METER.)
OUT of the deeps I cried to thee,
Lord hear the prayer that I have pressed,
And let thine ears attentive be
unto the voice of my request.
For if thou mark iniquities,
Lord, who may stand before thine eyes:
But there is forgiveness, Lord, with thee,
That sweetly feared thou may be.
I wait for God, my soul does stay,
his word I hope in day and night:
My soul waits for the Lord, I say,
more than the Watchmen for the light.
Let Israel hope in God therefore,
For with the Lord is mercy store:
Plentious Redemption he brings in,
To save all Israel from his sin.
HYMN 548. (4. METER.)
Argument.
The depths of mercy give relief,
Unto the utmost depths of Grief.
Psalm 130.
FROM the depths of troubled mind,
Lord, to thee I cried,
And to thee, O Lord, most kind
were my prayers applied:
Lord vouchsafe to hear my cry
in commiseration,
Bow thine ear attentively
to my supplication.
If thou mark iniquity
who, Lord, should be cleared?
But forgiveness is with thee
that thou may be feared.
I am waiting for the Lord,
yea my soul attends,
And on his most holy Word
all my hopes depends.
My soul waits for God, I say,
more than men for morning,
More than Watchmen for the day,
for the days returning.
Hope thou Israel in the Lord
with an apprehension,
How with him is richly stored
mercy and redemption.
And he shall his Church redeem
from their vast offenses,
Though they do past pardon seem
and cry loud against us.
O give thanks to God therefore
for the Lord is gracious;
And his mercies evermore
kindly do embrace us.
HYMN 549. Pride mortified.
Psalm 131. (1. METER)
NO haughty heart, O Lord, have I
in great affairs to deal:

to thee I dare appeal.
I have not sought nor entertained
the things for me too high:

so meek and mild am I.
The weaned child's behavior
my soul has altogether.
Israel in his savior
must hope henceforth for ever.
HYMN 550. Pride to be mortified.
A Praxis for the proper Tune of the old 50. Psalm. The mighty God, etc.
Psalm 131. (2. METER.)
NOT self-high-pris'd,
but meek and mild am I:
Not exercised
in things too great and high.
But as a Child
weaned from his mothers breast;
So am I mild,
and set my heart at rest.
And in this way
must Israel endeavor
To trust and stay
on God, henceforth for ever.
HYMN 551. Promotion of the Church and State.
Psalm 132.8, 9.
ARise, O God, into thy rest,
and settle us now at length,
As when thy Ark did once invest
the Temple of thy strength.
O let thy Priests perpetually
with righteousness be clad:
And make thy Saints to shout for joy,
and be exceeding glad.
13, 14, 16.
Because the Lord has Sion chose,
desiring there to dwell:
This is for ever my repose,
I love and like it well.
My saving health shall cloth throughout
his Priests perpetually:
And I will make her Saints to shout,
and shout aloud for joy.
15.17.
And I will in abundance spread
provisions for her store:
And I will satisfy with bread
the numbers of her poor.
There will I make the horn to bud
of David on his Throne:
I have ordained a lamp so good
for mine anointed one.
18.
As for his enemies that combine,
I Will cloth them all with shame:
But on himself his Crown shall shine,
and flourish with his fame.
HYMN 552. Promotion of Unity.
Psalm 133. (1. METER.)

how happy a thing to find,
When Brethren live in amity,
and unity of mind.

which was poured out and spread
Upon the Priestly function
on Aaron's honored head.
It wet not only head and hair,
but on his beard ran down:
And wet the garments which he ware,
and border of his gown.
As dew distilled upon the tops
of Hermon's fragrant hill,
Or Sion with his silver drops
the fields with fruits does fill.
So plentiously the blessing flows
commanded from above.
With everlasting life on those
that live in peace and love.
HYMN 553. (2. METER.)
Argument.
Unity and Christian Love
Bring great blessings from above.
Have mercy, etc.
Psalm 133.
BEhold how good a thing,
and pleasant it is to find;
That Brethren (where cohabiting)
firm unity should bind.
It Is like the Ointment shed,
and by command conferred
On Holy Aaron's Priestly head,
which wet both head and beard.
And did from thence distill
his Garment skirt to wet;
It Is like the lovely Hermon hill
with drops of dew beset.
Like Sion's silver showers
descending on the dales:
For there the Lord the blessing powers
of life that never fails.
HYMN 554. Promotion of Unity.
The mighty God, etc.
Psalm 133. (3. METER.)
BEhold how good! how sweet it is to see
when Brethren by the laws of love are led!
Dwelling together all in unity,
it is like the Ointment that perfumed the head,
The head and beard of Aarons Priestly Order,
And wet his Garments to the skirt and border.
It Is like the fruitful showers of morning dew,
that did upon the Hill of Hermon fall:
Or that which does descend in drops not few
on Sion Mountain fruitfullest of all.
For there the Lord commands the happy blessing
Of life so sweet and endless in possessing.
HYMN 555. Protection out of Sion, or the Levites Blessing.
Psalm 134. (1. METER)
BEhold, bless ye the Lord,
O ye his servants all*
That in his house by night keep guard
according to your call.
Lift up your humble hands
within his holy place:
And bless the Lord as he commands,
and humbly beg his grace.
The Lord (shall ye say sti^^)
that made both Heaven and Earth,
Accomplish thee from Sion-hill
with blessings thence powered forth.
HYMN 556. Protection out of Sion, or the Levites Blessing.
A Praxis for the proper Tune of the 124 Psalm. Now Israel, etc.
Psalm 134. (2. METER.
LO! ye his servants praise the Lord most high,
Ye that by night within his Temple stand:
There bless the Lord and us with raised hand.
The Lord, say ye, that made both Earth and Sky,
Out of his Temple bless thee bounteously.
HYMN 557. Providence to Israel God's peculiar treasure.
Ye Children, etc.
Psalm 135.1. to 5.
PRaise ye the Lord, and spread his fame,
O ye his servants still proclaim
the praises of his holy Name:
Ye that do stand within his gate,
And at the Sacred Altar wait
of our great God, his praise relate.
Praise ye the Lord, for good he is;
Sing praises to that Name of his,
for a most pleasant work it is.
For God has chosen, and foreknown
Jacob and Israel as his own
for his peculiar wealth alone.
5, 6, 7, 8.
For that the Lord is great, I know,
And infinitely does outgo
all gods, and great ones high and low.
For whatsoever does him please,
In heaven, in earth, in deeps, in seas,
he acts in all, in each of these,
Vapors he draws from earths far ends,
Lightnings for Rain from Clouds he rends,
and Winds out of his treasury sends.
Who smote all Egypts first increast,
The first of Man, the first of Beast;
all, from the greatest to the least.
9, 10, 11, 12.
Wonders and Sines send forth did he,
O Egypt, in the midst of thee,
on Pharaoh, and his Family.
Who did the mighty Nations smite,
And slew the Kings of potent might,
as Sion, that strong Amorite.
And Og, who sat on Bashan Throne
He also slew; nor him alone,
but Canaans Kingdoms every one.
And to his People gave their Land,
He gave it into Isreal's hand,
an heritage at their command.
HYMN 558. Pureness of God's Worship, and derision of Idols.
Ye Children, etc.
Psalm 135, 13. to 17. (2. PART.)
THY Name, O Lord, shall never die,
And thy memorial, O most high,
endures to all posterity.
For God to Judgment will awake,
His peoples cause to undertake,
repenting for his servants sake:
The Heathens Idol-Gods, behold,
They are of Silver and of Gold,
such as the hands of men did mold:
Mouth, Ears and Eyes, they have all three,
But neither speak, nor hear, nor see.
and void of breath their Nostrils be.
18, 19, 20, 21.
Their makers (guilty of the sin)
Are like to them, and much a kin,
and so are all that trust therein.
But God the Lord, deserves great fame,
O house of Israel bless his name,
O house of Aaron do the same.
Bless ye the Lord, O Levy's house,
And make his praises glorious,
let all that fear him praise him thus.
O bless the Lord from Sion-hill,
That dwells at Salem with good will,
O bless the Lord, and praise him still.
HYMN 559. Pure services of the Church.
Psalm 135.19. (3. PART.)
BLess ye the Lord with one accord,
O house of Israel:
And each of us of Aaron's house,
his glorious praise forth tell.
20.
Let Levy's Tribe due praise ascribe
to God's most holy Name:
And all that fear him every where
his noble praise proclaim.
21.
O bless him still from Sion-hill,
whose is that blessed abode,
Jerusalem, and dwells with them,
praise ye the Lord our God.
HYMN 560. Remembrance of God's ancient works, and everlasting mercies.
Psalm 136.1, 2, 3, 4. (1. METER.)
GIVE thanks to God, for he is good;
for's mercy lasts for ever:
To the God of gods show gratitude,
for's mercy fails never.
The Lord of lords give thanks unto,
for's mercy never fails:
Who can alone great wonders do,
for's mercy still prevails.
5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
To him whose wisdom made the Sky,
for's mercy still shines bright:
And stretched the Earth, than Seas more high,
for's mercies infinite.
Who made Sun, Moon and Stars for lights,
for's mercy still outshines:
That rules the day, and these the nights,
for's mercy never declines.
10, 11, 12, 13.
To him that Egypts firstborn smote,
for's mercies still abound:
And Israel from among them brought,
for's mercy's still renowned.
With arm outstretch'd, and mighty hand,
for's mercy still extends:
Caused the Red Sea in parts to stand,
for's mercy still transcends.
14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
Amidst it he gave Israel ground,
for's mercies still endure;
Where Pharaoh and his host were drowned,
for's mercies still are sure.
That led his flock the deserts through,
for's mercies still persist:
And smote great Kings and famous too,
for's mercies never mist.
19, 20, 21, 22.
King Sion the Amorite he did kill,
for's mercies still remain:
And Og, the King of Basan hill,
for's mercies ever reign.
And for an heritage gave their land,
for's mercies still stand fast:
Into his People Isreal's hand,
for's mercies ever last.
23, 24, 25, 26.
Who thought on's in our low estate,
for's mercies never slack:
And saved us from our enemies hate,
for's mercies never go back.
Who feeds with food all kinds of flesh,
for's mercies still provides:
To the God of Heaven give thanks afresh,
for's mercy still abides.
HYMN 561. Remembrance of God's ancient Works and everlasting mercies.
Give laud, etc.
Psalm 136. (2. METER.)
GIVE laud unto the Lord,
for very good is he,
The God of gods record,
the Lord of lords praise ye:
For certainly
His mercies do endure unto
Eternity.

whose wisdom made the skies:
And spread the Earth abroad,
above the Sea to rise:
For certainly, etc.

that made those glorious lights,
The Sun to rule by day,
the moon and stars by nights:
For certainly, etc.
Aegypt's firstborn smote,
and Israel (scaping harm)
He from among them brought
with strong out-streched arm:
For certainly, etc.

where Israel passage found:
But Pharaoh and all they
of his whole host was drowned.
For certainly
His mercies do endure unto
Eternity.

the Wilderness quite through:
Who mighty Kings smote dead,
and famous Kings he slew.
For certainly
His mercies do endure unto
Eternity.
Sihon and Og he slew,
and in their Land do dwell,
He gave possession to
his servant Israel.
For certainly
His mercies do endure unto
Eternity.

when in a low estate:
And our Redemption wrought,
from them that did us hate.
For certainly, etc.

O then give thanks unto
The God of Heaven so good,
to whom all praise is due.
For certainly, etc.
HYMN 562. Revenge upon Babylon.
Have mercy, etc.
Psalm 137. (2. METER.)
Babylon
we sat down every one:
And Sion's state now ruinate
we wept to think upon.

on Willow-trees we hung:
Where they did thus require of us,
come sing a Sion-song.

that carried us away
In captive state, and desolate,
urge us to sing and play.

though wasted by their hand:
How can our tongues tune Sion's Songs
within a foreign Land?
Salem! If that I
forget thee carelessly;
Let my right hand lose all command
of music faculty.

then prosper let me never:
But let it cause my tongue and jaws
to cleave and cling together.
Jerusalem
I do not quite contemn
All joys that be, and count not thee
above the chief of them.

showed by the Edomite:
Thus did they say in Salem's day,
down with it, raze it quite.
Babylon,
whose ruin now comes on:
Happy is he that does to thee
as thou to us have done.

that takes and dasheth thee
(Thy little ones) against the stones
when Babel's doom shall be.
HYMN 563. Service and safety of the Humble, God's true favorites.
Psalm 138. (1. METER.)

with all my heart and might:
Before the gods who'ere they be,
in Men and Angels sight.

toward the stately frame
Of thine own house and holy place,
there will I bless thy Name.
For all thy loving kindness, Lord,
and for thy truth Divine:
For thou have made thy faithful Word
over all thy Name to shine.

thou answerest me again:
And gav'st such inward strength to me,
as did my soul sustain.

when they shall hear of thee:
What promises thou did proclaim,
and have fulfilled to me.

in God's most holy ways:
Because the Glory of our Lord
deserves so great a praise.

the lowly he respects:
But them that carry't loftily
he utterly neglects.

fresh comforts thou shall send:
Against the Wrath of all my foes
thy hand thou shall extend.
And thy right hand, O thou most high,
my sure defense shall be;

that which concerns me.
Thy mercy does, O Lord, abide,
for that can never fade.
O do not lay the work aside
which thine own hands have made.
HYMN 564. Service and safety of the Humble, God's true favorites.
Ye Children, etc. Or, To the proper (...) of the Old 127. Psalm. Except the
Lord, etc.
Psalm 138. (2. METER.)
LORD, from my heart I Will praise thy Name,
Before the Gods I Will sing thy fame,
prostrate at Sion's sacred frame:
For thy sweet love and truth so tried,
For thou thy Word have magnified,
yea, more than all thy Name beside.
Thou heard'st me when I cried to thee,
With inward strength thou strengthenedst me;
and did my soul from danger free:
All those that Earthly Scepters bear
Shall praise thee when thy Words they hear;
and know how well fulfilled they were.
Yea, they shall sing, and give thee praise,
Walking as Converts in thy ways;
whose Wonders admiration raise:
Though God be high above the Skies,
He on the lowly casts his eyes;
but does the proud as much despise.
And though I walk in midst of woes,
Thy hand shall save me from my foes,
and raise me in their overthrows.
My perfect peace shall thou command,
Thy mercies, Lord, for ever stand:
leave not the works of thine own hand.
HYMN 565. Seeking God, or supplications at our awaking.
All People, etc. Or, O Lord Consider, etc.
Psalm 80.1. and 121.4. and 139.17, 18.
O Shepherd that do Israel keep,
Who never slumbrest nor do sleep:
How precious are thy thoughts to (...)
How great a sum, O God, they be!
If I thereof would take account,
The Sands in number they surmount:
And whenever I awake,
These things into my thoughts I take.
And I am ever with thee still,
To contemplate of thy good will:
As for the wicked and the lewd,
All such companions I exclude.
For thou will surely slay such men,
And bring destruction upon them:
They speak against thee wickedly,
And talk of God whom they deny.
I hate their bold impieties,
I hate them that against thee rise:
I count no man so much my foe
As him that does thy fear forgo.
Nor do I speak from feigned zeal,
To thee, O Lord, I dare appeal:
Search me, O Lord, and see my heart,
Try me, and prove my inward part.
See, Lord, If I do go astray
In any evil wicked way:
And guide me, that I may not miss
The way to everlasting bliss.
HYMN 566. Supplications for the Morning.
Psalm 141.2, 3.
LORD, let my prayer be now set forth
as incense in thine eyes:
And the uplifting of my hands
as the evening Sacrifice.
Lord set a Watch before my mouth,
that no ill Words take place:
And keep the door of both my lips
by thine effectual grace.
4, 5.
Incline my heart to no ill thing,
no wicked work to follow:
With them that act iniquity,
nor their sweet baits to swallow.
But let the righteous smite me, Lord,
and it shall be a favor:
And his reproof a precious oil
of acceptable savor.
5.
Such smiting shall not break my head,
and I Will requite their care:
When their calamities shall need
the succors of my prayer.
2. METER.
All people, etc.
LORD let my prayer be now set forth
Before thee, as a thing o^ worth:
As incense let it, Lord, arise,
Or as the Evening Sacrifice.
Lord, set a careful watch before
My mouth and lips to keep the door:
To no ill thing incline my heart,
With sinners let me take no part.
Nor let me of their dainties eat,
That swallow sin as men do meat:
But let the righteous man reprove,
And smite me with the checks of love.
As precious Oil, or Odours shed,
Such smiting shall not break my head:
And in my prayers I shall bless
The Saints, when fal^'n into distress.
HYMN 567. Supplications in times of extreme danger.
Psalm 142. (1. METER)
WITh earnest voice I cried to God,
I showed my woeful case:
With earnest voice I cried aloud,
and humbly su'd for Grace.

before him to express:
I showed before him, and declared
my trouble and distress.

thou did my danger see,
How in the way that I did pass
they laid a snare for me.

but none did notice take:
All refuge failed, none did regard
my life that lay at stake.

to thee my hopes arrive:
Thou art my portion and my aid
while I remain alive.

how very low I lie:
From my pursuers rescue me,
since stronger far than I.

that I may praise thy Name:
The Just shall flock about me then,
thy bounty to proclaim.
HYMN 568 Supplication of King David.
To the Tune of the Old 124. Psalm. Now Israel, etc.
Psalm 142. (2. METER.)
I Cried to God
aloud with all my might,
I cried aloud
unto the Lord most high,
I made my supplications
earnestly.
I powered out my
complaints before his sight:
I showed before
him my distressfull plight.
When as my heart
was overwhelmed with care,
Thou knewst my path,
and how I was beset:
The way I went
was lined as a net.
Mine enemies
had laid a secret snare,
That I might fall
into it unaware.
I looked on
my right hand and beheld,
But none would know
me, no man did condole,
All refuge failed,
none cared for my soul*
I cried to thee,
and said, thou have excelled:
God is a Refuge
most unparalled.
Thou art my portion
whilst I live an hour,
Attend my cry,
for I am brought full low:
O save me from
my persecuting foe.
For they that seek
my soul for to devour,
Are stronger far
than I, and more of power.
O bring my soul
from prison by command,
That I may show
and celebrate thy fame:
And render praises
to thy holy Name.
Then shall the righteous
round about me stand,
When thou shall bless
me with a bounteous hand.
HYMN 569. Supplications relating to Posterity.
Psalm 144.
LORD make our Sons as thriving Plants
which growing youth does grace:
Our Daughters as the battlements
of some fair polished place.
Our Garners full of each good thing,
our Sheep in numbers great:
Their thousands, and ten thousands bring,
within our fields to bleat.
Our laboring Oxen strong and stout,
that there be no restraint:
No breaking in, nor going out,
Nor in our streets complaint.
Happy are men in such a case,
yea rather we record
That people blessed in every place,
whose God is God the Lord.
2. METER.
The mighty God, etc.
LORD make our Sons as plants grown up in youth,
our Daughters as the carved corner stones
Of some fair Palace, which an artist does
erect with Pillars, making curious ones:
Our Garners full all sorts of store containing:
Our Sheep by thousands, and ten thousands yeaning.
Our Oxen strong to labor, fat of flesh,
no breaking in where dread and danger meets:
No going out to wars begun afresh,
no sad complaining uttered in our streets.
Happy the people blessed so for their bodies,
Yea, happy people, whose protector God is.
HYMN 570. (Out of Psalm 145.)
Argument.
Perpetual praises to the Lord are vowed,
And Saints enjoined to set them out aloud.
David's Psalm of praise.
I Will extol thee, Lord, my King,
and bless thy Name for ever:
Each day will I be honoring
thy Name; neglecting never.
Great is the Lord, and great in praise,
his greatness none can search:
One age shall praise thy works and ways
to thy succeeding Church.
Thy mighty acts they shall proclaim,
and I will here discuss
The glorious fame of thy great Name,
and works miraculous.
And men shall show the mightiness
of all thy dreadful deeds;
And I Will express with readiness
thy greatness which exceeds.
The memory of thy goodness great
they largely shall express;
Thy righteousness they shall repeat
in Songs of thankfulness.
HYMN 571. (2. PART.)
Argument.
God's slow to anger prone to grace:
His mercy shines in every place.
Psalm 145.

whom kind compassions fill:
To anger slow, to mercy prone,
and bears us great good will.

as all his creatures find;
And all his works in general
taste of his mercies kind.

and thee thy Saints shall bless:

and thy great power express.

God's mighty acts and great:
His Kingdoms gloriousness to show.
and his majestic Seat.

and stands forever fast:
And thy alone Dominion
from age to age shall last.

and universal flesh*
His holy Name's renown shall raise
and ever sound afresh.
HYMN 572. (3. PART.)
Argument.
The weak upheld, all Creatures are supplied
With timely food, and God is magnified.
Psalm 145. v. 20.
THE Lord preserves faithfully
all those that do him love:
But all the wicked he will destroy
with vengeance from above.

and thou do give them meat,
In fitting opportunity
that all may have to eat.

does great abundance bring;
To satisfy the appetite
of every living thing.
Psalm 145. (4. PART.))
Argument.
God just and holy takes delight
To hear the Prayers of men upright:
He quite subverts lewd sinners ways,
And claims our universal praise.

holy in all he does:

and calls on him in truth.

of all the holy seed:
He hears their cry, what that requires,
and helps them at their need.
Israel's God the Lord therefore
be praised of all together:
From first to last for evermore,
Amen, Amen, for ever.
HYMN 573. Trust in God blessed.
Psalm 146.1, 2. (1. METER.)
GReat praise to God Almighty give,
my soul praise thou the Lord:
Yea, whilst I have a day to live
his praises I Will record.
I will give praises ^o my God,
my soul and song agreeing:
Whilst here on earth I have abode,
whilst I have any being.
3, 4.
Trust not in Princes mortal seed,
nor in the Son of man:
For help you in your greatest need
be sure they never can.
His breath goes forth and he is dead,
he turns to his clay:
And all his thoughts are perished,
in that same very day.
5, 6.
But happy, happy man is he
whom Jacob's God does own:
Whose help the Lord his God will be
who hopes in him alone.
Which did the Heaven and Earth begin,
creating both together.
The Sea, and all that is therein,
which keeps truth for ever.
7, 8.
Which executes judgment good,
for men that are oppressed:
Which to the hungry gives food,
and prisoners sets at rest.
The Lord does open blind men's eyes,
and raises from the dust:
The bowed down, the Lord likewise
does greatly love the just.
9.
He keeps the stranger safe and sure
in their forlorn estate:
The Lord relieves the Orphans poor,
and Widows desolate.
But as for men that disobey,
the Lord on them does frown:
And their ungodly wicked way
he turns upside down.
10.
The Lord throughout all ages still
shall reign for evermore:
Even thy God, O Sion hill,
praise ye the Lord therefore.
HYMN 574. Trust in God immortal, powerful, faithful.
Give laud, etc.
Psalm. 146. v. 1, to 9. (2. METER.)
MY soul praise thou the Lord,
as long as thou have breath,
In Songs his praise record,
and honor him till death.
trust not in Kings,
Nor humane seed, which are indeed
vain helpless things.
Breath fails, and dust they be,
there all their thoughts are laid:
But happy, happy he
whom Jacob^s God does aid,
that hopes in him
Who made all these, Heaven, Earth, and Seas,
and all therein.
That keeps Covenant still,
that helps the wronged to right;
That does the hungry fill,
that gives the blind their sight;
sets prisoners free;
Loves upright men, and raises them
bowed down that be.
HYMN 575. Trust in the preserver; viz. of Srangers, Widows and Fatherless.
Give laud, etc.
Psalm 146.9. (3. METER.)
THE Lord's Almighty hand
preserves evermore
The Strangers in the Land,
the Widows and the poor:
and does relieve
The Fatherless in their distress,
that mourn and grieve.
As for the sinners way
he turns it upside down:
But he shall reign for aye,
and wear the Eternal Crown.
thy God, thy Lord,
O Sion-hill, shall govern still:
his praise record.
HYMN 576. (4. METER)
Argument.
Never in Kings or Princes trust,
For they quickly fall to dust.
All People, etc.
Psalm 146.1 to 5.
THE Lord's deserved praise proclaim,
my soul do thou extol his fame:
I, while I live, will praises give
unto the Lord's Almighty Name.
Unto my God will I sing praise,
while breath prolongs my life and days:
Trust in no King, nor mortal thing,
they can no help nor succor raise.
For lo! there passes out his breath,
and he returns to dust of death;
That very day his thoughts decay,
and every project perishes.
HYMN 577. (5. METER.)
Argument.
Happy he that trusts alone
In the high and holy one;
That made Heaven, Seas and Shore,
And keeps Covenant evermore.
Psa. 146.
O Happy, happy, happy one,
whoever Jacob's God has known
To be his aid: whose hope is staid
upon the Lord his God alone.
That made the Heavens, Seas and Shore,
the Earth and all the numerous store
In liquid Seas: he made all these,
and keeps truth for evermore.
In judgment he for us proceeds
for to avenge oppressors deeds;
From bondage he sets prisoners free;
the Lord likewise the hungry feeds.
HYMN 578. (6. METER.)
Argument.
God loves the Just, helps the distressed,
For ever reigns, his Name is blessed.
Psalm. 146.
THE Lord does righteous men affect,
The bowed down he does erect:
Opening likewise the blind man's eyes,
and strangers does the Lord protect.
The Lord relieves the fatherless,
and helps the Widow in distress:
But in his Wrath, the sinners path
the Lord does utterly suppress.
The Lord shall reign continually,
thy God, O Sion, rules on high;
And so he shall to ages all;
his Name do ye still magnify.
HYMN 579. (7. METER.)
Argument.
Creation-works demands our praise,
And all the Churches, all our days.
Three Children, etc.
Psalm 136.

for good he is.
For his mercies sure for ever do endure.

his honor raise.
For his mercies, etc.

with one accord.
For his mercies, etc.

whose fame exceeds,
For his mercies, etc.

made Heaven on high.
For his mercies, etc.

the Seas to bound.
For his mercies, etc.
HYMN 580. (8. METER.)
Argument.
Creation works and wonders wrought of old,
Require thanksgiving great and manifold.
Psalm 136.

great lights to shine.
For his mercies, etc.

to rule the Day.
For his mercies, etc.

to rule the night.
For his mercies, etc.
Egypt's first increase
of man and beast.
For his mercies, etc.
Israel from among
the barbarous throng.
For his mercies, etc.

of high command.
For his mercies, etc.
HYMN 581. (9. METER.)
Argument.
God's greatness and his goodness (past our search)
Are celebrated by his faithful Church.
Psalm 136.

for he is good.
For his mercies, etc.

as ye should do.
For his mercies, etc.

with thankfulness.
For his mercies, etc.

for Israel's way.
For his mercies, etc.
Israel through the midst of it
he did transmit.
For his mercies, etc.
Pharaoh and his host
on that Sea Coast.
For his mercies, etc.

of desert Grounds.
For his mercies, etc.
HYMN 582. (10. METER.)
Argument.
God's wondrous works of judgments wrought of old,
Require thanksgiving great and manifold.
Psalm 136.

Who smote great Kings.
For his mercies, etc.

he overthrew.
For his mercies, etc.
Sion that strong Amorite,
his power did smite.
For his mercies, etc.
Og the King of Bashan too
he overthrew.
For his mercies, etc.

to the after age.
For his mercies, etc.

and desolate.
For his mercies, etc.

that were our foes.
For his mercies, etc.

all mortal flesh.
For his mercies, etc.

to the God of Heaven.
For his mercies, etc.
HYMN 583. Variety of mercies magnified.
Psalm 147. (1. METER.)
PRaise ye the Lord, sing to the Lord,
for very good it is:
Pleasant and comely to record,
and praise that Name of his.
The Lord builds up Jerusalem,
his repossessed throne:
And Israel's outcasts all of them
he gathers into one.
3, 4, 5.
The wounds of every broken heart
he heals with gentle hand:
He numbers all the Stars apart,
and names them as they stand.
Great is our Lord of Israel,
and of great power and might:
His understanding does excel,
for it is infinite.
6.
The Lord lifts up the meek on high,
But does the proud confound:
And casts the wicked scornfully
down to the very ground.
1. METER. 2. PART. Ver. 7, 8.
SING to the Lord with thanksgiving,
sing praise with one accord:
Upon the solemn Harp, O sing,
unto our God the Lord.
Who makes thick Clouds o'respread the Sky
to feed the Earth with rain:
And Grass to grow on Mountains high
as on the fertile plain.
9, 10.
He gives to the beast his food
with plentiful supply:
And feeds the Ravens callow brood,
when hunger makes them cry.
God takes no joy in any horse,
nor in a Champions limb:
Nor can their courage, strength, or force
delight or pleasure him.
11.
But lo! the Lord does take delight
in them that fear his Name:
And in his mercies infinite
their confidence proclaim.
HYMN 584. Variety of mercies magnified.
1. METER. 3. PART. Psalm 147.12, 13, 14.
O Praise the Lord, Jerusalem,
thy God, O Sion praise:
For lo! thy gates and bars of them
he very strongly stays.
Thy Children in thee he has blessed,
thy peace he makes full great:
And fills thee with the very best
and finest of the Wheat.
15, 16.
He sends out his commandment
on all the Earth so vast:
No sooner can his word be sent,
but runs exceeding fast.
He gives snow like gentle wool,
and scatters all abroad:
His hoary frost most plentiful
like ashes that are strow'd.
4. PART. 1. METER. 17, 18.
THE Lord casts out his Icy hail,
like morsels to behold:
And who can stand and shall not quail
to feel his pinching cold?
He sends out his word, and lo!
it melts them again:
He causes then his winds to blow,
and waters flow amain.
19, 20.
God shows his word to Jacob's house,
that they may know it well:
His Laws and judgments righteous,
he shows to Israel.
He has not dealt so large a lot
to any Land beside:
As for his Laws they know them not,
the Lord be magnified.
HYMN 585. Variety of Providence praised. 2. METER.
Give laud, etc.
Psalm 147.1.
GIVE laud unto the Lord,
it is a pleasant thing,
His praises to record,
and his sweet songs to sing:
who on a rock,
His Church erects, and recollects
his scattered flock.
He heals the heart contrite,
and binds up all their wounds:
He tells the Stars of light
whose number so abounds.
and he can call
Each shining flame of them by name,
he knows them all.
Great is this God of ours,
yea most exceeding great:
His power above all powers,
and has the sovereign seat.
and as his might,
So likewise his pure wisdom is
most infinite.
The Lord lifts up the meek,
the wicked throws to ground:
Praise him with songs most sweet,
and harps harmonious sound.
the Heavens he fills
With Clouds for showers, makes Grass and flowers
to grow on hills.
The beasts and ravens young
he feeds when they call:
In horse, or Champion strong
he joyeth not at all.
but God above
Delights in them that fear his Name,
and trust in's love.
HYMN 586. Variety of Providence praised. 2. PART. 2. METER.
Psalm. 147.12.
O Salem praise the Lord,
praise him O Sion-hill,
Who has thy Gates well barred,
and does thy Cities fill:
thy peace full great
He makes to be, and fills thee
with flower of wheat.
Through the Earth his mandats go,
his word most swiftly flies:
Like wool he gives snow,
his frost as ashes lies:
his Ice is rolled
As morsels, and, O who can stand
before his cold?
He speaks, and straight it thaws,
he breaths and water flows:
To Israel his Laws
(and to none else) he shows:
as for his word
No heathen land does understand:
praise ye the Lord.
HYMN 587. (3. METER.)
Argument.
Praise suits with Saints for God his Grace imparts
To Israel's outcasts, and to broken hearts.
He tells the Stars, his power and skill abounds;
He cheers the meek, and lewd men he confounds.
Psalm 147.

his praises to forth-tell:
And to sing praises to our God,
for it becomes us well.
Jerusalem's Walls
to bring his people thither:
And Israel's outcasts he recalls,
and gathers them together.

where sense of sin abounds:
And (taking pity of their smart)
binds up their bleeding wounds.

and calls them all by Name:
Superior of Superiors
must we our God proclaim.

So great in power and might:
His understanding does exceed,
for it is infinite.

whom sharp afflictions wound:
But all the wicked he controlls,
and casts them to the Ground.
HYMN 588. (3. METER.)
Argument.
He praises God, who gives to all their food:
But he takes pleasure only in the good.
2. PART.

and spread his praise abroad:
With solemn harp his praise express,
and sing unto our God.
Who covers Heaven with Clouds of Rain
to enrich the Earth below:
And on the hills as on the plain
he makes the Grass to grow.

young Ravens cry to him:

nor in a strong man's limb.

is ever in the just:
In them that fear him faithfully,
and in his mercy trust.
HYMN 589. (3. METER.)
Argument.
He praises God that sends peace;
And plenty in the fields increase.
3. PART. Psalm 147.

O Salem praise him still:
The praises of thy God record
O Sion's sacred hill.

which to thy Gates pertain:
And blesses the inhabiters
within thee that remain.

within thy borders spread:
And plenteously he fills thee
with finest of the bread.

his word which runs swift:
Like locks of wool he sends the snow,
that also is his gift.
HYMN 590. (3. METER.)
Argument.
God sends the Seasons from above,
In token of his tender love:
But the chief Glory's Israel's
In freedom of God's Oracles.
4. PART.

as ashes on each side:
His Ice as morsels he casts out,
his cold who can abide?
He sends out his word in course
and melts the Ice and snow:
He makes his wind to blow with force,
and then the waters flow.
He shows his word to Jacob's Land,
and shows it for this cause,
That Israel may understand
his judgments and his laws.
The tokens of such tender love
no heathens can record:
His judgments they know nothing of,
wherefore praise ye the Lord.
HYMN 591. Universal thanksgiving, or Benedicite, etc. 1. METER.
Psalm 148.
PRaise ye the Lord, praise ye the Lord,
from Heavens lofty frame:
Him from on high, O magnify,
all Angels praise his Name.
O all his hosts his praise record,
O praise him moon and sun:
Ye stars of light that shine so bright,
the like of you be done.
Ye Heavens of Heavens that are so high,
praise him with one consent:
And water: ye on high that be
above the firmament.
O let them praise and magnify
the Lord's Almighty Name;
For lo! they were created there
when his commandment came.
He likewise did contrive it so,
to stablish them for ever:
So firm Decree ordained he,
that pass it they shall never.
Praise ye the Lord from Earth below,
ye Dragons and each deep:
Fire, Vapor, Snow, Hall-storms that blow,
his word that firmly keep.
All Mountains high, and fruitful trees,
All hills and Cedars tall:
Ye Fowl with wings, and creeping things,
ye Beasts and Cattle all.
Kings, Princes, People, all degrees,
ye Judges praise his Name:
Young men and Maids, Children and Babes,
and old men do the same.
The Lord's great Name still praised be,
for that alone excells:
And far more high than Earth or Sky
his glittering Glory dwells.
The praise of all his Saints is he,
and he the horn does raise:
Of Israel's Sons his dearest ones,
O give the Lord his praise.
HYMN 592. Universal thanksgiving, or Benedicite, etc. 2. METER.
To the proper Tune.
Psalm 148.
GIVE Laud unto the Lord,
from the Celestial Coasts,
All ye his praise record,
his Angels and his hosts:
him glorify,
Sun, Moon and Stars, ye higher Spheres,
and cloudy Sky.
O let them praise his Name,
since made by his command:
Who stablish'd all the frame
perpetually to stand.
He also made
A firm decree, which needs must be
by them obeyed.
Praise God from Earth below,
ye Dragons and ye deeps:
Fire, hail, clouds, wind and snow,
whom in command he keeps.
hills low and high,
Trees all that grow, Beasts swift or slow,
fowl all that fly.
Kings, and the vulgar throng,
Princes and Judges all:
Ye men and maidens young,
old men and Children small:
praise ye his Name,
Whose Name alone (as the only one)
excells in fame.
Whose Glory bright does blaze
above the Earth and Sky:
(Of all his Saints the praise)
he sets their horn on high:
Even theirs that spring
Of Isreal's race, (much in his grace)
his praises sing.
HYMN 593. Works of grace to the Church.
Psalm 149.1.
PRaise ye the Lord, sing to the Lord
a new-composed Song:
His memorable praise record
where all his Saints do throng.
Israel shout and sing
in their Creatour's Name:
Let Sion's Children in their King
triumphant joys proclaim.

the Harp before him bring:
And join the Timbrel to the same,
with these his praises sing.

in Israel does delight:
The humble he will beautify
with robes of saving might.

sing loud upon their bed:
And their Religious mouths employed

And with a double edged Sword,
put here into their hands,

upon the heathen lands.
Impose the peoples punishments,

The Noble Peers, and Presidents
in iron bands and chains.

the judgment on record:
Such honor to the Saints does fall,
praise ye, praise ye the Lord.
HYMN 594, Works of Grace to the Church. 2. METER.
The mighty God, etc.
Psalm 149.
PRaise God with new made Songs, and cheerful Voice,
his praises in the Saints assemblies sing:
Let Israel in his maker much rejoice,
let Sion's Sons be joyful in their King.
O let them praise his Name with comely dancing:
With harp and timbrel his sweet praise advancing.
For in his people God takes much delight,
the meek with saving health I Will beautify;
Let Saints be joyful in his Glory bright,
and sing aloud as on their beds they lie:
The Lord's high praises with their mouths unfolding:
And in their hands a sword two-edged holding,
To execute his wrath on heathen Lands,
with punishments the people to condemn:
To bind their Kings in chains, their Lords in bands,
the written judgment to fulfill on them:
For with such honor all the Saints are crowned:
Praise ye the Lord, who is to be renowned.
HYMN 595. Yielding Universal Praises.
Psalm 150. (1. METER)
PRaise ye the Lord with one consent
in Sion's sacred Tower,
O praise him in the firmament
of his Almighty power:

in grateful Songs recite,
According to the excellence
of his adored might.

with Timbrel and with Dance,

his Noble praise advance.

his Glorious Praise record:

and praise, O praise the Lord.
HYMN 596. Yielding Universal Praises.
All People, etc.
Psalm 150. (2. METER.)
PRaise, praise the Lord in's holy Tower,
Praise him in the spreading of his power:
Praise him for his great miracles,
Praise him as his great power excells.
Praise him with Trumpets melody,
Praise him with Harp and Psaltery:
Praise him with Timbrel, Pipe and Flute;
Praise him with Organ and with Lute.
Praise him, O praise him zealously,
With Cymbals sounding loud and high,
Let all that breath his praise record,
O praise and magnify the Lord.
HYMN 597. (3. METER.)
Argument.
Heaven must God's praise begin,
Then must all the Earth come in,
Art and Nature, Strength and Skill,
Instruments both loud and shrill:
Things above, and all beneath,
All must praise him while they breath.
Psalm 150.
PRaise God in's Sanctuary bright,
and powerful Firmament:
O praise him for his Acts of might,
and greatness excellent.
With sound of Trumpet spread his fame,
with Psalteries, Harps and Flutes,
With Timbrels also praise his Name,
with Organs and with Lutes.
With Cymbals loud his praises sing,
and Cymbals sounding high:
O praise him every breathing thing,
praise him perpetually.
HYMN 598. (4. METER.)
All People, etc.
Psalm 150.
PRaise ye the Lord, his praise repeat
Within his Sanctuaries seat:
O praise him in the Firmament
That shows his power Omnipotent.
O praise him for his mighty deeds,
And for his greatness which exceeds:
Praise him with sound of Trumpet sharp,
And with the Psaltery and Harp.
Your Timbrels in his praise employ,
And let your hearts even leap for joy:
Praise him with Instruments well strung,
And quavering Organs sounding long.
Praise him, O praise him cheerfully
With Cymbals sounding loud and high:
Let every thing inspired with breath
Applaud and praise the Lord till death.
HYMN 599. (5. METER.)
Argument.
Heaven must God's Praise begin,
Then must all the Earth come in:
Art and Nature, Strength and Skill,
Instruments both loud and shrill:
Things above, and all beneath,
All must praise him while they breath.
To the First New Tune.
Psalm 150.
PRaise ye the Lord with all your might,
Within the Sanctuary bright;
and that high Tower
Of large extent, the Firmament
of his great power.
Praise him for those great Acts of his
According as his greatness is:
therein is he
Most excellent, so eminent
his praise must be.
With sound of Trumpets pierce the Skies,
Praise him with Harps and Psalteries:
his Name advance;
Take in your hand the Timbrel, and
strike up the Dance.
Praise him with instruments well strung,
With lovely Organs sounding long:
sweet Cymbals sound
Both loud and shrill, that his Name still
may be renowned.
Let every thing inspired with breath
Sing forth his solemn praise till death:
let all accord
To spread the Fame of his great Name,
praise ye the Lord.
HYMN 600. 6. METER.
The Mighty God, etc.
PRaise ye the Lord, praise him in's holy Tower,
Praise him in the firmament of his great power:
Praise him for his great Acts and eminent
According to his greatness excellent;
O praise him with the Trumpet sweetly sounding,
With Harp and Psaltery and Joys abounding.
O praise him with the timbrel and the dance,
With stringed Instruments his praise advance;
Praise him with Organs reaching to the cloud,
Praise him with Cymbals sounding high and loud:
Let every thing that breaths his praise endeavor,
Praise ye the Lord, O praise the Lord for ever.
The End of the Psalm Hymns.
THE CANTICLES: OR THE SONG OF SOLOMON PARAPHRASED. By William Barton late
Minister of St. Martins in Leicester.

The Song of Songs.
[The Church.]
JOIN thy life-breathing lips to mine,
Thy love excells the joy of Wine:
Thy Odors oh! how redolent
Attract me with their pleasing scent:
These sweetly flowing from thy Name
Our Virgins with desire inflame;
O draw me, my beloved, and we
With winged feet will follow thee.
Thy loving Spouse at length, great King,
Into thy royal chamber bring;
Then shall our Souls entranced with joy
In thy due praise their zeal employ;
Thy celebrated loves recite
With more than crowned cups delight:
Who truth and sacred justice prize
To thee their hearts shall sacrifice.
You Daughters of Jerusalem,
You branches of that holy stem;
Though black in favor I excel,
Black as the Tents of Ishmael;
Yet graceful as the burnished Throne,
And Ornaments of Solomon.
Despise not my discolored look,
This tawny from the Sun I took,
My mothers Sons envied my worth,
And swollen in malice, thrust me forth
To keep their vines in heat of day,
While, ah! mine own neglected lay.
More loved than all of humane seed
O tell me where thy sheep do feed;
Where rest they, in what graceful shade,
When scorching beams the fields invade?
Why should I stray, and turn to those,
Who, though companions, are thy foes?
[Christ.]
O thou the fairest of thy kind,
I will inform thy troubled mind;
Follow the way my flock has led,
And in their steps securely tread.
Thy kids feed on the fruitful plains,
Besides the sheep-coat of our swains.
Thou, love, art like those generous steeds
Which Pharaoh for his Chariot breeds,
Tric'kt in their rich Caparisons,
How shine thy cheeks like sparkling stones!
That loosly dangle from thine ears,
Thy neck the ocean treasure wears;
Borders of Gold we'll make for thee,
Whose studds of purest Silver be.
[The Church.]
While he the Prince of Bounty feasts,
And entertains his happy Guests,
My Spiknard shall perfume his hair,
Whose Odors fill the ambient Air:
All night his sacred head shall rest
Betwixt the pillows of my breast;
Not Myrrh, new bleeding from the tree,
So acceptable is to me.
Nor Camphire clusters when they blow,
Which in Engedy's Vineyard grow.
[Christ.]
Thy beauty, love, allures my sight,
And sheds a firmament of light;
In either eye there sits a Dove,
So mild, so chaste, and full of love.
[The Church.]
Thou, my beloved, art fairer far,
Thou as the Sun, I but a Star;
Come, my delight, our pregnant bed,
Is with green Buds and Violets spread;
Our Cedar-roofs are richly guilt,
Our Galleries of Cypress built.
The Second Song.
[Christ.]
I Am the Lilly of the Vales,
The Rose of Sharon's fragrant dales:
Lo, as the unsullyed Lilly shows,
Which in a Brake of Bramble grows,
My love so darkens all that are
By erring men admired for fair.
[The Church.]
Lo, as the tree which Citrons bears,
Amidst the barren Shrubs appears,
So my beloved excells the race
Of man in every winning Grace.
In his desired shade I Will rest,
And with his fruits my palate feast:
He brought me to his magazine
Replenisht with refreshing Wine;
And over me (a tender maid)
The Ensign of his love displayed.
With flagons, oh! revive my powers,
And strew my bed with fruits and flowers;
Whose taste and smell may cordial prove,
For oh! my soul is sick of love:
Beneath my head thy left arm place,
And gently with thy right embrace.
Ye Daughters of Jerusalem,
Ye branches of that holy stem;
I by the mountains, Roes, and by
The Hinds which through the forest fly,
Adjure you that ye silence keep,
Nor till he wake, disturb his sleep.
Is it a dream, or do I hear
The voice that so delights my ear?
Lo! he over hills his steps extends,
And bounding, from the clifts, descends;
Now like a Roe outstrips the wind,
And leaves the breathed Heart behind.
Behold, without my dearest stays,
And through the latice darts his rays,
Thus, as his words, his looks invite,
O thou the Crown of my delight.
[Christ.]
Arise my love, my fair one rise,
O come, delay our joy envyes:
Lo, the sharp winter now is gone,
Those threatening Tempests overblown;
Hark how the airs musicians sing,
And caroll to the flowery spring:
Chaste Turtles housed in shady Groves
Now murmr to their faithful loves;
Green figs on sprouting trees appear,
And vines sweet smelling blossoms bear.
Arise my love, my fairest rise,
O come, delay our joy envyes;
O thou my dove, whom terror locks
Within the Cranyes of the Rocks;
Come forth now, like thy self appear,
And with thy voice delight mine ear:
Thy voice is music, and thy face
All conquers with resistless Grace.
My love, come vanquish, for my sake,
These foxes, these young foxes take;
Who these our tender Grapes destroy,
And in their thriving rapine joy.
[The Church.]
I am my loves and he is mine,
So mutually our loves combine;
He, whose affection words exceeds
His flock among the lilies feeds:
Return to me my only dear,
Stay till the morning star appear;
Stay till nights dusky shadows fly
Before the days illustrious eye;
Run like a Roe or Heart upon
The hills of lofty Bethoron.
The Third Song.
[The Church.]
STrecht on my restless bed all night,
I vainly sought my souls delight;
Then rose, the City searched, the street,
No angle my unwearied feet
Untrodden left, yet could not find
The only solace of my mind.
When, lo, the watch that walk the roun
Me in my souls distemper found,
Of whom with passion I inquired,
Saw you the man so much desired?
Nor many steps had further past,
But found my love, and held him fast;
Fast held, till I the so long sought,
Had to my mothers mansion brought,
In that adorned chamber laid
Of her who gave me breath, I said;
Ye Daughters of Jerusalem,
Ye Branches of that holy Stem,
I by the mountains, Roes, and by
The Hinds, which through the Forest fly,
Adjure you that ye silence keep,
Nor till he call disturb his sleep.
[Chorus.]
What beauty from the Desert comes,
Like spires of smoke raised from sweet gumms,
With Aromatic Powders fraught,
By Merchants from Sabaea brought?
[The Church.]
Behold the bed he rests upon,
The royal bed of Solomon,
Twice thirty Soldiers that excells
In valor Sons of Israel's,
So dreadful to his enemies
Their bright swords mounted on their thighs.
His person guarded from th'affright,
And treason of concealing night;
King Solomon a Chariot made
With trees from Lebanon conveyed,
The Pillars Silver, and the Throne
With Gold of India, Ophire-stone,
With Tyrrean Purple cield above
For Sion's Daughters paved with love:
Come, holy Virgin, O come forth,
Behold a spectacle of worth;
Behold the Royal Solomon
High mounted on his Father's Throne,
Crowned with the Crown his Mother placed,
On his smooth brows with gemms in have,
At the solemnized nuptial feast,
When joy his ravished soul possessed.
The Fourth Song.
[Christ.]
HOW fair art thou? how wondrous fair^
Thy Dove-like eyes in shades of hair?
Whose dangling curls appear like flocks
Of climing Goats from Gilead's Rocks.
Thy teeth like sheep in their return
From Chyson, washed and smoothly shorn;
None marked for barren, none at all,
But equal twins at once let fall;
Thy lips like shreads of Scarlet show,
Whence grateful accents sweetly flow;
Thy cheeks like Punick-apples are,
Which blush beneath thy flowing hair:
Thy neck like David's Armory,
With polisht marble raised on high;
Whose walls a thousand shields adorn
By Worthies often in battle born.
Thy breasts are twins, twins of the Roe,
There grazing where the lilies grow.
I to the mountains will retire
Where bleeding trees perfumes expire;
Until the morning fleck'd the Sky,
And nights relapsed shadows fly.
How beautiful do thou appear,
In every part from blemish clear;
My spouse let us at length be gone,
Leave we the fragrant Lebanon.
Look down from Amana, look down
From Shenars top and Hermons Crown;
From hills where dreadful Lions rage
And from the mount'nous Lepards cage.
Thou who my spouse and sister art
How have thou ravished my heart?
Struck with one glance of thy bright eyes,
One hair of thine in fetters ties.
Thy beauty, sister, is divine,
Thy love, my spouse, more strong than wine:
Thy Odors far more redolent
Than Spices from Panchea sent.
Thy lips drop honey; from below
Thy palate milk and honey flow.
Thy robes a sweeter odor cast
Than Lebanon with Cedars graced;
Our love by mutual vows assured
A Garden is, with strength immured.
A crystal fountain, a clear spring
Shut up and sealed with my ring:
An orch-yard stored with pleasant fruits,
Pome-granet trees there spread their roots;
Where sweetly smelling Camphir blows,
And never-dying Spiknard grows,
Sweet Spiknard Crocus newly blown,
Sweet Calamus and Cynamon:
Those trees which sacred incense shed,
The trees of myrrh and aloes bleed,
From bitter wounds, with all the rare
Productions which perfume the air.
[The Church.]
Those living springs from thee proceed,
Which still our plants with moisture feed;
Like those clear streams which issue from
The fountain (fruitful Lebanon.)
Ye cooler winds blow from the North,
Ye dropping Southern-gales break forth,
On this our Garden gently blow,
And through the Land rich Odors throw:
Come, love, come with a lovers have,
Of our ripe fruits and spices taste.
The Fifth Song.
[Christ.]
I To my Garden have retired,
Reapt Myrrh, with Spices much desired,
Sweet Gums from trees profusely shed,
On dropping combs of honey fed:
Drunk morning milk and new pressed wine;
O friends whom like desire combine,
Eat, drink, drink freely, nor remove
Till thou be all enflamed with love.
[The Church.]
Although I sleep, my passions wake,
For he who knocked, this sadly spoke,
My spouse, my sister, thou more mild*
Than harmless Doves, my undefiled,
O let me enter, Night has shed
Her dew on my uncovered head,
Which from my drenched lo^ks distills,
And with a frozen numbness chills.
Can I assent to thy request,
Disrobed and newly laid to rest?
Shall I now cloth my self again,
And feet so lately washed distain?
But when I had his hand discerned,
Drawn from the latch, my bowels yearn'd,
I rose, nor longer could defer,
TO unlock the door, when liquid myrrh
Thence dropping on my fingers fell,
And breathed an odoriferous smell;
But oh! when opened, he was gone,
His grief fetched from my heart a groan;
In vain I sought my souls beloved,
I called him, O, too far removed!
The watch and those who walked the round
That me in this affliction found,
Smote, wounded, and profanely tore
The sable veil my sorrow wore.
Ye Virgins of fair Solyma,
I charge you if ye meet him, say,
That I his spouse am sick of love,
And with your tears soft pity move.
[Chorus.]
O thou of all our sex most fair,
Can none with thy beloved compare?
Does he our loves so much transcend,
That we should him a Love intend?
[The Church.]
Amongst a Myriod he appears
The chief, and beauties Ensign bears,
His head adorned with burnisht Gold,
Which curls of shining hair infold,
Black as the newly plumed Crow,
His eyes like Doves by fountains show;
Late bathed in a Rivulet
Of milk, alike exactly set;
His cheeks sweet spice and flowers confer,
His lips like Lillies dropping myrrh;
His hands the wondering eye invites
Like rings that blaze with Chrysolites:
His belly bright as Ivory,
That Is overlaid with Saphirs dye:
His legs like marble pillars placed
On sockets of fine Gold, stand fast.
His countenance like Lebanon
Or like the Cedars grow thereon;
His tongue the ear with music feeds,
And he in every part exceeds:
Ye Daughters of Jerusalem
Such is my friend, my love, my gemm.
The Sixth Song.
[Chorus.]
FAIR Virgin, paralleled by none,
O whither's thy beloved gone?
Direct our forward zeal, that we
May join in his pursuit with thee.
[The Church.]
Behold, the more than life desired
Down to his Garden is retired;
There gathers flowers fast in the shade,
On beds of bruised spices laid.
Our mutual flame all flames exceeds,
His flock among the lilies feeds.
[Christ.]
Not regal Tirzah, Isaaels
Delight, thy beauty, love, excells:
Not thou Divine Jerusalem,
That art of all the world the gemm.
Not Armies with their Ensigns spread
So threaten with amazing dread:
O turn from me thy wounding eyes,
In every glance an arrow flies;
Thy dangling curls appear like flocks
Of climing Goats from Gileads Rocks:
Thy teeth, like sheep in their return
From Chyson washed and smoothly shorn:
None marked for barren, none at all,
But equal twins at once let fall:
Thy cheeks like Punick-apples are
Which blush beneath thy flowing hair.
They boast of many Queens, great store
Of Concubines, and Virgins more
Than can be told, my undefiled
Is all in one, the only child
Of her fair mother, and brought forth
To show the world an unknown worth:
Queens, Virgins, Concubines beheld,
Admired and blessed the unparalled.
[Chorus.]
Who Is this? who like the morning shows,
When she her paths with roses strows,
More fair than the replenisht moon,
More radiant than the Sun at noon:
Not Armies with their Ensigns spread,
So threaten with amazing dread.
[Christ.]
I to my pleasant Garden went
Where Nutmegs breath a fragrant scent,
To see the vines disclose their gemms,
And granets blooming on their stemms:
Where unawares and half amazed,
Me-thought my ravished soul was raised:
Up to a Chariot swift as winds
Drawn by my peoples willing minds.
[Chorus.]
Return, fair Shulamite, return
To us who for thy absence mourn:
What see ye in the Shulamite?
Two Armies prevalent in fight.
The Seventh Song.
[Christ.]
O Princess, thou than life more dear,
How beautiful thy feet appear
When they with purple ribbands bound,
In Golden Sandals print the Ground!
Thy Joints like Jewels which impart
To wondering eye the work-mans art.
Thy Navel like a Mazer filled
With juice from rarest fruits distilled.
Thy belly like an heap of wheat
With never fading Lillies set;
Thy breasts like two young Roes do show,
Which fell at once from one fair Do:
Thy Neck's an Ivory Tower, thine Eyne
Like those Fish-pools in Heshbon shine.
Thy Nose presents that Tower upon
The face of flowery Lebanon:
Which all the pleasant plains survays,
Where Abana her streams displays.
Thy head like Carmel clothed with shade,
Whose Tresses Tyrrean fillets brayed,
Sweet fetters for the great Kings Eyes,
Fast holden in those Galleries:
How pleasant, Oh! how exquisite
Thy beauty framed for sweet delight;
Thy stature like an upright palm,
Thy breasts like clusters dropping balm.
I will ascend thy palms high crown,
Whose boughs victorious hands renown:
Thy Nose shall smell like apples fine,
Thy breasts like clusters of the Vine:
And from the spreading branches root
Will gather her delicious fruit.
Choice wine shall from thy palate spring,
Most acceptable to the King;
Which sweetly shall descend and make
The dumb to speak, the dead to wake.
[The Church.]
I my beloved am only thine,
And thou by just exchange art mine:
Come, let us tread the pleasant fields,
Taste we what fruits the Country yields*
And in the Villages repose,
When shades of night all forms enclose:
Then with the early morn repair
To our new Vineyard, see if there
The tender Vines disclose their gemms
And Granets blossom on their stemms:
Amongst those fragrant trees my love
There only shall thou freely prove,
How sweet a smell our mandrakes yield,
Our Gates with various fruits are filled;
Fruits that are old, fruits from the tree,
New gathered, all preserved for thee.
The Eighth Song.
[The Church.]
O Had we from one mother sprung,
Both at her breast together hung,
Then should I meet thee in the street
With unreproved kisses greet:
And to my mothers house conduct
Where thou thy sister should instruct;
There would I spiced wine produce,
And my pome-granets purple juice;
Beneath my head thy left arm place,
And gently with thy right embrace.
Ye virgins born in Sion's Towers
I charge you by the chief of powers,
That ye a constant silence keep,
Nor till he call disturb his sleep.
[Chorus.]
Who Is this whose feet the hills ascend
From deserts leaning on his friend?
[The Church.]
I my beloved first raised when he
Lay under the Pome-citron tree;
Thy careful mother in that shade,
With anguish her fair belly laid;
Be I, oh thou my better part,
A Seal impressed upon thy heart?
Let me thy fingers Signet prove,
For death is not more strong than love:
The Grave not so insatiate
As jealousies inflame debate;
Should falling clouds with floods conspire
Their waters could not quench loves fire:
Nor all in Natures treasury
The freedom of affection buy;
We have a sister immature,
Who has no breasts, as yet obscure;
What ornaments shall we bestow,
When mortals her endowments know?
[Christ.]
On her if strongly built to bear,
We will a silver Palace rear;
Or if a door to deck the same,
We'll leaves of carved silver frame.
[The Church.]
I am a firm foundation
For my beloved to build upon;
My breasts are towers, I his delight,
His object and sole favorite.
[Christ.]
Late at Bal-hamon, Solomon
Let forth his Vine-yards every one,
For fruits and wine there yearly made
A thousand silver pieces paid.
[The Church.]
This Vineyard thus which I possess
With diligence I daily dress;
Thou Solomon shall have thy due
Two hundred more remain for you
Out of the surplus of our gains,
Who in our Vineyard took such pains.
[Christ.]
O thou that in the Garden liv'st,
And life-infusing counsel giv'st
To those that in thy song rejoice,
To me address thy cheerful voice.
[The Church]
Come, my beloved, O come away,
Love is impatient of delay;
Run like a youthful Heart or Roe,
On hills where precious spices grow.
A CATALOGUE OF VIRTUOUS WOMEN Recorded in the Old and New Testament.

1 Cor. 7.16. What know thou O Wife, whether thou shall save thy Husband? Or
how know thou O Man, whether thou shall save thy Wife?

The Second Edition; with Additions.

LONDON, Printed for William Cooper at the Pelican in Little Britain. 1688.

To the Right Honorable the Lady FRANCES, Countess of Rutland.
Right Honorable and Renowned Lady,
THE favorable acceptance which this small Present found with you, encouraged
me to communicate it to other virtuous Ladies and Gentlewomen, who were very
desirous of a Copy of it; which desires growing ample and importunate, made me
weary of writing, and willing (though not ambitious) to impart it to the Press:
partly to commemorate the honorable acceptance, and partly to congratulate
and gratify the respects it found.

Moreover, by much perusal, I perceived that I had left out many memorable
Persons of high account in Holy Scriptures, and that some that were put in had
too scant a Character, wherefore to make all complete, and to leave a living
Monument of those Resplendent Virtues that are recorded of the Female Sex,
which will undoubtedly excite good Women to Godly imitation, I have presumed to
make this Paper public for the honor of that Sex which God has so highly
honored, as the most acute Aretius observes upon the pious Women's coming first
to the Sepulcher of our Savior, Luke 24.1. Totum hoc ad gloriam Muliebris
Sexus pertinere, That it did all belong to the Glory of the Female Sex: and
learned Polanus says on the same occasion, Syntag. Theol. Christ. Page 419. at
the letter C. Column 1. Resurrectio Christi primum ab Angelo annunciata est
mulieribus quia voluit Deus sic ornare pietatem illarum quarum Zelus pro Gloria
Christi fervidior erat quam Virorum. The Resurrection of Christ (says he) was
first told by the Angel to the Women because their zeal for the glory of Christ
was hotter than the Men's.

Considering therefore that it cannot be condemned for flattery; (for none can
inherit such glory but they that imitate them) nor can it provoke envy or
disdain, which is so clear a record of the Holy Scriptures, neither does it
derogate from the Man, but dignifie him. For as he is her head, so she is his
glory, 1 Cor. 11.3.7. And a Virtuous Woman is a Crown to her Husband, Prove.
12.4. I humbly crave your Honors allowance and acceptance of the Publication
in your Name. And so with supplications for your Honors long health and
happiness, I rest,

Your Honors duly devoted, and most humble Servant, William Barton.

To the Right Honorable the Lady FRANCES, Countess of Rutland.
An EPIGRAM, Presented on the Feast Day of our Blessed Savior's Nativity, Anno
Dom. 1669.
IT IS a famous Character
Which I often have heard of Her^
Corresponding to the Fame
Of her Noble Father's Name.
Thus Religion understood,
Often runs in a Blood:
And, for multitude we find
Most what of the Womankind.
This is still the true Renown,
Virtue! which puts envy down:
So the Sacred Book defines
All the Ancient Heroines.
A CATALOGUE OF VIRTUOUS WOMEN, etc.
Genesis 3.26. and Verse. 15.
EVE the Mother of all Living,
Who was saved by God's forgiving,
When she first embraced the Creed
Of the precious promised Seed;
Genesis 3.15.
Deeply doubtless she resented
Her transgression, and repented,
Had her share in Godly grief,
If therein she was not chief.
Ibidem.
Neither did she so far grieve,
But as truly did believe
In the Savior promised*
Who should break the Serpents head.
Genesis 4.2. Verse. 25, 26.
She brought forth the Proto-Martyr,
And good Seth that followed after:
In the days of which good man
Public worship first began.
Genesis 4.25.
And of whom she prophesied,
This, said she, did God provide
In the room of Abel, slain
By the cruel hand of Cain.
Ibidem.
Thus was Eve (in primest place)
Mother of the Godly Race:
And a Pattern does appear
Of them all that follow here.
1 Pet. 3.6. Genesis 17.15.
Sarah that obeyed the word
Of her Dear, and called him Lord,
Though her own Name mounts so high,
And a like does signify. (...) or (...)
a Lady or Princess.
Genesis 22.20, etc.
Milcah, mightily renowned,
Springing forth as fruitful Ground,
Mother of Bethuel, says the text,
Father of her that follows next.
Genesis 27.26. and Verse. 12.
Good Rebeccah grieved to death
With the Heathenish Dames of Heth:
Wishing him the Prista^ly place,
That was principal in ^er^ce.
Mat. 2.18. Genesis 35.19. Jer. 31.15.
Beauteous Rachel, whose sad cross,
Lack of Children, seemed as loss:
For as loss it was resented,
And as mournfully lamented.
See Diod. on Mat. 2.16. etc. and Jer. 31.15.
Thus by Faith she prophesied
Of the Bethlehem babes that died:
Mothers tears, and Childrens blood See Postsc.
Made a lamentable Flood. Note 1st.
Genesis 30.22. Chapter 41.28.36. Chapter 47.25.
Yet at length her Prayers obtained
Such a Seed as ruled and reigned:
Joseph, Aegypt's Foster Father,
Who did large provisions gather.
1 Samuel 10.21.24. Genesis 48.16. Chapter 49.22.
Benjamin, from whom did spring
Israel's first exalted King:
And from Joseph soon ensued
Ephraim's populous multitude.
Exodus 6.20. chapter 2.2. etc. 1.21.
Next is to be registered
Resolute good Jochebed,
For, three months she hid her Son
The Inquisition so to shun.
Exodus 12.2.4. ^ Heb. 11.23.
Miriam next, tha^ (...) her hand
(Fearing not the (...) command)
To secure the Babe from slaughter,
Kindly saved by Pharaoh's Daughter.
Exodus 2.9, etc.
Whom the beauteous Babe did please,
Weeping in the Bull-Rushes:
And her pity and her purse
Hired for him an Hebrew Nurse.
Ibidem.
Witty Miriam calls her Mother
To be Nurse unto her Brother:
So the Serpent and the Dove
Met alike in Miriam's Love.
Micah 6.2. Numb. 36.59.
So was she recorded One
With her Brethren so well known:
One in their Levitick Stock,
One in Conduct of the Flock.
Numb. 27.3. chapter 36.10.
And the Daughters we must add
Of the good Zelophehad:
That were free from all Defection,
And still followed God's direction.
Chapter 27.4, 7 --
That could plead their own just right,
Well approved in God's own sight:
And a President became
For the Females rightful claim.
Ver. 8. See the Postscr. Note 2.
And did prove Estates to fix
With the true inheretrix:
Which by Reason should withdraw,
The Error of the Salique Law.
Isa. 49.23.
For we find by Scripture search
Nursing Mothers to the Church:
And that Queens as well as Kings
Are ordained to such high things.
Josh. 15.19. Psalm. 87.7.
Acsah too that asked a blessing,
Granted at her first addressing:
The upper and the nether Springs,
Which import far higher things.
Ruth 1, etc.
Naomi for faith excelling,
Whiles with hateful Heathens dwelling:
And when plunged in deep distress
Was upheld by humbleness.
Josh. 6.17. Ruth 1.17. Mat. 1.8.
Rahab too, and Virtuous Ruth,
Converts that embraced the truth:
Both enrolled by Grace Divine
In our blessed Savior's Line.
Josh. 2.4.6.
O the noble faith of her
That was but a Victualler!
That durst boldly hide the Spies
In her flax-spread Galleries.
15, 16.
And did wisely let them down
By the wall-side of the Town:
And then showed them how to shun
The pursuit that was begun.
Ver. 11.
That believed God's truth and might,
As a true born Israelite:
And declared this faith of hers
To her welcome messengers.
Ver. 9.
Well, said she, I understand
God has given you the Land:
And the Land I Will tell you true
Faints and melts because of you.
Ver. 10.
For they heard how God most high
Made for you the Red Sea dry:
And, for your sake, how he smote
Kings that were of famous note.
Ver. 12.
Swear now to me by the Lord,
For my safety from the Sword,
Give a token that secures
Her, that staked her life for yours.
Ver. 18.
Tie, said they, this scarlet line
To thy window for a sign:
All that keep within thy door
Shall be safe upon our Score.
Ver. 19.
All without shall bear their guilt
(...) their blood be spilt:
So she bargained and brought in
All her household and her kin.
Ruth 1.15.
As for Ruth, no surer dart
Ever hit true lovers heart:
Cleaving so resolvedly
To her Mother Naomi.
16.
Press me not, said that kind Daughter,
From access or following after;
Where thou go, I Will go thither,
And where lodge, we'll lodge together.
16, 17.
For my people thine I Will own*
For my God, thy God alone:
Where thou die and art buried,
There I Will die and be interred.
God do so to me and more
If I give this journey over:
Or if ought but death shall be
Cause to separate me and thee.
18.
Thus good Ruth the Moabitess
Proved a perfect Proselytess,
Quitting Country, Customs, Kindred,
All for Christ, nor would be hindered.
Judge. 4.4. etc.
Deb'rah Wife of Lapidoth,
Prophetess and Princess both:
That arose by God's command
As a mother in the Land.
Ver. 14, --
That did call a War, and carry it
Spite of Sisera's Iron Charet:
And did startle (to the best)
Brave resolves in Barach's breast.
Judge. 4.21. Chapter 5.14.
Jael too for courage crowned
Nayling Sisera to the Ground:
Whose blessed honor did augment,
Past all women's in the Tent.
Judge. 13.23. Heb. 11.33.
And the wife of Manoah,
Her good Husbands prop and stay:
Mother of the Nazarite,
Magnified for faith and fight.
1 Samuel 1.18, 27. Chapter 2.22.
Hannah that revived by prayer,
And obtained a Son and Heir:
Vowed him freely to the Lord,
With her Husbands joint accord.
Chap. 2.1, 22. Luke 1.46.
And presents him most complete
With her Gratulation great:
Whose inspired heart and tongue*
Hint the Holy Virgin's Song.
1 Samuel 4.19.
And the wife of Phinehas,
For a Zealous Saint she was,
More lamenting Israel's fall,
Than her own loss, life and all.
1 Samuel 4.20.
Troubled that the Ark was taken,
Israel's Glory so forsaken:
Calls her dear Child Ichabod,
Grieving for the Ark of God.
1 Samuel 25.18, 31.
Abigail that durst engage
To subdue a Soldiers rage,
Courted David, sought and served him,
From a rash revenge preserved him.
Ver. 23.
Wins him with Civility,
Wisdom and Humility:
Of his greatness prophesied,
And e're long became his bride.
2 Samuel 20.16.
And that peaceable good Spirit
Of immortal fame and merit:
She that at the siege of Abel
Carried all so amicable.
Ibidem.
Talking with the royal Captain,
Of the fears the Town was wrapped in:
How, said she, can thou take joy
God's inheritance to destroy?
Ibidem.
Far from me be such a fury,
Said the Captain, I Will assure ye:
Only Sheba's body bring,
That has clasht against the King.
Ibidem.
Then she treats with all the Town,
Cries the traiterous Rebel down,
Gets his head cast over the wall,
And forthwith appeaseth all.
Pro. 31.1. Mat. 1.6.
And the Queen we count upon,
That instructed Solomon:
Princess in the Royal Line,
Prompting Oracles Divine.
1 Kings 10.1. Mat. 12.42.
And the Queen of famous Note,
That did come from parts remote,
In her zeal to seek the Lord,
As both Testaments record.
Ibidem.
That with Solomon did consult,
Asking questions difficult:
And the Heaven-inspired King
Answered her to every thing.
Ibidem.
That admired the works she saw,
And his Oeconomick Law:
Most of all his rare Ascent,
As he to the Temple went.
Ibidem.
It Is a true report, said she,
Which at home I heard of thee:
But by what I now behold,
Lo! the one half was not told.
Ibidem. Ver. 9.
Blessed be the Lord thy God,
And thy people I applaud,
That such Oracles may hear,
From a Prince to them so near.
1 Kings 17.13.
She that first Elijah fed
With the last bit of her bread:
But by faith which she embraced,
Neither Meal nor Oil did wast.
2 Kings 4.6.
And that faithful widow too
That had vessels not enough
To contain the Liquor filled,
Which by Miracle distilled.
2 Kings 4.36. Heb. 11.35.
And the Shunamites good wife,
Who received her dead to life:
Whom Elisha did require
That did such a Guest invite.
2 Kings 5.1.
And the little Captive Maid
From her native Land conveyed,
That did wait on Naaman's wife,
And put fair to end the strife.
Ver. 3.24.
Would to God (said she) my Maste^
Were (in spite of all disaster)
With the Prophet, that does dwell
In Samaria's CITADEL.
Ver. 3.14.15.
For he would undoubtedly
Cure him of his Leprosy:
So he went and was made whole
Both in body and in soul.
2 Chr. 34.22, 26. Mat. 1.10.
Hulldah dwelling in the College,
Perfect in Prophetic knowledge:
That did comfort King Josiah,
(Grandchild to King Hezekiah.)
Ver. 28.24.
And assured his peaceful end,
For even death must stand his friend:
Though God's wrathful indignation
Scorcht the following Generation.
Ver. 25.
And the Prophetess was bold
To denounce the wrath foretold:
For their sin so far incensed,
That the wrath could not be quenched.
Esther 4.14.
Royal Esther, most religious,
Born as for a time prodigious:
With her Maidens mourned and prayed,
Staked her life for Israel's aid.
Chap. 7.6.
Cop'd with Haman, got the day,
Which advanced Mordecay:
And if any women be
Types of Christ, it is such as she.
Thus the Testament has told
Worthy Women of the Old:
Now great Ladies take a view
Of the Worthies of the New.
Luke 1.6. Ver. 44.
First Elizabeth admire,
Whose obedience was entire:
Whose sweet Babe within her womb,
Leaped for joy that Christ was come.
Luke 2* 37. Chap. 7.38.
Aged Anna that did pray
Instantly both night and day.
Mary that did weep as fast,
Till her tears all price surpast.
Luke 10.39.
The other Mary we must mention,
Who to Christ gave great attention:
For the better part she chose,
That which she could never lose.
John 11.2. Mat. 26.13.
This was also she that shed
Precious Spiknard on his head:
Which to such account did come,
As must pass through Christendom.
Luke 11.38. John 11.5.
And good Martha must be numbered,
Though with too much care encumbered:
One expressly said to be
Loved of Christ among the three.
John 11.22.
For she was a sound believer,
Though her brothers death did grieve her:
And (confiding) told our Lord
He could raise him at a word.
Mark 12.44. 2 Cor. 9.7.
And the Widow whose Gratuity
Passed the rich men's superfluity:
Though two mites was all her living*
So much prized is cheerful giving.
Mark 7.26. Mat. 15.20.
And the Greek Syro-Phoenician,
Who so pressed her bold petition:
Term of Dog she overcomes,
Dogs (said she) may eat the crumbs.
Ibidem.
So she stoutly stood the trial,
And misdoubted no denial:
For she knew she should prevail,
And her faith did never fail.
Mat. 9.20.
Such a faith did Christ avouch
Hers to be that stole a touch:
For, said that believing soul,
If I touch I shall be whole.
John 4.26.
She of Sychar made acquainted
With Messiah, (God's Anointed)
She made all the Town to know,
They believed and found it so.
John 19.25. Luke 2.35.
And of them that so surpass
Was the wife of Cleophas,
Sympathizing in the smart,
That did pierce the Virgins heart.
Ibidem. See Postscript Note the third.
And the Virgins Sister there
That did like affection bear:
And Salome, who likewise
Did so strongly Sympathize.
Luke 8.2. Mat. 27.46.
And that Godly Convert then
Called Mary Magdalen:
Who last served our Savior slain,
And first saw him raised again.
Acts 9.39. chapter 17.34.
Tabitha that did prepare
Garments for the poor to wear:
Damaris that clave to Paul
When the learned neglected all.
Acts 12.14.
Rhoda that knew Peter's Voice,
And thereat did so rejoice:
That she straight ran in, and said,
Here Is the man for whom we prayed.
Acts 16.14. etc.
She whose heart the Lord did open
To attend to what was spoken:
And her heart set ^pe (to ^each her,)
Sets her house so to the Preacher.
Romans 16.8.
Phoebe that did service pay
To the Church of Cenchrea:
And Priscilla that did purchase
Thanks of all the Gentile-Churches.
Ver. 6.12.
Mary too, a Saint illustrious,
And for Saints dear sakes industrious:
So Tryphaena's works import,
And Tryphosa's came not short.
2 Timothy 1.5. chapter 3.15.
Lois, next (as Scripture says)
In whom dwell'd unfeigned faith:
And Eunice praised as high,
Which two trained up Timothy.
2 John 1. etc.
And the Lady called Elect,
With the Robes of Virtue decked:
And her Children from their youth
Walking steadfast in the truth.
Romans 16.15. Phil. 4.3. 2 John 13.
Some but named are set down,
And a Name is some renown:
Here a Sister, there a Wife,
Owned in the book of life*
Phil. 4.3. Luke 8.3.
Women then as well as Men
Have their praise by Scripture pen:
Women of their substance lent
To our Lord with one assent.
Luke 8.3.
One of these was good Susanna,
And the Noble Dame Joanna
( Herod's Stewards wife) was one,
And a many more unknown.
Luke 23.27. Ver. 40.55.
Women did with mournful breath,
Most of all lament his death:
Women at his Grave did grieve,
On the sacred Sabbath Eve.
Luke 23.50. chap. 24.1.
And (that past) they did not fear
To embalm his body there:
And had there the best inspection,
First, into his Resurrection.
Acts 17.4.12.
Lastly (to give all their due)
Famous women, and not few,
Were converted, and strait-way,
At the Gospels spring of day.
Wherefore to conclude the story
Of this faithful Female glory,
One thing more I must annex
In the honor of your Sex.
Mat. 1.27. Luke 1.44, 48.
One of yours excelled all other,
That was both a Maid and Mother:
Whom all Generations shall
Blessed Virgin Mother call.
Luke 1.32. Ver. 46.
Mother of Almighty God,
Celebrated all abroad:
Yet was she of meek behavior
Magnifying Christ our Savior.
Heb. 1.6. Luke 2.10.
Whom all Angels evermore
Are commanded to adore;
And with joy they all obey,
Witness this triumphant day.
FINIS.
The Postscript.
NOTE 1. For the distick in Italian Character Page 748. Take this following if
you think it fit.

Infants (of both Sexes some)
Suffered bloody Martyrdom.
Though some Interpreters say that the Male Children only suffered; but that
could hardly be: See the Text in Jer. 31.18. And Reverend Bishop Hall, in his
Contemplations of Herod and the Infants, says thus: All the Infants of
Bethlehem shall suffer for this one.

Note 2. The Salique Law is a Law of France, whereby the Crown of France cannot
fall to a Woman; The Original and injustice of it, and how confuted and
condemned from this President of Zelophehad's Daughters, Number. 27. and 36. c.
See in Dr. Heylin's description of the World, Edition 8. in Quarto, page 80.
and in the Edition in Folio, page 177.

Note 3. Some take the Virgin Mary's Sister, spoken of John 19.25. to be the
same with the Wife of Cleophas; for thus the Text expresses it, (...). His
Mother, and His Mothers Sister. Mary the Wife of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalene.
And Calvin construes it, that this Mary (called her Sister) was her Cousin, and
might be the Daughter of Cleophas, for any thing said in the Text, and the
Translators put it in a different Character; But Aretius distinguishes them,
Adest Matter Christi, adest Soror ejus, Adsunt aliae duae Mariae, Uxor Cleophae
and Magdalenae. There was present (says he) the Mother of Christ, there was
present her Sister, there were present two other Mary's, the Wife of Cleophas,
and Magdalene.

A TABLE to the Three Last Centuries, containing the Psalm-Hymns.
A
AAron and Moses Israel's Lamp, 586 Affection to Ordinances, 512 Affiance and
repose in God. 369 Afflictions great imposed and allowed, 482 Ancient Sabbath,
528 Angels protecting Saints, 415 Answer of our supplications 478 Appearing of
Hope, or Sion's Reparation, 547 Applause of God's Mercies, 550 Applause of
God's greatness, 557 Applause of the Creation, Ibid. Arraignment of
Persecutors, 371 Arraignment and Ruin of Persecutors, 372 Atheists shamed by
babes and sucklings, 374
B.
BAbes and sucklings setting forth Gods praise, 373 Babes and sucklings shaming
Atheists, 374 Believers victory over the Dragon, 527 Believers Comfort and
Crown, Ibid. Benedicite, etc. Or Universal thanksgiving* 709 Birth of our
blessed Savior, 516 Blessed man described, 361 Blessedness of Charity, 422
Blessings of the Womb, 653, 654 Blessings ordained for man, 560 Blessings
conferred on Saints 465 Blessings rich and plentiful by Land and Sea, 561
Blessings of a fruitful year, 477 Blessings of provision applauded, 558
Blessings of the Creatures, viz. Plants, Planets, etc. 559 Blessings showing
forth the glory of God, 562
C.
CAlamity of the Wicked, 377 Canaan the Type of Heaven, 428, 576 Canaan fell to
Israel, 4^8 Captives redemption prayed for, 593 Captives free favors, Ibid.
Chains of darkness for the wicked, 378 Charity blessed, 422 Chastisements,
God's faithfulness therein 523 Christ's Kingdom, how exalted, 366 Christ's
Kingdom, how opposed and hated, 365 Christ's praise, 431 Christ's praise past
all expression, 434 Christ's power converting souls, 432 Christ's Throne decked
with Justice, Ibid. Christ's Reign and Triumph his enemies dread, 535 Churches
inward beauty and succession, 434 Churches beauty highly praised, 442 Churches
favors prayed for, 583 Church besieged and delivered, 442 Church records God's
mercies her safety, 443 Church-freedom to Saints, 514 Church redeemed from
Captivity, 517 Church redeemed and warned, 518 Comfort in godliness, 624
Comforts flowing from above, 426 Comforts for the righteous, 379 Comparison
between good and bad men, their Works, and their Rewards, 364 Confusion of the
wicked. 380 Converted Nations comforted, 535 Corruption of youth bridled, 619
Corruption of the times, 381 Creation applauded, or service of the Creator, 563
Creation applauded, or service of the Elements, 564 Creation applauded, or
service of the Field, 566 Creation applauded, or service of the Fruits, 567
Creation applauded, or service of the Seas, 568 Creation-works and wonders
wrought of old, 695 Creation-works demand ours and the Churches praise, 694
Creator^s Glory celebrated, 570 Curbing of the wicked, 382
D.
DAvid's wicked enemies destroyed, 475 Death, the Saints advantage, Worldlings
sorrow, 444 Death and Judgment shows difference between Saints and Sinners, 445
Degenerate world described, 383, 384 Deliverance prayed for, 490 Deliverance
urged, 491 Deliverance celebrated, 573 Depths of mercy, 661 Derision of Idols,
669 Description of true Christians, 385 Description of true Citizens of Sion,
386 Destruction of Rebellious Men, 393 Difference betwixt Good and Bad, 363
Devout and true Saints, 399 Devotion of pious Pilgrims, 620 Devotion, Pardon
and Vocation, 478 Dull and drooping Saints quickened, 620
E.
ENVY not Worldlings honor or delight, Which ends in horror and perpetual
night. 446 Enemies of the Saints increase, 368 Enemies of King David destroyed,
475 Entrance of the King of Glory, 400 Escape from death and the Joy thereof,
408 Establishment of Christ's Kingdom, 493 Everlasting mercies, 671 Exaltation
of Christ's Kingdom, 366 Exceeding happiness of pardon, 412 Exhortations to
fear God, 415 Expectation of the Resurrection, 387 Experience stirs up to
prayer and praise, 483 Extolling of Scripture, Verity and Virtue, 388 Exurgat
Deus, 487
F.
FAith seen in fear of sin, 389 Faiths Victorious Banner, 391 Faithfulness of
Saints to the end, 621 Faithfulness of God's Chastisements, 523 Falseness of
Persecutours, 423 Favors prayed for, 583 Favors free to Captives, 593
Felicity of God's Protection, 369 Felicity of the Church pray^d for, 581
Flattering world applauds her own, 445 Foes of the Lord dismayed with fear, 435
Free Grace of God revealed, 404 Free Favors to Colonies or Planters, 594 Free
Favors to distressed ones, 595 Free favors to Prisoners, 596 Free favors to
sick-men, 597 Free favors to such as go to Sea, 598 Freedom of the Godly, 623
Frequent Prayer prevalent, 470 Fruits of the Earth perish or prosper at God's
pleasure, 599 Fruitful year a Blessing, 447, 478 Fruitfulness of the Saints in
Age, 530
G.
GEntiles called to Sion's Court, 433 God's acceptable sacrifices, 455 God
cease wars, proclaims his power, 438 God's Clemeney tenders man's frailty, 555
God's comforts the Saints feast, 418 God's different dealings with good and bad
men, 600 God's free Grace revealed to them that seek it, 404 God's Free Grace
to Israel, 428 God's Free-love cheers the soul, 426 God our good and sure
Shepherd, 396, 397 God the good Shepherd of our souls, 394 God the good
Shepherd does supply our wants, 395 God's greatness and goodness, 696 God's
greatness seen in Tempests, 405 God's greatness applauded, 557 God's greatness
seen in Thunder, 407 God's glory in his Temple, 534 God guides the meek and
penitent, 403 God's Judgments and Destruction of Rebels 393 God just and holy,
delights to hear prayers, 688 God loves the just, helps the distressed 694 God's
mercies the Saints support, 417 God's mercies keeps both man and beast, 418
God's mercies to the Saints secure, 418 God's mercies larger than from East to
West, 554 God's mightiness in Judgment, 448 God's mightiness in mercy, 449
God's mightiness in punishing the wicked, 450 God's mightiness in the day of
Judgment, 451 God's mightiness in Vengeance upon the wicked, 453 God's
Ordinances cheer the godly mind, 425 God^s pardoning grace, 552 God's praise
set forth by babes and sucklings, 373 God's praises past all expression, 582
God a present refuge, 437 God procures peace for the Saints, 368 God's
providence praised, great foes submit, 480 God's Providence cannot be
descried, 529 God's propensity to pity the Saints calamity, 519 God's
protection the felicity thereof, 369 God's sovereign rule to keep our souls
alive, 481 God's Sovereign Throne, 556 God slow to anger, prone to grace, 687
God subverts lewd sinners in their ways, 688 God the sure portion of the pure
in heart, 499 God sends the seasons from above, 708 God's true favorites, 676
God vindicates the oppressed, 553 God's wondrous works of Judgment, 697 Good
Christians described, 398 Good Men and bad their ways and ends discovered, 362
Good wellcomers of the King of glory, 401 Gospel days celebrated, 533
Gratulations to God, and supplications for the Church, 601 Greatness of
Christ's Kingdom, 602 Greatness of Christ's Kingdom expressed and explained,
603 Great freedom of the godly, 623 Great works of God celebrated, 606 Great
works of God for his Church, 607 Great sins scor^d on, great mercies are
forgot, 583
H.
HAbitation of cruelty suppressed, 500 Happiness conferred on the Saints, 410
Happiness of pardon, 412 Hearty comfort in godliness, 624 How to fear God
aright, 415 Holy Angels protecting Saints, Ibid. Honor, Happiness and Virtue
of the Saints, 608 Honors and promotions of the poor, 611, 612 Honoring God
at all times, 414
I.
JAcob's safe conduct, 613 Jacob's safe conduct from Egypt, 614 Idols derided,
615 Idolatries bloody and inhumane, 590 Jew and Gentiles glory with confession,
434 Jewels of God's keeping, 416 Ill deeds describe the wicked, 417
Image Worship accursed, 536 Joys of Heaven, 419 Joseph reserved for many Lands
relief, 577 Israel's refuge and high tower, 438 Israel's deliverance from
Babylon, 651 Israel's passing the Red Sea, 480 Israel's ingratitude, 506
Israel's seed charged to seek God, 575 Israel in Egypt harbored, then
oppressed, 578 Israel departs from Egypt, 580 Israel forgets the works of God,
585 Israel grown brutish, 586 Israel believes not, but murmurs basely, 587
Israel spares the worst people in Canaan, 589 Israel mixes with Heathen
Idolatries, 590 Israel ensnared by Heathens examples, 589 Israel grossly stained
by Idolatries, 590 Israel's misdeeds recorded and punished, 591 Israel's
enemies rule over them; Ibid. Israel cries in their great distress, moves God
to their redress, 592 Judgments against persecutors, 469 Just man's portion and
practice, 625 Just man's Vindication, protection and provision, 419 Just man's
sure safeguard and happy end, 421 Justification implored, 457, 460 Just beloved
of God, 694
K^
KEenest afflictions profitable, 626 King David's wicked Enemies destroyed, 475
Kings moved to receive Christ's Kingdom, 367 Kings supply and sure defense by
prayer, 392 Kingdom of Christ how opposed and hated, 365 Kingdom of Christ how
exalted, 366 Knowledge and Acknowledgment of Mortality, 421
L.
LEvites blessing, 667 Liberty of the Gospel, 616 Liberty and latitude of the
Gospel, 617 Life of Religion. Ibid. Life of Religion in practice, 6^2 Living in
quietness longed for, 640 Lord proclaimed a present aid, 435 Looking up to God,
642 Lowly Adoration a public worship, 532 Love of Saints to Grace and
Godliness, 627 Lovers of Liberality, 611 Lovers of Sion, 643 Lovers of Sion
blessed, 644 Lovers of Charity blessed, 422
M.
MAking God our hope, 628 Man's frailty tendered by God's Clemency, 555 Man's
Glory shining in his Creation and Restoration, 376 Martyrdom or slaughter of
the Sheep, 429 Meekness of Captives, 646 Meekness and Mourning of Captives,
Ibid. Mercies to the Church by our Saviou's Ascension, 439 Mercies to the
Gentiles by Christ's Ascension, 441 Mercies the Saints support, 417 Mercies
keeps both man and beast, 418 Mercies secured to the Saints, Ibid. Mercies
larger than from East to West, 554 Mighty men warned, 509 Mightiness of God in
Judgment, 448 Mightiness of God in the day of Judgment, 451 Mightiness of God
in Mercy, 449 Mightiness of God in punishing the Wicked* 450 Mightiness of God
in Vengeance upon the Wicked, 453 Miracles of Mercy, or the Snare broken, 647,
-- Idem, 648 Moses and Aaron Israel's Lamp, 586 Moses saves Israel in the Gap,
587 Mortality acknowledged, 421 Mount Sion's sure standing, 649, 650 Mourning
turned to rejoicing for Israel's deliverance from Babylon, 651 Mourning turned
to rejoicing, or the Dream made real, 652 Murmuring at Meribah moves the
meekest Man, 589
N.
NAtivities blessed or Blessings of the Womb, 653, 654 Never failing of God's
word, 629 New Building of Sion, and the Sacrifices most acceptable to God, 455
O.
ORdinances, true love to them, 511 Ordinances, Affection to them, 512 Olive
Branches, 655 Onsets upon Israel, or the Powers defeated, 656, -- Idem, 657
Opposition or hatred to Christ's Kingdom, 365
P.
PArdon implored, 456, 457 Pardon of bloodshed, and Prayers for Sion, 458, 461
Pardon of sin implored, 459 Pardoning Grace, 476 Pardoning Mercies, 658
Pardoning Mercies implored, 659 Pardoning Mercies plentiful, 660 Pattern of
Princely Government, 545 Peace of Conscience implored, 460, 461 Peace of
Worldlings a Riddle, 444 Perpetual praises to the Lord, 686 Persecutors
Judgments, 469 Persecutors Arraignment, 371 Persecutors arraigned and ruined,
372 Persecutors falseness, 423 Persecutions greatly grieve and grind, 425
Pharaoh overthrown in the Wilderness, 501 Phineas does justice and is blessed,
588 Pious Prince described, 546 Plagues of Egypt, 578, 579 Portion and
practice of just men, 625 Power of Religion in Practice, 630 Power of Christ
converting souls, 432 Praises to God, 706, 707 Praise of Christ, 431 Praise of
Christ past all expression, 434 Praise sui^s with Saints, 705 Praises from
Heaven and Earth, 717 Prayer frequent, prevalent, 470 Prayer for the King, 492
Prayers for Sion's prosperity, 462 Prayer for Captives redemption, 593
Priesthood and power of Christ, 605 Pride mortified, 662 Pride to be mortifyed,
663 Promotion of the Church and State, Ibid. Promotion of Unity, 664, 666
Properties of Tale-bearers accused, 462 Prosperity puffs up, and Grace
withdraws, 409 Prosperous state of the wicked makes them commit greater sins,
496 Protection and provision from above, 413 Protection, provision and
vindication of just men, 419 Protection of Saints, 467, 468 Protection out of
Sion, or the Levites Blessing, 667 Providence to Israel God's peculiar
Treasure, 668 Providence to the Saints, 528 Punishment of Atheists, 467, 468
Pure Lamp of the Word, 631 Pure in Heart are taught to know the Worldlings End
and Woe, 497 Pure in heart have joys supreme, 498 Pure in heart are God's sure
portion, 499 Pure Services of the Church, 670 Pureness of God's Worship, and
derision of Idols, 669
Q.
QVieting of cares, 471, 473 Quieting principles, 474
R.
RED Sea dried, and Israel passing it, 480 Red Sea dried and enemies drowned,
584 Release from Afflictions, 483 Remarkable judgments on the Wicked, 377
Remembrance of God's ancient works and everlasting mercies, 671, 673 Renouncing
of ill Courses and Companions, 632 Repose in God, 471 Revenge upon Babylon, 675
Revelation of the Gospel, 484 Revelation and Riches of the Gospel, 485 Riddle
of Worldlings peace and bliss, 444 Righteous comforted, 379 Rising of the Ark,
or Exurgat Deus, 487 Rock of Refuge, 473
S.
SAcrifices, which are most acceptable to God, 455 Safe Conduct, 503 Saints
sighs and prayers when confined from God's house, 424 Saints should banish
fears, 437 Saints Calamity and God's propensity to pity, 519 Saints
preservation in times of pestilence, 52^ Saints Honor, Happiness and Virtues,
608, -- Idem, 610 Salvation of Saints, 537 Sanctification implored, 457, 460
Sanctuary Songs for the wonderful works of God, 489 Satisfying grace, 476
Seeking God, or supplications at our awaking, 679 Service and safety of the
humble, God's true Favorites, 676, 678 Services of the Church, 670 Service of
the Creator, 563 Service of the Elements, 564 Service of the Field, 566 Service
of the Fruits, 567 Service of the Seas, 568 Short Age of man, 524 Sion's
prosperity prayed for, 462 Sion's Reparations, 490 Sion's glory in turning the
Gentiles, 521 Sion's reparation, or the appearing of Hope, 547 Silent praise to
God, 476 Sins kept, with hold true Blessings, 483 Slaughter of the Sheep or
Martyrdom, 429 Speedy deliverance prayed for, 490 Spiritual uncleanness follows
Corporal, 588 Spiritual Government of Christ figured in Soloman, or a prayer
for the King, 492 Speedy deliverance urged, 491 Soul cheered in God's free
love, 426 Spouse of Christ, 433 Stability of the Church, 548 Strength and
establishment of Christ's Kingdom, 493 Strength of sinners subdued, 500
Strength of the Leviathan subdued, 501 Supplication to God to spare
Chastisements, 370 Supplication for deliverance and direction, 633
Supplications for the Church, 601 Supplications at our awaking, 679
Supplications for the Morning, 680 Supplications in times of extreme danger,
681 Supplications of King David, 683 Supplications for posterity, 684 Sweet
pardoning Grace, 476
T.
TAle-bearers properties, 462 Tale-bearers cursed, 46^ Temptation much assaults
the pure in heart, 495 Temptation encountered and overcome, 502 Throne of
Christ, 432 Throne of Israel reestablished, 506 Time of trouble complained of,
504 Tribulation and woe to the wicked, 510 True love to Ordinances, 511 True
believers victory over the Dragon, 527 True zeal and charity of Christians, 634
True zeal and purity of Christians, Ibid. True thankfulness, 447 Truth
springing out of the earth, 516 Trust in God blessed, 689 Trust in God
immortal* powerful, (...) ^^^ Trust in the pres^^ver of strangers, (...) and
fatherless, ^^^ Trust not in Kings and Princes, Ibid. Trust alone in the high
and holy one, 693 Trial of Loyalty, or Israel's Ingratitude, 506 Trial of
Israel and attest of God's (...), 5^^ Turning the Gentiles, or Sion's Glory,
521 Turning the Gentiles to the Church, 522
V.
VAlidity of God's promises, 523 Vanishing of Life, 524 Variety of Meroi^^
magnified, ^98, 7^0 Variety of providence^ praised, ^02, 704 Victoriousness of
God's power, 530 Victoriousness of God's power and promises, 531 Virtuousness
of Saints in Age, 530 Vocation to public Worship, 532 Unity and Christian
Love, 665 Universal thanksgiving, or Benedicite, 709 Unwearied seeking of God,
636 Unworthiness of the wicked counterpois^d, 637
W.
WANT of God's Fear destructive, 470 Watchfulness of Saints, 638 Ways and Ends
of Good-men and Bad-men discovered, 362 Weak upheld, all Creatures are
supplied, 688 Wicked their calamity and remarkable Judgment, 377 Wicked, their
chains of darkness, 378 Wicked their Confusion, 380 Wicked their curbing, 382
Wicked described by their ill deeds, 417 Wicked, Great Woes attend them, 418
(...) for good times, ^^^ (...) of God by sea and Land, 476 (...) Confidences
condemned, 474 Worldlings peace a Riddle, 444 Worldlings honor and delight
ends in hor^our and darkness, 446 Worldlings and and wo^, 497 Wordlings joy is
but a dream, 498 Works of God celebrated, 606 Works of God for his Church, 607
Works of Grace permanent, 639 Works of Grace to the Church, 712, 713 Worship of
Images accursed, 536 Worship of the sovereign Lord, 538 Worship of the supreme
Judge, 539 Worship performed by the Ancients, 540 Worshippers of old, Moses,
Aaron and Samuel, 542
Y.
YIelding Universal praises, 714, 715
Z.
ZEAL to the Temple, 513 Zeal in public Worship, 543, 544
FINIS.

