THE Four Last Things: Viz. DEATH, JUDGMENT, HEAVEN, HELL,
Practically considered and applied, In Several DISCOURSES.

By William Bates, D. D.

Recommended as proper to be given at Funerals.

LONDON, Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhil. 1691.

To the Right Honorable RACHEL Lady RVSSEL.
MADAM,
OF all Affairs for the compassing whereof Men are so diligent and sollicitous,
there is none of that absolute necessity, and high importance, as the
Preparation for Death and Judgment, and the immediate Consequences of them,
Heaven and Hell, to obtain the one, and escape the other. This requires the
whole Man in his best vigor, and should be the Work of the Day, but it is
usually delayed till the melancholy Evening of Age, or the twilight of Death.
The Trifles of this World divert them from that main business, to which all
other things should be subordinate. It equally deserves Wonder and Compassion,
that Death which is so constantly in Men's view, should be so seldom the matter
of their application, when all are of the same Glass, made of the same frail
natural Principles; and no Argument is more frequently and pathetically urged
upon them.

It Is not strange that deep Truths, that by the strength and exercise of the
mind are drawn like Gold out of the Mines, have no efficacy upon those that are
not capable of understanding them: but the Doctrines of Death and Judgment,
Heaven and Hell, are plain Truths, by NaNatural, Moral, and Divine Evidence
known to all; yet no more affect Men, than a Paradox of incredible Novelty. If
the Doctrine of Eternal Judgment were but a probable Opinion, controverted with
equal Arguments, yet it is a matter of such vast concernment, that Reason
requires all our possible diligence to avoid an eternal evil that may be, the
loss of Celestial Glory, and the Torments of Hell: But since it is an infallible
Truth, as certain as the Word of God, it is a Miracle to astonish Heaven and
Earth, that Men live as carelessly as if they should never die, and die as
securely as if they should not live in the next state, to receive the just
punishment of their Sins. They are fearless whilst Death is far off in their
thoughts: and when Age has snowed upon their heads, that no Marks of decaying
Nature should appear, make their own Winter to flourish with another Spring.
But it is in vain, for Death knows them under their disguise, and will not stay
beyond the appointed time. And in that decisive hour, Infidelity or Presumption
hardens Men to pass as quietly and boldly in appearance into another world, as
unfeigned Faith, and a regular lively Hope in the Promises of the Gospel. But
as deceitful Physic stops the Fit for the present, that will return more
violently and fatally afterward* So a counterfeit short Peace transmits them
to everlasting Sorrows.

The design of the following DISCOURSE is to awaken Men, that they may be wise
and consider their latter end: to secure an interest in our Redeemer, who has
disarmed Death of its Sting, and made that Enemy our Friend: and to practice
dying every day, by withdrawing their hearts from the vanities of this
transient World, that have such a pernicious influence to excite the carnal
Appetites, and stupify the Conscience, which are the true causes of their sin
and Misery. And what can be more powerful to render them temperate and sober in
the use of present things, vigilant and serious in their preparations for their
great and final Change, than the remembrance that Death is immediately attended
with Judgment, and Judgment with Blessedness or Misery for ever. I know this
Argument is naturally displeasing, but the usefulness should recommend it to
our most solemn and composed thoughts, before all the vain entertainments of
the Fancy and sensual Affections. As Herbs of Medicinal virtue, that are not
pleasing to the sight or smell, yet are valued by the Skilful as treasures of
Health; and preferred before the fairest Flowers that are perfumed and painted
by Nature, so as to excel the richest luster of Solomon's Glory.

The Body is in a continual Consumption, and no Art can long preserve it: but
whilst the outward Man is irrecoverably declining and wasting, if the Inward
Man be ascending and renewing to perfection, the advantage is incomparable. O
how comfortable is it to a holy Believer in the parting hour to commit his
Spirit into the hands of his Heavenly Father! (for thus he is authorized and
encouraged by our Savior's Example) and lay down the Flesh to rest in Hope:
for Christ is the Guardian of the Grave, has the Keys of Death, and will revive
the Bodies of his Saints incorruptible and immortal, the Copies of his own
glorious Body.

The immediate Recompenses of Eternal Judgment, Heaven and Hell, are worthy of
our most attentive and applicative Thoughts, that we obtain the one, and escape
the other. Heaven is the true Happiness of the reasonable Creature, and is the
first and last in the order of things desirable; the first for its attractive
Excellence, the last in its consummate Fruition. This may be certainly and
perpetually enjoyed by all who sincerely and diligently seek it. If in the very
different States of Life here, there were any incapable of Eternal Life, or
that have another Object for their last End, there might be some reason why
they should be coldly affected toward Celestial Happiness, and to justify
their sole pretentions to the Things of Time, wherein their Interests are
confined: but the offer of Heaven regards all that upon God's Terms will accept
of it. The most sensible inequality, that Riches, Dignity, or any temporal
Accident makes between Men here, is so true a Nothing in comparison of Eternal
Glory, that it makes no difference of one from another as to the obtaining it.
For this Reason it most nearly concerns every Person, First to seek the Kingdom
of Heaven, and the Righteousness thereof, as the only way to ascend to it.

The serious consideration of the everlasting Hell prepared for unreformed
Sinners, is most necessary and useful, tho carnal Men are extremely averse from
thinking on that terrible Object. For this is the first Motive that turns Men
from Sin to Holiness. The Joys of Heaven being Spiritual and Divine, have no
attractive influence upon the carnal Affections, would never convert and reform
any; but the Torment of Fire being most evident and vehement to Sense, is
strongly represented by the Imagination, and moves the Affections. How many by
solemn and believing Thoughts of the unquenchable Fire, have felt the Miracle
upon the three Children in the Furnace, renewed in themselves, their strong
Cords, the obstinate Habits of Sin burnt asunder, and their Powers restored to
the freedom of Duty, the blessed Liberty of Obedience. In this respect the fear
of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom, that directs us in the Way to
Blessedness.

Madam, I shall not attempt the celebrating your Ladiship's Virtues, that
render you a bright Ornament of your Sex, and more truly Honorable than your
Noble Descent and Alliance: but direct my best Desires to God, that your Family
may be a singular and eminent Example of the Divine Favor: that the fading
Gloss of this World may not deceive you, but your Heart may be above, where
your Treasure is; that you may live to God and your Soul, for Heaven and
Eternity. I am,

Madam, Your Honor's very humble and faithful Servant, WILLIAM BATES.

The Bookseller's Advertisement.
THE Four Last Things, Death and Judgment, Heaven and Hell, are Subjects of
that great Importance, and so nearly concerns all Persons, that serious
Discourses published upon them, deserve the Reader's best Attention and
Application. And that they may be of more diffusive and general Benefit, it
will be a proper Means, that (according to the Examples of some pious Persons)
Books treating of those solemn Arguments BE GIVEN AT FUNERALS, AS A
FUNERAL-LEGACY: When according to the observation of the wise Preacher, The
Living lay to Heart their own Frailty, and are more receptive of Holy Counsels
to prepare for their great Change from Time to Eternity, and would affect their
Minds with the present Instance of Mortality, much better than Wine,
Sweatmeats, Gloves or Rings, or unprofitable Talk, as is too usual at such
Solemnities.

All serious practical Books are proper for this Design, which may be of any
Price or Bigness: And if Bound in Black, with a Cipher of Mortality, will be
very decent: And some Memorables of the Life of the Deceased (if desired) may
be printed on a Leaf, or more, and bound with it. Several Books so bound, may
be seen at the Three Pigeons against the Royal Exchange in Cornhil.

B. A.

OF DEATH.
HEB. 2.15. And deliver them, who through fear of Death were all their
Lifetime subject to Bondage.


IN the first Chapter of this Epistle, the Proofs of the Eternal Deity of
Christ are produced with that evidence of Scripture Light, that only a veiled
Heart, obstinate Infidelity can resist. The Medium which the inspired Penman
makes use of, is, the comparing him with the Angels, the most noble Flower of
the Creation, and showing that he is infinitely dignified above them. This he
does by a strong connection of Arguments: First, By his Title that is divinely
high and peculiar to himself. He is declared by the Testimony of the eternal
Father to be his Son, Ver. 4, 5.
in the most proper and sublime sense: begotten of him, and therefore having
the same essential Perfections of the Godhead in their uncreated Glory. But the
Angels are not dignified with this Name in any Places of Scripture, where the
Excellency of the Angels is in the fullest Terms expressed. And that this Name
is taken from his Nature, is clearly proved: because Adoration is due to him
upon this account, even from the Angels of the highest Order. Ver. 6.
When he brings in the first-begotten into the World, he says, And let all
the Angels of God worship him.

Divine Worship is a Prerogative inseparably annexed to the Deity, both upon
the account of the supreme Excellencies of the Nature of God, and his Relation
to Angels and Men as Creator and Preserver, the Fountain of their Being and
Happiness. This without the most open defiance of his Authority, cannot be
given to a mere Creature; Deuteronomy. 6.13. and 10.20.
and by the Command of God himself is to be performed as a Respect due to the
filial Godhead. The Argument proceeds from the Name to the Offices. Of the
Angels he says, Ver. 7.
Who makes his Angels Spirits, and his Ministers a flame of Fire. They are the
prime Instruments of his Providence, most zealous and active to accomplish his
Pleasure. But the Son is God, not by Analogy and Deputation as Princes are, nor
with a limitation and diminution, as Moses was made a God to Pharaoh, but
absolutely and really as subsisting in the Divine Nature: And consequently he
is the Supreme King, and to him the Ensigns of Majesty divinely Royal are
ascribed: But unto the Son he says, Thy Throne, Ver. 8.
O God, is for ever and ever; a Scepter of Righteousness is the Scepter of thy
Kingdom: Whereas the Scepters of Earthly Kings are often unrighteously managed,
and their Thrones ruinously fall. There is a further Confirmation from his
Works, that are divinely great and glorious, wherein no Creature has any share
of Efficiency. The making of the World is ascribed to him. Thou, Lord, Ver. 10.
in the beginning have laid the Foundation of the Earth, and the Heavens are
the Works of thy Hands.

The Divine Attributes, the peculiar Character of the Deity belong to him:
Eternity and Immutability. The most solid parts of the visible Creation shall
perish and be changed: but thou remainest, and art the same. His Life is an
entire, uniform, unchangeable Perfection. His Glory and Felicity are in the
same invariable Tenor for ever possessed by him. Lastly, the Son sits in that
quality at the right Hand of the Father, Ver. 13.
in the Society of Empire, as equal to him in Power and Honor, commanding all
in the visible and invisible World, most easily and irresistibly, tho
gradually, subduing his Enemies to a consummate Victory. But the Angels, so
numerous and powerful, Ver. 14.
are ministering Spirits, employed for the defense and benefit of the Church.

From this summary account we may understand how firmly the Divinity of Christ
is established in the Scripture. For those Passages of the Prophets, that speak
of the God of Israel as Creator, and the sole Object of Adoration, are directly
referred to Jesus Christ. And the Name Jehovah, Psalm. 97.9.
the Majesty of which consists in its being incommunicable, is attributed to
him. This is the Foundation upon which the whole Fabric of the Gospel is
built. The Office of Mediator in the Prophetical, Priestly, and Regal
Administration is necessarily joined with the Divinity of his Person. And the
revelation of it from Heaven, is as clear as the Sun is visible in the
Firmament. All the Difficulties in our conceiving this great Mystery of
Godliness, are but like the Shadows that attend the Light. And all the
heretical Subtilties to pervert the Sense of such plain and positive Texts, are
as impertinent as impious.

This being established, the Apostle proceeds to give an account of the Son of
God's assuming the Humane Nature, and submitting to Sufferings and Death. This
is a Divine Secret so miraculously strange, that the Contrivance was without
the Compass of the Angelical Minds, and the discovery of it is only by
supernatural Revelation; but when revealed, the account of it is so open and
consentaneous to Reason, as being the most congruous Means for the illustration
of God's Glory in the saving lost Men, that the humane Mind, if not deeply
corrupted with the tincture of Prejudice, must consent to it as worthy of all
Acceptance.

The substance of his reasoning is this, That it was the product of the most
wise, merciful, and righteous Counsel of God, that the Savior of Men should
have Communion with them in their Nature, that he might have a Right to redeem
them by his Alliance and Propinquity: for he that sanctifies, Chap. 2.11.
and they that are sanctified, are all one: and that he might undergo
Sufferings, even to death, for the price of their Redemption, and the remedy of
their Infirmities: Forasmuch as the Children are partakers of Flesh and Blood,
he also likewise took part of the same, that through Death he might destroy him
that had the Power of Death, that is the Devil: And deliver them who through
fear of Death, were all their Lives subject to Bondage.

The Devil is said to have the Power of Death.

1. Because he induces Men to commit Sin, that meritoriously renders them
liable to Death. He tempted the first Man cum effectu, and was a Murderer from
the beginning.

2. In that he inspires them with furious Thoughts, and inflames their
Passions, from whence proceed Strifes and Wars, that efficiently cause Death.
He is supreme in all the Arts of Mischief, and always intent upon Evil. It Is by
his Instigation that Men become like raging Beasts, animated and bent on mutual
Slaughter.

3. Because he is many times the Executioner of God's Wrath, and inflicts Death
upon rebellious and incorrigible Sinners. It Is recorded by the Psalmist, That
God cast upon the Egyptians the fierceness of his Anger, Wrath, Psalm. 78.49.
Indignation, and Trouble; by sending evil Angels: Those Princes of the Air,
the Instruments of the Thunder and fiery Storm of Hail that destroyed them.

4. Because he makes Death more formidable to Sinners, by heightning their
guilty Fears of God's Tribunal. The false Spirit tempts Men to sin by many
Blandishments, but afterward he is a severe Accuser of them to God, and to
themselves.

Lastly, This Title may signify his tormenting Sinners with unrelenting Cruelty
in Hell, which is the second Death.

Now these Evils being the penal Consequence of Sin, our Savior by his Death
appeased the injured Justice of God, and thereby destroyed the cruel Tyranny of
the Devil. As the Lamb of God, in the notion of a Sacrifice, he overcomes our
spiritual Enemies. Sin, Satan and Death, lie vanquished at the foot of his
Cross. Besides, our Savior having felt such Sorrows and Infirmities as are
usual to his People, by that correspondence and resemblance between them, is
compassionately inclined to relieve them.

I shall now insist upon the blessed Privilege of Believers set down in the
Text, viz.

That Jesus Christ by his Death frees his People from the servile tormenting
fear of Death.

In prosecuting the Point, I shall, 1. Consider the Account the Scripture gives
of Death's entrance into the World. 2. Show what the fear of Death includes,
and the Bondage consequent to it. 3. How the Death of Christ frees us from the
thraldom of that Fear. 4. Who are partakers of this blessed Privilege.

And then apply it.

I. The Scripture gives an account of Death's entrance into the World, in a
threefold Respect.

1. As the Desert of Sin. 2. As the Effect of the divine Decree. 3. As the
Sentence of the Law.

1. As the Desert of Sin. The first Design of the Creator was his own Glory in
conjunction with the Happiness of Man. He was made accordingly holy in
Perfection, placed in Paradise, and his State contained all the Ingredients of
Felicity proper to his Nature. He was capable of dying, as sad Experience
proves, yet no Accident from without, no Distemper from within had impaired his
Vigor, and made him actually subject to Death without Sin. Whilst innocent he
was immortal, not from everlasting Principles of Nature, but by Divine
Preservation, of which the Tree of Life was the ordained Means and sacramental
Pledge. For God unchangeably loves his own Image: and though by his Sovereignty
and absolute Power he may resume the Being he gives, yet his Goodness and
Covenant were a sacred assurance that Man's happy Life should run parallel with
his perseverance in his Duty. This Immortality was not the singular Privilege
of Adam's Person, but had been the Inheritance of all his Progeny. But he soon
revolting from his just Obedience, of Immortal became Mortal, and according to
the original Establishment of Propagation, transmitted his Nature with the
guilt and poison of Sin to all his Posterity. Thus by one Man Sin entered into
the World, Romans 5.12.
and Death by Sin, and so Death passed upon all Men, for that all have sinned.
As his Obedience had been rewarded, so his Rebellion is punished in all that
naturally descend from him. From hence it is, that so numerous a part of
Mankind are cut off before the commission of actual Sin. Death enters into the
Forge of Life, and destroys the Conception that newly began to live. And what
is more righteous than that Man when he disobeyed the Author of Life, should
forfeit his Life and Blessedness. The Soul voluntarily lost the spiritual Life
by forsaking God, Anima volens perdidit vivere, nolens ergo perdat and
vivificare.
therefore unwillingly loses the natural Life by expulsion from the Body. The
Apostle says, the Wages of Sin is Death, not only that of the Body, Romans 6.23.
but the Death of the Soul, which is a dreadful Concomitant of it. And from
hence we may discover the false Philosophy of the wisest Heathens in their
Opinion of Death. Hac lege intraverant, ut exiirent.

Senec.
They judged it to be the primary necessity and condition of Nature, fixed by
irresistible Fate: and not understanding the true and just reason of its coming
into the World, they could not apply a sufficient Remedy against its Evil.

2. As the Effect of the divine Decree respecting Sin. This is discovered by
Revelation in the Word of God, and by the real execution of it. It is appointed
to Men once to die. Heb. 9.27.
This Decree is universal and unrepealable. One Generation passes away,
Eccles. 1.4.
and another Generation comes: like the ebbing and flowing of the Sea in its
stated Periods. Nothing can interrupt or frustrate this Appointment. There are
diverse Conditions of Men, and various ways of living in the World; some are
high in Dignity, others are level with the Earth: some walk in a Carpet-way
smooth and easy, others in a thorny and troublesome: some walk on the golden
Sands, others on the Mire: but the same uncontrollable necessity of dying
involves all. And whatever the way be, whether pleasant or doleful, yet every
one passes in it with equal Steps, measured by the same invariable spaces of
Hours and Days, and arrive at the same common End of Life. Those who are
regarded as visible Deities amongst Men, that can by their Breath raise the
Low, and depress the Lofty, that have the Lives of Millions in their Power; yet
when the ordained Time is come, as they cannot bribe the accusing Conscience
for a minute's Silence, so neither delay Death. I have said ye are Gods, but ye
shall die like Men.

3. Death is to be considered as the Sentence of the Law. The reasonable
Creature was made under a Law the Rule of his Actions. The moral Law directed
him how to continue in his holy and blessed State: To which was annexed the
Precept of not eating of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, only as a mark
of his Subjection, and for the trial of his Obedience. This Precept had an
infallible Sanction by the most high Lawgiver: In the day thou eatest thereof,
Genesis 2.17.
thou shall die the Death. Man did not keep this Command of so easy
Observation, and justly incurred its doom. As Sin is the violation of the Law,
so Death is the violation of the Sinner in his Nature and Felicity retorted
from the Law.

The Deaths of Men are very different in their kinds; and are comprised in the
words of David concerning Saul; The Lord shall smite him, or his Day shall come
to die, 1 Samuel 26.10.
or he shall descend into the Battle, and perish. Sometimes they are cut off by
the immediate flaming Hand of God, for the more exemplary revenge of Sin;
sometimes by surprising Accidents; sometimes by bloody Contentions; sometimes
by consuming Diseases. But though Death be not uniform, yet it is always the
execution of the Law upon Offenders. As of those who are condemned by humane
Justice, some suffer a more easy and honorable Death, others a more
disgraceful and torturing; some are beheaded, others are crucified, yet all die
as Malefactors. Thus some die a natural Death, others a violent; some by a
gentle preparing Sickness without reluctation, others die upon the Rack by
sharp Pains: some die attended with their Friends, and all Supplies to sweeten
their Passage, others forsaken of all Comforters: yet Death is the same
Sentence of the Law upon all Men. And this, if duly considered, makes it
terrible in whatever shape it appears.

II. The next Thing to be considered is, What the fear of Death includes, and
the Bondage that is consequent to it. This I shall explain and amplify, by
considering four Things.

1. The nature of Fear in general, as applicable to the present Subject.

2. The particular Causes that render Death so fearful.

3. The degree of this Fear expressed by Bondage.

4. How it comes to pass that Men are not always under the actual fear of
Death, but subject to the Revolutions of it all their Lives.

1. I will consider the nature of Fear in general, as applicable to the present
Subject.

Fear is a Passion implanted in Nature, that causes a flight from an
approaching Evil. Three things are requisite to qualify the Object, and make it
fearful.

(1.) The Evil must be apprehended. Knowledge, or at least Suspicion, excites
Fear, by representing an Evil that is likely to seize upon us. Till the Mind
discern the Danger, the Passions are unmoved: and imaginary Evils by the mere
apprehension, are as strongly feared as real.

(2.) The Evil must be future. For the naked Theory of the most pernicious Evil
does not wound the Soul, but the apprehension of falling under it. If Reason
can open an Expedient to prevent an Evil, this Passion is quiet. And Fear
precisely regards its Object as to come. Present Evils induce Grief and Sorrow:
past Evils by reflection affect with Joy, and give a quicker relish to present
Felicity. Approaching Evils alarm us with Fear.

(3.) The Evil must be apprehended as prevalent to make it fearful. For if by
comparison we find our Strength superior, we either neglect the Evil for its
levity, or determine to encounter it; and resistance is the proper effect of
Anger, not of Fear. But when an impendent Evil is too hard for us, the Soul
shrinks and recoils from it.

Now all these Qualifications that make an Object fearful, concur in Death.

1. It Is an Evil universally known. The frequent Funerals are a real
demonstration that speaks sensibly to our eyes, that Death reigns in the World.
On every side Death is in our view, and the shadow of it darkens our brightest
Days.

2. It Is certainly future. All the wretched Accidents of this Life, such as
concern us in our Persons, Relations, Estates and Interests; a thousand
Disasters that a jealous Fear and active Fancy will extend and amplify; as they
may, so they may not happen to us. And from this mixture of contrary
Possibilities, from the uncertainty of event, Hope, that is an insinuating
Passion, mixes with Fear, and derives Comfort. For as sometimes a sudden Evil
surprises not forethought of; so often the Evil that was sadly expected, never
comes to pass. But what Man is he that lives, Psalm. 89.4.
and shall not see Death? Who is so vain as to please himself with an
imagination of Immortality here? Though Men are distinguished in the condition
of Living, yet all are equal in the necessity of Dying. Humane Greatness in
every kind, Nobility, Riches, Empire cannot protect from the sudden and
Sovereign Hand of Death, that overthrows all. The most conspicuous difference
in this World is between the Victorious, and the Vanquished prostrate at their
Feet: but Death makes them equal. Then the wretched Captive shall upbraid the
proud Conqueror, Art thou become weak as we? Art thou become like us? The
Expressions of Scripture concerning the frailty of Man are often literally and
precisely verified: He is like the Grass, in the morning it flourishes and
grows up, in the evening it is cut down and withers. Death is a prevalent
insuperable Evil, hence the proverbial Expression, Strong as Death that subdues
all, cruel as the Grave that spares none. It Is in vain to struggle with the
pangs of Death. No Simples in Nature, no Compositions of Art, no Influence of
the Stars, no Power of Angels, can support the dying Body, or retain the
flitting Soul. Eccles. 8.8.
There is no Man has power over the Spirit to retain the Spirit; neither has
he power in the day of Death: and there is no discharge in that War. The Body
sinks in the Conflict, and Death feeds on its prostrate Prey in the Grave.

2. I shall consider more particularly the Causes that render Death so fearful
to Men: 1. In the apprehension of Nature. 2. In the apprehension of Conscience.
1. In the apprehension of Nature, Death has this Name engraven in its
forehead, Vltimum terribilium, the Supreme of terrible things, upon several
accounts.

1. Because usually Sickness and Pains languishing or tormenting, make the
first Changes in the Body, and the natural Death is violent. This Hezekiah
complained of with a mournful accent, He will cut me off with pining Sickness:
from day even to night thou will make an end of me. Isa. 38.
I reckoned till morning, that as a Lion, so will he break all my Bones. A
Troop of Diseases are the forerunners of this King of Terrors. There is a
preceding Encounter, and sometimes very fierce, that Nature feels the cruel
Victory before it yields to this Enemy. As a Ship that is tossed by a mighty
Tempest, and by the concussion of the Winds and Waves loses its Rudder and
Masts, takes in water in every part, and gradually sinks into the Ocean: So in
the shipwreck of Nature, the Body is so shaken and weakened by the violence of a
Disease, that the Senses, the animal and vital Operations decline, and at last
are extinguished in Death.

2. Death considered in the strictest propriety, as destructive of the natural
Being, that is our first and most valuable Good in the order of Nature, is the
just object of Fear. The Union between Soul and Body is very intimate and dear,
and like David and Jonathan they part unwillingly. Nature has a share in the
best Men, and works as Nature. St. Paul declares, we would not be unclothed,
not finally put off the Body, but have it glorified in conjunction with the
Soul. Our blessed Savior, without the least impeachment of the Rectitude and
Perfection of his Nature, expressed an averseness from Death, and with
submission to the divine Will desired a freedom from it. His Affections were
holy and humane, and moved according to the quality of their Objects.

3. The natural Consequents of Death render it fearful. Life is the foundation
of all natural Enjoyments; and the Loss of it induces the loss of all for ever.
It Is from hence that such Evils that are consistent with Life, and deprive us
only of some particular Content and Pleasure, are willingly chosen rather than
Death. The forfeiture of Estate, the degrading from Honor, the confinement to
a perpetual Prison, the banishing from our native Country, are less Penalties
than Death.

There is a natural love of Society in Man, and Death removes from all. The
Grave is a frightful Solitude. There is no Conversation in the Territories of
Darkness. This also Hezekiah in his apprehensions of Death speaks of with
Tears: Isa. 38.11.
I shall see Man no more in the Land of the Living. Dies moritur in noctem, and
tenebrisusquequaque sepelitur; funestatur mundi honor, omnis substantia
denigratur, sordent, silent, stupent cuncta: ubique justitium est. Tertul. de
Resurrec. Car.
As in the Night, the World is an universal Grave, all Things are in a dead
Silence; Palaces, Courts of Justice, Temples, Theaters, Schools, and all Places
of public Conversation are shut up: the Noise and Rumor that keeps Men in
continual Observation and Action ceases. Thus when the Sun of this present Life
is set, all the Affairs and Business, all the vain Joys of Company, Feasting,
Dancing, Music, Gaming, ceases. Every one among the Dead is confined to his
sealed obscure Cell, and is alone an entertainment for the Worms.

The Psalmist says of Princes, Their Breath goes forth, they return to the
Earth, in that very day their Thoughts, their glorious compassing Thoughts,
perish. This the Historian observes was verified in Julius Caesar: After his
assuming the Imperial Dignity, he thought to reduce the numerous Laws of the
Romans into a few Volumes, comprising the Substance and Reason of all; to
enrich and adorn the City of Rome, as was becoming the Regent of the World: to
epitomize the Works of the most learned Grecians and Romans for the public
Benefit. And whilst he was designing and pursuing these, Talia agentem atque
meditantem mors praevenit.

Sueton.
and other vast and noble Things, Death surprised him, and broke off all his
Enterprises.

At the terrible Gate that opens into Eternity, Men are stripped of all their
Honors and Treasures, and as naked as they come into the World, go out of it.
Be not thou afraid when one is made rich, Psalm. 49.16, 17.
when the Glory of his House is increased. For when he dies, he shall carry
nothing away; his Glory shall not descend after him. Death equally vilifies,
makes loathsome and ghastly the Bodies of Men, and reduces them to sordid Dust.
In the Grave the As our Divine Poet expresses it. The brags of Life are but a
nine days wonder;
And after Death the Fumes that spring,
From private Bodies make as big a Thunder,
As those that rise from a huge King.
Herbert.
Dust is as precious and powerful of one as of another. Civil Distinctions are
limited to the present time. The prodigious Statue in Nebuhadnezzar's Vision,
Dan. 2.32, 33, 34, 35. while it was upright, the Parts were really and visibly
distinct: The Head was of fine Gold, the Breast and Arms of Silver, the Belly
and Thighs of Brass, the Legs of Iron, the Feet part of Iron and part of Clay:
but when the Stone cut out without hands, smote the Image upon the Feet, then
was the Iron, the Clay, the Brass, the Silver, and the Gold, broken to pieces
together, and became like the Chaff the Wind carries away. Who can distinguish
between Royal Dust taken out of magnificent Tombs, and Plebean Dust from common
Graves? Who can know who were rich, and who were poor; who had Power and
Command, who were Vassals, who were remarkable by Fame, who by Infamy? They
shall not say this is Jezebel: 2 Kings 9.37.
not know this was the Daughter and Wife of a King. The King of Babylon, styled
Lucifer the bright Star of the Morning, that possessed the first Empire in the
World, was degraded by Death, humbled to the Grave, and exchanged all his
glorious State for Worms and Putrefaction. Isa. 14.11.
The Worm is spread under thee, and the Worms cover thee. In short, Death
separates Men from all their admired charming Vanities. Now considering Man
merely in the Order of Nature, what Reflection is more fearful and tormenting,
than the necessity, that cannot be overruled, of parting for ever with all the
Delights of Life? Those who have ascended to the Throne, that are arrived at
the height of Temporal Happiness, what a melancholy Prospect is before them of
Death and the dark Grave? When all things conspire to make Men happy here, the
sensitive Faculties and their Fruitions are ebbing and declining, till then
sink into Death, the Whirlpool that will shortly swallow them up for ever. This
renders the Thoughts of Mortality so frightful, and checks the freest
enjoyments of carnal Pleasures.

2. Death is fearful in the apprehension of Conscience, as it is the most
sensible mark of God's Wrath, that is heavier than Death, and a Summons to give
an account of all Things done in this Life, to the righteous Judge of the World.
Heb. 9.27.
It Is appointed to all Men once to die, and afterward the Judgment. The Penal
Fear is more wounding to the Spirit than the Natural. When the awakened Sinner
presently expects the Citation to appear before the Tribunal above, where no
Excuses, no Supplications, no Privileges avail, where the Cause of eternal
Life or Death must be decided, and the awards of Justice be immediately
executed; O the Convulsions and Agonies of Conscience in that hour! when the
diseased Body cannot live, and the disconsolate Soul dare not die, what
Anxieties surround it? This redoubles the Terrors of Death, that the first
transmits to the second that was figured by it. O the dismal aspect of Death
riding on a pale Horse, with Hell the black Attendant following. This Fear
surprised the Sinners in Sion. Who among us can dwell with devouring Fire? who
among us can remain with everlasting burnings? This made a Heathen, the
Governor of a Province, to tremble before a poor Prisoner: While Paul
discoursed of Righteousness, Temperance, Acts 24.25.
and Judgment to come, Felix trembled. It Is a fearful thing to fall into the
Hands of the living God, who lives for ever, Heb. 10.31.
and can punish for ever. None is so powerful as God, nothing so fearful as the
guilty Conscience.

3. The Degrees of this Fear are expressed by Bondage. This Passion when
regular in its Object and Degree, is excellently useful: it is a wise Counselor
and faithful Guardian, that plucks off the Mask from our Enemies, and keeps
Reason vigilant and active to prevent a threatening Evil, or to sustain it in
the best manner. It Is observable in the brute Creatures, that the Weak and
Fearful are most subtle and ingenious to secure themselves, and supply the
want of Strength with Artifice. But when Fear is inordinate, it is a tyrannous
Master, that vexes the weary Soul, and hinders its free and noble Operations.
Caesar chose rather to be exposed to sudden death, Praestat semel mori quam
semper timere.
than to be continually harrass'd with fears how to avoid it. (...) from (...)
The Greek word implies the binding of the Spirit, that causes an inward
Slavery. And in the Apostle's Writings, (...). Romans 8.15.

(...). 2 Timothy 1.7.


the Spirit of Fear, and the Spirit of Bondage, are equivalent. Ishbosheth,
when Abner provoked by the Charge about Readiness Concubine, imperiously threatened
to translate the Kingdom to David, was struck with such a fear, that he could
not answer Abner a word, 2 Samuel 3.10, 11. The sudden Passion stifled his Reply,
and reduced him to a defenseless Silence. Now the fear of Death, as it is remiss
or vehement, such are the degrees of Bondage from it.

1. It embitters the enjoyments of the present Life, and makes the most
prosperous in the World, even in the fullness of their sufficiency, to be in
straits. Though the Senses are pleased with the quick sweetness of Change from
one Object to another, yet the Soul cannot have a delightful undisturbed
Fruition, foreseeing that the stream of Pleasure will issue into the dead Sea.
Truly Light is sweet, Eccles. 11.7.
and it is a pleasant thing to behold the Sun. But how short is this Life with
all its Pleasures, in comparison of the Days of Darkness that follow. Now
though it is our best Wisdom and truest Liberty, to rejoice in this World as if
we rejoiced not, and frequently to meditate on the cooling Doctrines of Death
and Judgment, to repress the transports of the voluptuous Appetite; yet since
the Comforts of this Life are liberally indulged to us by the Love of God, to
be the Motives of our grateful and affectionate Obedience, to sweeten our
passage to Heaven, we may with tranquillity of Spirit make a pure and cheerful
use of them in his Service; and it is an oppressing bondage, when the
disquieting anxious Fears of Death hinder our temperate enjoyment of his
Favors and Blessings.

2. The fear of Death oppresses the Souls of Men under a miserable Bondage to
the Devil; for his Dominion is maintained by the Allurements and Terrors of the
World. Though Men do not explicitly acknowledge his Sovereignty, yet by
voluntary yielding to his pleasing Temptations, they are really his Slaves. And
the apprehension of temporal Evils, especially of Death, dressed up in a
frightful representation with its bloody Pomp, Prove. 29.
is the strongest snare to the Soul. The Faint-hearted prove false-hearted in
the time of trial: For the timorous Spirit being wholly intent how to avoid the
incursion of a present Evil, forgets or neglects what is indispensably to be
done, and thinks to find an excuse in the pretended necessity. How many have
been terrified from their clearest Duty and resolved Constancy? To escape
Death, they have been guilty of the most insufferable Impieties, by renouncing
God their Maker and Savior, and worshipping the Devils for Deities. Every Age
presents sad Spectacles of many that choose Iniquity rather than Affliction,
Job 36.21.
that relinquish their Duty, and by wicked Compliances save their Lives and
lose their Souls. Carnal Desires, and carnal Fears, are the Chains of Hell that
retain Men Satan's Captives. But what folly, what madness is it, for the
avoiding the impotent fury of the Creature, to venture on the powerful Wrath of
God, that exceeds all the Terrors that can be conceived by Fear? This renders
them more brutish than the Horse, that starting at his Shadow, springs over a
desperate Precipice. The Fearful are excluded from Heaven, Rev. 21.
and cast into the Lake of Fire and Brimstone for ever.

3. The extreme fear of Death and Judgment, dejects and discourages the Soul
from the use of means to prevent eternal Misery, and induces a most woeful
Bondage. Fear anticipates and exasperates future Evils: for as Knowledge excites
Fear, so Fear increases Knowledge, by the uncessant working of the Thoughts upon
terrible Objects. The fearful Mind aggravates the foreseen Evil, and distills
the Poison from all the Circumstances and Consequences of it. And when the Evil
is apprehended as insuperable and indeclinable, all endeavors to escape are
cut off. What a Philosopher observes of an Earthquake, Nullum malum sine
effugio.

Senec.
compared with other destructive Evils, is true in this case. There may be a
safe retreat from Fire, from Inundations, from Storms, from War, from
Pestilence, but an Earthquake astonishes with so violent a perturbation, that
stops our flight from the imminent Danger: Timor fugam perdidit.
So the vehement impressions of Fear from the approaches of Death, and the
severe executions upon the Sinner after it, distracts the Mind, and disables
from flying from the Wrath to come. These Fears are more heavy by the
suggestions of Satan, who represents God so terrible in his Majesty, inexorable
in his Justice, and unchangeable in his Threatenings, that all Hopes of
obtaining his Favor are lost. As the Egyptian Darkness was not merely from the
absence of the Sun, but from feculent Vapors condensing the Air* that it might
be felt: So these dark and fearful expectations of the Divine Wrath are not
only from the withdrawing the Light of God's Countenance, but from the Prince
of Darkness that foul Spirit. And as we read of the Egyptians, that no Man
arose from his place for three days; as if they had been buried in that
Darkness, and deprived of all active Power and Motion: so the despairing Soul
sits down mourning at the Gates of Death, totally disabled from prosecuting the
Things that belong to its Peace. It Is Hope inspires and warms us with alacrity,
encourages our Endeavors: Despair blunts our edg and industry. The Soul
suffers the hardest Bondage, and the Condition is unexpressibly sad under the
tyranny of this Fear. O how enthralled, how desolately miserable! Despair does
meritoriously and effectually ruin the Soul. For whereas there is no Attribute
more Divine, no clearer Notion of the Deity than Love and Mercy; this Passion
disparages his Mercy, as if Sin were more omnipotent, than his Power to pardon;
and all the Tears that flow from it, are so far from expiating, that they
increase Guilt: and whereas the believing view of Christ would as completely
and presently recover the Soul-wounded Sinner, as the Israelites were by
looking to the ordained visible Sign of their Salvation; Despair turns away the
Eye from our Deliverer, and fixes it upon Misery as remediless and final.

4. How comes it to pass that Men are not always under the actual fear of
Death, but subject to the revolutions of it all their Lives?

The Seeds of this Fear are hid in the guilty Breasts of Men, and at times,
especially in their Calamities, break forth and kindle upon them. In their
Leisure and Retirement, intercurrent thoughts of Death and Judgment sting them
by fits, and make them uneasy. The flashes of Conscience, like moments of
Lightning, startle them, but they relapse into their habitual stupidity. And
the account of it will be clear, by considering the following Particulars.

1. Men are apt to flatter themselves with the hopes of long Life, and look
upon Death at a great distance. Tho there be a dying disposition in the
youngest and strongest Persons, though we live in a World of Casualties, and
Death lie in ambush to surprise us every day, yet we are secure: because Evils
affect us according to their apprehended nearness. A petty Constable that is
troublesome and vexatious, is more feared by his Neighbors, than the Grand
Signior with all his Executioners. As remote Objects, though of vast bigness,
are lessened to our sight; so through the supposed interval of many years,
Death is looked on with a diminution of its Terror. But when Death presents it
self before Men ready to dispatch them, how formidable is its appearance! Saul
though renowned for his Valor, yet when he understood by Revelation, that to
morrow he and his Sons should be in the state of the Dead, 1 Samuel 28.
there was no strength in him; but he fell straitway all along on the Earth;
struck through with fear before he was wounded by the Arrows of the
Philistines. Belshazzar in the midst of his luxury and jolity, attended with a
thousand Lords, Dan. 5.1, 2, 3, 4.
and his Herd of Concubines, inflamed with Wine, and therefore less capable of
fear, yet upon the sight of the fatal Hand writing on the Wall a few unknown
Characters, which his guilty Conscience (before the Prophet Daniel came)
interpreted to be the Sentence of present Death, how fearfully was his
Countenance changed pale as a Carcass? How suddenly did his Blood congeal, and
his warmest quickest Spirits die in his Heart? His whole Body was seized by
such a vehement trembling, that his Joints were loosed, and his knees smote one
against another. This is a representation of those who bid defiance to Death at
a distance; but when the fatal Hour is come, and they hear the Sentence decreed
against them, God has numbered thy days, and finished them: thou art weighed in
the balance, (all thy Words and Actions, thy Thoughts and Affections) and art
found wanting: and thy Soul shall be divided from thy Body, the one sent to
Hell to suffer the undying Worm of Conscience, the other to the Grave, to be a
Prey to the Worms of Corruption; how are they overcome with horror!

2. The continual succession of the Pleasures and Business of the World divert
the Mind from the attentive strong contemplation of Death, and the Consequences
of it. Pensive Thoughts are unwelcome, and we studiously endeavor to cancel
the memory of such things as afflict us. It Is said of the Wicked, that God is
not in all their Thoughts. The consideration of the holy Inspector and Judge of
their Actions is tormenting, therefore they fill their Minds with earthly
Imaginations, to exclude the Divine Presence. We read of those, Amos 6.3, 4.
who to put far away the evil Day, chaunted to the sound of the Viol, and drank
Wine in Bowls. They are rocked asleep with the motion of fantastic Vanities.
And Sleep takes away Fear, but gives no safety. It Is recorded of Marius, Aelian.
that after his Overthrow by Sylla, he was always in consternation, as if he
heard the sound of the Trumpets, and the noise of the victorious Army pursuing
him: And his Fears were no longer quiet than whilst charmed with Wine and
Sleep: he therefore was continually drunk, that he might forget himself, his
Enemy, and his Danger. Thus Men make a pitiful shift to forget their latter
End: and whilst they are following either secular Affairs, or sensual
Pleasures, are unconcerned for what is to be hereafter. But this Diversion will
shortly be at an end, for in their languishing hours, when the wasted Body
fails the carnal Mind, and sensual Desires fail the Man, then Conscience that
spoke with a low Voice before, is loud and terrible, and like the rigid Exactor
in the Parable, that took his Debtor by the throat, requires them to pay what
they owe.

3. Some are so hardened in Infidelity, that the Powers of the World to come
make no Impression on their Hearts. They mind but little, and are less affected
with invisible things. They fortify themselves with gross Thoughts, that the
Spirit of Man vanishes with his Breath, that Death is the end of this Life, and
not the beginning of another, and feed without Fear. Place one in the midst of
destructive Evils, but unseen or not believed, and he is as fearless as a blind
Person walking on the brink of a deep Pit. Indeed there are none less disturbed
with the Terrors of Death, than the eminently Good, or the extremely Bad: for
the one sort have a blessed Hope that Death will be to them an entrance into
Life, and live like the Angels, with a Joy unspeakable and glorious. The others
are as sensual and secure as the Beasts that perish, having extinguished the
fear of eternal future Evils, which is the proper passion of Reason. The
Apostle declares, That knowing the Terror of the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.11.
we persuade Men to be reconciled to him, before the Season of Mercy be
expired. But those who have suppressed the natural Notions of Eternal Judgment,
as they think it beneath their Wisdom to be persuaded by the Promises of
Heaven, so beneath their Courage to be terrified with the Threatenings of Hell,
and triumph over the Ruins of Conscience. But though wicked Infidels slight
the Threatenings, they shall not escape the Vengeance of God.

Heb. 11.
We read of Noah, That being warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved with
fear, he prepared an Ark for the saving of his House. His Fear was the native
issue of his Faith. But the profane World, in whom Sense was predominant, that
despised the Oracle, and trembled at no Judgments but what were acting on the
visible Stage, they ate and drank, married, and were given in marriage, till
swept away by the unfeared Inundation. We read that Lot being certified by an
embassy of Angels, that a Deluge of Fire would in a few hours pour down from
Heaven upon Sodom, he most earnestly solicited his Sons-in-Law, Arise, depart
out of this Place, for the Lord will destroy this City: but they entertained
his compassionate Advice with derision, he seemed to them as one that mocked,
and were surprised by those fearful Flames that dispatched them from a Temporal
Hell to that which is Eternal. Thus 'twas prophesied, That in the last days
there shall come Scoffers, walking after their own Lusts, and saying, Where is
the Promise of his coming? But let them blaspheme and scorn the most sacred and
terrible Truths, let them perpetuate their excess of Riot, and wild Mirth while
they live, Death will come, and Judgment as sure as Death.

III. I now come to show how the Death of Christ frees us from the tormenting
fear of Death.

For the clearing this, we are to consider, that Sin, Satan and Death, are
Enemies in combination against Man in his mortal State; and the destructive
Power of Satan, and Death, is from Sin. When Man renounced his Creator and
natural Lord, he was judicially given up to Satan as the Executioner of
Vengeance, and to the Power of Death. Such is the Order, rather the Confusion
in the World by Sin. The Empire of Satan and Death is built on the Ruins of our
Innocence.

Now the Son of God came from his Throne in Heaven to deliver us: And whereas
there are two ways of obtaining freedom from Captivity, either by Ransom, or by
Power and Rescue, in both respects our deliverance from Bondage to these
Capital Enemies, is ascribed to the Death of Christ.

It Is called our Ransom, and that in its strict Notion has a respect to
Captivity. There is one God, and one Mediator between God and Man, 1 Timothy 2.6.
the Man Christ Jesus; who gave himself a Ransom for all. His Life was the full
price of our Liberty and Salvation. God does not pardon Sin, and release from
Punishment by a pure absolute Act of his Will and Authority, as a Creditor
forgives a Debtor; but in such a way as to preserve the Rights of Justice
inviolate. Therefore when Man was devoted to Death, our Redeemer exchanged
Conditions with him, and offered up his precious Blood, as our Ransom to God, 1
Pet. 1.
in the quality of the King and Judge of all. Such was the Dignity of his
Person, that the entire World, the Heavens and the Earth, with all their
Inhabitants, are of less value to him, than the basest Dross to refined Gold.
Such was the greatness of his Sufferings, (...)
in which the highest degree of Obedience, and the lowest degree of Humility
were conspicuous, as to be a valuable Compensation, to obtain eternal
Redempt^^^ for us.

Now when God the supreme Jud^^ satisfied, Satan forfeits the right he (...) to
torment us, and is divested of h^^ Dominion over our Wills; which the justly
permitted, was an usurpation upon God's Right in Man that can never be
extinguished. It Is said by the Apostle, (...)
that our Savior blotting out the handwriting of Ordinances that was against
us, which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his
Cross: He abolished the use of the Ceremonial Law, that was an Evidence and
Enditement of their Guilt who performed it, and the Curse of the Moral Law: It
follows, and having spoiled Principalities and Powers, he made a show of them
openly, triumphing over them in it. Our Savior died victoriously; the Tree of
Infamy on which he suffered, was the Trophy of his Conquest. His Death disarmed
Satan of his Weapons, whereby he subdued Us, Sin, the Law, and Death; for
though his actual Triumph was in his Resurrection and Ascension to Glory, yet
it is justly ascribed to his Death; for that meritoriously opened the Grave at
his Resurrection, and Heaven at his Ascension.

And here by the way it is most worthy of observation, that our Deliverance from
our spiritual and most deadly Enemies is equally righteous, as admirable and
glorious: for our suffering Savior appeased the Wrath of God, and broke the
Powers of Darkness. The Wisdom and Love of God had their Designs in his Death,
as well as the Malice and Rage of Satan; as Lines, that are opposite in the
Circumference, meet in the Center.

And as from the Tyranny of Satan, so the Death of our Redeemer is our
redemption from Death, as to the Curse and final Dominion of it; nay, has made
it a blessed Advantage to us.

1. The Curse is removed. Death considered as the Wages of Sin, is all sting
and poison, the consequent of the spiritual Death, and the introduction to
eternal Death. 1 Cor. 15.
The sting of Death is Sin, and the strength of Sin is the Law. Death has its
wounding Power from Sin, and Sin from the Law, that forbids it, that discovers
its Nature, and enhanses the measure of its Guilt, and denounces condemnation
for it. Now our Savior having in our stead, subjected himself to Death, the
penalty of the Law for Sin, There is no condemnation to those that are in
Christ Jesus. Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being made a
Curse for us. Gal. 3.
Death inflicted on the Saints, has not that relation to the guilt of Sin, as
to be properly satisfaction to revenging Justice. There are no petty payments
to be made by our Sufferings after his complete Satisfaction to God. The Lord
laid on him the Iniquities of us all. Isa. 53.


It Is indeed still a declaration of God's holy Displeasure against Sin, for
that originally opened the way of its coming into the World; and sometimes by
the immaturity or manner of it, it is a chastisement upon good Men for Sin; that
is, to make them renew their Repentance, and mortify their carnal Affections
that fasten them to the World. For though after the last act of Expiration
there is no place for Repentance; yet in the approaches of Death, the Soul is
strongly excited by the Call of God to review its State, and make solemn
preparation to be found of him in Peace. But it is not in a strict sense the
malediction and vengeance of the Law executed upon them. The Serpent is turned
into a Rod of Correction in the hands of our Heavenly Father for their good.
Heb. 12.
As the Apostle, speaking of some that for their profaning the Lord's Table,
were fallen asleep, 1 Cor. 10.33.
adds, that when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we may not
be condemned with the World. Rev. 2.
A Believer shall not be hurt of the second Death.

From hence it is, that in the Book of Life, the Scriptures, the Death of the
Saints is called a Sleep. Saint Paul argues, 1 Thessalonians. 4.14.
If we believed that Jesus died and rose again; even so them also that sleep in
Jesus, will God bring with him. It Is observable how the Apostle varies the
expression, Jesus died, and the Saints sleep in him: for he sustained Death
with all its Terrors, that it might be a calm Sleep to his People. Annon long
gloriosius fuit, quandoquidem totum pro nobis agebatur, ut non modo passio
corporis, sed etiam cordis affectio pro nobis faceret? Et quos vivificabat
mors, nihilominus and trepidatio robustos, and moestitia laetos and taedium
alacres and turbatio quietos facecet, and desolatio consolatos? Bern. Sermon. 1.
de S. Andr.

Isa. 57.1, 2.
They enjoy as perfect a Rest in the Beds of Dust, as ever in the softest Down.
Stephen in the midst of a shower of Stones fell asleep. Believers die in Peace.
The Righteous is taken from the Evil to come; he enters into Peace. Being
reconciled to God through the Blood of Christ, they are not terrified at his
Call, but with sweet tranquillity resign their Souls unto him. Lord, Luke 2.
now let thy Servant depart in Peace, for mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation.
There is a vast difference in God's account, between the Death of the Righteous
and the Wicked. As the Tabernacle in the Wilderness was taken down with care
upon their change of station, and delivered to the Levites charge, in order to
the raising of it again with honor; but the House incurably infected with the
Leprosy, was plucked down with violence, and thrown into an unclean place with
execration: Thus the death of the Saints is precious in the sight of the Lord,
their Bodies are kept in the bosom of the Earth, to be raised in Glory; and the
death of the Wicked is accursed. In short, as the Wood that Moses cast into the
Waters of Marah, by a miraculous virtue sweetened them: so the Cross of Christ
has taken away the malignity and bitterness of Death.

2. Death is a blessed Advantage, and enriching Gain to a Believer: it brings
him to the possession of that Good that incomparably exceeds the Evil that
remains in it. For the Death of a Saint is not total; but as in the Ceremony of
Purification from Leprosy, one Bird was killed, and the other let fly in the
open Air, the mysterious shadow of the Lepers being restored to a state of
Liberty: Thus when the Body dies and returns to the Earth, the Spirit returns
to God, the Father of Spirits, and Fountain of Life. Our Savior told the Jews,
I am the living Bread that came down from Heaven: John 6.48.
if any Man eat of this Bread, he shall live for ever; and the Bread that I
will give is my Flesh, that I will give for the Life of the World. The Heavenly
Divine Life, that is communicated by the Spirit of Christ to Believers, remains
entire when the sensitive Life is lost. The natural Order is, There is a time
to be born, and a time to die: the supernatural is, there is a time to die, and
a time to be born. The Death of a Saint is a Dies iste quem tu tanquam supremum
reformidas, aeterni natalis est.

Senec.
new Birth; the pains of the dying Body are as Throws, whereby the ripened Soul
is delivered into the Land of the Living. The happiness of a Saint after Death,
more particularly will appear by considering;

1. The freedom he obtains from all afflicting Evils that are numberless here,
and from Sin the worst in its nature, and the cause of all the rest. The
present World is a Labyrinth of Thorns, in every state we meet with something
to vex us. You may as well count the Waves of the Sea when enraged by a
Tempest, as the Troubles to which in this mortal open state we are exposed. Man
that is born of a Woman, Job 14.1.
is of few days, and full of Trouble. A short Life, and many Miseries. O our
unhappy Capacity! the Body is liable to as many Diseases as there are Members;
Tempus angustatur ad vitam, dilatatur ad miseriam.
and the Soul to as many Perplexities as Passions. How often are the Scenes and
Habits changed in the time of one Man? He that lives in Pleasures, must act the
Mourner's part. Our sweetest Comforts have hidden Stings: and whatever is most
pleasing, may occasion bitter grief. And usually holy Men have a greater
portion of Afflictions here: sometimes by the malignity and violence of the
Wicked; as under the Law, the Lamb and the Dove were Sacrifices, the Emblems of
Innocence, and Purity, and Meekness, whilst the Vulture and the Lion, the
greedy Devourers, escaped. This the Apostle declares of the Elect, They are
predestined to be conformed to the Image of God's Son, who traced out the Way
to Heaven in his own Blood, and by the Cross ascended to the Throne. Sometimes
more immediately Divine Providence afflicts them, to preserve their Spirits
from the tainted Pleasures of the World, and for other holy Ends: but there is
a Rest for the People of God in Heaven. Besides, there are Relics of Sin in
the best of the Saints here. Indeed Sin is deposed from Sovereignty and Rule;
the imperious Lusts are crucified, but not quite expired. As those that were
nailed to the Cross in their Hands and Feet, the parts least vital and most
sensible, died a painful lingering Death. Still the Flesh lusts against the
Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh. As there is a complexion of Humors
in humane Bodies, always jarring when they are in the soundest Health; and
where there is not this active contrariety, either the Body is without a Soul,
a mere Carcass, or a glorified Body in Heaven. So where there is not this
internal Combat between Grace and Sin, either the Man is wholly Omnes homines
aut sunt penitus caro, and nihil habent spiritus, ii sunt infideles sine
regeneratione. Aut sunt tantum spiritus sine carne. Ii sunt sancti; qui jam in
Coelo aeterna fruuntur pace sine pugna. Aut sunt partim spiritus, partim caro.
Ii sunt omnes renati per Spiritum Sanctum in Christo. Aug. cont. Jul.
carnal, dead in Sins and Trespasses; or wholly spiritual, reigning in Heaven.
And there is nothing more works on the tender Affections of a Saint, than to
find in himself what is displeasing to God; that still he is under a sad
necessity of sinning. What is said concerning an old Man wasted and decayed in
his drooping Years, that the Grasshopper is a burden to him, is true of the new
Man in a Christian; the Sins that are counted light in the valuation of the
World, are a heavy weight to him. Vain Thoughts, idle Words, irregular
Passions, unprofitable Actions, are motives of heartbreaking Sorrow. Now Death
is to a Believer an universal Remedy against all the Evils of this Life: it
frees him from all Injuries and Sufferings, and from Sin in all its degrees,
from all inclinations and temptations to it. He that is dead, cease from Sin.
Death is the Passage from this Wilderness to the true Canaan the Rest above,
that flows with better Milk and Honey, with Innocence and Happiness for ever.
There nothing can disturb the Peace, or corrupt the Purity of the Blessed.

3. Besides the privative advantage, the freedom from all the Effects of God's
Displeasure, and the resentments of it, there is the highest positive Good
obtained by Death; The Spirits of just Men are made perfect in Heaven. The Soul
is the Glory of Man, and Grace is the Glory of the Soul, and both are then in
their Exaltation. All the Faculties of the Soul are raised to the highest
degrees of Natural and Divine Perfection. In this Life Grace renews the
Faculties, but does not elevate them to their highest pitch: it does not make a
mean Understanding pregnant, nor a frail Memory strong, nor a slow Tongue
eloquent, but sanctifies them as they are. But when the Soul is released from
this dark Body of Earth, the Understanding is clear and quick, the Memory firm,
the Will and Affections ardent and vigorous. And they are enriched with Divine
Light, and Love, and Power, that makes them fit for the most noble and heavenly
Operations. The Lineaments of God's Image on the Soul are first drawn here, but
then it receives his last Hand. All the Celestial Colors are added, to give
the utmost life and luster to it. Here we are advancing, but by Death we arrive
at Perfection.

We shall in Heaven be joined to the Assembly of Saints and Angels, our best
Friends. Love is the Law of that Kingdom, and perfectly obeyed there. Now how
charming is the Conversation of one that is wise and holy, especially if the
sweetness of Affability be in his Temper? How pleasantly does Time slide away
in the company of our beloved Friends? We are not sensible of its flight. But
what dear satisfaction is it to be united to that chosen consecrated Society
Above, who love one another as themselves? Though the Angels and Saints have
different degrees of Glory, yet every one is perfectly happy and pleased. As
the strings of an Instrument differ in the size and sound; some are sharp and
high, some grave and deep, others a mean, and from that variety results the
Harmony and Music, so that if every string had Judgment and Election, it would
choose to be what it is: so from the different degrees of Glory in Heaven, the
most amiable and equal Order of the Divine Wisdom appears, that satisfies every
one.

We shall be in the glorious Presence of God and Christ, where is fullness of
Joy, and infinite Pleasures for ever. It Is said of Abraham, he rejoiced to see
the Day of Christ, two thousand Years before his coming. When by Faith he saw
the Incarnation of the Son of God, in order to the redemption of Men, it put
him into an exstasy. Yet then our Savior was born to Sorrows and Miseries. But
how ravishing is the sight of our Redeemer, set down on the right Hand of the
Majesty on high, having purged our Sins by himself, and accomplished our
Salvation? Now we are absent from God, yet in believing his infallible
Promises, we rejoice with a Joy unspeakable and glorious: But how much more
joyful is the fruition of them? Here the Divine Goodness is derived to us
through secondary means, that weaken its efficacy, but in Heaven the
Consolations of the Creator are most purely dispensed, and his immediate
Excellencies are made known.

This Blessedness exceeds all our Thoughts and explicit Desires, and requires
the eloquence and experience of an Angel to set it forth. The bright Sum of it
is this, We shall see God in his Glory, face to face, 1 Cor. 13.
in the most perfect manner: the sight of his Glory shall transform us into his
Likeness; we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. 1 John 3.
This shall produce in us the most pure and ardent Love; and Love shall be
attended with inexpressible joy, and that with the highest Praises of the
blessed God, whose influxive Presence is the Heaven of Heaven.

And that which crowns all is, that the Life above is Eternal. This satisfies
all our Desires, and excludes all our Fears: for Unchangeableness is an
inseparable Attribute of perfect Felicity. The Blessed are in full Communion
with God, the Fountain of Life, and Christ the Prince of Life. Because I live,
says our Savior, ye shall live also. What can interrupt, much less put an end
to the Happiness of the Saints? The Love of God is immutably fixed upon them,
and their Love upon him. Here their Love is subject to decays, and gradual
alienations; as the Needle in the Compass, though it always has a tendency to
the North Pole, yet sometimes it declines and has its variations. But in Heaven
the Love of the Saints is directly and constantly set upon God. The Light of
his Countenance governs all their Affections. It Is as impossible to divert
their Desires from him, as to cause one that is inflamed with Thirst, to leave
a clear flowing Spring for a noisome Puddle. In short, Heaven is filled with
eternal Hallelujahs: for there is no appearance of Sin, no shadow of Death
there: all Miseries are vanished, and all that is desirable is possessed by the
Saints: the Circle of their Employment is to enjoy and praise the Divine
Goodness for ever.

Now is not the blessed Exchange a Christian makes of the present Life, for
that which is infinitely better, sufficient to make Death not fearful, nay
desirable to him? The regular well-grounded hope of this will compose the
Thoughts in the nearest Approach and Apprehension of Death: No other Principles
or Resolutions are able to vanquish the Terrors of our last Enemy. And this
Happiness was purchased for us by the everlasting Treasure of our Savior's
Blood. The Satisfaction of his Sufferings was meritorious, as the Merits of his
active Obedience was satisfying.

Before I proceed to the third Head, I shall resolve a Question, How it comes
to pass, since Believers are freed from the Sting of Death, that they die, and
remain in the State of Death for a time.

For this there are several Reasons.

1. By this means all the sinful Frailties that cleave to the Sains in this
Life, are abolished. Romans 8.
The Body is dead because of Sin: And what is more becoming the wise and Holy
Providence of God, than that as by Sin Man was at first made subject to Death,
so by Death Sin dies entirely for ever. Thus as in Sampson's Riddle, Out of the
Devourer comes Meat; and our worst Enemy is conquered by his own Weapons.

2. Death is continued to the Saints, for the more eminent Exercise and
Illustration of their Graces, for the Glory of God, and in order to their
future Reward. Poterat autem Christus etiam hoc donare credentibus, ut nec
istius experi^entur corporis mortem: sed si hoc fecisset carni quaedam
foelicitas adderetur, minueretur fidei fortitudo. Quid enim magnum erat vivendo
eos non m^^i qui crederent se non morituros? Quanto est majus quanto fortius
quanto laudabilius ita credere, ut se speret moriturus sine fine victurum? Aug.
de pecc. Mort. Lib. 2.
Faith, and Love, and Patience, are declared in their most powerful Operations
in our Encounter with Death. If every Saint were visibly and entirely
translated to Heaven, after a short course of Holy Obedience; if the Wicked did
visibly drop down quick into Hell, Faith would be resigned to Sight here. This
would confound the Militant State of the Church with the Triumphant. Therefore
now Death happens to the Good as well as to the Wicked. In the next State they
shall be separated by a vast Gulf, and an amazing Difference. Now Faith,
whatever the kind of Death be that a Christian suffers, sees through the
thickest Clouds of Disgrace and Misery, the glorious Issue. As the illustrious
Confessor who was crucified with our Savior, proclaimed his Eternal Kingdom in
the midst of insulting Infidels. And our Love to God then appears in its
Radiancy and Vigor, when we are ready for the Testimony of his Truth, and
advancing his Glory, to suffer a violent Death: or when it comes in a gentler
manner, for it is even then terrible to Nature, we are willingly subject to
Dissolution, that we may be united to God in Heaven. And our Patience has never
its perfect Work, and is truly victorious, till this last Enemy be subdued.
Death is the Seal of our Constancy and Perseverance. Now the righteous Rewarder
will crown none but those that strive lawfully, and are complete Conquerors.
Exercitia nobis sunt non funera, dant animo fortitudinis gloriam: Contemptu
mortis praeparant ad coronam. Cypr. de Mortal.
And how wise and sweet is the Economy of the Divine Providence in this, that
the Frailty of our Nature should afford us a means of glorifying God, and of
entitling our selves by his most gracious Promises to a blessed Reward?

3. Our Savior by his unvaluable Obedience and Sufferings, has procured for
Believers a Celestial Divine Life, of which the natural Body is not capable.
The Apostle says, Flesh and Blood cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. The
exigencies and decays of the sensitive Nature require a continual Relief by
Food and Sleep, and other material Supplies: but the Life above is wholly
spiritual, and equal to that of the Angels. Therefore till this earthly Animal
Body be reformed and purified, it is not capable of the Glory reserved in
Heaven. This is so absolutely requisite, that those Believers, who are sound
alive at the last Day, shall in the twinkling of an Eye be changed, that they
may be qualified for it. Now herein the Wisdom of God is wonderful, that Death
which by the Covenant of Works was the deserved Penalty of Sin, by the Covenant
of Grace should be the Instrument of Immortality. That as Joseph by a
surprising Circuit was brought from the Prison to the Principality; so a
Believer by the Grave ascends to Heaven. This the Apostle in his Divine
Disputation against Infidels, proves in a most convincing manner; Thou Fool,
that which thou sowest, is not quickened except it die. As the rotting of the
Corn in the Earth is necessary to the reviving and springing of it up: so we
must die, and the Image of the Earthly Adam be abolished, that we may be
transformed into the Image of the Heavenly One.

And to the other part of the Question, Why the Saints remain in the state of
Death for a time? there is a clear Answer. The Resurrection of the Saints is
delayed till Christ's coming to Judgment, partly for the Glory of his
Appearance: For what an admirable Sight will it be, that the Saints of all Ages
shall at once arise glorified and immortalized to attend upon our Savior in
the last Act of his Regal Office, and then to make a triumphant Entry with him
into Heaven: And partly, that the established order of Providence may not be
disturbed: for the changing of our Nature into Glory, in a sudden and
inexplicable manner, cannot be without miraculous Power; and if every Believer
presently after Death, were in his glorified Body translated to Heaven, the
World would be always filled with Miracles, which were to cease after the
sufficient Confirmation of the Gospel by them. But how long soever the Interval
be to the Resurrection, it shall be with them that sleep in Jesus, as it is with
those that awake out of a quiet natural Sleep, to whom the longest Night seems
but as a Moment: so when the Saints first awake from Death, in the great
Morning of the World, a thousand Years will seem no more to them than to God
himself, but as one day.

I now come to prove the third thing, That our Savior will abolish the
Dominion of Death over the Saints.

Whilst the Bodies of the Saints remain in the Grave, they seem to be
absolutely under the Power of Death. The World is a Golgotha, filled with the
Monuments of its Victories. And it may be said to this our last Enemy, in the
Words of the Prophet to the bloody King, Have thou killed, and taken
Possession? But we are assured by an infallible Word, that the Power of Death
shall be abolished, and the Bodies of the Saints be revived incorruptible and
immortal.

The Resurrection is a Terra incognita to the wisest Heathens; a Doctrine
peculiar to the Gospel: some Glimmerings they had of the Soul's Immortality,
without which all Virtue had been extinguished in the World, but no conjecture
of the reviving of the Body. But Reason assists Faith in this point, both as to
the Will of God, and his Power for the performing it. I will glance upon the
natural Reasons that induce the considering Mind to receive this Doctrine, and
more largely show how the Resurrection of the Just is assured by our Redeemer.

1. The Divine Laws are the Rule of Duty to the entire Man, and not to the Soul
only: and they are obeyed or violated by the Soul and Body in Conjunction.
Therefore there must be a Resurrection of the Body, that the entire Person may
be capable of Recompenses in Judgment. The Soul designs, the Body executes: the
Senses are the open Ports to admit Temptations. Carnal Affections deprave the
Soul, corrupt the Mind, and mislead it. The Love of Sin is founded in bono
jucundo, in sensible Pleasures: and the Members are the Servants of Iniquity.
The Heart is the Fountain of Profaneness, and the Tongue expresses it. And the
Body is obsequious to the Holy Soul in doing or suffering for God; and denies
its sensual Appetites and Satisfactions in Compliance with Reason and Grace.
The Members are the Instruments of Righteousness. It follows then there will be
an universal Resurrection, that the rewarding Goodness of God may appear in
making the Bodies of his Servants gloriously happy with their Souls, and their
Souls completely happy in Union with their Bodies, to which they have a natural
Inclination, and his revenging Justice be manifest in punishing the Bodies of
the Wicked with eternal Torments answerable to their Guilt.

And of the Possibility of the Resurrection, the circular and continual
Production of things in the World, is a clear Demonstration of the Power of God
for that effect. There is a pregnant Instance that our Savior and the Apostle
made use of as an Image of the Resurrection: A Grain of Corn sowed in the
Earth, corrupts and dies, and after springs up entire: its Death is a
disposition to Life. The Essays of God's Power in the Works of returning
Nature, Flowers and Fruits in their season, instruct us how easily he can make
those that are in the Dust to awake to Life. If the Art of Man, whose Power and
Skill are very narrow and limited, can refine Gold and Silver to such a Luster,
as if their matter were not Nomen terrae in igni reliquit.

Tertul.
Earth dug out of the Mines: If from black Cinders it can form Crystal
Glasses so clear and shining, how much more can Omnipotency recompact our Dust,
and reanimate it with a glorious Life? Death that dissolves our vital Frame,
does not abolish the matter of our Bodies: and though it is corrupted and
changed by a thousand accidents, yet it is unperishing; and under whatsoever
Colors and Figures it appears, God perfectly discerns, and will separate it
for its proper use.

More particularly, I will show how the Resurrection of Christ is an assurance
of the Resurrection of Believers to Glory. As our Surety he was under the
arrest of Death; it becoming the holy Majesty of God, and conducing to the ends
of his Government, not to derogate from the dignity of his Law, but to lay the
penalty upon his Son, who interposed for us. Now having finished the Work of
our Redemption by his Sufferings, his Resurrection was the just consequent of
his Passion. And it is observable that his Resurrection, tho one entire Act, is
ascribed as to himself, so to his Father, Romans 1.11.
by whose consent and concurrence he rose again. Therefore it is said, Whom God
raised up, having loosed the Pains of Death, Acts 2.24.
since it was impossible he should be holden by it. 'Twas naturally impossible
upon the account of the Divine Power inherent in his Person, and legally
impossible, because Divine Justice required that he should be raised to Life;
partly to vindicate his Innocence, for he was reputed, and suffered as a
Malefactor, and principally because he had fully satisfied God. Accordingly the
Apostle declares, he died for our Sins, Romans 4.
and rose again for our Justification. Having paid our Debt, he was released
from the Grave, and the Discharge was most solemnly published to the World.
It Is therefore said, Heb. 13.
the God of Peace raised him from the Dead: the Act is most congruously
ascribed unto God, invested with that Title, because his Power was exerted in
that glorious Work, after he was reconciled by the Blood of the Covenant.
Briefly, Our Savior's Victory over Death was obtained by dying, his Triumph by
rising again. He foiled our common Enemy in his own Territories the Grave. His
Death was a Counter-poison to Death it self: as a bruised Scorpion is a Qui
sibi ipse pulcherrimum medicamentum.

Celsus.
noble Antidote against its Venom.

Indeed his Death is incomparably a greater Wonder than his Resurrection. For
it is apparently more difficult that the Son of God, who originally possesses
Immortality, should die, than that the humane Body united to him, should be
raised to a glorious Life. It is more conceivable that God should communicate
to the humane Nature some of his Divine Perfections, Impassibility, and
Immortality, than that he should submit to our lowest Infirmities, Sufferings,
and Death.

Now the Resurrection of Christ is the argument and claim of our happy
Resurrection. For God chose and appointed him to be the Example and Principle
from whom all Divine Blessings should be derived to us. Accordingly he tells
his Disciples in a forecited Scripture, Because I live, ye shall live also.
Our Nature was raised in his Person, and in our Nature all Believers: Therefore
he is called the first fruits of them that sleep; because as the first Fruits
were a pledge and assurance of the following Harvest; and as from the condition
of the first Fruits being offered to God, the whole Harvest was entitled to a
Consecration; so our Savior's Resurrection to the Life of Glory is the earnest
and assurance of ours. He is called the firstborn among the Dead, and owns the
Race of departed Believers as his Brethren, who shall be restored to Life
according to his Pattern. He is the Head, Believers are his Members, and
therefore shall have Communion with him in his Life. The effect is so
infallible, that now they are said to be raised up together, Ephesians. 2.6.
and made to sit in heavenly Places in Christ Jesus. If his Victory over our
Enemies had been imperfect, and he had saved himself with difficulty and
hazard, [ as it were by Fire] in the Apostle's expression, our Redemption had
not been accomplished: But his Passion was triumphant; and is it conceivable,
that he should leave the Saints, his own by so many dear titles, under the
power of Death? If Moses, the Deliverer of Israel from the Tyranny of Pharaoh,
Exodus 10.26.
would not suffer any thing of theirs, not an hoof to remain in the House of
Bondage; Will our great Redeemer be less perfect in his Work? Shall our last
Enemy always detain his Spoils, our Bodies, in the Grave? This would reflect
upon his Love and Power. It Is recorded, to confirm our Hopes, how early his
Power was displayed in forcing the Grave to release its chained Captives: And
many Bodies of Saints which slept arose, Mat. 27.52, 53.
and came out of the Graves after his Resurrection, and went into the holy
City, and appeared unto many. What better Earnest can we have, that the
strength of Death is broken? From what he has done to what he is able to do,
the Consequence is clear. The Apostle tells us, He will raise our vile Bodies,
Phil. 3.1.
and change them like unto his glorious Body, by that Power whereby he is able
to subdue all things to himself. Our Redemption will then be complete, Romans
8.23.
and all the bitterness of Death past. The Redemption of the Soul is
accomplished from Sin and Misery immediately after Death: but the Redemption of
the Body is the last in order, and reserved to crown our Felicity at the Great
Day. Then Death shall be swallowed up in Victory, 1 Cor. 15.
abolished for ever.

And O the joyful reunion of those dear Relatives after such a Divorce! when
the Body that was so long detained in the loathsome Grave, 1 Cor. 15.
shall be reformed with all glorious Perfections, and be a fit Instrument for
the Soul, and partaker with it in consummate Blessedness and Immortality. It Is
said, that those that wear rich Clothing are in Kings Houses: but what are all
the Robes of costly Folly wherein earthly Courtiers appear, to the Brightness
and Beauty of the Spiritual Body wherewith the Saints shall be clothed, to
qualify them for the Presence of the King of Kings, and to be in his House for
ever? But O the miserable Condition of the Wicked in that Day! Death now breaks
their Bodies and Souls into an irreconcilable Enmity, and how sad will their
Conjunction be! The Soul will accuse the Body to have been Sin's Solicitor,
continually tempting to Sensualities: and the Body will upbraid more than ever
it allured the Soul, for its wicked Compliance: Then the Sinner shall be an
entire Sacrifice burning, Mark 9.
but never consumed. Now from the assurance of a blessed Resurrection by
Christ, the forementioned Fear of Death is conquered in Believers. If the
Doctrine of the Foelices errore suo quos ille timorum
Maximus, haud urget leti metus, inde ruendi
In ferrrum men's prona viris, animaeque capaces
Mortis, and ignavum rediturae parcere vitae.
Lucan.
Transmigration of Souls into Bodies (the invention of Pythagoras) inspired his
Disciples with that fiery vigor, as to encounter the most present and apparent
Dangers, being fearless to part with the Life that should be restored; how much
more should a Christian with a holy Confidence receive Death, knowing that the
Life of his Body shall not be finally lost, but renewed in a blessed Eternity?

The fourth General to be considered is, the Persons that have an Interest in
this blessed Privilege.

This Inquiry is of infinite moment, both for the awakning of the Secure, who
vainly presume upon their Interest in the Salvation of the Gospel, and for the
confirming and encouraging the Saints. And we have an infallible rule of trial
declared by St. John; 1 John 5.12.
He that has the Son, has Life; and he that has not the Son, has not Life.
All the excellent and comfortable Benefits procured by our Savior are
communicated only to those who are united to him. Particularly with respect to
the present Subject: Justification, that great Blessing of the Gospel, the
complete Pardon of Sins, that disarms Death of its Sting, is not common to all
that are Christians in title, but is a Privilege with a limitation; Romans 8.1.
There is no Condemnation to those that are in Christ Jesus, vitally as their
Head, from whom are derived spiritual Influences, and judicially as their
Advocate in Judgment; and such are described by this infallible Character, who
walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit. The Blessedness after Death
that is assured by a Voice from Heaven, is with this precise restriction,
exclusive of all others: Blessed are the Dead that die in the Lord; Revel.
they rest from their Labors, and their Works follow them. The glorious
Resurrection at the last Day, when the Bodies of the Saints that now rest in
Hope, shall be incorruptible and immortal, is the consequence of Union with
him. Thus the Apostle declares; As in Adam all die, 1 Cor. 15.22.
so in Christ shall all be made alive. As all that were naturally in and from
Adam, the corrupt Fountain of Mankind, are under the sentence of Death; so all
that are in Christ the Head of the Regenerate, shall partake of his blessed
Life. Others shall be raised by his Power, as their Judge, but not as their
Head: raised to be more miserable than Death can make them, not be transformed
into his glorious Resemblance; made capable of suffering an ever-dying Death,
not revived to eternal Life.

Now the Bond of our Union to Christ, is the Holy Spirit derived from him, as
the Head of the Church, and is the inward, powerful and lasting Principle of
Holiness, and new Obedience in Believers. 1 Cor. 6.17.
He that is joined to the Lord, is one Spirit: that is, by the Spirit of
Holiness has a real Participation of his Life, is both quickened and united to
him. John 6.36.
When the Prophet Elisha by the outward applying the parts of his Body to the
dead Child, 2 Kings 4.34.
inspired Life into him, there was no real Union between them: but Christ is by
his Spirit so intimately united to Believers, that he lives in them, and they
in him. Gal. 2.20.
The sanctifying Spirit renews the directing and commanding Faculties, the
Fountains of moral Actions; enlightens the Understanding with saving Knowledge,
rectifies the Obliquity of the Will, purifies the Affections, and reforms the
Life; so that the same Mind is in Christians as was in Christ; and as his
Conversation was, such is theirs in the World. This Divine Change is not
wrought by natural Reason, though assisted by the most powerful Arguments. The
Breath of a Man may as easily dispel a Mist, or thaw a Frost, as humane
Directions and Motives to Virtue can renew the Mind and Heart, and produce a
Holy frame of Soul toward God. Renewed Christians are said to be in the
Spirit, illuminated, inclined and enabled by the Spirit to do God's Will; and
the Spirit of God to dwell in them, by his peculiar and eminent Operations.
They live in the Spirit, and walk in the Spirit. An Angel may assume a Body,
and act by it: but the humane Soul enlivens it, and performs sensible
Operations by it. And such a Principle is the Holy Spirit to the Soul, gives it
spiritual Life, Activity and Power for good Works. By what Application of the
Spirit's Power this is produced is mysterious and inexplicable: but as the
Apostle speaks of his Rapture into the third Heavens, that he knew it was real,
and heard unutterable things; though how it was performed, whether in the Body,
or out of the Body, he could not tell: thus when a natural Man, the current of
whose Thoughts and Affections, was to the things of this World, becomes
spiritual, when the carnal Appetite is subdued, and sanctified Reason has the
Throne, when he feels such strong and sweet Impulsives to Holiness as engage
the Will; when the Stream of his Desires ascend to the things above, and his
Life becomes Holy and Heavenly, he feels and knows this wonderful Change,
though the manner how it was wrought he cannot tell. I will show more fully
this sanctifying Work of the Spirit, that we may the better understand our
State.

The Spirit of God is denominated by various Titles, the Spirit of Truth, John
15.26.
the Spirit of Holiness, the Comforter, and represented by various Types, Romans
1.4.
by an Ointment that clarifies the Eye to see things aright, by cleansing
refreshing Water, by purifying refining Fire, correspondent to his sacred
Operations in the Soul.

As the Spirit of Truth, he illuminates the Understanding to see the Reality
and Excellency of supernatural and Heavenly things, of the great Mysteries of
Godliness, of Eternal Glory; so that a Christian in his most deliberate, solemn
and composed Thoughts, in his exactest Valuation infinitely prefers them before
the gaudy Vanities of this transient World. When the Eyes of the Mind are truly
enlightened, present things appear, or rather disappear, as Shadows.

As the Spirit of Holiness he renews the Will and Affections, inspires the Soul
with Divine and unutterable Desires after the Favor and Grace of God, and
communicates spiritual Power for the Prosecution and obtaining those Desires.

The Holy Spirit raises such a Love to God, that habitually and strongly
inclines the Soul to obey his Commands.

This is the most clear and essential Character of a Christian, the special and
most excellent Property of a Saint, upon which all other Holy Qualifications
depend. As Reason is the first and chief Excellence of Man, from whence his
other Perfections are derived, that distinguish him from the Brutes, and give
him a natural and regular Preeminence and Dominion over them, so that a Man is
most properly defined a reasonable Creature. Thus the Love of God is the most
Divine Grace, the true Form of Holiness, the Root from whence all other Virtues
spring and flourish, and most peculiarly distinguish a Saint from unregenerate
Men, however adorned and accomplished; so that a Saint is most properly defined
to be a Lover of God.

This is the Principle of true Holiness inherent in the Soul, and shining in
the Conversation, that distinguishes the Sincerity of a Saint from the Art of
Hypocrisy, an affected Appearance of Religion for carnal sordid respects: and
from civil Virtue, that restrains from what is ignominious and disgraceful to
our Reputation, and makes obnoxious to Penalties of the Laws, and excites to
praiseworthy Actions, upon worldly Motives: and from Philosophical Morality,
that forbids Vice as contrary to Reason, and commends Virtue as the chief
Ornament and Perfection of humane Nature, without a Regard to please and
glorify God.

And Divine Love is the Principle of universal Holiness. Love is called the
fulfilling of the Law, as it is a comprehensive Grace, and as it draws forth all
the active Powers of the Soul to do God's Will in an exact manner. Universal
Obedience is the Exercise of Love in various Instances. As the Spouse in the
Song of Solomon is transformed in diverse Representations; sometimes as a
Sister, sometimes as a Warrior, sometimes as the Keeper of a Vineyard, but she
always acted as a Lover, and her chief business was to please her Beloved. This
Allegorical Description of the Church, signifies that when the Soul is inflamed
with the Love of God, that Affection will be active and discover it self in all
it does or suffers in the Service of God. This will make a Christian very
desirous and diligent to please God in all things, and careful not to displease
him in any thing; for that is the inseparable Effect of Love. The Felicity of
the natural temper, and the force of Education, may cause a loathing of some
Evils, and dispose to some good Works, but with a reserved delight in other
Sins, and a secret Exception against other Duties. Servile Fear is a partial
Principle, and causes an unequal respect to the Divine Precepts: it restrains
from Sins of greater Guilt, at which Conscience takes fire: it urges to some
Duties, the neglect of which causes Disquiet: but the Love of God causes the
Hatred of Sin; and therefore it is against all Sin, not only to prevent the
Exercise of it, but to eradicate it out of the Soul. All the fearful
consequences of Sin do not render it so odious to a gracious Spirit, as its own
proper Idea and intrinsic Evil, as it is contrary to the holy Nature and Law of
God. Love unites the Soul to God, and turns the Thoughts continually to him:
and the lively sense of his Majesty and Presence, who is so pure that he cannot
behold Iniquity, causes an aversion from all that is displeasing to his Divine
Eyes. And from hence it is that a zealous Lover of God is frequent and strict
in reviewing his Heart and Ways, and upon the discovery of sinful failings,
renews his Repentance, which is the exercise of Grief and Love, and renews his
purposes of more care and circumspection for the future. Love aspires to be
like God in all possible degrees of Purity: for it inflames our Desires after
his Favor, as that which is better than Life, and all the sweetest enjoyments
of it, and Holiness is the powerful attractive of God's delightful Love to us.

Love is the Principle of free, ingenuous, and joyful Obedience. 'Twas our
Savior's Meat and Drink to do the Will of his Father. For Love is the fountain
of Pleasure, it moves the Soul with Election and Liberty, and makes every thing
grateful that proceeds from it. Therefore the Apostle declares, that the Law is
not made for a righteous Man; that is, as it is enforced by terrible penalties,
to constrain rebellious Sinners to Obedience: for Love is an internal living
Law in the Heart, and has an Imperial Power over his Actions. And this also
distinguishes the renovation of one sanctified by the Spirit, from the
imperfect Change that is made in the Unregenerate. They may stop the eruption
of corrupt Nature, but are Swine that being washed, have an inclination to
wallow in the Mire: they may by strong impressions of Fear be urged to do many
good things; but in this they are like a Bowl that is thrown with such
violence, as controuls the drawing of the Bias, and makes it run contrary to
it. But Love enclines the Soul to obey the holy Motions of the Spirit with
facility: as the Wheels in Ezekiel's Vision turned every way with readiness, as
the Spirit moved them.

And with holy Love there is a spiritual Power communicated, that both the
natural averseness and impotence to what is good may be healed. By the virtue
of the sanctifying Spirit, the Soul that was dead, absolutely unable to perform
spiritual and supernatural Acts, is revived to a kind of Omnipotence, it can do
all things, required by the Evangelical Covenant, by the new Law that is in the
hands of our merciful Mediator for Salvation. It Is true, there are relics of
Sin in the best, and the Flesh and Spirit are repugnant Principles warring
against one another: but the holy Spirit will make no capitulation or
composition with Sin, but is so predominant, that Sin is gradually subdued, and
does not so freely and frequently break forth, as it does from the unrenewed.
By the accession of his Strength we are enabled to mortify the Deeds of the
Body, to crucify the Flesh with the Affections and Lust thereof: And to perform
holy Duties with freedom, alacrity and zeal, in such a manner as is acceptable
to God. In short, saving Grace is distinguished from that which is common to
the Unregenerate, by its prevalency and constancy. There may be a declination
in the Saints tending to a downfall; but the Seed of God, that supernatural
Grace that remains in them, will by the Power of the holy Spirit recover the
Supremacy. Others may be enlightened, and feel some good Motions, and transient
Touches; as Saul had his rapture among the Prophets; but they are not truly,
entirely, and perseveringly converted to God; they are not proof against the
allurements or Terrors of the World. They make a fair Profession till they are
tried by Temptations. Congealed drops of Water appear like solid Crystal, till
the warm beams of the Sun dissolve them, and discover the hypocrisy of the
Crystal. False Jewels may seem to have the luster of Diamonds, till they are
broke by a fall, and discovered to be Glass. Thus the Riches, the Honors and
Pleasures of the Flesh melt some, and temporal Evils break the Resolutions of
others, and make it evident they were not sincere Converts. But where the holy
Spirit savingly works, he is said to dwell: he is not like a Passenger, or a
Tenant at will, that neglects the House, and suffers it to fall into ruin, but
as the Proprietary and Owner he keeps perpetual residence in true Christians,
and by his continual Influence preserves them from final Apostasy.

Now from hence we may judge whether we have an Interest in Christ and his
Benefits. For the Apostle clearly tells us, Romans 8.9.
That if any Man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. By this
sacred Signature, we are appropriated to Christ, and visibly distinguished from
the World. For though the secret and pure Influences of the Spirit in the Soul
are only known to the Person that feels them, yet his active Inspirations are
declarative of his Presence and Power in the outward Conversation. As the Wind
that is of so thin and subtle a nature that it is invisible in it self, but we
certainly know from what Point it blows by the course and way that the Ship
makes: thus the Spirit of God, who is compared to the Wind, is discovered by an
infallible Indication, his Fruits and Effects in a holy Life. And those who
have communion with Christ by his Spirit, have a share in his Victories, and
may with confidence meet the last Enemy, Death: For we are assured, If the
Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell in us, Romans 8.11.
he that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken our mortal Bodies,
by the Spirit that dwells in us.

A preparative conformity to Christ in Grace, will be followed with a
consummate in Glory. But those who never felt the sanctifying efficacy of the
Spirit in their Hearts and Lives, though they are Christians in profession, yet
they have no other Union with Christ, than a dead Branch with a Tree that
receives no sap and virtue from it; or an artificial Member joined to the Body,
that may have the outward clothing and ornaments proper to that part, but
derives no Life and Sense from it. Whoever is in Christ is a new Creature. 2
Cor. 5.17.
And only those who partake in the first Resurrection from Sin, shall be
exempted from the Power of the second Death, and upon just grounds are freed
from the Terrors of the first.

To apply this Point, let us,

1. Consider our dear Obligations to our blessed Savior, who to free us from
the sting and enslaving fear of Death, submitted to it with all its Terrors
from God and wicked Men. He felt a Sadness to an Agony in his Soul, and
suffered the equal extremities of Ignominy and Torment in his Body. The Favor
of God was intercepted from him, that it may shine upon us in that gloomy hour.
And all his terrible Sufferings, though foreknown by his enlightened Mind, could
not weaken his determined Will to undergo them for us: But when Peter regarded
with a more tender eye his Life than our Salvation, he was repelled with
indignation: Unparalled Love! no less than Divine, transcending all the
Instances of humane Affection. The highest kind and excess of Love amongst Men
is to die for another, and the highest degree in that kind is to die to save an
Enemy; and of this our Savior is the singular Example: Love incomprehensible!
it passes knowledge, and all understanding but his who expressed it. His Love
was equal to the height of his Glory from whence he descended, and the depth
of his Sufferings that he sustained in our stead. By washing us from our Sins
in his Blood, Revel. 1.
he makes us Kings, dignifies us with spiritual Sovereignty over not only
defiling, but disturbing Passions. The freest and most confident Sinner in the
World, that rebels against the Divine Laws without restraint, is a Slave not
only under the Chains of his imperious Lusts, but in that he is liable to the
scourgings of Conscience when ever awakened, and to the servile fear of Death
every day. But the sincere Christian has a clear and sweet Peace, a blessed
Tranquillity, from the tormenting apprehensions and fears of Death, that are
the just consequents of Guilt.

Macti ingenio este Coeli interpretes, rerumque naturae capaces, Argumenti
repertores, quo Deos hominesque vinxistis. Plin. lib. 2.
One of the ancient Romans highly celebrates the Astronomers, who discovered the
true Causes of the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, and freed the World from the
double darkness of Ignorance and Fear; for before that Discovery, Men believed
the obscuring of those great Lights were the fainting fits of Nature, and
mortal Symptoms threatening an universal Calamity. But what Praise and Blessing
is due to our Savior, who has given us infallible assurance that the Death of
the Righteous is not, as the Heathen World imagined, an irreparable loss of
Life, but a short eclipsing of this low and mean Light that is common to
sensitive Creatures, to be restored more excellent and permanent in Heaven;
where those Stars shine in the Divine Presence for ever? Thanks be to God which
gives us the Victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. This should render him
infinitely precious to us, and inflame our Hearts with Desires equal to our
Obligations to serve him.

2. Let us make it the main Business of our Lives to remove from our Souls the
just Fears of Death. It Is one of the solemn Follies of the World to fear where
there is no cause: As if a Sentinel should mistake Gloworms in the Night for
lighted Matches, and give a false Alarm: but it is a worse Folly, though
pleasing, not to fear when there is the greatest Reason to excite it. And it is
so in the present Case: for the most are without the Fear of Death, that should
make them serious in preparing for it: nay, to maintain their Security, are as
unwilling to hear Conscience declare the Wretchedness of their Condition with
respect to Eternity, as Ahab was the Prophet Micaiah, who always foretold evil
things to him.

'Twas the chief Design of the Philosophers, by Principles of Reason to fortify
themselves against all frightful Accidents, and with a masculine Mind, with an
Heart ardent, and with generous Spirits to Foelix qui potuit rerum cognoscere
causas:
Atque metus mortis and inexorabile fatum
Subjecit pedibus.
Virgil.
encounter this inevitable Evil. When one of them was threatened by the Emperor
Antigonus with present Death, he boldly replied, Threaten this to your
dissolute Courtiers that are softened and melted by sensual Pleasures, and
easily receptive of terrible Impressions, not to a Philosopher to whom Death is
contemptible in any Appearance. This was a piece of affected Bravery; for Pagan
Philosophy could never furnish them with Armor of Proof against the Dart of our
last Enemy. But the Gospel assuring us that Death is an Entrance into
Immortality, makes that to be the Reality of a Christian, that was a vain boast
of the Philosophers.

Now that we may be established in that blessed Tranquillity that Death cannot
discompose, the following Directions are infinitely useful.

1. We must give all Diligence to be in a State of Reconciliation with God. The
things requisite to that are, as the Apostle declares, Acts 20.21.
Repentance toward God, and Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. Repentance
includes a Godly Sorrow for Sins past, with a Detestation and forsaking them
sincerely, without Hypocrisy, and entirely, without Partiality in the Heart and
Conversation. It Is called Repentance from dead Works: Heb. 6.1.
the proper Name of our Sins, that deserve Eternal Death. By Repentance we
return to Obedience that is due to God our Maker and Lawgiver. Faith respects
the Redeemer, who by his Blood shed on the Cross, and pleaded in Heaven,
reconciles God to penitent Sinners. The Belief of his merciful and powerful
Mediation for our Acceptance and Pardon, Works by Love, and constrains us to
dedicate our selves in a devoted Propriety to his Glory and Service, 2 Cor.
5.14.
and to live according to that Dedication. These two are absolutely necessary
to the vital and salvifical State of a Christian. And as soon as a Person
sincerely repents and believes, he is justified before God; and, if he dies,
will certainly obtain eternal Glory. This should be the early and most speedy
Work of our Lives: for the Delay of Repentance, and Neglect of securing the
Favor of God, arms Death with more Stings and Terrors.

The infinite Danger of this I will unfold, to awaken the Careless and Secure.

The Devil is a Sophister in Perfection, and his ordinary and successful
Artifice to elude the force of present Conviction, and wrap Men in Sin and
Damnation, is to induce them to delay the great Work of the Soul till
afterward. He is not so foolish to tell them, as he did our first Parents, Ye
shall not die, for the Temptation is so palpable, that it could deceive none.
Though the Evidence and Certainty of supernatural Truths, that disturb the
Security of Sinners, is sometimes obscured by affected Doubts, yet there is no
Artifice that can resist the full and strong Conviction in Men, that Death is
inevitable. Though Nature recoils from it with Abhorrence, yet this sad Truth
is so visible, that it forces an Assent from all. Those who are titular Gods,
the greatest Princes, are not so vain as to pretend to an Exemption by
Privilege from that fatal Necessity; they cannot fancy to be imbalm'd alive,
and that Nature may be made incorruptible by Art: The Palace is as near the
Grave as the Cottage: therefore the Devil cherishes in Men fond hopes of a long
Life: As some optic Glasses deceive the Sight, and make a superficial
Representation in Colors on a Wall but two or three Steps distant, appear a
long deep Gallery. Thus the Tempter by a dangerous Deceit presents to the
Imagination the fatal term at a great Distance; and since he cannot lessen the
Certainty of Death in Men's Belief, he removes the Image of it out of their
Memories, to weaken the Impression that it is capable to make on their
Affections: they dare not venture to die, as they live, careless of Salvation,
and unprepared for their Accounts with God; therefore they suspend the Workings
of Conscience by a seeming Compliance; they resolve at random to convert and
reform hereafter, but will not determine at present to forsake their Sins. The
Tempter insinuates, there will be a long Interval between the present time and
the last hour, that shall decide their State for ever; that it will be a
convenient season to prepare for the other World when they have done with this;
as if Repentance were best at last, when there are no Temptations, and
therefore no Danger of retracting it. And the Heart of Man is a great
Flatterer, very subtle to deceive and ruin him with vain Resolutions of a
devout Retirement, and becoming seriously religious hereafter; and thus by an
easy Permission he gratifies the present Desires of the Flesh, and goes in a
Circuit from one Vanity to another, till Death surprise the Presumer. It Is very
applicable to this purpose, what is related of Alcaeus the Poet, Athen.
who from every season of the Year, took Arguments to give a new Title to his
Intemperance; The Spring he said, required liberal drinking in Sign of Joy for
the Renovation of Nature; the Summer to temper our Heat, and refresh our
Thirst; 'twas due to Autumn that is dedicated to the Vintage; and Winter
required it to expel the cold, that would congeal the Blood and Spirits. Thus
he pleaded for the Allowance of his Excess. And so Men in the several Ages of
Life, (that are correspondent to the Seasons of the Year) frame some Excuses to
delay Repentance, and give some color to their Rebellion against God, who
commands us to hear his Voice to Day, obediently and immediately, upon no less
Penalty than being excluded from his blessed Rest for ever: Heb 2.7, 8. Quis
enim satis explicet verbis, quantum mali sit non obedire tanto potestatis
imperio, and tanto tenenti supplicio?
Yet the self-deceiving Sinner preaches another Gospel to himself, and thinks
the Vanities of Childhood, the Pleasures of Youth, the Business of Middle-Age,
and the Infirmity of Old Age, are plausible Pretenses to put off the serious
Work of Repentance: O that such would duly consider the desperate Uncertainty
upon which Men build their Hopes of a future Repentance, and Divine Acceptance.

1. Men delay Repentance upon the Presumption of a long Life: But what is more
uncertain? It Is the Wisdom and Goodness of God to conceal in his impenetrable
Counsels the time of our Sojourning here: For if Men, though liable to Death
every hour, and therefore should be under just Fear, lest it surprise them
unprepared, yet against so strong a Curb, run with that exorbitant vehemence
after the present World; how much more licentious would they be, if secured
from sudden Death? But none can promise to himself one Day. Death comes not
according to the order of Nature, but the Decree of God. How many in the Flower
of their Youth and Strength thought themselves at as great a Distance from
Death, as the East is from the West, when there was not the space of an Hour
between them and Death, between them and Hell? The Lamp suddenly expires by a
Blast of Wind, when there is plenty of Oil to feed it. The rich Man pleased
himself with Designs of sensual Enjoyments for many years, yet did not see the
dawning of the next Morning: Thou Fool, this Night shall thy Soul be required
of thee. This Sentence is pronounced in Heaven against thousands that are now
alive, conversant in the Vanities and Business of the World, Eating and
Drinking, Playing and Trading, and all unconcerned as to dying, yet shall
breath their last before to Morrow, and their unwilling Souls be rent from the
Embraces of their Bodies. In various manners Men die from inward and outward
causes; an Apoplexy, an Imposthume, a Flux of Rhume stopping Respiration, kills
the Body without any presaging Signs of Death: As if the Roof and all the
Chambers should fall within the House, while the Walls are standing entire: And
how many unforeseen Accidens, and therefore inevitable, put a sudden Period to
Life? Is it not our truest Wisdom by an early Repentance to prepare for Death,
when the Season is certainly short, and but uncertainly continued, and the
Omission is irreparable?

2. Suppose Life be continued, yet Sinners that delay Repentance, can have no
rational hopes that they shall sincerely repent in time to come. For,

1 st. Saving Repentance is the Gift of God: and is it likely that those who
have been insensible of the loud and earnest Calls of the Word, inflexible to
the gracious Methods of his Providence leading them to Repentance, should at
last obtain Converting Grace? The Gales of the Spirit are very transient and
blow where he pleases; and can it be expected that those who have wilfully and
often resisted him, should by an exuberant Favor receive afterward more
powerful Grace, to overruled their stubborn Wills, and make them obedient? To
expect Divine Grace and the powerful Workings of the Spirit, after long
resisting his Holy Excitations, is both unreasonable and unrevealed. It Is
written as with a Sunbeam, that God will graciously pardon repenting Sinners
that reform their Lives, but it is nowhere promised that he will give
Saving-Repentance to those who securely continue in Sin, Nemo ergo sibi
promittat, quod evangelium non promittit.

Aug.
upon a corrupt Confidence they will repent at last. Our Savior threatens to
him that neglects the improving the Grace that is offered, That which he has
shall be taken away: Yet Men unwilling at present to forsake their Sins of
Pleasure and Profit, vainly hope they shall obtain Grace hereafter, without any
Promise from God, and against the Tenor of his Threatenings. God has threatened
that his Spirit shall not always strive with rebellious Sinners, and then their
State is remediless. This may be the case of many in this Life, who are
insensible of their Misery. As consumptive Persons decline by degrees, lose
their Appetite, Color, and Strength, till at last they are hopeless: So the
Withdrawings of the Spirit are gradual, his Motions are not so strong nor
frequent; and upon the continued Provocations of the Disobedient, finally
leaves them under that most fearful doom, He that is filthy, let him be filthy
still; He that is unrighteous, let him be unrighteous still: and thus punishes
them on this side Hell, as he does the Damned, by giving them over to Sin. It Is
a bloody Adventure for Men to indulge their carnal Appetites, as if they had
infallible Assurance that they should not die in an impenitent State. The
Delayer does not regularly trust, but tempt God.

2 dly. Suppose the Holy Spirit be not totally withdrawn, yet by every Day's
Continuance in Sin, the Heart is more hardened against the Impressions of Grace,
more averse from returning to God, and Repentance more difficult and hazardous.
The last guilty Disposition that seals up the Damnation of Sinners is
Impenitence. Now he that delays the returning to his Duty, shall have more
cause to repent hereafter, but less Will and Power; for Sin repeated, makes him
more incapable of Repentance, and that which is Indisposition, will become
Averseness and Obstinacy. The Heart with Difficulty changes its last End.
Actions may be suddenly changed, when there is a Disability to perform them;
but the inward Inclinations to Sin, without supernatural renewing Grace,
remain. It Is therefore the Subtilty of the old Serpent to make the Entrance of
Sin easy: for he knows that Custom is a second Nature, and has a mighty Power
in us: Can an Ethiopian change his Skin, or the Leopard change his Spots? then
may you who are accustomed to do Evil, do good. If Sin in its Infancy can make
such Resistance, that the Spirit of Grace is foiled in his Motions to rescue
the Soul from its Bondage, how much more when it is grown into a confirmed
Habit? Therefore the Apostle urges so zealously; To Day if you will hear his
Voice, harden not your Hearts, lest any be hardened through the Deceitfulness of
Sin.

3. How uncertain is it whether God will accept the Addresses of such at last?
We are commanded, Seek the Lord while he may be found, call upon him while he
is near. The Limitation implies, if the Season be neglected, he will hide his
Face for ever. Now in cases of great Moment and Hazard, what Diligence, what
Caution should be used?

1 st. Consider how derogatory it is to his Majesty, to offer to him the Dregs
of our Age, the Relics of a licentious careless Life, spent in the Works of
Vanity. Is this to give Glory to God? Jer. 13.16.
Contempt provokes Superiors as much as actual Injuries: How vilifying is it
of his excellent Greatness, that Men lavishly waste the best of their Time and
Strength upon their Lusts, and when through Weakness of Age, or the Violence of
a Disease, they can no more do the Acts of Sin, nor relish the Pleasures of
Sin; to presume that God will upon their Prayers forgive their Sins so long
indulged, and of such violent Provocations, and receive them into his Kingdom,
as if he could not be happy without them, and it were his Interest to receive
them? God has laid his Exceptions against such Addresses: He may justly stand
upon his Greatness and Honor: If ye offer the Blind for a Sacrifice, is it not
evil? And if ye offer the Lame and Sick, is it not evil? Offer it now to thy
Governor, will he be pleased with it, to accept thy Person, says the Lord of
Hosts? As the Lord upbraids the Jews for their black Ingratitude in barginning
for thirty pieces of Silver, to have him betrayed to their Malice; a goodly
Price that I was prized at of them. So when there is an universal Prostration
of all the Powers and Faculties, when the Spirits are damped, the vital Heat is
checked, and the function of the senses is obstructed, then to seek to God for
Mercy, and to make fair Promises of Obedience, he may justly reproach the
Presumer, a goodly time you have allotted for me! Your Youth and Strength, the
Golden Age of Life, has been wasted on your Lusts, and in the Business of the
World; and the wretched remains you think worthy of my Acceptance.

2 dly. Consider what Sincerity or moral Value is in Religion that merely
proceeds from bitter Constraint? It Is a Rule in Law, Falsum est eam peperisse,
cui mortuae filius extractus est: It Is not a natural Birth when the Child is
extracted from the dead Mother: It Is not genuine Piety that is extorted by the
rack, whilst the Heart full of Reluctance does not truly consent: Pure Religion
flows uncompell'd from Love to God; it is the Dregs that come forth with
pressing. It Is observed of the Israelites, Psalm 78.34, 36.
that when God slew them, they sought him, and returned and enquired early
after God. But it is added, Nevertheless they did flatter him with their Mouths,
and they lied to him with their Tongues; for their Hearts were not right with
him, neither were they steadfast in his Covenant. How often does Experience
convince us of the Inefficacy of a Sickbed-Repentance? How many that were very
devout and mournful with one Foot as it were in the Grave, and another in Hell,
and were as a Brand plucked out of the Fire; yet when the Fear of Death is
removed, all the Terrors of Conscience, the religious Affections that were felt
and expressed by them, vanish as the Morning-Dew? Now converting Grace is
distinguished by its radication and efficacy, not only from the mere Pretenses
of those who know their own Insincerity, but from the real Workings of
Conscience, and the imperfect Dispositions to Good that are in the Unrenewed.
And those Persons who with the return of Health, have returned to their Sins,
if they had died with their religious Resolutions, would have presumed, that
their Repentance was unto Life, and of their Interest in the Divine Mercy. The
Heart is deceitful above all things, and above all things deceitful to it self.
Besides, when Sinners are plunged in deep Distress, when the shadow of Death
sits upon their Eyelids, they may with plentiful effusions of Tears desire God
to receive them to Heaven, not to see and praise his adorable Excellencies, not
to please and glorify him for ever, but as a Sanctuary from revenging Justice,
a Refuge from Hell. And will such Prayers prevail? What swells the Confidence
of Sinners, but unworthy Notions of God, as if a forced and formal Confession
of their Sins could deceive his all-discerning Eye; and Desires merely
terminated on themselves, were sufficient to reconcile his offended Majesty?

3. There is nothing renders Men more unworthy of Mercy than continuance in
Sin, upon presumption of an easy Pardon at last. This is the most provoking
Abuse of his Goodness and Long-suffering, Romans 2.
that should lead them unto Repentance. He can in the twinkling of an eye, in
the beating of a Pulse cut off the Sinner: it is as easy to his Power as to will
it. And there is no Consideration should be so melting and moving as his
Clemency. We read of David, that he had more than once in his power Saul his
unjust and cruel Enemy, yet spared him: the effect of it was, that Saul was
softened, and under such compunction of Spirit, that he wept, confessed his
Guilt, and persecuted him no more, overcome by that unexampled Love: 1 Samuel
26.21.
If a Man find his Enemy, will he let him go? Yet Men take advantage from the
Goodness of God, securely to despise his Laws. The habitual Sinner thinks that
God is so gracious, such a Lover of Souls, so easy to be entreated, that upon
his dying Prayer, Lord, remember me in thy Kingdom, the Answer will be, To day
shall thou be with me in Paradise. This is the deceitful Principle upon which
Men usually build their Hopes, as their Actions, that bear the Image of their
Minds, clearly manifest. Now this presumptuous Indulgence gives the deepest
grain to their Sins, and makes them more incapable of Pardon. Chrysostom
observes, that Judas was encouraged to betray his Master, presuming on his
Lenity, Goodness, Benignity, which Considerations intolerably aggravated his
Treason, and confounded his Hopes. There is a dreadful threatening against those
who reject the Invitations of Grace in their Prosperity, and when the righteous
Judge comes to Sentence and Execution, are earnest Suppliants for Mercy. Because
I have called, Prove. 1.
and ye have refused; I have stretched out my Hands, and no Man regarded: But
ye have set at naught all my Counsel, and would none of my Reproof: I will also
laugh at your Calamity, and mock when your Fear comes: When your Fear comes as
a Desolation, and your Destruction as a Whirlwind, when Distress and Anguish
come upon you; then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall
seek me early, but shall not find me: For they hated Knowledge, and did not
choose the Fear of the Lord. A doleful Case beyond all possible expression!
when the sinful Creature, forsaken of all Comforts below, addresses to Heaven
for Relief, and meets with Derision and Fury, Scorn and Indignation. The
foolish Virgins, careless to prepare for the Bridegroom's Coming, in vain at
last discovered their want of Oil, in vain solicited the wise Virgins for
Supply, in vain knocked at the door, crying, Lord, Lord, open to us; Matthew. 25.
the Answer was severe and peremptory, I know you not; and they were for ever
excluded from the Joys of Heaven.

4. How incongruous is it to delay the solemn Work of Reconciliation with God
till the time of Sickness. This is an Affair wherein our transcendent Interest
is concerned, and should be performed in our most calm and sensible Condition,
when we are most capable of reflecting upon our Ways, and making an exact trial
of our selves, in order to our returning to God by a holy Change of our Lives.
Now that the Time of Sickness is not a convenient Season for this Work, is
sadly evident; for some Diseases are stupifying, and all the Powers of the Soul
are benumbed in a dull Captivity; so that the sick Man only perceives with his
animal Faculties. Some Diseases are tormenting, and cause a great Disorder in
the Soul, and distract the Thoughts from considering his spiritual State. When
the Storm is at the highest, and the Pilot so sick that he can give no
Directions, the Ship is left to the fury of the Winds, and escapes by Miracle.
When there is a Tempest in the Humors of the Body, and the Soul by Sympathy is
so discomposed, that it cannot apply it self to prepare for its appearance
before the Divine Tribunal, what danger of being lost, and passing from a short
Agony to everlasting Torment?

Besides; Suppose the Sickness more tolerable, yet how unfit is a Person weak
and languishing, Male cum his agitur, quibus necessitas incumbit belli and
morbi.

V^g.
when Sense and Conscience are both afflicted, to encounter with the cruel
Enemy of Souls? All that sincerely seek Peace with God, must expect fierce
Anger and War from Satan: therefore it is a point of necessary Wisdom, whilst
our Bodies and Minds are in the best order, to be preparing against his
Assaults.

5. Consider how uncomfortable it is to delay Repentance till Age and Sickness,
when the Fruits of it are not so evident nor acceptable: In evil days, and the
Approaches of Death, it is very hard to discover the Sincerity of the Heart,
whether Repentance proceeds from Holy Principles, whether the Sorrow then
expressed be Godly for Sin, or merely natural, for Punishment; whether the good
Resolutions be the Effects of permanent Fidelity, or of violent Fear, that will
vanish, the cause being removed. When the Invitations to Sin cease, there may
remain a secret undiscerned Love to it in the Heart, which is the Center of
Corruption, and Root of Apostasy. The Snake that seemed dead in the Frost,
revived by the Fire. The inordinate Affections that seemed mortified, when the
sensitive Faculties were disabled to carnal Enjoyments, may have inward Life,
and will soon be active and vigorous in the Presence of Temptations. And that a
Deathbed-Repentance is usually deceitful, appears from hence, that not one of a
thousand that recover from dangerous Diseases are faithful in performing their
most sacred and solemn Vows. How many having the Sentence of Death in
themselves, and under the Terrors of the Lord, have expressed the greatest
Detestation of their Sins, and resolved, as they thought sincerely, if God
would spare them, to reform their ways, to become new Creatures, exemplary in
all Holy Conversation; yet the Danger being over, their Heats of Devotion
expire as they revive, and their Lusts recover Strength with their Bodies, and
being suppressed only by Fear, are more fierce in their Return. Their Hearts
were as Marble, that in rainy Weather seems dissolved into Water, but it is only
from the Moisture of the Air, and remains as hard as ever: When the Fear of
Death is removed, all their Promises of Reformation are ineffective, as violent
and void; all their religious Affections vanish as the Morning-Dew. Now if
these Persons had died before this visible Trial and Discovery, they had past
into the other World with the Reputation of true Penitents, deceiving others
with their Prayers and Tears, and liberal Promises, the outward Signs of
Repentance, and deceived themselves by the inward Workings of an alarmed
Conscience: Therefore Ministers should be very circumspect in applying the
Promises of Mercy to Persons in such a State; for an Error in that kind has
fearful Consequences. A little opiate Divinity may quiet the Mind for a time,
but the Virtue of it will be soon spent, and the Presumer perishes for ever.
But suppose a dying Person with true Tears and unfeigned persevering Affections
returns to God; Can he have a comfortable Assurance of his Sincerity? Indeed
the Searcher and Judge of Hearts will accept him: but how doubtful and wavering
are his Hopes? what anxious Fears are in his Breast, lest he builds upon a
sandy Foundation? And how dreadful is it to appear before the Tribunal of God,
and expect an uncertain Sentence?

But Sinners still please themselves in this, that God has effectually called
some at the last Hour, and they may find the same Favor with others. To this I
answer:

1. It Is true, we have some rare admirable Instances of God's Mercy and Grace,
the dying Thief and some others, which showed it is possible with God to abolish
the most confirmed Habits in a short time, and by a swift Conversion to prepare
a Sinner for Heaven. But these miraculous Examples are not to be drawn into
Consequence for the Encouragement of any in their Sins. A Quod alicui gratiose
conceditur, trahi non debet ab aliis in exemplum.
Prince will not endure that his free Favors should be made a Law to him, and
the special Privilege of some be extended to all? As Thales said, An old
Mariner that has escaped the various Dangers by Rocks and Storms at Sea, was a
new Miracle: So that one who has lived an obstinate Sinner, dies a penitent
Believer, is very rare and extraordinary. What our Savior said concerning the
Salvation of rich Men, is justly applicable to this Case, That it was as easy
for a Camel to go through the eye of a Needle, as for a rich Man to enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven. This so astonished the Apostles, that they cried, Who
then can be saved? To mitigate the Difficulty, he remembers them of the Divine
Omnipotence: All things are possible with God. Thus for one who has been
hardened in a long course of Sin, and making himself meet for the Company of
damned Spirits in Hell, to be at last suddenly prepared and received into the
pure and glorious Society above, is possible, but possible only as Miracles are
by the Efficacy of Infinite Power; and we cannot reasonably expect such
Miracles. And are Heaven and Hell such trivial things as to be left to an
Uncertainty? Are not Men concerned in another manner in the Affairs of this
World? How careful to prevent the Sentence of Death, of Imprisonment, of
Banishment? How diligent to obtain some temporal Advantage? Yet how neglectful
in things of highest importance? It may be, says the secure Wretch, God will
give me Repentance at last, as he did to others. (...).

Chrysostom.
Remember you speak of that that most nearly concerns your Soul, and dare you
venture the Salvation of an immortal Soul upon a naked possibility of receiving
Grace? What reasonable Person would neglect a Disease that may prove deadly,
and rely on extreme Remedies? And can you be guilty of such a cruel
Indifference, such a desperate Carelessness, as to leave eternal Salvation and
Damnation to a peradventure?

2. Consider how many thousands have died in their Sins, Vix dici potest
quantos haec inanis spei umbra deceperit.

Aug.
and of them great Numbers cherished fallacious Hopes of repenting at last.
Diagoras the Atheist, that denied a governing Providence of things in this
lower World, the Sphere of Mutability, when one for his Conviction showed him
in the Tull.
Temple of Neptune many votive Tables, containing the grateful Acknowledgments
of those who by Addresses to the Gods in dangerous Storms, had arrived safe at
their Ports; and asked him, Whether he had observed those numerous Testimonies
for Divine Providence? He replied, I see them; but how many having invocated
Neptune, Tully.
yet perished in the Ocean, and never came to pay their Vows for Deliverance?
'Twas Impiety in him to argue so against God's disposing Providence; but it may
be justly said to those who neglect their present Duty, presuming upon some
Examples of his glorious Goodness on those who were converted and saved in
their approaches to Death. How many have finally miscarried in shooting that
Gulf, to one that has arrived safe at Heaven? How many that presume, upon
their Youth and Strength, to delay Repentance, are suddenly cut off? the first
Symptom of their Sickness is Death. And what the Angel with such solemnity
declared, that Time should be no more, is verified concerning them by an
unexpected Dissolution. How many, when sick, hope either by the Vigor of
Nature, or the Virtue of Medicines, to overcome the Disease? and this Hope is
cherished by the mortal Kindness, the cruel Deceit of Friends, who are
unwilling to discover their Danger, lest their Spirits should sink under the
apprehension of it. And thus deluded, many never see Death till they feel it,
and perish for ever in their Impenitence. How many that are guilty and
graceless, when distant from Death and Hell but a few hours, yet from Atheism
are secure as Jonah, who slept in the midst of a Tempest at Sea? The Tenor of
their Lives discovers this to be Divine Vengeance, they are seized by a Spirit
of Slumber, and pass without fear into the State of everlasting Desperation.
How many are deceived with the appearance of Repentance, and mistake a false
Peace for a true, and assuage the anguish of Conscience by palliating Remedies?
Their Sorrow for Sin, their Prayers, their Resolutions of Reformation, are the
product of servile Fear, that is ineffectual to Salvation: And as it is with
crafty Tradesmen, that take up much upon Trust, when near breaking; so they are
very liberal of the Promises of Amendment, when they are near dying. From hence
they vainly presume that God is reconciled to them, whose all-discerning Eye
sees the inward Spring of their Sorrows, and the Principle of all their
religious Resolutions is the guilty fear of eternal Judgment. Now a false
Tranquillity is more terrible than the Storms of a troubled Spirit: for those
who hope upon deceitful grounds, are in the most hopeless State, neglecting
what is requisite in order to Salvation. Thus innumerable pass in a Cloud of
Delusion to the Kingdom of Darkness. And how many who have lived in careless
Security, as if they had made a Covenant with Death, when Conscience is
awakened, and looks into the depth of their Guilt, when they see Death before
them attended with Judgment, and Judgment with an everlasting Hell, as we read
of Sisera, who from extreme Fear, passed to extreme Security; so on the
contrary, these Self-deceivers from Security have fallen into Despair. Then
Truth and Conscience that were so long under unrighteous Restraints, break the
Fetters, and terribly charge the Sinners: Then innumerable Acts, which they
thought to be innocent, appear to be Sins; and Sin that they made light of, to
be infinitely evil, and in the highest degree hateful to God. And sometimes by
the Suggestions of the Enemy of Souls, they are overwhelmed with Despair, and
their last Error is worse than the first. The Devil makes his advantage of the
timorous Conscience, as well as of the seared: Solitude is his Scene as well as
the noisy Theater; and by contrary ways, either Presumption or Despair, brings
Sinners to the same end. He changes his Methods according to their
Dispositions; the Tempter turns Accuser; and then such who had but a dim sight
of Sin before, have an over-quick sight of it, and are swallowed up in an abyss
of Confusion. The Condition of such is extremely miserable. It Is observed of
those who are bitten with a mad Dog, that their Cure is extreme Miserrimum
morbi genus, in quo aeger and siti and aquae metu cruciatur, quorum spes in
angusto est.

Cells.
difficult, if not impossible; for being tormented with Thirst, yet are so
fearful of Water, that the sight of it sometimes causes sudden Convulsions and
Death. This is a significant Emblem of a despairing Soul: For when enraged
Conscience bites to the quick, the guilty Person filled with Estuations and
Terrors, ardently thirsts for Pardon, yet fearfully forsakes his own Mercies.
Whatever is propounded to encourage Faith in the Divine Promises, he turns to
justify his Infidelity. Represent to him the infinite Mercies of God, the
unvaluable Merits of Christ sufficient to redeem the lost World, it increases
his Despair, because he has perversely abused those Mercies, and neglected those
Merits. The most precious Promises of the Gospel are killing Terrors to him: as
the sweet Title of Friend, wherewith our Savior received Judas when he came to
betray him, was the most stinging Reproach of his perfidious Villainy. Thus it
appears how dangerous it is to delay Repentance and Reconciliation with God
till Sickness and a Deathbed, when the remembrance or forgetfulness of Sin,
the sense or security of Conscience may be equally destructive.

The Sum of what has been amplified in this Part is this: A vain hope of living
long, and being reconciled to God when Men please, is the fatal Foundation of
their Sins and Misery. They apply the Word of God against the Mind of God, and
securely provoke him, as if they could take Heaven by Violence, in
contradiction to the Gospel. But they usually dispose of that time they shall
never enjoy, and presume upon that Mercy and Grace they shall never obtain. We
are commanded to seek the Lord while he may be found; a sad Intimation that
it is not in our power to find him to our Comfort when we please: He spares
long, but abused Patience will deliver Sinners to revenging Justice. Sampson
was three times in the Chamber of his Lust, exposed to Treachery, and escaped;
but the fourth time he said, I will arise, but was surprised by his Enemies,
and lost his Strength, and Sight, and Liberty. How justly will the wilful
neglect of Salvation so long, and so compassionately offered to Sinners, render
the Divine Mercy inexorable to their Prayers and Tears at last? When a Roman
Gentleman that was wont to revel in the night, and sleep in the day, had wasted
a great Estate by Luxury, he petitioned the Emperor Tiberius to relieve his
Poverty, and was dismissed with this upbraiding Answer, Sero experrectus es,
you are risen too late. He never opened his Eyes to see his Condition till it
was past Remedy. This is the sad Case of many that waste the Seasons of Grace,
and are careless of their Duty, till upon the point of perishing, and then
address themselves to God for his Favor and Pardon, but are justly rejected
with the reproaches of their obstinate neglect of Salvation in the time of
their Lives. I doubt not that some are wonderfully converted and saved at last;
but these special Mercies are like our Savior's miraculous healing the two
blind Persons as he was passing in the way, when great numbers of the Blind
remained uncur'd. We read a prodigious Story in the Book of Kings, that a
Captain and his fifty Men commanded Elias to come to the King, and immediately
a Tempest of Lightning destroyed them. Now who would think that another Captain
with his fifty should be so desperate, that having the Ashes and Relics of
those miserable Carcasses before their Eyes, as to make the same Citation to
the Prophet? yet they did, and provoked the Justice of Heaven to consume them.
And this Madness is exemplified in thousands every day; for notwithstanding
they see Sinners like themselves cut off in their evil Ways, they continue
unreformed, as if they were fearless of Hell, as if resolved to secure their
own Damnation.

I would not from what has been represented in this Matter so universally
useful, discourage any that have lived in a course of Sin, from earnest seeking
to God in their last Hours: For even then they are not utterly destitute of
Hope. The Gospel sets forth the Mercy of God to returning Sinners, in various
Representations and Expressions of admirable Tenderness. When the lost Sheep
was recovered, there was Joy, as if a Treasure had been found. The Prodigal had
wasted his Estate in Lasciviousness and Luxury, and by a harsh reduction came
to himself, reflected with shame upon his Folly and Rebellion, and the sense of
his Misery (not a more ingenuous or noble Principle at first) compelled him to
go to his Father, to try what his Affection would do. And it was not a vain
presumption, for he found the effects of fatherly and compassionate Love: When
he was a great way off, his Father saw him, and had Compassion, and ran and
fell on his Neck, and kissed him. And the Son said, Father, I have sinned
against Heaven, and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son.
But the Father said to his Servants, Bring out the best Robes, and put a Ring
on his Finger, and Shoes on his Feet; and bring hither the fatted Calf, and
kill it; let us eat and be merry, for this my Son was dead, and is alive again,
was lost, and is found. The Design of Christ was to represent his Heavenly
Father in that Parable: and to wounded Spirits that feel the intolerable weight
of Sin, the Mercy and Mildness of the Gospel is to be exhibited. God is rich in
Mercy to all that call upon him in Truth. But to tell Sinners who securely
proceed in their sinful Ways, that they may be saved at last, and
notwithstanding their presumptuous Repulses of God's Calls to his Service, yet
think they may come into the Vineyard at the eleventh hour, and be rewarded, is
to give countenance and protection to Sin, and to harden them to Destruction*
Poison is not cured by giving Food, but Antidotes, that put Nature into a
Passion till it be expelled. The Terrors of the Lord can only prove medicinal
to such depraved Souls.

To conclude this Argument, let us seriously consider the Revelation God has
afforded of himself in the Gospel: He is a Father and a Judge; Justice and
Holiness as well as Mercy are essential to his Nature, that our Affections may
be accordingly moved toward him. If ye call on the Father, who without respect
of Persons judges according to every Man's Work, pass the time of your
sojourning here in fear. Presumption and Despair are very dishonorable to God,
and pernicious to the Soul: the one destroys the Fear, the other the Love of
God. But Hope contemper'd with Fear, has an excellent Influence in the
Christian Life. As the Ballast and the Wind are both necessary, that the Ship
may sail safely; without the Wind the Ship can make no way; and without Ballast
it is in danger of oversetting by every Gust. Thus Hope and Fear are necessary
to bring us safely to Heaven. Fear without Hope chills, and stupifies the
Vigor and Alacrity of the Soul, that it cannot come to God: and Hope without
Fear, makes it vain and careless of its Duty, and liable to be overthrown by
every pleasing Temptation. Briefly, let us rightly understand the Tenor of the
Evangelical Promises of Pardon and Grace: they are conditional and applicable
only to penitent Believers. And unfeigned Faith purifies the Heart, works by
Love, and is the living Principle of universal Obedience. And Repentance unto
Life is productive of all good Fruits in their Season. Without Faith and
Repentance we can neither be justified in this World, nor glorified in the
next. Be not deceived, God is not mocked: as a Man sows, so shall he reap. He
that sows to the Flesh, shall of the Flesh reap Corruption: he that sows to the
Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap Life everlasting.

2. The careful preserving our selves from wilful presumptuous Sins, is an
happy means to render Death comfortable to us. Sins of Ignorance and Infirmity,
of sudden Surreption and Surprise, the best Men are not freed from in the
present State: and being the daily motive of our Grief, and serious
circumspection to prevent them, are consistent with the regular Peace of
Conscience, and the Friendship and Favor of God. But great Sins in their
matter being so contrary to natural Conscience, and supernatural Grace, or Sins
presumptuous in the manner of their commission, such as proceed from the choice
of the perverse Will against the enlightened Mind, whatever the matter or kind
of them be, are direct Rebellion against God, a despising of his Command, and
provoke his pure Eyes, and make the aspect of Death fearful. The Spirit seals
our Pardon and Title to Heaven as the holy Spirit; his Testimony, that we are
the Children of God, and Heirs of Glory, is concurrent with the renewed
Conscience, and distinguished from the ignorant Presumptions, blind
Conjectures, and carnal Security of the Unholy. As the sanctifying Spirit he
distinguishes true Christians from the lost World, appropriates them to God,
confirms their present Interest in the Promises of the Gospel, and their future
Hopes. Briefly, Grace is the most sensible effect and sign of God's special
Favor, the fruit of Election, and the earnest of Glory: and the Truth of Grace
is most clearly and certainly made evident by the continual Efficacy of it in
the Conversation. The observation of our Hearts to suppress unholy Affections,
and of our Senses to prevent them, a constant course of Holiness in our Lives,
(though many Frailties will cleave to the best) is usually rewarded with great
Peace here.

God has established a connection between our Obedience and his Comforts. Those
that keep themselves pure from the Defilements of the World, have the white
Stone promised, the bright Jewel of assurance of God's pardoning and rewarding
Mercy. We read of Enoch, that he walked with God, was a Star shining in a
corrupt Age, the tenor of his Life was holy, and he was translated to Heaven
without seeing Death. Though this was an extraordinary Dispensation, yet there
is a peculiar Reward analogical to it; for those who walk circumspectly, they
shall not see Death with its Terrors, but usually have a holy Cheerfulness, a
peaceful Joy, in their passage through the dark Valley to Heaven. But
presumptuous Sins against external and internal Restraints, the convincing Law
of God, and the Directions of Conscience, (to which even the Saints of God are
liable here, as appears by David's earnest Prayer to be preserved from them)
such Sins grieve the holy Spirit, and wound our Spirits, and, if continued,
sequester us from the comfortable Privileges of the Gospel, and render us
unfit for the Kingdom of Heaven. And when they are retracted by Repentance, yet
there often remains a bitter Remembrance of them: as deep Wounds, though cured,
yet are felt in change of Weather. And sometimes a Springtide of Doubts and
Fears breaks into humble penitent Souls, in the last Hours: though Death brings
them safely, yet not comfortably to Heaven.

3. The zealous Discharge of the Duties of our Place and Calling, the
Conjunction of our Resolutions and Endeavors to glorify God, and do good
according to our Abilities and Opportunities of Service, sweetens the Thoughts
of Death to us. For the true End and Perfection of Life is the Glory of God,
and when with Fidelity it is employed in order to it, Death brings us to the
blessed Rest from our Labors. Our Savior when he was to leave the World,
addressed himself to his Father, John 17.
I have glorified thee on Earth, I have finished the Work thou gave me to do.
And now, Father, glorify me with thy self, with the Glory which I had with thee
before the World was. A Christian that imitates and honors Christ, and with
Diligence perseveres in well-doing, may with an humble Confidence in the Divine
Mercy expect the promised Reward. The Reflection upon a well-spent Life is
joined with a joyful Prospect of God's Favor and Acceptance above. But to the
careless and remiss, to those who are wilfully negligent of their Duty, how
fearful is Death that summons them to give an account of their Talents to the
Righteous Lord?

4. A holy Indifference of Affection to present things, makes it easy to part
with them, and Death less fearful to us. David, though a King, declares he was
a Stranger on Earth, not only with respect to his transient Condition, but his
inward Disposition; and that he was as a weaned Child from the admired Vanities
of the World. Chrysostom in a Letter to Ciriacus who was tenderly sensible of
his Banishment, wrote to him, You now begin to lament my Banishment, but I have
done so for a long time: for since I knew that Heaven was my Country, I have
esteemed the whole Earth a place of Exilement. Constantinople, from whence I am
expelled, is as distant from Paradise as the Desert to which they send me. But
when our Affections are set upon external things, and we are irregular in our
Aims, intemperate in our Use, and immoderate in our Delights, how sensible and
cutting is the Division from them? How bitter is Death that deprives a carnal
Wretch of all the Materials of his frail Felicity? What a Storm of Passions is
raised, to lose all his good things at once? for it is a Rule in Nature, What is
possessed with transporting Joy, is lost with excessive Sorrow. As the Ivy that
twines so closely about the Tree, and is intimately fastened by so many Roots as
there are Branches, cannot be plucked away without rending the Bark with it; so
when the World, that was as it were incarnated with the Heart, is taken away,
the Heart it self is grievously rent by the violent Separation. And the
Infelicity of carnal and worldly Persons is heavily aggravated, Haec enim est
infoelicitas hominum, propter quae peccant Morientes hic dimittunt, and ipsa
peccata secum portant.

Aug.
in that the Guilt in procuring or abusing those Treasures and Delights that
they leave here with so great Sorrow, will cleave to them, and give Testimony
against them before their Judge. But when the Affections are loose to the World,
and set upon Heaven, our leaving the Earth is no Loss but Gain, and our
Separation from the Body of Flesh is with that Alacrity, as the putting off a
vile Garment to be clothed with a Royal Robe. 'Twas the wise Counsel of
Tertullian to the Women of the first Ages of the Church, Stemus expeditae ad
omnem vim, nihil habentes quod relinquere timeamus; Retinacula ista sunt spei
nostrae.

De cult. Foem.
not to value and love the Jewels and Ornaments of Gold, that they might be
more ready and resolved to obtain by Death, Martyrdom, and by Martyrdom,
Eternal Glory. And that we may disentangle our Souls from those voluntary Bands
that fasten us to present things, we must have a sincere uncorrupted Judgment
of their Meanness. The Apostle exhorts Christians to Moderation in their Temper
and Conversation, with respect to the Business and Enjoyments here, that they
who have Wives, be as though they had none; that those that rejoice, be as
though they rejoiced not; and they that buy, as though they possessed not; and
they that use the World, as not abusing it; for the fashion of the World
passes away. To a wise and pondering Observer, what comparison is there
between Shadows and Dreams, and substantial everlasting Blessedness? If Men had
the same opinion of this World whilst they live, as they will have when they
are to die, they would not inordinately seek it. They who have magnified
temporal Honors and Riches, and lived in Pleasures without Remorse, yet in
their dying Hours, when Men speak with most Feeling and least Affectation, how
have they vilified those empty Appearances of Happiness? with what moving
Expressions declared the Vanity and Brevity of worldly things? As when the
Israelites were to go through the River Jordan, that opened it self to make a
free and dry Passage for them; the lower part of its Waters ran into the Dead
Sea, and utterly failed: Josh. 3.16. Ad instar montis intumescentis, apparebant
procul.
but the Waters that came from above, rose up and appeared like a Mountain.
Thus when Men come to the universal Passage, from this to the next Life,
inferior things absolutely fail, and are lost in the dead Sea, but the things
above, that are eternal, then appear in their true Greatness, exceeding all
humane Comprehension: from hence is the change of Mind and Language concerning
the one and other.

5. Solemn, affectionate, and frequent Converse with God in religious Duties,
will render Death not fearful to us. The whole Life of a Christian, as such, is
a continual Communion with the Father, 1 John 1.3.
and with Jesus Christ. For he performs all good Works by Divine Grace
communicated from above, and refers all to the Divine Honor. As in a pair of
Compasses, one Foot is fixed in the Center, while the other moves in the
Circumference: so the Heart of a Christian is in Heaven, his aims are for God,
whilst he is active here in the World. His Natural and Civil Actions are
heightened to a supernatural End: And thus his Conversation is in Heaven. But
this was spoken of before: and that which is now specified, is the more
immediate Service of God in Holy Meditation, Prayer, and the Ordinances of the
Gospel, which is the noblest part of the spiritual Life.

Our blessed Savior who was a Comprehensor upon Earth, always saw the Face of
God, and invariably sought his Glory in all things, yet had his special times
of Prayer and Heavenly Communion with God, and the most glorious Testimonies of
his Favor in those times. Our Communion with God here is as true as in Heaven,
but the Influence and Fruition is different according to our Capacity. When the
Soul feels the vigorous Exercise of the Thoughts and Affections upon God, and
the raised Operations of Grace in Holy Duties, it is as certain a Sign of God's
Favor and Acceptance, as when Fire descended from Heaven to consume the
Sacrifice. And often our affectionate Duties are rewarded with sensible
Consolations, and holy Souls are dismissed from the Throne of Grace, as they
shall be received at the Throne of Glory, with the reviving Testimonies of
God's Approbation. Now the Assurance of God's Love conquers the Fear of Death.

This Communion must be frequent. As Love and Respects between Friends are
maintained by constant Visits and Letters, and mutual Confidence arises from
Acquaintance: so by the interchange of holy Duties and divine Favors, we
preserve a lively Sense of God's Love, and an humble Familiarity with his
Majesty, that his Presence is not a Terror to us. A Christian that walks with
God here, when he leaves the World, (to use the Words of a dying Saint) changes
his Room, but not his Company. God was always with him on Earth, and he shall
be ever with God in Heaven.

But cold and seldom Converse begets Strangeness, and that makes us shy of God.
When religious Duties are performed as a complemental Visit without zealous
Affections, or used only in times of Affliction and Exigency, as Cordial Waters
in swooning Fits, the Divine Presence is uncomfortable to us. They who prefer
carnal Sweets before Acquaintance with God, cannot with Peace and Joy think of
appearing before him. O how unwelcome is Death to such! for then the Spirit
returns to God that gave it.

6. Let us strengthen our Belief of the blessed State after Death. Divine
Truths lose their Influence and Efficacy when they are not steadfastly believed.
Faith is the substance of things not seen, Heb. 11.1.
and the Evidence or Conviction of things hoped for. The Spirit confirms our
Faith, not by a pure Physical Act, but by convincing Reasons of the Truth of
the Gospel. The Life of Christ so glorious in Holiness, his Doctrine so
becoming the Wisdom and other excellent Attributes of the Deity, his Miracles
so great, numerous, open, and beneficial, not merely to surprise the Spectators
with Astonishment, but to touch their Hearts; his Death foretold by the
Prophets, and exactly agreeing in all the Circumstances of the Predictions; his
Resurrection the most noble Operation of the Divine Power, are the strongest
Proofs that what he has revealed as the Counsel of God for our Redemption, and
the Preparations of Glory for the Saints in Heaven, are divine Truths. And the
Efficacy of the Spirit of Christ in sanctifying his Disciples in all Ages, is a
continual and as satisfying an Argument that the Gospel is derived from God the
Fountain of Truth, as extraordinary Miracles. For Holiness is as inseparable a
property of the Divine Nature as Omnipotence; and the Sanctification of the
Soul as divine an Effect, as the Resurrection of the Body. Now in the Gospel
God enters into Covenant with obedient Believers, to be their God, a Title and
Relation, that supposing them the most happy here, all the Enjoyments of this
World cannot fulfill. This Covenant is not dissolved by Death, for he uses this
Style after the Death of his faithful Servants: and from hence it follows they
are Partakers of his Glory and Joys in the next Life. For the Honor of his
Veracity is most dear to him. The Psalmist declares, that he has magnified his
Word above all his Name. No Perfections of his Nature are more sacred and
inviolable than his Truth. The Foundations of Nature shall be overturned, and
the most solid parts of the Creation destroyed, but his Promises shall be
completely accomplished. We are assured by his infallible Authority, that there
remains a Rest for the People of God. And he that receives this Testimony, sets
to his Seal that God is true; honors the Truth of God's Word, and binds
himself more firmly to his Service, and is encouraged to leave this sensible
World, for that which is infinitely better. Our Confidence and Patience in
well-doing, and in suffering the utmost Evil to Nature, is from the pregnant
Apprehensions of the Reality of eternal things. We know, 2 Cor. 5.1.
says the Apostle, if our earthly Tabernacle be dissolved, we have a Building
not made with Hands, eternal in the Heavens. This fortified him against the
Terrors of Death. When Stephen saw the Heavens open, and the Son of God ready
to receive him, with what Courage and Constancy did he encounter the bloody
Rage of his Murderers? Faith supplies the want of Vision, it pierces the
Clouds, opens a Window in Heaven, sees the Crowns of Righteousness prepared for
the Saints, and sweetens the bitterest Passage to it. But if our Faith be weak
and wavering, our Courage will decline in the needful Hour. It Is with
Christians in their last Passage from Earth to Heaven, as with Saint Peter
walking upon the Waters to Christ: whilst his Faith was firm in Christ, he went
upon the Waves as on the firm Land: but upon the rising of a Storm, his Faith
sunk into Fear, and he sunk in the Waters; till our Savior upon his earnest
Prayer, Lord, save me, took hold of him, and raised him with that compassionate
Reproof, O thou of little Faith, wherefore did thou doubt?

The last Use is, to excite the Saints to die with that Courage and
Cheerfulness as becomes the Gospel of Christ. The Encouragement of Joshua to
the Israelites against the Giants that terrified them from entering into the
Land of Canaan, the Type of Heaven, Be not afraid of them, they are Bread for
us, we shall obtain an easy Conquest over them, is applicable to this purpose:
Do not fear Death, the Enemy that interposes between us and the true Canaan;
for our Conflict shall be the means of our Victory, and triumphant Possession
of the holy and blessed Land above. This is very honorable to our Redeemer,
and recommends Godliness to the Judgment, Affections, and Practice of others.
Epist. Jul.
St. Basil tells of a Custom to anoint the tops of Doves Wings with some
fragrant Liquor, that mixing in company with other Doves, they might by the
Sent allure them to follow to the Dove-houses. Thus when holy Persons live and
die with peaceful Joy, those that converse with them, are drawn by that
Fragrance of Paradise to apply themselves to serious Religion.

It Is the Apostle's consolatory Advice to Believers, 1 Thessalonians. 4.
Not to be sorrowful for those that sleep in JESUS, as those that are without
hope.

When Jacob saw his beloved Son's Coat rent and stained with Blood, he
abandoned himself to desperate Sorrow, and continued mourning for his Death,
when Joseph was advanced in Authority and Dignity next to Pharaoh in the
Kingdom of Egypt. Thus when we see the Garment of Mortality rent by Diseases,
we mourn for departed Saints, as if Death had absolutely destroyed them, when
their Souls are reigning in Glory. This immoderate Sorrow is an Heathenish
Passion, suitable to their ignorance of the future happy State, but very
unbecoming the plenary Assurance the Gospel affords us of it. Indeed for the
Wicked to die with fears and palpitations of heart, to be surrounded with
impendent horrors, when such a precipice and depth of Misery is before them,
is very just and reasonable; but for the Saints to die uncomfortably under
inordinate Fears, is a disparagement to the Blessed Hope established upon the
Revelation of Life and Immortality by the Gospel.

Now in three things I shall propound the Duty of dying Christians.

1. To submit to the Divine Pleasure with resigned Spirits, as to the Means,
the Manner, and Time of Death. God has a Sovereign Right and Dominion over us.
The present Life is his most free Favor, and he may justly resume it when he
pleases. His Will should be the first and last Rule of ours. Whether he gently
untwines the Band of Life, or violently breaks it, we must placidly, without
reluctation, yield up our selves. By what Means soever Death comes, all second
Causes are moved by an impression from above, in what Age of Life soever; all
our Times are appointed by the divine Counsel: and a Saint ought with that
readiness and meek submission receive it, as if he heard an express Voice from
Heaven calling him to God, and say in his heart with Samuel, Here I am, thou
did call me. This is the last act of our Obedience, and very pleasing to God.
We read of the mavelous Ille exerit gladium, ille cervicem, uno voto, una
devotione: sub tanto non dicam humanitatis, sed p^tius naturae ipsius metu,
lati sunt.
Consent of Abraham and his Son Isaac, the Father to offer up his Son, and the
Son his Life, (that were both the Gifts of God) in compliance with the divine
Command, and from Heaven he declared his high approbation of it. This is to
make a Virtue of Necessity, and turn Nature into Grace. But discontent and
reluctance, as if our Lives were our own, and taken from us unjustly or
unseasonably, is Rebellious Unthankfulness, unbecoming a Creature, much more a
true Christian, who exchanges a perishing Life for that which is eternal.

2. To receive Death not only with Patience, but earnest desires to be with
Christ. I know Death is naturally unwelcome. Our Savior tells St. Peter, When
thou art old, John 21.41.
another shall bind thee, and lead thee where thou would not: signifying his
Martyrdom. The Circumstance [ when thou art old] is remarkable, Secutus a
corpore volebat esse cum Christo, sed si fieri posset praeter mortis molestiam.
Nolens ad eam venit, sed volens eam vicit. Aug. Tract. 123 in Joan.
and intimates the natural unwillingness to die, when there was little time to
live. But his rational sanctified Will was superior and prevalent. The
universal desire of the Saints is to be happy in the Presence of God: for the
divine Nature communicated to them is intelligent, and inclining toward its
chief Good: and if the obtaining it were not by being unclothed, but clothed
upon by an immediate Translation to Heaven, how willingly would they leave this
World? But there is a bitterness in Death that makes it unpleasant; and many
holy Souls that desire the Glorious Liberty in Heaven, yet are loath to leave
their Prison. Now there are so many Arguments to make the Saints desirous of
dying, that methinks since Life is chiefly valued and dear to them, as it is
the way to Heaven, when they are come to that blessed end, it should not be
longer desirable. What is this lower World that chains us so fast? It Is the
Devil's Circuit wherein he ranges, seeking whom he may devour: It Is the Theater
of Contentions: The Low aspire to rise; the Exalted fear to fall: The Poor envy
the Rich, and the Rich despise the Poor. It Is a foreign Country to the Saints;
and as Pilgrims and Strangers, they are liable to Reproaches, Injuries, and
hard Dealings from the Wicked, the Natives of the Earth. What is the present
momentany Life that so enamours us? It Is surrounded with Temptations, oppressed
with Fears, ardent with irregular Desires, and continually spent in Vanity or
Vexation. In Adversity it is depressed and melancholy; in Prosperity foolish and
proud. It Is a real Infelicity under the deceitful appearance of Felicity. But
above all other Motives, the evil of Sin from which we cannot be clearly
exempted here, should render Death desirable. The best suffer internal
Divisions between the Law of the Flesh, and the Law of the Mind; as Rebecca
felt the Twins, Esau and Jacob, repugnant in her Womb. How hard is it to be
continually watching the Heart that Corruptions do not break out, and the
Senses that Temptations do not break in? How difficult to order the Affections,
to raise what is drooping, and suppress what is rebellious? For they are like
the People of whom the Historian speaks, qui nec totam servitutem pati possunt,
nec totam libertatem. How many Enemies of our Salvation are lodged in our own
bosoms? The Falls of the Saints give sad evidence of this. If the Body were
unspotted from the World as in the Creation of Man, there might be a just Plea
of our unwillingness to part with it, but since it is the incentive and
instrument of Sin, we should desire to be dissolved, that we might be perfectly
holy. Death is the final Remedy of all the temporal and spiritual Evils to
which we are liable here. And the Love of Christ should make us willing to part
with all the Endearments of this Life, nay desirous to enter into the Celestial
Paradise, though we must pass under the Angels Sword, the stroke of Death, to
come into his Presence. He infinitely deserves our Love, for we owe our
Salvation and Eternal Glory to the merit of his Humiliation, and the power of
his Exaltation. With what earnest affections did St. Paul desire to be
dissolved and to be with Christ? Phil. 1.
Love gave Wings of Fire to his Soul, ardent desires mounting to Heaven. How
valiant were the Martyrs in expressing acts of Love to Christ? How boldly did
they encounter Death that interposed between them and the sight of his Glory?
Their Love was hotter than the Flames that consumed them. They as willingly
left their Bodies, as Elias let fall his Mantle to ascend to Heaven. And how
does it upbraid the coldness of our Love, that we are so contented to be here,
absent from our Savior. That the Moles of the Earth, who never saw the Light
of the Sun, and feed on bitter Roots, are pleased in their dark Receptacles, is
no wonder; but if Birds that are refreshed with his cheerful Beams, and feed on
sweet Fruits, should willingly be consigned in Caverns of the Earth, it were
unnaturally strange. Thus for Pagans, (and those who are so in Heart, though
different in Profession) that are so short-sighted and depraved, that they only
perceive and affect present sensible things, for them to be unwilling to die is
no wonder; for then all that is valuable and delightful to them is lost for
ever: but for those who are enlightened by the Revelation of God so clearly
concerning the state of Glory, and have tasted the Goodness of the Lord, and
know the incomparable difference between the mean and frail Felicity here, and
the inestimable immutable Felicity hereafter, for them to be unwilling to leave
this World for that which is infinitely better, is astonishing. Such was the
Love of our Savior, that his personal Glory in Heaven did not fully content
him, without the Saints partaking of it with him: Father, I will that those
whom thou have given me be with me where I am, that they may behold my Glory.
John 17.
If our Hearts do not answer his, it is a sad indication that we have not an
Interest in him: for the application of his Merits is always joined with the
imitation of his Virtues, and the reflection of his Love. The Lovers of Christ
will join with the inflamed Spouse, Cant. 1.
Draw us, and we will run after thee: O loosen our Affections from this World,
that we may readily ascend to thee: they will renew the Sighs of holy David in
his Banishment, O when shall we come and appear before God!

Lastly, To die with Thanksgiving and Joy. It Is usual to compare this Life to a
Voyage; The Scripture is the Chart that describes the Coasts we must pass, and
the Rocks we must avoid; Faith is the Compass that directs the Course we must
steer; Love is the Rudder that governs the Motion of the Ship; Hope fills the
Sails: Now what Passenger does not rejoice at the discovery of his Country
where his Estate and Heart is, and more at the near approach to the Port where
he is to land? Is not Heaven the Country of the Saints? Is not their Birth from
above, and their tendency to their Original? And is not the blessed Bosom of
Christ their Port? O what joyful Thanksgivings are due to God, when by his
Spirit and Providence they have happily finished their Voyage through such
Quamdiu in Salo isto, tamdiu inter naufragia.
dangerous Seas, and are coming into the Land of the Living? How joyful was to
Noah the coming of the Dove with an Olive Branch, to show him the Deluge was
assuaged, and the Time was come of his freedom from the troublesome company of
Animals, and from the straitness and darkness of the Ark, to go forth and
possess the World? How joyful should Death be to a Saint, that comes like the
Dove in the evening, to assure him the Deluge of Misery is ceased, and the time
is come of his enlargement from the Body, his deliverance from the wretched
sinful Society here, and his possessing the Divine World? Holy Souls are
immediately transported by the Angels to Christ, and by him presented to his
Father, without spot or wrinkle, complete in Holiness, and prepared for
Communion with him in Glory. How joyfully are they received into Heaven by our
Savior and the blessed Spirits? they are the reward of his Sufferings, the
precious and dear purchase of his Blood: The Angels that rejoice at the
Conversion of a Sinner, do much more at the Glorification of a Saint: and the
Church of the Firstborn who have before us entered into Glory, have a new
accession of Joy, when their younger Brethren arrive to the undefiled immortal
Inheritance. And is it not very becoming Believers joyfully to ascend to the
Seat of Blessedness, to the happy Society that inspires mutual Joys for ever?
For our encouragement there are numerous Instances of Believers that have with
Peace and Joy, though in various degrees, past through the dark Valley to the
Inheritance of Light. Some have died with more Joy than they lived, Accitus sum
ad id miraculi, videre exultantem in morte hominem, and insultantem morti.
Bern. 26 Sermon. in Cant.
and triumphed over the last Enemy with the vocal Praises of God: others with
silent Affections have quietly commended their Spirits into his Hand. Some have
inward Refreshings and Support; others exuberant Joys and Ravishments, as if
the Light of Glory shined into them, or the Vail of Flesh were drawn, and their
Spirits were present with the invisible World. Some of the Martyrs in their
cruellest Sufferings felt such impressions of Confidence and Alacrity, that as
in the House of Lamech there was accorded at the same time two discordant
Callings by the two Brothers; Jubal the Inventer of the Harp and Organ, Genesis 4.
and Tubal-Cain the first Artificer in Brass and Iron: the one practiced on
Instruments of Music, breathing harmonious Sounds and Melodies; the other used
Hammers and Anvils, making noise and tumult: So in some Persons, whilst the
heaviest Strokes fell on their Bodies, their Souls were ravished with the
sweetest Joy and Exultation. Indeed it is not thus always with the Saints: for
though Sin be pardoned, yet the apprehensions of Guilt may remain. When a
Stream is disturbed, it does not truly represent the Object: When the
Affections are disordered, the Mind does not judge aright of a Christian's
State. A Serpent may hiss when it has lost its Sting. Death may terrify when it
cannot hurt us. I doubt not but some excellent Saints have been in anxieties to
the last, till their Fears were dispelled by the actual fruition of
Blessedness. As the Sun sometimes sets in dark Clouds, and rises in a glorious
Horizon. We read our Evidences for Heaven by the Light of God's Countenance:
his Image is made visible in our Souls by the illustration of his Spirit: and
he exercises Prerogative in the dispensation of his Comforts. It Is his pleasure
to bestow extraordinary Favors on some, and deny them to others that are as
holy. But every penitent Believer has just cause of Joy in Death: for Jesus
Christ has reconciled God, destroyed Satan, and conquered Death: and the last
Day of his Life is the first of his Glory.

FINIS.
OF ETERNAL JUDGMENT.

BY WILLIAM BATES, D.D.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons against the
Royal Exchange in Cornhil. 1691.

OF Eternal Judgment.
Acts 17.31. Because he has appointed a Day, in the which he will judge the
World in Righteousness, by that Man whom he has ordained: whereof he has
given Assurance unto all Men, in that he raised him from the dead.


SAint Paul had this Title of Honor eminently conferred upon him, the Apostle
of the Gentiles: This Office he performed with persevering Diligence, diffusing
the Light of Life to those that sat in Darkness, and in the Shadow of Death.
In this Chapter we have recorded the Substance of his Sermon to the Athenians;
wherein his admirable Zeal and Prudence are remarkable, in the matter and order
of his Discourse, to convince and persuade them to recive the saving Truth of
the Gospel. He first lays down the Principles of natural Religion, to prepare
them for the more easy Belief of supernatural revealed Religion. The
Depravation of the Minds of Men was in no Instance more prodigious than in
their vilifying Conceits of the Deity: They attributed his Name and Honor to
various Idols, and ascribed to him their own Figure, and which was infinitely
more unworthy and dishonorable, their own Passions and Vices. They adored
their own vain Imaginations. The Idols of their Hearts were erected on their
Altars. Venus was a Goddess, because impure Love reigned in their Breasts.
Bacchus had religious Rites, because sensual Pleasures, as sweet as Wine,
intoxicated their Spirits. These Errors, as gross as impious, were universal:
the Philosophers themselves were not exempted from the Contagion. The Apostle
therefore makes use of the clearest Arguments, to give Authority to the plain
conspiring Voice of Nature, that had so long in vain recalled them from
Idolatry to the Worship of the only true God. He therefore declares, that the
Divine Maker of all things, the Father of Spirits, Ver. 29.
could not be represented by corporeal and corruptible things, but was to be
acknowledged and adored in a manner becoming his spiritual and infinite
Perfections. Ver. 26.
That he made all Nations of one Blood, though distinguished in their
Habitations and Times, that they might seek and serve the one universal
Creator. And though the Pagan World for many Ages had lived in an unnatural
Oblivion of God, and he seemed unconcerned for their Violation of his Laws, yet
it was not from the defect of Justice, but the Direction of his Wisdom, that
his Patience was so long extended to them. And this he proves by the new and
most express Declaration of his Will: But now he commanded all Men every where
to repent; because he has appointed a Day, in which he will judge the World in
Righteousness, by the Man whom he has ordained: whereof he has given
Assurance to all Men, in that he raised him from the Dead.

In the Words, the Eternal Counsels of God are revealed in two great things.

1. The determining a time wherein he will righteously judge the World: He has
appointed a Day.

2. The Designation of the Person by whom he will perform that eminent part of
Sovereignty: by Jesus Christ, whom he has raised from the dead.

In order to the handling of the main Point, it is requisite to premise briefly
some Propositions.

1. That God is the Universal Monarch of the World, and has supreme Authority
to govern reasonable Creatures, antecedent to their Election and Consent. The
Psalmist calls to the Heathens, Psalm. 100.
Know ye that the Lord is God: that is, the most glorious Being, and absolute
Sovereign; for it is he that made us, and not we our selves. He formed all
things by his Almighty Goodness, and is King by Creation.

2. The two principal and necessary parts of his Sovereignty are, to give Laws
for the ruling of his Subjects, and to pass final Judgment upon them for their
Obedience or Disconformity to his Precepts. Mere natural Agents are regulated
by a wise Establishment, that is the Law of their Creation. The Sun and Stars
are moved according to the just Points of their Compass. The Angels are under a
Law in Heaven, and obey his Commandments. The Humane Nature of Christ, though
advanced to the highest capacity of a Creature, yet received a Law. And his
whole Work upon Earth for our Salvation, was an Act of Obedience to the Will of
God. If a Prince out of affection to his Friend will leave his own Dominions,
and live privately with him in a foreign Country, he must be subject to the
Laws of that Place. Indeed it is not conceivable that a Creature should be
without a Law; for this is to make it supreme and independent: Supreme, in not
being liable to a superior Power to confine and order it; Independent, as to
its Being and Operations; for Dependence necessarily infers Subjection. There
is a visible connection between those Titles; The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is
our Lawgiver, Isa. 33.22.
the Lord is our King. And sometimes in Scripture his Sovereignty is intimated
in the Title of Judge: thus in that humble Expostulation of Abraham for Sodom;
Shall not the Judge of all the World do right? He addresses his Request to God
under that Title, to soften his Power, and incline his Clemency to save the
Wicked for their sakes who were comparatively Righteous, that is, innocent of
their crying Sins.

3. As his right to govern and judge the World is natural, so are his
Attributes, his Wisdom, Holiness, Justice and Power, that qualify and render
him most worthy to exercise this Government. These are finite separable
Qualities in Angels or Men, but essential Perfections to the Deity. It Is more
rational to conceive that things may be congealed by the heat of Fire, or
turned black by whiteness, than that the least act of Injustice can be done by
the righteous Lord. The Apostle rejects with extreme detestation, the
blasphemous Charge of Unrighteousness in God's Proceedings: Is God unrighteyus
that takes Vengeance? Romans 3.5, 6.
God forbid: For then how shall God judge the World? He may as soon renounce his
Nature, and cease to be God, for as such he is necessarily Judge of the World,
as violate his own Perfections in his judicial proceedings with us.

4. God being invisible in his own Nature, has most wisely ordained the last
Judgment of the World to be transacted by a visible Person: because Men are to
be judged, and the whole process of Judgment with them, will be for things done
in the Body. The Person appointed for this Great Work, is Jesus Christ the Son
of God united to the Humane Nature. John 5.22.
The Father judges no Man: Not as if he descended from the Throne, and
divested himself of his Supremacy, but not immediately; but has committed all
Judgment to the Son. And it follows, Ver. 26, 27.
As the Father has Life in himself, so has he given to the Son to have Life
in himself: And has given him Authority to execute Judgment also, because he
is the Son of Man; that is, in the quality of Mediator, for the reward of his
Sufferings. The quality of this Office requires no less Person for the
discharge of it, than the Son of God.

1. Upon the account of its superlative Dignity. No mere Creature is capable of
such a glorious Commission. To pass a Sovereign Sentence upon Angels and Men,
is a Royalty reserved for God himself. We read that no Man in Heaven or Earth
was able to open the Sealed Book of his Eternal Counsels, Rev. 5.
as unsearchable as deep: only Jesus Christ who was in the Bosom of the Father,
the Seat of his Counsels and Compassions, and was acquainted with all his
Glorious Secrets, could unfold the Order of the Divine Decrees about the
Church. And if no Creature was worthy to be admitted into God's Counsel, much
less to be taken into his Throne. The Eternal Son, the express Image of his
Person, is alone fit to be his authorized Representative in Judgment. Our
Savior declares, that the Father invested the Son with this Regal Power, that
all Men should honor the Son, John 5.23.
with the same religious Reverence, and supreme Adoration, as they honor the
Father.

2. Upon the account of the immense Difficulty, no mere Creature is able to
discharge it. To judge the World, includes two things: 1. To pass a righteous
and irrevocable Judgment upon Men for all Things done in this Life. 2. The
actual execution of the Sentence. And for this no less than infinite Wisdom,
and infinite Power are necessary. If a select number of Angels of the highest
Order were deputed, yet they could not manage the judicial Trial of one Man:
For besides the innumerable Acts and Omissions in one Life, the Secrets of the
Heart, from whence the guilt or goodness of Moral Actions is principally
derived, are not open to them. He alone that discerns all Things, can require
an account of all.

3. The Son of Man is invested with this high Office as the Reward of his
Sufferings. We must distinguish between the essential and oeconomical Power of
Christ. The Son of God, considered in his Divine Nature, has an original Power
of Judgment equal with the Father; but considered as Mediator, has a Power by
delegation. In the quality of the Son of Man, he is inferior in Dignity to the
Father. The Apostle declares this in that scale of Subordination, of the
Creatures to Believers, and of Believers to Christ, and of Christ to God. All
things are yours, and you are Christ's, and Christ is God's. And observing the
beautiful Order that arises from the superiority and dependence between Things,
he says, The Head of every Man is Christ, and the Head of the Woman is the
Man, and the Head of Christ is God. Now this Power by Commission was conferred
upon him as the Reward of his Sufferings. The Apostle expressly declares it,
that Christ being in the Form of God, and without any usurpation truly equal to
him in Divine Perfections and Majesty, humbled himself, and became obedient to
the Death of the Cross. Wherefore God has highly exalted him, and given him a
Name above every Name: that at the Name of Jesus every Knee should bow, of
Things in Heaven, and Things in Earth, and Things under the Earth; and that
every Tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the Glory of God the
Father. His victorious Sufferings are the Titles to his Triumphs; his being so
ignominiously depressed and condemned by Men, is the just reason of his
advancement to judge the World.

5. There is a Day appointed wherein the Son of Man will appear in sensible
Glory, and exercise his judicial Power upon Angels and Men. He is now seated at
the right Hand of the Majesty on High, and the Celestial Spheres are under his
Feet: Universal Nature feels the power of his Scepter: He reigns in the Hearts
of the Saints by his Word and Spirit, and restrains the Fury of his Enemies in
what degrees he pleases: but still his Servants are in distress, and his
rebellious Enemies insolently break his Laws; and the Curtains of Heaven
conceal his Glory from us: therefore a Time is prefixed, when in the face of
the World he will make an eternal difference by Rewards and Punishments between
the Righteous and the Wicked, and his Government shall have its complete and
glorious Issue. This is styled the Judgment of the Great Day.

1. With respect to the appearance of the Judge. When the Law was given from
Mount Sinai, the Mountain was covered with Fire, and the Voice of God as loud
as Thunder proclaimed it from the midst of the Flames, so that the whole Army
of the Israelites was prostrate on the Plain, struck with a sacred Horror, and
almost dead at the amazing Sights and Sounds. From hence it is said, that in his
right Hand was a fiery Law. And if the Lawgiver appeared in such terrible
Majesty at the proclaiming the Law, how much more when he shall come to revenge
the Transgressions of it? It Is set forth in Scripture in the most lofty and
magnificent Expressions: He shall come in his Father's Glory, Luke 9.26.
and his own Glory, and the Glory of the Angels. A devouring Fire shall go
before him, to consume all the Works of the Universe. He shall descend from the
highest Heavens, glorious in the attendance of innumerable Angels, but more in
his own Majesty, and sit on a radiant Throne high above all.

2. It Is great, with respect to the appearance of those who are to be judged:
All the Apostate Angels, and the universal Progeny of Adam. The bowels of the
Earth, and the bottom of the Sea, and all the Elements shall give up the Dead.
The mighty Angels, the winged Ministers of Justice, shall fly to all Parts, and
attach the Wicked to bring them as miserable Prisoners before that high
Tribunal. And those blessed powerful Spirits shall congregate the Righteous, to
present them at his right Hand.

3. It Is great with respect to what shall be then done: He shall perform the
most glorious and consummate act of his Regal Office, after a righteous Trial
pronounce Judgment, upon which the eternal Destiny of the World depends. And
immediately the Saints shall ascend with him to the everlasting Mansions of
Glory, and the Wicked shall be swallowed up in the fiery Gulf for ever.

To define the particular Time when this shall be accomplished, is beyond the
knowledge of the Angels of highest Dignity. It Is inter Arcana Imperii, among the
Secrets of the Kingdom of Heaven. It Is observable that God has revealed the
Times precisely wherein some great Events should come to pass: after how many
Years the Israelites should be freed from Egyptian Bondage: after what space of
Time they should be restored from the Captivity of Babylon: when the Messiah
should die for the expiation of Sin: but there is no designation by certain
Characters of the particular Day, nor Year, nor Age, in any Prophecy, of our
Savior's coming to Judgment. And of this an Account may be given. The special
End of those Predictions was, that those who lived to see their accomplishment,
notwithstanding the seeming Impossibilities, might believe the Truth and Power
of God to fulfill the Revelation of his Purposes for the Time to come. But at
the last Day, all the Promises and Threatenings will be fulfilled, nothing will
remain to be the Object of Faith; and consequently it was superfluous to
declare the certain Time, since the exact accomplishment of it according to the
Prediction, will neither be useful to confirm Believers, or convert Infidels.

Lastly, The Resurrection of Jesus Christ is the most convincing and commanding
Evidence of this Doctrine, that he shall judge the World. For he was charged
with Blasphemy deserving of Death for this Testimony: I say unto you, Mat.
26.64, 63.
hereafter shall you see the Son of Mand sitting on the right Hand of Power,
and coming in the Clouds of Heaven. He dedicated Martyrdom in his own
Sufferings. Now God in raising him from the Dead, confirmed the Truth of his
Testimony by that visible Miracle, and the belief of it converted the World to
Christianity.

I will now proceed to illustrate and prove the main Point, which is this: That
God will judge the World in Righteousness by Jesus Christ.

The Mediator, who shall be Judge in the Union of both Natures, considered as
the Son of God, is essentially Holy and Righteous; and considered as the Son of
Man, was holy, harmless, undefiled, and separate from Sinners. In him all
Virtues shined in their absolute Purity: and who is so worthy and qualified to
reward Holiness and punish Wickedness, as the holy One of God? It Is said of
him, Thou have loved Righteousness, and hated Iniquity, Heb. 1.
therefore thy God has anointed thee with Oil of gladness above thy Fellows:
Consecrated him to the Regal Office, and enriched his humane Nature with
Endowments suitable to it. 'Twas prophesied of him, The Spirit of the Lord
shall rest upon him, Isa. 11.2, 3, 4.
the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, the Spirit of Counsel and Might, the
Spirit of Knowledge, and of the Fear of the Lord; and shall make him of quick
understanding in the Fear of the Lord, and He shall not judge after the sight of
his Eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of his Ears. But with Righteousness
shall he judge the Poor, and reprove with Equity. Humane Judgments are often
unrighteous from vicious Respects and Affections that pervert the Will, or fair
appearances that deceive the Understanding: by Gifts or Guile, Innocence is
cast, and Guilt acquitted: but the Judge of the World is inflexible to
Partiality, and all things are entirely open to his sight. In the Act of
Judgment he is represented sitting on a white Throne, Rev. 20.11.
the Emblem of unspotted Holiness.

The Righteousness of God's Judicial Proceedings will appear by considering
three Things.

I. The Equity of his Law, the Rule of the great and final Judgment. II. The
Evidence of the Facts and Matter, which shall be produced as the Reason of the
Judgment. III. The Impartiality of the Sentence.
I. The Equity of the Law which shall be the Rule of the last Judgment. This
will appear by considering the Law of Nature, and the Law of Faith, in their
Precepts and Penalties, annexed to enforce the Observation of them.

1. The Law of Nature, which is the Rule of Man's Duty, will be the Rule of
Judgment: for without the Law there is no Transgression; and consequently a
Person is unaccountable for his Actions. This Law is composed of such Rules as
are most becoming the wise and gracious Creator to give, and the reasonable
Creature to receive and obey: for they entirely agree and concenter in his
Glory and the Good of his Subjects. The Apostle adorns the Law with the most
excellent Elogy, it is Holy, Just, and Good. Holy, Romans 7.17.
as it enjoins all Acts of Piety to God: the adoration of his Majesty resulting
from his inexpressible Divine Perfections, the imitation of his Purity, a
reliance on his Goodness, a resignation to his most wise Providence, and a
dutiful obedience to his Will. Such a sense of our dependence and subjection to
God, is the proper Character of the reasonable Creature, as dignified above
inanimate and mere sensitive Beings. The Law is just, as it directs us how to
demean our selves in our various Relations. Justice is the Cement of Societies,
without which they disband and fall into Confusion. And the Sum of the Law is
virtually comprised in one Rule, to do to others as we would they should do to
us, than which nothing is more equal. It Is good to Man that keeps it,
commanding nothing but what is influential upon his Well-being here and for
ever. It does not infringe his true Freedom, but allows him unstained Delights,
and enjoins what is proper to advance and secure his Dignity, Felicity and
Perfection. It forbids every thing that defiles and debases him, and causes a
degeneration from his native Excellency. If we prescind in our thoughts the
sacred Authority of the Lawgiver, all the Precepts of the Law for their moral
Goodness, deserve our esteem and choice, and entire observation. The sanctified
Mind approves them universally. Psalm. 119.128.
I esteem all thy Precepts concerning all things to be right, says holy David.
Nay, in the Wicked there is an intellectual assent to the Goodness of the Law,
though the corrupt Will does not embrace it: there are some Inclinations and
Wishes to obey it, but controlled by vicious Desires. It Is said of the
convinced Sinner, Thou know his Will, Romans 2.18.
and approvest the things that are more excellent.

It may be objected, That the Law being pure, and Man in a frail state,
surrounded with innumerable Temptations, to require perfect Obedience from him,
and condemn him for his Failings, seems hard. The Law lays a restraint upon all
the Senses, and forbids all fleshly Lusts: this may be easy to separate Souls,
but for Men to live in the Body, as if they were out of it, to be always
vigilant against the insinuations or attacks of Sin, is impossible. Thus the
Carnal Mind is apt with some color, to traduce the Righteousness of God's
Government. But it will be clearly vindicated, by considering;

(1.) The Law supposes Man in a state of integrity, furnished with sufficient
Power to comply with every Precept, though free to fall from his Duty and
Happiness. To command absolute Impossibilities, is tyrannical, and utterly
inconsistent with the Nature of the Blessed God.

(2.) The first Man wilfully transgressed the Law, and lost his Holiness: And
Nature being poisoned in the Fountain, is corrupt in all the descendants from
him. Mankind was justly degraded in rebellious Adam, and is destitute of
spiritual Strength to perform all that the Law requires.

(3.) This disability is vicious and culpable, and can be no pretense against
the Rights of the Lawgiver. A natural disability from the want of requisite
Faculties is a just excuse. It Is no Fault that a Man cannot stop the Sun, as
Joshua did; nor calm a Tempest, as our Savior did by his Word. But the
disability that arises from a depraved disposition, renders a Person more
guilty. And this is the present Case. The Will of Man is disobedient and
perverse, and as soon as it can exercise Election, chooses Evil; and by custom
in Sin becomes more hardened and obstinate. And from hence the Prophet charges
the contumacious Jews; Behold their Ear is uncircumcised, (...). 6.10.
and they cannot hearken. Were they incapable of hearing the Divine Commands?
No; but the Word of the Lord was to them a Reproach, they had no delight in it.
And our Savior upbraids the Pharisees, How can ye believe, John 5.44.
which receive Honor one of another, and seek not the Honor that comes from
God only? They were in high reputation for their Holiness, which made it
impossible for them in an humble penitent manner to submit to our Savior. In
short, the primary end of the Law was the Happiness of Man in the performance
of his Duty; and his first Sin, and consequent Impotence to fulfill it, was by
his own fault. As the Obliquity of a Line cannot be ascribed to the strait
Rule, but to the Error of the Hand that draws it. And from hence it is clear,
that if God should with a terrible exactness require of Men unsinning Obedience
upon the pain of Damnation, he could not be taxed with Unrighteousness.

2. But God has been pleased to mitigate and allay the Severity of the Law by
the Gospel; so that although the least breach of it makes a Person an Offender
and obnoxious to Judgment, yet the Law of Faith propounds such merciful
Conditions to the Guilty, that upon the performance of them, they may plead
their Pardon sealed with the Blood of their Redeemer, and shall be saved and
crowned in the Day of Judgment. We are commanded so to speak and do, James 2.12.
as they that shall be judged by the Law of Liberty. Thus the Gospel is styled,
in that it frees the Conscience, though not from the Obedience, yet from the
Terrors and Condemnation of the Law; for there was not the least signification
of Mercy by it. But in the Gospel, the Grace of God most illustriously appears.

(1.) In that when our Innocence was lost, there may be a renovation of the
Sinner by Repentance: to which the plenary Pardon of Sin is assured, Wash ye,
Isa. 1.16, 17, 18
make ye clean, put away the evil of your Doings from before mine Eyes: Cease
to do evil, and learn to do well, says the Lord: and though your Sins be as
Scarlet, they shall be white as Snow; though they be red like Crimson, they
shall be white like Wool. God will not pardon those who forgive and flatter
themselves in their Sins; but those who confess and forsake them, shall find
Mercy.

(2.) Sincerity of Obedience is accepted where Perfection is wanting. When a
Person with consent of Heart and serious Endeavors strives to obey the holy
Will of God, without the exception of any known Duty, or the indulgence of any
Sin, God will spare him, Mal. 3.17.
as a Father spares his Son that serves him. It Is not so much the Matter as the
Allowance that makes Sin deadly. Where there is guile in the Heart, it will be
severely imputed. It Is not according to some particular Acts of Sin, but the
Tenor of the Life, that the state of Men will be decided.

(3.) Unfeigned Faith in the Lord Jesus, that is, such a belief of the Truth
and Goodness of his Promises, as induces us to receive him as our Prince and
Savior, as purifies the Conscience, the Heart and Life, will free us from
Hell, and entitle us to Heaven, according to the Covenant of Grace. In short,
the final Resolution of a Man's Trial and Case will be this; either he has
performed the gracious Conditions of the Gospel, and he shall be saved; or
rejected them, and he shall be damned.

If it be objected, that the Terms of Evangelical Justification, though in
themselves comparatively easy, yet are of impossible performance to Men in
their natural sinful State. The Answer is clear:

1. That although the natural Man be dead in Sin, without spiritual strength to
resolve and perform his Duty, and holy heat of desires to it; and nothing is
alive in him but his corrupt Passions, that are like Worms generated in a
Carcass; yet by the Grace that is offered in the Gospel, he may be enabled to
perform the Conditions of it: for in this the Gospel excels the Law, the Law
discovers Sin, but affords no degrees of supernatural Power to subdue it, and
directs to no Means for the expiation of its Guilt* As the Fire in the Bush
discovered the Thorns without consuming them. But the sanctifying Spirit, 2 Timothy 1.7.
the true Spring of Life and Power, is the concomitant of the Gospel, as St.
Peter declares, With the preaching of the Gospel the Holy Ghost was sent down
from Heaven. 1 Pet. 1.12.
And the Spirit by illuminating, preventing, and exciting-Grace, assists Men to
repent and believe; and is promised in rich and liberal Supplies to all that
humbly and ardently pray for it. This our Savior assures to us by a most
tender and endearing Comparison: If ye that are evil, Luke 11.13.
know how to give good things to your Children; how much more shall your
Heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to those that ask it?

2. From hence it follows, that it is from the perverseness of the Will, and the
love of Sin, that Men do not obey the Gospel. For the Holy Spirit never
withdraws his gracious assistance, till resisted, grieved, and quenched by
them. It will be no excuse, that Divine Grace is not conferred in the same
eminent degree upon some as upon others that are converted: for the Impenitent
shall not be condemned for want of that singular powerful Grace that was the
Privilege of the Elect, but for receiving in vain that measure of common Grace
that they had. If he that received one Talent had faithfully improved it, he
had been rewarded with more, but upon the slothful and ungrateful neglect of
his Duty, he was justly deprived of it, and cast into a Dungeon of Horror, the
Emblem of Hell. The Sentence of the Law has its full force upon impenitent
Sinners, with intolerable aggravations for neglecting the Salvation of the
Gospel.

Concerning the Heathens, the Scripture declares,

1 st. That although the Law published by Moses was not communicated to them,
yet there was a silent, though less perfect Impression of it in their Hearts.
The Law of Nature in the fundamental Precepts of Religion, and Society, and
Temperance, was better known than obeyed by them. Therefore the Apostle endites
them for atrocious Crimes, Romans 1.26, 27.
such as natural Conscience consenting with the Law of God, severely forbids
upon the pain of Damnation. Romans 1.32.
Thus it is said of the Heathens, Who knowing the Judgment of God, that they
which commit such things are worthy of Death; not only commit the same, but
have pleasure in them that do them. And at the last Day, Romans 2.
As many as have sinned without the Law, as delivered to the Jews, shall be
judged and perish, not according to that Law of Moses, but the Law of Nature
that obliged them to do Good, and restrain themselves from Evil; of which the
counterpart was not totally deleted in their Hearts.

2 dly. Although the Revelation of Christ in his Person, Office and Benefits,
is not by the preaching of the Gospel (that is necessary for the begetting of
Faith) extended to all Nations; yet the Grace of the Redeemer is so far
universal, that upon his account the indulgent Providence of God invited the
Heathens to Repentance. His renewed Benefits that sweetened their Lives, Romans
2.4.
and his powerful Patience in forbearing so long to cut them off, when their
Impurities and Impieties were so provoking, Acts 14.17.
was a Testimony of his inclination to Clemency upon their Reformation. And for
their abusing his Favors, and resisting the methods of his Goodness, they will
be inexcusable to themselves, and their Condemnation righteous to their own
Consciences.

We are next to consider the Sanction of the Law that enforces Obedience; and
it will appear that God is not extreme, but wisely and justly ordained Eternal
Death to be the punishment of Sin.

This will appear by considering,

1. The end of the Sanction is to preserve the Authority of the Law in its full
vigor, to render it most solemn and awful; and consequently it is the wisdom of
the Lawgiver, to ordain a Punishment so heavy, as to overpoise all Temptations
that might otherwise induce the Subjects to transgress its Precepts.

Therefore to Adam, the first and second Death was threatened upon his
Disobedience; and Fear, as a Sentinel, was planted in his Breast, that no
guilty Thought, no irregular Desire, no deceitful Suggestion should enter to
break the Tables of the Law deposited therein. Now since, notwithstanding the
threatening, Man was so easily seduced by the insinuations of the Tempter to
break the Law, and disorder the Government of God in the World, it is evident
that such a Restraint was not over-rigorous to secure his Obedience. I shall
not insist on what is sadly visible since the first Apostasy, that there is in
Mankind such a prodigious propensity to sensual things, that without the fear
of Hell, no Arguments are strong enough to prevent the bold violation of the
Divine Law.

2. It Is consented to by common Reason, -- Adsit Regula peccatis, quae poenas
irroget aequas.

Horat.
that there ought to be a proportion between the quality of the Offense, and
the degrees of the Punishment. Justice takes the Scales into its hand before it
takes the Sword. Now Sin against God is of such an immense Guilt, that an
eternal Punishment is but equivalent to it. This will appear by considering,

(1.) The Perfections of the Lawgiver, who is infinitely above us. One Act of
Sin is Rebellion against God, and includes in it the contempt of his Majesty,
before whom the highest Angels cover their Faces with Reverence and Adoration,
Isa. 6.2, 3.
as unworthy to behold his Glory; and cover their Feet, as unworthy that he
should behold them: the contradiction of his Holiness that is his peculiar
Glory: the denial of his Omniscience and Omnipresence, as if he were confined
to the superior World, Job 22.14.
and busy in regulating the harmonious Order of the Stars, and did not discern
and observe what is done below: the defiance of his Eternal Power, and
provoking him to Jealousy, as if we were stronger than he.

(2.) If we consider the Obligations of the reasonable Creatures to obey his
Commands, the guilt of Sin rises prodigiously. They were made by his Power,
with this special character of Excellency, according to his Image: they were
happy in his Love: they were endowed with intellectual Faculties capable to
understand and consider their Obligations to their bountiful Lord. From hence
it appears that Sin is the most unnatural Rebellion against God, and in it
there is a concurrence of Impiety, Ingratitude, Perfidiousness, and whatever
may inhance a Crime to an excess of Wickedness.

(3.) The meanness of the Motives that induce Men to prefer the pleasing their
depraved Appetites before Obedience to his sacred Will, extremely aggravates
the Offense. Of this we have a convincing Instance in the first Sin committed
upon Earth. Deceitful Curiosity, flattering Pride, a secret pleasure of acting
according to his Will, joined with the low attractives of Sense, blinded and
transported Adam to eat the Mortal Fruit, against the express Command of God.
And ever since, the vanishing shadows of Honor, or Gain, or Pleasure, are the
only perswasives to Sin. And what can be more provoking, than for a Trifle to
transgress the Law of God, and equally despise his Favor and Displeasure? Can
any Punishment less than Eternal, expiate such Impieties? The Rules of Humane
Justice may discover to us the Equity of the Divine Justice. It Is ordained by
the wisest States, that many Crimes which may be done in a few minutes, shall
be punished with Death, and the Offender be deprived of his natural Life for
ever. And is it not most just, that Treason against the Great and Immortal
King, should be revenged with Everlasting Death?

(4.) That which farther clears the Divine Justice in punishing Sin with Hell,
is this, That God by his infallible Promise assures us, that all who sincerely
and uniformly obey him, shall be rewarded with Heaven for ever: a Blessedness
most worthy the Greatness and Love of the Eternal God to bestow upon his
Servants: a Blessedness that surpasses our most comprehensive Thoughts. Now if
Everlasting Glory be despised, what remains but endless Misery to be the
Sinner's Portion? The Consequence is remediless. If Sin with an eternal Hell in
its Retinue be chosen and embraced, is it not equal that the rational Creature
should inherit his own choice? How just is it that those who are the Slaves of
the Devil, and maintain his Party here, should have their Recompense with him
for ever? That those who now say to the Almighty, Depart from us, we desire not
the knowledge of thy Ways, should hear the dreadful Depart from me into
everlasting Fire? As there will be no vain-boasting in Heaven, where the Reward
is the Gift of pure Bounty; so there will be no righteous Complaint against God
in Hell, where the Punishment is inflicted by powerful Justice. He that
voluntarily sins, by consequence chooses the Punishment due to it.

(5.) The estimation of an Offense is taken from the disposition of him that
does it. When it is done with pleasure and obstinacy, there is no place for
Favor. Now final Impenitence alone makes Sin actually and eternally damning to
the Sinner. Those that, notwithstanding all gracious Means, live continually in
Rebellion against God; those that impenitently die in their Sins; those that
desire to live here for ever, that they might enjoy their sweet Sins; those
that are so hardened and naturalized in their Vices, that if they were revived
and brought again into this World of Temptations, would certainly return to the
Pleasures of Sin; is it not righteous that their incorrigible Obstinacy should
be punished for ever? Poenae aequalitas non nude spectanda ut in ponderibus and
mensuris, sed expenso proposito, and voto ejus qui deliquit.

Grot.
Is it not just that those who would continue under the dominion of Sin, should
forfeit all their claim to the Divine Mercy? For if we consider them as
unrepentant and irreclaimable from their Wickedness, there are in them the just
provocations and true causes of God's final rejection and hatred: and if we
consider God as revealed in his Word and Works, his essential Properties,
Wisdom, Purity, Justice, necessarily work upon such Objects in such a manner.
How zealous an Indignation did the Son of God express against the obdurate
Pharisees? You Serpents, Mat. 23.33.
you Generation of Vipers, how should you escape the Damnation of Hell? They in
despite of all his Miracles, the equal Expressions of his Goodness and Power,
resisted his Authority, blasphemed his Person, and slighted his Salvation. Now
though other Sins are of an inferior Nature, and weaker Evidence, yet
Obstinacy added to them, makes a Person unworthy and incapable of Mercy. From
hence the Misery of the Damned is without Redemption, without Hope, without
Allay for ever.

II. I shall now proceed to consider the Evidence of the Facts that is produced
as the Reason of that Judgment.

The temper of Divine Justice is very observable in the particular Judgments
recorded in Scripture. In the first process of Justice on Earth, we read that
God made the enquiry of Adam, Have thou eaten of the Tree whereof I commanded
thee that thou should not eat? Genesis 3.11.
and by palpable Evidence convinced him before he condemned him. Thus before
the fiery Vengeance upon the wicked Cities, the Memory of which will never be
extinguished; The Lord said to Abraham, Genesis 18.20, 21
Because the Cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great, and because their Sin is
grievous, I will go down now, and see whether they have done according to the
Cry of it that is come up unto me; viz. whether they were so numerously and
excessively wicked; if not, I will know. God is pleased to incarnate himself in
Man's Expression, to declare more sensibly to us, that he never punishes with
precipitation, but after an equal trial of the Cause. Thus we read of that
profane King of Babylon, Dan. 5.27.
Belshazzar, That he was weighed in the Balance, and found wanting, before he
was sentenced to be deprived of his Kingdom and Life. And the Destruction of
the Antichristian State is attended with solemn Hallelujahs for the
Righteousness of that Judgment. Rev. 19.2, 3.
And in the last Day the Righteousness of God's Proceedings shall be
universally manifest and magnified. It Is therefore called the Day of the
Revelation of the righteous Judgment of God. Now in order to this, Romans 2.5.
the Scripture informs us, that all the Works of Men shall be brought into
Judgment, even every secret thing, Eccles. 12. ult.
whether good or evil. And the Apostle says, That we must all appear before
the Judgment Seat of Christ, 2 Cor. 5.10.
that every one may receive the things done in his Body, according to that he
has done, whether it be good or bad.

All Sins, whether secret or openly visible, shall be accounted for. Those Sins
that have been acted in the most secret Retirement, so that no Eye of Man could
take cognizance of them, Sins concealed from the Eye of the Day, the Light of
the Sun, and from the Eye of the Night, the Light of a Candle, shall then be
made manifest. Nay, the Sins of the Thoughts and Affections, of which Satan
could not accuse Men, when the inward Fire of Lust or Malice is not discovered
by the least smoke or sparkles, by no expressions, all those shall be brought
to Judgment: Romans 2.16.
God will judge the Secrets of Men by Jesus Christ.

The Sins of Omission of our Duty that are so numerous, from carelessness and
diversions, from slothfulness and delays, and that now so little affect us; for
we are more sensible of what we do than of what we have not done; the guilt of
all these shall then be heavily charged on the Conscience of the Sinner. I was
an hungry, and you gave me no Meat; I was thirsty, and you gave me no Drink,
was the Accusation of the Reprobates from the Judge himself. To him who knows
to do Good, James 4.
and does it not, to him it is a Sin. The neglect of improving all the Means,
Advantages, and Opportunities of doing or receiving Good, will be a great part
of that Judgment. The Lord called his Servants to an account for the Talents
committed to their Trust, and required Profit in proportion to their Number and
Worth.

All Sins of Commission in Youth and Age, whether gross Sensuality, as
Lasciviousness, Lusts, excess of Wine, Revellings, Banquetings, and abominable
Idolatries, and all excess of Riot, shall be accounted for to him who is ready
to judge the quick and the dead: 1 Pet. 4.5.
or Acts of Unrighteousness to others. He that does wrong, shall receive
according to the Wrong he has done. And Sins of a lesser guilt, for which the
most are not touched with grief or shame, Col. 3.25.
shall then be produced in Judgment. All the Sins of our Words, so easily
committed, and not so easily observed, shall then be called to a heavy
remembrance. The Judge himself tells us; I say unto you, that every idle Word
that Men shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the Day of Judgment.
And if vain Words, the Signs and immediate Effects of a vain Mind, Mat. 12.
shall sadly increase our Accounts, how much more all the contentious, fierce
and revengeful Words, the detracting, false, contumelious and injurious Words,
the impure, filthy and contagious Words, the profane, blasphemous and impious
Words, that slow from the evil Treasure of the Heart? O their dreadful Number,
and oppressing Weight!

And all the Aggravations and Circumstances of Men's Sins, that raise their
Guilt to such fearful heights, shall be enumerated in order to Judgment. For
thus 'twas foretold; Behold, the Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints,
Jude 14, 15.
to execute Judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them,
of all their ungodly Deeds which they have ungodly committed; and all their
hard Speeches which ungodly Sinners have spoken against him. And all the good
Works of the Saints shall then be remembered, even to the least work of Piety,
Luke 21.3, 4.
the giving of two Mites to the Treasury of the Temple; and the least work of
Charity, Mat. 10.42.
the giving a Cup of cold Water to a Disciple, upon the account of his relation
unto Christ. All their secret Graces and Duties shall then be rewarded.

The manner of this Judicial Evidence is set forth to us in Scripture, by the
opening the Books; congruously to proceedings in humane Judgment, wherein the
Information and Charge is produced from Writings for the conviction of the
Accused. Thus it was represented to St. John in a Vision; I saw the Dead, Rev.
20.12.
small and great, stand before God; and the Books were opened, and the Dead
were judged out of the things that were written in the Books, according to
their Works.

1. The Books of the Law and Gospel shall then be opened in all the Injunctions
and Prohibitions, and our Lives compared with them. Our Savior told the Jews,
Do not think that I will accuse you to my Father; John 5.45.
there is one that accuses you, even Moses, in whom you trust: not the Person,
but the Law of Moses. And he denounced against those that reject the Gospel;
the Word that I have spoken, the same shall judge them in the last Day. John
12.48.
The Law is the exact Transcript of God's Sacred Will, the natural and
immutable Rule of Righteousness; it is pure, forbids all Sin, and enjoins
universal Holiness; it is spiritual, requires not only a conformity in Words and
Actions, but inward Sanctity in Mind and Heart: for the Soul is the principal
part of Man, entirely open to God's Eye, the Maker and Judge of it. And the most
enlightened Saints have but an imperfect knowledge of it here. This made holy
David, after his meditation upon its Purity and Perfection, to cry out in an
Agony, Psalm. 19.
Who can understand his Errors! cleanse thou me from secret Sins. This, when
opened in its spiritual and comprehensive Nature, by a wise and zealous
Preacher, darts a Light into the Conscience, and discovers many secret Sins,
that like so many Serpents were still and quiet in the dark; but upon the
sudden breaking in of the Light, fly upon the Sinner, and torment him with
their mortal Stings. But when the Lawgiver himself shall expound the Law in
its full extent and perfection, with respect to all the Duties it commands, and
Sins it forbids, how guilty will Men appear? how unable to answer one Article
of a thousand charged upon them?

2. The Omniscience of God will give most convincing Evidence of all our Works:
Heb. 4.13.
All things are naked and open to his Eyes, with whom we have to do in
Judgment. The Psalmist declares the infinite perspicacity of his sight: The
Darkness hides not from thee, Psalm. 139.
but the Night shines as the Day. As his Light and transcendent Brightness is
invisible to us, 1 Timothy 6.16.
so our thickest Darkness is visible to him. We cannot see things in the Night,
because it hinders the reception of the Rays, that insinuate into the Eye, and
causes sight: but the Eyes of our Judge are like a flame of Fire, Rev. 1.14.
dispelling all Darkness. From his Throne in Heaven, his piercing Eye sees
through all the concealments of Men's Sins. Thou have set our Iniquities before
thee, Psalm. 90.8.
and our secret Sins in the Light of thy Countenance. He discovered the
Sacriledg of Achan, the Lie of Gehazi, the Deceit of Ananias. Readiness
Disobedience in sparing the Amalekites devoted to Destruction, 1 Samuel 15.21.
had the colorable pretense of Piety, and, as a Sacrifice, was laid on the
Altar. And David's Murder of Vriah was imputed to the chance of War as a
sufficient excuse. 2 Samuel 11.25.
But though they might have deceived others, they could not deceive God. He is
intimately present with the Souls of Men, that are unsearchable to the most
discerning Angels of Light, and knows all their most secret Designs and
Desires, the deepest Seeds of their Actions. He alone has exact Scales to weigh
the Spirits of Men, all the Principles, Aims and Affections that are
inseparable from their Works. The Pharisees in whom Pride was the first
Property, and Hypocrisy a second Nature, could not, with all their Saintly
shows, impose on our Savior: Matthew. 23.14.
for he knew what was in Man. He discovered their Alms to be not the effect of
Charity but Ostentation, Matthew. 6.2.
and their specious Acts of Devotion to be a train to surprise some rich Prey.
Matthew. 23.14.


And this Divine knowledge of Men and their Actions is in order to Judgment.
Thus the wise King declares, Does not he that ponders the Heart consider it?
Prove. 24.12.
and he that keeps thy Soul, does not he know it? And shall not he render to
every Man according to his Works? And God himself testifies, Jer. 17.10.
I the Lord search the Heart, even to give to every Man according to his Works.
For this reason he is said to keep a Register of Men's Sins. Thus he speaks of
the impure Idolatries of the Jews; Isa. 65.6.
Behold, it is written before me, to signify his exact and actual knowledge, I
will not keep silence, but will recompense, even recompense into their Bosoms.
And at the Day of Judgment he will declare his Knowledge of their Sins before
all, and the most secret shall be made evident, as if written in their
Foreheads in the most plain and legible Characters.

And all the Goodness of the Saints shall then be revealed by the Judge. O si
nobis animam boni viri liceret inspicere, quam pulchram faciem, quam sanctam,
quam ex magnifico, placidoquefulgentem videremus!

Senec.
Their greatest Excellencies are invisible to the Eyes of Men: the Sanctity of
their Aims and Affections, which gives Life and Value to all the Acts of
Obedience, their secret Duties, wherein the sincerity and ardency of their
Souls is most expressed, are only known to God. And such is the excellent
humility of the Saints, that the more they are enriched, and abound with the
gracious Influences of the Spirit, the less they discover to the World; as the
Celestial Bodies, when in nearest conjunction with the Sun, and most filled
with his Light, are least in appearance to the Inhabitants of the Earth. But
there is a Book of Remembrance before him, for them that feared the Lord, Mal.
3.16, 17.
and thought upon his Name. And they shall be mine, says the Lord of Hosts, in
the Day when I make up my Jewels: and I will spare them as a Man spares his Son
that serves him.

3. The Conscience of every Man shall then be opened, Romans 2.15, 16.
and give an accusing or excusing Testimony of all things: for these Acts of
Conscience in the present Life, have a final respect to God's Tribunal. And
though the Accounts are so vast, there shall be an exact Agreement between the
Books of God's Omniscience, and of Conscience in the Day of Judgment. Now
indeed the Conscience of Man, though never so inquisitive and diligent in
examining and revising his Ways, is unable to take a just account of his Sins.
As one that would tell the first appearing Stars in the Evening, before he can
reckon them, others appear and confound his Memory with their number: so when
Conscience is seriously intent in reflecting upon it self, before it can reckon
up the Sins committed against one Command, innumerable others appear. This made
the Psalmist, upon the survey of his Actions, break forth in amazement and
perplexity; Psalm. 40.12.
Mine Iniquities are more than the Hairs upon my Head, therefore my Heart fails
me. But it will be one of the Miracles of that Day, to enlarge the view of
Conscience to all their Sins. Now the Records of Conscience are often
obliterated, and the Sins written therein are forgotten; but then they shall
appear in so clear an impression, that the Wicked shall be inexcusable to
themselves, and Conscience subscribes their Condemnation. And O the formidable
Spectacle, when Conscience enlightened by a Beam from Heaven, shall present to a
Sinner in one view the Sins of his whole Life! Now Conscience is a Notary in
every Man's Bosom; and though it is not always vocal, yet writes down their
Actions. The Sin of Judah is written with a Pen of Iron, Jer. 17.1.
and with a point of a Diamond it is graven upon the Tables of the Heart. But
then it shall be compelled to give a full Charge against the Guilty. Of this we
have an infallible Presage in this World, when Conscience turns the Point
against the Breast of a Sinner, and enforces the Tongue, by a secret
instigation, to accuse the Person. And this Information of Conscience at the
last will make the Sinner speechless: for the Book of Accounts with Divine
Justice, was always in his own keeping; and whatever is recorded there, was
written with his own Hand. And how will those hardened Sinners that now kick
against the Pricks of Conscience, be able to repel its strong and quick
Accusations before that terrible Tribunal?

4. Other numerous Witnesses will appear to finish the process of that Day. Not
as if God, that knows all things, wants Information, but for the public
Conviction of the Wicked.

Satan will then bring in a bloody Charge against them. Such is his Malignity,
that he is a Complainer of God to Man, and by calumniating the Blessed Creator,
seduced our first Parents; and he is the Accuser of Men to God. Rev.
He is styled the Accuser of the Brethren before God day and night. Sometimes
falsely, as when he taxed Job, that his Piety was mercenary; and often truly to
provoke the Divine Displeasure. But though his Charge be just against them as
Sinners, yet as Penitent Sinners they are absolved by the Judge upon the Throne
of Grace. This we have represented to the Prophet Zechary, Zech. 3.1, 2, 3.
Joshua the High Priest, a Type of the Church, standing before the Angel of the
Lord, and Satan standing at his right hand to accuse him; for that was the
place of Accusers. But Christ the Blessed Reconciler interposed: And the Lord
said to Satan, The Lord rebuke thee, O Satan, even the Lord that has chosen
Jerusalem, rebuke thee. But he will principally act the part of an Accuser at
the last Judgment. This is intimated in that fearful Imprecation, Let Satan
stand at his right hand: Psalm. 109.6, 7.
when he is judged, let him be condemned. He is now an active watchful Spirit,
whose Diligence is equal to his Malice, and by glittering Snares, or violent
Temptations, draws Men to Sin. But then he will be their most bitter Accuser,
not from zeal of Justice, but pure Malignity. Then he will aggravate their
Crimes by the most killing Circumstances; though in accusing them he endites
himself, their Sins being usually done by his solicitations.

And the Wicked themselves will accuse one another. In this World
Fellow-sinners usually conceal one another Wickedness, restrained by their own
obnoxiousness. But then all that have been jointly engaged in the commission of
Sin, will impeach each other. The voluptuous Sinners that have excited one
another to Lust or Luxury; Come, Prove. 7.18.
let us take our fill of Love till the Morning. Come, I will fetch Wine, Isa.
56.12.
and we will fill our selves with strong Drink, for to morrow shall be as to
day, and much more abundant. All the charming Companions and Associates will
with fierceness charge one another. And the malicious cruel Sinners that say,
Come, let us lay wait for Blood, Prove. 1.
let us swallow them up quick as the Grave, will then like enraged Furies fly
upon one another. In all Sins of Combination, the inferior Instruments will
accuse their Directors for their pernicious Counsel, and the Directors will
accuse the Instruments for their wicked Compliance.

And all the holy Servants of God, who by their Instructions, Counsels,
Admonitions, Examples, have endeavored to make the World better; especially
those who by their Place and Relation were more concerned, and more zealously
and compassionately urged and persuaded those under their Care to reform their
Lives, and save their Souls, will give a heavy Testimony against them. Indeed
the very Presence of the Saints will upbraid the Wicked, for their resisting
all the warming, melting Entreaties, all the grave and serious Reproofs, all
the tender earnest Expostulations, that were ineffectual by the hardness of
their Hearts.

Briefly, the Scripture attributes to the Signs and Circumstances of Men's Sins,
a vocal Evidence against them. Thus the Prophet speaking of the House built by
Rapine and Extortion, The Stones of the Wall cry, Hab. 2.11.
and the Beams answer them; and with concurrent Testimony accuse the
unrighteous Builder. And St. James declares, That the Wages of the Hireling,
kept back by Fraud, James 5.3, 4.
cry against the Oppressor. And the Rust of Gold and Silver treasured up, is a
Witness against the Covetous. And this by the recognition of Conscience will be
a Memorial against them hereafter.

To what the Scripture speaks of this kind of Evidence of Men's Sins, I shall
add a useful Representation framed by a Heathen, to signify that Wickedness,
how secretly soever committed, shall be brought to light in Judgment. He tells
us, That the Soul of a very guilty Wretch, was after Death arraigned before one
of the severe Judges below. And at his Trial, because his atrocious Crimes were
done in secret, he stood upon his defense, denying all. The Judge commanded his
Lamp to be produced, that was an Eyewitness of his Wickedness. The Lamp
appeared, and being demanded what it knew of him? answered with a sigh, Would I
had been conscious of nothing, for even now the remembrance of his Villainies
makes me to tremble: I wish my Light had been extinguished, that the Oil that
maintained had quenched it. But I burnt with disdain, and cast about some
Sparks to fire his impure Bed, and was grieved that my little Flame was so weak
as not to consume it. I said within my self, If the Sun saw these Villainies, it
would be eclipsed, and leave the World in Darkness. But I now perceive why I
was constrained to give Light to him, that being a secret Spy of his
Uncleanness, his Thefts and Cruelties, I might reveal them. But we that are
enlightened by Faith, and know that God is omnipresent, and that whatever Sin
is done, though in the deepest and darkest recess, is manifest to him, Ipse
timendus est in publico, ipse in secreto. Lucerna ardet? videt te. Lucerna
extincta est? videt te. In cubile intras? videt te. In cord versaris? videt
te. Ipsum time.
have no need of Lucian's Lamp to make our Judge to be feared by us.

3. The Impartiality of the Sentence will make the Justice of God conspicuous
before the whole World. This consists in two things.

1. There will be no distinction of Persons.

2. There will be a distinction of Causes in that Judgment; and according to
their Nature, the Sentence will pass upon all.

1. There will be no distinction of Persons. In humane Courts the Judges
sometimes extend and amplify, sometimes contract or smother the Evidence, and
are more rigorous or favorable in their Sentence, as they are biased toward
the Persons before them. But the Righteous Judge of the World is incapable of
being inclined to Favor or Severity upon such base Motives. This is frequently
declared in Scripture, to possess us with his Fear. If ye call upon the Father,
1 Pet. 1.17.
who without respect of Persons judges according to every Man's Work, pass the
time of your sojourning here in fear. No spiritual Privileges upon which Men
are so apt to presume, viz. that they are Members of the Reformed Church; that
they are enriched with excellent Gifts; that they enjoy the Ordinances in their
purest Administration, will avail them without real Holiness in their Hearts
and Lives. The being united to Societies of the most glorious Profession, of
strictest Purity, and sublime Devotion, does no more prove one to be a real
Saint, than the being of an eminent Company of Merchants proves one to be a
rich Citizen. Those that bow the Knee and not the Heart in faithful Reverence,
that give the empty Title of Lord to Christ, without the tribute of Obedience,
will be rejected by him. Many shall say at the Day of Judgment, Matthew. 7.22.
Lord, Lord, we have prophesied in thy Name, and done many wondrous Works. Then
will the Judge say, I know you not: Depart from me ye Workers of Iniquity. No
degrees of Civil Greatness will be of any moment and advantage in that day.
Saint John testifies, I saw the Dead, small and great, stand before God, in an
equal Line, to receive their Trial. Kings shall then be divested of their
Imperial Titles, of their Crowns and Scepters, and their Robes of State, and
only be accompanied with their Works. Of this we have an undoubted Proof, in
that they are no more exempted from the common Law of dying than the meanest
Slave. Death, that rugged Officer, arrests them without Ceremony, and summons
them to appear before that Tribunal. The Royal Purple could not protect Herod
from being devoured by Worms. The Apostle speaks indefinitely in the forecited
Place; He that does wrong, Col. 3. ult.
shall receive for the wrong he has done; and there is no respect of Persons.
No circumstantial Accidents can derive true worth, or truly debase Persons, but
inherent Qualities, and the Actions that flow from them: and accordingly, the
High and Holy God will accept or disapprove them. What St. Paul observes of the
saving Grace of the Gospel being indifferently offered to all, is applicable in
this case. He tells us, Col. 3.11.
There is neither Greek nor Jew, Barbarian nor Scythian, Bond nor Free, that
are preferred or excluded upon a Carnal account, but that all may equally
partake of spiritual Blessings. Thus the difference of Nations will be no
Privilege or Prejudice to any in the Day of Judgment. The most rude and
contemptible shall have as fair and equal a Trial, as the most polite and
civilized. The ignorant Barbarians as the Learned Grecians, that so much
boasted of their vain Excellencies above them. The Negroes in Africa as the
People of Europe: for they have the same Relation to God their Maker, and as
truly bear the impression of God stamped upon the Humane Nature in the
Creation, and therefore common to the whole species of Mankind. An Image may be
fashioned in Ebony as well as in Ivory. Briefly, all Men are equally subject to
his Laws, and shall be equally accountable for their Actions. The Rich and the
Poor shall then meet together, without distinction, before God the Maker and
Judge of them all.

2. There shall be a distinction of Causes, and every Man be judged according
to his Works, the tenor of good Works, and the desert of bad. The Apostle
assures us, Gal. 6.7, 8.
That whatsoever a Man sows, that shall he reap: He that sows to the Flesh,
shall of the Flesh reap Corruption; but he that sows to the Spirit, shall of
the Spirit reap Life everlasting. The Harvest shall be according to the Seed,
both in kind and measure.

Romans 2.7.
(1.) Those who by patient continuance in well-doing, seek for Glory, and
Honor, and Immortality, shall obtain eternal Life. Romans 6. ult.
Indeed, eternal Life is the Gift of infinite Bounty, nay of pure Mercy, and
Mercy excludes Merit. Jude 21.
It Is said of the blessed Martyrs, who contended for the Truth and Purity of
the Gospel to the Death, that their Robes were washed white in the Blood of the
Lamb, not in their own Blood. Rev. 7.14.
Their Right to Heaven was from the application of his Merits to them. But the
Reward is dispensed from God according to the Evangelical Law; not only as a
magnificent Prince, but as a Righteous Judge. All those to whom the Gospel
promises eternal Life, shall infallibly obtain it, and none that the Gospel
excludes. Those who were sensible of their Sins, and cordially forsaking them,
did humbly and entirely depend upon the Grace of God, through the blessed
Reconciler and Savior, shall be justified and glorified. Then the Judge will
discern between unfeigned Faith and vain Presumption, and will justify the
Faith of the Saints by the genuine Fruits of it, the Godliness, Righteousness,
and Sobriety of their Lives, and a victorious perseverance in their Duty,
notwithstanding all the pleasing Temptations or Tortures to withdraw them from
it. Thus the Apostle expresses his humble Confidence; I have fought the good
Fight, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8.
I have finished my Course; henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of
Righteousness, which God the Righteous Judge will give me at that day: and not
only to me, but to all that love his Appearance. We read in the Description of
the Last Judgment, Rev. 20.12.
That the Book of Life was opened: the Names of all that were written in
Heaven, shall then be declared, that it may appear they are saved by Grace. For
it was his most free pleasure to select some from the common Mass of Perdition,
who were naturally as guilty and corrupted as others, and to predestinate them
to Eternal Glory, and effectual persevering Grace to prepare them for it. The
Saints are created in Christ Jesus unto good Works, which God has before
ordained, that they should walk in them. And the New Creation is as undeserved
and entire an Effect of God's Love as the first was. But it is said, That every
Man was judged according to his Works. For Eternal Election does not entitle a
Person immediately to Heaven, but according to the Order established in the
Gospel. Thus the King at the last Day speaks to the Elect; Come, Mat. 25. 34.
35.
ye Blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom, prepared for you before the
Foundation of the World: for I was hungry, and ye fed me; naked, and ye clothed
me.

And according as the Saints have excelled in Fidelity and Zeal in God's
Service, they shall be rewarded with a more excellent Glory. The Stars of the
supreme Heaven are of a different brightness and greatness, as the Stars of the
visible Firmament. Indeed all are perfectly happy, without Plus amant illud
Regnum in quo non timent habere consortes. Aug. de Civit. Dei.
jealousy, that any is equal or superior to them in that Kingdom. But God will
crown his own Graces as the Saints have improved them. Our Savior valued the
Widow's two Mites, as transcending all the magnificent Gifts of others, because
of the degrees of Love in the Giver. There was a richer Mine of Affection in
her Heart, Gold of a more noble Vein, more pure and precious than all their
Riches. This was of greater price in God's Account, who weighs the Spirits in
his Balance. God will accept and reward according to what a Man has, and not
according to what he has not. 2 Cor. 8.12.
He that improves but two Talents with his best skill and diligence, shall have
a greater Reward than another that had ten Talents, and was remiss and less
careful to employ them for his Master's Profit. The Rule will be exactly
observed, He that sows bountifully, shall reap bountifully; and he that sows
sparingly, shall reap sparingly.

And if God will be thus impartial in rewarding the Saints, much more in
punishing the Wicked. For the remuneration of our Duty is the effect of his
most free Favor; but the recompenses of Sin are due, and decreed by Justice,
in Number, Weight, and Measure. The severity of the Sentence will be in
proportion, as Men's Sins have been more numerous and heinous. Although all the
Damned shall be equally miserable in Despair, all broken on an endless Wheel,
yet the degrees of their Torment are different. Sins of Ignorance are
extenuated in comparison of rebellious Sins against Knowledge. The first are
like a Servant's dashing against his Master in the dark; the oother like the
insolent striking of him in the light: And as they incur greater Guilt, will
expose to greater Punishment. Accordingly our Savior predicts, Luke 12.47, 48.
That the Servant which knew his Lord's Will, and prepared not himself, neither
did according to his Will, shall be beaten with many Stripes. But he that knew
not, and did commit things worthy of Stripes, shall be beaten with few Stripes.
Unactive Knowledge is worse than Ignorance. For this reason the Case of Heathens
will be more tolerable than of the Jews: for though some natural Principles
were strong and quick in their Minds, that made them sensible of their Duty and
Danger, yet they were not so clear and perfect as the Law delivered by Moses.
Those Sins that were Infirmities in a Pagan, were presumptuous in a Jew. And
the Case of the Jews will be more tolerable than of disobedient Christians, who
enjoy the Gospel less charged with Ceremonies, and more abundant in Grace than
the Mosaical Dispensation. Those that have set before them the Life of Christ,
the Model of all Perfection, that are excited by such loud Calls to flee from
the Wrath to come, and yet are deaf and regardless to the Commands, nay to the
melting Invitations and precious Promises of the Gospel, shall have a more
intolerable Judgment than the most guilty Sinners, even the Sodomites and
Sidonians that were Strangers to it. The precious Blood of the Son of God
despised, induces a Crimson Guilt. And as Sins are committed with Pride and
Pleasure, with eager Appetite and Obstinacy, the revenge of Justice will be
more heavy upon Persons.

More particularly, Sins of Consesequence, whereby others are drawn to Sin,
will heighten the Guilt, and the retribution of Justice will be to every Man
according to his Ways, Jer. 17.10.
and according to the fruit of his Doings.

This will principally concern Superiors in eminency of Place, whose Dignity
has always a concomitant proportion of Duty. Their vicious Actions are
Examples, and their Examples more powerful Rules than their Laws, and give
countenance to others to sin licentiously. They sin with an high Hand, and
involve the Ruin of innumerable Persons that depend upon them. As the Dragon in
the Revelation, whose Fall from Heaven drew a Train of lesser Stars with him.
And all inferior Magistrates, who by personal commission, or partial
connivance, encourage and harden others in Sin, and by their Power
discountenance serious Religion, and obstruct the Progress of it, heap up
Damnation to themselves.

And the Ministers of the Word, who are obliged to watch for the Souls of Men;
and should, like the Heavens, by their Light, Influence, and Motion, their
Doctrine and Lives, guide and quicken others in the Ways of Holiness; if by
their Neglect and Wickedness others are lost for ever, their Account will be
most heavy and undoing.

Of this Number are those, who by their unholy Conversation weaken the
Authority and Efficacy of the Word, and more successfully persuade Men to do
Evil, than by their Preaching to do well: for we are apt to take deeper
impression through the Eye than through the Ear, and to follow the Physician's
Practice rather than his Counsel. These perish not alone in their Iniquity. And
such who are unfaithful Dispensers of the Treasures of their Lord, and by loose
Doctrines corrupt the Minds of Men, to fancy a Mercy in God derogatory to his
Holiness, that although they live indulgently in Sin, they may obtain an easy
Pardon and Happiness at last. And such who employ their high Commission for low
and base Ends: Those who instead of preaching Jesus Christ, and him Crucified,
the pure and saving Truths derived from the Fountain of the Gospel, entertain
their Hearers with flashy Conceits, and studied Vanities, to give a relish to
Curiosity, and to have the applause of Fools, and obscure the native Majesty of
the Word, enervate its Force, and render it powerless to Conscience.

And those who spend their Zeal in things of no moment to Salvation, and let
fly bitter Invectives against those that dissent from them in unconcerning
Matters, by which they harden Atheistical Scorners in vilifying the Office of
the Ministry as a Carnal Invention, set up and used for Secular Ends; and
induce others to place Religion in Formalities and slight colors of it, as if
Conformity to needless Rites would exclude the Defects of substantial Holiness.

It Is observed in the Chaldee Paraphrase, when God was inquiring of Cain
concerning Abel, that he charges him, The Voice of thy Brother's Blood cries
unto me: As if Cain were a Murderer not of a single Man only, but of a numerous
Race that might have descended from his Brother. Thus a wicked Minister will be
charged not only for murdering himself, but as many precious Souls as might
have been converted and saved, if he had faithfully performed his Duty.

And Parents that should instill the Principles of Godliness into their Children
in their early Age, and season their Minds with the knowledge of the Divine
Laws, to regulate their Lives, and make them sensible of their Obligations to
obey them, that should recommend Religion to their Affections by an holy and
heavenly Conversation, if by the neglect of their Duty their Children are
exposed as a Prey to the Tempter, and ruined for ever, it will enhance their
last Reckoning, and increase the Score of their Guilts beyond expression.

And Masters of Families, and all others that have Authority and Advantage to
preserve or reform from evil those that are committed to their Care, and to
instruct and command them to do what is pleasing to God, and profitable to
their Souls, will be sadly accountable for those that perish by their neglect.

In short, we see by common Experience, that Company and mutual Consent is a
usual Motive to Sin; and many Persons that alone would with abhorrence reject
some Temptations, yet are sociably sinful. Now all those who by excitation or
example, lead others to Destruction, as they are first in Sin, will be chief in
Punishment. We read in the Parable of the rich Voluptuary, Luke 16.28.
that being in Hell, he desired a Messenger might be dispatched from the Dead
to warn his Brethren, lest they should come to that place of Torment. Is there
such Charity in Hell to the Souls of others? Non orat pro fratrum salute qua
non tangitur reprobus, sed pro se ne ipsius tormenta ex consortio fratrum
augeautur.

Brugen.
No, that Furnace always burns with its proper Flames, there is not a spark of
that Divine Fire there: But remembering how guilty he had been of their Sins,
feared that his Torments would be increased by their coming thither. Society in
endless Sorrows does not divide, but reflect them.

Now if Damnation for Sin be such a Misery as is expressed in the Scripture by
the most violent Figures and Words of the heaviest signification; if all the
possible Tortures suffered here are but a Lenitive to the preparations of Wrath
in Hell, how miserable shall those be, who, as if a single Damnation were a
light matter, do not only commit Sin in their own Persons, but are in
combination with Satan to corrupt and destroy others, and multiply Damnation
against themselves? These treasure up Wrath against the day of Wrath.

Briefly; The whole Process of that Day, the Arraignment and Sentence will be
so ordered, the Righteousness and Reasonableness of the Proceedings will be so
manifest, as to clear the Judge, and confound the Guilty. God will be justified
in his Sentence, and overcome when he judges.

I shall now come to apply this great Doctrine.

1. Let us from what has been discoursed of Judgment to come, be excited to
confirm our Faith in this great and useful Doctrine; and by serious and
frequent thoughts to apply it to our selves. Some within the Church have only a
superficial belief of this, as a point of the Religion wherein they were
educated; but carnal Affections, Fear, Hope, Love, and Desire, control their
Assent, as to its operation upon them. They believe in the general that God is
the Judge and Rewarder of our Actions, and in the absence of Temptation resolve
to obey him: but when a strong Trial comes from some temporal Good or Evil that
is present, their Faith is negligent, and unactive to keep them from Sin. Now
to make our Faith powerful, we must,

First, confirm it by convincing Arguments, that it may be an undoubted
Assurance, a certain Light, directive and persuasive in the course of our
Lives. Some Doctrines of Religion, that are of an incomprehensible nature, and
should be received with silent adoration for the Authority of the Revealer, are
obstinately contradicted by some, upon a vain pretense that nothing is to be
believed that will not endure the rigorous inquisition of Reason, and be
comprehended by our narrow Minds: but Reason, though darkened, sees the
necessity of a future Judgment. Nature and Scripture testify there is a God,
and that he has a Right, and Power, and Will to distribute the rewards of
Virtue, and the penalties of Vice to his Subjects. To deny this, is directly
against the implanted Notion of the Deity in the Heart of Man. There is a real
difference between Moral Good and Evil, not depending upon Opinion, but arising
from the immutable Nature of things, and the eternal Law of God. Otherwise,
considered in it self, it were no more faulty to murder a Parent, than to kill
a Fly; nor to rob a Travellor, than to chase a Deer. But the Conscience of the
most profligate Wretch would startle at such an Assertion. The disposition and
admirable order of the World in its various parts, and the vicissitude of
Seasons, declare to the observing Mind, that a most wise, good, and powerful
God governs and preserves all things by his vigorus Influence. And can it be
that the Divine Providence, so visibly wise and good in regulating the course
of Nature, should be defective toward Man, the most noble part of the World?
And can it be extended to humane Affairs, if there be no other than the present
state, wherein the Righteous are afflicted, and the Wicked prosper? where Sins
of the deepest stain and the lowdest cry are unpunished; and the sublime and
truly heroic Virtues are unrewarded? nay, where Vice receives the natural
reward of Virtue, Honor and Felicity, and Virtue the just wages of Vice,
Disgrace and Sufferings? It Is necessary therefore that there be a future State,
and a righteous distribution of Rewards, according to the good and evil of Men's
Actions here.

The Heathens disguised this terrible Truth under the Fictions of the Infernal
Judges, Minos, and Rhadamanthus, and Eacus. And the Furies and Vultures, and
fiery Lake, which they thought tormented the Wicked in the next World, discover
what apprehensions they had of the desert of Sin, Testimonium animae
naturaliter Christiana. Tert.
and the punishment that certainly attended it. The Guilty would fain be freed
from the terrors of it, and strangle Conscience, that is bound over to give
Testimony in the Day of Judgment, that they may sin without scruples. But
though Fear be a troublesome and involuntary Passion, they cannot totally
extinguish the internal sense and presages of future Judgment; but as the
motions of Courage came upon Sampson at times; so Conscience awakened by sharp
Afflictions, by sudden Dangers, and the approaches of Death, makes a sad
deduction of past Sins, and forecasts cruel things. It cites the Offender
before the enlightened Tribunal of Heaven, scourges with remorse, and makes him
feel even here the strokes of Hell. Though the Sin be secret, and the guilty
Person powerful, not within the cognizance or reach of humane Justice, yet
Conscience has a Rack within, and causes pain and anxiety, by fearful
expectations of Judgment to come.

And Divine Revelation is most express in declaring this great Truth. The Light
of Faith is more clear and certain from the infallible Word of God, than the
Light of Reason. Before the Flood, Enoch in the early Age of the World foretold
it; Behold, the Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints, to execute
Judgment upon all. Jude 14, 15.


Solomon under the Law repeats this Doctrine, that every secret thing shall be
brought into Judgment, Eccles. 12.
whether good or evil. And God himself speaks in the sublimest style of
Majesty, and swears by himself, for our firmer belief, As I live, says the
Lord, very Knee shall bow to me, Esa. 45.23.
and every Tongue confess to God, the glory of his Justice. From whence the
Apostle infers, Romans 14.10, 11.
So then every one of us shall give an account to God for himself. In the
Gospel we have distinctly described the Person of the Judge, Mat. 13.42, 43. and
23.30, 31.
the glorious Attendants of his Coming, and the manner of his proceedings in
that Day. Now the many Predictions in Scripture so visibly accomplished in the
Person of Jesus Christ, An vere extribuit nobis omnia quae promisit, and de
solo die judicii nos fefellit?

Aug.
and by him, give infallible assurance, that all his Promises and Threatenings
are equally certain, and shall be fulfilled. As sure as our Savior is come in
his humble state, and has accomplished the Prophecies of his Sufferings, he
will come in his Glory to judge the World.

Secondly. That the belief of eternal Judgment may be powerful in our hearts
and lives, it must be actuated by frequent and serious thoughts. Faith gives
life and efficacy to our notions of eternal things, and Consideration makes our
Faith effectual. As the natural Life is preserved by the activity of the vital
Principles, the Circulation of the Blood, the drawing of the Breath, the motion
of the Pulse; so the spiritual Life is maintained by the exercise of Grace. The
carnal Affections dare not appear before Reason and Conscience, when awakened
by the serious believing Consideration of eternal Judgment. The Evangelists
relate, that when our Savior was asleep in the Ship, a sudden Tempest arose
that was likely to over-set it in the Sea: but awakened by the cry of his
Disciples, Lord, save us, we perish; he presently rebuked the Wind, and a Calm
ensued. Thus whilst the habit of Faith is asleep in the Soul, there will be
great danger from the concurrent violence of Temptations and Corruptions; but
when it is awakened by lively and powerful thoughts, it does Miracles in
subduing the strongest Lusts. It Is monstrous and beyond all belief, did not
sensible Experience make it evident, that notwithstanding the minds of Men are
convinced of the certainty of the Divine Judgment, and the Recompenses that
immediately follow, yet their Wills remain unconverted, and their Affections
cold and unactive in their preparations for it: That such numbers who have so
much Christianity as to believe that an irrevocable Doom will pass upon the
Wicked, and so little Christianity, that they cannot justly hope to escape from
it, yet are so careless of their Duty, nay joyful in their sinful courses, as
if Judgment were a dreadless thing. What is the cause of this prodigious
security? It Is the neglect of considering, that we must all appear before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, to receive according to the things done in the body,
whether good or evil.

The next Cause of this stupidity is, that they put the Evil Day at a remote
distance: as the Scorners said, the Vision is for many Days: They study to be
secure, and delay their preparations, presuming to have time enough before
them. Their Senses and Faculties are so employed abroad in the World, they have
neither leisure nor desire to think seriously of it. Their Hearts are so
ravished with Dreams of Sensuality, and engaged in terrene Affairs, that they
are very averse from exercising their minds upon such displeasing Objects.

Vain Men! how willingly do they deceive themselves? The Judge himself declares,
Behold, I come quickly: His Throne is like a fiery Flame, and his Wheels as
burning Fire; an Emblem of his swift coming to judgment. Can they be assured of
Life one Hour? The Day of Death is equivalent to the Day of Judgment: for
immediately after there is a final decision of Men's states for ever.

I have read of an excellent Preacher, that in a Sermon described the last
Judgment in all its Terrors, with such ardent Expressions, and those animated
with such an affecting Voice, such an inflamed Countenance and Action, that his
Hearers broke forth into passionate Cries, as if the Judge himself had been
present to pass the final Sentence upon them. In the height of their
Commotion, the Preacher bid them stop their Tears and Passions, for he had one
thing more to add, the most afflicting and astonishing Consideration of all the
rest, That within less than a quarter of an hour, the Memory and regard of that
which so transported them would vanish, and their Affections return to carnal
Objects in their usual manner.

The neglect of Consideration makes even the Doctrine of Judgment to come to be
without efficacy. It Is necessary therefore that the belief of this be so firmly
seated in the Heart as its Throne, that it may command the thoughts to be very
attentive to it, and may have Regal Power over our Wills and Affections, that
our Lives may be ordered according to its Rules.

2. The Consideration of Eternal Judgment will vindicate the Proceedings of
Divine Providence, and the honor of God's governing this World, from the
imputations of Unrighteousness. God is provoked every day, yet spares the
Wicked, and heaps an abundance of Favors on them. His Patience and Goodness
they profanely abuse, and become more obdurate and inflexible. Psalm. 14.1.
They are apt to blaspheme the Excellency of his Nature in their Hearts,
thinking that he is ignorant or careless, impotent or unjust. They implicitly
deny his Providence and Judgment, that he does not observe their Sins, and will
not require an account for them: Or else they interpret his Permission to be an
Approbation of their Sins. These things have thou done, and I kept silence;
Psalm. 50.
thou thoughtest I was such an one as thy self. Thus the Heathens transplanted
the Vices of Earth to Heaven, and represented their Gods to be sensual,
jealous, furious as Men, and accordingly expected an easy Absolution for their
Sins. Or else the distance of Judgment to come so hardens them, that they hear
God's Thunder with less fear, than Boys do their Squibs and Crackers. Because
Sentence against an evil Work is not speedily executed, Eccles. 8.2.
therefore the hearts of the Sons of Men are fully set in them to do evil. But
how desperate is the madness of Sinners? Acts 17.130.
God now seems to wink at their Sins, but has appointed a day of Accounts. He
suffers them to live in prosperity, but they are reserved to the day of
Judgment to be punished, 2 Pet. 2.4.
and possibly sooner: for sometimes they are cut off by visible Vengeance, to
convince the World that the supreme Judge does not bear the Sword in vain. But
though it is delayed for a time, yet he declares, Deuteronomy. 32.34.
that their Sins are laid up in store with him, and sealed up among his
Treasures. To him belongs Vengeance and Recompense. He is a mild Judge now, and
his Clemency suspends their Punishment; but Amos 8.7.
Justice will not forget it. He threatens the secure Sinner, I will reprove
thee, Psalm. 50.21.
and set thy Sins in order before thine eyes. How will the scornful obstinate
Sinner change complexion and tremble, when an Army of Sins more terrible than
so many Furies shall be ranged in Battle, and with fiery Darts wound his naked
Soul? How will the stubborn Atheist, that pleases himself with vain
imaginations of the Eternity of the World, and the Mortality of the Soul, be
confounded when he feels the truth of Scripture-threatnings, to his eternal
Sorrow? then all their Raileries will be turned into Lamentations. It Is not for
Cum habeat in potestate vindictam mavult diu tenere patientiam. Cyprian. de
bon. Patient.
want of Power that God spares the Wicked, but because they are always in his
Hands, and he can make them as miserable as they are sinful when he pleases.
It Is not through the neglect of Justice, but for most wise and holy Reasons, as
shall appear in the last day, when a decisive irreversible Judgment shall be
pronounced, and immediately inflicted upon them before the World. When an
(...), etc.

Cum hi novissimi versus in Tragoedia Euripidis pronuntiati essent, totus
populus ad ejiciendum and Actorum and Carmen consurrexit uno impetu: donec
Euripides in medium prosiluit petens ut expectarent, viderentque quem admirator
auri exitum faceret Senec. Epist. 115.


Actor at Athens spoke with admiration of Riches, as the most valuable
Acquisition, and of the Felicity of Rich Men: the People were in an Uproar at
the immorality of the Speech, and were ready to chase him from the Stage. But
the Poet himself appeared, and desired them to stop their Fury till they saw
the Catastrophe, the wretched end of that sordid Miser. Thus we are apt to
accuse the ways of God when the Wicked flourish; but we should stop our
tumultuous thoughts, for their end will absolve Divine Providence from all
undue reflections upon the account of their temporal happiness.

And the sound belief of this will rectify all mistaking apprehensions, and
clear all perplexing appearances about the Sufferings of the Righteous here.

Indeed if we consider the holiest Men as they are Sinners, their Afflictions
are so far from blemishing the Justice of God, that they are the signs of his
Mercy: for all is a Favor on this side Hell to those that deserve it. David,
an excellent Saint, acknowledges the righteousness of God's Judgments with
respect to himself. But when the Saints suffer for a righteous Cause; and, as
the Psalmist expresses it, Psalm. 4.
for thy sake are we killed all the day long, and are counted as Sheep for the
slaughter; there is not a visible correspondency between the Providence of God
in his governing the World, and the unchangeable Rules of Justice, that those
who do evil should suffer evil, and those who do well should be happy. As the
Apostle speaks to the persecuted Christians, 2 Thessalonians. 6.7.
It is a righteous thing with God to recompense Tribulation to them that
trouble you, and to you who are troubled rest with us. Now there is a day
coming, when the Persecutors shall be punished, and the Saints be rewarded for
all their Sufferings, and the distribution of Recompenses shall be in the
presence of the World, for the glory of Divine Justice. For the distinction
that is made between Men at Death is private and particular, and not sufficient
for the honor of God's Government. But at the last Day all Men that have lived
in several successions of Ages shall appear, and Justice have a solemn Process
and Triumph before Angels and Men. As some excellent Piece that is to be
exposed to public view, is covered with a Traverse, to prevent the disturbance
in the Working, and the discovery of the Work till brought to such perfection
as will surprise with wonder those that see it: So God is pleased to cover his
Proceedings for a time, but in the last Day there will be such a Revelation of
the righteous Judgment of God, Romans 2.7.
that those who now doubt, or complain of his Justice, shall admire and adore
it.

3. The belief of this Doctrine as it vindicates Divine Providence, so it is
powerful to comfort the Saints under Persecutions for Righteousness sake;
especially when Innocence is wounded with slanderous Darts, and Calumnies are
joined with Cruelties, representing them as worthy of public Hatred. It was
one of the Subtle Artifices of Julian the Apostate, to mingle the Images of
the Heathen Gods with those of the Emperors, that the doing reverence (as the
Christians were commanded) to all together, might imply a dereliction and
renouncing of their Religion, and their Simplicity seem Impiety: or if, jealous
of slipping from their Profession, they refused to do it, they might seem to
deny the Expressions of honor due to their Emperors, and be reputed to suffer
not as Christian Martyrs, but as Rebels. But the believing Consideration of
God's righteous Judgment will make them despise the Censures and Reproaches of
malicious Adversaries. 1 Cor. 4.5.
With me, says the Apostle, it is a very small thing that I should be judged
by Man's Judgment; he that judges me is the Lord. The severest Censure was of
no more weight compared with the approbation of God, than the lightest Feather
that flies in the Air, put in the Scales against the Globe of the Earth. Inter
Judicem justum, and conscientiam tuam, noli timere nisi causam tuam. Aug.
The assurance of a righteous Cause, and a righteous Judge, will preserve an
inward and joyful tranquillity of Soul in the midst of all the Storms of
Reproach and Scandalous Imputations; like the calmness of a Haven when the Sea
is tempestuous without. And this will fortify Believers to bear with an
invincible Courage all the Violence that is offered to them for their fidelity
to God. All the wrongs and injuries they endure, shall be redrest with infinite
advantage. The extremest Evils to which they are exposed for Christ, are like
the Chariots of Fire sent from God, not to consume but conduct Elias in triumph
into the highest Heaven. God will give them present Support, inward
Consolations, and a future Crown. There is an appointed day when oppressed
Innocence shall obtain the noblest Victory, and disgraced Godliness the most
public and highest Honor. 1 Pet. 1.7.
The Faith of sincere Christians shall be found to Praise and Glory. They may
suffer under the tyranny of Time, but shall Reign in the Kingdom of Eternity.
The belief of this, when firmly radicated in the heart, is so powerful as to
make them glory in the sharpest Tribulations, and joyfully triumph over Satan,
with his perverted malignant World. Cantando rumpitur Anguis. But alas, the
Sin, and a great part of the trouble of the Saints, arises from their weakness
of Faith, and not patient waiting for the Day of the Lord. When heavy
Persecutions and great Distresses are continued by the restless Adversaries,
they are apt through impatience and instability of mind, to be full of
sorrowful Complaints that God delays their particular Deliverance. And as
sometimes the Clock out-runs the motion of the Sun, that is the true measure of
Time; so their hasty desires prevent the eternal Counsel of his Will, that has
determined the period of the Miseries of his People, and of the Prosperity of
the Wicked in the fittest time. And that he suspends his glorious Coming to
judge the World in Righteousness, discourageth weaker Christians, and makes them
ready to faint in the day of Adversity. 2 Pet. 3.9.
But the Lord is not slack in performing his Promise, as Men count slackness.
There is not the least reason to question his Fidelity and Power, or to suspect
his Love and Remembrance of his People. And as the Stars of Heaven enlighten
the Earth, but the Candles on Earth cannot enlighten the Heavens: so the Wisdom
of God's Counsel and Providence should direct us patiently to expect his
appointed time, but our glimmering Reason cannot direct him.

4. The serious belief of future Judgment is the most effectual restraint from
secret Sins. Men are apt to encourage themselves in evil upon the account of
secrecy: it is the usual tinder of Temptations. If solitude and silence, if the
darkness of the night, or any disguises may conceal their Wickedness from
humane Eyes, they are bold and secure as to God. The Psalmist declares what is
the inward principle that acts them, what is the language of their hearts:
Psalm. 94.5, 6.
All the workers of Iniquity boast themselves, they say, The Lord shall not
see, neither shall the God of Jacob regard it. But O the brutish folly of Men,
to think, that because they do not see God, that he does not see them. As if
one should shut his Eyes in the face of the Sun, and do some foul abominable
thing, thinking himself to be unseen, because he sees no person. How vain is
the impure diligence of the Adulterer, the crafty diligence of the Deceiver,
the sollicitous diligence of other Sinners to hide things from the Judge of
all? Shall not God search it out, for he knows the very secrets of the heart?
What a confounding discovery will be made of secret Wickedness at the last day?
Here obscurity is the mask of Shame that conceals it from the World. Or if only
Children and Fools that are not capable to judge of the indecency and turpitude
of Actions, be Spectators, Men are not touched with shame for foul things. But
then their Wickedness shall be displayed before God, the holy Angels and
Saints. The actual belief of this would deprive Satan of one of his greatest
Advantages, and be a blessed Preservative from many Sins that allure the
consent by the temptation of secrecy. A considering Christian will reject them
with indignation, saying with Joseph, How can I do this great Wickedness, and
sin against God? The Sins undiscovered and upunish'd by temporal Tribunals,
shall then receive a just recompense.

5. The remembrance of that strict Judgment, is the most natural and powerful
remedy against sensual Temptations that so easily insinuate and engage the
Hearts of Men. S. Peter reckoning up the Heathens Sins, 1 Pet. 4.3, 4.
Lasciviousness, Lusts, excess of Wine, Revellings, and abominable Idolatries,
tells the Christians, that the Gentiles thought it strange that they did not
run with them to the same excess of riot. As the Disciples when our Savior
walked upon the Waters, thought he had been a Spirit, judging that no real Body
could tread on them without sinking: thus Men are apt to think it impossible to
restrain their carnal appetites when allured by pleasing Objects. But the
belief of the Terrors of the Lord, will damp the sensual Affections when most
strongly inclined to forbidden things, and extinguish delight in Sin: for
Delight and Fear are inconsistent. Therefore the wise Preacher gives this
Counsel, Rejoice, O young Man in thy youth, Eccles. 11.
and let thy Heart cheer thee in the Days of thy Youth, and walk in the ways of
thy Heart, and sight of thine Eyes: but know thou for all these things God will
bring thee to Judgment. This will change the apprehensions of the mind, and
alter the taste of the appetite, and make the most enticing and irresistible
Lusts, the objects of our greatest detestation.

6. The consideration that the Son of God, clothed with our Nature, shall judge
the World, affords strong Consolation to his People, and is a motive of great
terror to the Wicked. How comfortable is it to his People that he who loved
them above his Life, and was their Redeemer on the Cross, shall be their Judge
on the Throne? He is the same Jesus Christ, yesterday, to day, and for ever;
the same indulgent Savior, in the exaltation of his Glory, as when under
Sufferings, Reproach and Shame. He is described in that glorious Appearance, by
the conjunct Titles of his Majesty and Power, The Great God; Tit. 12.13.
and of his Compassion and Mercy, Our Savior, to signify his Ability and
Affection to make them happy. When he comes with a heavenly Train of Angels to
Judgment, he will be as tender of his Servants, as when he suffered for them in
his humble state. He that paid their Debt, and sealed their Pardon with his own
Blood, will certainly publish the Acquittance. How is it possible he should
condemn those for whom he died, and who appear with the impressions of his
reconciling Blood upon them? How reviving is it that Christ, whose Glory was
the end and perfection of their Lives, Phil. 1.
shall dispose their states for ever? that he, who esteems every act of their
Charity and Kindness done to his Servants as done to himself, shall dispense
the blessed Reward? Then the King will say to them placed on his right hand,
Mat. 25.
Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the World. O the transports of Joy to hear those words from his
Life-breathing Lips! The Prophet breaks forth in an Ecstasy, How beautiful are
the feet of the Messengers of Peace, those that bring glad-tidings of
Salvation? but how much more beautiful is the face of the Author of our Peace
and Salvation? O how full of Serenity, and Clemency, and Glory! The expectation
of this makes them languish with impatience for his Coming. Though the
Preparations of that Day are so dreadful, when the Sun shall be darkened, Acts.
2.
and the Moon turned into Blood, and the Stars fall like leaves in Autumn, yet
it is styled a Day of Refreshment to the Saints.

But how dreadful will his Coming in Majesty to Judgment be to the Wicked!
Videtis vulnera quae inflixistis, agnoscitis latus quod pupugistis, quoniam and
per vos, and propter vos a pertum est, nec intrare voluistis.

Aug.
They shall see him whom they have pierced, and with bitter lamentation
remember the Indignities offered to him. What Excuses can they alledg, why they
did not believe and obey the Gospel? Our Savior revealed high Mysteries, but
confirmed them with great Miracles. He required strict Holiness, but offered
Divine Grace to enable Men to do his Will. He poured forth his Spirit upon
them, but their Hearts were as hard as the Rocks, and as barren as the Sands.
Then he will reproach them for their insolent Contempt of all the Perfections
of his Divine Nature, and the bleeding Sufferings of his Humane Nature to
reconcile them to God: for their undervaluing neglect of the great Salvation,
so dearly purchased, and so freely and earnestly offered to them: for their
Obstinacy, that the purple Streams that flowed from his Crucified Body, that
all the Sorrows and Agonies of his Soul were not effectual Perswasives to make
them forsake their Sins: for their preferring the Bramble to reign over them,
Satan the Destroyer of Souls, and ungrateful rejecting the true Vine, the
blessed Savior, who by so many miraculous Mercies, solicited their Love, and
deserved their Service; this will make the Sentence as just as terrible, and
the more terrible because just. This will exasperate the Anguish, that the
Gospel shall be a savor of Death to them; and the blessed Redeemer pronounce
them cursed, and dispatch them to everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and
his Angels for ever. The Judgment of the Redeemer will be more heavy than that
of the Creator. For all the Riches of his Goodness which they despised, shall
be the Measure of their Guilt and Woes. All the Means of Grace used for their
Conversion, but frustrated by their Perverseness, shall be charged upon their
Score. What Consternation will seize the Wicked, when ten thousand Accusers
shall rise up in Judgment against them, and not one Advocate appear for their
defense? Satan will be ready to aggravate their Sins above his own: For although
the superior Excellence of his Nature and State, did heighten his Obligation,
and consequently his disobedience to his Creator; and that he sinned of
himself, derived a Guilt upon him exceeding that of Man's original Sin, who was
seduced to his Ruin: yet in that Justice was so quick and severe, that the
Angels, after their Sin, were immediately expelled from their blessed
Habitation, no space of Repentance was allowed; and no Mediator interposed to
obtain Terms of Reconciliation with the incensed Deity, their Doom was final
and irrevocable: but after our rebellious Sin, the Son of God, such was his
immortal Love, was willing to be mortal to redeem sinful Men, and freely
offered himself a Sacrifice to atone the divine Displeasure: and a Day of Grace
and Long-sufferance was granted, and many compassionate Invitations were sent
from Heaven to soften their stony Hearts: But they neglected and despised the
Grace of the Gospel, and wilfully excluded themselves from Mercy. In this
respect they are more guilty than the fallen Angels; and Justice will revenge
the Abuse of Mercy. Do they hope to soften the Judge by Submissions and
Deprecations? Alas, he will be inflexible to all their Prayers and Tears. The
Lamb will be then a Lion armed with Terrors for their Destruction. Or can they
appeal to an higher Court to mitigate or reverse the Sentence? No, his
Authority is supreme, and confirmed by the immutable Oath of God. Or, do they
think to resist the execution of the Sentence? Desperate Folly! The Angels,
notwithstanding their numbers and strength, could not for a moment escape his
revenging Hand. The whole World of Sinners is of no more Force against his
Wrath, than the light Dust against a Whirlwind, or dry Stubble against
devouring Fire. Or do they think, by a stubborn Spirit, to endure it?
Self-deceiving Wretches! If the correction of his Children here, tho allayed,
and for their amendment, make their Beauty and Strength consume away as a Moth,
how insupportable will the Vengeance be on his obstinate Enemies? Who knows the
Power of his Anger? Who can sound the Depths of his Displeasure?

7. The Consideration of Eternal Judgment should be a powerful Incentive to
prepare our selves for it. The Affair is infinitely serious, for it concerns
our Salvation or Damnation for ever. Yet the Pleasures and Business of the
World fasten Men in Security, and hinder the entire application of their Minds
to prepare for their last Account. It Is an awful Caution of our Savior to his
Disciples, Take heed lest at any time your Hearts be overcharged with
Surfeiting and Drunkenness, and Cares of this Life, and so that Day come upon
you unawares: For as a Snare shall it come on all them that dwell on the face
of the Earth. A dissolute voluptuous course of Life, is joined with a brutish
neglect of God and the Soul: and the indulging the carnal Appetite, though not
in such enormous Excesses as the Profane are guilty of, alienates the Minds of
Men from due considering their Spiritual State, and lessens the preventive Fear
that makes us serious and diligent to be found of God in Peace. And others are
so involved in secular Business, that they are not at leisure, to regard the
one Thing necessary: their Minds are so overshaded with the Cares of the
present World, they cannot take a right Aspect of the World to come. The Flood
broke in upon the old World, whilst they were eating and drinking, marrying and
giving in marriage, buying and selling, and destroyed them all: The last Fire
will devour this World in the same wretched incogitancy, and stupid neglect to
prepare themselves for Judgment. As it was in the Days of Noah, so shall it be
in the Days of the Son of Man. It Is a divine and solemn Warning, Behold, I come
as a Thief in the Night, blessed is he that watches and keeps his Garments,
lest he be found naked, without the Robe of Holiness, and be exposed to
confounding shame in that Day. When secure and careless Sinners shall say,
Peace and Safety, sudden destruction will come upon them, as Travel upon a
Woman with Child; as surprisingly, as irresistibly, and they shall not escape.

But the Wise foresee the Evil, and esteem it their incomparable Interest to
secure the Favor of the Supreme Judge. It Is the Inference the Apostle makes
from the Certainty of our appearing before the Righteous Judge, 2 Cor. 5.9.
Wherefore we labor, that whether present, or absent, in this or the next
Life, we may be accepted of him. This was his great Design, his chief Care, his
Duty and his Glory: Never did any person more ardently aspire, and ambitiously
endeavor for the obtaining a Kingdom, than he did to secure his own Acceptance
with the Lord. In order to this, I will lay down the Rules of our Acceptance in
that Day, and conclude the Argument.

First, Unfeigned Faith in the Lord Jesus is absolutely necessary, that we may
be accepted. This is such a belief of his all-sufficient Merits, and his
merciful inclination to save us, that the guilty and self-condemned Sinner
entirely consents to the Terms of the Gospel, as well as to the Privileges of
it, with a reliance upon his Merits, and a resolution to obey his Precepts. He
is a Priest on a Throne, a Prince, and a Savior, and so must be acknowledged
and received. Upon this condition his Righteousness is freely imputed to us for
our Justification unto Life, without which we must perish in our Sins. For,

1. The best Saints are guilty and deeply obnoxious to the Law, and the
Judgment of God is invariably according to Truth; so that appearing in their
Sins, they will be cast for ever. God's Tribunal, like that of the severe Roman
Judge, is Reorum Scopulus, a Rock that dashes in pieces all the Guilty that come
to it. Therefore the Psalmist so earnestly deprecates, Enter not into Judgment
with thy Servant, O Lord; for in thy sight shall no Man living be justified.
And the Apostle, though a transcendent Saint, devests himself of his own
Righteousness, that he may be entirely covered with the Righteousness of
Christ, and renounces all things, that he may be found in him as his Surety in
that Day of Accounts, and obtain Pardon by virtue of his Satisfaction for Sin.
We cannot perfectly obey the Commands, nor appease the Displeasure of God: but
the expiatory Sacrifice of Christ propitiats the Divine Justice. This alone can
make us stand in Judgment before the fiery Law, and the fiery Tribunal, and the
Judge who is a consuming Fire, to all the Guilty that appear in their Sins
before him. The Blood of the Mediator has sprinkled the Throne of God in
Heaven; and our Consciences being sprinkled with it by an unfeigned Faith, we
may appear before God the Judge of all with an humble confidence, and enter into
the Holy of Holies, the Celestial Sanctuary with joy.

2. Not only the pardon of our Sins, but the acceptance and rewarding of our
Services with eternal Glory is upon the account of our Savior's complete
Righteousness. There are defilements in the Persons, and defects in the works
of the Saints. Their most holy and fervent Prayers are perfumed by the Incense
of his Intercession, Rev. 8.3.
and so become grateful to God. Our best Virtues are mixed and shadowed with
Imperfections; but in him all Graces were conspicuous in their consummate
degrees. Our Obedience, supposing it perfect, is of no desert: When we have
done all, we are unprofitable Servants: but his Obedience was infinitely
meritorious by the union of the Deity with his humane Nature, and is the
foundation of the excellent Reward. Not that his Merits derive a value to our
Works to make them worthy of eternal Glory: as some noble Mineral infused into
Water, that is in it self without taste or efficacy, gives it a medicinal
tincture and Virtue; for this is impossible, since the infinite Dignity of his
Person, and his most perfect habitual and actual Holiness, that are the
fountains and reasons of his Merits, are incommunicable to our Persons and
Works. But the active and passive Obedience of Christ is so satisfactory and
meritorious, that God is pleased graciously to reward with the Crown of Life
the mean Services of those who are by a lively and purifying Faith united to
him.

Secondly, Sincere Obedience, that is an uniform and entire respect to all the
Commands of God, will alone be accepted in that day: for his Authority runs
through all, and binds them on the Conscience. David had this Testimony from
God himself, that he was a Man after his own Heart, that fulfilled all his
Will. And St. John refers the decision of our state to this, If our Hearts
condemn us of any allowed Sin of omission or commission, 1 John 3.20, 21.
much more God will, who is greater than our Hearts, and knows all things. But
if the illuminated tender Conscience does not condemn us of insincerity, we
have confidence toward God, that he will spare and accept us notwithstanding
our Frailties, and give free and safe access into his Presence. The lives of
many are checkered with a strange disparity, they are restrained from some Sins
of apparent odiousness, but indulgent to others; they are strict in some
Duties, but loose and slack in others, as if they hoped by way of commutation
to be accepted of God; to expiate their Delinquencies in one kind by
supererrogating in another. Some are painted Pharisees in the duties of the
first Table, very exact in the formalities of outward Devotions, but gross
Publicans in the duties of the second; careless of Justice and Equity, and
Charity to Men: Others are in appearance strictly moral in the discharge of
their duties to Men, and negligent of their Obligations to God. But partial
Obedience can never endure the trial of Conscience, much less of God. For what
is the weak light of our Minds, to the pure Eyes of his Glory? It will make us
liable to inward rebuke now, and to open confusion at the last. 2 Cor. 1.12.
St. Paul's rejoicing was from the Testimony of his Conscience, that in
simplicity and godly Sincerity he had his Conversation in the World: and, as he
expresses it in another place, it was his daily Exercise to have a Conscience
void of Offense toward God, and toward Men. Tho our conquest of Sin be not
complete, yet our resolution and endeavors must be to mortify it in every
kind. Tho our Obedience has not the perfection of Degrees, we must be equally
regarding the Divine Law. If there be any secret-favour'd Sin, either of
Omission or Commission, it will render our Petitions unacceptable at the Throne
of Grace, and our Persons at the Throne of Judgment; If I regard Iniquity in my
Heart, the Lord will not hear my Prayer. The Law requires the performance of
our Duty without abatement, or denounces the Penalty without allay or
mitigation: The Gospel has not relaxed the strictness of the Law, as it is the
Rule of Life, but as it was the condition of obtaining Life. Sincere Obedience
is accepted by that gracious Covenant, where the Legal Perfection is wanting;
but that is indispensably required of all. I may illustrate this by a Passage
of Alexander the Great, who being desirous to learn Geometry, applied himself
to a skilful Instructor in it. But his warlike Disposition made him more
capable to conquer, than to measure the Earth; so that tired with the first
Propositions, he desired his Master to make the Scheme more clear and plain,
and easy to him: Cui praeceptor: ista inquit omnibus eadem sunt, aeque
difficilia.

Senec. Ep. 91.
To whom the Master replied, that the Theorems of that Science were equally
difficult to all, and required the same attention of Mind to understand them.
Thus the Gospel of Mercy requires of all sincere Sanctification, and serious
endeavors to perfect Holiness in the Fear of God, and without this none shall
be exempted from Condemnation.

To the sincerity of Obedience, I shall add a more restrained Notion of it as
respecting Religion. The Duties of Piety consist of an outward and inward part;
and the one without the other, is but as a Carcass without a quickening Soul.
Now there will be an exquisite Anatomy of the Heart in that Judgment, a
discovery of all the Principles and Motives by which Men were acted; and then
he that is a Saint inwardly, in the Spirit, who with pure Aims and holy
Affections has served God, shall have praise of him. And those who have used
God to enjoy the World, that have assumed pretenses of Piety for secular Ends,
shall be reproved. This will be a cause of wonder in that day, that many who
are highly esteemed by Men as excellent Saints, shall be an abomination to God.
That in the broad way to Hell thousands go thither is sad beyond expression,
but not strange at all: but that in the Path of Heaven any should descend to
Hell, is astonishing. That those who live without God in the World, in the
profane neglect of his Worship, in a dissolute disorderly course, should fall
under Condemnation, is believed of all: but that those who have appeared
zealous in Religion, shall be at last rejected, is contrary to universal
expectation. And not only the gross Hypocrite that deceives others, but he that
deceives himself by the external practice of holy Duties, without correspondent
lively Affections; that prays with that coldness as if he had no desire to be
heard, and hears with that carelessness as if he had no desire to be sanctified
by the Word, and is conversant in other parts of divine Service in that slight
manner, as if he had no design to be saved, shall by a convincing upbraiding
Light see his Wickedness in dishonouring that God whom he pretended to worship,
and neglecting his Soul. When the Upright as pure Gold shall be more radiant by
the Fire, the Insincere like reprobate Silver shall not endure that severe
trial.

Thirdly, The frequent discussion of Conscience, and reviewing our Ways, is
necessary in order to our comfortable appearing before our Judge. This is a Duty
of constant Revolution: for while we are in Flesh, the best Saints,
notwithstanding all their vigilance and diligence, are overtaken by surprizal,
and sometimes overborn by strong temptations; and it is more necessary to beg
for daily Pardon, than for our daily Bread. Under the Law, if any one had by
touching a dead Body contracted Uncleanness, he was to wash his Clothes in the
Evening, and not to lie down in his Uncleanness. This was typical of our Duty,
that we should wash away our sinful Defilements every day in the purifying
Fountain of Christ's Blood, that is set open for Sin and for Uncleanness. And
the Method of the Gospel to obtain the grant of Pardon, and our comfortable
Sense, and the blessed Effects of it is this, there must be a mournful Sight,
and serious Acknowledgment of our daily Sins, and a judging our selves by the
domestical Tribunal in our Breasts as worthy of Condemnation: for though we
cannot satisfy Divine Justice for the least Sin, we must glorify it; and with
humility and fervency desire that God would graciously forgive our renewed
Sins, with unfeigned Resolutions and Care against them for the future. Thus we
are to sue out our Pardon for Sins committed every day. And whereas many Errors
in regard of our frailty, and their fineness, do slip from us, we should with
contrite Spirits implore the divine Majesty to cleanse us from our secret Sins,
Psalm. 19.12.
such as through ignorance or inadvertency escape from our observation. If we
are obliged to be reconciled to an offended or offending Brother before the
night, and the Sun must not go down upon our Wrath, much more to be reconciled
to an offended God, that his Displeasure may be atoned. The Morning and
Evening-Sacrifice was a Figure of the constant use of Christ's Merits and
Mediation for us. The secure neglect of renewing our Repentance for our renewed
Sins, deprives us of the Comforts of the Covenant, and will make the thoughts
of Judgment as heavy as Mountains upon the Conscience, when it is awakened out
of its slumber. But when the Soul's Accounts are kept clear with Heaven every
day, O what a blessed Rest does the penitent Believer enjoy in the Favor of
God! O the divine Calm of Conscience, when our Debts are cancelled in the Book
of God's Remembrance! If we should be unexpectedly summoned to appear before
the Judge of all, the sight of our Sins will rather excite thankful Affections,
and joyful Praises of God for his Mercy, that he has pardoned them; than
fearful despairing thoughts of his Mercy, that he will not pardon them.

And as this considering our ways leads to Repentance, and is a Remedy for past
Sins, so it is a powerful Preservative from Sins afterward. For as in War the
greatest care is to fortify the weakest Part of a besieged Town, and make it
impregnable; so a Christian, by the experience of his infirmity and danger,
will be more wise and wary, more circumspect and resolved against those Sins
whereby he has often been foiled, to prevent the daily incursion, and sudden
surreption by them. And according to the degrees of our Innocence, we have
confidence of Acceptance with God in Judgment.

Fourthly, Let us improve with a wise and singular diligence the Talents
committed to our Trust: for in that day we shall be responsible for all that we
have received. All the Blessings we possess, whether natural, our Life, our
Faculties, our Endowments, our Health and Strength; or Civil, Honor and
Dignity, Riches and Reputation; or Spiritual, the Gospel in its Light and
Power, the Graces and Assistance of the Holy Ghost, as they are Gifts from
God's Love, so they are Talents to be employed for his Glory. We are Stewards,
not Proprietaries: for the Supreme Lord does not relinquish his Right in our
Blessings, that we may dispose of them at our own pleasure, but has prescribed
Rules for our using them in order to his Glory, our own Good, and the Benefit
of others. And it is sad to consider that usually those who enjoy the greatest
Gifts, render the least Acknowledgments, and the most abundant in Favors are
most barren in Thankfulness. Time, that unvaluable Treasure, that is due to God
and the Soul, the Price of which arises from the Work of Salvation to be done
in it, how is it squandered away? Conscience would blush at the serious
reflection that every day so much is spent in the Business of the World, or
Pleasures, and so little redeemed for Communion with the Holy God: that as in
the Prophetic Dream the lean Kine devoured the Fat, so unconcerning Vanities
take up that time that should be employed for our last and blessed End. While
Time is miserably wasted, the Soul lies a bleeding to everlasting Death. More
particularly, we shall be accountable for all the days of the Son of Man that
we have seen, all the special Seasons of Grace: these we should improve for our
Eternal Advantage, to prepare us for the Divine Presence above. But alas, the
Lord's Day that is consecrated for the immediate Service of God, and should be
entirely spent in it, and in things that have a necessary subordination to it,
yet neither the enforcement of Duty, nor incitations of Love prevail upon the
most, conscienciously to employ it in spiritual Affairs. If they afford their
presence at the Public Worship, it is thought enough; and, as if the rest of
the Day was unsanctified Time, they waste it either in Complemental Visits, or
Secular Business, in Recreations, or things impertinent to their Salvation.

Riches are an excellent Instrument of doing good: Gold is the most precious
and extensive Metal, and by a mavelous Art an Ounce may be beaten out into
some hundred Leaves: but it is a more happy Art by giving it, to enrich our own
Souls, and supply the Necessities of many others. But great Estates are often
used to foment Men's vicious guilty Affections, Pride, and Sensuality; and it is
called Nullis vitiis desunt pretiosa nomina.

Plin. lib. 73.
Greatness and Magnificence to waste them in sumptuous Vanities. I instance in
these Talents, because they are usually abused to the dishonor of the Donor.
If the slothful Servant that hid his single Talent in a Napkin, and returned it
without advantage to his Lord, was cast into outer darkness, where there is
weeping and gnashing of teeth; a fearful Image of what will befall all
unprofitable Persons, how severe will their Accounts be who lavish out their
numerous Talents to gratify their carnal Appetites, and betray the Blessings of
God to his Enemy the Devil? Only the wise and good Servant, that with prudent
Contrivance, and zealous Endeavors, improves his Talents, shall from the
gracious Lord, in whom are all Attractives and Remuneratives of our Service,
receive an excellent Reward.

Fifthly, Another Rule of our Acceptance at the last Day is, That we must with
Courage and Zeal maintain in our rank and places the Cause of Christ. For thus
he declares expressly, Whosoever shall confess me before Men, Mat. 10.33, 34.
him also will I confess before my Father which is in Heaven. But whosoever
shall deny me before Men, him also will I deny before my Father which is in
Heaven. When the Truth, Purity, and Power of Religion, in Doctrine, Worship,
and Practice, is discountenanced and overborn, our Savior commands, and will
reward our undiscouraged visible Constancy in it. Romans 10.
He will not only reign in our Hearts, but be honored with our Lips, and in
our Conversations. We usurp the Title of Christians, unless we adhere to our
Duty in despite of all opposition. The Temptations that usually withdraw Men
from confessing and glorifying Christ, are such as work upon the Passions of
Fear and Shame. And the consideration of the last Judgment will fortify us
against both.

1. Sometimes Religion exposes the Professors of it to the loss of all temporal
Enjoyments, and of Life it self. And when the Honor of our Savior requires
such a Service of us, when that Confirmation is necessary to recommend Divine
Truth to the Belief and Affections of others, when our cheerful and courageous
Example in suffering would animate those that are fearful to Constancy and
Confession, then from Cowardice to withdraw our Testimony, is to betray him
again. When our Duty is attended with extreme Dangers, then the sincerity and
perfection of our Love to Christ is brought to the strictest trial. As true
Carbuncles are discovered in the Night, for the Darkness redoubles their
Splendour; so the fidelity of Christians is evident in Persecutions that inflame
and excite their Zeal to magnify the Name of Christ in the sight of the World.
There is no Fear in Love, 1 John 4.18.
but perfect Love casts out Fear. But Fearfulness hinders the expressing acts
of Love to Christ, and betrays to Apostasy. For as every Passion is a
Perturbation, so especially Carnal Fear that blinds and disturbs the Mind, and
hinders the serious consideration of the Reasons of our Duty, and those Motives
to persevere in it, that are the Fountains of our Strength. From hence the
timorous are often treacherous, and Faith lies buried under the cold pale Ashes
of Fear. Now the irregularity of this Passion is best cured by directing it to
the most powerful Object. As the Rod of Moses swallowed up the Rods of the
Magicians, so a stronger Fear will subdue that which is in a weaker degree. Our
Savior therefore threatens those that for the fear of Men (who can but kill
the Body) dare not own and defend his Truth and Cause, that he will renounce
them before his Father in the great Day, the immediate consequence of which
will be the destruction of Body and Soul in Hell. Matthew. 10.31, 32, 33.
If Earthly Potentates had a Jurisdiction over Heaven, if Men were to be tried
by their Laws at the last Day, if their Power extended to Eternity, they might
exact unlimited Obedience to their Wills; but Conscience is a more desirable
Friend and terrible Enemy than Caesar; and all temporal Tribunals are
subordinate and accountable to the Supreme and Eternal: there is one Lawgiver
and Judge, who is able to save, and to destroy for ever. It is the worst
Perdition to secure our selves by the neglect of our Duty, when we ought to
perish for the Glory of our Savior. He that saves his Life shall lose it.

2. Shame wounds deeper the Breasts of some than Violence. Zedekiah would
rather expose his Kingdom and Life to the Fury of the Chaldean Armies, than be
himself exposed as an Object of Derision by surrendering it. And Satan who
understands the temper of Men's Spirits, suits his Temptations accordingly. The
Purity and Holiness of Religion, expressed in the Actions of the Saints, is by
the seurrilous Reflections and bitter Sarcasms of profane Persons made
contemptible. This is as foolish and malicious, as if a Slave should reproach
the Son of a King, that he was like his Father in his Countenance and Actions;
for by how much the resemblance of God's Holiness appears with more evidence
and eminence in their Lives, their Divine Relation is more certainly and justly
to be acknowledged. Yet how many are ashamed of this Glory? And Zeal to
vindicate the Honor of Religion is traduced and vilified, either as the Effect
of designing Faction, or of the Indiscretion and Rashness of a weak Judgment
and strong Passions. In every Age the faithful Servants of God are by scornful
Titles despised: 1 Cor. 4.17.
We are accounted, says the Apostle, the Offscouring of the World. But a
generous Christian looks upon disgrace for the sake of Christ as his Honor.
The Apostles rejoiced that they were accounted worthy to suffer shame for his
Name. It Is said of the Baptist, He was not that Light, but came to bear Witness
to that Light: Acts 5.41.
intimating as if that were the next degree of Dignity to it. And our Savior,
speaking of the Proofs of his Divine Mission, reckons up the Witnesses of such
Dignity, that it is not possible for Sacred Ambition to aspire to higher Honor,
than to be in Conjunction with them: they are John the Baptist, John 5.33, 36,
37, 39.
his Miracles, his Father, and the Scriptures.

Let us appeal then from the light depraved Fancies of carnal Men, to the wise
and faithful Judgment and Authority of the Son of God. He will at the last Day,
in the presence of his Father and all the Court of Heaven, give an incomparable
Crown to all that have despised Shame for his sake. But those vile Spirits,
whose Courage of Straw is quelled by vain Opinion, and the Reproaches of Fools,
and have deserted the Cause of Christ, shall then be clothed with Confusion;
for this we are assured by our Judge, That whosoever shall be ashamed of me and
my words, Mark 8.38.
in this adulterous and sinful Generation, of him also shall the Son of Man be
ashamed when he comes in the Glory of his Father, with the Holy Angels. If the
unnatural Brothers were astonished when the Governor of Egypt told them, I am
Joseph whom ye sold; how much more will false Christians, when the Lord of
Glory shall tell them, I am Jesus whom for base shame ye denied? How will it
confound those abject Wretches to be a spectacle of Abhorrence and Scorn before
that Universal Glorious Confluence? They would choose rather to be covered under
the Ruins of the World. If we value and desire the Approbation of the King of
Angels, if we fear a final rejection from him, to obtain the one and avoid the
other, we must entirely adhere to his Interest, without any respect to the eyes
and esteem of the perverse deceived World.

Sixthly, A cordial beneficent Love to the Saints, is a requisite Qualification
of our Acceptance in the Day of Judgment. Matthew. 25.34, 35.36.
Then shall the King say to them on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the World.
For I was an hungry, and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink;
I was a stranger, and ye took me in; naked, and ye clothed me; I was sick, and
ye visited me; I was in Prison, and ye came unto me. The Union and Endearments
betwixt Christ and his People, are mutual and reflexive; as they are extremely
tender of his Glory, so he is concerned in all that is done to them. And though
the Perfection of Love consists more in the Affection of the Heart than in
outward Offices, yet our Savior most congruously produces in Judgment the
conspicuous Effects of Love to them, the supplying their Wants, allaying their
Sorrows, owning them when obscured and deprest by Afflictions, and injuriously
treated by others. This love of Service that is directed and exercised toward
the Saints, for the Image of God shining in them, because they are the Children
of God, and Members of Christ, and therefore extended to all in whom the reason
of that Love appears, shall be gloriously rewarded: for he interprets what is
done upon his Account to those who are his own by so many dear Titles, as done
to himself. And what is more becoming his excellent Goodness, than to reward
the Works of Mercy with saving Mercy? But those who when Christ presents
himself to them in his poor distressed Members, and sollicits their assistance,
to protect them from Injuries, to refresh their Sorrows, to support them in
their Exigencies, those that have Ability, but want Affection to do them good,
and incompassionately neglect the suffering Saints, shall be sentenced to be
tormented with the Apostate Angels for ever. What Indignity is it to the Son of
God, that those for whom he shed his most precious Blood, should be in less
value and regard with many, than the Dogs and Horses maintained for their
pleasure? And if those on the left hand shall be condemned to eternal Fire, for
the coldness of their Love, how terrible will the Judgment be of those that
from the heat of their Enmity outragiously persecute the Servants of Christ for
his sake, in their Persons, Estates, Reputations, that with a worse than
barbarous inhumanity seek their ruin? Is there any Sin of a more mortal Guilt?
The infernal Furnace is sevenfold heated for the punishing such Wickedness.

To conclude this Argument, let us observe the Command of our Savior, To watch
and pray always, that we may be counted worthy to stand before the Son of Man.
These are Duties of universal Influence into our Lives, the one prevents
Carelessness, the other vain Confidence in our selves; and the consideration of
Judgment to come, is the greatest Motive to them, and the first Principle of
Holiness. This should work more powerful in us, considering the Day of Death is
equivalent to the Day of Judgment to every Person; for then a particular
Sentence decisive and irrevocable passes, that shall be published at the last
Day. Methinks the Terrors of the Lord should engage our Souls and Senses to a
continual preparation for his Coming. It Is represented so as to affect the Eye,
Jude 15.
and keep it vigilant: Behold, the Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints,
to execute Judgment upon all. Behold, Rev. 1.9.
he comes in the Clouds, and every Eye shall see him. And to call the Ear, and
make it attentive; The Lord himself shall descend from Heaven, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16.
with the Voice of the Archangel, and with the Trump of God. How circumspect
should we be in all our Ways, since every Action shall be reviewed by our Judge?
St. Peter strongly infers from the dissolution of the World, as a most cogent
Argument, that we should be exactly and universally Holy: Seeing then all these
things shall be dissolved, Pet. 3.11, 1^.
what manner of Persons ought we to be in all holy Conversation and Godliness?
But the consideration of the eternal Judgment immediately succeeding the
destruction of the World; O how powerful should it be upon Conscience and the
Affections to regulate the whole course of our Lives with a final respect to
God's Tribunal?

In short, That which we read of the success of the Apostle's preaching to the
Athenians upon the present Subject, the Immortality of the Soul, comprised in
the Resurrection of the Body and the future Judgment, is the same in all times
and places: Acts 17.32, 34.
And when they heard of the Resurrection of the Dead, some mocked; and others
said, We will hear thee again of this matter; and others believed. There are
three Differences of the Hearers of this Doctrine of so great importance: some
deride it as an extravagant Fancy; some believe it, and yield up themselves
entirely in obedience to it; others do not absolutely reject it, as the first,
nor accept it, as the second, but have a Conjecture, or slight superficial
Opinion of it, or a speculative Assent as to a history of things that do not
concern them, and defer the serious consideration and applying of it to
themselves. And of this third sort (O Grief!) are the most of those who are
Christians in Name. They delay till Death, the solemn reflecting upon the final
Judgment, and the inevitable Consequence of it, a blessed or miserable Estate
for ever. And whereas the Apostle, who had infallible assurance of God's Love,
did with an holy severity and self-denial abstain from all carnal Complacencies
that might hazard the never-fading Crown; 1 Cor. 19.27.
I keep under my Body, and bring it into subjection, lest by any means when I
have preached to others, I should be a Castaway. Vae miseris nobis qui de
electione nostra nullam adhuc (...) vocem cognovimus, and iam in otio qu^^^ de
securitate torpemus. Greg. lib. 39. Moral.
Yet the most live and die in a secure state, without preparation to appear
before the Presence of his Glory.

FINIS.
OF HEAVEN.

BY WILLIAM BATES, D.D.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons against the
Royal Exchange in Cornhil. 1691.

OF HEAVEN.
Psalm 16.11. Thou will show me the Path of Life: in thy Presence is fullness of
Joy, at thy right Hand there are Pleasures for evermore.


THE Divine Wisdom and Goodness was pleased, before and during the legal
Dispensation, by various Predictions and Types to delineate the Person of our
Redeemer, and the Work of Redemption, to prepare the Minds of Men for his
Reception at his coming into the World. All the Evangelical Prophecies recorded
in the Old Testament, as dispersed Rays, are conspicuously united in him, the
Sun of Righteousness; and as in a curious Piece of Mosaic Work, each Stone
according to its natural Vein and Color is so exactly disposed, and with that
proportion joined to another, that the lively Figure of the Humane Body,
results from the Composure; so by variety of Types, the entire Image of our
Savior's Life is represented from his first appearing on Earth, to his
ascending to Heaven.

Now the due comparing and observing the harmonious Agreement between the
Prophesies and Types of the Old Testament, and the History of the New, is a
powerful means to produce and establish a true lively Faith in the blessed
Jesus as the promised Messiah: For it is an infallible Argument of the Divine
Providence in disposing Times and Things so, as the Oracle should be verified
in the Event, and the mysterious Figures substantially exhibited in the
manifestation of the Son of God. It Is true, his Miracles raised Admiration, and
argued the concurrence of Power truly Divine: For the exercise of an absolute
Dominion over the Order of Nature, is a Royalty reserved to God: but that his
miraculous Operations were foretold, added more Authority to his Person, and
Efficacy to his Doctrine. Therefore our Savior himself, in answer to the
public Question sent from John the Baptist, whether he were the expected
Savior of the World, commanded the Messengers to tell him what they heard and
said, The Blind receive their Sight, Matthew. 11.
and the Lame walk, the Lepers are cleansed, the Deaf hear, and the Dead are
raised up: Which healing Miracles were foretold by the Prophet Esaias, Isa. 35.
as the clear and distinguishing Characters of the Messiah from all Seducers,
when he should come. The fulfilling God's Word by the Works of Christ, of which
there was sensible evidence, was an irrefutable testimony that his Miracles
were true, and performed for the confirmation of the Truth.

Now of all the chosen Saints that foretold the coming of Christ, the new Law
of Grace, and the new Kingdom of Glory, that he should reveal and establish: Of
all that represented him in various Particularities, concerning his Person and
Offices, there was not a more illustrious Type than David, Illorum hominum non
tantum lingua sed and vita prophetica fuit.

Aug.
that by prophetical Words, and by prophetical Actions did so clearly describe
him.

In this Psalm composed by him, there is a mixture of History and Prophecy:
Some things in the literal and immediate sense referring to David: I have set
the Lord always before me; because he is at my right hand, I shall not be
moved. Our being at God's right Hand, implies the highest Honor; his being at
our right Hand, implies present and sure protection and defense. And of this
David had the infallible Promise of God to secure his Hope, notwithstanding all
his unrighteous and implacable Enemies. But the following Verses are applicable
to David but in a lower sense, and by a remote Metaphor, and have their literal
and principal Accomplishment in our Savior. Thou will not leave my Soul in
Hell, that is, in the State of the Dead; nor suffer thy holy One to see
Corruption: that is, the Body of our Savior should be exempted from the
corrupting Power of the Grave, and restored the third Day to Life. In this
propriety and perfection of sense, the Prophecy is applied by St. Peter to our
Savior's alone: for David died and saw Corruption; Acts 2 27, 29.
and his Body still remains under the Dominion of Death. And this last Verse,
Thou will show me the Path of Life: in thy Present is fullness of Joy, at thy
right Hand are Pleasures for evermore; is applied by the Apostle to Christ, his
Resurrection, Ascension to Heaven, and sitting at the right Hand of the Majesty
on high. Thou will show me the Path of Life; that is, introduce him into the
Kingdom of Glory, and by experimental Fruition make him partaker of it: In thy
Presence is fullness of Joy, at thy right Hand are Pleasures for evermore.

In these words the Causes and Excellencies of the Heavenly Life are expressed.
The Causes, are the glorious Presence of God, and the intimate application of
his Presence, and discovery of his peculiar Love to the Saints. This our
blessed Savior had respect to, as the complete Reward of his Sufferings: Thou
shall make me full of Joy with thy Countenance. And his right Hand implies his
Bounty that dispenses, and his Power that secures our Happiness. The
Excellencies of it, are fullness of Joy, and Pleasures for evermore.

From the words I shall observe one Proposition.

The enjoyment of the Divine Presence in Heaven, is the supreme and everlasting
Felicity of the Saints.

In the discoursing of this Point, I will consider, First, The Place wherein
the Divine Presence is gloriously revealed. Secondly, Show that the enjoyment
of the Divine Presence is the supreme Felicity of the Saints. Thirdly, Prove
that the Felicity shall be Everlasting.


First, The Place wherein the Divine Presence is revealed. It Is consistent with
the Divine Immensity, to be differently present in some places. The essential
Presence of God is the same every where; the influxive declarative Presence of
God is special, and wise in one place than another. He is more excellently
present in the living Temples, his Saints on Earth, by the gracious and eminent
Operations of his Spirit, than he is in the rest of the World: He is most
excellently present in Heaven, by the clearest Manifestation, and the express
Characters and Effects of the Divine Perfections.

This inferior World is framed with exquisite Order; The Earth is full of the
Glory of the Lord: yet it is but the Sediment of the Creation, the Habitation of
Birds and Beasts, nay of rebellious Sinners: And by this we may raise our
Thoughts to conceive something of the glorious Sanctuary of Life and
Blessedness above. It Is called the Heaven of Heavens, which is the highest
Comparison to instruct and astonish us with the Amplitude and Glory of the
Place. It Is a Place becoming the Majesty of God, the Image of his Immensity.
Our Savior assures us, In his Father's House are many Mansions, to receive the
innumerable company of glorified Saints. It Is called the Excellent Glory, 2
Pet. 1.17.

The shining Firmament, with all the Luminaries that adorn it, are but the
Frontispiece to the highest Heaven. All the Luster of Diamonds, the Fire of
Carbuncles and Rubies, the Brightness of Pearls are dead in comparison of its
Glory. It Is the Throne of the God of Glory, wherein his Majesty is revealed in
the most illustrious manner. For Pleasantness it is called Paradise, in allusion
to the delightful Garden planted by the Hands of God himself for Adam, his
Favorite, whilst innocent. There is the Tree of Life. There are Rivers of
Pleasure springing from the Divine Presence. It Is called the Inheritance of the
Saints in Light; to signify the Glory and Joy of the Place; for Light has
splendor, and conciliates cheerfulness, and is a fit Emblem of both. As on the
contrary, Hell is described by the blackness of darkness for ever: to signify
the sadness and despair of the Damned; and because in that center of Misery, a
perpetual Night and invincible Darkness increases the horror of lost Souls.

Heaven for stability is called a City that has Foundations, whose Builder and
Maker is God. The present World is like a Tent or Tabernacle set up for a time,
whilst the Church is passing through the Wilderness: but Heaven is the City of
the Living God, the Place of his happy Residence, the Seat of his eternal
Empire. The visible World, with all its perishing Idols, shall shortly fall,
this Beautiful Scene shall be abolished: but the supreme Heaven is above this
Sphere of mutability, wherein all Bodies compounded of the jarring Elements are
continually changing and dissolving: it is truly called a Kingdom that cannot be
shaken. Briefly, the wise Maker has framed it correspondently to the end for
which it was designed: it is the Seat of his Majesty, his Sacred Temple, wherein
he diffuses the richest Beams of his Goodness and Glory, and his chosen
Servants see and praise his adorable Excellencies for ever.

Secondly, I will endeavor to show, that the enjoyment of the Divine Presence
in Heaven, is the supreme Felicity of the Saints.

To make this supernatural Blessedness more easy and intelligible to us, the
Scripture describes it by sensible Representations. For while the Soul is
clothed with Flesh, Fancy has such a dominion, that we conceive of nothing but
by Comparisons and Images taken from material things. It Is therefore set forth
by a Marriage Feast, Rev. 17.7.
to signify the Joy and Glory of the Saints above. But to prevent all gross
Conceits, we are instructed, that the Bodies of the Saints shall be spiritual,
not capable of Hunger or Thirst, nor consequently of any Refreshment that is
caused by the satisfaction of those Appetites. The Objects of the most noble
Senses, Seeing and Hearing, the pleasure of which is mixed with Reason, and not
common to the Brutes, are more frequently made use of to reconcile the blessed
and Heavenly State to the proportion of our Minds. Thus sometimes the Saints
above are represented on Thrones, and with Crowns on their Heads: Sometimes
clothed in White, with Palms in their Hands: sometimes singing Songs of Triumph
to him that sits on the Throne. But the real Felicity of the Saints infinitely
exceeds all those faint Metaphors. The Apostle, to whom the admirable
Revelation was exhibited, of the Sufferings of the Church, and the victorious
issue out of them in the successive Ages of the World, tells us, it does not
appear what the Saints shall be in Heaven. The things that God has prepared for
those that love him, are far more above the highest ascent of our Thoughts,
than the Marriage Feast of a King exceeds in splendour and Magnificence, the
Imagination of one that has always lived in an obscure Village, and never saw
any Ornaments of State, nor tasted Wine in his Life. We can think of those
things but according to the Poverty of our Understandings. But so much we know
as is able to sweeten all the Bitterness, and render insipid all the Sweetness
of this World.

This will appear by considering whatever is requisite to constitute the
complete Blessedness of Man, is fully enjoyed in the Divine Presence.

1. An exemption from all Evils is the first condition of perfect Blessedness.
The Sentence of the wise Solon is true, Dicique beatus

Ante obitum nemo supremaque funera debet.

No Man can be called happy whilst in this Valley of Tears. There are so many
natural Calamities, so many casual, which no humane Mind can foresee or
prevent, that one may be less miserable than another, but none perfectly happy
here. But upon the entrance into Heaven, all those Evils, that by their number,
variety or weight, disquiet and oppress us here, are at an end.

Sin, of all Evils, the worst and most hateful, shall be abolished, and all
Temptations that surround us and endanger our Innocence shall cease. Here the
best Men lament the Weakness of the Flesh, and sometimes the violent Assaults
of Spiritual Enemies. St. Paul himself breaks forth into a mournful Complaint,
O wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from this Body of Death? And
when harrass'd by the buffets of Satan, renews his most earnest Addresses to
God to be freed from them. Here our Purity is not absolute, we must be always
cleansing our selves from the Relics of that deep Defilement that cleaves to
our Nature. Here our Peace is preserved with the Sword in our Hand, by a
continual warfare against Satan and the World. But in Heaven no Ignorance
darkens the Mind, no Passions rebel against the sanctified Will, no Inherent
Pollution remains. The Church is without Spot or Wrinkle, or any such thing.
And all Temptations shall then cease. The Temper was cast out of Heaven, and
none of his poisoned Arrows can reach that purified Company. Glorious Liberty!
here ardently desired, but fully enjoyed by the Saints above. And as Sin, so
all the penal Consequences of it are quite taken away. The present Life is a
continual disease, and sometimes attended with that sharp sense, that Death is
desired as a remedy, and accepted as a Benefit. And though the Saints have
reviving Cordials, yet their Joys are mixed with Sorrows, nay caused (...)
Sorrows. The tears of Repentance are their sweetest refreshment. Here the
living Stones are cut and wounded, and made fit by sufferings for a Temple unto
God in the new Jerusalem. But as in building of Solomon's Temple, the noise of
a Hammer was not heard, for all the parts were framed before with that exact
design and correspondence, that they firmly combined together. They were hewn
in another place, and nothing remained but the putting them one upon another,
and then as Sacred they became inviolable. So God the wise Architect, having
prepared the Saints here, by many cutting Afflictions, places them in the
eternal Building, where no Voice of Sorrow is heard. Of the innumerable
Assembly above; is there any Eye that weeps, any Breast that sighs, any Tongue
that complains, or any appearance of Grief? The Heavenly State is called Life,
as only worthy of that Title. There is no infirmity of Body, no Poverty, no
Disgrace, no Treachery of Friends, no persecution of Enemies. There is no more
Death, nor Sorrow; nor shall there be any more Pain: for former things are past
away. God will wipe away all Tears from the Eyes of his People. There Salvation
is complete in all degrees. Pure Joy is the Privilege of Heaven, unmixed
Sorrows the Punishment of Hell.

2. A concurrence of all positive Excellencies is requisite to Blessedness. And
these are to be considered with respect to the entire Man.

1. The Body shall be awaked out of its dead Sleep, and quickened into a
glorious immortal Life. The Soul and Body are the essential parts of Man; and
though the inequality be great in their holy Operations, yet their concourse is
necessary. Good Actions are designed by the counsel and resolution of the
Spirit, but performed by the ministry of the Flesh. Every Grace expresses it
self in visible Actions by the Body. In the Sorrows of Repentance it supplies
Tears; in religious Fasts, its Appetites are restrained; in Thanksgivings the
Tongue breaks forth into the joyful Praises of God. All our Victories over
sensible Pleasure and Pain, are obtained by the Soul in conjunction with the
Body. Now it is most becoming the Divine Goodness, not to deal so differently,
that the Soul should be everlastingly happy, and the Body lost in
forgetfulness; the one glorified in Heaven, the other remain in the Dust. From
their first setting out in the World to the Grave, they ran the same race, and
shall enjoy the same Reward. Here the Body is the Consort of the Soul, in
Obedience and Sufferings, hereafter in Fruition. When the Crown of Purity, or
Palm of Martyrdom shall be given by the great Judge in the view of all, they
shall both partake in the Honor. The Apostle assures us, the Bodies of the
Saints shall be revived and refined to a spiritual and glorious Perfection.
Flesh and Blood, the Body with its terrene Qualities, is mutable and mortal,
and cannot inherit the Kingdom of Heaven; it cannot breath in so pure an Air.
God tells Moses, No Man can see my Face and live: The sight of the Divine Glory
is not consistent with such tempered frail Tabernacles of Flesh. Nay, the Body
must be freed from the innocent Infirmities that were inseparable from Adam in
Paradise: for he was made a living Soul, i. e. the Soul united to the Body was
the Fountain of the natural sensitive Life, which was in a perpetual Flux, the
vital Heat wasting the radical Moisture, from whence there was a necessity of
Food and Sleep to repair the Substance and Spirits, and preserve his Life in
vigor: but in the Divine World, the Body shall be spiritual in its Qualities
and the Principle of its Li^e: it shall be supported by the supernatural Power
of the Spirit, without the supplies of outward nourishment, and exempted from
all the low Operations of Nature: therefore our Savior tells us, the Children
of the Resurrection shall be equal to the Angels, prepared for the employment
and Enjoyments of those blessed Spirits.

And a substantial unfading Glory will shine in them infinitely above the
perishing Pride of this World, and the Glory of the Flesh, that is but an
appearance, like the false Colors painted on the Feathers of a Dove, by the
reflection of the Light, which presently vanishes, when the Posture is changed,
or the Light withdrawn. Of this we have a sure Pledge in the glorified Body of
Christ, who is the first Fruits of them that sleep; He shall change our vile
Bodies, that they may be fashioned like to his glorious Body, according to the
working of his Power, whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself. What
can be more glorious, than to be conformed to the humanity of the Son of God?
This Conformity shall be the Work of his own Hands: and when Omnipotence
interposes, nothing is difficult. The raising the Body to an immortal state of
Glory, is as easy to the Divine Power, as the forming it first in the Womb. As
the Sun labors no more in the Mines, in the forming Gold and Silver, the most
precious and durable Metals, than in the production of a short-lived Flower.

2. The supreme happiness of Man is in the Soul's Communion with God. This will
appear by considering the principal Ingredients of Happiness: they are the
excellence of the Object, and the vigor of the Actings upon it. The Life and
Blessedness of God, is to know and love himself, according to his infinite
Perfections. And it is the highest happiness of the reasonable Creature to know
and love God. For he is a spiritual infinite, unchangeable Good, and can fully
communicate all that is requisite to entire Blessedness, Supply all the Wants,
and satisfy all the Wishes of the immortal Soul. The Understanding and Will are
our most comprehensive Faculties, the principles of our most eminent
Operations. To know and to love are essential to the reasonable Soul, and in
directing those Acts upon God, the Rectitude, the Perfection and Felicity of
Man consists. As the intellectual Creature by setting its Mind and Heart upon
earthly things, is degraded into a lower order, the thoughts and desires that
are spiritual with respect to the principle from whence they proceed, are
sensual and perishing with respect to their Objects: So when our noble
faculties are exercised in their most lively and vigorous perceptions upon the
supreme Good, Man is advanced to an equality of Joy and Perfection with the
Angels. Now in Heaven, God by his most evident and effectual presence, excites
and draws forth all the active Powers of the Soul in their highest degrees; and
such is the immensity of his Perfections, fills their utmost Capacity, from
whence a Divine pleasure, a perpetual Satifaction springs, a Joy that is as
unspeakable as it is eternal.

To unfold this more particularly.

1. The Understanding shall clearly see the most excellent Objects. Now we know
but in part. 1 Cor. 13.
The naked Beauty of divine Things is veiled, and of impossible discovery: and
by natural or accidental weakness, the Mind is not proportionable to sustain
that dazzling brightness. But when that which is perfect is come, then that
which is in part shall be done away. In that enlightened the State,
manifestation of the Objects shall abundantly exceed the clearest revealing of
them here. And the Understanding shall be prepared in proportion to take a full
view of them. Therefore the Apostle compares the several Periods of the Church
in respect of the degrees of Knowledge, to the several Ages of humane Life. When
I was a Child, I spoke as a Child, I understood as a Child, I thought as a
Child: but when I became a Man, I put away Childish things. In Children the
Organs, either from the excess of moisture, or their smalness, are indisposed
for the vigorous exercise of the Mind: some strictures of Reason appear, a
presaging sign what will be, but mixed with much obscurity. But when the Organs
are come to their just proportion and temperament, the Soul displays its
strength and activity.

To explicate this, it is requisite to consider the expressions in Scripture,
that signify the eminent degrees of Knowledge in the Blessed. Our Savior
assures us, that the Pure in Heart shall see God. Sight is the most noble,
extensive, and affective Sense, and therefore fit to notify the clear, sweet
and satisfying intuition of God in Heaven. It Is true, the Deity is spiritual
and invisible to the Eye of the Body, infinite and incomprehensible to the Eye
of the Soul; but the glorified Saints so clearly understand the Divine
Perfections, that our present knowledge of God, compared to that Vision, is but
as the seeing of a dark Shadow in a Glass, to the immediate view of the living
Substance and Person. The discovery of the Deity to us in the present state, is
by his Works and Word: and both are imperfect, and far inferior to the
manifestation in Heaven. The absolute fullness of Perfection that is inseparable
from the Godhead, is inimitable by any Creature; for the Perfection of any
Creature; is limited in its kind as well as degrees. Therefore God was pleased
by variety of effects and resemblances, to express and represent his
Attributes, that our Minds might ascend by those steps to contemplate those
Perfections that are in him eminently and beyond all comparison. The Light of
Heaven in all its purity and luster, is but a shadow of his unapproachable
Brightness: all the Excellencies of visible things are but a weak
representation of the Glory of his Atrributes, like the describing with a Coal
the beautiful Colors of the Morning: and compared with the immensity of his
Perfections, are like the describing in a sheet of Paper the vast Celestial
Spheres.

In his Word there is a more clear and full discovery of his Nature and Will,
but according to our capacity of receiving. The Divine Attributes in Scripture
are masked and shadowed under sensible Comparisons: for no Light shines into
our Minds here but through the Windows of Sense. The intellectual Powers
depend, as to the first notices of things, upon the lower Faculties and Senses:
therefore as Elisha in reviving the Shunamite's Child, contracted himself to
the proportion of the Child, and put his Mouth upon his Mouth, and his Eyes
upon his Eyes, and his Hands upon his Hands; so God is pleased to condescend to
our Capacity, and to adapt the Expressions of his Majesty to the narrowness of
our Imaginations. But in Heaven the Revelation of the Deity is much more
glorious: and the Mind is clarified from those terrene Images that flow through
the gross Channels of the Senses. In this present state our purest Conceptions
of God are mixed with Dross, and very imperfect; but there the Gold shall be
separated from the Dross, and our Conceptions be more proper and becoming the
Simplicity and Purity of God. Here the Objects of Glory are humbled to the
perception of Sense: Hereafter, the sensible Faculties shall be raised and
refined, and made the Subjects of Glory. Now when Divine Light shines with
direct Beams, and the thick Curtain of Flesh is spiritualized and transparent,
the Soul enjoys the clearest Vision of God. The Light of Nature was so
defective as to the discovery of God's Compassionate Counsels to save the lost
World; and the Minds of Men were so darkened from the Fumes of their Lusts, that
that Light was but the Hemisphere of the Night in comparison of the Revelation
of the Gospel: as St. Peter expresses the happy Privilege of Christians, and
their consequent Duty, that they should show forth the Praises of him who has
called them out of Darkness into his mavelous Light. And the Glorious Gospel
compared to the Revelation of God in Heaven, is but as the Twilight of the
Morning, wherein the Light of the Day is checkered with the Shadows of the
Night, to the Sun in its full Luster. In Heaven we shall see God Face to Face:
which signifies the clearest manifestation of his Glory, and of his Favor to
the Blessed: for the Face is the Throne of Majesty and Beauty, and the Crystal
wherein the Affections are conspicuous. Accordingly when Moses prayed, I
beseech thee show me thy Glory; God answered him, it was impossible, for no Man
could see his Face, and live. And the form of Divine Blessing to the People of
Israel was, The Lord make his Face to shine upon thee, and be gracious to thee.
Whether the immediate Essence of God can be seen by the intellectual Creature,
is a question, but we are sure in the Heaven of Presence, God exhibits himself
to the Blessed in a most glorious manner: for according to the degrees of
Excellency in the Work, such are the Impressions and Discoveries of the Cause.
Now all gross material things in the low order of Nature, are but weak
resultances from his Perfections, in comparison of their glorious Effects in
the Divine World. The Glories of the Place, and of the Inhabitants the Angels
and Saints, are the most noble Effects and Expressions of the Divine
Attributes. But in a transcendent manner God exhibits himself in the glorified
Mediator. He is styled the Brightness of his Father's Glory, and the express
Image of his Person; to signify that God, in the Person of the incarnate
Mediator, is so fully represented to us, that in him we have a view of God's
unchangeable Perfections. This appears by the following words, that having
purged us from our Sins, he sat down on the Majesty on high: for they respect
the Son of God as united to the Humane Nature, in which he performed the Office
of the Priesthood, and took possession of his Kingdom. During his humble State,
tho darkened with many afflicting Circumstances, the Divine Virtues, Wisdom,
Goodness, Holiness, Power, were so visible in his Life, Revelations, and
miraculous Works, that when Philip with that ardency of Affection, desired the
sight of the Father, the only consummate Blessedness, show us the Father, and
it suffices: He told him, He that has seen me, has seen the Father. But how
brightly do they appear in his Exaltation? We shall see him as he is; in the
Majesty and Glory of the Son of God. The Apostle says, We shall know as we are
known: This we are not to understand according to the exactness of the
Expression; for the Sun may be as well included in a spark of Fire, as God may
be comprehended by our finite Faculties. Beyond the fullest discoveries we can
receive of the Deity, there remains an entire infinity of Perfections, not to
be known by the most intelligent Spirits: but as we are known, is a note of
Similitude, not of Equality. The Light of a Candle as truly shines as the Light
of the Sun, but not with that extent and splendour. We shall have such a perfect
knowledge of God, as our Minds can receive, and our Hearts desire.

We shall then see what we now believe concerning the glorious Nature of God,
his Decrees and Counsels, his Providence and Dispensations. The sublimest
Doctrine of the Christian Religion, above the disquisition and reach of Reason,
is that of the Sacred Trinity, upon which the whole Economy of the Gospel
depends. In assenting to this, Faith bows the Head and adores. But such is the
pride of the Carnal Mind, that it disdains to stoop to Divine Revelation: and
the seeming wise Philosophers despised the Primitive Christians as Captives of
a blind Belief. But this foul Reproach was as unjust as many others wherewith
they designed to disgrace Christianity; for the humility of Faith does not
extinguish or darken the Light of Reason, but revives and increases it: what is
more suitable to incorrupt Reason, than to believe the Revelation God affords
of his own Nature who cannot deceive us? In the State above, where reason is
rectified and enlarged, we shall understand that from Eternity God was sole
existing, but not solitary; that the Godhead is not confused in Unity, nor
divided in number; that there is a priority of Order, but no superiority among
the Sacred Persons, but they are all equally possessed of the same Divine
Excellencies, and the same Divine Empire, and are the Object of the same Divine
Adoration. Our Savior tells his Disciples, In that Day ye shall know, that I
am in the Father, that is by unity of Essence, and as naturally and necessarily
God as the Father. This Promise immediately refers to the time of pouring forth
the Holy Ghost upon them, after the Resurrection of our Savior, but shall be
fully accomplished in Heaven.

All things of a supernatural Order shall be revealed. The great Mystery of
Godliness, God manifest in the Flesh, the union of the high Perfections of the
Divine Nature, with the innocent Imperfections of the Humane Nature, the
contrivance of our Redemption, wherein there is an harmonious concurrence and
concord of the principal Attributes of the Deity that seemed irreconcilable:
that product of the Divine Wisdom that is so adored by the Angels, that
astonishes and saves us, shall be unfolded. The Divine Counsels in governing
the World, the Designs, the Ways, the Orders and Operations of God's Providence
shall be conspicuous. In some Dispensations of God, we discern the Eye in the
top of his Scepter: the Wisdom, the Rectitude, the equity of his Providence is
so visible in the defense of the Innocent, and his Justice and Power in the
punishment of the Guilty, that it may convince the Atheists who deny a
Providence, and causes all sincere Believers to admire and reverence it. But
there are other Dispensations, the immediate Reasons of which are so concealed
in the Bosom of God, that only the Lamb with whose Blood the Elect to Glory are
written in the Book of Life, can reveal: Why the Light of the Gospel was never
visible to so many Kingdoms; why many are called, and few chosen, the
unsearchable Ways, and incomprehensible Judgments of God, which St. Paul in an
ecstasy admires, which it is not lawful to inquire in here, we shall then
understand in such a manner, that Light it self is not more clear. How often
are the People of God here in miserable Perplexities? and say with the
Prophets, Verily thou art a God that hidest thy self, O God of Israel the
Savior! It Is true a steadfast Faith in the Providence of God, that all that he
does, and all that he permits and disposes is best, will quiet their Passions,
and change the tempestuous Ocean into the pacifick-Sea: but when they are
admitted into the Council of State above, and see the immediate Reasons of his
Decrees, what a heavenly Wonder, what an exquisite Pleasure will fill their
Minds? when the original Fountains of Wisdom, as clear as deep, shall be
opened, what sweet Satisfaction will be shed abroad in their Spirits? They will
see the Beauty of Providence in disposing temporal Evils in order to their
eternal Felicity: that as in a curious Picture the darkest Tinctures are so
disposed, as to give Life and Grace to the orient Colors: So all the
Afflictions of this State were but shadows or foiles, to make their Faith, and
Love, and Patience more resplendent, and their Reward more excellent. What our
Savior said to Peter, is applicable to the impenetrable dispensations of
Providence to us in our mortal State: What I do, thou know not now, but
shall know hereafter: then the Arcana Imperii, the Secrets of his Counsels,
shall be unsealed, and we shall be able to expound the perplexing Riddle, how
out of the Eater came Meat, and out of the Strong came Sweetness: we shall
understand that his overruling Providence is most eminently glorified in
extracting Good out of Evil; for we shall know as we are known.

2. I will consider the blessed Effects of the Vision of God in Heaven upon the
Saints. Our Savior tells us, This is Life eternal, to know thee the only true
God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. The beginning and introduction of
our Felicity, is by a lively Faith here, the consummation of it is by present
sight in Heaven. From the Vision of his Glory, there will be a resultance of
his likeness impressed on us. We shall be like him, for we shall see him as he
is. All the Perfection and Happiness of the Saints is comprised in that
Promise. The Sun, when the Sky is clear and serene, forms its Image on a Cloud
tempered to receive it, with that orient brightness, that the Eye cannot
distinguish between the Copy and the Original. Thus the uncreated Sun by
powerful emanations transforms the Soul into its likeness, in that divine
Degree of Holiness and Felicity, as gloriously resembles God. Moses by
conversing with God in the Mount, and seeing his back-parts, returned to the
Israelites with such a radiancy in his Face; that they could not look on it
without a Vail. What an impression of Glory is in the Saints, who see his
Perfections in their infinite luster? It Is the privilege of Christians in this
Life, above the Church under the Law, They behold in the Gospel as in a Glass,
the Glory of the Lord, and are changed into the same Image, from Glory to
Glory: they become more Holy and Heavenly, more purified and adorned with his
Virtues and Graces. Now if the Vision of Christ here in a Glass, an eclipsing
Medium, be so influxive upon Believers, what an illustrious and infallible
efficacy has the immediate, clear, and permanent view of his Glory upon the
Saints in Heaven? That sight is productive and conservative of his Image in its
purity and perfection for ever.

The Divine Presence affects the Saints with the most humble reverence and
solemn veneration of God. This is an eternal respect due from the intellectual
Creature to the Creator, upon the account of his infinite and incommunicable
Excellencies. He is distinguished not only from Idols, but from Creatures of
the highest Order, by his essential supreme, and singular Name, I AM. Every
kind of Being, every spark of Life, every degree of Perfection is from his
Efficiency, and depends entirely upon his supporting Power. The most eminent
Qualities of the Creatures are but in show and appearance, compared with the
reality and stability of his glorious Nature. In the Scripture, Wisdom,
Holiness, Goodness, Power, Truth, Immortality, are attributed to God, with the
exclusion of all Creatures from those Prerogatives; they being his essential,
infinite and wise incomparable Perfections. They are separable Qualities in the
Creatures, like the gilding and enamaling of baser Metal: but in the Deity,
they are like substantial massy Gold. There is a vast distance between created
Beings; but the Distance between a Fly, or a Worm, and an Angel, is nothing to
the distance between an Archangel and God: there being no comparison between
finite and infinite. All Creatures equally vanish, and disappear as nothing
compared to the glorious Creator. As if one from the Region of the Stars
should look down upon the Earth, the Mountains and Hills with the Valleys,
would appear one flat Surface, an equal Plain, the height and the lowness of
the several parts being indiscernible at that immense distance.

Now in Heaven the Divine Majesty is most visible and most awful and adorable.
The sublimest Spirits cover their Faces before his glorious Brightness. The
Prophet Isaiah had a representation of Heaven: I saw the Lord sitting upon a
Throne high and lifted up, and his Train filled the Temple. Above it stood the
Seraphims: each one had six Wings: With twain he covered his Face, with twain
he covered his Feet, with twain he did fly. And one cried to another, and said
Holy, holy, holy Lord of Hosts, the whole Earth is full of his Glory. They
highly honor him, by the reflection of his separate and peerless Excellencies,
his Almighty Power, his Infinite Supremacy and Eternal Empire, in their consert
of Praises.

This is the principal Duty of Angels and Men to the blessed Creator for his
admirable Perfections, and his excellent Benefits. The Evidence of it is so
entire, that the reasonable Mind cannot suspend its Assent: for Goodness and
Beauty, the Fruit and the Flower of amiable Things, do so recommend them to the
Understanding and Will, that they powerfully allure and engage the Affections.
Now these are in God in unspeakable degrees of Eminence. The Prophet breaks out
in a rapture, How great is his Goodness, how great is his Beauty!

'Twas a Precept of the Ceremonial Law, that the Firstlings of the Flock, and
the first and best Fruits of the Earth should be offered to God; not as if the
first that opened the Belly was more valuable in his Account than the last, or
the most early Fruits in the Spring more pleasing to him than the later in the
Autumn; but 'twas instructive, that our Love, the first born of the Soul, and
the beginning of its strength, should be consecrated to God.

2. In Heaven the Saints as perfectly love God as they know him. The Love of
God is the Essential Character of a Saint, that distinguishes him from the
Unregenerate. Indeed, it is strange that God, who is infinitely lovely, and
infinitely liberal and benificent, should not prevail on the Hearts of all Men;
but if we consider the degeneracy of Mankind, how their Minds are depraved and
deceived, and their Affections are vitiated, the Wonder will cease. Carnal Men
have not due Conceptions of God, and will not attentively observe his amiable
Perfections. St. John tells us, He that loves not, does not know God. Knowledge
is the leading Principle in the Operations of the Soul. There must be a
heavenly Eye to discover the heavenly Beauty, before there can be love of it.
Now Men are in ignorant darkness, and are defiled in Flesh and Spirit, and
therefore cannot love God who is glorious in Holiness. Without resemblance
there can be no affectionate Union, which is the Essence of Love. The
contrariety of Dispositions infers a contrariety of Affections. The Scripture
expresses this in dreadful Colors: The carnal Mind is enmity against God: the
Friendship of the World is enmity with God: that is, Pride, and Covetousness,
and Sensuality, which are the Lusts of the Carnal Mind, and are terminated upon
worldly Things, are inconsistent with the Love of God. The Justice of God is
terrible to the Consciences, and his Holiness odious to the Affections of the
Unrenewed; 'Till by Divine Grace the Understanding is enlightened and purified
to have right apprehensions of God; till the Will and Affections are cleansed
and changed; till there be a resemblance of God's holy Nature, and a conformity
to his holy Laws, they are not capable of delightful adhering to him, which is
the internal essential Property of Love.

But those who are partakers of the Divine Nature, the holy and heavenly taste,
and see how good the Lord is, and according to the Illustrations of the Mind,
such are the Impressions upon the Heart; the Love of God in their Breasts here
is like smoking Flax, but in Heaven it is a triumphant Flame. God is the first
Fair, the Original of all amiable Excellencies, in whom they shine in their
unstained Luster and Perfection; when he fully reveals himself, and displays
the richest Beams of his Love and Glory, how transporting and endearing is that
Sight? Our Affections that are now scattered on many things, wherein some faint
Reflections of his Goodness appear, shall then be united in one full Current to
him, who is all in all. In Heaven the immense Treasures of his Grace are
revealed: That when Man for his rebellious Sin was justly expelled from
Paradise, and under the Sentence of Eternal Death, God should not only pardon,
but prefer us to the dignity of his Children, and prepare such a Glory for us,
and us for such a Glory. This will inspire the Saints with such ardent
Affections, that will make them equal to the Angels, those pure and everlasting
Flames of Love to God.

In Heaven we shall be with Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, who is
seated at the right Hand of God. And how admirable will he appear to the Sense
and Soul of every glorified Saint? for we shall see the King in his Beauty.
When our Savior was upon the Holy Mount, and one vanishing Beam of Glory
appeared in his Transfiguration, Peter was so transported at the sight, that he
forgot the World and himself: How ravishing then will the sight of him in his
Triumphant Majesty be, when we shall be transfigur'd our selves? Now while
Believers are in the shadows of the earthly State, they love their unseen
Savior with such intense degrees of affection, as deface all the washy
Colors, all the vain loves of things in this World: but when they are admitted
into his shining Presence, and see him in the day of Celestial Glory; with what
an ecstasy of Affection will they be transported?

We shall then feel the endearing Obligations our Savior has laid upon us, who
ransomed us with so rich a Price, and purchased for us such an unvaluable
Inheritance. For in proportion as we shall understand his Greatness in himself,
we shall his Goodness to us. The Eternal Son of God descended from the Heaven
of Heavens to our lowly Earth; and which is more, from the Majesty wherein he
there reigned, and was visible to the Angels, he became Man that he might die,
to redeem us from the most woeful Captivity, from Death, and the sting of Death,
Sin, and the strength of Sin, the Law, and obtain a blessed Life and
Immortality for us. O unexampled Love! Greater Love has no Man than this, to
lay down his Life for his Friend: And what is the Life of a sinful Man, a
vanishing Vapor, a Life mixed with Troubles and Vexation; and to lay down this
for a Friend deservedly dear, is the highest expression of humane Love: But for
the Son of God to lay down his Life, a Life without Sin, and without End, for
Immortality was a Privilege due to his Innocence, and for Enemies, for the
worst Enemies, Rebels by revolture from obedience to their Creator and King, is
a Love truly Divine, and infinitely surpassing, not only the Affections, but
the understanding and knowledge of all Creatures. Ephesians. 3.
Briefly, he gave his Life for us, and gives himself to us, the most excellent
testimonies of Love that we can receive from Love it self, and we shall love
him with all the strength of our glorified Spirits.

3. Union with God by Knowledge and Love, accomplishes the Perfection and
Happiness of the Saints. The most pernicious effect of Sin, is the separation
of the Soul from God: and the restoral of us to Happiness, is by reunion with
him. This we obtain by Christ, who is Emanuel in his Nature, and by Office, who
took our Flesh which he offered as a Sacrifice to God to atone his Displeasure,
and gives his Spirit to dwell in us, as a permanent active Principle, by whose
special operation Faith is produced in our Hearts; that is, such a belief of
his Love in redeeming us, as inspires us with a sincere and superlative Love to
him; and by these vital Bands we are united to him, and as his true Members,
live the same Life with him in Grace and Glory.

Now in Heaven our Union with God is more near and noble, more intimate and
influential, more inseparable and eternal. It Is observable in natural
Causalties, that what is of a more refined and purer Nature, is more active and
penetrating, and more closely unites with other things, than what is more gross
and material. Light, which is the purest Quality in the World, actuates all
Colors, and makes them visible, and actuates the Eye, and conveys the lively
Image of the Object with shining Evidence into it. The Sun shoots its invisible
Virtue into the deepest Mines. Fire is more subtle and pure than Water, and
will pierce into solid Metals, which the Water cannot soak into. The glowing
Iron seems to be all Fire. Now God is the purest Spirit, and of infinite
energy, and can unite himself to our Spirits, more intimately than the closest
Union between any Creatures in the World. He unites himself to the
Understanding by an immediate irradiation, and discovery of his glorious
Excellencies. In thy Light, says the Psalmist, we shall see Light. He unites
himself to the Will, by the infusion of his Love, and by that, drawing forth
our Love to him. This Union is complete in Heaven, and most communicative of
the Divine Influences to the Saints, and consequently their conformity and
fruition of God, is in the highest degrees that created Spirits are capable of.
This is the most desirable and perfect State of reasonable Creatures; for God
is the ever-flowing Fountain of Felicity, the only stable Center of the Soul,
wherein it reposes it self for ever. Accordingly the Psalmist speaks, Return to
thy Rest, O my Soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee.

When the Soul opens its Eyes to the clear discoveries of the first Truth, in
which is no shadow of Error, and its Breast to the dear and intimate embraces
of the Supreme Good, in which is no mixture of Evil, and beyond which nothing
remains to be known, nothing to be enjoyed, what a Deluge of the purest and
sweetest Pleasures will overflow it? We cannot ascend in our Thoughts so high,
as to conceive the excess of Joy that attends those Operations of the glorified
Soul upon its proper Object. But something we may conjecture.

Those who are possessed with a noble Passion for Knowledge, how do they despise
all lower Pleasures in comparison of it? How do they forget themselves, neglect
the Body, and retire into the Mind, the highest part of Man, and nearest to
God? The bare apprehension of such things that by their internal Nature have no
attractive influence upon the Affections, is pleasant to the Understanding. As
the appearance of Light, though not attended with any other visible Beauties,
refreshes the Eye after long darkness: So the clear discovery of Truths, how
abstract so ever, that were before unknown, is grateful to the intellective
Faculty. Thus some have been strangely transported with the pleasure of a
Mathematical Demonstration, when the Evidence, not the Importance, of the thing
was so ravishing; for what is more dry and barren of delight than the
speculation of Figures and Numbers? Solon when near his End, and some of his
Friends that visited him were speaking softly of a Point of Philosophy, by that
sound of Wisdom was awakened from the sleep of Death that was just seizing on
him, and opening his Eyes, raising his Head to give attention; being asked the
reason of it? Answered, That when Ut cum istud quicquid est de quo disputatis
percepero, moriar.

Val. Max.
I understand what you are discoursing of, I may die. Such was his delight in
Knowledge, that a little of it made his Agony insensible.

But here are many Imperfections that lessen this intellectual Pleasure, which
shall cease in Heaven. Here the acquisition of Knowledge is often with the
expense of Health: The Flower of the Spirits, necessary for natural Operations,
is wasted by intense Thoughts. How often are the Learned sickly? As the Flint
when it is struck, gives not a spark without consuming it self; So Knowledge is
obtained by Studies that waste our faint sensitive Faculties. But then our
Knowledge shall be a free emanation from the spring of Truth, without our labor
and pains. Here we learn by circuit, and discern by comparing things; ignorant
darkness is dispelled by a gradual succession of Light: But then perfect
Knowledge shall be infused in a moment. Here, after all our labor and toil, how
little Knowledge do we gain? Every Question is a Labyrinth, out of which the
nimblest and most searching Minds cannot extricate themselves. How many
specious Errors impose upon our Understandings? We look on things by false
Lights, through deceiving Spectacles: But then our Knowledge shall be certain
and complete. There is no forbidden Tree in the Celestial Paradise, as no
inordinate Affection. But suppose that all things in the compass of the World
were known, yet still there would be emptiness and anguish in the Mind: for the
most comprehensive knowledge of things that are insufficient to make us happy,
cannot afford true Satisfaction. But then we shall see God in all his
Excellencies, the supreme Object and End, the only Felicity of the Soul. How
will the sight of his glorious Perfections in the first moment quench our
extreme Thirst, and fill us with Joy and Admiration? It Is not as the naked
conception of Treasures, that only makes rich in Idea's, but that Divine sight
gives a real interest in him. The Angels are so ravished with the Beauties and
Wonders of his Face, that they never divert a moment from the contemplation of
it.

2. The pure Love of the Saints to God is fully satisfied in the possession and
enjoyment of him, and consequently the greatest delight and complacency is shed
abroad in their Hearts. Love considered as an Affection of Friendship, is
always attended with two Desires; to be assured of Reciprocal Love, and to
enjoy the Conversation of the Person beloved, the testimony of his Esteem and
Good Will. This kind of Aristotle.
Affection seems to be inconsistent with that infinite distance that is between
God and the Creature. But tho it is disproportionable to the Divine Majesty,
it is proportionable to his Goodness. Accordingly our Savior promises, He that
loves me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and manifest my
self unto him. And to confirm our belief of this astonishing Condescension,
repeats it, If a Man love me, my Father will love him, and we will come to him,
and make our abode with him. In the present state, the signs of God's special
Favor are exhibited to his Friends. Now he bestows on them the honor of being
his Sons, the Graces and Comforts of his Spirit, the precious Earnests of his
Love, and Seal of their Redemption. But in eminency of degrees, the Emanations
of his Love, and the Effects of his Beneficence, are incomparably more glorious
in Heaven. Here the Saints are adopted, there crowned. There he opens all the
bright Treasures of his Wisdom, the Riches of his Goodness, the Beauties of his
Holiness, the Glories of his Power, and by the intimate application of his
Presence makes his Love most sensible to them. Infinite Goodness excites and
draws forth all the Powers of the Soul, and fills the utmost Capacity and
Expansion of the Spirit. From hence perpetual Pleasure and Satisfaction
springs. O the pure Delights between God and glorified Souls! God looks on them
with an engaged Eye, as his own by many dear Titles, and is ravished with the
Reflex of his own Excellencies shining in them. As the Bridegroom rejoices over
the Bride, ('it is the Language of Divine Love) so their God rejoices over them.
The Lord thy God in the midst of thee is mighty, he will save, he will rejoice
over thee with joy: he will rest in his love; he will rejoice over thee with
singing. He is infinitely delighted in the communication of his Goodness to
them. And what a blessed Rest do they find in the complete fruition of his
Goodness? All their Desires quietly expire in his Bosom. What triumphs of Joy
follow? Can we frame a fuller Conception of Happiness, than to be perfectly
loved by the best and most blessed Being, and perfectly to love him, and to
partake of the richest Emanations of his Loving Kindness, that is far more
valuable and desirable than Life it self?

How precious and joyful will the Presence of Christ be to the Saints? 'Twas
his Prayer on Earth, Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me, be
with me, where I am, that they may behold my Glory. When the Saints are
received into the Everlasting Kingdom, the first Object that draws their
admiring regards, is Christ on the Throne. Inestimable Felicity! whether we
consider him as the Son of God, in whose conspicuous Countenance all the Glory
of his Father shines, or as the Savior of Men, and the Head of the Elect, upon
a double account: partly, that he that loved us, and washed us from our Sins in
his Blood; after suffering all Indignities and Cruelties for our sake, has
received the Reward of his meritorious Sufferings, the triumph of his Victory,
being glorified with the Father with the Glory he had before the World was: and
partly because every Member shall be conformed to him in Glory. The sight of
the Face of Moses when radiant, had no transforming Efficacy, for the Light of
it was not in him as its Spring but by derivation. But the Son of God is Light
essentially, and the sight of his Glory will transform us into his Likeness.
And how dear and joyful is the presence of the Saints to Christ? He then sees
of the travel of his Soul, the fruit of his sharp Sufferings and bleeding Love,
and is satisfied. How delightful is it to him to see all his Spiritual Progeny
safely brought to Heaven, and made partakers of his Glory and Joy in his
everlasting Kingdom? For according to the extent of the Object, and dearness of
the Affection, Joy rises. He will then present them to his Father with infinite
complacency; Behold, here am I, and the Children whom thou have given me.

The dearest Affections of Christ and the Saints in Heaven, are mutual and
reflexive. In the Sacred Song, the expressions of Love, Desire, and Joy,
borrowed from the espousals of Solomon and his beloved Wife, are, as it were,
Characters in the Bark, to be understood in a spiritual Sense, of the Mystical
Marriage of Christ and the Church. What endearing intercourse is there between
the most perfect Lover and his Spouse inspired with the same pure Flam? Here
amiable Perfections attract his Eye and Heart: Thou art all fair, my Love,
Cant. 7.
there is no spot in thee. His propriety in the Church is his unvaluable
Treasure: My Vineyard which is mine, is ever before me. He repeats the word
Mine, in the sweetest and most tender manner. And the Church, with the same
harmonious Affections, speaks of Christ. She contemplates in a soft ecstasy his
ever-satisfying Beauty. My Beloved is the chiefest of ten thousand, Cant. 10.16.
he is altogether lovely. She breaks forth in triumph, My Beloved is mine,
Cant. 6.
and I am his. By all their expressions of joyful Love and Union, we may ascend
in our Thoughts, what are the Joys of Heaven, where the Communion of Christ and
the Church is entire and uninterrupted for ever? If Faith and Love of our
unseen Savior produce a Joy unspeakable and glorious, as if Believers were
wrapped up to Paradise, or Paradise descended into them, what will the sight and
fruition of him? There is as great a difference in degrees between the Joy that
flows from the assurance and application of Faith, and the Joy from Vision and
full Possession, as between the impression of Joy the Forerunner of Christ
felt, when he sprang in the Womb at the coming of our Savior; and his
ravishing Joy, when he saw Christ, and pointed him out to his Disciples, Behold
the Lamb of God, that takes away the Sins of the World.

3. The supreme Joy of the Saints is for the Felicity and Glory of God himself.
For as the holy Soul feels no more powerful motive to love God, than because he
is most worthy of it, as he is God, a Being of infinite Excellencies, and
therefore to be loved above the dearest Persons and Things, even it self; so
the highest Joy it partakes of is from this consideration, that God is
infinitely blessed and glorious. For in this the supreme desire of Love is
accomplished, that the most beloved Object is perfectly honored and pleased.
In Heaven the Love of the Saints to God is in its highest Perfection, and they
see his Glory in the most perfect manner, which causes a transcendent Joy to
them. And this is one reason why the Saints, tho shining with unequal degrees
of Glory, are equally content. For their most ardent Love being set on God,
that he is pleased to glorify himself by such various communications of his
Goodness, is full satisfaction to their Desires. Besides, in those different
degrees of Glory, every one is so content with his own, Sic itaque habebit
donum aliud alio minus, ut hic quoque donum habeat, ne velit amplius.

Aug.
that there is no possible desire of being but what he is.

4. In Heaven the innumerable Company of Angels, and the General Assembly of
the Church of the Firstborn, as they receive Happiness from the sight of God,
so they communicate the purest Pleasure to one another. An unfeigned ardent
Affection unites that pure Society. Our Love is now kindled, either from a
relation in Nature, or a civil Account, or some visible Excellencies that
render a Person worthy of our Choice and Friendship: but in Heaven the Reasons
are greater, and the degrees of Love incomparably more fervent. All Carnal
Alliances and Respects cease in that supernatural State. The Apostle tells us,
If I have known Christ after the Flesh, I know him so no more. By the
Resurrection and Ascension of Christ he was transported into another World, and
had communion with him as an Heavenly King, without low regards to the temporal
Privilege of conversing with him on Earth. The spiritual Relation is more near
and permanent than the strictest Band of Nature. The Saints have all relation
to the same Heavenly Father, and to Jesus Christ the Prince of Peace, and Head
of that happy Fraternity. The principal Motives of Love here are the inherent
Excellencies of a Person. Wisdom, Holiness, Goodness, Fidelity are mighty
Attractives, and produce a more worthy Affection, a more intimate confederacy
of Souls, than propinquity in Nature, or any carnal respects. Virtue is amiable
in an old Person, tho wrinkled and deformed: Vice is hateful in a young Person,
tho beautiful. There are clearer Eyes than those of Flesh, a purer Light than
what is sensible, a diviner Beauty than what is Corporeal, and a nobler Love
than what is sensual. David declares that all his delight was in the Excellent.
But there are allays of this Spiritual Love here. For,

1. There are Relics of Frailty in the best Men on Earth, some Blemishes that
render them less amiable when discovered. Here their Graces are mixed with
Infirmities, and but ascending to Glory. Accordingly our Love to them must be
regular, and serene, not clouded with Error, mistaking Defects for amiable
Qualities. But in Heaven, the Image of God is complete, by the union of all the
glorious Virtues requisite to its perfection. Every Saint there exactly agrees
with the first Exemplar, a Divine Beauty shines in them ever durable, a Beauty
that darts no contagious Fire, that is inviolable and can suffer no injury. The
Apostle tells us, The Church shall be glorious in Holiness, without spot or
wrinkle, or any thing that may cast an Aspect of deformity upon it.

2. In the present state the least part of the Saints Worth is visible. As the
Earth is fruitful in Plants and Flowers, but its Riches are in Mines of
precious Metals, and the Veins of Marble hidden in its Bosom. True Grace
appears in sensible Actions, but its Glory is Within. O si animum boni viri
liceret inspicere, ex magnifico placidoque fulgentem! nonne veluti numinis
occursu obstupefacti essemus?

Senec.
The sincerity of Aims, the purity of Affections, the impresses of the Spirit
on the Heart, the interior Beauties of Holiness, are only seen by God. Besides,
such is the humility of eminent Saints, that the more they abound in spiritual
Treasures, the less they show. As the heavenly Bodies when in nearest
conjunction with the Sun, and fullest of Light, make the least appearance to
our sight. But all their Excellencies shall then be in view. The Glory of God
shall be revealed in them. And how attractive is the Divine Likeness to an holy
Eye? How will it ravish the Saints to behold an immortal Loveliness shining in
one another? Their Love is reciprocal, proportionable to the cause of it. An
equal, constant Flame is preserved by pure Materials. Every one is perfectly
amiable, and perfectly enamored with all. How happy is that state of Love? The
Psalmist breaks out in a Rapture, Behold how good and pleasant it is for
Brethren to dwell together in Unity! Love is the Beauty and Strength of
Societies, the Pleasure of Life. How excellent is the Joy of the Blessed, when
the Prayer of Christ shall be accomplished, that they all may be one; as thou
Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us. God is
absolutely One in his glorious Nature and Will, and therefore unalterably
Happy; And their inviolable Union in Love, is a Ray of the Essential Unity
between the Sacred Persons. There are no Divisions of Heart and Tongues, as in
this Babel; but the most perfect and sweetest Concord, an Eternal Agreement in
Tempers and Inclinations. There are no envious Comparisons; for Love that
affectively transforms one into another, causes the Glory of every Saint to
redound to the Joy of all. Every one takes his share in the Felicity of all,
and adds to it. Such is the Power of that Celestial Fire wherein they all burn,
that it melts and mixes Souls in such an entire Union, that by Complacence, and
an intimate Joy, the Blessedness of all is, as it were, proper to every one; as
if every one were placed in the Hearts of all, and all in the Heart of every
one. If in the Church of the Firstborn Christians in the earthly Jerusalem,
the Band of Charity was so strict, that it is said, the Multitude of Believers
were of one Heart, and one Soul; How much more intimate and inseparable is the
Union of the Saints in Jerusalem above, where every one loves another as
himself? It Is recorded of Alexander, that entering with Hephestion his Favorite,
into the Pavilion of the Mother of Darius, then his Prisoner, she bowed to the
Favorite, as having a greater appearance of Majesty, thinking him to be
Alexander: But advised of her Error, she humbly begged his Pardon. To whom the
generous King replied, Non errasti Matter, nam hic Alexander est. Curt. lib. 3.
You did not err, Mother, this is also Alexander. Such was their Affection,
that whoever was taken of them, the other was taken in him; the less ascending
in the greater, without degrading the greater in the less. This is a Copy of
the holy Love of the Blessed; but with the same difference, as between the
Description of a Star with a Coal, and its Beauty in its proper Aspect. And
where all is Love, all is Delight. The Act it self is its own Reward. As that
benign and pleasant Affection is enlarged with respect to the Object, and its
degrees, such is the complacence and delight that results from it. In that
blessed Society there is a constant receiving and returning of Love and Joy.
And that double exercise of the Saints, in the perfect circle of Love, is like
the pleasant labor of the Bees, who all the day are flying to the Gardens, and
returning to their Hives, and all their Art is in extracting the purest Spirits
from fragrant Flowers, and making sweet Honey. O how do they rejoice and
triumph in the Happiness of one another? With what an unimaginable tenderness
do they embrace? What Reciprocations of Endearments are between them? O their
ravishing Conversation, and sweet Intercourse! for their Presence together in
Heaven is not a silent Show. In the Transfiguration, Moses and Elias talked
with Christ: We may understand a little of it, by the sensible complacence that
is among sincere Friends here. In pure Amity there is a threefold Union: a
Union of Resemblance, that is the principle of it; likeness causes Love: a
Union of Affection, that is its Essence; it is said of Jonathan, that
incomparable Friend, his Soul was knit with the Soul of David, and he loved him
as his own Soul: the Union of Conversation, that is requisite to the
satisfaction of Love. What an entertainment of Love and Joy is there in the
presence and discourses of dear Friends! their mutual Aspects, like a Chain
composed of Spirits luminous and active, draw and fasten their Souls to one
another: The Felicity of Love consists in their Conversation. Now in Heaven
whatever is pleasant in Friendship is in Perfection; and whatever is distastful
by Men's Folly and Weakness is abolished. With what excellent Discourses do they
entertain one another? If David felt such inward Pleasure from the sense of
God's Favors, that he could not restrain the expression of it, but invites the
Saints, Come and hear, all ye that fear the Lord, and I will tell you what he
has done for my Soul. Certainly in Heaven, the Blessed with overflowing
Affections recount the Divine Benefits: the admirable Methods, whereby the Life
of Grace was begun, preserved and carried on in the midst of Temptations; the
continual Succession of Mercies in the time of their Hopes, and the
Consummation of all in the time of their enjoyment. How joyfully do they concur
in their Thanksgivings to God for the Goodness of Creation: in making them
reasonable Creatures, capable to know, love and enjoy him, when they might have
been of the lowest Order in the whole Sphere of Beings; for his compassionate
Care and Providence over them in this World, but especially for his sovereign
and singular Mercy in electing them to be Vessels of Honor; for his powerful
Grace, in rescuing them from the cruel and ignominious Bondage of Sin: for his
most free Love, that justified them from all their Guilt by the Death of his
only Son, and glorified them with himself. They are never weary in this
delightful Exercise, but continually bless him for his Mercy that endures for
ever. We may judge by the Saints here, when they are in a fit disposition to
praise God, what Fervors they feel in their united Praises of him in Heaven.
The Psalmist in an Ecstasy calls to all the parts of the World to join with him;
The Lord reigns, let the Heavens rejoice, and the Earth be glad; let the Sea
roar, let the Fields be joyful, and all that dwell therein. He desires that
Nature should be elevated above it self, that the dead parts be inspired with
Life, the insensible feel motions of Joy, and those that want a Voice break
forth in Praises, to adorn the Divine Triumph. With what Life and Alacrity will
the Saints in their blessed Communion celebrate the Object of their Love and
Praises? The Seraphims about the Throne cried to one another, to express their
Zeal and Joy, in celebrating his Eternal Purity and Power, and the Glory of his
Goodness. O the unspeakable Pleasure of this Concert! when every Soul is
harmonious, and contributes his part to the full Music of Heaven. O could we
hear but some Echo of those Songs wherewith the Heaven of Heavens resounds,
some remains of those Voices wherewith the Saints above triumph in the Praises,
in the solemn Adoration of the King of Spirits, how would it inflame our
Desires to be joined with them? Blessed are those that are in thy House, they
always praise thee.

3. The fullness of Joy in Heaven is everlasting, without defect, and without
end.

1. It Is undecaying, the productive Causes are conservative of it, being always
equal. Those are the beatifick Object, and the continual fruition of it. Whilst
we are here below, the Sun of Righteousness, as to our perception and sense,
has Ascensions and Declinations, Accesses and Recesses. And our Earth is not so
purified, but some Vapors arise that intercept his cheerful refreshing Light.
From hence there are alternate successions of Spiritual Comforts and Sorrows,
of Doubts and filial Confidence in the Saints. It Is a rare Favor of Heaven,
when an humble Believer in his whole course is so circumspect, as not to
provoke God to appear displeased against him: When a Christian (as those
tutelar Angels spoken of in the Gospel) always beholds the Face of his Heavenly
Father, and converses with him with an holy Liberty. And what a torment the
hiding of God's Face is to a deserted Soul, only they know who feel it.
External troubles are many times attended with more Consolations to the Spirit,
than Afflictions to Sense; but to love God with a transcendent Affection, and
to fear he is our Enemy, no Punishment exceeds, or is equal to it. As his
Loving Kindness in their esteem is better than Life, so his Displeasure is
worse than Death. How do they wrestle with God by Prayers and Tears, and offer,
as it were, a holy Violence to the King of Heaven, to recover their first
serenity of Mind, the lost Peace of Heart? How passionately do they cry out
with Job, in the Book of his Patience, O that I were as in months past, Job.
29.2, 3, 4.
as in the days when God preserved me: when his Candle shined upon my head, and
when by his Light I walked through darkness: As I was in the days of my youth,
when the Secret of God was upon my Tabernacle. And sometimes God delays the
revealing himself even to his dearest Children; not that he does not see their
Necessities, and hears their Prayers, or is so hard that till their Extremities
he is not moved with Compassion, but for wise and holy Reasons; Either that
they may not return to folly, if by any presumptuous Sin they forfeited their
Peace; or if they have been careful to please him, yet he may deprive them of
Spiritual Comforts for a time, to keep them humble, and that with an obedient
resignation to his Sovereign Pleasure they may wait for his reviving Presence.
And then Joy returns greater than before. For thus God usually renders with
interest what he suspended only for trial. But the Saints above are for ever
enlightened with the vital splendour, and dear regards of his Countenance, always
enjoy his beamy smiles. A continual effusion of Glory illustrates Heaven and
all its blessed Inhabitants.

And their Contemplation of God is fixed. If the Object, though extraordinary
glorious, were transient, or the Eye so weak that it could only see it but by
glances, the height of Joy would not be perpetual. But the mind is prepared
with supernatural vigor, to see the brightness of God's Face, and by the most
attentive application always converses with that blessed Object; so that the
Joy of Heaven is never intermitted for a moment. They always see, and love, and
rejoice, and praise him.

It Is possible a carnal suspicion may arise in some, as if the uniform
perpetual vision of the same Glory might lose its perfect delightfulness. For
those who seek for happiness in the vanity of the Creatures, are always
desirous of change, and have their Judgments so corrupted, that while they
languish with a secret desire after an unchangeable Good, yet they conceive no
Good as desirable, that is not changed.

But to correct this gross error of Fancy, let us a little enquire into the
causes of Dissatisfaction, that make the constant fruition of the same thing
here to be tedious.

Sensible things are of such a limited Goodness, that not any of them can
supply all our present wants, so that it is necessary to leave one for another.
And the most of them are Remedies of our diseased Appetites, and if not
temperately used, are destructive Evils. Eating and Drinking are to extinguish
Hunger and Thirst, but continued beyond just measure, become nauseous. Besides,
the Insufficiency of their Objects, the Senses themselves cannot be satisfied
all at once. The Ear cannot attend to delightful Sounds, and the Eye be intent
on beautiful Colors at the same time. The Satisfaction of one Sense defeats
another of enjoying its proper good; therefore the same Object is not
constantly pleasant, but the Heart is distempered from as many Causes, as there
are desires unaccomplish'd. Add farther, all things under the Sun afford only a
superficial delight, and miserably deceive the Expectations raised of them: and
many times there is a mixture of some evil in them, that is more offensive,
than the good is delightful. The Honey is attended with a Sting, so that often
those very things we sigh after through vehement desire, when they are
obtained, we sigh for grief. Now all these Causes of dissatisfaction cease in
Heaven; Vitae nos taedium tenet timor mortis, natat omne consilium, nec implere
nos ulla faelicitas potest. Causa aute^ est, quod non pervenimus ad illud bonum
immensum and insuperabile, ubi necesse est, consistat nobis voluntas nostra,
quia ultra summum non est locus. Senec. Ep. 74.
for there is an infinite variety in God, and whatever is truly desirable is
eminently enjoyed in him. And in his Presence all the Powers of the Soul are
drawn out in their most pleasant exercise, and always enjoy their entire
happiness. The fruition of him exceeds our most raised hopes, as much as he is
more glorious in Himself than in any borrowed Representations. God will be to
us incomparably above what we can ask or think. The compass of our thoughts,
the depth of our desires are imperfect measures of his Perfections. And as he
is a Pure Good in Himself, so he is prevalent over all Evil. It Is evident
therefore that nothing can allay the Joys of Saints when they are in God's
presence.

2. Novelty is not requisite to ingratiate every Good, and make it perfectly
delightful. (...). Arist. Eth. l. 7. c. ult.
God is infinitely happy, to whom no Good was ever new. It Is indeed the Sauce
that gives a delicious taste to inferior things. For Men relish only what is
eminent; and the good things of this World are so truly mean, that they are
feign to borrow a show of Greatness by comparison with a worse estate
preceding. But an infinite Good produces always the same pure equal complete
Joy, because it arises from its intrinsic perfection, that wants no Foil to
commend it. The Psalmist breaks forth, Whom have I in Heaven but Thee? This is
no vanishing Rapture, but a constant joyful height of Affection. God, the
essential Happiness of the Saints, is always perfectly lovely and delightful to
them.

3. The glorified Saints in every Period of their happy state, have as lively a
perception of it as in the beginning. To make this evident, we must consider
that the pleasure of Novelty springs from a quick sense of the opposite terms,
between our condition in the want of some desired Good, and after our obtaining
it. Now the Mind is more intense on the advantage, and more strongly affected
at first. One newly freed from the torments of a sharp disease, feels a greater
pleasure than from a constant tenor of health. Those who are raised from a low
state to eminent Dignity, are transported with their first change, but in tract
of time the remembrance of their mean condition is so weakened and spent, that
it is like the shadow of a Dream, and proportionably their Joy is lessened.
Honors like Perfumes, by custom are less sensible to those that carry them.
But the Saints above always consider and feel the excellent difference between
their suffering and triumphant state. They never lose that ravishing part of
felicity, the vivid sense of past evils. Their reflections are always as strong
on the Misery from whence they were raised to the pitch of Happiness, as in
their first glorious Translation. In what an Ecstasy of wonder and pleasure will
they be, from the fresh memory of what they were, and the joyful sense of what
they are? I was (says the admiring Soul) poor, blind, and naked; but O
miraculous and happy Alteration! I am full of Light, enriched with the
Treasures of Heaven, adorned with Divine Glory. I was under the tyrannous power
of Satan, but he is bruised under my feet. I was sentenced to an everlasting
separation from the Presence of God, my only Life and Joy; but now am possessed
of my supreme Good. O how transporting is the comparison of these wide and
contrary extremes? How beautiful and pleasant is the Day of Eternity, after
such a dark tempestuous Night? How does the remembrance of such Evils produce a
more lively and feeling fruition of such Happiness? How strangely and mightily
does Salvation with Eternal Glory affect the Soul? This gives a spritely accent
to their everlasting Hallelujahs. This preserves an affectionate Heat in their
Thanksgivings to their Victorious Deliverer. And thus their Happiness is always
the same, and always new. Their Pleasure is continued in its Perfection.

The number of Possessors cannot lessen their Felicity. The Divine Presence is
an unwasted Spring of Pleasure, equally full and open to all, and abundantly
sufficient to satisfy the immensity of their Desires. Envy reigns in this
World, because earthly things are so imperfect in their Nature, and so peculiar
in their Possession, that they cannot suffice, nor be enjoyed by all. But in
Heaven none is touched with that base low Passion: for God contains all that is
precious and desirable in the highest degrees of Perfection, and all partake of
his Universal Goodness without intercepting one another. In the Kingdom of
Heaven there is no cause for the Elder Brother to repine at the Father's Bounty
to the Younger, nor for the Younger to supplant the Elder to obtain the
Birthright. The Heirs of God are all raised to Sovereign Glory, and every one
enjoys him as entirely and fully as if solely his Felicity. God is a Good as
indivisible as infinite, and not diminished by the most liberal communications
of Himself. We may illustrate this by comparing the Price of our Redemption,
and the Reward. The Death of Christ is a universal Benefit to all the Saints,
yet it is so applied to every Believer for his perfect Redemption, as if our
Savior in all his Agonies and Sufferings had no other in his Eye and Heart, as
if all his Prayers, his Tears, his Blood were offered up to his Father only for
that Person. The common respect of it the Apostle declares in those admirable
words, that signify such an excess of God's Love to us, He that spared not his
own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely
give us all things? But to imagine that the Et totum se dedit universis, and
totum singulis. Ac per hoc quicquid passione sua Salvator praestitit, sicut
totum ei debent universi, sic singuli; nisi quod prope hoc plus singuli quam
universi, quod totum accepe run^^ singu^^ quantum un^ versi.

Salvian.
propriety of every Believer is thereby prejudiced, is not only false, but
extremely injurious to the Merit and Dignity, and to the infinite Love of
Christ. Therefore the same Apostle tells us, The Life which I now live in the
Flesh, I live by the Faith of the Son of God; who loved me, and gave himself
for me: as if he were the sole Object of Christ's Love, the End and Reward of
his Sufferings. And this appropriating of it to himself, is no prejudice to the
Rights of all others. St. John describes himself by that truly glorious Title,
The Disciple whom Jesus loved. Could he speak this of himself without the
injury and indignation of the other Disciples? Certainly he might. For if we
consider that incomprehensible Love of Christ, expressed to them all at his last
Supper, after Judas was gone forth; As the Father has loved me, so I have
loved you; we may easily understand, that every one of them might justly
believe that he was singularly beloved of Christ. They were all received in the
Heart, though (with John) they did not all lean on the Breast of their Divine
Master. Thus in Heaven God is the universal Treasure of all the Saints, and the
peculiar Portion of every one, not engrossed by possessing, nor wasted by
enjoying. Si audiat multitudo silens, non inter se particulatim comminuunt
sonos, tanquam cibos: sed omne quod sonat and omnibus totum est, and singulis
totum. August. in Ep. ad Volusan.
As by his Essence he equally fills the whole World, and every part of it; and
by his Providence equally regards all and every particular Creature; so in
Heaven he dispenses the Riches of his Love to all, that they cannot desire
more, if every one of them were the sole Heir of all the Merits of his Son, and
enjoyed him alone for ever.

2. The Blessedness of the Saints, as it is without diminution, so it is without
end: it is complete and continual for ever. This makes Heaven to be Heaven; the
Security is as valuable as the Felicity. There is no satiety of the present, no
solicitude for the future. Were there a possibility, or the least suspicion of
losing that happy State, it would cast an aspersion of bitterness upon all
their Delights; it would disturb their peaceful Fruition, and joyful
Tranquillity: as Hope in Misery allays Sorrow, so Fear in Happiness dashes Joy:
and the more excellent the Happiness is, the more stinging would be the fear of
losing it. But the Inheritance reserved in Heaven, is immortal, undefiled, and
fades not away. And the Tenure of their Possession is infinitely firm, by the
Promise of God, who is truly immutable, and immutably true, and by the Divine
Power, the support of their everlasting Duration. Our Savior assures his
Disciples, Because I live, ye shall live also: and he lives for evermore. This
blessed Privilege the Saints have by Jesus Christ, (who obtained eternal
Redemption for them) above the Grace given to Angels and Men in the first
Creation. The Angels were upon trial of their Obedience, not in a determined
State of Felicity. The first declination of Love and Subjection, was fatal to
them. Woeful Change! how unlike to themselves in their Original Purity and
Glory! an unparalled Example of the Frailty of the Creature, and the Divine
Severity. Man did stand in Paradise for a little while, and had a ruinous Fall
with all his Progeny. But the glorified Saints sit with Christ in Heavenly
Places, and enjoy an unchangeable Happiness, as permanent as the everlasting
Author of it, and the everlasting Soul the Subject of it. With God is the
Fountain of Life. Who can pluck them out of the Hands and Bosom of a Gracious
God? He will never withdraw his Love, and they shall never forfeit it: for Sin
is from the perverseness of the Will and the disorder of the Affections, joined
with some Error of the Mind. But in the Light of Glory, and full enjoyment of
God, the Understanding is so perfectly illuminated, the Will and Affections so
exceedingly satisfied, that it is impossible they should apprehend erroneously,
or desire irregularly. God is Love, and will kindle in the Saints a pure
Affection that Eternity shall not lessen. In the present state, our Love is
imperfect; and as Fire out of its Sphere dies away by our neglect to feed it by
proper Materials, enamouring Considerations of God. But in Heaven the uncreated
Sun attracts every Eye with the Light of his Beauty, and inflames every Heart
with the heat of his Love. The glorious Presence of God is in different
respects the Cause and Effect of our Love to him, for the sight of God is the
most powerful Attractive to love him, and Love fixes the Mind upon him. And the
persevering Love of God assures the constant fruition of him: for by Love the
supreme Good is possessed and enjoyed. The Apostle tells us, Charity never
fails, and therefore the Happiness of Heaven never fails. They enjoy a better
Immortality, than the Tree of Life could have preserved in Adam. The
Revolutions of the Heavens, and Ages, are under their Feet, and cannot in the
least alter or determine their Happiness. After the passing of Millions of
Years, still an entire Eternity remains of their enjoying God. O most
desirable State! where Blessedness and Eternity are inseparably united. O
joyful Harmony! when the full Chorus of Heaven shall sing, This God is our God
for ever and ever. This adds an infinite weight to their Glory. This redoubles
their Joys with infinite sweetness and security: for the direct pleasure of
enjoying God, is attended with the pleasant reflection it shall continue for
ever. They repose themselves in the complete fruition of their Happiness. God
reigns in the Saints, and they live in him for ever. Eternity crowns and
consummates their Felicity.

The Application.
From what has been discoursed we should,

1. Consider the woeful Folly of Men in refusing such an Happiness, that by the
admirable Favor of God is offered to their choice. Can there be an
Expectation, or Desire, or Capacity in Man of enjoying an Happiness beyond what
is Infinite and Eternal? O blind and wretched World! so careless of everlasting
Felicity. Who can behold, without compassion and indignation, Men vainly
seeking for Happiness where it is not to be found, and after innumerable
disappointments flying at an Impossibility, and neglect their Sovereign and
final Blessedness? An Error in the first enquiry might have some color of an
Excuse, but having been so often deceived with painted Grapes for the Fruits of
Paradise, that Men should still seek for substantial Blessedness to fill the
Soul, in vain shows that can only feed the Eye, is beyond all degrees of Folly.
Astonishing madness! that God and Heaven should be despised in comparison of
painted Trifles. This adds the greatest contumely to their Impiety. What
powerful Charm obstructs their true judging of things? What Spirit of Error
possesses them? Alas, Eternal things are unseen! not of conspicuous moment, and
therefore in the carnal Balance are esteemed light, against temporal things
present to the Sense. It does not appear what we shall be: The Vail of the
visible Heavens covers the Sanctuary, where JESUS our High Priest is entered,
and stops the enquiring Eye.

But have we not assurance by the most infallible Principles of Faith, that the
Son of God came down from Heaven to live with us, and die for us, and that he
rose again to confirm our Belief in his exceeding great and precious Promises
concerning this Happiness in the Future State? And do not the most evident
Principles of Reason and universal Experience prove, that this World cannot
afford true Happiness to us? How wretchedly do we forfeit the Prerogative of
the reasonable Nature, by neglecting our last and blessed End? If the Mind be
darkened, that it does not see the amiable Excellencies of God, and the Will be
depraved that it does not feel their ravishing Power; the Man ceases to be a
Man, and becomes like the Beasts that perish. As a blind Eye is no longer an
Eye, being absolutely useless to that end for which it was made. And though in
this present state Men are stupid and unconcerned, yet hereafter their Misery
will awaken them, to discover what is that Supreme Good wherein their
Perfection and Felicity consists. When their Folly shall be exposed before God,
Angels, and Saints, in what extreme confusion will they appear before that
glorious and immense Theater? Our Savior told the unbelieving Jews, There
shall be weeping, and gnashing of Teeth, when ye shall see Abraham, and Isaac,
and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, and you your selves
turned out. They shall be tortured with the desire of Happiness without
possible Satisfaction. It Is most just that those who err without excuse, should
repent without remedy.

2. Let us be seriously excited to apply our selves with inflamed desires and
our utmost diligence to obtain this unchangeable Happiness? In order to this we
shall consider the causes of it, and the means whereby it is obtained.

The Original moving Cause is the pure rich Mercy of God that prepared it for
his People, and prepares them for it. The procuring Cause is the meritorious
efficacy of Christ's Obedience and Sufferings. This is expressly declared by the
Apostle; The wages of Sin is Death, but the gift of God is eternal Life through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

I. The designing, the preparation, and actual bestowing of the Heavenly Glory
is from the Mercy of God. This will appear by considering,

1. That it is absolutely impossible that a mere Creature, though perfect,
should deserve any thing from God. For enjoying its being and powers of working
from his Goodness, the product of all is entirely due to him. And the payment
of a Debt acquires no Title to a Reward. He is the Proprietary and Lord of all
by Creation. Hence it is clear that in the order of distributive Justice nothing
can be challenged from him.

2. Besides, such is the infinite Perfection of God in Himself, that no benefit
can redound to him by the Service of the Creature. When you have done all, say
you are unprofitable Servants, for we have done but what we ought to do. The
neglect of our duty justly exposes to punishment, but the performance of it
deserves no Reward, because no advantage accrues to God by it. Who has first
given unto him, and it shall be recompensed to him again? He challenges all
Creatures even of the highest order. To speak strictly therefore, When God
crowns the Angels with Glory, he gives what is merely his own, and does not
render what is theirs. If he should leave them in their pure Nature, or deprive
them of their Being, he were no loser, nor injurious to them. For what Law
binds him to enrich them with Immortal Glory, who are no ways profitable to
him, or to preserve that being they had from his unexcited Goodness. No
Creature can give to him, therefore none can receive from him by way of
valuable Consideration.

3. There is no proportion between the best Works of Men, and the excellency of
the Reward, much less an equivalence. 'Twas the just and humble acknowledgment
of Jacob to God, I am less than the least of all thy Mercies, those that common
Providence dispenses for the support and refreshment of this temporal Life. But
how much less than the glorious Excellencies of the supernatural Divine Life,
wherein the Saints reign with God for ever? The most costly, the most difficult
and hazardous Services, are equally nothing in point of Merit, with the giving
but a Cup of cold Water to a Disciple of Christ, there being no correspondence
in value between them and the Kingdom of Heaven. The Apostle tells us, I count
the Sufferings of the present Life are not to be compared to the Glory that
shall be revealed in us. And suffering is more than doing. God rewards his
faithful Servants not according to the dignity of their Works, but his own
Liberality and Magnificence. As Alexander having ordered fifty Talents of Gold
to be given to a Gentleman in Poverty to supply his want, and he surprised with
that immense Bounty, modestly said, ten were enough; He replied, If fifty are
too much for you to receive, ten are too little for me to give; therefore do
you receive as Poor, I will give as a King. Thus God in the dispensing his
Favors does not respect the meanness of our Persons or Services, but gives to
us as a God. And the clearest Notion of the Deity is that he is a Being
infinite in all Perfections, therefore all-sufficient and most willing to make
his Creatures completely happy.

4. If a Creature perfectly Holy that never sinned is incapable to merit any
thing from God, much less can those who are born in a sinful State, and guilty
of innumerable actual Transgressions, pretend to deserve any Reward for their
Works. This were presumption inspired by prodigious Vanity. For,

1. By his most free Grace they are restored in conversion to that Spiritual
Power by which they serve him. The Chaos was not a deader Lump before the
Spirit of God moved on the Face of the Waters, than the best of Men were before
the vital influences of the Spirit wrought upon them. And for this they are so
deeply obliged to God, that if a thousand times more for his Glory were
performed, yet they cannot discharge what they owe.

2. The continuance and increase of the powerful supplies of Grace to the
Saints, who even since their holy calling by many laspes have justly deserved
that God should withdraw his grieved Spirit, are new Obligations to
Thankfulness: and the more Grace, the less Merit.

3. The best Works of Men are imperfect, allayed with the mixtures of
Infirmities, and not of full weight in the Divine Balance. If God should
strictly examine our Righteousness, 'twill be found neither pure nor perfect in
his Eyes, and without Favor and Indulgence would be rejected. And that which
wants Pardon, cannot deserve Praise and Glory. He shows Mercy to thousands that
love him, and keep his Commandments. If Obedience were meritorious, it were
strict justice to reward them. The Apostle prays for Onesiphorus, who had
exposed himself to great danger for his love to the Gospel, The Lord grant he
may find Mercy in that day. The Divine Mercy gives the Crown of Life to the
Faithful in the day of eternal Recompenses.

II. The meritorious Cause of our obtaining Heaven, is the Obedience of Jesus
Christ comprehending all that he did and suffered to reconcile God to us. From
him as the eternal Word we have all benefits in the order of Nature, for all
things were made by him, and for him, as the incarnate Word, all good things in
the order of Grace. What we enjoy in Time, and expect in Eternity, is by him.
To show what influence his Mediation has to make us happy, we must consider;

1. Man by his Rebellion justly forfeited his Happiness, and the Law exacts
precisely the Forfeiture. Pure Justice requires the Crime should be punished
according to its Quality, much less will it suffer the guilty to enjoy the
favor of God. For Sin is not to be considered as an Offense and Injury to a
private Person, but the violation of a Law, and a disturbance in the order of
Government, so that to preserve the honor of governing Justice, an equivalent
reparation was appointed. Till Sin was expiated by a proper Sacrifice, the
Divine Goodness was a sealed Spring, and its blessed effects restrained from
the guilty Creature. Now the Son of God in our assumed Nature offered up
himself a Sacrifice in our stead, to satisfy Divine Justice, and removed the
Bar, that Mercy might be glorified in our Salvation. The Apostle gives this
account of it; Heb. 10.19, 20.
We have boldness to enter into the Holiest, by the Blood of Christ, by a new
and living way which he has consecrated for us through the Vail, that is to
say, his Flesh.

2. Such were the most precious Merits of his Obedience, that it was not only
sufficient to free the guilty contaminated Race of Mankind from Hell, but to
purchase for them the Kingdom of Heaven. If we consider his Humane Nature, all
Graces were born with him, as Rays with the Sun, and shined in the whole course
of his Life in the excellence of Perfection. And the dignity of his Divine
Person derived an immense Value to all he performed as Mediator. One Act of his
Obedience was more honorable to God than all the Lives of the Saints, the
Deaths of the Martyrs, and the Service of the Angels. God was more pleased in
the Obedience of his Beloved Son, than he was provoked by the rebellion of his
Servants. Therefore, as the just Recompense of it, he constituted him to be
Universal Head of the Church, supreme Judge of the World; invested him with
Divine Glory, and with Power to communicate it to his faithful Servants. He is
the Prince of Life. In short, it is as much upon the account of Christ's
Sufferings that we are glorified, as that we are forgiven. The Wounds he
received in his Body, the Characters of Ignominy, and Footsteps of Death, are
the Fountains of our Glory. His Abasement is the cause of our Exaltation.

If it be said, This seems to lessen the freeness of this Gift. The answer is
clear;

This was due to Christ, but undeserved by us. Besides, the appointing his Son
to be our Mediator in the way of our Ransom, was the most glorious Work of his
Goodness.

2. The Means of our obtaining Heaven are to be considered. Though the Divine
Goodness be free in its Acts, and there can be nothing in the Creature of
Merit, or Inducement to prevail upon God in the nature of a Cause, yet he
requires Qualifications in all those who shall enjoy that blessed unchangeable
Kingdom. The Apostle expressly declares, It Is not of him that wills, nor of him
that runs, Romans 9.16.
but of God that shows Mercy. But we must distinguish the Effects of this
Mercy, which are dispensed in that order the Gospel lays down. The first Mercy
is the powerful calling the Sinner from his corrupt and wretched State; a
second Mercy is the pardoning his Sins; the last and most eminent is the
glorifying him in Heaven. Now it is clear that in this place, the showing of
Mercy, signifies the preventing Grace of God in Conversion; for in the 18 th
Verse, it is said, God shows Mercy to whom he will, and whom he will he hardens.
Where it is evident that showing Mercy is opposed not to condemning, but to
hardening; and consequently the intent of the words is this, That Divine Grace
overcomes the Rebellious Will, softens the stiff and stubborn Heart, and makes
it pliant to Obedience. This flows from his pure good Will and Pleasure,
without the least Motive from the Inclinations or Endeavors of sinful Men. But
the other Effects of God's Mercy require Conditions in the Subjects that
receive them: for he pardons only penitent Believers, and glorifies none but
persevering Saints.

To make this clear, it is worthy of Observation, The Gospel has several
Denominations. It Is called a Law, a Covenant, and a Testament. It Is called the
Law of Faith, Romans 3.27.
and the Law of the Spiritual Life. As a Law, it signifies a new Right that God
has most freely established in favor of lost Man, that commands certain
Duties, and sets before them Eternal Life as the Reward of Obedience, and
Eternal Death the Punishment of Disobedience. According to this the trial and
decision of Men's everlasting States shall be, which is the Character of a true
Law. This Law of Grace is very different from the Law of Nature, that required
entire Innocence, and for the least omission, or accusing Act, past an
irrevocable Doom upon the Offenders; for that strictness and severity is
mollified by the Gospel, which accepts of sincere persevering Obedience tho
imperfect; accordingly it is called the Law of Liberty. James 2.
But the Law of Faith is unalterable, and admits of no Dispensation from the
Duties required in order to our being everlastingly happy.

2. The Gospel is styled a Covenant, and that imports a reciprocal Engagement
between Parties for the performance of the Matter contained in it. The Covenant
of Grace includes the Promise of pardoning and rewarding Mercy on God's part,
and the Conditions on Man's, with respect to which it is to be performed. There
is an inviolable dependence between them. He will be our God, Heb. 9.
to make us happy, but we must be his People to yield unreserved Obedience to
him. 2 Cor.
He will be our Father, and we shall be his Sons and Daughters; but it is upon
the terms of purifying our selves from all pollutions of Flesh and Spirit, and
unfeigned endeavors to perfect Holiness in his fear. It Is astonishing Goodness
that he is pleased to condescend to such a Treaty with fallen Creatures: by a
voluntary Promise he encourages them, but tho most free in making, it is
conditional in the performance. The constancy of his Holy Nature obliges him to
fulfill his Word, but it is if we do not fail on our part by carelessness of our
Duty. A Presumer may seal Assurance to himself, and be deceived in this great
Matter, but God will not be mocked. If we prove false in the Covenant, he will
be faithful, and exclude those from Heaven that were neglectful of the
Conditions to which it is promised.

3. The Gospel is styled, a Testament sealed in the Blood of Christ, confirmed
by his Death. The Donation of eternal Blessings in it is not absolute and
irrespective, but the Heirs are admitted to the possession of the Inheritance
according to the Will of the rich liberal and wise Testator. There can be no
regular Title or Claim made out without performing what is required. And this
is the Will of God and Christ our Sanctification, without which we cannot enjoy
it.

Now from hence we may see the admirable Agreement between these two Notions,
that Heaven is a Gift, and a Reward. It Is a Reward in the order of giving it,
not due to the Work, but from the Bounty of the Giver. God gives Heaven to
those that faithfully serve him. But their Service was due to God, of no worth
in respect of Heaven; so that Man's Work is no Merit, and God's Reward is a
Gift. Our everlasting Glory must be ascribed to his most free Grace, as much as
the pardon of our Sins.

I shall now proceed to consider, what the Gospel declares to be indispensably
requisite in order to our obtaining of Heaven: this is comprised in the holy
Change of Man's Nature, which I will briefly unfold, and show how necessary it
is to qualify us for Celestial Glory.

1. This holy Change is expressed in Scripture by the new Birth. Our Savior,
with a solemn repeated Asseveration, John 3.3.
tells Nicodemus; Verily, verily, except a Man be born again, he cannot see the
Kingdom of God. Sin is natural to Man from his Conception and Birth, and
infects with its Contagion all his Faculties. This is fomented and cherisht by
Temptations that easily encompass him. The Understanding is polluted with evil
Principles, full of strong Prejudices, and lofty Imaginations against the
supernatural Mysteries of Salvation. It Is full of Ignorance and Folly, and from
hence either rejects them as incredible, or despises them as impertinent or
unprofitable. The Will is depraved and perverse, full of unruly and unhallowed
Affections. The Senses are luxurious and rebellious. In short, Man is so
viciously and sensually inclined, so alienated from the Life of God, as if he
had no diviner Part within him, that should aspire to a spiritual Blessedness,
that should regulate and control the excess of the inferior Appetites. This
is the unhappy Character Satan impressed on him in his Fall, and without
Renovation upon an infinite account he is incapable of seeing God. This
Renovation consists not in the change of his Substance, as the Water was
miraculously turned into Wine at the Marriage in Cana of Galilee: the same Soul
with its essential Powers, the same Body with its natural Senses, the Work of
the Creator remains; but in the cleansing of his stained Nature, in the
sanctifying his Faculties that are the Springs of his Actions, the whole Man is
quickened into a Divine Life, and enabled to act in conformity to it. And of
this the new Birth is a convenient Illustration. An active Principle of
Holiness is planted in him, that springs up into visible Actions. The Apostle
particularly expresses it in his earnest Prayer for the Thessalonians, The very
God of Peace sanctify you wholly, and preserve your whole Spirit, Soul and Body
blameless, till the coming of Jesus Christ. Every Faculty is renewed, and every
Grace infused that constitutes the Divine Image. The Mind is renewed by
Spiritual Light, to believe the Truth and Goodness of unseen Things promised,
the reality and dreadfulness of Things threatened in the Word of God. It sees
the truest Beauty in Holiness, the highest Honor in Obedience to God, the
greatest Equity and Excellence in his Service. The Will is renewed by holy
Love, a purifying Flame, and feels the attractive virtue of our blessed End,
before all desirable Things on Earth, and determines to pursue it in the
vigorous use of proper means. The Body is made an holy Instrument fit for the
renewed Soul. In short, the natural Man becomes Spiritual in his Perceptions,
Resolutions and Actions. All things are become New. There is a firm assent, an
inviolable adherence to those most precious Objects revealed in the Scripture,
and a sincere chosen constant Obedience flows from the renewed Faculties. And
from hence we may distinguish between regenerating Grace, and formal Hypocrisy
in some, and the proficiency of Nature, and power of common Grace in others. A
Hypocrite in Religion is acted from without, by mercenary base respects; and
his Conscience being cauteris'd, handles sacred Things without feeling: a
regenerate Person is moved by an internal living Principle, and performs his
Duties with lively Affections. Natural Conscience under the compulsion of Fear,
may lay a restraint upon the outward Acts of Sin, without an inward Consent to
the Sanctity of the Law. Renewing Grace cleanses the Fountain, and the Current
is pure. It reconciles the Affections to the most Holy Commands. I love thy Law
because it is pure, says the Psalmist.

A Moral Principle may induce one to abstain from many Sins, and to perform
many praiseworthy things in conformity to Reason. But this is neither
sanctifying nor saving; for it only prunes Sin as if it were a good Plant, and
does not root it up; it compounds with it, and does not destroy it. There may
be still an impure Indulgence to the secret lustings of the Heart,
notwithstanding the Restraint upon their Exercise. And many Duties may be done
on lower Motives, without a divine respect to the Commands and Glory of God.

But renewing Grace subjects the Soul to the whole Royalty of the Law,
uniformly inclines it to express Obedience to all its Precepts, because they
are pure, and derived from the eternal Spring of Purity. It mortifies
Concupiscence, and quickens to every good Work, from a Principle of Love to
God, and in this is distinguished from the most refined unregenerate Morality.
In short, there may be a superficial tincture of Religion from common Grace, a
transient Esteem, vanishing Affections, and earnest Endeavors for a time after
Spiritual Things, and yet a Person remain in a state of Unregeneracy. But
renewing Grace is a permanent solid Principle, that makes a Man partaker of the
Divine Nature, and elevates him above himself.

This holy Change is wrought by Divine Power. Our Savior tells Nicodemus,
Except a Man be born of Water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom
of God. The Analogy of a new Birth signifies, that it is entirely the Work of
the sanctifying Spirit, that conveys a Principle of Life in order to the
Functions of it. It Is the living Impression of God, the sole Efficient and
Exemplar of it, the Fruit and Image of the Divine Virtues. It Is expressed by the
new Creature. The production of it is attributed to God's Power displaying it
self in a peculiar excellent way, even in that precise manner, as in making the
World. For as in the first Creation all things were made originally of nothing,
so in the second, the Habit of Grace is infused into the Soul that was utterly
void of it, and in which there was as little preparation for true Holiness, as
of Nothing to produce this great and regular World. And although there is not only
an absolute privation of Grace, but a fierce resistance against it, yet
creating invincible Power does as infallibly and certainly produce its Effect
in forming the new Creature, as in making the World. From hence it appears that
preventing renewing Grace is so entirely the Work of God; as his forming the
humane Body from the Dust of Earth at first. But with this difference, the
first Creation was done without any sense in the Subject, of the efficiency of
the Divine Power in producing it: but in the new Creation, Man feels the vital
Influence of the Spirit, applying it self to all his Faculties, reforming and
enabling them to act according to the quality of their Nature.

And by the way we may observe the admirable Grace showed to Man in the
renovation of his corrupted Nature. In the composition of his Being are united
a Spirit like the Angels, and a Body like terrestrial Animals, by which he
partakes of the spiritual and natural Life: but he has peculiar Favors
conferred upon him. For, whereas his Soul sinned with the Angels, and his Body
dies with the Beasts, yet God is pleased to restore them by his glorious Power.
An Angel after Sin never repents, and is therefore incapable of Pardon, and
irrecoverably disinherited of Heaven: a Beast after Death never revives: but
though Man sins and dies, yet his Soul may be renewed by Divine Grace, and his
Body shall be raised in an incorruptible Glory.

Now the indispensable necessity of this holy Change is evident from the Words
of our Savior, for he speaks universally, Except a Man be born again, he
cannot see the Kingdom of God. He does not simply declare that an unregenerate
Man shall not, but with the greatest Emphasis, cannot, to signify an absolute
impossibility of it. The Jews highly presumed of the privilege of their carnal
Birth, they sprang from the pure and noble Blood of Abraham, God's Friend; they
had the Seal of the Holy Covenant marked in their Flesh: and hence it was
proverbial amongst them, that every Israelite should have a part in the World
to come. But our Savior overthrows this vain conceit, and tells them that the
supernatural Birth entitles to the supernatural Inheritance. Circumcision then,
and Baptism now, without real Grace is an ineffectual sign, of no avail to
Salvation. Romans 8.17.
In the quality of Sons, we are Heirs of God's Kingdom. And that honorable
Relation we have upon a double account; Gal. 4.7.
by Adoption and Regeneration. Divine Adoption is not a mere change of our
state, a naked Declaration that one shall be dignified with the Title of God's
Son; but a holy Nature is always infused into the Person, whereby he is made
like to God in his Excellencies. In this it differs from humane Adoption, that
gives the Name and Arms, the Honor and Estate of the Adopter to a Person,
without conveying any of his intellectual or moral Endowments. Whom God adopts,
he begets to a Divine Life. Besides, our Savior purchased this high Privilege
for us: God sent his Son made of a Woman, under the Law, to redeem them that
were under the Law, that we might receive the Adoption of Sons: By Union with
him we receive the investiture of this Dignity. Now whoever is in Christ is a
new Creature. For the quickening Spirit, that is to the Soul what the Soul is to
the Body, the principle of Life and Strength, of Beauty and Motion, and an
active purifying Faith that is influential upon all other Graces, are the Band
of that vital Union: So that as all in Adam are universally corrupt by the
first Birth, all that are in Christ are made holy by a new Birth. But of this I
shall speak in the next Chapter more fully, under a distinct Head. Briefly, the
Spirit of Grace that sanctifies, is the Spirit of Adoption that seals our Right
to that Kingdom.

Now the Reasons why this Change must be in order to our obtaining of Heaven,
are these:

1. There is an exquisite Wisdom shines in all God's Works, in disposing them
for the ends to which they are appointed: and is it not monstrously absurd to
imagine, he will admit into his Presence and Kingdom, those that are absolutely
unqualified for its Blessedness, and opposite to its Purity?

2. His invariable Justice excludes for ever all unholy Persons from Heaven.
For in the last Judgment God will be glorified as a Governor, in the
distribution of Rewards with respect to the Obedience and Disobedience of Men.
It Is worthy of observation, that the Actions of God on the reasonable Creatures
are of two sorts. Some proceed from his sovereign good Pleasure, of which there
is no motive or reason in the Subjects on which they are terminated. Thus by a
free and insuperable Decree (when all Mankind, lapsed and miserable, was in his
view) he chose some to be Vessels of Mercy, and by privilege separated them
from the rest that finally perish. Now what induced him to place a singular
Love on the Elect? There was nothing in them to incline his Compassion, being
equally guilty and depraved with the rest of the Progeny of Adam. This
difference therefore is to be resolved into his unaccountable and adorable
Will, as the sole cause of it. Thus God declares it to be his glorious
Prerogative, I will have Mercy on whom I will have Mercy, and I will have
Compassion on whom I will have Compassion. And this is no unjust acceptance of
Persons: For as a Benefactor, he may dispense his own Favors as he pleases. A
Gift from mere and arbitrary Bounty may be bestowed on some, and not on others,
without injustice. But there are other Actions of God for which there is an
evident reason in Men on whom they are terminated. Thus as the supreme Judge,
without respect of Persons, 1 Pet. 1.17.
he will judge and reward every Man according to his Works. The Evangelical Law
(as was touched on before) is the rule of eternal Judgment, Romans 2.16. Acts
26.18.
and gives a right from the gracious Promise of God, to all penitent Believers
in the Kingdom of Heaven, and excludes all impenitent Infidels. Divine Justice
will illustriously appear then in distinguishing Believers from Unbelievers by
their Works, the proper Fruits either of Faith or Infidelity. All the thick
Clouds of Disgraces, Calumnies, Persecutions, that often oppress the most
sincere Christians here, shall not then darken their Holiness; and all the
specious appearances of Piety, which the most artificial Hypocrites make use of
to deceive others, shall not conceal their Wickedness. And accordingly the one
shall be absolved and glorified, the others condemned and punished for ever. In
short, without violation of his own righteous establishment in the Gospel, Heb.
12.14.
God cannot receive the unholy into his Glory.

3. Besides the Legal Bar that excludes unsanctified Persons from the beatifick
vision of God, there is a moral incapacity. Suppose that Justice should allow
Omnipotence to translate such a Sinner to Heaven, would the Place make him
happy? Can two incongruous Natures delight in one another? The happiness of
Sense is by an impression of Pleasure from a suitable Object: The happiness of
intellectual Beings arises from an entire conformity of dispositions. So that
unless God recede from his Holiness, which is absolutely impossible, or Man be
purified, and changed into his likeness, there can be no sweet Communion
between them. Our Savior assigns this Reason of the necessity of Regeneration
in order to our admission into Heaven: That which is born of the flesh, is
flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit, is Spirit. According to the
quality of the Principle, such is what proceeds from it. The Flesh is a corrupt
Principle, and accordingly the Natural Man is wholly carnal in his propensions,
operations, and end. The Disease is turned into his Constitution. He is dead to
the Spiritual Life, to the actions and enjoyments that are proper to it: Nay,
there is in him a surviving Principle of Enmity to that Life: not only a mortal
coldness to God, but a stiff aversation from him, a perpetual resistance and
impatience of the Divine Presence, that would disturb his voluptuous
enjoyments. The Exercises of Heaven would be as the Torments of Hell to him,
while in the midst of those pure Joys his inward inclinations vehemently run
into the lowest Lees of Sensuality. And therefore till this Contrariety, so
deep and predominant in an unholy Person, be removed, it is utterly impossible
he should enjoy God with satisfaction. As it was necessary that God should
become like Man on Earth, to purchase that Felicity for him, so Man must be
like God in Heaven before he can possess it. Holiness alone prepares Men for
Celestial Happiness; that is against the corruption and above the perfection of
mere Nature.

I shall now proceed to consider more particularly what is requisite in order
to our obtaining of Heaven.

1. Faith in the Redeemer is absolutely required of all that will partake of
the Salvation purchased by him. John 3.16.
God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son; that whoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have Eternal Life. This is the Spirit
and Substance of the Gospel, therefore I will briefly unfold it. The Son of God
having assumed the human Nature, and performed what was necessary for the
expiation of Sin, Phil. 2.8, 9.
the Father was so pleased with his Obedience, that from his lowest State he
raised him to Divine Glory, and gave him supreme Authority, and all-sufficient
Power to communicate that Glory to others. Thus our Savior declares; John 17.2.
Thou have given him (i. e. the Son) power over all Flesh, that he should give
Eternal Life to as many as thou have given him. And he exhorts the People,
Labor for that Meat that endures unto Eternal Life, John 6.
which the Son of Man shall give unto you, for him has God the Father sealed.
Now this glorious Life is not given to all, but only to those who are united to
him. As Adam, the principle of the carnal corrupt Nature, derives Guilt and
Death to all his Progeny: so Jesus Christ (who is opposed to him) the Head and
Prince of the renewed State, communicates Life and Glory to his People. The
Apostle expresses it, 1 Cor. 15.22.
As in Adam all dye, his natural Descendants are involved in his Condemnation;
even so in Christ shall all be made alive: that is, all that are spiritually
united to him, shall partake of his glorious Resurrection. And St. John tells
us, 1 John 5.12.
He that has the Son, has Life; and he that has not the Son, has not Life.
The having the Son, upon which our right to Eternal Life depends, is believing
in him. Faith has a principal Efficiency in receiving Christ, therefore it is
expressed by that Act; John 1.13.
But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the Sons of God,
(and consequently Heirs of Glory) so as many as believed on his Name. And
Christ is said to dwell in our Hearts by Faith. Ephesians. 3.17.
This is not a mere assent to the Doctrines of the Gospel concerning the
Dignity of his Person, that he is in so high and glorious a Relation of being
the Eternal Son of God, and the infinite value of his Merits, whereby he is
able to save all that come unto God by him, and his merciful compassionate
Nature to embrace returning Sinners, and the excellency of the benefits
purchased by him, but such a Belief as sways the Will and Affections to receive
him upon God's terms for our Salvation. Faith is seated in the whole Soul, in
the Mind and Heart, and accepts of Christ entirely as Prophet, Priest, and
King. The parts of the Mediator's Office, are inseparably connected, and all
the Effects of them are communicated to the same Persons. Jesus Christ is made
of God to Believers, 1 Cor. 1.
Wisdom; to cure their Ignorance and Folly; Righteousness, to abolish their
Guilt; Sanctification, to renew their Natures; and Redemption, to free them at
last from the Grave, and bring them to Glory. From hence it is clear, that the
Faith, which is justifying and saving, includes in its Nature, as dependence
and trust in Christ as a powerful and merciful Mediator, that is able and
willing to reconcile us to God, and make us for ever happy in his Favor; so a
sincere resolution of Obedience and Subjection to all his holy Commands, even
to the plucking out of the right Eye, and the cutting off the right hand, the
parting with the most pleasing or profitable Sins. For the Promises of God that
are the Rule of Faith, make an offer of Christ upon these Conditions to us: Him
has God exalted with his right hand, Acts 5.31.
to be a Prince and a Savior, for to give repentance to Israel, and
forgiveness of Sins. And only the Justified shall be glorified. Romans 8.
Those therefore who desire a partial interest in him as a Savior, out of
absolute necessity to escape Hell, and will not out of Love submit to him as
their Prince, have not that Faith that is unfeigned, and gives a title to
Eternal Life by the Promises of the Gospel.

2. We must choose Heaven as our supreme Happiness, and regard it as the main
end of our Lives. Man fell from his Duty and Felicity by preferring sensual
Pleasure before the Favor of God, and became guilty of the greatest
Disobedience and Dishonor to his Maker, and is restored by the holy change of
his Will, the setting his Affections on a pure Spiritual Blessedness. This
subliming the Will, and turning its Love and Choice from the Creatures to God,
is the effect of Divine Grace, and wrought in a rational way. For Man is not
moved as artificial Engines by force, nor as Brutes from necessity, their
Faculties being determined by the outward application of Objects: he is not
drawn up to Heaven by such a natural impression, as Steel by the Lodestone,
nor forced by a violent motion as a Stone ascends, but as an understanding free
Agent, by the direction of the enlightened Mind, and the consent of the Will, an
elective unconstrained Faculty. And herein the Wisdom, Goodness and Equity of
God's Transactions with Man appears. His Wisdom, in that as he has ordered in
the whole sphere of Nature, that the active Powers of every Creature, be drawn
forth into exercise for their preservation, and accordingly he is pleased to
work in and by them; so the Understanding and Will, the Principles of Operation
in Man, are to deliberate and choose in order to his Happiness. Otherwise the
rational Faculties would be in vain. His Goodness and Equity, in that he sets
before them Eternal Life as the Reward of Obedience. God will be glorified by
him as a Lawgiver and a Benefactor, and has ordained in the Gospel, that all
who choose and diligently seek the Kingdom of Heaven shall infallibly obtain it,
and none be deprived of it but for their neglect. The Decree of a final state
of Misery, though not in time, yet is consequent in the order of causes to the
obstinate reluctance of Sinners against restoring Grace, and the wilful
forsaking their own Mercies. Therefore God vindicates the Equity of his
Proceedings with Men by their own Principles, and with tender pity
expostulates, Why will ye die? The corrupt Will, declining from God, and
adhering to the Creature as its Happiness, is the true cause of Man's ruin.
This will infinitely clear the Wisdom and Justice, the Purity and Goodness of
God from all Imputation.

The choice of Heaven for our Felicity is primarily to be determined, for it is
from the prospect of it that all holy Counsels derive their Life and Vigor. As
in drawing the Picture of a Man, the first work is to delineate the Head, not
only as the part that in dignity and eminence is above the rest, but as it
regulates the drawing of the other parts, and gives a just proportion and
correspondence between them, without which the whole Figure becomes disordered
and monstrous. Thus in the moral consideration of Man, that which is primarily
to be considered is the Soul, and its final Felicity, as incomparably more
excellent than the Body and its Pleasures: for this will have a powerful
influence upon the whole Life, directing to avoid what is inconsistent and
impertinent, and to do what is conducive to it.

Now this being a matter of unspeakable importance, I will, First, Show what
the regular Choice of Heaven includes, as to its Qualities and Effects.
Secondly, Direct how to make this Choice. Thirdly, Present some powerful
Motives to excite us to it.


The Qualities of this Choice are three.

1. It must be sincere and cordial. 2. Early, in our first and best Days. 3.
Firm and constant.
1. It must be sincere and cordial. The most essential and active Desire in
humane Nature is to Happiness; but there being two kinds of good Things
presented to the Will, that solicit the Affections, the Pleasures of Sense, and
spiritual Joys, from hence it is that that which makes Men happy is the Object
of Election. And although there is nothing more uniform and inviolable than the
natural inclination to Happiness, yet the great distinction of Mankind arises
from this source, the regular or perverse use of this Inclination, the wise or
mistaking choice of Happiness. Now the sincerity of our Choice is discovered,
when it is clear and entire, arising from a transcendent esteem of the Favor
and Enjoyment of God as our chief Good, and absolutely requisite for us. And
from hence it is evident that the Choice of true Happiness, necessarily
includes the despising and rejecting of the false Happiness that stands in
competition with it. There cannot be two reigning Principles in the Soul: for
it cannot vigorously apply it self to two Objects at the same time. Our Savior
has decided it, No Man can serve two Masters, for either he will hate the one
and love the other, or hold to the one and despise the other: ye cannot serve
God and Mammon. The Masters are irreconcilable, and their Commands are
directly opposite. It was as possible to place upon the same Altar the Ark of
God, and the Idol of the Philistines, as that Heaven and the World should
compound and take equal shares in our Affections. Indeed, if the Conceptions in
the Mind are but faint and floating of the universal satisfying Goodness of the
Object proposed to make us happy, the Will remains in suspense; but when it is
clearly and strongly represented, the Heart is drawn entirely to embrace it.
Divine Grace, by the illumination of the Understanding, purifies and changes
the depraved Will, and heals the distempered Affections. The wise Merchant that
had a discerning Eye saw reason enough to part with all, that he might gain the
Pearl of Price, the Grace and Glory of the Kingdom of Heaven. The Apostle
declares his resolute contempt of the concurrence of all the Prerogatives
either the Law or the World could afford him, that he might have an Interest in
Christ, the Reconciler and Restorer of Man to the Favor and Fellowship of God.
But what things were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ; yea doubtless
I count all things but loss for the Excellency of the Knowledge of Jesus Christ
my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but
dung, that I might win Christ. The glorious Gospel is the brightest and most
pleasant Light that ever shone upon the World, a Revelation of the deepest
Wisdom and most admirable Love, wherein the Combination of God's holy and
wonderful Counsels for our Salvation is unfolded; and accordingly St. Paul,
with the greatest Life of Affection, sets forth his value of it, and by full
and most vilifying Expressions, rejects all things in comparison of it.

2. The Sincerity of the Heavenly Choice is discovered by a zealous observance
of the Means requisite in order to it. Inanimate things incline to rest in
their Center, the Rational intend and pursue it. The blessed End, when valued
and respected according to its worth, excites and directs the Affections and
Endeavors in that order and measure as is proportionable to its Excellency,
and the Difficulties of obtaining it. There may be a naked estimation, and some
desires of Eternal Happiness simply considered, yet the Will remains incomplete
and undetermined in its choice: for the End in conjunction with the Means is
propounded to us, and the carnal Man will not consent to the Means. He dislikes
the Holiness of Religion, and will rather forfeit Heaven, than submit to such
strict terms. Though with Balaam, in a fit of Devotion, he says, O that I might
die the death of the Righteous, and that my last End might be like his; yet
from Indulgence to his sensual Inclinations, he will not live as the Righteous.
All his Wishes of true Happiness are soon strangled by the predominant love of
some Vanity. It Is said of the Israelites, Psalm. 106.14.
they despised the pleasant Land, not absolutely in it self, for it was the
Glory of all Lands, abounding with things for the support and delight of Man;
but considering its distance, a Wilderness waste and wild interposing, and the
Enemies to be encountered, they did not think it worthy of undergoing such
Hazards and Difficulties. The Land of Canaan was a Type of Heaven, both with
respect to its pleasantness, and the manner of the Israelites obtaining it.
Their Title to it was derived from the rich Bounty of God, therefore it is
called the Land of Promise; but it was to be possessed by Conquest. Thus the
Celestial Canaan is the pure Gift of God, but the actual enjoyment of it is
obtained by victorious resistance, against the Enemies of our Salvation. And
Carnal Men despise this pleasant Land, the Promise being inseparably joined
with Precepts of Duty and Obedience, from which they are averse. But he that
chooses sincerely, is joyful and vigorous in the use of means for acquiring his
most desired Good. Ardent Affections, like Elijah's Chariot of Fire, ravish the
Soul above this sensible World, to the place where God dwells in Glory. Zeal
animates his Endeavors, as the Motion of the Heart diffuses the Spirits into
the Arteries, to convey Life to all parts of the Body. One thing (says the
inflamed Psalmist) have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after, that I
may dwell in the House of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the
Beauty of the Lord, and to enquire into his Temple. The sensual Man is ranging
abroad for satisfaction, and shoots all the Game that crosses his Eye; but the
Soul that has a discovering Light, and feeling heat of the divine Beauty,
unites all its desires in God, and with affection to an Ecstasy longs for the
enjoyment of him, and the endeavors are in some proportion to the desires. Our
Savior tells us, That from the days of John the Baptist until now, the Kingdom
of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force. Some previous
Rays of the Sun of Righteousness appeared in his Ministry, and produced such a
holy Ardency in those Converts, that with all resolution, diligence and
earnestness they sought to be partakers of the Blessedness revealed. Lazy
Desires, easy Prosecutions, sluggish Attempts, discover that the Heart is not
thoroughly engaged for the spiritual Eternal Good. When the End is truly
designed, it will give Law to the Actions. This is visible in Men who are
wholly led by Sense, how sagacious, how sollicitous are they to accomplish
their Ends and base Designs? They try all ways either by fine dissimulation, or
toilsome industry, to obtain their Desires. No time is too much in their
gainful Affairs, or voluptuous Enjoyments. They transform the Night to lengthen
out the Day for their Profit, they vail the Day to lengthen out the Night for
their Ease and Pleasure. But alas, Heaven is only regarded by the By; as if the
intellectual Soul were only given to dwell with the Body on Earth, the place of
its Banishment, and direct Affairs here below, and not to lead in the way to
Heaven, the place of its Nativity, and prepare for another World. The Work of
Salvation is followed with that remiss degree of Affection, as if it were a
slight matter whether performed or neglected. These Persons carry their
Conviction in their Bosoms; for they are ardent and active to obtain inferior
and infinitely less concerning Ends, but with that cold application mind the
superior nobler End of Man, that it is wholly frustrate, which plainly shows it
was never seriously intended by them.

The sight of Worldly Men so active and vigilant to prosecute their low
Designs, should quicken us to seek with greater diligence and alacrity the
Kingdom of Heaven, and the Righteousness thereof. A Carnal Wretch, urged by the
sting of a brutish Desire, with what impatience does he pursue the Pleasures of
Sin that are but for a season? An ambitious Person, with what an intemperate
height of Passion does he chase a Feather? A covetous Man, how greedily does he
pursue the Advantages of the present World that passes away, and the Lusts
thereof? Ah! how do they upbraid our indifferent Desires, our dull Delays and
cold Endeavors, when such a high Prize is set before us? Who is able to
conceive the ravishing Pleasure of the Soul when it first enters through the
beautiful Gate of the Celestial Temple, and sees the Glory of the Place, and
hears a Voice from the Throne, Enter into thy Master's Joy, to be happy with
him for ever? The serious belief of this, will draw forth all our active Powers
in the Service of God.

3. The sincerity of our Heavenly Choice declares it self, in the temper and
frame of our Hearts, with respect to all temporal Things in this World. For our
main and happy End being established, that it consists not in secular Riches,
and Honors, and the Pleasures of Sense, but in the clear Vision of God, the
blessedness of the Spirit; it follows that all present things are in our use so
far Good or Evil, and to be desired or not, as they are profitable or
prejudicial to our obtaining Salvation, as they conduct or divert us from
Heaven. A wise Christian looks on temporal things not through the Glass of
disordered Passions, that are impetuous and impatient for what is grateful to
them, but with reference to his future Happiness. He considers the train of
Temptations that attend an exalted Condition, and desires such a portion of
these things, as may redound to the Glory of the Giver, and be improved for his
own Salvation. This Purity of Affections our Savior teaches us: For in his
Divine Form of Prayer, the true Directory of our Desires, are set down in an
admirable order all things we are to pray for. And they respect the End, or the
Means. The End is the primary Object of our Desires, accordingly the two first
Petitions concern our blessed End, as it respects God and our selves. We pray,
Hallowed be thy Name, that is, by the reverence and adoration of all his
Subjects: and, Thy Kingdom come, that is, for the manifestation of his Eternal
Glory in the next World, that we may reign with him. The Means in order to this
End are of two sorts. Some conduct to it by themselves, those are the good
things desired in the third and fourth Petitions; and some lead to it by
accident, and those are the freedom from Evils expressed in the last Petition.
The good things desired, either have a direct influence upon our obtaining
Happiness; and they are summed up in our universal Obedience to God's Will,
expressed in the third Petition, Let thy Will be done on Earth as it is in
Heaven; or they are such as by way of subserviency promote our Happiness, and
those we pray for in the fourth Petition, Give us this day our daily Bread. And
it is observable there is but one Petition for Temporal Blessings, and it is the
last in the order of those that concern good things. And that single Petition
is so restrained, that it is evident by its Tenor, that earthly things are not
absolutely good to be desired for themselves, but relatively and subordinately
to our eternal Good. Daily Bread we must ask of our heavenly Father, the
necessary support of the present Life, without which we cannot exercise our
internal or external Powers and Faculties in his Service, but not Delicacies
and Abundance for the luxurious Appetite.

The difference of Conditions in the present World is very great: as in
Pharaoh's Dream, some Ears of Corn were so full and weighty that they bended
with their weight; others so thin and blasted, that they were as Stubble for
the Fire. Thus some abound in all Felicities possible in this Life, others are
chastened every Morning, under various and continual Afflictions. Now this
infallible Principle being planted in the Heart, that all present things are to
be improved with respect to our future Happiness, will moderate the Affections
in Prosperity, so to use the World that we may enjoy God, and make us not only
patient, but pleased in Adversities, as they are preparatory for Heaven.

The Original of all the Sins and Misery of Men, Frui est amore alicujus rei
inhaerere propter seipsam uti autem, quod in usum venerit, ad id quod amas
obtinendum refer. Aug. de Doct. Christ.
is their perverse abuse of things, by turning the Means into the End, setting
their Affections of Love, Desire, and Joy upon sensible things, as their proper
Happiness, with inconsiderate neglect of the spiritual eternal state, to which
all other things should be subservient. As if one diseased and sickly in a
Foreign Country, that could not possibly recover Health but in his Native Air,
in his return thither, invited by the pleasantness of the way, should take up
his residence in it, and never arrive to his own Country. Among the West
Indians some are Acosta.
reported to be so swift in running, that no Horse can keep pace with them, and
they have a constant rule in their Diet, to eat of no Beast, or Bird, or Fish
that is slow in motion, fancying it would transfuse a sluggishness in them. The
Christian Life is by the Apostle compared to a Race, and earthly things by an
inseparable property of Nature load and depress the Soul, that it cannot with
vigor run the Race set before it. The Believer therefore who intends for the
high price of his Calling, and is true to his End, will be temperate in all
things. Nay, he will not only be circumspect, lest they should check with his
great Design, but wisely manages them in subserviency to it. St. Paul charges
them that are rich in this World, to do good, 1 Timothy 9.18, 19.
to be rich in good Works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate, laying
in store for themselves a good Foundation against the time to come, that they
may lay hold of eternal Life.

And the fixed aim at Heaven as our Felicity, will reconcile an afflicted state
to us. When temporal Evils are effectual means to promote our everlasting
Happiness, the amiableness and excellency of the End changes their Nature, and
makes those Calamities that in themselves are intolerable, to become light and
easy. The Poor, the Mourners, the Persecuted are blessed now, because theirs is
the Kingdom of Heaven. The Apostle, tho under variety of sharp Troubles, yet
expresses his sense with that mitigation, as but lightly touched with them: as
sorrowful, but always rejoicing. From hence he tells us, that with unfainting
courage he prosecuted his glorious End. For our light Afflictions that are but
for a moment, work for us a far more exceeding weight of Glory. This seriously
believed and considered, will make us understand the Harmony and Consent of the
most discordant parts of God's Providence. This will reconcile the severity and
roughness of his Hand, with the tender Compassions of his Heart toward his
Servants. This will dry up Rivers of unprofitable Tears that flow from the
Afflicted, and make the Cross of Christ a light burden. For their heaviest
Afflictions are not only consistent with his Love, but the Effects of it, being
influential upon their Happiness. We are now tossed upon the alternate Waves of
Time, but it is that we may arrive at the Port, the blessed Bosom of our
Savior, and enjoy a peaceful Calm; and so we shall be ever with the Lord.
Words of infinite sweetness! This is the Song of our Prosperity, and the Charm
of our Adversity: Well might the Apostle add immediately after, Therefore
comfort one another with these Words.

4. The sincere Choice of Heaven as our final Happiness, will make us aspire to
the greatest height of Holiness we are capable of in the present state. For the
End has always a powerful Virtue to transform a Man into its Likeness: and
Heaven is a state of perfect conformity to the Holy God. This difference is
observable between the Understanding and the Will in their Operations: The
Understanding in forming Conceptions of Things, draws the Object to it self.
The Will is drawn by the Object to it chooses, and is always fashioning and
framing the Soul into an entire conformity to it. Thus Carnal Objects when
propounded as the End of a Man, secretly imprint on him their Likeness, his
Thoughts, Affections, and whole Conversation is Carnal. As the Psalmist speaks
of the Worshippers of Idols, they that make them are like unto them, so is
every one that trusts in them: whatever we adore and esteem, we are changed
into its Image. Idolaters are as stupid and senseless, as the Idols to which
they pay Homage. Thus when God is chosen as our supreme Good and last End, by
conversing with him, the Image of his glorious Holiness is derived on the Soul,
and it becomes Godly: the Heart is drawn by his attractive Excellencies, and
the Life directed to him. This being a Point of great importance, I shall
further prove and illustrate it. There is no deliberating about the degrees of
that which is loved for it self as our End. More or less may respect the Means
that are valued and used to obtain it, but the Love of the End is vast and
unlimited. A Physician endeavors to recover his Patient to sound and perfect
Health, that being the End of his Art. He that seeks for Honor or Riches, is
not content with a Mediocrity of Success, but drives on his Affairs to the full
period of his Desires. An ardent lover of Learning with a noble jealousy
strives to excel others in Knowledge. In short, no Man designs and longs for a
thing as his Happiness, but will use all diligence to gain the present and full
possession of it. Therefore it cannot be imagined that any Person sincerely
propounds the enjoyment of Heaven as his End, but Love will make him fervent
and industrious to be as Heavenly as is possible here. He will strive by
blessed and glorious Gradations, to ascend to the perfection of his Aims and
Desires, to be holy as God is holy in all manner of Conversation, to be pure as
Christ is pure. We have an admirable instance of this in St. Paul, who
declares, Brethren, Phil. 3.13, 14.
I count not my self to have apprehended; but this one thing I do, forgetting
those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are
before, I press toward the Mark, for the Prize of the high Calling of God in
Christ Jesus. His Progress was great, yet that did not make him slack in the
prosecution of his End. He labored to attain the Precedent of our Savior, to
feel the Power of his Death and Life, to apprehend Christ entirely and
perfectly as Christ had apprehended him. He was very diligent to improve the
Divine Image in his Heart and Life.

From hence we may discover the vanity of their Hopes, that are of lukewarm
Affections in Religion, (the abhorred character of Laodicea) who esteem it a
prudent Principle, as convenient for their carnal ease and interest, not to be
earnest in following Holiness. Vices in mediocrity are tolerable with them,
only the excess is condemned. They content themselves with a mediocrity in
Religion, and are presumptuous and secure, as the Church that said, I am rich,
and have need of nothing. They boast as if they had found out the temperate
Region between the burning Line and the frozen Pole. They account all that is
above their degrees in Religion, to be furious or indiscreet Zeal, and all
below to be dead, cold Profaneness. They censure those for Hypocrisy or
unnecessary Strictness, who are visibly better, and stand upon proud
comparisons with those who are visibly worse. And thus set off themselves by
taxing others. But how easily do Men deceive and damn themselves? Can we have
too much of Heaven upon the Earth? Can we become too like God, when a perfect
conformity to him is our Duty and Felicity? Indeed Moral Virtue consists in a
Mediocrity, not of the habitual Quality, but of the Affections and Actions
between the vicious extremities. Fortitude consists in the mean between
Cowardice, and rash Boldness; but how much the more confirmed the courageous
Habit is, so much the more a Man excells in that Virtue. Liberality consists
between an indiscreet Profuseness, and sordid Avarice; Patience between a soft
Delicacy, and stupid Insensibility. Thus Philosophic Virtue glories in its
Beauty as pure and entire, between two vicious Deformities. And the Religion of
many is Paganism dressed up in a Christian Fashion. But this mediocrity only
belongs to inferior Virtues, that respect things of created limited goodness,
and is determined according to the worth of their Nature. But divine Graces
respect an Object supreamly Good, and their perfection consists in their most
excellent degrees, and the most intense Affections and Operations that are
leading to it. Faith in its Obedience, Hope in its Assurance, Love in its
Ardour can never exceed. When the Object is Infinite, a mediocrity is vicious.
Humility can never descend too low, nor Love ascend too high: for reflecting
upon our natural and moral Imperfections, that we were raised from nothing,
that we are defiled and debased with Sin, we cannot have too low thoughts of
our selves. And since God the Sovereign Being, infinite in Perfections, and
infinitely amiable is the Object, no bounds or measure must be set to our
Affections, but with all our united Powers, all the Heart, and with all the
Soul, and with all the Mind, and with all the Strength, we must love him, and
please him, and endeavor to be beloved of him.

There are others will acknowledge their defects, and tell you they do not
pretend to eminent Sanctity, to the Graces of the Apostles and Martyrs, nor
aspire to their degrees in Glory, they are content with a lower place in
Heaven, and less strict Religion is sufficient for their purpose. This deceit
is strengthened by Popery, that enervates and dissolves many of our Savior's
Precepts, by teaching they are not Laws obliging all Christians to Obedience,
that will attain to eternal Life, but Counsels of Perfection: if they are not
done it is no Sin, and the performance of them meritoriously intitles to a
richer Crown. And though Men by impure Indulgencies please their sensual
Affections, yet by tasting Purgatory in the way, they may come to Heaven on
easier terms, than a universal respect to God's Commands, and an equal care to
observe them. But Death will confute all these feeble wretched Pretenses, for
though the Saints above shine with an unequal brightness, as the Stars differ
in Glory; yet none are there but Saints. And those who do not mourn under their
Imperfections, and unfeignedly desire and endeavor to be better, were never
really good. The slothful Servant that did not waste but neglect to improve his
Talent, was cast into outer darkness. There are different degrees of
punishments in Hell, but the least miserable there are miserable for ever. In
short it is a perfect contradiction, a Prodigy, for any Man to think he is
sincere in his Choice, and prepared in his Affections for the pure glorious
Felicity in Heaven, that does not labor to cleanse himself from all pollutions
of Flesh and Spirit, and to perfect Holiness in the fear of God.

Secondly, The choice of Eternal Felicity must be early in the prime of our
days. The rule of our Duty, and Reason binds us to remember our Creator in our
Youth, to pay to him the first fruits of our Time and Strength. When we are
surrounded with enticing Objects, and the Senses are entire and most capable to
enjoy them, when the electing Powers are in their vigor, then it is just we
should live to God, obey him as our Lawgiver, and prefer the fruition of him
in Heaven, the reward of Obedience, before all the pleasures of Vanity. It Is
very honorable and pleasing to God to give the Heart to him, when the Flesh
and the World strongly solicit to withdraw it. It Is a high endearment of the
Soul to him, when his Excellencies are prevalent in the Esteem and Affections
above all the Charms of the Creatures. And it is an unspeakable satisfaction to
the Spirit of a Man, to declare the truth and strength of his Love to God by
despising Temptations when they are most inviting, and the Appetite is eager
for the enjoyment of them. But alas! how many neglect their Duty, and defer
their Happiness? They think it too soon to live for Heaven before the evil Days
come, wherein they shall have no pleasure; when they cannot sin, and vainly
presume they can repent. The danger of this I have considered in the Discourse
of Death, and shall therefore proceed to the next Head.

Thirdly, Our Choice of Heaven must be constant and lasting.

The two principal Rules of the Spiritual Life are to begin and end well: to
fix and establish the main Design for everlasting Happiness, and from a
determinate Resolution and ratified Purpose of Heart to pursue it with firmness
and constancy: to live for Heaven, and with readiness and courage to die for
it, if the Glory of God so require. Perseverance is indispensably necessary in
all that will obtain the Eternal Reward.

For the clearing this most important Point, I will, First, Represent from
Scripture the Idea of Perseverance, that is attended with Salvation. Secondly,
Consider why it is so strictly required.


First, Saving Perseverance includes the permanent residence of Grace in the
Soul: It Is composed of the whole Chain of Graces, the union of holy Habits that
are at first infused into a Christian by the sanctifying Spirit. When Eternal
Life is promised to Faith, or Love, or Hope, it is upon supposal that those
Graces being planted in the Heart shall finally prosper. He that is faithful to
the Death, Rev. 2.
shall inherit the Crown of Life. It Is Love that never fails, that shall enter
into Heaven. 1 Cor. 13.
It Is Hope firm unto the End, that shall be accomplished in a glorious
Fruition. If Grace be disseised by a usurping Lust, Apostasy will follow, and
the forfeiture of our right in the Kingdom of Heaven.

2. Grace must be continually drawn forth into exercise according to our
several states and duties, and the various occasions that happen in our course
through the World. Those who are light in the Lord, are commanded to walk as
Children of the Light; to signify the excellency and purity of the Christian
Life. Those who live in the Spirit must walk in the Spirit; that is, by a
conspicuous course of Holiness declare the vigor and efficacy of the divine
Principle that is communicated to them. Paulum septultae distat inertiae celata
virtus: Virtue that breaks not forth into visible Actions, is not worthy of the
Name. The mere abstaining from evil is not sufficient, but all the positive
acts of the holy Life are to be constantly done. In discharging both these
parts of our Duty, complete Religion is expressed, and the power of Grace
consists.

3. Perseverance includes not only continuance in well-doing, but fervor and
progress toward Perfection. There are two fixed States, the one in Heaven, the
other in Hell. The blessed Spirits above are arrived to the height of Holiness.
The Devil and damned Spirits are sunk to the lowest extremity of Sin. But in
the middle state here, Grace in the Saints is a rising growing Light, and Sin
in the Wicked improves every day, like Poison in a Serpent that becomes more
deadly by his Age. We are injoined not to remain in our first Imperfections,
but to follow Holiness to the utmost issue of our Lives, to its entire
consummation. For this end all the dispensations of Providence must be improved
whether prosperous or afflicting. And the Ordinances of the Gospel were
appointed that in the use of them we may be changed into the divine Image from
Glory to Glory.

4. Preseverance is required notwithstanding all Temptations that may allure or
terrify us from our Duties; what ever affects us one way or other, while we are
clothed with frail Flesh. It Is the fundamental Principle of Christianity
declared by our Savior, If any Man will come after me, that is, be my Disciple
and Servant, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow me; even to
be crucified with him, rather than wilfully forfeit his Integrity and Loyalty
to Christ. He must by a Natator amnem interpositum superaturus, exuitur, nec
tamen hoc tanto appararu, quod se dispoliaverit, transnatabit, nisi totius
Corporis nisu torrentis impetum scindat, and laborem natationis exhauriat.

Paulin.
sacred sixth resolution divest himself of all things, even the most valued and
desirable in the present World, and actually forsake them, nay entertain what
is most distasteful, and resist unto Blood, rather than desert his Duty.

1. He must with unfainting Patience continue in doing his Duty,
notwithstanding all Miseries and Calamities, Losses, Disgraces, Torments, or
Death it self, which wicked Men, and greater Enemies, the Powers of Darkness,
can inflict upon him. To them who by patient continuance in well doing seek for
Glory, Romans 2.
Honor and Immortality, Eternal Life is promised. Mat. 10.22.
He that endures to the End (notwithstanding the most terrible Sufferings to
which he is exposed for Christ's sake) shall be saved. In this a Christian must
be the express image of his Savior, who for the joy that was set before him
endured the Cross, despised the shame, and is set down at the right hand of
God. Disgrace and Pain are Evils that humane Nature has a most tender sense of,
yet the Son of God with a divine generosity and constancy endured them in the
highest degrees. He was scorned as a feigned King, and a false Prophet. He
suffered a bloody Death, and by the Cross ascended to Glory. And we must follow
him, if we desire to be where he is.

2. But this is not the only trial of a Christian. Prosperity is a more
dangerous Enemy to the Soul, though Adversity be more rigorous. Saevior armis
Juven.
Incumbit luxuria:
For the Spirit is excited by Perils and Difficulties to seek to God for
Strength, and with vigilant resolute Thoughts unites all its Powers to oppose
them; but it is made weak and careless by what is grateful to the sensual
Inclinations. It keeps close the Spiritual Armor in the open encounter of
Dangers that threaten its ruin, but is enticed to put it off by the caresses
and blandishments of the World. It does not see its Enemies under the disguise
of a pleasant Temptation. Thus Sin insinuates its self, and by stealing steps
gets into the Throne without observation. A Man is wounded with a pleasant
Temptation as with the Plague, that flies in the dark, and Grace is insensibly
weakened. From hence it is that Adversity often reforms the Vicious, and
Prosperity corrupts the Virtuous. Now Perseverance must be of proof against
Fire and Water, against what ever may terrify or allure us from our duty.

5. Saving Perseverance excludes not all Sins, but total Apostasy, and final
impenitency, which are fatal and deadly under the New Covenant. Ezekiel. 18.24.
If the Righteous turns away from his righteousness, and commits Iniquity,
and does according to all the Abominations that the wicked Man does, shall he
live? all his Righteousness that he has done shall not be mentioned, in his
Trespass that he has trespassed, and in his Sin that he has sinned he shall
die. If any Man draw back, Heb. 10.38.
my Soul shall have no pleasure in him, says the Lord. These Threatenings
imply, there is a possibility of the Saints falling away considered in
themselves, but not that they are ever totally deserted by the Holy Spirit, and
left under the reigning Power of Sin. The Threatenings are intended to awaken
their Care, and are Preservatives of them from Ruin, and have a singular
Influence on their Perseverance. A vigilant and cautious Fear establishes the
certainty of their Hope. Indeed from the Relics of weakness and corruption in
the Saints, they sometimes actually fall into presumptuous Sins, and by
rebellious relapses wound Conscience, and let out much of the vital Spirits,
their Graces and Comforts. But though the divine Nature in them is miserably
wasted by such Sins, yet it is not abolished. As after the Creation of Light,
there was never pure and total Darkness in the World. Grace does not consist in
a Point, but is capable of Degrees. The new Creature may decline in Beauty and
Strength, yet Life remain. Between a lively and a dead Faith there may be a
fainting Faith; as in St. Peter, for certainly our Savior was heard in his
Prayer for him, that his Faith should not fail in his dreadful Temptation. The
Saints do not by a particular fall extinguish the first living Principles of
Obedience, Faith and Love; nor change their last end by an entire turning from
God to the World. In short, a single act of Wickedness does not reduce them
into a state of Unregeneracy: for it is not the matter of the Sin singly
considered, but the disposition of the Sinner that denominates him. If Grace in
the Saints should utterly perish, as some boldly assert, their recovery would
be impossible. For the Apostle tells us, that if those who were enlightened, and
had tasted of the Heavenly Gift, that had been under some common Workings and
lower Operations of the Spirit, if such fall away universally, and live in a
course of Sin opposite to their former illuminations and resolutions, it is
impossible to renew them by Repentance; how much more then if those who were
truly sanctified by the holy Spirit, should entirely lose all those gracious
habits planted in them in their Regeneration? But David, though guilty of
Adultery and Murder, Sins of so foul a Nature as would dishonor Paganism it
self, and made the Enemies of God to blaspheme, was restored by Repentance. The
Gospel propounds a remedy not only for Sins committed before Conversion, but
after it. If any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
Righteous. God does not revoke the Adoption, nor reverse the Justification of a
Believer, but upon scandalous disorders, the effects of Justification are
suspended with respect to the new contracted guilt, till there be sincere and
actual Repentance. He is not disinherited, but his right to the Kingdom of
Heaven is eclipsed as to the comfortable sense of it, nay suspended, till by
renovation he is qualified and made fit for the enjoyment of that pure
Inheritance. For those Sins which are a just cause of excommunicating an
Offender from the Church on Earth, would exclude him from the Kingdom of Heaven
without Repentance. Our Savior tells us, what is bound on Earth, is ratified
in Heaven. And the Apostle expressly declares of those kinds of Sin for which
Professors must be removed from the Communion of Saints here, that they are an
exclusive bar from the Kingdom of Heaven. But I have written to you, 1 Cor.
5.11.
not to keep Company, if any that is called a Brother be a Fornicator, or
Covetous, or an Idolater, or a Railer, or a Drunkard, or an Extortioner: with
such a one, no not to eat. And know ye not that the Unrighteous shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God? 1 Cor. 6.9, 10.
Be not deceived: neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor
Effeminate, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall
inherit the Kingdom of God. If one that is truly a Child of God fall into any
of these Sins, till by an extraordinary Repentance he is prepared for Pardon,
he cannot obtain it, nor have a comfortable hope of entering into Heaven. For
only those who are justified are glorified. Indeed it is not imaginable where
the Seed of God remains, the vital Principle of Grace, as it does in all that
are born of God, but that notorious Sins that cannot be concealed from the view
of Conscience, will cause stings and sorrows proportionable to their malignity,
and consequently a hatred and forsaking of them. Now Perseverance principally
respects the End of our Course. There may be Interruptions in the way for a
time, but if with renewed Zeal and Diligence we prosecute our blessed End, we
shall not fall short of it.

Secondly, I come now to consider the second thing propounded, The Reason why
Perseverance is requisite in all that will obtain Eternal Life, and it is this,
That their Sincerity may be discovered by constancy in Obedience under all
Trials. Blessed is the Man that endures Temptation, for when he is tried, he
shall receive the Crown of Life, which the Lord has promised to them that love
him. The Law required unsinning Obedience as the Condition of Life, the Gospel
accepts of Sincerity, but if that be wanting, there is no Promise that gives
right to the Reward. Now Sincerity implies such an entire Love of God, as makes
a Person submit to all Duties commanded in his Law, and all Trials appointed by
his Providence. A high Example we have of this in Abraham, when he was
commanded to offer up his only Son Isaac, and by his own Hands, for a
Burnt-Offering. This was to kill a double Sacrifice at one Blow, for the Life
of Abraham was bound up in Isaac: he lived in him more dearly than in himself;
all his Joy, all his Posterity by Sarah had died in Isaac. What resentments,
what resistance of Nature did he suffer? yet presently he addressed himself to
perform his Duty. Whoever saw a more glorious Victory over all the tender and
powerful Passions of humane Nature? O unexampled Obedience! being an Original
without any Precedent to imitate, and without a Copy to succeed it. After this
clear infallible Testimony of his Sincerity, the Angel declared from Heaven,
Now I know that thou fear God, seeing thou have not withheld thy Son, thine
only Son from me. And it is said concerning the followers of the Lamb, that they
loved not their Lives unto the Death. The Love of Christ that animated them in
all their Sufferings, was sweeter than Life, and stronger than Death.

Indeed there was a wonderful difference in the behavior of the Martyrs under
Sufferings, but in all the same Persevering Grace was evident, though working
variously. Some in the most beautiful Flower of their Age encountered Fire and
Sword, Tormentors and Torments, with that sensible Joy, with those Songs of
Praise to Christ, as if they saw the Heavens open with St. Stephen, and their
Savior ready to receive and crown them. But many others, as Homil. 6. de laud.
Paul.
Chrysostom testifies, went to the Tribunals, to the Theaters, to Death, with
many appearances of Fear. Upon hearing the wild Beasts roar, they were struck
with horror, at the sight of the Executioners and the Instruments of Torment,
they were pale and trembling. The Flesh seemed to cry out, O let this Cup pass
from me, yet weak and faint, it followed the Spirit, that corrected the natural
desire, with not my Will, but thine be done. As the Moon in Eclipse, though
obscure, yet goes on in a regular course, as when it is full of Light by the
reflection of the Sun: So those desolate Martyrs, though as it were forsaken,
and deprived of the bright Beams of Comfort, yet persever'd in their Profession
of the Truth. When one Word to renounce Christianity would have saved them, no
Torments could force it from them, but they patiently endured all. Now in these
the Combat of Nature was visible, and the admirable Power of Grace. They first
overcame their own Fears, the reluctance of the carnal part, their Affection to
whatever is desirable in the World, which is the noblest Victory, and then the
Cruelty of their Persecutors. In them was verified the Testimony of the Spirit,
Here is the patience of the Saints, Here are they that keep the Command of God
and the Faith of Jesus.

But how many appear faithful while their Faith is not to be showed by
difficult Works, and proved by Sufferings. The Seed that fell on the stony
Ground, sprang up as hopeful as the Seed in the good Ground at first; but when
Tribulation came, it withered away, wanting the Root of Sincerity. And that
which was sown among Thorns, was choked by the Cares and Pleasures of the
World. Some Lust in the Heart interweaves with the Affections, and causes
Apostasy. How many from glorious Beginnings have made a lamentable End? not
only Mercenaries in Religion, whose Zeal is a foreign Complexion, not springing
from an inward Principle of Life and Health, relinquish even the profession of
Godliness, when their Gain ceases, but some who have thought themselves
sincere, yet in times of danger their Resolutions, like the morning Dew, have
suddenly vanished. As the foolish Builder that computed not the Charges of his
designed Work, began to raise a magnificent Structure, but unable to finish it,
laid the Foundation in his own Shame. They repented their Choice of Heaven,
when they saw what it must cost them, and would save the World with the loss of
their Souls.

Others that began in the Spirit, and with raised Affections set out in the
ways of Godliness* yet by the allurements of sensual Lusts and Temptations,
(and therefore with greater Quae justior venia in omnibus causis, quam
voluntarius, an quam invitus peccator implorat? Negationem quanta compellunt,
ingenia carnificum, and genera poenarum? Quis magis negavit, qui Christum
vexatus, an qui delectatus amisit? Qui quum amitteret doluit, an qui quum
amitteret lusit? Tert. de pudicit.
Guilt) leave their first Love, and end in the Flesh. They fall from high
Professions, but received by soft Pleasures feel not the Fall. These were never
sincere, and never had a Right to Heaven. They took up sudden Resolutions, not
grounded in serious and deep Thoughts, and for a Flash were hot and active, but
with great levity return to their former Lusts. The Apostle tells us of such,
it had been better for them they had not known the Way of Righteousness, than
to turn back and voluntarily to forsake it. It Is observed that boiling Water
taken off from the Fire, congeals more strongly than that which was never
heated: because the subtle Parts being evaporated by the Fire, the more
terrestrial Parts remaining are more capable of Cold. So those who have felt
the Power of the Word in their Affections, and afterward lose that holy heat,
become more hardened in their Sins. God justly withdraws his Grace, and the
evil Spirit that was expelled for a time, returns with seven worse, and
aggravates his Tyranny.

To conclude; Since the certainty of Salvation is conditional, if we persevere
in a holy State, let us beware of a corrupt Confidence, and a vicious Dejection
of Spirit, the trusting in our selves, or distrusting God. To prevent the
trusting in our selves, consider,

1. The most excellent Creatures are by the instability of Nature liable to
defection, subject to a corruptive change. Of this the fallen Angels are a
dreadful Example, who of their own motion, untempted, sinned in Heaven.

2. The Danger is greater of falling away, when they are urged and solicited by
a violent or grateful Temptation. Thus our first Parents fell, and lost more
Grace in an Hour, than can be recovered by their Posterity in all Ages to the
end of the World.

3. When there is supervenient Corruption in the Creature, that inclines them
with earnest propensity to forbidden Things, and takes Flame from every Spark,
the Danger is extreme. Like a besieged City that is in great hazard of taking,
by Assaults from without, and Conspiracies from within. Let us therefore be
very watchful over our Hearts and Senses, and keep as much as is possible at a
safe distance from Temptations. And be very diligent in the use of all holy
Means to confirm and fortify our Resolutions for Heaven. God promised to
Hezekiah 15 Years, but not to preserve his Life by Miracle; he was obliged to
repair the wastings of Nature by daily Food, and to abstain from what was
noxious and destructive to his Body. The Apostle excites Christians, to work
out their own Salvation with fear and trembling, for it is God that works in
them to will and to do of his good Pleasure. Denique saepe cognovimus, quoniam
quem formidolosa carnificum pompa non terruit, nec divisi lateris sulcus
infregit, nec ardentes ^^minae a triumphalis (...).
Let him that stands take heed lest he fall. None are a more easy Conquest to
the Tempter, than those who presume upon their own Strength. We should be
always jealous of our selves, from the sad Examples of Apostasy in every Age.
St. Ambrose testifies from his own knowledge, that many after the courageous
enduring of cruel Torments for Religion, the tearing open their Sides that
their Bowels appeared, and the burning of some parts of their Bodies, yet when
led forth to finish the Victory of Faith, to be a triumphant Spectacle to
Angels and Men, when the blessed Rewarder was ready to put the Martyrs Crown on
their Heads, at the sight of their mourning Wives and Children in the way, were
overcome by Pity the weakest Affection, and failed in the last act of Christian
Fortitude. We must pray to be strengthened with all Might, according to his
glorious Power, unto all patience and long-suffering with joyfulness. For some
may vigorously resist one sort of Temptation, and render themselves to others.
And if finally vanquished by one of those Enemies, we lose our Victory and
Crown.

And as Presumption betrays the Soul into the Devil's Snares, so a vicious
dejection of Spirit from a distrust of Relief from God in our Difficulties, and
his assistance with our unfeigned endeavors for Salvation is very pernicious.
For this damps Industry, and causes either a total neglect, or uncomfortable
use of Means for that End. Many Christians considering their Graces are weak,
their Nature fickle and apt to revolt, are ready (as David said, One day I
shall perish by the Hand of Saul) to conclude sadly of the Issue of their
Condition. To encourage such, let them consider, that Perseverance is not only
a Condition, but a Privilege of the Covenant of Grace; For that assures us of
supply of spiritual Strength to the sincere Believer for performing the
Condition it requires. Indeed if Grace were the mere product of Free Will, the
most fervent Resolutions would vanish into a Lie, upon the Assault of an
overpowering Temptation. As Hezekiah acknowledged, that the Assyrian Kings had
destroyed the Gods of the Nations that were no Gods, but Idols the work of Men's
Hands. But sanctifying Grace is the effect of the Holy Spirit, and he that
begins that good Work in the Saints, will perform it until the day of Jesus
Christ. He that inclined them joyfully to choose the Spiritual Eternal Good,
will bind their unconstant Hearts, that by a faithful adherence they shall
cleave to their Duty and Felicity. God has most graciously declared, I will put
my Spirit into their Hearts, that they shall never depart from me. The Promise
is founded in the unchangeable Love of God to his People. Were God, as Man,
subject to Variation, there might be Jealousies in Believers lest they should
lose his good Will. As those who depend on Princes, are suspicious lest from
the natural inconstancy of the human Will, a new Favorite should supplant
them. But whom God loves, he loves to the End. The Apostle prays for the
Thessalonians, that God would preserve them blameless until the coming of
Christ, by this Consideration, faithful is he that calls you, he will do it.
He speaks of the Internal Call, that opens the Heart, and overpowers all
Resistance. As when the Angel came with a Light shining in the Prison to St.
Peter, and struck him on the Side, bid him arise quickly, loosed his Chains,
and led him through the Guards, opened the Doors, and restored him to Liberty.
The effectual calling of a Sinner, is the visible and infallible Effect of
electing Mercy; and God is unchangeable in his own purpose, and faithful to his
Promises of bringing all such by Sanctification to Glory. The same Apostle
tells the Saints at Corinth, That the Redeemer would confirm them to the End:
God is faithful, by whom ye are called. Grace that was at first inspired, is
continually actuated by the Spirit, who is styled the Earnest of the Saints
Inheritance. So that whereas the Angels that excelled in strength, kept not
their first State of Purity and Glory, but are sunk into Corruption and Misery,
yet true humble Believers, though weak, and encompast with many Difficulties,
shall be preserved from destructive Evil, and raised to an unchangeable Estate
of Perfection. This is as truly admirable, as if the Stars should fall from
Heaven, and Clods of Earth ascend and shine in the Firmament. The Apostle who
acknowledged his insufficiency of himself to think a good Thought, yet
triumphantly declares, I can do all things (within the compass of his Duty)
through Christ that strengthens me. The Love, Fidelity and Power of God are a
sure Fountain of Assistance to every Christian, that sincerely resolves and
endeavors to prosecute his last and blessed End.

I shall now come to the Directions how to fix our Choice aright.

This is a matter of everlasting Consequence, it therefore becomes us with the
most intense application of Mind to consider it, and according to the advice of
Wisdom, to keep the Heart with all diligence; for out of it are the issues of
Life.

Indeed the choice were not difficult between lying Vanities and substantial
Blessedness, if uncorrupted Reason had the superior sway: but in this lapsed
state of Nature, the Understanding and Will are so depraved, that present
things pleasing to sense, ravish the Heart into a Compliance. Men are deceived,
not compelled into ruin: the subtle Seducer prevails by fair Temptations. This
will be evident by reflecting upon the frame and composition of Man, as he
consists of Spirit, Soul and Body, and the manner of his acting. The Spirit is
the intellective discerning Faculty, the Seat of Reason, capable to compare and
judge of the qualities of things, and foresee their issues. The Body includes
the lower Faculties, the Senses Fancy and Passions, that are conversant about
present things. The Soul is the Will, the principle of Election, in the midst
of the other, as the Center to which all their Addresses flow. Now upon the
proposal of the spiritual and carnal Good in order to Choice, the Will is to be
directed by the Mind, and by its own Authority to rule the lower Passions. But
alas! the Mind has lost its primitive Light and Purity, Vigilance and
Integrity, neglects its Duty, and from Ignorance, Error and carnal Prejudices
often pleads for the Flesh: and the Will, the rational Appetite, is voluntarily
subordinate and inslaved by the Sensitive. From hence it is that in the
competition, Heaven with all its Glory is despised, and the present World
embraced. To open this more particularly, consider:

1. The Senses can only taste and enjoy grosser dreggy Pleasures.

2. The Fancy that depends upon them in its Operations, and is guided by their
Report, conceives of Felicity only under the notion of sensitive Pleasure. We
may illustrate this by the practice of Flagitio insigni, semper alicujus
foeminae amore flagrans and ob id Deas pingens sub dilectarum imagine. Itaque
scorta ejus venerabantur.

Plin.
Aretius a Painter, recorded with Infamy, who being often employed to paint the
Goddesses to be set in the Pagan Temples, always drew their Pictures by the
Faces and Complexions of his Harlots, that the Objects of his impure Love might
have Veneration, and a Divinity attributed to them, under the Titles, and
pretense of Minerva, Juno, Diana, and the other Goddesses adored by the
Heathens. This Impiety in an Idolater, is resembled by Men who fancy Happiness,
(that is a spiritual divine Perfection enjoyed in the glorious Vision of God)
to be a carnal Fruition, and having with sensible Colors and Lineaments
represented it agreeable to their brutish Faculties, place it in their Hearts,
and sacrifice all their Thoughts, Affections, and Service to it.

The Fancy is very powerful in Men upon a double account.

1. The Understanding naturally receives the Notions of Things by Phantasms
that are still mixing in its Contemplations. While the Soul is confined to a
Tabernacle of Flesh, it apprehends no Object without the precedent excitation
of the Senses. From whence it is impossible, that a Person absolutely deprived
of Sight from his Birth, should have an Idea of Light or Colors; or that is
born deaf, should conceive what Sound is, the Sense never having imparted an
account of it to them. And the Image of the Object is not immediately
transmitted from the Sense to the Mind, but first to the Imagination, that
prepares it for its view. And from hence the sensual Fancy is so predominant in
sweying the Judgment, and inclining the Will. As those Counselors of State
that have the Ear of the Prince, and are continually with him, by specious
Informations, and disguising Truth, influence him to approve or reject Persons
and Things according to the various Aspects given by them. The same Object
propounded in a dark confused manner, weakly moves us, but varnisht and
beautified with lively and pleasant Colors by the Imagination, is armed with
such Power that ravishes the esteem of the Mind, and consent of the Will. Now
Celestial Happiness being purely Spiritual, such as Eye has not seen, nor Ear
heard, nor entered into the Heart of Man to conceive, though some discoveries be
made of it by Revelation, yet the Imagination makes such an obscure detracting
Idea of it, that it affects no more, than a dead Shadow drawn in some imperfect
Lines of an exquisite Beauty: But when the Fancy is warmed and enlivened by the
presence of sensible Objects, it makes a vigorous impression of them upon the
Mind, and that represents the Pictures of Pleasure as very lovely and
delightful to the Will, which presently embraces them.

2. The Fancy has a mavelous force upon the sensitive Appetite, that eagerly
desires what is represented as pleasant, though the enlightened Mind sees
through the Temptation, and knows it is a mere Dream, that brings neither solid
nor durable Joy. One in a Fever is pleased by imagining Fountains and Streams,
though he knows that imaginary Waters cannot quench his Thirst, nor afford the
least real Refreshment. Now the sensitive Appetite being inflamed by the Fancy,
imparts a contagious Fire to the Will, and that induces the Mind, either to
concur with it, and palliate the deceit, and to judge favorably according to
its Inclinations, or makes it slack or remiss in its Office, diverting the
Thoughts from what might control the Appetite; or if the Understanding still
contradicts, yet it is in so cold and speculative a matter, that the Law of the
Members rebels against the Superior Light, and is too strong for the Law of the
Mind, and that Saying is verified, Video meliora proboque
Deteriora sequor.
I see what is worthy to be chosen, but pursue what is to be abhorred. Thus
miserably weak are the rational guiding Powers in Man since his Fall, thus
imperious and violent the brutish Faculties. In short, illusion and
concupiscence are the principal Causes why the most noble and divine Good is
undervalued and rejected in comparison of inferior transitory Vanities. O the
cheap Damnation of beguiled Souls! A Mess of Pottage was more valuable to Esau,
than the Birthright that had annexed to it the Regal and Priestly Dignity.
Unwise and unhappy Wretches! that follow lying Vanities, and forsake their own
Mercies.

Thus I have briefly set down the process of Men's foolish choice in this
degenerate State. Now that we may with a free uncorrupted Judgment compare
things in order to a wise Choice of true Felicity, it follows from what has
been said, that as the Apostle in obeying his Heavenly Commission, conferred
not with Flesh and Blood. We must not in this matter of infinite importance,
attend,

1. To the Suggestions and Desires of the Senses and carnal Appetite, which are
the worst Counselors, as being incapable of judging what is our proper
Happiness, deceitful and importunate.

First, They are incapable of apprehending Spiritual Eternal Things, which
alone bring fit and complete satisfaction to the Soul, and cannot look forward
to the end of sinful Pleasures, and balance the terrible Evils they leave at
parting, with the slight vanishing content that springs from their Presence.
Therefore as blind Persons lay hold on things they feel, so the sensitive
Faculties, that are blind and brutish, adhere to gross present enjoyment, not
understanding the pure spotless Felicity that is to come, and despising what
they do not understand. Now who would in an Affair upon which his All depends,
advise with Children and Fools, whose Judgment of things is without Counsel,
their Counsel without Discourse, their Discourse without Reason? There is
nothing more contrary to the order of Nature, than for Men that should affect
with Judgment, to judge by their Affections.

2. The Carnal Appetite with its Lusts are very deceitful, a Party within
holding correspondence with our Spiritual Enemies, the Armies of evil Angels,
so active and assiduous in conspiring and accomplishing the Damnation of Men.
The Devil in Scripture is called the Tempter by way of eminence, who manages
and improves all Temptations, and his pernicious Design is by the Objects of
Sense, ordered and made more alluring and killing by his various Arts, to
engage the Affections into a compliance, and so to gain the Will. Now our great
danger is not so much from Satan the Enemy without, as from the Carnal
Appetite, the Traitor within, that gives him the first and easy entrance into
the Soul. He can only entice by representing what is amiable to Sense, but the
corrupt Appetite inclines to the closing with it. He tempted Jesus Christ, but
was repelled with shame, having found nothing within him to work upon. The
perfect regularity of Faculties in our Blessed Savior was not in the least
disordered neither by his fairest Insinuations, or most furious Assaults. And
we might preserve our innocence inviolable notwithstanding all his Attempts,
did not some corrupt Affection, cherished in our Bosoms, lay us naked and open
to his poisoned Darts. The Apostle Peter, who had a Spiritual Eye, and
discerned wherein the strength of our great Enemy lies, admonishes Christians,
Dearly Beloved, I beseech you, as Strangers and Pilgrims, abstain from fleshly
Lusts, that war against the Soul. And we are told by him, That the Corruption
that is in the World, is through Lust. The outward Objects are useful and
beneficial in their kind, the abuse of them is from Lust. The Poison is not in
the Flower, but in the Spider. It Is therefore infinitely dangerous to consult,
or trust our carnal Faculties in this matter, for they are bribed and
corrupted, and will commend temporal things to our choice.

3. The sensual Affections are so numerous and clamorous, so vehement and
hasty, that if they are admitted to counsel and give the decisive Vote, the
Voice of Conscience will not be heard or regarded. In concernments of a lower
Nature, it is constantly seen, that nothing more disturbs Reason, and makes Men
improvident and precipitant in their Determinations, than a disordered Passion.
From hence, it is a prudent Rule, That as it is not fit to eat in the height of a
Fever, because the Meat feeds the Disease, by increasing the feverish, not the
vital heat: so it is not good to deliberate in the heat of any Affection. For
then the Thoughts strongly blow up the Passion, and smother Reason, and the
Mind is rather a Party than a Judge: but after the declination of that Fever in
the Soul, in a quiet interval, it is seasonable to consider. Now if any simple
Passion when moved, transports and confounds the Mind, and makes it incapable
of judging aright, much more the love of the World, an universal Passion that
reigns in Men, and has so many swarming desires answerable to the variety of
sensible things, and therefore is more unruly, lasting and dangerous than any
particular Passion. In short, sensual Affections captivate the Mind, and hinder
its due considering the folly and obliquity of the carnal choice, and when
incensed (as distracted Persons whose Strength grows with their Fury) violently
break all the restraints the understanding can apply from reason and revelation.

2. In order to make a right Choice, we must be very watchful lest the general
Example of Men taint our Reason, and cause an immoderate esteem of temporal
things. The whole World lies in Wickedness, in a sensual Sty, without
Conscience of its Misery, or care of regaining its Happiness, deceived and
pleased with shows of Felicity. The way to Hell is broad, as the inclinations
of the licentious Appetite; pleasant, as the delights of Sense; so plain and
easy, that Men go to it Bion.
blindfold; and so frequented, that it would force Tears from any considering
Person, to see Men so hasty to meet with Damnation. When Calisto the Harlot
reproached Socrates that there were more followers of her Beauty than his
Wisdom; the (...). Aelian. l. 13. c. 32.
Philosopher replied, That was not strange, because it was much easier to draw
them in the way of Pleasure, that is steep and slippery, than to constrain them
to ascend to Virtue, seated on a Hill, where the ascent is slow, and with toil
and difficulty. Now there is nothing more contagious than Example. We blindly
consent with the Multitude, and are possessed with foolish Wonder, and carnal
admiring of worldly Greatness, Treasures and Delights, neglecting to make a due
estimation of things. It Is the ordinary Artifice of the Devil to render
temporal things more valuable and attractive to particular Persons, from the
common practice of Men who greedily pursue them as their Happiness. As some
crafty Merchants, by false reports raise the Exchange, to advance the price of
their own Wares. The Men of the World are under the direction of Sense, and
think them only to be wise and happy that shine in Pomp, abound in Riches, and
overflow in Pleasures. The Psalmist tells us of the prosperous Worldling, that
while he lives, he blesses his Soul; and Men will praise thee when thou do
well to thy self. By vicious imitation our Judgments are more corrupted, and
our Passions raised to higher degrees for painted Vanities. The Affections in
the pursuit of earthly things are inflamed by the contention of others. And
when holy Desires and Resolutions spring up in Men, yet so powerful is the
custom of the World, that they often become ineffectual. As a Ship whose Sails
are filled with a fair Wind, but makes no way, stopped by the force of the
Current. Now to fortify us against the pernicious influence of Example,
consider,

1. It Is most unreasonable in this Affair of so vast moment to be under the
direction of the Multitude. For the most are sottish and sensual, governed by
the uncertain motions of a giddy voluble Fancy, and roving impetuous Passions;
so that to be led by their example, and disregard the solid immortal rules of
heavenly Wisdom, is as perfect madness, as for one to follow a herd of Swine
through the Mire, and leave a clean Path that lies before him. If there were
but few in an Age or Country that were deluded with false Appearances, it would
be a disgrace to imitate the practice of the Foolish: and shall the great
numbers of the Earthly-minded give Reputation and Credit to their Error? He
were a strange Fool indeed, that should refuse a single piece of counterfeit
Money, and receive a great heap in payment, as if the number added a real value
to them. It Is therefore a necessary point of Wisdom to divest all Nunquam de
vita judicatur, semper creditur, sanabimur, si modo separemur a coetu. Sen, de
vit. Beat.
vulgar Prejudices, to separate our selves from the Multitude, that we may see
the vanity of Things that dazzle inferior Minds.

2. Consider the universal Judgment even of the worldly Men in their last and
serious Hours, when the Prospect of Eternal Things is open before them. How
vastly different are their Apprehensions of Temporal Things in the review, from
what they were in their vicious Desires? How often do they break forth in the
sorrowful Words of the Apostle, We have been toiling all Night, and caught
nothing? When there are but a few remaining Sands in the Glass of Time, and
Death shakes the Glass before them, how powerfully do they preach of the
emptiness and uncertainty of Things below, and sigh out in Solomon's Phrase,
All is vanity? And this is more singularly observable in those who have had the
fullest enjoyment of earthly Things. How do they complain of the vain World,
and their vainer Hearts, when Experience has convinced them of their woeful
Folly? Solomon who was among other Princes, as the Sun in the midst of the
Planets, that obscures them by his illustrious Brightness, He that had surveyed
this Continent of Vanity, to make an Experiment whether any satisfaction could
be found in it, at last sadly declares, that all things here below are but
several kinds and ranks of Vanities, as ineffectual to make Men happy, as
counterfeit Jewels of several Colors are to enrich the Possessor. Nay they are
not only Vanity, but Vexation, an empty show that has nothing real, but the
vexation of disappointment. And shall we not value the judgment of Men when
they are best instructed, and give credit to their Testimony when they are
sincere? Certainly in their Approaches to the Divine Judgment they are most
considerate and serious, they have the truest and justest thoughts of Things,
and most freely declare them. O the astonishing Folly of Men! they will not be
convinced of the error of their ways, till they come to the end of them, and
the Sun is set, and no time remains for their returning into the way of Life.

I shall proceed to show further what is necessary to direct us in our choice,
that we may not fall into the double Misery, of being deceived with a false
Happiness for a little time, and deprived of true Happiness for ever.

First, A sound and steadfast belief of unseen Eternal Things. Secondly, Serious
Consideration of the vast difference between things that are the objects of
Sight, and that are the objects of Faith.
First, The sound and steadfast belief of Eternal Things is requisite to direct
our choice aright. Faith is the substance of things hoped for, Heb. 11.1.
the evidence of things not seen. It assures us of their reality and worth as
if they were before our Eyes, and in our actual Possession. This Divine Light
governs and conducts the Will to choose wisely, and excites all the practick
Powers for the preventing the greatest Evils, and the obtaining perfect
Felicity. When the Devil, the deadly Flatterer, by inviting representations of
the World intices the Heart, the serious belief of the future reward so
glorious and eternal, disgraces the most splendid Temptations, and makes them
ineffectual. This is the Victory that overcomes the World, even our Faith. If
tempted to Lasciviousness by the allurements of an earthly Beauty, Faith
represents the angelical luster of the Saints, when they shall come with the
unspotted Lamb in his glorious appearance, and this unbinds the Charm, and
makes the tempting Person an object not of Desire, but Aversation. If tempted
with Honor to a sinful compliance, Faith represents so convincingly the Glory
which all those who preserve their Conscience and Integrity inviolable, shall
receive at the universal Judgment, in the presence of God, and the holy Angels,
(as our Savior has promised, He that serves me, him will my Father honor) and
the confusion wherein the most honorable Sinners shall then be covered, that
with a generous disdain all secular honors will be despised. And it is as
powerful to enervate the Temptation of temporal Profit. We read of Moses, that
by Faith, when he was come to Years, (and therefore more capable to understand
and enjoy what Felicity the brightest Honors and greatest Riches could afford)
refused to be called the Son of Pharaoh 's Daughter; choosing rather to suffer
Affliction with the People of God, than to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin for a
season; esteeming the reproach of Christ greater Riches than the Treasures of
Egypt: for he had respect to the recompense of Reward. And all the Evils which
a wicked World, inspired with rage from Satan, can threaten to fright us from
our Duty, Poverty, Disgrace, Banishment, nay Torments and Death, those
terribles visu formae, so heightened by the carnal Fancy, are easily overcome by
a sincere and strong Believer. Thus some who were urged by such motives to
renounce their Religion, told the Persecutors, that Life was not sweet to them
if they might not live Christians, nor Death bitter if they must die for
Christ. A lively firm persuasion of the excellence and eternity of the Reward,
Nec vereamur occidi, quos constat, quando occidimur coronari.

Cyp.
what miraculous effects would it produce? Nothing would be impossible within
the compass of our Duty, either to do or suffer in order to a glorious
Immortality. Faith has a celestial Power, a magnetic Virtue to draw up the
Heart from the Earth, and fastens it to things above. It is not imaginable that
a clear-sighted Soul, that sees a Good infinitely great, should reject it for
mean things to please the lower Desires. We may as probably imagine, that a
skilful Jeweller would part with the richest Oriental Pearls, for Cherry Stones
to play with Children.

From hence we may discover the true cause of the neglect of the great
Salvation offered in the Gospel, the Word preached does not profit, not being
mixed with Faith in them that hear it. It is astonishing to consider that Earth
should contend with Heaven for our Affections, and prevail against it; that
Vanity should turn the Scale against the exceeding and eternal weight of Glory;
that Men should pursue fleeting Shadows, and neglect the most excellent
Realities, as if they could be happy here, and continue for ever, and hereafter
there were neither Happiness nor Eternity. But this releases the wonder, that
all Men have not Faith. Eternal Things are not of conspicuous moment in the
carnal Balance. Some are Infidels in Profession, openly declaring themselves
to be without Religion, without God, and have the same credit of the Heaven and
Hell discovered in the Gospel, as of the Elysian Fields, and Stygian Lake, the
Fables of the Poets. These live as if they should never die, and die as if they
should never live in the other World, as if Death caused so deep a sleep, that
the Voice of the Son of God could not awaken them at the last day. Their
Unbelief is not from Reason, but vicious opposite Affections; for the truth of
the Eternal State is so clearly revealed, and strongly established in the
Gospel, that the sincere Mind must readily assent to it. But the Wicked cannot
delight in the discovery of that for which they are unprepared, and therefore
try all ways to elude the Force of the most satisfying Arguments. Their
Infidelity is obstinate and incurable. An instance whereof we have in the
Pharisees, who rejected our Savior. Tho all the Characters of the Messiah were
conspicuous in his Person, tho his Doctrines were confirmed by Miracles, yet
they would not yield up themselves to that omnipotent conviction, so strong
were their carnal Prejudices against his humble State, and holy Doctrines. That
Reproach is more justly due to Infidels under the Gospel, than to Israel in the
Prophet: Who is blind as my Servant? The Heathens who are blind from their
Birth, and have only some glimmering apprehensions that Eternity succeeds Time,
are less culpable than those who have infinitely more reason to believe it, and
yet believe it less. The Plea for them will be a terrible Accusation against
such Unbelievers. If a blind Person falls, it moves Compassion; but if one
voluntarily shuts his Eyes against the Sun, and refuses the Direction of the
Light, and falls from a Precipice, his Ruin is the just Consequence of his
Folly. Simple Ignorance excuses as to the degrees of the Fault, but affected
wilful Ignorance, now Reason and Revelation with united Beams give so clear a
prospect into the Eternal World, aggravates the Guilt and Sentence of such
Unbelievers.

Besides, the most who are Believers in Title, are Infidels in Heart. Our
Savior tells the Jews, who pretended the highest Veneration to the Writings of
Moses, That if they had believed Moses, they would have believed him, for Moses
wrote of him. If Men did seriously believe such an excellent Reward, as the
Gospel propounds, would it be a cold unperswasive Motive to them? The
depravation of the Will argues a correspondent defect in the Mind; though not
absolute total Infidelity, yet such a weakness and wavering in the Assent, that
when Temptations are present and urgent, and it comes to actual Choice, Sense
prevails over Faith. This will be clear by Universal Experience in temporal
Things. The probable hope of Gain, will make those who are greedy of Gold,
prodigal of their Lives, and venture through tempestuous Seas to accomplish
their Desires. And if the belief were equal, would not Men do or suffer as much
for obtaining what is infinitely more valuable? A firm Assent would produce
adherence, and Faith in the Promises, Fidelity in obeying the Commands of
Christ. Tertullian propounds it as a powerful incentive to the Martyrs, Quis
ergo non libentissime tantum pro vero habeat erogare, quantum alii pro falso?
Who would not joyfully sacrifice Life and all its Indearments, to obtain true
Blessedness, which others do for the vain Appearance of it? Men may be as truly
Subjects without subjection, as Believers without a Heavenly Conversation,
which is inseparable from the Reality of Faith. Many in the Bosom of the Church
are as truly, though not so notoriously, Infidels, as Turks and Heathens.
Indeed even in true Believers the apprehension of eternal Things has such great
allays, that temporal Things are over-valued and over-feared. A strong Faith in
the Truth and Power of God, would make the glorious World so sure and near in
our Thoughts, that with indifferent Affections we should receive good or evil
Things here, Rejoice as if we rejoiced not, and mourn as if we mourned not. Our
Lives would be so regular and pure, as if the Judge were to come the next Hour,
as if the Sun did now begin to be darkened, and the Trumpet of the Archangel
were sounding, and the noise of the dissolving World were universally heard.
Infidelity deads the Impression, and suppresses the reigning Power of Eternal
Things in our Hearts. In short, Men are heavenly or earthly in their Choice and
Conversation, as they are directed by the sincere Light of Faith, or misled by
the false Beams of Sense.

Secondly, The second Thing requisite in order to a wise Choice, is
Consideration. For as by Faith the Virtue of the Reward is diffused through all
the Faculties, and the Powers of the World to come are felt in the Soul; so, by
consideration, Faith is exercised and becomes effectual. This unites and
reinforces the Beams of Eternal Truth, and inflames the Affections. As the
Psalmist expresses himself, My Heart was hot within me while I was musing, the
Fire burned. Heaven is a Felicity so glorious and attractive, that if duly
considered, no Man can possibly refuse it: and Hell is a Misery so extreme and
fearful, that if seriously laid to Heart, none can possibly choose it. The last
End is to be conceived under the Notion of an infinite Good, without the least
mixture of Evil, to which the humane Will swayed by the invincible Impression
of Nature, has a tendency. The Liberty of Indifference is with respect to some
particular good Things, which may be variously represented, so as to cause
Inclination or Aversion. Those Men who believe Eternal Life is the Reward of
Holiness, yet with a careless Inadvertency pass over their Duty; and that
Eternal Death is the Wages of Sin, yet securely continue in it, is more
wonderful than to see Martyrs sing in the Flames; and the great Cause of it is
the neglect of Consideration. This is assigned to be the Cause of that
unnatural and astonishing Rebellion of Israel against God their Father and
Sovereign: Hear, O Heavens, Isa. 1.2, 3.
and give Ear, O Earth: for the Lord has spoken, I have nourished and brought
up Children, and they have rebelled against me. The Ox knows his Owner, and the
Ass his Master's Crib: but Israel does not know, my People does not consider.

This Duty as it is of admirable Advantage, so it is universally necessary; for
all are equally concerned, and it is within the Power of all to perform. Though
Men cannot convert themselves, yet they may consider what is preparatory to
Conversion. For the Will may turn the Thoughts of the Mind to any sort of
Objects.

I will briefly show the Nature of this Duty, and how to manage it for
spiritual Profit, and those Objects from whence our Thoughts derive vigor for
the swaying of the Will and the Conduct of the Life.

1. The Nature of Consideration is discovered by its End, which is this; That
the Mind being satisfied in the just Reasons upon which the Choice of Heaven is
to be made, the Will and Affections may be engaged in an earnest joyful and
constant pursuit of it. And in this respect it differs from simple Knowledge,
and naked Speculation, that informs the Mind without Influence and Efficacy
upon the Heart: Like a Garland of Flowers that adorns the Head without any
benefit and refreshing to him that wears it. And practical Meditation differs
from the study of Divine Things in order to the instructing of others. That is
like a Merchant's buying of Wine for Sale, this like providing it for our own
use.

2. That the Consideration of Eternal Things may be effectual, it must be,

1. Serious and deliberate. For the Affair is great in reality above all
possible Conception or Comparison. All other things, how considerable soever in
themselves, yet respectively and in parallel with this, are of no account. Our
Savior told Martha, One thing is necessary: Mary has chosen the better part,
that shall not be taken from her. What Instance can be of equal moment with
that of entertaining the Son of God? Yet a serious attention to the Words of
Eternal Life dropping from his Lips, was more necessary than making provision
for him. The greatest and most weighty Affairs in the World are but a vain
Employment, but Irregularity and Impertinence, in compare with Eternal
Salvation. And the greatest solemnity of Thoughts is requisite, to undeceive
the Mind, and engage the Will for Heaven. It Is very observable that Errors in
Judgment and Choice spring from the same Causes, the not sincere and due
weighing of Things. In the decisions of Questions, Truth is discovered by
comparing, with an equal staid Attention, the Reasons of the one and the other
part: But when some vicious Affection contradicts the Truth, it fills the Mind
with Prejudices, that it cannot impartially search into Things, and is deceived
with specious Fallacies, with the Image of Truth. For according to the present
application of the Mind it is determined, and Passion strongly applies it to
consider that which is for the Carnal Interest, and consequently Inclination,
not Reason, is the Principle of the Persuasion. And this is more evident in
Men's foolish Choice: As the Eye cannot see but what is visible, nor the
Understanding conceive what is not Intelligible, the Will cannot love and choose
what is not amiable, at least in show. If the Devil did appear without a
Disguise, he would have no Power to persuade, but in all his Temptations there
is the mixture of a Lie to make it pleasant. He presents a false Perspective,
to make what is but superficial appear solid and substantial. And the carnal
Heart turns the Thoughts to what is grateful, without seriously considering
what is infinitely better, and accordingly chooses by the Eye of Sense, the
happiness of this World. Therefore till Eternal Things are opened in the view
of Conscience, and the Mind calmly considers by the Light of Faith their
Reality and Greatness, no right valuation, nor wise choice can be made.

Besides, the most clear and rational enforcements by the actings of the
Thoughts, are necessary to make a strong impression on the Affections, and
rescue them from the captivity of the Flesh. In other things as soon as the
Mind is enlightened, the Will resolves, and the inferior Faculties obey; but
such is the resistance of the carnal Heart, that although it is evident from
infallible Principles there is an everlasting Glory, infinitely to be preferred
above the little appearances of Beauty and Pleasure here, yet the most piercing
Reasons enter heavily without earnest inculcation. Slight or sudden Thoughts
may produce vanishing Affections of complacence, or distaste, and fickle
Resolutions, that like sick Feathers drop away, and leave the Soul naked to the
next Temptation; but solemn and fixed Thoughts are powerful on the Heart, in
making a through and lasting Change. When the Clouds dissolve in a gentle
Shower, the Earth drinks in all, and is made Fruitful; but a few sprinkling
Drops, or a short storm of Rain, that wets only the Surface, without sinking to
the Root, is little beneficial. In short, there may be some excitations to
Good, and retractions from Evil, some imperfect faint essays toward Heaven,
from an impulse on the Mind; but solid Conversion is produced by deliberate
Discourse, by the due consideration and estimation of things, it is rational and
perpetual.

2. Consideration must be frequent, to keep eternal Objects present, and
powerful upon us. Such is the natural Levity and Inconstancy, Sloth and
Carnality of the Mind, That the Notions of Heavenly Things quickly pass
through, but of Earthly abide there. If a Stone be thrown upwards, it remains
no longer in the Air, than the impression of the force by which it was thrown
continues; but if it falls on the Earth, it rests there by Nature. When the
Soul is raised in contemplation to Heaven, how apt is it to fall from that
height, and lose the esteem, the lively Remembrance and Affections of Eternal
Things? But when the Thoughts are excited by the presence of what is pleasing
to Sense, the withdrawing the Object does not deface the Idea of it in the
Memory, nor lessen the Conceit, nor cool the Desires of it, because the Heart
is naturally inclined to it. Therefore it is necessary every day to refresh and
renew the conceptions of eternal Things, that although they are not always in
act, yet the efficacy may be always felt in the Heart and Life. The Soul
habituated to such Thoughts will not easily yield to Temptations, that surprise
and overcome others that are Strangers in their Minds to the other World: Nay
the presence of Temptations, as by Antiperistasis, will reinforce the
Resolutions for Heaven; like the pouring Water upon Lime, that revives a hidden
Fire in it, which seems a natural Miracle. It Is therefore of great advantage
frequently to sequester our selves from the World, to redeem Time from secular
Affairs, for the recollecting of our Thoughts and their solemn exercise upon
the Eternal World. Sense that reveals natural things, darkens spiritual. How
can the Thoughts be fixed on invisible things so distant from Sense, if always
conversant with secular Objects that draw them down? In the silence of the
Night a small Voice is more distinctly heard, and a little distant Light more
clearly seen: so when the Soul is withdrawn from the noisy throng of the World,
and outward things are darkened, the Voice of Conscience is better heard, and
the Light of Heaven more perfectly received.

3. Consideration of Eternal Things must be with present Application to the
Soul. It Is not the mere conviction of the Mind, but the decree of the Will that
turns Men from Sin to Holiness, from the Creatures to God. The Heart is very
deceitful, and by variety of shifts and palliations is disposed to
irresolutions and delays in spiritual Concernments. How often does the
miserable Sinner contend with himself, and while Conscience urges him to seek
the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Affections draw down to the Earth, the carnal
part prevailing over the rational, he overcomes, and is overcome, he is
convinced and condemned by his own Mind. Till Consideration issues in this,
that with settled Judgment and Affections the Soul determines for God and
Heaven, it is without profit. Therefore in the managing this Duty, it is our
Wisdom not to be curious and inquisitive after subtle Conceptions, and exalted
Notions of the future State, that little confer to the making the Heart better,
but to think seriously on what is plain and evident, and most useful to produce
a present lasting Change. It were egregious Folly in a Man, that for the use of
his Garden, should with great labor fetch Water from distant Fountains, and
neglect that which springs up in his own Ground. That Meditation is profitable
which produces not new Thoughts, but holy and firm resolutions of obeying God
in order to the full enjoying of him for ever.

To persuade us to the serious practice of this Duty, there are many
Enforcements.

Is any Man so foolish, so regardless of his Convenience, to purchase a House
wherein he must live all his Days, and will not first see whether it will be
convenient, and secure for his Habitation? Shall we not then consider Heaven
the Mansion of Blessedness, and Hell the Seat of Misery and Horror? for
according as we choose here, we shall be in the one or other place for ever. I
shall in the fourth part of this Treatise, endeavor to represent something of
the inexpressible Misery of the Wicked hereafter, and show how congruous and
powerful the Thoughts of it are to restrain Men from Sin; but at present shall
briefly excite to the Meditation of the Heavenly Glory, as the most noble,
delightful and fruitful Work of the Soul, whiles confined to the Body of Flesh.
It Is the most exalted Exercise of the Mind, the purest converse with God, the
Flower of consecrated Reason. It Is most like the Life of glorified Spirits
above, who are in continual contemplation of the Divine Excellencies, and it is
most raised above the Life of Carnal Men, that are sunk into Sensuality and
Brutishness. It Is the most joyful Life, in that it sheds abroad in the Soul
Delights that neither satiate, nor corrupt, nor weaken the Faculties, as the
Delights of Sense do, but afford Perfection as well as Pleasure. It Is the most
profitable Life. As in those parts of the Earth where the Beams of the Sun are
strongly reflected, precious Metals and Jewels are produced, wherein the
refulgent resemblance of that bright Planet appears: so the lively and vigorous
Exercise of the Thoughts upon the heavenly Glory, will produce heavenly
Affections, heavenly Discourses, and a heavenly shining Conversation. This will
make us live like the blessed Society above, imitating their Innocence and
Purity, their joyful, entire and constant Obedience to God. This confirms the
Holy Soul in its Choice, with an invincible efficacy against the Temptations
and Lusts of the World. The serious considering Believer is filled with
ravishing Wonder of the Glory that shall be revealed, and looks down with
Contempt upon the Earth, and all that has the Name of Felicity here. All the
Invitations, nay Terrors of the World, are as unable to check his pursuit of
his blessed End, as the Breath of an Infant to stop the high flight of an Eagle.

But how rare and disused a Duty is this? How hardly are Men induced to set
about it? Business and Pleasures are powerful Diversions. Some pretend Business
as a just Cause, but in vain; for the one Thing necessary challenges our
principal Thoughts and Care. Besides, there are intervals of Leisure, and the
Thoughts are always streaming, and often run waste, which directed aright,
would be very fruitful to the Soul. The true Cause of this neglect is from the
inward temper of Men. Carnal Pleasures alienate the Mind, and make it unfit for
the deep serious actings of the Thoughts upon Eternal Things. I have said of
Laughter, Thou art mad; it makes the Mind light, and vain, and desultory. As a
distracted Person by every motion of Fancy flies from one thing to another
without Coherence. The Heart filled with cloudy Cares, and smoaky Fires, with
Thoughts and Desires about worldly Things, is unprepared for such a clear,
calm, and sedate Work. A Carnal Person can taste no sweetness, feel no relish
in the Meditation of Heaven, nor any Spiritual Duty. It Is as if one should take
some delicious Fruit into his Mouth, a Peach, or the like, without breaking the
Skin; it would be rather a trouble, than pleasant. Nay, the Gospel expressly
declaring, That without Holiness no Man shall see God; those who by vicious
Affections are engaged in any sinful way, being conscious of their Guilt and
unpreparedness, and that while such, they are under a peremptory exclusion from
celestial Glory, cannot endure the thoughts of Heaven. The Divine Presence is
their Torment, and the serious consideration of it, is to bring them before
God's holy and just Tribunal, to accuse and condemn them.

I shall now take a particular view of those Objects, from whence Consideration
derives Vigor, for the inclining of the Will to a right Choice, and for
regulating the Life.

1. Consider the End for which Man was designed in his Creation, why endued
with rational and noble Powers of Soul, and placed by the Sovereign Maker in
the highest rank of so numerous and various Natures that fill the Universe. Is
it to raise an Estate, to shine in Pomp, to enjoy sensual Pleasures for a
little while, and after the fatal term to be no more for ever? Was he sent into
the World upon as mean a Business as that of the foolish Emperor, who employed
an Army, furnished with all Military Preparations, to gather Shells upon the
Seashore? This were, according to the passionate expostulation of the
Psalmist, to charge God that he had made all Men in vain. Reason and Scripture
tells us the End of Man is to glorify and enjoy God, the obtaining whereof
makes him perfectly happy, and the missing of it perfectly miserable. This is a
fundamental Truth, upon which the whole Fabric of Man's Duty and Felicity is
built. Without this Foundation, our Faith presently sinks. If the clearness of
this principle be obscured, we shall wander from the way of Eternal Life, and
not only lose the way, but the remembrance and desire of it. Thinking is the
property of the reasonable Soul, and the just order of Consideration is, that
the Mind primarily regards this supreme directive Truth that is to govern all
our Actions. 'Twas prudent Counsel that Primum ego scriptoris officium
existim^^, ut titulum (...) legate, atque identidem (...) quid cap^^it scribere.
one of the Ancients gave for composing a Book, that the Author frequently
reflect upon the Title, that it may correspond in all the parts with his
original Design. Thus it becomes a Man often to consider the End of his Being,
that the course of his Life may have a direct tendency to it* and the more
excellent our End is, the more constraining is the necessity to prosecute it.
It Is of great Efficacy to reflect upon our selves, Whither do my Thoughts and
Desires tend? For what do I spend my Strength, and consume my Days? Will it be
my last Account, how much by my Prudence and Diligence I have exceeded others
in temporal Acquisitions? If a General were at play while the Armies are
engaging, would it be a noble Exploit for him to win the Game, whiles his Army
for want of conduct loses the Victory? Will it be profitable for a Man to gain
the World, and lose his Soul? Let Conscience answer in Truth.

It Is observable what is reported of a Cum natalis dies Februarii admonuisset
aetatis numerandae, and tricesimo reperissem, invasit me subita moestitia, and
perculsit admirantem, quomodo sine sensu vitae ad ejus culmen pervenissem, a
quo lux quaelibet fit obscurior, and dies nostri ad occasum inclinare
incipiunt. Visa est mihi rerum facies momento mutata, and tunc primum me
hominem agnovi.

Memoires Chanut.
noble Forreigner, that on his Birthday, reflecting upon the Age of his Life,
he was surpised with grief, and struck with Astonishment, that without a due
Sense of the proper Business and End of Life, he was arrived to that Age, when
our Days begin to decline. In an instant all things seemed to change appearance
in his view. Then first (says he) I perceived I was a Man, for before I had not
resolved for what I should employ my Life. The issue was, his serious
Resolution unfeignedly to honor God, sincerely to confess Christ, to place his
Felicity in Holiness of Life, and most zealously to follow it. Let any one that
is not of a reprobate Mind, and an incorrigibly depraved Heart, duly consider
the sublime and supernatural End of Man. O what a mavelous change will it
make in him, of Carnal into Spiritual? nay it would be a kind of Miracle if he
continued in his sinful State. How will it transform him into another Man, with
new Valuations, new Affections and Resolutions, as if he were born again with a
new Soul? How will it amaze him that his whole course has been a contradiction
to the wise and gracious design of God, that all his Industry has been a race
out of the way, a perpetual diversion from his main Business, that his Life has
been fruitless and dead to the true End of it? How will he be confounded at his
former Folly? Then alone we act with Understanding, when moved by our blessed
End, and our Actions by a strict tendency without variation issue into it.

2. Consider attentively the Objects that stand in competition for our Choice,
the present World and Heaven, to make a judicious comparison between them in
their Quality and Duration.

First, in their Quality. The things of the World, according to the judgment of
God himself, who is only Wise and Good, and has the highest Authority to decide
in the case, are but fallacious appearances of Happiness, mere Vanity. And
certainly the Creator knows the true worth of all things, and would not
disparage his own Works, but would undeceive Men that are apt to judge and
choose by the Eye of Sense. The Apostle tells us, That an Idol is nothing in
the World; although the matter of it may be of Gold, or Marble, or Wood, yet it
has no divine Perfection, which the Idolater attributes to it. So all worldly
things, in which Men place their chief Care, and Confidence, and Joy, though
they have some degrees of Goodness, and are a transient relief to us in our
passage to Eternity, yet they are nothing as to perfect Felicity. It Is merely
Opinion and Conceit that makes them so valued and pleasing, like a rich Dye to
a slight Stuff from whence its Price arises. Reason is either obscured, or not
obeyed, when the World is the Object of our Choice. Now what are these
Appearances of Beauty and Pleasure, compared with a Blessedness that is truly
infinite? Carnal Joy smiles in the Countenance, flatters the Fancy, touches the
Sense, but cannot fill the Heart, but the Favor of God satisfies the Soul.
Thou have put Gladness into my Heart, more than when their Corn and Wine
increased. Carnal Joy in its highest elevation in the time of the Harvest and
Vintage, is incomparably less than Spiritual Joy that springs from the Light of
God's Countenance. The World cannot fill the narrow capacity of our Senses, but
divine Joys exceed our most enlarged comprehensive Faculties. The Eye is not
satisfied with seeing, nor the Ear with hearing; but the Peace of God passes
all Understanding. The Things of the World are of a limited Goodness; Wisdom is
not Strength, nor Learning Riches, nor Beauty Fruitfulness: But God is a
Universal Good, in whom are all Attractives to raise and satisfy our Desires.
If Men did consider, they would distinguish and despise in comparison all that
is named Felicity here, with the Favor of God. To seek for satisfaction in the
Creature and forsake him, is as if one desirous to see the Light should
withdraw from the presence of the Sun, to borrow it from a weak Ray reflected
by some obscure Matter. Now if there be so vast a difference in their Nature,
as between a painted Vapor, and the solid glorious Good, between Finite and
Infinite, why is there not a difference accordingly in our Esteem, Affections
and Respects to them? How unreasonable is it that a Soul capable of God, should
cleave to the Dust? It would be most egregious folly to hang a Weight, that is
able to turn a great Engine, upon a small Clock: it is incomparably more
foolish, when the love of Happiness, the weight of Humane Nature, which applied
aright, will turn our Desires to Heaven, is only used to give vigorous motion
to our Endeavors about earthly Things.

2. Consider their Duration. The Apostle tells us, that the main scope of his
Actions was Things invisible; and gives the reason of it, 2 Cor. 4.18.
For the things that are seen are Temporal; but the things that are not seen
are Eternal. To insist upon the vast difference between Temporal and Eternal,
may seem needless: for the first Notions of things are of such uncontrollable
clearness, that an attempt to prove them, is to light a Candle to discover the
Sun. Yet this Principle drawing after it such powerful Consequences for the
government of our Hearts and Lives, and Conscience being so remiss, and the
sensual Affections so rebellious, it is needful to consider this seriously, that
what is really assented to in Speculation, may not be contradicted in Practice.
Now who can unfold the infinite Volume of Ages in Eternity? The Understanding
of an Angel can no more comprehend what is incomprehensible than the Mind of a
Man. A Snail will pass over an immense space as soon as an Eagle: for though
one dispatches more way than the other, yet both are equally distant from
arriving to the end of what is endless. But that the Conception of Eternity may
be more distinct, and affecting, it is useful to represent it under some
temporal Resemblances, that sensibly, though not fully, express it. Suppose
that the vast Ocean were distilled drop by drop, but so slowly, that a thousand
Years should pass between every drop; how many millions of Years were required
to empty it? Suppose this great World in its full compass, from one Pole to
another, and from the top of the Firmament to the bottom, were to be filled
with the smallest Sand, but so slowly, that every thousand Years only a single
Grain should be added; how many Millions would pass away before it were filled?
If the immense Superficies of the Heavens, wherein are innumerable Stars, the
least of which equals the magnitude of the Earth, were filled with Figures of
Numbers without the least vacant space, and every Figure signified a Million,
what created Mind could tell their Number, much less their Value? Having these
Thoughts, I reply; The Sea will be emptied drop by drop, the Universe filled
grain by grain, the Numbers written in the Heavens will come to an end; and how
much of Eternity is then spent? Nothing; for still infinitely more remains. In
short, whatever is Temporal, extend the continuance of it to the utmost
possibility of Conception, is infinitely short of Eternity. A Day, an Hour, a
Minute, has some proportion with a thousand Years; for that duration is
determined by a certain number of Days, and Hours, and Minutes: but Millions of
Ages have no proportion to Eternity, because it is an indeterminable Duration.
The Mind is soon tired and lost in searching after Numbers to represent it:
it is confounded and struck with amazing Horror, and can only direct the Eye
upward or downward to the two Habitations of Eternity, the glorious and the
miserable, Heaven and Hell. Now let us compare the Things of the present World
with those of the future State. The first are measured by flying Time, the
other remain in an unmovable Eternity. The Comforts that spring from the
Earth, suddenly wither and fall to it: the Tree of Life flourishes only above.
Frequent changes from Prosperity to Adversity are the Properties of this mortal
State. As those who are in Voyages at Sea, sometimes are in a calm, and
presently suffer a storm, and are forced to alter their Course by the changing
of the Winds; so it is with us in our passage here. But upon the first entrance
into another World, all the variations of this are at an end. Verily every Man
at his best estate is altogether Vanity. Surely every Man walks in a vain show,
surely they are disquieted in vain. The visible Felicity of Man is of no
continuance. We may frequently observe in the Evening, a Cloud by the
reflection of the Sun invested with so bright a Luster, and adorned with such a
pleasant variety of Colors, that in the judgment of our Eyes, if an Angel were
to assume a Body correspondent to his Glory, it were a fit matter for it. But
in walking a few steps, the Sun is descended beneath the Horizon, and the Light
withdrawn, and of all that splendid flaming appearance, nothing remains but a
dark Vapor, that falls down in a Shower. Thus vanishing is the show of
Felicity here. In this, Sense assists Faith; for the experience of every day
verifies what the Scripture declares, that the Fashion of this World passes
away. And therefore the guilty Folly of Men is aggravated, to set their Eyes
and Hearts upon that which is not. To see one passionately dote on a Face
ruined and deformed with Age, to be enchanted without a Charm, raises wonder,
and exposes to contempt. Yet such is the stupidity of Men to embrace with their
most entire Affections the withered Vanities of the World, that are hastening
to their Period. 'Twas a stinging reproach to Idolaters from God, None
considers in his Heart, neither is their Knowledge nor Understanding, to say, I
have burnt part of it in the Fire; yea, I have also baked Bread upon the Coals
thereof; I have roasted Flesh and eaten it; and shall I make the residue an
Abomination? shall I fall down to the stock of a Tree? And are not sensual Men
equally guilty of such monstrous Folly? for though universal Experience
convince them, that all things under the Sun are fading, and that many times
their dearest Comforts are snatched away from their Embraces; yet who does
advisedly consider, and say to himself, Shall I give my Heart to transient
Shadows? Shall I cherish vain Hopes, vain Aims and Desires of obtaining
Happiness in a perishing World? Although the worshipping a Stock be Idolatry of
grosser Infamy, yet it is as foolish and as destructive to set our chief Love
and Joy, that is only due to God, upon the Creature. And what follows in the
Prophet is justly applicable to such Persons; He feeds on Ashes, (that not
only afford no nourishment, but is very hurtful to the Body) a deceived Heart
has turned him aside, that he cannot deliver his Soul, nor say, Is there not a
Lie in my right Hand? Thus Carnal Men are so blinded with their Affections to
these short-lived Pleasures, that they cannot take the true liberty of judging
and reflecting that they are deceived and delighted with empty Shadows that
will suddenly end in disappointment and sorrow? Briefly, these glittering
Fictions and false Joys cannot please without an Error in the Mind, that shall
last but a little while. And if you saw a distracted Person sing and dance,
with a conceit that he is a Prince, would you be willing to lose sober Reason
for his fantastic Pleasure, especially if you knew that his cheerful Fit
should suddenly change into a mournful or raging Madness for ever? But the
Blessedness above is unchangeable as God the Author and Object of it, Eternal
as the Soul that enjoys it. And shall the World that passes away with the Lusts
thereof, turn our Affections from the undefiled immortal Inheritance? Shall the
vanishing appearance, the fleeting Figure of Happiness be preferred before what
is substantial and durable? If a spark of true Reason, of sincere Love to our
Souls be left, we shall count all things but dross and dung, that we may gain
the Kingdom of Glory. Thus Eternity inlightens, thus it counsels us.

To encourage us to seek the Kingdom of Heaven, I shall propound other Motives
to Consideration.

1. God is very willing that Men should be saved and partake of his Glory. For
this end, he has brought Life and Immortality to light in the Gospel. The Lord
Jesus, the Sun of Righteousness, has dispel'd the darkness of the Gentiles, and
the shadows of the Jews, and rendered the blessed and eternal State so clear and
so visible, that every Eye may see it. Our assurance of it is upon infallible
Principles. And though the excellent Glory of it is inexpressible, yet it is
represented under variety of fair and lovely Types to invite our Affections.
Besides, God makes an earnest offer of Life to us in his Word, he Commands,
Counsels, Excites, Urges, nay Entreats and Beseeches with infinite Tenderness,
that Men will accept of it. Thus the Apostle declares, Now then wa are
Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in
Christ's stead be reconciled to God. Is it not evident then beyond the most
jealous suspicion, God is desirous of our Happiness? Can we imagine any design,
any insincerity in his Words? Why should Heaven court a Worm? It Is his love to
Souls that expresses it self in that condescending compassionate manner, to
melt and overcome the perverse and hardened in Sin.

And as his Words so his Works are a convincing Argument of his Will: His most
gracious sustaining and supporting of sinful Men, his innumerable Benefits
conferred upon them, in the provision of Good, and preservation from Evil, are
for this End, that by the conduct of his merciful Providence they may be led to
Repentance, and received into his Favor. And the temporal Judgments inflicted
on Sinners, are medicinal in their Nature, and in his design to bring them to a
sight and abhorrence of Sin, to prevent their final ruin: if they prove mortal
to any, it is from their obstinate Corruption. The time allowed to those who are
obnoxious to his Justice every hour, is not a mere reprieve from Torment, but a
space of Repentance to sue out a Pardon: They are spared in order to Salvation.
The Lord is long-suffering to usward, 2 Pet. 3.9.
not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to Repentance.

But above all his other Works, the giving of his Son to be a Sacrifice for
Sin, is an incomparable demonstration, how much he delights in the Salvation of
Men. Since God has been at such cost to put them into a capacity of obtaining
the Kingdom of unchangeable Glory, far transcending the earthly Paradise that
was forfeited by Sin, we have the strongest assurance that he desires their
Felicity. And how guilty and miserable will those Sinners be that when Christ
has opened Heaven to us by his Blood, refuse to enter into it? When Brutus the
most noble Roman, propounded to a Philosopher his design to restore Rome to
Liberty, he replied, That the action would be glorious indeed, but that so many
servile Spirits that tamely stoopt under Tyranny, were not worthy that a Man of
Virtue and Courage should hazard himself to recover that for them, which they
did so lightly esteem. The Redemption of Mankind is without controversy the
Masterpiece of God's works, wherein his principal Attributes appear in their
excellent Glory. But how astonishing is the unworthiness of Men, who wretchedly
neglect Salvation, which the Son of God purchased by a Life full of Sorrows,
and a Death of infinite Sufferings? Blessed Redeemer! may it be spoken with the
humble, affectionate, and thankful sense of thy dying Love, why did thou give
thy self a ransom for those who are charmed with their Misery, and with the
most foul Ingratitude disvalue so precious a Redemption? How justly shall they
be for ever deprived of it? Behold, ye despisers, and wonder, and perish.

2. Consider, this glorious Blessedness shall be the Portion of all that
unfeignedly choose it, and earnestly seek it. This motive was enclosed in the
first, but deserves a separate Consideration. And of this we have infallible
assurance from the Word of God, who cannot lie. Godliness has the Promise of
the Life to come. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance. The
hope of a Christian is so certain that it is compared to an Anchor fastened in
Heaven. And besides the Fidelity of his Word, God has given us Security of the
Reward, the Life of his Son. This methinks should turn the Current of our
Desires and Endeavors to Heaven. For notwithstanding all our toil and sweat,
the labor of the Day and the watchings of the Night for the obtaining earthly
things, yet we many times fall short of our aims and hopes. 'Twas the
observation of the wisest Man, I returned and saw under the Sun, that the Race
is not to the Swift, nor the Battle to the Strong, neither yet Bread to the
Wise, nor yet Riches to Men of Understanding, nor yet Favor to Men of Skill;
but Time and Chance happens to all. Indeed such is the order of Divine
Providence in the World, there must be different conditions of Men here, some
Rich, others Poor; some Noble, others Mean; some in Command, others in
Subjection. And from hence it is also evident, that neither Dignity nor Riches
nor Pleasures are the Happiness of Man. For it is not becoming the Wisdom and
Goodness of God to make that the last end of the reasonable Creature, which
though sought with Sincerity and Diligence, may not be obtained, or of which
without his own consent he may be deprived. But civil distinctions and
qualities are of no value and consideration with respect to the obtaining or
excluding from Heaven. The rich and honorable that are in an exalted State,
have not a more easy ascent and entrance into the Kingdom of God than those who
are in the lowest degree. The Stars appear with the same bigness to him that
stands in the deepest Valley as on the highest Hill. Is there any difference
between the Souls of the rich and great in the World, and the Souls of the poor
and despised? Are they not equally the Offspring of God, and equally ransomed
by the most precious Blood of his Son? Are they not equally capable of Eternal
Rewards? Are not the Promises of the heavenly Kingdom, equally addressed to every
one that has an immortal Soul, that is faithful to his Duty and Covenant with
God? This should inspire all with flaming Desires, and draw forth their utmost
Industry, and make them steadfast and unmovable, always to abound in the Work
of the Lord, knowing our labor shall not be in vain in the Lord.

I know the Carnal Will is impetuous and impatient of delay; and earnest for
what is present with the neglect of the future Glory. But the unreasonableness
of this is evident to all; for it is not a new and strange thing to sow in hopes
of reaping a Harvest, for Men to be industrious and active on Land and Sea for
future Advantage. Nay, it is the constant practice of the World: The Merchant,
the Husbandman, the Student, the Soldier, and every Man in the Circle of his
Calling are visible Instances of this; and tho many times the most flourishing
Hopes are blasted, they are not discouraged. And is it not a sight full of
wonder to observe Men cheerful in Labors and Hardships in the Service of the
World, to carry it so lightly as if they had Wings, and all for a poor and
uncertain Recompense, and to be slow and languid in their Endeavors for a
Reward as great and as sure as God is glorious and true? How many ambitiously
strive to please a Prince, and wait long in his Service, who is but a Man, and
therefore variable in his Temper and State, sometimes is not willing to do what
he can, and sometimes cannot do what he would to reward his Servants? And is
there not infinitely more reason we should labor to please God, who is the
most liberal, and rich, and certain Rewarder of all that seek him?

3. Consider how gracious the Terms are upon which Heaven is promised in the
Gospel. Our Savior's Laws are so holy, just, and in their own Nature so good
to Men, even in their present performance, that their own Excellence, and
Equity, and Sweetness, is sufficient to recommend them without a respect to the
glorious Reward of Obedience. For what can be more desirable than conformity to
the Nature of the blessed God? What Pleasure is comparable to that which
springs from a pure Conscience, from a godly, righteous and sober Conversation?
How joyful is the performance of that Service which more immediately is
directed to the honor of the Divine Majesty? In Prayer, and other sacred
Actions, we draw near to the Fountain of Felicity, and receive from his
Fullness. In the affectionate Praises of God, we are Companions of the Angels.
And is not Integrity and Honesty in our dealings with Men more easy and
comfortable than Fraud and Oppression? Is it not troublesome to be always under
a Mask, to use arts and disguises to avoid the reproach and revenge that
attends unjust Actions when discovered? Are Temperance and Chastity as hurtful
to the Body, as Luxury and Lasciviousness, the essential parts of Carnal
Felicity? How miserably distracted is Man when the Heart is rent with
numberless Vanities, the Affections divided between various Objects! how quiet
and composed, when the Heart is united to God as the supreme Good, and the
Affections joyfully conspire in his Service! Can it then be pretended that the
Yoke of Christ is heavy, and his Law hard? Or are his Promises uncertain, and
his Reward small? No, his Commands are not grievous; in the keeping them there
is a great Reward, a present Paradise. Religion will make us happy hereafter in
the enjoyment of God, and happy here in Obedience to his Holy Will. Such is his
Goodness, that our Duty and Happiness are the same.

But it will be said, That the Gospel requires us to pluck out the right Eye,
and to cut off the right Hand, and to take up the Cross of Christ; that is, to
mortify the dearest Lusts, and to submit to the sharpest Sufferings for his
Honor, that we may be eternally Happy.

To this I answer;

It Is true, the humane Nature in this depraved State, only relishes such
Objects as pleasantly insinuate with the Carnal Senses, and it is bitter as
Death to bind up the Affections from them. But Grace gives a new divine Nature
to the Soul, and makes it easy to abstain from fleshly Lusts. To make this more
clear by a sensible Instance: Suppose a diseased Person, whose Stomach is
oppressed with corrupt Humors, and his Throat and Mouth so heated with Choler
and continual Thirst, that he thinks it impossible, though for his Life, to
abstain from immoderate Drinking. If a Physician by some powerful Medicine
cleanses the Stomach, and tempers the internal Heat, he then can easily
restrain himself from Excess. Thus a Carnal Man that is full of false
Estimations, and irregular Desires, while there are Pleasures without, and
Passions unsubdued within, though his Salvation depends on it, thinks it
impossible to restrain the exorbitant Appetites of Flesh and Blood. The
Gentiles thought it strange Christians did not run with them to the same excess
of Riot. But divine Grace so clarifies and enlightens the Mind, so purifies and
elevates the Affections, that it is not only possible but easy to abstain from
unlawful Pleasures. St. Austin before his Conversion was astonished, that many
in the vigor of Youth, and in a frail World lived Chastely; and reflecting upon
himself, was encouraged by this Thought, that which such and such observe, why
shall it be impossible to me to observe? and upon serious trial, by the
prosperous influence of Heaven, was a Conqueror over all carnal Temptations.
Nay after his holy Change, Quam suave carete suavitatibus istis?
the withholding his Heart from vicious Delights, was inexpressibly more sweet
than his former enjoying of them. And are there not many visible examples of
holy heavenly Christians, to whom grosser sensual Pleasures are unsavory and
contemptible? You may as well tell the number of the Stars, as of those who
have practiced Religion in its strictness and purity, and by their enlightened
Conversations directed us in the way to Heaven. And are their Bodies taken from
the Vein of a Rock, and not composed of Flesh and Blood as well as others? Are
their Passions, like Solomon's brazen Sea, unmovable by any Winds of
Temptations? Are they entirely exempted from the impression of Objects, and the
lower Affections? No, they are alive, and sensible of those things that ravish
the Affections of carnal Men, but by the power of Grace despise and overcome
them. And this Grace is offered in the Gospel to all that sincerely desire it,
so that it is a vain wretched pretense that Religion binds to hard Service.

To the other part of the Objection, that sometimes Religion exposes the
Professors of it to heavy Sufferings, I answer, Indeed the Gospel is plain and
peremptory in this, if we will reign with Christ, we must suffer with him, when
we are called forth to give a noble testimony to his Truth. It Is no
extraordinary Elevation, no point of Perfection, but the duty of every
Christian to be always ready in the disposition and resolution of his Mind, to
sacrifice his Life when the honor of Christ requires it. But it is no hard
condition to suffer transient Afflictions for the obtaining a Happy
Immortality, to be conformable to the Image of our suffering Redeemer, that we
may be crowned with his Glory. How many Christians esteemed themselves honored
in the Disgrace, and blessed in the Injuries they suffered for Christ, and with
an invincible Patience, and astonishing Joy, endured the most cruel
Persecutions, though yet the human Nature in them was as tender and sensible of
Pains as in others? but the natural aversion and repugnance to suffering was
overruled by the determination of the rational Will, upon the account of their
Duty, and the Reward attending it. They gave a most convincing sensible
Testimony how much more valuable Heaven is, than this present World, willingly
exposing themselves to all Evil here, and rejoicing in hope of a glorious issue.

In short; the Reward of Obedience is a triumphal Crown; and where there is no
Victory, there can be no Triumph; and where no Combat, no Victory; and where no
Enemy, no Combat. Therefore we are commanded to fight against our internal
Enemies, our corrupt Affections, to kill the Lusts of the Flesh, and to
encounter and overcome, by Humility and meek Submissions, the Cruelty of
malicious Enemies without us, in order to obtain the Crown of Life. And a
Believer that has Heaven in taste and expectation, will easily renounce the
most pleasant, and willingly endure the sharpest Temptations, for the blessed
Reward of his Obedience.

Lastly, Fervent and constant Prayer is requisite for the Grace of God, that we
may fix our Aims aright upon eternal Happiness, and use those sure Means that
with divine Advantage are proposed in the Scriptures, that can make us wise to
Salvation; such is the depravation of Man since his Fall, the Mind is diverted
by vain Thoughts, and the Heart prepossessed with sensual Desires, that 'till
the Spirit of his Mind be renewed, and his original Affections to the Supreme
Good be revived and restored by Divine Grace, he is regardless of it, and only
applies himself to what is pleasing to Sense. There may be some transient
Glances, and volatile Wishes of Heaven in Carnal Men, but they are miserably
weak, and ineffectual. Therefore a most necessary Duty incumbent upon us, is by
humble and fervent Prayer to address our selves to God for his Spirit, to
enlighten our Minds, that we may believe the Reality and Greatness of the
Eternal Reward; and to reform our Wills, that we may feel its attractive Force.
Both these Acts of the Spirit are requisite, that the Love of God, as our chief
Felicity, may be the regent Principle of our Hearts and Lives.

1. For this end the Holy Spirit convinces Men thoroughly of the Reality and
Greatness of an invisible Happiness. In the Light of the Gospel, how many of
eminent intellectual Faculties are stupid as to their great Interest, and spend
themselves about Trifles, and are equally tractable to Eternal Ruin, as the Ox
to the Slaughter? He that is destitute of the illuminating Grace of the Spirit,
is blind, and cannot see afar off. Now by the Analogy between the corporal and
intellectual Faculties, we may understand, in some measure, how the Mind is
illuminated by the Spirit of God. For as to the Act of Seeing, two things are
requisite; 1. External Light in the Air, without which the Colors, Figures and
Beauties of Objects are not visible to the sharpest Eye, but lie obscured under
impenetrable Darkness. 2. Internal Light in the Eye, in which the visive Power
consists: if this be extinguished, the clearest Light of Heaven is of no use
for the discovery of Things. Thus the Understanding is enabled to see Spiritual
things. 1. By the Revelation of the Object: In this respect Life and
Immortality are brought to Light by the Gospel. Till that bright Discovery was
made of Eternal Blessedness, it was above the desires and hopes of sinful Man.
Coelum, homo nec optare poterat ex ignorantia, nec sperare ex propriae miseriae
conscientia. 2. By the inward inlightning from the Spirit of Wisdom, that
removes the Ignorance, Prejudice, and Inadvertency of the Mind, which as Scales
darkened its Sight, and disposes it to perceive the Verity and Excellency of
spiritual and future Things, tho not with comprehensive Evidence, yet with that
assurance, that no doubtfulness or suspense remains concerning them. It Is
observable that Faith is expressed in Scripture, by Prudence, Wisdom, and
Knowledge, whereby a Man knows the Grounds and Motives of his Judgment and
Actions. And Sin is called Folly. For as when the understanding Faculty, either
from the indisposedness of the Organs, as in Idiots, or from the disorder of
Fancy by inflammation of the Humors, as in distracted Persons, cannot weigh
and compare, and therefore makes a perverse judgment of things; so the carnal
Mind, by not due measuring and pondering, judges falsely of spiritual Things. If
something no bigger than the Hand were put before the Eye, it would intercept
the sight of the Heavens; and he that not considering the Properties of things
near and distant, should conclude that Piece to be bigger than the Heavens,
were justly reputed a Fool. And the folly of carnal Men is more gross, who
prefer things present to Sense, before what is future and of everlasting
consequence to the Soul. But there are some Actions, which if done by a
Natural, would be counted Folly, yet being done by those who in the reputation
of the World are Wise, are esteemed Prudent, but they are the most deplorable
Folly. Now as the restoring the Laesum principium, the broken Mind to its sound
state, whereby it is able to consider, discern and conclude of things according
to their Nature, such is the action of God's Spirit upon the corrupt Mind,
clarifying and enlightening it, so that it receives full conviction by the
clearest Marks of divine Authority shining in the Gospel, of the Truth of all
the great and precious Promises therein contained, and causing it, by a steady
application of the Thoughts, to see the vast difference between what is
Temporal, and Eternal; how despicably light all the Vanities of this World are
found, when put in the Balance against the infinite inestimable Happiness of
the next. In short, the renewed Mind knows Spiritual Things according to their
Nature and Qualities, believes, esteems, and determines that they are of
eternal Moment, and absolutely necessary for the Happiness of Man. And as when
the natural Faculty of seeing is perished, it is irreparable by human Skill, and
without a Miracle can never be restored; so the intellectual Faculty, when
darkened by sinful Lusts, without the renewing power of the Spirit, can never
know Spiritual Things as they ought to be known. Therefore as the blind Men in
the Gospel who dispair'd of help from the Physicians, hearing of the miraculous
Power of Christ, importunately begged his healing Mercy; so let us pray to the
Light and Savior of the World, but in a more noble and higher Sense, Lord,
that we may receive our sight. Let us with the most zealous Affections call
upon the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Glory, that he would give
unto us the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation in the knowledge of him, the Eyes of
our understanding being enlightened, that we may know what is the hope of his
Calling, and what the Riches of the Glory of his Inheritance in the Saints.

2. The efficacious Influence of the Holy Spirit is requisite to change the
Will, that with a free and full consent it may desire and prosecute the
Spiritual Eternal Good. Without this, the conviction of the Mind is not
powerful enough to convert the Soul from the love of the World, to choose
Heaven. There may be an enlightened Conscience, without a renewed Heart. Though
the Judgment assents that God is the Supreme Good, yet till the Heart be
circumcised, the sensuality of the Affections taken away, divine Love that
directs the Life to God as our blessed End, can never possess it. Suppose that
Men had a sensible and strong assurance of the Eternal State hereafter, if all
those who lived godly in a visible manner ascended with Elias to Heaven, and if
all who continued in their Sins visibly descended into Hell, as Corah and his
Company were swallowed up alive by the Earth, before the Israelites; if Men
could hear the joyful Exultations of the Saints above, their high Praises of
God, and hear the desperate Cries and deep Complaints of the Damned: if one,
according to the desire of the rich Man, were sent from Hell, and with his
Fiery Tongue should relate what he had seen and suffered, and exhibit a
sensible demonstration in himself of those Torments, yet this alone were not
sufficient to draw off their Hearts from the deceitful Happiness of this World,
and fasten them on the perfect and Eternal Happiness in the next. Indeed they
could not then indulge their Lusts so securely, but they would be Strangers to
the Life of God, such an inveterate alienation of Heart is in Men from real
Holiness. Till the sanctifying Spirit by a directive persuasive Light that
represents the Truth and Goodness of Spiritual Things, transforms the Soul, and
makes it Spiritual in its Valuations and Affections, it is inwardly averse from
Grace and Glory. The Lord direct our Hearts into the Love of God, and into the
patient waiting for Christ, when he shall come to be glorified in his Saints,
and admired in all them that believe.

FINIS.
OF HELL.

BY WILLIAM BATES, D.D.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons against the
Royal Exchange in Cornhil. 1691.

OF HELL.
Mark 9.48. Where their Worm dies not, and the Fire is not quenched.


THE Words are the repetition of a powerful Motive, by our Blessed Savior, to
deter Men from indulging Temptations to sin, how grateful or useful soever to
them: If thy Hand offend thee, cut it off; if thy Foot offend thee, cut it off;
if thy Eye offend thee, pluck it out. All the Occasions whereby Sin insinuates
it self, and inflames our Inclinations, whether it bribes us with Profit, or
allures by Pleasure, must be immediately cut off, and for ever separated from
us. This Counsel seems very severe to the natural Man, who freely converses
with Temptations: To do Violence to himself, and tear his beloved Lusts from
his Bosom, the Carnal Nature will not consent to. Our Savior therefore urges
such Arguments as may move the Understanding and Affections, may strike Sense
and Conscience: For it is better to enter into Life maimed, than having two
Hands to go into Hell where the Fire never shall be quenched. Hope and Fear are
the most active Passions: The Hope of Heaven is motive enough to induce a true
Believer to despise and reject all the Advantages and Pleasures of Sin that are
but for a Season: and the fear of an Everlasting Hell, is strong enough to
control the vicious Appetites. Reason determines, that when a Gangreen that is
deadly and spreading, Ut corpus redimas ferrum patieris and ignes: ut valeas
animo quicquam tolerare negabis? At pretium pars haec corpore majus habet.

Ovid.
has seized upon a Member, presently to cut off an affected Arm or Leg, to save
the rest: how much more reasonable and necessary is it to part with the most
charming and favorite Sin, to preserve the Soul from Eternal Death? It Is
observable, our Savior inculcates three times, that Men may take notice of it
with terror, Where the Worm never dies, and the Fire is never quenched: A Worm
gnawing upon the Bowels, that are of the most tender and quick sense, Fire that
causes the most vehement pain, are fearful Representations to typify the
Torments of the Damned: And that the Worm is undying, and the Fire
unquenchable, infinitely aggravates their Punishment.

The Proposition is this: That the punishment of those who will retain their
pleasant or profitable Sins, shall be extreme and eternal.

In the handling of this Point, I will, 1. Discourse of the Extremity of the
Punishment. 2. Of the Eternity of it.


1. Of the Extremity of it.

Before the particular Description of the Pains of the Damned, I shall observe
in general, That the full Representation of Hell is beyond all humane
Expression, nay our most fearful Thoughts cannot equal the Horror of it. Psalm.
90.11.
Who knows the Power of thine Anger? What are the prepared Plagues, by infinite
Justice and Almighty Wrath for obstinate Sinners? It is impossible for the most
guilty and trembling Conscience to enlarge its sad apprehensions according to
the degrees of that Misery. The Lord will show forth his Wrath, and make his
Power known in the Vessels fitted for Destruction. None can tell what God can
do, and what Man shall suffer, when made capable to endure such Torments for
ever, as now would presently consume him. As the Glory of Heaven cannot be
fully understood till enjoyed, so the Torments of Hell cannot be comprehended
till felt. But we may have some discovery of those unknown Terrors, by the
following Considerations.

1. The most heavy Judgments of God upon Sinners here, are light and tolerable
in Comparison of the Punishment of Sinners in the next State. For,

(1.) Temporal Evils of all kinds and degrees, as Pestilence, Famine, War, are
designed for the bringing of Men to a sight and sense of their Sins, and are
common to Good and Bad here. And if his Anger be so terrible when he chastises
as a compassionate Father, what is his Fury when he punishes as a severe Judge?
If the correcting Remedies ordered by his Wisdom and Love for the conversion of
Sinners be so sharp, what is the deadly revenge of his irreconcilable Hatred?

(2.) The Miseries of the present State are allayed with some enjoyments. None
are so universally afflicted, so desolate, but something remains to sweeten the
sense of their Sufferings. Judgments are tempered with Mercies. No Man is
tortured with all Diseases, nor forsaken of all Friends, nor utterly without
Comfort. And when the Affliction is irremediable, yet if our grief produces
Sympathy in others, it is some ease to the troubled Mind, and by that assistance
the Burden is made lighter. But in Hell the Damned are surrounded with
Terrors, encompast with Flames, without any thing to refresh their Sorrows, not
a drop of Water to a Lake of Fire. All that was esteemed Felicity here, is
totally withdrawn. Death puts a period to their Lives, and Pleasures of Sin for
ever. For it is most just, that those Objects which were abused by their Lusts,
and alienated their Hearts from their Duty and Felicity, should be taken away.
And which is extreme Misery, in their most pitiful State they are absolutely
unpitied. Pity is the cheap and universal Lenitive, not denied to the most
guilty in their Sufferings here: for the Law of Nature instructs us to pity the
Man, when the Malefactor suffers. But even this is not afforded to the Damned.
All their Agonies and Cries cannot incline the Compassion of God, and the
blessed Spirits in Heaven toward them: for they are not compassionable
Objects, their Misery being the just effect of their perverse obstinate Choice.
And in Hell all human tender Affections are extinguished for ever. Now it is the
perfection of Misery, the excess of Desolation, to be deprived of all good
things pleasing to our Desires, and to suffer all Evils from which we have the
deepest aversation and abhorrence. As in Heaven all Good is eminently
comprised, and nothing but Good, so in Hell all Evil is in excessive degrees,
and nothing but Evil.

(3.) Temporal Evils are inflicted by the mediation of second Causes that are
of a limited power to hurt: but in the next World he more immediately torments
the Damned by his absolute Power. The Apostle tells us, that the Wicked are
punished with everlasting Destruction from the presence of the Lord, and the
Glory of his Power. 2 These. 1.
What is the lashing with a few Rushes, to a blow given by the hand of a Giant
that strikes dead at once? This comparison is below the Truth.

More particularly, Indeed it is difficult to conceive how a material Fire can
act on a spiritual Substance. But it is unreasonable to determine that it is
impossible. For if we consider what Pain is, it is as conceivable how pure
Spirits are capable of it, as Spirits in Conjunction with Bodies. The human
Soul in its Nature is Spiritual as the Angels, yet has a painful sense of Fire
or other afflicting Evils incumbent on the Senses. The Body merely feels not
pain, but it passes through the Body to the Soul. If the Soul by a strong
diversion of Thoughts apply it self to an Object, the Body is insensible of
Pain, as is evident in some Diseases; and that in the heat of Battle, deep
Wounds are not felt. And as God by a natural Constitution has ordered, that the
Body so touched and moved, excites a painful Sense in the Soul, he may have
ordained that the Devils shall feel the impressions of Material Fire, in the
places to which they shall be confined.
the state of Misery is set forth in Scripture by such representations as may
powerfully instruct and terrify even the most carnal Men. Nothing is more
intolerably painful, than suffering the violence of Fire enraged with
Brimstone: and Hell is described by a Lake of Fire and Brimstone, wherein the
Wicked are tormented. Whether the Fire be Material or Metaphorical, the reality
and intenseness of the Torment is signified by it. But the ordinary Fire, tho
mingled with the most torturing Ingredients, is not an adequate representation
of it. For that is prepared by Men, but the Fire of Hell is prepared by the
Wrath of God for the Devil and his Angels. The Divine Power is illustriously
manifested in that terrible Preparation: So that, as some of the Fathers
express it, if one of the Damned might pass from those Flames into the fiercest
Fires here, it were to exchange a Torment for a Refreshment. The Scripture
speaks of the vehement heat and fiery Thirst, and outer Darkness in which the
Damned suffer, to satisfy the rights of Justice in the torment of those Senses,
for the Pleasure of which Men wilfully broke the Laws of God.

But the Soul being the chief Sinner, shall be the chief Mourner in those
Regions of Sorrow. An Image of this we have in the Agonies of Spirit, which
sometimes the Saints themselves are in here, and which the most stubborn
Sinners can neither resist nor endure. Job was afflicted in that manner that he
complains, The Arrows of the Almighty are with me, the Poison whereof drinks up
my Spirit, the Terrors of God set themselves in Array against me. If a Spark of
his Displeasure falls on the guilty Conscience, it tears and blows up all, as a
Fire-ball cast into a Magazine. Solomon, who understood the Frame of humane
Nature, tells us, The Spirit of a Man can bear his Infirmity: that is, the Mind
fortified by principles of moral Counsel and Constancy, can endure the assault
of external Evils: but a wounded Spirit who can bear? This is most
insupportable when the sting and remorse of the Mind is from the sense of
Guilt: for then God appears an Enemy, righteous and severe; and who can
encounter with offended Omnipotence? Such is the sharpness of his Sword, and
the weight of his Hand, that every stroke is deadly inward. Satan the cruel
Enemy of Souls, exasperates the Wounds. He discovers and charges Sin upon the
Conscience with all its killing Aggravations, and conceals the divine Mercy,
the only Lenitive and Balm to the Wounded Spirit. What Visions of Horror, what
Spectacles of Fear, what Scenes of Sorrow are presented to the distracted Mind
by the Prince of Darkness? And which heightens the Misery, Man is a worse Enemy
to himself than Satan: he falls upon his own Sword and destroys himself. The
guilty Conscience turns the Sun into Darkness, and the Moon into Blood: the
precious Promises of the Gospel, that assure Favor and Pardon to returning and
relenting Sinners, are turned into Arguments of despair, by reflecting upon the
abuse and provocation of Mercy, that the Advocate in God's bosom, is become the
Accuser. Whatever the Soul-wounded Sinner sees or hears, afflicts him; whatever
he thinks, torments him. All the Diversions in the World, Business, Pleasures,
merry Conversation, Comedies, are as ineffectual to give freedom from those
Stings and Furies in the Breast, as the sprinkling of Holy Water is to expel a
raging Devil from a possessed Person. Those who in their Pride and Jollity, have
despised serious Religion, either as a fond Transport and Ecstasy toward God,
or a dull Melancholy and Dejection about the Soul, or an idle Scrupulosity
about indifferent things, yet when God has set their Sins with all their
killing circumstances in order before their Eyes, how changed, how confounded
are they at that Apparition? how restless, with the dreadful expectation of the
doom that attends them! Belshazzer in the midst of his Cups, and Herd of
Concubines, by a few Words written on the Wall, containing his Process and
Judgment, was so terrified by his guilty jealous Conscience, that his Joints
were loosed, Nature sunk under the apprehension. Now all these troubles of
Mind, are but the beginnings of Sorrows, but the Smoke of the infernal Furnace,
but Earnests of that terrible Sum which divine Justice will severely exact of
the Wicked in Hell.

Indeed these Examples are rare, and not regarded by the most, and by some
looked on as the effects of Distraction; but to convince the bold and careless
Sinners who never felt the stings of an awakned Conscience, what extreme
Terrors seize upon the Wicked in the other World? Consider,

1. The Apprehension shall be more clear and enlarged than in the present
State. Now the Soul is oppressed with a weight of Clay, and in Drowsiness and
Obscurity. The great things of Eternity are of little force to convince the
Conscience, or persuade the Affections. But then the Soul shall work with the
quickest activity. The Mind shall by an irresistible Light take a full view of
all afflicting Objects. The most stupid and unconcerned Sinners shall then see
and feel their ruined State, what a glorious Felicity they have lost, what a
Misery they are plunged into, without any possibility of lessening it by false
Conceits, and receiving any relief by the error of Imagination.

2. The mournful Thoughts shall be always fixed upon what is tormenting. The
Soul in conjunction with the Body cannot always apply it self to one sort of
Objects. For the Ministry of the sensible Faculties is requisite to its
Operations. And the Body must be supported by Eating and Drinking and Rest,
which interrupts troublesome Thoughts. Besides, the variety of Objects and
Accidents here avert the Mind sometimes from what is afflicting. But the
separate Soul is in no dependence on the Body, and after their reunion, there
shall be no necessity of Food or Sleep, or any other animal actions to support
it, but it shall be restored to a new capacity for new Torments, and preserved
in that miserable State by the power of God. There will be nothing then to
divert the lost Soul from sad Reflections upon its Misery. There are no lucid
intervals in Hell.

3. All the tormenting Passions will then be let loose at once upon the guilty
Creature. And if there be no single Passion so weak, but heightened, will break
the Spirit, and render Life so miserable, that a Man will take Sanctuary in the
Grave to escape; how miserable is the Condition when the most fierce and united
Passions war against the Soul? This is signified by the never-dying Worm that
gnaws on the tenderest parts, and of quickest sense. Shame, Sorrow, Despair,
Fury, Hatred and Revenge are some of that brood of Vipers that torment the
Damned.

1. Shame is a Passion of which human Nature is very sensible, and this in the
highest degree of Confusion shall seize on the Wicked. Dan. 12.2.
For all the just causes of Shame shall then meet. The inward source of it is
the consciousness of Guilt, or Turpitude and Folly in the Actions; and all
these are the inseparable Adjuncts of Sin. Tacita sudant praecordia culpa.

Juv.
The guilty Soul by a piercing reflection upon its Crimes, has a secret shame
of its Degeneracy and Unworthiness. The Passion is increast, when a discovery
is made of vile practices that defile and debase a Man, expose to Contempt and
Infamy, before Persons of high Quality and eminent Virtue, whom we admire and
reverence, and whose esteem we value. To be surprised in an unworthy Action by
such a Person, disorders the Blood, and transfuses a Color into the Face, to
cover it with a Vail of Blushing. And the more numerous the Spectators are, the
more the Disgrace is aggravated. And if Derision be joined with the Ignominy,
it causes extreme Displeasure. O the universal Confusion, the over-powring
amazement that will seize on Sinners in the great Day of Discovery, when all
the Works of Darkness, all their base Sensualities shall be revealed before
God, Angels and Saints! When all the Covers of Shame shall be taken off, the
Excuses and Denials, to extenuate or conceal their Sins, shall vanish, and
their Breasts be transparent to the Eyes of all! How will they be ashamed of
their foul and permanent Deformity in the Light of that glorious Presence? How
will they be astonished to appear in all their Pollutions before that bright and
immense Theater? How will they be confounded to stand in all their Guilt before
that sublime and severe Tribunal? How will they endure the upbraidings for all
the Sins which they have so wickedly committed, and the derision for the
Punishment they so deservedly suffer? The holy Judge will laugh at their
Calamity, and mock when their fear comes. The Righteous also shall see, and
shall laugh at them, Lo these are the Men that made not God their Portion, but
perishing Vanities, that preferred sweet Folly before severe Wisdom. The Devils
will reproach them for that scornful advantage they had over them, That as
Children are seduced for things of Luster to part with real Treasures, so they
were easily persuaded for the Trifles of Time to exchange Eternal Happiness.
Whither will they cause their Shame to go? Jer. 14.12.
Those black Sinners that here never change color for their Filthiness, that
hardened by custom in Sin, are impenetrable to Shame, as the brute Beasts that
are absolutely destitute of reason, nay that have not only overcome all
tenderness, but glory in their Shame, shall glow at the manifestation of their
sordid Lusts, their vile Servilities, and be covered with Confusion, and the
sense of it shall be revived in their Minds for ever.

2. To open Shame is joined the greatest inward Sorrow. This Passion, when
violent, penetrates the Soul in all its Faculties, and fastens it to the
afflicting Object. When it dwells in the Bosom, it gives an easy entrance to
whatever cherishes and increases it, and rejects what might assuage and lessen
the sense of the Evil. The most pleasant things do not excite Desire or Joy,
but exasperate Grief. Like those Animals that convert the best nourishment into
their own Poison; so deep Sorrow receives mournful impressions from all things,
and turns the sweetest Comforts of Life into Wormwood and Gall. The causes of
Sorrow are either the loss of some valued Good, or the sense of some present
Evil. And the Sorrow is more violent, as the Cause is great in it self, and in
the apprehension and tenderness of the Sufferers. Now both these Causes, with
all the heavy Circumstances that can multiply and aggravate Sorrow, meet in
Hell the Center of Misery.

The loss is inconceivably great. If Cain when banished from the Society of the
Saints, where God was publicly worshipped, and by spiritual Revelations and
visible Apparitions, graciously made himself known, cried out in anguish of
Soul, My punishment is greater than I can bear: from thy Face shall I be hid,
and I shall be a Fugitive upon the Earth: how intolerable will be the final
separation from his glorious and joyful Presence be? In the clear and
transforming Vision of his Glory, and the intimate and indissolvable Union with
him by Love, consists the Perfection and Satisfaction of the immortal Soul. The
Felicity resulting from it, is as entire and eternal, as God is Great and True,
who has so often promised it in Scripture. Now the Damned are for ever excluded
from the reviving Presence of God. It Is often seen how tenderly and impatiently
the humane Spirit resents the loss of a dear Relation. Jacob for the supposed
death of Joseph, was so overcome with Grief, that when all his Sons and
Daughters rose up to comfort him, he refused to be comforted, and said, I will
go down mourning to the Grave. Jussisti Domine, and sic est ut poena sit sibi
omnis inordinatus affectus.

Aug.
Indeed this overwhelming Sorrow, is both a Sin and a Punishment. It Is
ordained, by the righteous and unchangeable Decree of God, that every
inordinate Affection in Man should be his own Tormentor. But if the loss of a
poor frail Creature for a short time be so afflicting, how insupportable will
the Sorrow be for the loss of the Blessed God for ever? Who can fully conceive
the Extent and Degrees of that Evil? For an Evil rises in proportion to the
Good of which it deprives us: It must therefore follow, that Celestial
Blessedness being an infinite eternal Good, the exclusion from it is
proportionably Evil. And as the Felicity of the Saints results from the
Fruition of God in Heaven, and from comparison with the contrary State: So the
Misery of the Damned arises, both from the thoughts of lost Happiness, and from
the lasting Pain that torments them.

It may be replied, If this be the utmost Evil that is consequent to Sin, the
Threatening of it, is likely to deter but few from the pleasing their corrupt
Appetites: for carnal Men have such gross and vitiated Affections that are
careless of spiritual Happiness. They cannot taste and see how good the Lord is.

To this a clear Answer may be given: In the next State, where the Wicked shall
be for ever without those Carnal Objects, that here deceive and delight them,
when deprived of all things that pleases their voluptuous Senses, their
Apprehensions will be changed; they shall understand what a Happiness it is to
enjoy God, and what a Misery to be expelled from the Celestial Paradise. Our
Savior tells the Jews, Luke 15.28.
There shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth, when ye shall see Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, and you your
selves thrust out. How will they pine with envy at the sight of that triumphant
Felicity, of which they shall never be Partakers? To see that blessed Company
entering into the sacred Mansions of Light, will make the loss of Heaven
infinitely more discernable and terrible to the Wicked, who shall be cast into
outer Darkness, and for ever be deprived of Communion with God and his Saints.
Depart from me, will be as dreadful a part of the Judgment as Eternal Fire.

With the loss of the most excellent Good, the suffering of the most afflicting
painful Evil is joined. The Sentence is, Depart ye Cursed into Everlasting
Fire. God's Justice is not satisfied in depriving them of Heaven, but inflicts
the most heavy Punishment upon Sense and Conscience in the Damned: for as the
Soul and Body in their state of union in this Life, were both guilty, the one
as a Guide, the other as the Instrument of Sin; and if an imaginarry Sorrow
conceived in the Mind without a real external Cause, as in Melancholy Persons,
when gross Vapors darken and corrupt the brightness and purity of the Spirits
that are requisite for its cheerful Operations, is often so oppressing that
Nature sinks under it: How insupportable will the Sorrow of condemned Sinners
be, under the impression and sense of God's Almighty and avenging Hand, when it
shall fully appear how pure and holy he is in his Anger for Sin, how just and
dreadful in punishing Sinners? It may be the indulgent Sinner may lessen his
fear of Hell, by fancying the number of Sufferers will assuage the sense of
their Misery. But this is a foolish Mistake; For the number of Sufferers shall
be so far from affording any relief, that the Misery is aggravated by the
Company and Communication of the Miserable. Every one is surrounded with
Sorrows, and by the sights of Woe about him, feels the universal Grief. The
weeping and wailing, the cries and dolorous expressions of all the Damned,
increases the torment and vexation of every one. As when the Wind conspires
with the Flame; it is more fierce and spreading.

3. The Concomitant of Sorrow will be Fury and Rage against themselves, as the
true causes of their Misery. For God will make such a discovery of his
righteous Judgment, that not only the Saints shall glorify his Justice in the
condemnation of the Wicked, but they shall be so convinced of it, as not to be
able to charge their Judge with any defect of Mercy, or excess of Rigor in his
proceedings against them. As the Man in the Parable of the Marriage Feast, when
taxt for his presumptuous intrusion without a Wedding Garment, How came thou
in hither? was speechless: so they will find no plea for their Justification
and Defense, but must receive the eternal Doom with Silence and Confusion. Then
Conscience shall revive the bitter remembrance of all the methods of divine
Mercy for their Salvation, that were ineffectual by their Contempt and
Obstinacy. All the compassionate Calls by his Word, with the holy Motions of
the Spirit, were like the sowing of Seed in the Stony Ground, that took no
root, and never came to perfection. All his terrible Threatenings were but as
Thunder to the Deaf, or Lightning to the Blind, that little affects them: the
bounty of his Providence designed to lead them to Repentance, had the same
effect, as the Showers of Heaven upon Briars and Thorns that makes them grow
the faster. And that a Mercy so ready to pardon, did not produce in them a
correspondent affection of grateful obedient Love, but by the most unworthy
provocations they plucked down the Vengeance due to obstinate Rebels, will so
enrage the Damned against themselves, that they will be less miserable by the
Misery they suffer, than by the conviction of their torn Minds, that they were
the sole Causes of it. What Repentings will be kindled within them, for the
stupid neglect of the great Salvation so dearly purchased, and earnestly
offered to them? What a fiery addition to their Torment, that when God was so
willing to save them, they were so wilful to be Damned. They will never forgive
themselves, that for the short and mean Pleasures of Sense, which if enjoyed a
thousand years, cannot recompense the loss of Heaven, nor requite the pains of
Hell for an Hour, they must be deprived of the one, and suffer the other for
ever.

4. The Sorrow and Rage will be increased by Despair: for when the wretched
Sinner sees the Evil is peremptory, and no Outlet of Hope, he abandons himself
to the violence of Sorrow, and by cruel Thoughts wounds the Heart more, than
the fiercest Furies in Hell can. This Misery that flows from despair shall be
more fully opened under the distinct consideration of the Eternity of Hell.
Briefly, as the Blessed are in Heaven, and Heaven is in them, by those holy and
joyful Affections that are always exercised in the Divine Presence, so the
Damned are in Hell, and Hell is in them by those fierce and miserable Passions
that continually prey upon them.

2. The Eternity of their Misery makes it above all other Considerations
intolerable. Our Savior repeats it thrice in the space of a few Verses, to
terrify those who spare some favorite Corruption, that in Hell their Worm dies
not, and the Fire is never quenched. God will never reverse his Sentence, and
they shall never change their State. How willingly would carnal Men raze the
Word Eternal out of the Scriptures, but to their grief they find it joined with
the Felicity of Heaven, and the Torments of Hell. The second Death has all the
terrible qualities of the first, but not the ease and end it brings to Misery.
All the Tears of those forlorn Wretches, shall never quench one spark of the
Fire. Where are the delicious Fare, the Music, the Purple, and all the carnal
Delights of the rich Man? they are all changed into a contrary state of Misery,
and that state is fixed for ever. From his vanishing Paradise he descended into
an everlasting Hell. In this the Vengeance of God is infinitely more heavy than
the most terrible execution from Men. Human Justice and Power can inflict but
one Death (that will be soon dispatched) upon a Malefactor worthy to suffer a
hundred Deaths; if he be condemned to the Fire, they cannot make him live and
die together, to burn and not be consumed: But God will so far support the
Damned in their Torments, that they shall always have Strength to feel, though
no Strength to endure them. Those extreme Torments which would extinguish the
present Life in a Moment, shall be suffered for ever. This Consideration
infinitely aggravates the Misery. For the lost Soul rackt with the fearful
Contemplation of what it must suffer for ever, feels as it were at once all the
Evils that shall torment it in its whole duration. The perpetuity of the Misery
is always felt by prevision. This is as the cruel breaking of the Bones upon
the Wheel, when the Soul is tormented by the foresight of Misery that without
allays shall continue in the circulation of Eternal Ages. To make this more
sensible, let us consider, that Pain makes the Mind observant of the passing of
the hours. In Pleasures, Time with a quick and silent motion insensibly slides
away: but in Troubles the Hours are tedious; in violent Pains we reckon the
Minutes as long. It Is observable how passionately the afflicted Psalmist
complains, Will the Lord cast off for ever? Psalm. 77.7.
Will he be favorable no more? Does his Promise fail for evermore? Has he
forgotten to be gracious? Has he in anger shut up his tender Mercies? In what
various pathetick Forms does he express the same Affection? Though he had
assurance that the gracious God would not be always severe, yet his Anguish
forced from him Complaints, as if the moment of his Trouble were an Eternity.
But what strains of Sorrow are among the Damned, who besides the present sense
of their Misery, have always in their Thoughts the vast Eternity wherein they
must suffer it?

When three terrible Evils were propounded to David's choice, pining Famine for
three Years, or bloody War for three Months, or devouring Pestilence for three
Days, he chose the shortest, though in it self the heaviest Evil.

Many sad Days must pass under the other Judgments, where Death by anticipation
in such variety of Shapes would be presented to the Mind, that the lingering
expectation of it would afflict more than the sudden stroke: whereas the fury
of the Pestilence would be soon over. But the Damned have not this relief, but
shall be tormented day and night for ever and ever. How earnestly do they seek
for Death, but cannot find it? What a Favor would they esteem it to be
annihilated? For certainly, if when the Evils in the present State are so
multiplied, that no Comfort is left, or so violent that the afflicted Person
cannot enjoy them, and refresh his sorrowful Spirit, Death is chosen rather
than Life; it cannot be imagined that in the future State, where the Misery is
extreme, and nothing remains to allay it, that the Damned should be in love
with the unhappy good of simple being, and not choose an absolute extinction if
it might be.

If any one should be so foolish to think that Custom will render that State
more tolerable, he will find a terrible confutation of his vain Fancy. Indeed,
continuance under light Evils, may arm the Mind with patience to bear them, but
in great Extremities it makes the Evil more ponderous and intolerable. He that
is tortured with the Stone, or on the Rack, the longer the Torture continues,
the less able he is to sustain it. In short, as the Joy of Heaven is infinitely
more ravishing, that the Blessed are without fear of losing of it; so the
Misery of Hell is proportionably tormenting, that the Damned are absolutely
destitute of hopes of a release. O it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands
of the living God, who lives for ever, and will punish for ever incorrigible
Sinners!

There are some who strongly fancy, it is not consistent with Divine Justice, to
inflict an eternal Punishment for temporary Sins. Therefore they soften the
Sentence, by interpreting the Words of Christ, These shall go into everlasting
Punishment, of the annihilation of impenitent Sinners; that is, they shall be
for ever deprived of Heaven, but not suffer Torments for ever.

To this there is a clear Answer: 1. The direct opposition between everlasting
Punishment, and everlasting Life, in the words of Christ, is a convincing
Argument they are to be understood in the same extent for an absolute Eternity.
And the words in the Revelation are so express, that they admit no mollifying
Interpretation, They are tormented Day and Night, for ever and ever: Which
necessarily infer, the tormented have Life and Sense for ever. Now that in
Scripture it is evident, that God has decreed and denounced eternal Punishment
to obstinate Sinners, is sufficient to satisfy all Enquiries about the Justice
of it: for Divine Justice is the correspondence of God's Will and Actions, with
the Perfections of his Holy Nature. From hence we may infer with invincible
Evidence, that whatever he pronounces in Judgment, and consequently inflicts,
is most Righteous. The Truth is, we may as easily conceive there is no God, as
that God is unjust; because absolute Rectitude is an inseparable Perfection of
his Nature. Thus the Apostle with abhorrence rejects the Question, Romans 3.5, 6.
Is God Unrighteous who takes Vengeance? God forbid: for then how shall God
judge the World? That were to deny him to be God, who is the Creator, and King,
and Judge of the World. It Is a full Reply to all the pitiful Shifts that are
made use of to elude the plain meaning of the eternal Judgment that will pass
upon the Wicked; Shall mortal Man be more just than God? Job 4.17.
shall a Man be more pure than his Maker? The Reprobates have now some bold
Advocates, that plead those things for favor to them, which they will not dare
to plead for themselves at the last Day. The Holy Judge will then cut off all
their Excuses, and reduce them to a defenseless silence, before he cuts them
off. God will be justified in his Sentence, and overcome when he is judges.

The Righteousness of the Proceedings at the last Day, in determining the
Wicked to a state of everlasting Torments, has been considered in the Discourse
of Judgment, and will farther appear by the following Considerations.

1. The Wisdom of God requires, that the Punishment threatened in his Law, as it
must be so firmly decreed, that all obstinate Rebels shall of necessity undergo
it, so it must incomparably exceed all temporal Evils, to which Men may be
exposed for their Obedience to the Divine Commands, otherwise the Threatening
would not be an effectual restraint from Sin: For the propinquity of an Evil
makes a strong impression upon the Mind, and a present Fear makes a Person
sollicitous to avoid the incursion of what is ready to seize on him, without
forecasting to prevent an Evil looked on at a distance. Therefore that the
Sanction of the Divine Law may preserve the Precepts Inviolable, that there may
be a continual reverence of it, and a fixed resolution in the Hearts of Men not
to transgress, the Penalty threatened must be in its own Nature so terrible,
that the fear of it may conquer the apprehension of all present Evils that can
be inflicted to constrain us to sin. Therefore our Savior warns his Disciples,
Fear not them that can kill the Body, (make that part die that is mortal) but
fear him that after he has killed, has power to cast into Hell; yea, I say unto
you, fear him. Now if the threatening of an everlasting Hell, through Infidelity
and Inconsideration, be not effectual in the Minds of Men to restrain them from
Sin, if temporary Torments in the next State were only threatened, which are
infinitely more easy and tolerable, carnal Sinners would follow the swinge of
their corrupt Appetites, and commit Iniquity with greediness; this would seem
to reflect upon the Wisdom of the Lawgiver, as if he were defective in not
binding his Subjects firmly to their Duty, and the Ends of Government would not
be obtained.

2. God, as the Sovereign Ruler of the World, has established an inseparable
Connection between the Choice and Actions of Men here, and their future
Condition for ever. The promised Reward of Obedience is so excellent and
eternal, that all the Allurements of the World vanish in comparison with it:
and there is such an infallible Assurance of this Reward in the Word of God,
that all, and only those who sincerely obey his Commands, shall enjoy it in the
future State; that a serious Believer who ponders things, cannot be diverted
from his Duty by present Temptations. Besides, by a Chain of Consequences,
sinful Pleasures are linked with eternal punishment threatened in the Divine
Law; and he that will enjoy forbidden Pleasures, binds himself to suffer all
the Pains annexed to them. Now when God has, from his excellent Goodness and
undeserved Mercy, assured Men of the Glory and Joys of Heaven that are
unspeakable and eternal, upon the gracious Terms of the Gospel; and, upon their
despising it, threatened Eternal Misery, if Men obstinately neglect so great
Salvation; how reasonable is it they should inherit their own Choice? There is
no middle State in the next World, no tolerable mediocrity, but two contrary
States; yet alike in this, that the Happiness and Misery are equally Eternal:
and it is just that all who neglect eternal Life, should suffer eternal Death:
for it is the natural and necessary Consequence of their Option: Therefore
Sinners are charged with extreme madness to wrong their own Souls, and to love
Death. Prove. 8.36.


3. It will appear how unqualified the Damned are for the least favor, if we
consider their continual hatred and Blasphemies of God. The Seeds of this are
in wicked obstinate Sinners here, who are styled haters of God; but in the
Damned this enmity is direct and explicit, the Fever is heightened into a
Frenzy, the blessed God is the Object of their Curses and eternal Aversation.
Our Savior tells us, that in Hell there is weeping and gnashing of Teeth;
extreme Sorrow, and extreme Fury; Despair and Rage are the proper Passions of
lost Souls. For when the guilty Sufferers are so weak, that they cannot by
Patience endure their Torments, nor by Strength resist the Power that inflicts
them, and are wicked and stubborn, they are irritated by their Misery, and foam
out Blasphemies against the righteous Judge. If their Rage could extend to him,
and their Power were equal to their Desires, they would dethrone the most High.
Hatred takes pleasure in Revenge, either real or imaginary: and although God is
infinitely above the transports of their Fury, and all their rancorous
Imprecations are reflexively pernicious to themselves, like Arrows shot against
the Sun, that fall down upon their Heads that shot them, yet they are always
venting their Malice against the just Power that torments them. It Is said of
the Worshippers of the Beast, that they gnawed their Tongues for Pain, Rev.
16.10, 11.
and blasphemed the God of Heaven because of their Pains. The Torment and
Blasphemies of those impenitent Idolaters, are a true representation of the
state of the Damned. From hence it appears they are the proper Objects of
revenging Justice. How can we reasonably conceive, that God, in favor to the
Reprobates, should cross the established order of Creation? For two Ranks of
Beings were made, the Material, of perishing Principles, the Spiritual, of an
immortal Duration: And will God withdraw his Conservative Power of the guilty
Soul in its Immortality, and to put an end to its deserved Misery, and
self-tormenting Reflections, annihilate it? If a Criminal were justly condemned
to a severe Punishment, and should contumeliously and fiercely reproach the
Prince, by whose Authority he was condemned, could it be expected there should
be a mitigation of the Sentence? And is it a Thought consistent with the
reasonable Mind, that the righteous Judge of the World, will reverse or mitigate
the Sentence against the Damned, who blaspheme his Majesty and Justice? and if
they were as omnipotent to effect, as they are malicious to desire, would
destroy his Being. It Is true, the Divine Threatening does not bind God to a
rigorous execution of it upon Sinners: he has declared, if Sinners will turn
from their evil ways, Jer. 26.3.
he will repent of the Evil he purposed to do unto them: but when Threatenings
are part of the Laws whereby Men are governed, it is congruous to the Wisdom
and Justice of the Lawgiver to execute them in their full force upon the
obstinate Offenders, withal considering the inflicting of them is so far from
working any ingenuous Change in those Rebels, that thereby they become more
fierce and obdurate.

Lastly, the immense Guilt that adheres to Sin, requires a proportion in the
Punishment. It Is a rule in all Courts of Judicature, that the degrees of an
Offense arise according to the degrees of Dignity of the Person offended: Now
the Majesty of God is truly infinite, against whom Sin is committed; and
consequently the Guilt of Sin exceeds our boundless Thoughts. This is the
reason of the Sentence, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things
which are written in the Book of the Law, to do them. The Curse threatened,
includes the first and the second Death. What a dishonor is it to the God of
Glory, that proud Dust should fly in his Face, and control his Authority? What
a provocation, that the reasonable Creature, that is naturally and necessarily
a Subject, should despise the Divine Law and Lawgiver? Though carnal Minds
elevate the Guilt of Sin, yet weighed in the Scales of the Sanctuary, it is
found so heavy, that no Punishment inflicted on Sinners, exceeds, either in the
degrees or duration, the desert of Sin.

God's Justice is not satisfied in depriving them of Heaven, but inflicts the
most heavy Punishment upon Sense and Conscience in the Damned: For as the Soul
and Body in their State of Union in this Life were both guilty, the one as the
Guide, the other as the Instrument of Sin; so it is equal, when reunited, they
should feel the penal Effects of it. Sinners shall then be tormented wherein
they were most delighted; they shall be invested with those Objects, that will
cause the most dolorous perceptions in their sensitive Faculties. The Lake of
Fire and Brimstone, the blackness of darkness for ever, are words of a terrible
signification. But no words can fully express the terrible Ingredients of their
Misery: The Punishment will be in proportion to the Glory of God's Majesty that
is provoked, and the extent of his Power. And as the Soul was the principal,
and the Body but an Accessory in the Works of Sin; so its capacious Faculties
shall be far more tormented than the limited Faculties of the outward Senses.
The fiery Attributes of God shall be transmitted through the Glass of
Conscience, and concentered upon damned Spirits: The Fire without is not so
tormenting as the Fire within them. How will the tormenting Passions be
inflamed? What Rancour, Reluctance, and Rage, against the just Power that
sentenced them to Hell? What impatience and indignation against themselves for
their wilful Sins, the just cause of it? How will they curse their Creation,
and wish their utter extinction, as the final Remedy of their Misery? But all
their ardent Wishes are in vain; for the Guilt of Sin will never be expiated,
nor God so far reconciled as to annihilate them. As long as there is Justice in
Heaven, or Fire in Hell, as long as God and Eternity shall continue, they must
suffer those Torments, which the strength and patience of an Angel cannot bear
one hour.

I shall now draw some practical Inferences, and conclude this Subject. 1. From
the Revelation in Scripture of the dreadful Punishment prepared for unreformed
Sinners in the next State, we may understand the tender Mercies of God to Men;
how willing he is they should be saved, who are so wilful to be damned. Hell is
represented to them by the most violent Figures, to terrify their Imaginations,
and strongly affect their Minds, that they may flee from the Wrath to come. God
counsels, commands, entreats, urges Sinners to be wise, to foresee and prevent
the Evil that every Hour is approaching to them: and with Compassion and
Indignation laments their Misery, and reproaches their Folly in bringing it
upon themselves. The Divine Mercy is as eminently and apparently declared to
Men in the present corrupt State, in threatening Hell to excite their Fear, as
in promising Heaven to allure their Hopes. For if carnal indulgent Sinners are
not roused by a quick apprehension of Hell, they will securely enjoy their
pernicious Pleasures, and despise the blessed Reward, and Heaven would be as
empty of humane Souls as it is full of Glory.

(1.) Because they are more capable to conceive of the Torments of Hell, than
the Joys of Heaven. Storms and Darkness are more easily drawn by a Pencil, than
a clear calm Day. Fire mixed with Brimstone, is very painful to Sense; and the
Fancy strongly represents its Vehemence in tormenting the Body: And what Misery
the uncessant remorse of the guilty Conscience will cause in the Damned
hereafter, is in part understood by the secret Accusations and Twinges of
Conscience in self-condemning Sinners here. But they are absolutely strangers
to the Joys of the Holy Ghost, to the Delights of the Soul in communion with
God, and to Peace of Conscience in his favor. They cannot without experience,
know how good the Lord is, no more than see a taste. To discourse to them of
spiritual Pleasures that flow from the Divine Presence, of the Happiness of the
Saints that are before the Throne of God, and serve him in his Temple, is to
speak with the Tongue of an Angel Si frigido loquar nescit quod loquor.

Aug.
unintelligible things. Their Minds and Language are confined to sensible
things. The natural Man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they
are foolishness to him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. There may be in the carnal Mind a conception of Heaven as a
Sanctuary wherein they may be secured from the Wrath of God, and some
smothering confused thoughts of its Felicity, as the Idea of Light and Colors
in one blind from his Birth; but only the pure in Heart can see God, as in the
perfect Vision of Glory hereafter, so in the imperfect reflection of it here.

(2.) Carnal Men are more disposed to be wrought upon, by representing the
Torments of Hell, than the Joys of Heaven. For we cannot love but what is
known, nor enjoy but what is loved. And as the purification of the Heart from
vicious Affections, is an excellent means to clear the Mind; so the
illustration of the Mind is very influential to warm the Heart. The true
conception of Heaven in its amiable Excellencies would powerfully and sweetly
ravish the Affections; and of this prepared Souls are only capable. But those
who are sensual are without relish of spiritual Happiness, and are allured or
terrified only with what is pleasant or painful to Flesh.

It Is recorded as the unparalled Folly of Nero, Identidem dictitans, qualis
artisex pereo!

Suet.
that when he was ready to cut his own Throat, to avoid the Fury of the
multitude, he broke forth into great Expressions of Sorrow, what an excellent
Artist he died. 'Twas not the loss of the Roman Empire that so much troubled
him, as that so much skill in Music died with him. He valued himself more as a
Fiddler, than an Emperor. Thus carnal Men with a folly infinitely more
prodigious, when Death is near, are not so much affected with the loss of the
Crown of Glory, and the Kingdom of Heaven, as with their present leaving this
World and its Vanities. This makes Death intolerably bitter. Till the Love of
God purifies the Heart, the fruition of his Presence is not esteemed or
desired. A Seraphim sent from the presence of God with a flaming Coal from the
Altar, touched the Lips of the Holy Prophet, and his Heart was presently melted
into a compliance with the Divine Will. But if a rebel Angel, that burns with
another fire than of Divine Love, were dispatched from Hell with a Coal from
that Altar, where so many Victims are offered to Divine Justice as there are
damned Souls, and touched obdurate Sinners, that they might have a lively sense
what it is to burn for ever, it were the most congrous and effectual means to
reclaim them; like stubborn Metals, they are only made pliant by the Fire. From
what has been said, we may observe the heavenly Harmony between Mercy and
Justice in God: he is the Father of Mercy, it is his natural Offspring, his
primary Inclination to the Creature, and the threatening of Vengeance against
Sinners, is a gracious design to constrain them with humility and repenting
Affections to seek his Favor. Briefly, his severity and flaming displeasure
never destroys Sinners, but to revenge the abuse of his neglected Benignity and
Clemency.

2. This shows the woeful depravation of the Minds and Wills of Men, that choose
Sin, when thinly painted over with Pleasure, notwithstanding the most dreadful
and durable Torments, the certain Consequences of it. Desperate folly! either
they believe, or do not, the eternal Torment of Hell. If they do not, how
prodigious is their impiety? If they do, it is more prodigious they dare indulge
their vicious Affections. A wicked Believer is more monstrous and guilty than a
wicked Infidel.

In some there is Atheism full of Folly, or Folly full of Atheism, that they
will not believe the prepared Plagues for the wicked in the next State, because
they have no sensible proof of them. Reason, assisted by Divine Revelation,
affords so clear an evidence of the future State, and the Rewards and
Punishments in it, that if any sincerely apply themselves to consider things,
he will receive the most affective conviction of them. It Is true, there is not
sensible evidence; for God will try our Faith before he satisfies our Sight:
partly, that we may honor his Veracity, by yielding a firm assent to his Word
before the actual accomplishment of what is promised or threatened; and partly
that our Obedience may be voluntary and unconstrained, that his Goodness may
take its rise to reward us. But these presumptuous Infidels live as if they had
no Spirit, nothing of understanding in them: they are wholly under the Dominion
of sense, as if they were free and lawless, independent and unaccountable: as
if the most high Governor of the World were an inferior Being, without Power
and Justice to vindicate the Honor of his despised Deity. They do not fear
Hell, but are afraid they should be fearful of it. This is such a piece of
folly, (but infinitely more woeful) as that of the West-Indians, who at their
first invasion by the Spaniards, were so terrified by their glittering Swords,
that they presently fled, and very considerately resolved to hide themselves in
the Day, and assault their Enemies in the Night. They were fearful to see their
Danger, and rash to encounter it, and fighting in the dark, were killed in the
dark. The threatenings of eternal Death are the brandishing of God's glittering
Sword before he strikes; and sensual Infidels are afraid lest the belief of
those terrible Truths should pierce into their Breasts; therefore are utterly
averse from due considering their Danger, and will not foresee what they shall
certainly suffer. It Is in vain to offer Arguments to convince them; for they
are as deaf as Adders to the wisest Instructions, till Sense extort an
Acknowledgment from them. They have hardened their Hearts and Faces against all
Reproofs, and by an open contempt of Scripture-Threatnings, are past
reclaiming. They are now fearless of that Judgment, the thoughts whereof make
the Devils tremble: but the time will shortly come, when the Word of the
righteous God, which now they despise, shall irresistibly and immediately, like
Lightning shot from Heaven, destroy them. There are many degrees of Sin, many
steps in the descent to Hell, but the lowest and nearest the Gate of that
infernal Prison, is the scornful derision of God's dreadful Preparations for
the wicked.

Others in the Christian Church, who profess and presume they are true
Believers, yet by living indulgently in their pleasant or profitable Sins,
discover their Faith is counterfeit, or such a superficial assent to the Truth
of God's Word that is without efficacy, and will not avail them at the last.
Unfeigned Faith of the Divine Threatenings, produces such a fear as would make
Men circumspect over their Hearts and Ways. The fear of a present destructive
Evil controuls the most eager Appetites. It Is recorded, that when the Army of
Israel was in pursuit of the Philistines, Saul, to complete his Victory,
forbad, upon pain of Death, that any should taste Food till the Sun was down.
In the chase of their Enemies they pass through a Wood dropping with Honey; yet
notwithstanding their Hunger and Faintness, and the easy provisions before
them, no Man so much as tasted it: for the People feared the King's Oath. And
did Men truly believe and fear the Law of God, threatening Hell for Sin, would
they dare to commit it, though invited by pleasant Temptations? Nay, not only a
strong Fear, but the mere suspicion of great Danger, will restrain the most
vehement desires of Nature. What Person, though inflamed with thirst, would
drink a Glass of cool Liquor, if he suspected that deadly Poison were mixed
with it? And if Men were persuaded that Sin is attended with eternal Death,
would they drink in Iniquity like Water? The Devils themselves are not able to
conquer the fear of Judgment to come, they believe and tremble: Therefore when
it is not active upon the Conscience, it is either because Men do not believe
it, or they fancy, that retaining their beloved Lusts, they may obtain an easy
Absolution, and escape the Damnation of Hell, which the Eternal Judge has
declared shall be the punishment of all that will not cut off the right Hand,
and pluck out the right Eye, separate their dearest Corruptions from them.
Astonishing Perverseness! How many will not discern nor censure that Folly in
themselves, which they will condemn in others for extreme Madness? If one
riotously lavishes away his Estate, and for the short Pleasure of a few Years,
be reduced with the Prodigal to extreme Poverty, and to loathsome Imprisonment
all his Life after, would he not be esteemed to have been besides himself? Yet
this is a very tolerable Case, in comparison of exposing the Soul to Eternal
Vengeance, for the Pleasures of Sin that are but for a Season.

3. Let us steadfastly believe, and frequently consider, that Eternal Death is
the Wages of Sin, that we may renounce it with the deepest Abhorrence, and
forsake it for ever. We are assured, from the Wisdom and Compassion of our
Savior, that it is a powerful Means to mortify the Inclination to sin, and to
induce us to prevent and resist all Temptations. The subtle Tempter cannot
present any Motives, that to a rectified Mind will make Sin eligible. Let the
Scales be even, and put into one all the Delights of the Senses, all the
Pleasures and Honors of the World, that are the Elements of Carnal Felicity,
how light are they against the Heavenly Glory? Will the Gain of the World
compensate the Loss of the Soul and Salvation for ever? If there were any
possible comparison between deluding transient Vanities, and the Happiness that
is substantial and satisfying for ever, the Choice would be more difficult, and
the Mistake less culpable, but they vanish into nothing in the Comparison.
According to the Judgment of Sense, would any one choose the enjoyment of the
most exquisite Pleasures for a Year, and afterward be content to burn in a
Furnace for a Day; much less to enjoy them for a Day, and to burn for a Year?
What stupid Brutes are they, who for momentany Delights, incur the fiery
Indignation of God for ever? Try but the Finger with the Flame of a Candle, you
will soon discover your weakness. Will the remembrance of sensual Delights
allay the Torments of the Damned? When Carnal Lusts are most inflamed, and
Objects are present, Pain will extinguish all the Pleasure of the Senses: And
if actual Enjoyment cannot afford Delight when the Body is under a Disease,
will the Reflections upon past Pleasures in the Fancy and Memory, refresh the
Damned in their extreme Torments? No, the remembrance will infinitely increase
their Anguish, that for such seeming and short Pleasures, they brought upon
themselves Misery intolerable, without Ease or End. O that Men would strip Sin
of its disguises, and wash off its flattering Colors, and look into its odious
Nature, and to the consequential Evils of it in the next World! O that they
would consider they hang by slender Strings, (a little Breath that expires
every Minute) over the bottomless Pit, and that within a little while nothing
will remain of the Pleasures of Sin, but the undying Worm, and the ever-living
Flames! This would be a means to raise and preserve in them an invincible
Resolution and Reluctance against all temptations to sin and provoke God. But
how hardly are Men induced to exercise their Minds on this terrible Object.
They think least of Hell, who have most reason to consider it.

To this I must add, that the mere fear of Hell, and the judicial impression
upon Conscience from it, is not sufficient to convert Men to God. For that
servile Affection, though it may stop a Temptation, and hinder the eruption of
a Lust into the gross Act, yet does not renew the Nature, and make Men Holy and
Heavenly. There may be a respective dislike of Sin, with a direct Affection to
it. Besides, that Religion that is the mere Effect of Fear, will be according
to the Nature of its Principle, with resistance and trouble, wavering and
inconstant: for tormenting Fear is repugnant to the humane Nature, and will be
expelled if possible. In short, the fear of Hell may be only a natural
Affection, that recoils from what is painful to Sense. Therefore it is the great
Design of the Gospel by the fear of Hell, Nisi timore incipiat homo Deum
colere, non perveniet ad amorem.

Aug.
as a powerful Preparative, to make way for the Love of God, who offers Pardon
and Indemnity to all returning Sinners, and for the Hope of Heaven the blessed
Reward promised to them. No Offers of Mercy will prevail to make Sinners to
yield themselves, till they are stormed by the Terrors of the Lord. But when
the fear of Hell has made a Breach, Divine Grace enters and takes possession.
As the Virtue of the Loadstone, when encompassed and armed with Iron, is
increased, and draws a far greater weight than when it is naked and single; thus
the Attractives of Heaven are more powerful to move the Hearts of Men, when
enforced from the Terrors of Hell. Now the Love of God, and the Hope of Heaven,
are spiritual Affections; and the Obedience that flows from them is voluntary
from the entire consent of the Soul, and persevering.

Lastly, From the consideration of the Punishment determined for Sin, we may
understand how dear our Engagements are to the Lord Jesus Christ. The Rector
and Judge of the World would not release the Guilty without a Ransom, nor the
Surety without Satisfaction; and the Son of God most willingly and
compassionately gave his precious Blood the Price of our Redemption. He
obtained the Spirit of Holiness, to illuminate our Minds, to incline our Wills,
to sanctify our Affections, without whose Omnipotent Grace, neither the Hopes
or Fears of things Spiritual and Future, would ever have cleansed and changed
our Hearts and Lives. We are naturally as senseless as the Dead, as to what
concerns our everlasting Peace, blind and brutish, and without fear; should
plunge our selves into Destruction, if the Spirit of Power, and of a sound
Mind, did not quicken us and direct us in the way to everlasting Life. O that
we might feel our dear Obligations to him who has delivered us from the Wrath
to come, and purchased for us a Felicity perfect, and without end! I would not
lessen and disparage one Divine Work, to advance and extol another; but it is a
Truth that shines with its own Light, and is declared by our Savior, that our
Redemption from Hell to Heaven, is a more excellent Benefit than our Creation;
in as much as our Well-being is better than our Being; and eternal Misery is
infinitely worse than mere not being. Our Savior speaks of Judas, It had been
better for him if he had never been born. How engaging is the Love of Christ,
who raised us from the Bottom of Hell to the Bosom of God, the Seat of
Happiness! If his Perfections were not most amiable and attractive, yet that he
died for us, should make him the Object of our most ardent Affections. To those
who believe he is precious; to those who have felt their undone Condition, and
that by his Merits and Mediation, are restored to the Favor of God, that are
freed from tormenting Fears, and revived with the sweetest Hopes, he is and
will be eminently and eternally precious. Blessing, and Honor, and Glory, and
Power, be to Him that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for ever and
ever.

FINIS.
Books writ by William Bates, D. D. and sold by B. Aylmer.
THE Harmony of the Divine Attributes, in the Contrivance and Accomplishment of
Man's Redemption by the Lord Jesus Christ: Or Discourses, wherein is showed,
how the Wisdom, Mercy, Justice, Holiness, Power, and Truth of God are glorified
in that great and blessed Work. In Octavo. Considerations of the Existence of
God, and of the Immortality of the Soul, with the Recompenses of the Future
State. To which is now added, The Divinity of the Christian Religion, proved by
the Evidence of Reason, and Divine Revelation: for the Cure of Infidelity the
Hectic Evil of the Times. In Octavo. The Sovereign and Final Happiness of Man,
with the effectual Means to obtain it. Also the Joys of Heaven, and Torments of
Hell are discoursed of. In Octavo. Several Sermons upon Death, and Eternal
Judgment. In Octavo. The Four Last Things, Death and Judgment, Heaven and Hell,
practically considered and applied, in several Discourses. In Octavo. The
Danger of Prosperity discovered, in several Sermons upon Prove. 1.17. In Octavo.
The great Duty of Resignation in Times of Affliction, etc. In Octavo. A Funeral
Sermon preached upon the Death of the Reverend and Excellent Divine, Dr. Thomas
Manton, who deceased October 18, 1677. To which is now added, the last public
Sermon Dr. Manton preached. In Octavo. The Sure Trial of Uprightness, opened in
several Sermons upon Psalm. 18. v. 23. In Octavo. A Description of the Blessed
Place and State of the Saints above, in a Discourse on John 14.2. Preached at
the Funeral of Mr. Clarkson. The Way to the highest Honor, on John 12.26.
Preached at the Funeral of Dr. Jacomb. The speedy Coming of Christ to Judgment,
on Rev. 22.12. Preached at the Funeral of Mr. Benj. Ashurst.
ADVERTISEMENT.
NEwly printed, The Holy Bible, containing the Old Testament and the New: With
Annotations and Parallel Scriptures. To which is annexed, The Harmony of the
Gospels: As also, The Reduction of the Jewish Weights, Coins and Measures, to
our English Standards. And a Table of the Promises in Scripture. By Samuel
Clark Minister of the Gospel. Printed in Folio of a very fair Letter; the like
never before in one Volume. Printed for Brabazon Aylmer in Cornhill.


