THE REGAL APOLOGY: OR, The DECLARATION of the Commons, Feb. 11. 1647.
Canvassed. WHEREIN Every Objection, and their whole Charge against His Majesty
is cleared, and for the most part, retorted.

Eccles. 10.20. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought.

Hosea 10.3, 4. For now they shall say, We have no King, because we feared not
the Lord, what then should a King do to us?

They have spoken words, swearing falsely, in making a Covenant.

Prove. 28.2. For the iniquity of a land, many are the Princes thereof.

Printed in the year, 1648.

The PREFACE.
THis has been an Accusative age in England; and the Prince of Darkness was
never more imitated by us in that Epither, notwithstanding our new lights. Yet
for the most part, our Accusations have been but like the crackling of thorns
under a pot: And our Accusers like the Mountains, which swelled into that
bulk, as it summoned the expectation of the world, and were delivered of a
poor Mouse. You cannot name us many Charges which either have not been quite
withdrawn, or sunk into a lower stream. Pray what Delinquent (as they term
them) Abate us but the Tragedy of Strafford and Canterbury, with the Hothams,
and a very few more who fell in a fit of Justice, and were sacrificed to
Revenge and Passion) has been brought to a Period commensurate to his Charge?

How did the Impeachment of the Judges echo through the kingdom? yet some of
the chief were not only permitted to sit on those Chaires, which it was
pretended they d^d prostitute, but offered Preferment also. What a terrible
Mouth was opened upon the twelve Protesting Bishops? yet the turn being served,
and the Votes against their whole Order passed in the House, they were not
only acquitted of their Charge, but also dismissed from Custody. How high ran
the Tide once against the Monopolists? what ease from other Burdens did not the
People believe they should have, by the squeezing of those swollen Spunges? yet
who among them has received the measure of his Desert? Nay, which of them,
that would nimbly dance after the Pipe of his great Accusers, has not been
even hugged in their Bosom, protected from the lawful Attempts of injured and
oppressed Subjects? What Haranges have been made against evil Counselors? How
was the Kingdom born in hand, with hopes of some exemplary Punishment upon, or
some severe Admonition at the least unto them? And yet name but one single
Privy-Counsellor ever questioned for ill advice formerly given to the King. Of
late, what a Charge was entered against the 11. Members, some of them Persons of
eminent Integrity and Merit, the Pillars of their respective Houses? yet we
hope well in their behalf. It will not stand with the Justice of a Parliament,
to install one (the Earl of Pembroke) again upon the Bench, and make him their
Judge, when his hand was to all the Warrants for Leavy's, and bring them to the
Bar, condemn them for Traitors, who signed but only one; whose fault was in
comparison but looking over the Hedge, while the Other Stole the Horse. What
has been said against the late Lord Mayor, and the Aldermen, Stars of the
first Magnitude in their Orb, whose influences have strongly contributed unto
the prosperity of the Parliament's Cause? yet we despair not, but that they
also may be dismissed, if they would but fairly sit down themselves. For we
are not ignorant of the underhand Offers, which have been made them, and the
Devices which have been in Agitation, to come off with them handsomely. And it
is a good Omen that Alderman Culham (whose guilt if it were any, was greater
then any of his Brethrens) is discharged upon his humble submission.

These are Instances enough to prove what I proposed; and Both sufficient to
convince any judgment: That it was not Public Justice, nor Relief of the
Kingdoms grievances which were the springs of these actions; but sinister and
private designs of their own: Something like that of Absalom, Oh that I were
made Judge (or rather Tyrant) in the Land, that every man which has a suit or
a cause might come unto me, and I would do him justice.

But all these former Proceedings are but rude Essays, in comparison of this
last Grand accusative Declaration against the KING, which we are ashamed of
already, and after-Ages will condemn as the Top of malicious Villainy, and an
unspeakable Scandal to our Religion. And, that which boils up the Iniquity to
the height, the King is debarred the Privilege of His meanest Subject, of the
greatest Malefactor, which is, to Plead for Himself, and to wipe off these
black Aspersions, whereby His Honor is so deeply wounded: Nay to hear, or
know His Accusation.

Let me therefore be pardoned the Presumption, if in this case the unworthiest
of millions of His people I become an Advocate for my oppressed Sovereign; and
with a few sparks which I shall strike (as near as is possible) from the Rock
of Truth, afford some Evidence of His Innocence, until the Searcher of all
Truth shall bring forth his righteousness as the light, and his judgment as
the noone day.

The Method of the Apology.
In my discourse upon this Argument, I shall proceed this way. 1. I shall
premise somewhat, which may serve for a discovery of the Grounds and Designs of
the Declaration. 2. I shall give some general Answers to the Declaration in
gross. 3. A distinct particular Answer to each Article or part thereof. In
which last part I shall speak to the Title first, The Votes after, Then to the
Particular Charges, as they are reducible to certain Heads. The first, of what
the King is pretended to have committed in relation to this Kingdom of
England. The second, to what he did in relation to Foreign Estates.

To the first, I shall reduce all which were done 1. Before his Reign, until
he wore the Crown. 2. From His Coronation until this Rupture between His
Majesty and the Parliament, whether they relate more immediately to His own
Person, or to His Officers and Ministers as the Privie-Councel men, His Council
at Law, and Servants: or to His Courts of Justice. 3. All Passages since the
Rupture. To the second Head or Classis, I shall reduce whatsoever is objected
concerning 1. Scotland, 2. Ireland, 3. the Protestants in Rochel, and all
France. In which if any particular relate to more heads then one, we shall (to
avoid repetion treat upon it, under that which it is most proper unto. In the
Discourse I shall first repeat the Charge, then give an Answer, and where it is
their own doing, lay the charge before their own doors.

The Ground and Design of the Declaration, discovered.
It is well known to all the world, That from the beginning of our War (to
trace the pedigree of them no higher) there have been two main parties in the
Parliament (to omit their sub-divisions) commonly distinguished by the names of
Presbyterians and Independents; who, though in the general they concurred in
beating down the power of the King, yet had several and indeed irreconcilable
designs therein unto themselves.

Nor can it be doubted, that the supreme sole Power and Authority was the Apple
of contention, as well between them now thus divided, as formerly between the
King, and them conjoined; what gaudy Colors soever are cast over, and specious
Pretenses made to stalk before it. Truth is, This is the general Ground of
most Quarrels; every man inheriting that ambitious Humor of our first common
Parents, even from the Disciples in their Poverty (who were projecting for the
Right Hand and for the Left, and in a kingdom too) unto the greatest
Statesmen. Nay, a wise Gentleman of our Age observed it to be the Itch, even
of kitchin-boyes, who should be the greatest.

Now the Independents (though inconsiderable at the first, even to Contempt,
being not above six among fourscore in the Assembly, nor double that number
visible in both Houses) have played their Cards so well, and followed their
business so close, that they have got the Purse of the kingdom at their
command, the whole Strength of it at their devotion, and now grasp at the
Authority also, and seek to establish their Iniquity by a Law.

But by what steps and Degrees they have climbed thus high, is very difficult
to discover exactly; the foundation being laid deep under ground, and carried
up with as much Art, as ever Building of that nature was; Nor is it much
material.

The greatest and only unquestionable Authority of this Kingdom is of the
King and His two Houses of Parliament; to this their Ambition did aspire. But
having strugled in vain in the Houses for a good while, they found the wind to
sit too strong in their faces there, and an impossibility for them to begin
that way, as the Temper of the Houses stood. If the King were but in their
hands, being stripped of all strength, and in some desperate apprehension of
Himself, then their Hopes would handsomely smile upon them.

In order to this therefore a Quarrel is picked with the Parliament, the King's
Person seized on, and soon after the Parliament is most shamefully despised,
abused, disgraced, made to double at pleasure, to eat up their own Ordinances
and Decrees, perfectly overawed and even trampled on. So far, that one of
their own Members in the House openly told them, That he could not call them a
House of Parliament, but a company of Gentlemen met together to fulfill the
Just of an Army.

Yet were they so wise, and commenced their quarrel so cunningly, as that they
might keep two strings to their Bow; and as the Beast, which has two holes to
his den, can stop or open either, as the weather sits: even so were their
Proposals and Declarations contrived and sent abroad, that by changing or
interpreting one word, they might comply with the King to destroy the
Parliament, if they should find themselves unable to mould it after their own
Humor; Or if once it were under their Girdle, then afterward to bring the King
to their Bent, or lay him quite aside, and by binding his Hands to establish
the whole Power and Authority of the Kingdom in their own. And either of
these Cards they drew, as they had Occasion, and conversed with men of
different Interests.

In the mean time, they handle the King with much Civility, and shows of
Indulgence, allowing him the service of his Chaplains, and the free use of the
Liturgy, which was denied him by the Houses, bearing him in hand, that they
preferred Episcopacy before the Presbyterian way; and tickling him with
ambiguous Promises; to mollify his hard Conceits toward them, or at least to
harden him the more against the Presbyterians, and make that breach wider. They
had likewise the wit for to humor and stroke the Royal party, by a thousand
pretty devises and Artifices, entertaining some of them in their bosoms,
allowing them Seats, even in their Councels of War, carefully forbearing in
their Declarations to stigmatize them with that so familiar brand of
Malignancy, and filling them with hopes and expectations of I know not what
great favors; which they meant to perform, when two Sundays met together.

Thus having well divided the Kings party from the Presbyterians, they had then
a smooth and easy way to victory. The City opens the Gates; The Parliament
trembles; The chief Leaders of both Houses, either fly for it, or withdraw for
a while, and play least-in-sight. Which was foreseen when Cromwell stole
privately to Newmarket from London, and asking Whether they had the King in
their hand? Being assured of that, told some of the Officers, That then they
had the Parliament in their pockets.

Those who are of private spirits, and for their own either safety or designs
constantly swamme with the stream and Tide, began now to tack about, and to do
Journy-worke for the stronger side, and Vote with the prevailing party, of
which I will give but one Instance by the way, and that is of Colonel Hervy,
who three days before would undertake to beat them three miles into the
Ground, but upon their admission into the City, was their first Advocate.

When the House was thus brought in a great measure to be at their devotion,
the last Rub in their Alley was the King, He persisted in his Obstinacy, and
would not yield up the Bucklers into their hands, nor the power to protect his
people. Wherefore to bring His Majesty under the more advantage, by
insinuations both of danger to His Person, and of an impossibility in them to
save Him from the Agitators, (whom yet they countenanced for that purpose) and
withal by secret promises of fair compliance, he is juggled into the Isle of
Wight.

After that Bills are provided, with pretense of condescension, lest they
should seem to invade the Throne per saltum; but in very deed, such as would
have stripped him bare of all Sovereignty, and of power to protect His Subjects,
and established themselves by a Law, in an absolute domination and Tyranny over
us.

The King not more for his own interest and safety, then for the benefit of
his Subjects, refusing to comply with their desires herein, is immediately
confined; and that in such a manner, as it is hard to find a Parallel. His
Wife, Children, Friends, Servants, all the Comforts of life kept from Him, (a
course formerly pronounced barbarous and inhumane, even in a Subjects case.)
By-and-by, the prodigious Votes, forbidding all intercourse of Letters to Him
or from Him, under the penalty of High Treason, so cutting off all possibility
of Accommodation, were carried in the House.

Last of all, to render Him as black as was possible, and so utterly to
alienate the affections of his people, this goodly Declaration (first set on
foot in the Army, and allowed the Agitators to please themselves withal, so to
divert them from more dangerous designs, as the Chesse at the siege of Troy to
keep Soldiers from mutiny) is thought upon, and taken up by the Grandees,
licked into a better form, so exposed unto public view; that besides their
aim therein against the King, they might somewhat stroke the Levellers, by
taking up their Principles, in a recompense for devesting them of their power:
and so pave their way as much as was possible to a perfect sovereignty for
themselves.

THE REGAL APOLOGY. The general ANSWER to the DECLARATION in Gross.
1. THis Declaration imports very little or nothing, but what has been either
by the Parliament in their Remonstrances, Declarations and Messages, or by
their Instruments and Emissaries, inculcated ad ravim usque, and so often
repeated, that they do even nauseate the Reader. And surely it yields a shrewd
Suspicion of Penury of Matter, when they are feign so often to take up the Old,
and to harp thus continually upon the same Strings.

2. Many of the Charges are not of his own faults, some being of the Courts of
Justice, his Judges and other Ministers of State; for some of which there has
been satisfaction given, either by a total abolition of the Judicature, as of
the Star Chamber, High Commission, etc. or by abridgement of their
Jurisdiction, as of the Privy Counsel, or by exposing those Instruments to the
rigor of the Law; nay, to the very will of their mortal Enemies, the
Parliament.

It would go but hard with his Accusers, if they would take upon themselves all
the Mis-carriages, all the Cruelties and Oppressions of their Committes, or of
their Soldiers; and yet have they many Eyes to see, many Ears to hear withal:
nay, if they would own but the personal faults of their own Members, which
would fill up many Volumes, if all were set in array against them. If we will
not admit of that old Law-maxime, The King can do no wrong, nor be so
Court-like, as the Persians, whose fashion it was to beat the Clothes only of
their young Princes and Noblemen, when they had committed an offense, methinks
we might at least be so just, as to lay the saddle upon the right Horse, and
charge every man but with his own Crimes.

3. Many of those against himself have been abundantly (for to satisfy the
people) acknowledged, and amended ( offered to be so at least.) With God
Almighty, Confession goes for good Satisfaction. And what Pattern should we
rather follow then that of our heavenly Father? Be ye merciful, as your
heavenly Father also is merciful, Mat. 5. Even in the Judgment of a Heathen
man, Repentance is above half way to Innocence. And surely, when a King shall
please to stoop so low to his own Subjects, as upon their Admonition to recall
himself, and cry Peccavi, his high Place sets a higher price upon his
Repentance; and he richly deserves to hear no more of his former Over-sights.

4. The fowlest of these Charges is not backed with any proof, but insinuated;
and that sometimes upon no manner of Ground at all (as that of the Spanish
Fleet) sometimes upon lamentable weak Surmises, bare Hear-say's, flying
Reports, perhaps started on purpose against such a time. But what? Is this
Justice? to a King? to our own King? By the mouth of two or three witnesses
(says the word of God) shall every word be established. Not under two, (says
the Civil-law) and those contemporary to the fact, not successive. Indeed, by
the Law of this land, One single Witness for the King is enough. But shall his
Honor bleed, his Authority be snatched away, his very Life struck at, upon
Suggestions from one, from none? upon Surmises and Conjectures? How miserable
then, beyond compare, were the condition of a King? How true was that saying of
Demetrius, That if men knew the Thorns it was beset withal, they would not
stoop to take up a Crown, even from the Channel.

5. Notwithstanding all this, There is a strong Presumption, that this is
farced with whatsoever Malice could prompt, or the Wit of Men and Devils could
contrive. Consider the multitude in both Houses, their several Relations and
Dependences, some of them being of the Bedchamber to the King. It is
impossible, any fault could escape them, their Eyes being more then those of
Argus for number, of Lynceus for Perspicacity; ( nothing so quick-sighted as
Malice.) Again, do but take a Survey of the Committee, entrusted with this
Affair, Lisle, Martin, Mildmay, Challoner, etc. Some of them covetous and
cunning; such as desired to keep the waters troubled still, that they might
fish the better, for another Master-ship of St. Crosse's, or some such like
Advantage; Others of them, broken in their Estates, and cracked in their Credit,
could wish the whole Kingdom like themselves; All of them of an
Anti-monarchicall spirit, whose Hearts are brim-full of Gall and venom against
the Crown, and whose Tongues drop continually with the poison of Aspes against
the Person of the King.

It was the Boast of a French Promoter, That he desired no other advantage to
break any man's neck, then that he might be employed in an Office of State, but
for a twelve month; So hard he deemed it for such a one to execute his place
free from Exception, fo easy for those that stand on Battlements and Pinacles
to catch a fall. And if the faults of Kings (as Q. Elizabeth was wont to say,
who was much delighted in wearing of white) were like spots in such Garments,
easily discovered, and though small in themselves, borrowed greatness of their
great Authors, Judge you, how it must fare with the King, when so many sly
Promoters, crafty Lawyers, malicious Enemies, do jointly set their wits on the
Tenter-hooks to find out matter of Accusation, when they go nosing and smelling
after faults (and have done for seven years together) throughout the Spacious
field of his whole Reign; nay, of his private life too; and pry into every
nook, every Corner for an Imputation, whereby they may with some Color
bespatter him, and lay his Honor in the dust.

6. These Articles were never presented to him, that he might make his defense
(a Privilege never yet denied any man, save by the Parliament) but thrust
abroad into the world for to empoison the inconsiderate part of the people (an
everlasting Objection against this sinister way of proceeding.) Many things at
Court appear but on the Dark-side; It were no wisdom to lay open the Arcana
Imperii. The design might be good, though attended with ill Success. Things
are not always as they appear; some are worse, some are better; and therefore
the Judge of all forbids us to to judge after the appearance, that being no
righteous Judgment. How easy is it this way to blast and pervert both words
and deeds of a true Saints to make any Speech, Treason; any Action, Villainy?

7. Diverse of their own Members, such as have gone hand in hand with them, and
resigned up their judgments and understandings in a willing Captivity to their
Sense, have failed them in this Transaction. Many of whom withdrew, during the
Debate; and some do cry Shame upon it ever since. We know more then one or two,
who were tutoured at their first Access unto the House, never to desert their
Party for right or wrong. We can tell of another, was wooed into one side by
this Argument, Thou will never be able to do thy Country service, thy friend a
Courtesy, or stand upon thy own legs, otherwise. Besides it is known now,
that if the Lord Inchequin would have put his neck into such a Collar, he had
not sufferd under such Accusations and Reproaches, nor been exposed to those
difficulties in Ireland.

8. Few or none of those Objections and Crimes, they asperse the King withal,
but they are in a transcendent measure guilty of themselves. Even among the
Jews, not a man could be found to throw the first Stone at an Adultresse,
because his Conscience twitted him with his own inward guilt. With what Brass
have they fenced their Brows against all shame? what brawny seard Consciences
dwell within their Breast, when they pelt a matchless Prince with Stones,
being themselves such great Strangers to Innocence? Blush, o England! for these
thy Sons, whose Impudence has forgot all bounds. Methinks, they should have
swept before their own doors first, before they brought the Beesome unto the
Court-gates; pulled out the Beams out of their own Eyes, which hindered them to
see clearly, before they attempted to take the Moates out of their Soveraigne's
Eye. Till this be done, we may not let loose our Belief to their loud
Criminations against our Sovereign Lord; nor need we doubt, upon the high
warrant of the Lord of Lords, to call them Hypocrites.

9. Add to all these, That these very men have made many Promises, to render
him a Great and glorious King beyond all his Royal Predecessors, after most
of these supposed Crimes were committed. If their Charity was then so large a
Mantle, as to cover such a multitude of sins, it can be nothing but their
Malice, that now proclaims them upon the Housetop. And we will take the
Confidence to presume, that if the King had gratified them in the matter of
their four last modest Bills, only praeambular to a personal Treaty (which,
alas, contained nothing, but provision for their safety and security) then had
he now been Rectus in Curia, nor had the World been put to this Astonishment in
reading such a Slanderous Chronicle of his life. But now, that they find him
obstinately averse from parting with his Crown and protection of his people,
(for indeed their four Bills amounted to little less) out shall all come in one
heap, and his Nakedness (if any) must be discovered in sight of the sun.

But from the general Answer, let us descend unto an examination of every
particular Branch apart, and first a word or two of the Title.

The TITLE of the Declaration considered.
It is christened a Declaration; where observe the deviation of this manner of
proceeding from the Rule in the Gospel; which enjoynes in case of Trespass
against a Brother, first a private Admonition; then, if that work no good
effect, before two or three witnesses; and if neither will serve the turn; if
the delinquent adds obstinacy to his Trespass, then, not till then, Dic
Ecclesiae, declare it to the Church. Now this rule I take to reach to civil
Affairs, and to be a direction for private men in their reciprocal Behavior.
The Scripture holds forth stricter Precepts in reference to the King, Thou
shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy people, (no not upon any Provocation)
and Is it fit to say to a King, Thou art wicked? and again, Curse not the King,
no not in thy thought. Eccles. 10. It was only the ungracious Son, that made
sport with his fathers Nakedness; for which even his Posterity were pronounced
Heirs of his Malediction. If they would needs rake in the shame of their
Sovereign, How much better had it been for them to have taken the Counsel
given them by one of their own Members, To send it to the King himself,
because he knows best, whether these things are true or no, I am sure some of
our Proofs are short. This course might have raised in him an opinion of the
Tenderness of his Commons toward his Honor, and in case he were not innocent,
wrought some Conviction upon his Spirit. But since they have stopped their Ears
to his wholesome Advice, and chosen the way of unrighteousness, every good man
will look upon it, as a Defamation, rather then a Declaration.

Or if it must be a Declaration, then it is of themselves, of what lay before in
the Closet of their evil Hearts, treasured up against a convenient season; a
Declaration of their deep Distaste against the Crown, their old Malice against
the Kings person, their itching desire of Domination, their low Conceit of this
great and wise people, to be fobb'd with Paper, and fooled with reasons of
Straw; and that too, after the long and frequent Experience of so many forged
Plots and Cheates.

2. Consider we the Authors, on whom it is fathered, the Commons of England. So
then, 1. It is considered, this was not passed by the Lords. The calling of
their Concurrence was decry'd, because they had some Noble blood in their
veins, to make them startle and hang off for a while, (though they must submit
at last.) And perhaps, some of them having lived in a sphere nearer to his
Majesty, might be too well acquainted with his Innocence in many things, and so
by discovery of truth in the debate, bring less Credit upon the whole Exploit.
2. Not of all the Commons, bate me an Ace there. It is notoriously known, that
between 50 and 60 of the ablest men, who for the most part were likely to
oppose this violence, were purposely sent out of London, to raise the
ninemonethes Assesment from the respective Countries, so to ease them of
free quarter, (where, we will note by the way, there was a double Aim. 1. To
have the advantage of their Absence, in relation to this course against the
King. 2. To draw an Odium upon them from their Countries; whiles that, either
the condition, upon which the Money was invited out of their hands* should not
be performed; or another Tax (as indeed there is one already of six months)
made the Requital of their forward discharge of the first sums.) It is true,
some of them were returned, but few or none present in the House. 3. Not of all
those Commons, who were not so sent abroad, for upon the division, there were
50 on the one side, and 80 on the other. 4. It was at eight in the night, a
work of double Darkness* not daring to look the sun in the face. It was
huddl'd up; when diverse, that had their lodgings in the remoter parts of the
City, or without it, diverse that were infirm, or aged, or lazy, or hungry, or
tired, or fearful, all that took care to avoid the throw of the Dye between
the Envy and evileye of a prevailing Faction and their own Consciences had
retired: the House so thin, that a Motion was made by a grave Patriot, that it,
being a Business of very great concernment unto the Kingdom, might undergo the
fullest debate, be re committed, that a full House might be called, and then
all referred unto the wisdom thereof.

Where by the way, let me put them in mind, that the best-govern'd States in
Christendom, even such to which they pretend to model themselves, Venice,
Holland, etc. (Indeed, where is it not so, abroad?) nothing of Consequence is
concluded, but wherein two Thirds of the Suffrages do concur. In our Kingdom,
how often has a Voice, or two, an inconsiderable Overplus, carried a business,
even to our undoing? Let me mind them of one thing more, That there they have
Boxes, by which means their Votes are Secret, and their consciences under no
awe of an Imperious faction, under no danger of question for having dissented,
of being Poasted, or exposed to the Rage of Porters, as ours are, and have been.

Even among that number, if you deduct such as were Crackt-Courtiers enraged by
former dis-respects, or having Judas-like betrayed their Master, cannot be
secured but by his Ruin; such as were broken Citizens, Ven, Penington, Hervy,
etc. that had in their Eye to heal the wounds of their ruinous Estates; such
as were Low-fortun'd Soldiers, driving at the continuance of their Trade, by
laying the grounds of new Contestations; such as sailed by the Compass of
their Leaders, following the Herd they were sorted to, by a blind faith, and
through pure Simplicity; Such as were Committee Men, obnoxious, and in danger
to be questioned for Accounts, so willing to shut the door fast against that
storm; and lastly, such as were devoted unto Journy-work, in expectation of a
Boon, or to be reciprocally gratified in some other kind; deduct (I say) all
these, and you will have a poor Company, perhaps no more, then sometimes have
served in the House of Lords to pass matters of high Consequence, the Speaker
and one or two more. Let the whole world now judge, whether this deserves to
bear that high Stamp and Character, as an Act of the Commons of England
assembled in Parliament.

Of the VOTES, and how they were passed in the House of Commons.
Because the Votes lead the file, and are made the occasions of the
Declaration, It is fit they should come to the Test; and I shall show you, how
they passed.

1. Fifty or sixty (as I said before) of the most active intelligent Members,
suspected to be cros-grain'd to that way, were sent abroad under color of the
Public service.

2. The Headquarters were appointed to draw toward London; and the Soldiers
from other parts, to startle the securer Members, and affright the weaker and
obnoxious.

3. At the Debate, the first Vote was begun withal, which had some show of
Reason in it; cunningly enough; that when the Dissenting party had champed upon
that awhile, they might perhaps yield unto it, and then retire; while the other
three Votes were dispatched in their Absence.

4. To evince these Votes, there wanted not Argumenta bacillina, Insinuations
of Force and compulsion (a common practice there in all Debates of Consequence)
made by Crumwell especially, who represented it more then once, how
dis-tastfull it might be to the Army, if not consented to. And upon the
Division, Crumwell addressed himself to Ceely, whom he had not spoken to in in
many months before, and gave him thanks; whose Answer was, that though he was
of his mind in that point, yet was it not upon his Argument.

And thus the Votes were carried in the House of Commons.

The VOTES how passed in the House of Lords.
There was never much Difficulty made of the maddest Votes to pass the House
of Lords, if the Commons pleased to switch or spur them up: yet here they were
not willing to trust their good Natures altogether. First, a Message of Thanks
is sent from the Army by a glittering Committee of six Colonels, to the House
of Commons, with a promise to live and die with them in defense thereof (a fure
sign, where the Bird was first brooded, and from whence it came to the House of
Commons.) A Message with two faces, one looking to what was already done by the
Commons, the other (which was the chief) to what was expected from the Lords,
and afterward from the rest of the Kingdom, to which it was meant as a
Preparation. Secondly, Address was made in particular to every one of the
Lords, by these Champions of the Votes, the Colonels; much Courtship showed;
many promises made; all of them dealt with, according to their several Temper
and Disposition. The fiery Spirits stooped unto and plied with gentle
Fomentations; the well-affected encouraged; with some implicit Menaces unto the
tame Spirits; a strong Motive to bring the Lords over to a compliance with the
Commons, when they entreat, that can enforce it, if it be denied. Thirdly, A
public printed Engagement, to maintain the Honor of the House of Peers is
tendered. For they foreseeing the Inference would unavoidably be made, That if
the Crown were trampled on, Peerage could not look for any long Date, did
wisely enough by this printed little piece of Rhetoric, apply themselves to
invalidate that piece of Logic, and so to satisfy the Scruples of the Lords
before hand. Fourthly, While the Lords made some demur, and as yet the Scale
stood even, high words passed in the House of Commons, to this effect, That as
they had saved the Kingdom without the Lords, so could they settle it without
them; and more to that purpose. Fifthly, To make sure work under pretense of a
Guard to the Houses, a Rod is brought over their Heads, of a Regiment of Foot
to White Hall, and another of Horse to the Mewes. This, this struck the
business dead. The Lords are convinced by such Arguments, and so concur.

The Iniquity of the VOTES in their Substance.
I need not spend much time on this Argument; it seems, the Kingdom is
convinced hereof already: for neither the Example of the Army (who made haste
to present a Gratulatory Acknowledgement unto the House for these Votes) nor
the Policy of the Committee Men, Justices, (men according to their own tooth,
chosen to adjutate for the two Houses, more then for their Country's service)
with other Engineers and Emissary's, Nor yet the Force of their Soldiery,
dispersed through the Kingdom, has been sufficient to awe them or entice them
into such a Noose, as to make any demonstration of their Concurrence in
Judgment, or of Engagement with them in the defense thereof; except the poor
Town of Taunton, and an inconsiderable part of inconsiderable men in
Buckingham-shire, we hear of none; and for Those it is no Wonder: for the
Taunton-men are so Independent, that they will not acknowledge any Landlord;
but pretend those Houses which stand in the Town, were saved by their Sword,
and with the hazard of their lives; and therefore are their own. The
Buckingham-shire men were outwitted; some being made believe, the Petition was
for taking off Free Quarter; Others, for the Presbyterian Government. Others
were sent for up to meet their Ministers and other Confidents at Paddington,
upon pretense of business of huge Importance, but knew not what, until they
were come thither, and then went on, like Geese, with the flock.

Let the Kingdom but seriously consider the Barbarism herein toward his
Majesty, and the misery wherein they involve this Nation thereby, and I believe
there will no more be found to tread in their Steps. Imprisonment is the
Burial of a Man alive, and that which Private persons hardly endure with
patience: no Creature will, if it be possible to make any Escape. And it was
formerly a high Charge, even in a Subjects case, upon the Star Chamber, and
other Courts. But for a King to be so dealt withal, our own, an Innocent and
Pious Prince, by his own Subjects, and to be put under the custody of his
desperate implacable Adversaries; further, to be deprived of all Access or
Intercourse with his Wife, Children, friends, sequestered from all the Comforts
of life, This is much more, then ever was inflicted upon Lilburne, Pryn, or
Bastwick; whose hard usages have been thunderd by themselves throughout the
Kingdom, to be savage, barbarous, inhumane. By the Law of this Land. It is
Treason to imprison the King, though at large. 25 Ed. 3. c. 2. What will these
men be thought worthy of, when that shall recover its own Channel, and flow
down our Streets like a Stream? when they shall come to their Accounts?

The Miseries wherein they involve this Nation hereby, are obvious to every
understanding. The Parliament touching the Succession, 1 Mariae, cap. 1.
acknowledges, That the welfare, profit, and special benefit of the universal
people is continued and maintained, in the surety and preservation of the
Prince. Even in this Parl. in their Declarations, they say, That the very
Safety and Being of both his Kingdoms depends upon His Majesty's return to
London. Since the King was in their power, The very Army could acknowledge,
There can be no Peace in this Kingdom, without a good agreement between the
King and his Subjects. Now, is it possible, there should be an Accommodation,
where there is no Intercourse, no Addresses made or entertained? Those who have
felt the Burden of this War, need no Admonitour to judge, what will be the
Burden of another. As much as lies in them, the Houses have laid a lasting
foundation to entaile, if not perpetuate the Discord to our Posterity, with all
the sad Consequences thereof.

A Collection of all the particular Objections against His Majesty before he
came to the Crown.
Those Objections which are made against His Majesty before his Reign, and
belongs to the first Classis of his Charges, are only sour.

1. His Letter to the Pope which he writ in Spain. 2. The Articles of Marriage
made with Spain. 3. The Articles of Marriage made with France. 4. The Death of
King James.
But because the three first do relate to that Charge which are against his
Majesty, as being inclined to Popery; we shall give them their answers under
that.

The brief of their Calumny concerning K. James his death, is this,
That when the Duke was charged by the House of Commons of high Misdemeanour
and Presumption, In that he did contrary to the advice of his Physicians, cause
a Plaster to be applied, and a Drink to be given to K. James, who was sick but
of an Ague; and that conceived to be in the Declination by his Physicians:
whereupon, diverse distempers and ill symptoms ensued, and the King himself did
attribute the cause thereof unto the Plasters. That his Majesty who now is,
took notice of this in the Lords House, told them He could be a Witness to
clear the Duke in every particular, and did interrupt them by frequent
Messages in their proceeding: afterward Dissolved the Parliament, and did
imprison Sir I. Eliot and Sir Dudly Diggs; and hereupon, they desire every one
to judge where the guilt lay.

An Answer to that Calumny concerning K. James.
James was an aged man; and to all the Court, that he kept an ill Diet:
particularly, how he was addicted to Excess of sweet Wines; by reason whereof,
together with ease and want of exercise, as also the forbearance of all
Physic, he grew full of humors, corpulent, and of an evil constitution. For
the sickness he died of, it was a kind of Ague, mixed of a quotidian and a
tertian, called an Hemitritaea; and so determined of by all his Physicians, six
or seven at least. Now that Disease, though styled by the name of an Ague, is
known to be mortal in its own nature, and more to die of it, then to recover:
But in such an Age, Constitution, and course of Diet, as King James was of,
nothing more certain; Especially considering he hated Medicines, would conform
to no directions; nay, was so cross, that when one of his Doctors, as the
mouth of the rest, had told him, that he must bleed, in a great Rage, he
ingeminated the Scandal of a Butcher upon him.

2. As they agreed, this was his Disease, so they were convinced, that his
Death was the natural and genuine effect thereof, and they testified the same.

3. His Body being opened, was found fair and free from any ground of
Suspicion, in the judgment both of his Chyrurgeons (of whom Master Hayes is yet
living, and in the King's Bench) Apothecary's and Physicians. There are three of
those Physicians yet alive, Doctor Hervy, Doctor Lister, and Doctor Craig, all
three honest and worthy men, the two last resident in the Parliaments quarters
about London, and in this Breach between the King and them of their party;
Doctor Craig under a disgust at Court, and discharged from his Attendance long
before, and therefore not likely to be partial to the King; Who all do testify
the truth of this Narrative, and (I believe) are so noble, that they will
readily give satisfaction to any man, that shall but do his Judgment that
right, as to inform it.

2. Touching the Duke, I shall first premise somewhat; both James, and also how
far he was accused in Parliament, then answer the Charge.

The Duke himself had been sick of an Ague, and that not long before: in which
Disease he was attended by three able Physicians; but after some wrestling with
it by their help, the Countess of Buckingham his Mother, shutting them out of
doors, gives the Duke a Vomit, made with Tobacco; which wrought violently, but
recovered him from his Disease. After which, finding himself somewhat weak, he
retires to the Earl of Warwick's house in Essex, where, either upon change of
Air, or some relics of the disease, or what cause soever, he suffered a
relapse: and being persuaded by the E. of Warwick, sent for one Remington, a
Physician living thereabout, who by a Plaster, applied to his Stomach and
Wrists, and a Posset Drink taken inwardly, recovered him from that Relapse.

After this, K. James being sick, his disease an Ague, the Duke ignorant of the
distinction between Agnes, thinking all of the same Nature, that bore the same
Name, perceiving the Physicians doubtful, other directions unsuccessfull, the
Kings disposition impatient of many Medicines, declares to the King his own
Cure, proposes to the Physicians to Vomit him with Tobacco. But the danger
thereof being suggested, by reason of the violence of it, and the special
Antipathy of the King against it, he forbeares that remedy, yet upon the urgent
desire of King James himself, procures for him the aforesaid Plaster and
Drink; the one being only London-Treacle, the other no more but Posset Drink,
boiled with Harts-horne and Marigold-flowers, then sweetened with syrrup of
Gilly-flowers; which were both discovered to the Physicians afterward, and
obtained before, not without some assistance of the Earl of Warwick.

After the application of this, whether by the natural course of the disease,
or some other cause, the King grew worse indeed; the Physicians take it not
well; these Medicines are laid aside. Yet, the disease not abating upon
intermission of the directions, the King, impatient both of his disease, and of
his Physicians prescripts, importunes again for that Remedy, which he had
rejected. Hereupon, a Bed-chamber-man is presently dispatched unto the
Apothecary, Monsieur du Plure, Treacle is sent for: no term of Specification
being added, he thought it fit to send the best unto his Majesty, and by that
means sent him Venice-Treacle, which as it was better in it self, so was it
worse for the Kings disease. This being brought, no body there present could
order it, but the Countess of Buckingham. It was applied again; but being
hotter then the former Plaster, and the Kings hot fit approaching, it might
somewhat aggravate his Heat; whereupon, he cried out, That these had done him
hurt, and were the cause of his Extremity. Upon this, some one in the room
drank up the Posset-drinke; and the Plaster was applied to another, who took
no manner of hurt, but that he was cured of an Ague.

This is the whole truth concerning that Application; and besides others, it
will be attested by Master Patrick Maule, then of the Bedchamber, and in
Attendance, a Gentleman, whom the Parliament has employed about the King, ever
since he has bin in their hands, and therefore one that in all probability
would relate nothing to their disadvantage, on set purpose.

For the Duke's Impeachment in Parliament, this was the ground of it.
When that Parliament was summoned, and the Elections were made, Sir John
Eliot, who much honored the Duke, and was reciprocally much esteemed of by
him, made an address unto the Duke in the name of many Members, offered him
many Arguments to bring him unto their Party, made engagements unto him to
establish him in all his Places by Parliament, and to add unto his Grandeur.
But the Duke, rejecting these offers, and replying with some Scorn, according
to the Height (and perhaps, vanity) of his Spirit, That the King should have
that now, by no leave of theirs, which formerly he would have thanked them for;
and that the turbulent Spirits were so dashed, that there could be no
considerable Opposition in their House to his designs (and indeed in sight,
more of the Members of that Election were at the Dukes devotion.) Whereupon,
Sir John Eliot, like a good Patriot, replied, that he was mistaken in the
Spirit of that House, the very walls infusing Resolution into them who sat
there; and rather then the Duke should not be dashed, that he himself would
break the ice. And hereupon was the E. of Bristol countenanced (whom in former
Parliaments they themselves had cast some frowns upon, and threatened with some
danger.) This Impeachment against the Duke is contrived in such a way, as that
the King must either engage against him, or at least stand Neuter, or (which
was worst of all) bear the reflection of that Dirt, which they would bestow
upon the Duke. This was the true ground of that Charge; and this was the Man,
who carried it up, and did chiefly manage it in the House of Commons and in
their Committees.

3. These things thus premised, I answer, First by way of Concession, Duke was
guilty of Imprudence, to meddle in an Art, he was not Master of; And more yet,
to exhibit any thing that way unto a King; so that he was in some measure
liable to the Charge against him. Secondly, by way of Exception, 1. This was no
cause of the Kings death; and so much the very Charge implies, which was but of
Mis-demeanors and high Presumptions. Had it been of his Death, it could not
have stood on this side High Treason; and therefore it was a malicious
intimation to the Kingdom, that his Majesty was guilty of what they themselves
were ashamed to charge upon the Duke. 2. It was done out of a good affection,
and an intent to recover the King. Had he had other Ends, he would never have
owned the Action, as he did. He was not so weak a Politician, as to do such a
business with his own hands, or by those of his Mother, or so much
above-boord. 3. The Medicines of themselves were innocent, and could not
prejudice. I have heard it from learned Physicians, that London-Treacle is of a
temperate nature, and propulsive of Venom from the Heart, a Cordial; the
decoction of Hartshorn with Marygold-flowers and Gilly-flowers is no other.
Nay, this was attested by some of the Physicians upon their Examinations in
that Parliament, that those Medicines did him no hurt. 4. There was a
possibility to save the King thereby. Experiment is the best Leg and Base of
Physic; and oftentimes, when a learned Doctor has strugled in vain, a Nurse
or a Midwife has wrought the Cure by an approved Receipt. How often has the Lady
of Kent flattered her self in this kind, and the Lady Brooks too, or they have
done Cures by a Medicine or two, which have been blowed at in vain by good
Physicians? 5. It was done by K. James his earnest entreaty; and we know, how
far the Importunity of a great Person, a Prince, may transport a man, his
servant, even against Reason, much more where there was Reason for it. We can
produce an example of a French K. in a Fever, who being prohibited all Wine by
his Physicians; did so importune his Servants for that liquor, as they gave him
his fill, and that of the strongest too, whereby he was not only satisfied, but
his Fever cured. 6. The chief Witnesses against the Duke were Ramsey and
Eglisham, the first to the Parliament, the other to the Kingdom by his pen,
both of them of so bad a Reputation, that their testimony was not to be taken
against a private man; the former being expelled, or enforced to relinquish the
College of London for his ill-behavior, who will lie, swear, flatter, do any
villainy: the latter expelled from his University, a Papist, or rather of no
Religion, and of as little honesty or learning, a man of a cracked Brain too.
8. For K. James his own Clamor, his word that way was no Slander. How often
has Treason been in his Mouth, when he was but crossed or disturbed in his
sports and recreations? I have heard, the King of Sweden used to make himself
merry with that Expression of King James, upon an accidental cut of his finger
by his Carver. 9. That the Disease was in the declination, was uncertain.
Sometimes one fit flatters, and the next kills. Physicians love to speak
Placentia, especially to Great Patients. We have lately had an Experiment of
that in the L. Fairfax who died of a Corn in his Toe, and that presently after
his Physician had made his Attendants and Friends secure of his recovery. Nor
is it sometimes amiss in reference to the Cure, to feed them with hopes, and
to cherish their conceit, which is, though but of small reality, yet of no
small Consequence. Besides, at that time it was given out by them so; One of
the ablest told the rest, and diverse others, That the Kings disease was
mortal, and would surely speed him; giving this reason, That he had twenty
Patients that year, and none of them recovered, under sixteen fits, but the
King had not strength enough to endure twelve. Besides, that was the year,
which preceded the great Sickness; before which, usually diseases have much
Malignancy, and oftentimes put tricks upon the best Physicians.

4. As to his Majesty, that now is, Those who were conversant that they are
confident, he knew not any of those Passages. In that he brought off the Duke,
he might think himself bound by a threefold Cord, of Honor, Justice, and
Friendship: of Honor, because that which was the ground of the Accusation was
his own service, at least, pretended so to be. Of Justice, because he had done
King James no hurt, did it in obedience to King James his own command,
intended him all good; and was prosecuted by his Adversaries upon another Score
and Spite. Of Friendship also, it being well known, how deeply the Duke had
wound himself into the Kings favor (I dispute not, how justly) the very laws
of friendship called for relief at his hands, when he saw the Duke in danger to
be oppressed. H. Martin himself, the most professed enemy unto the King, thought
so meanly of this Accusation, that he only made sport of it: when in some
company it was spoken of, told them, (if it were true) It was the only good
action he had ever done in his life, and therefore desired he might not be
always twitted with that.

And now let all the world judge of the abominable Iniquity of these men, that
lay to the charge of their own Prince things that he knew not, things of that
ugly Stamp, that a loyal Subject dares not put them into words.

We may add unto all that has bin said in defense of his Majesty,

1. The singular observance and dutifulness of his own Children toward
himself, a comfort seldom vouchsafed, but as a reward of former obedience. God
observes, for the most part, a proportion in all his Retributions; and
punishes, as it were, in Specie, according to the nature of our Offenses, in
their own kind.

2. His Majesty's composednes and equality of Spirit, in the midst of his
dangers and afflictions. When his Chamber has been beset with Armed men, I
cannot learn, that he lost one hours Rest for that, which might have been a
cause of Terror, even to a clear Conscience. Nor can I understand, that he
made scruple at any of those Cates, which were cooked by a Hand, that had been
armed and held up against him in the field. Whatsoever his troubles and
distresses were, he was himself still -- Mediis tranquillus in undis.
But Murder, especially Parricide is a Fury, which keeps the Conscience in a
continual Alarm, and presents unto all the Senses, objects of horror and
approaching vengeance. The History is known of Nero, who never could endure a
clap of Thunder, after the murder of his own Mother; but crept even under his
Bed, or into the closest Corner he could possibly find, at the noise of it. And
I need not enlarge that story of a Prince, who hearing Swallows singing in his
Palace, fancied they sung it clearly, That he was his Fathers murderer, and
therefore caused them to be pursued and beaten down. Many more such Arguments
we might insist upon, if we would make use of such Topics, as pass with the
House of Commons for excellent strength of reason, when it may serve their
Occasions.

I must acknowledge, that I expected with this, His Majesty should have been
charged with the Death of his elder Brother Prince Henry also: for I know, That
had a place in the first rude draught of the Catalogue of his Crimes, which was
composed in the Army. But the House remembered, his Majesty was but twelve years
of Age, and so that was expunged.

A Collection of the Crimination they make against His Majesty from the time of
His coming to the Crown until the present Rupture.
Those Aspersions, which they cast upon the King from his entrance upon the
Crown until this Breach between Him and them, are reducible to 3 Heads:

The first to such, as more immediately relate unto his own Person.

The second, to such as were done by his Ministers, and did originally flow
from them, as the Lords of the Privy Council, his Council at Law, and his
Servants.

The third, to such as were done by his Courts of Justice, either Civil or
Ecclesiastical.

Under the first of these, we may marshall, 1. Perjury, and Breach of Trust. 2.
Popery, and a Conspiracy with Papists to massacre all the Protestants in
England and Ireland. 3. Tyranny. 4. Hate of Parliaments.


Their Charge of Perjury, and Breach of Trust.
This deserves the first place, as the greatest Crime in a Prince, if true; and
the fowlest Calumny, if false; which they tax His Majesty withal in these
general words, page 11. He has broken his Coronation Oath, several Vows,
Protestations, and Imprecations, through His whole Reign, and so often renewed
before God and the world: a little after, They accuse him of a continued Track
of Breach of trust, since he wore the Crown.

That Charge answered and retorted.
1. These are but barely asserted; and I appeal to their own Breasts, whether
it be fit to take their word in this Case; I am confident, I may to the
Kingdom.

2. This is only a General Accusation; no particular Instance given. Indeed
afterward there is an Imputation of Breach of Articles with the Scots; denying
of any Commission to have been granted to Cockram, which they took with other
Papers; and some such things there are which amount to no more then
Tergiversation, if all were true as they relate; and shall have a full
Satisfaction in their proper places. If they had held forth any proof of any
particular, we should have joined Issue, and made no question to vindicate His
Majesty. They may remember, Generalities afford a shrewd suspicion of juggling
fraudulence; and we have some aim at their Intents, by their audacious
Imputations to make something stick upon His Majesty, whether true or false.

3. With what Confidence can they accuse his Majesty (if he had been guilty) of
that, wherein they themselves lie so grossly open to Exception? Quis tulerit
Gracchos? etc. Their whole Practice has been Prevarication, Breach of Oath and
Trust, both with God and Man. Have but a little patience, to eye their
deportment toward all men they have had to deal with. In relation to the King,
Have they not broke the Oath of Allegiance, wherein they have sworn to bear
faith and true Allegiance to His Majesty's person, and to defend the same
against all Conspiracies, etc? Have they not broke the Oath too of Supremacy,
wherein they have professed, testified and declared him the only supreme Head
and Governor over all Persons, in all Causes, within these His Dominions? both
which Oaths they must and do take, before they can legally sit and Vote in
that House. Have they kept the Protestation better, which provided for the
Kings honor, Power, and Safety, before their Privileges? And have they kept
their own solemn Covenant, either in this or any Branch thereof? Nay, has it
not been resembled to an Almanac out of date, by one of their own Members,
Martin in his Answer to the Scots Declaration, and that without a check?

How have they deceived and abused this poor Nation, in reference to the King;
when they conjured us up to rescue the Kings Person, (among other things) out
of the hands of his Evil Counselors, and to fetch him home gloriously to his
Greatest, and most faithful Counsel, Themselves?

How well have they answered that very great Trust the King reposed in them,
when (to please them if possible) he tied up his own hands from the dissolving
this Session of Parliament, without their Consent? (the greatest Breach of
Trust that ever the King made, if we may believe John Lilburne.)

How have they acquitted their Engagements to the Scots, as touching the King?
Nay, have they not disclaimed their own Declarations, as Obligatory, and told
the Scots since, That they were framed, published and made use of, as Affairs
then stood, and that they may alter them now? and in another place, that they
are alterable at pieasure, although they were Promissory, and that upon the
most sacred Invocation possible; as you may see in the Scots Papers, We
profess in the sight of Almighty God. which is the strongest obligation that
any Christian, and the most solemn Public Faith that any State can give,
(Husbands Book of Decl. p. 587. and 663. the like,) That no trouble nor
success should change their resolutions, ib.

And how they have made good these following Expressions of the Army, (for now
I must charge the Parliament with the Doublings of the Army, who rule the roast
there) Whereas there is a scandalous Information, presented to the Houses,
importing as if His Majesty were kept a Prisoner amongst us, and barbarously
and uncivilly used, We cannot but declare, that the same and all other
Suggestions of that nature, are most false, scandalous, and absolutely
contrary, not only to our declared desires, but also to our Principles, etc.
and a while after, We clearly profess, we do not see, how there can be any
Peace to the Kingdom firm and lasting, without a due consideration of and
provision for the Rights, Quiet, and Immunity of His Majesty, His Royal
Family, etc. Remonst. from Ex. and A. Jun. 23. 1647. in another place, That
until the settlement, His Majesty may find all personal Civility and
Respects, with all reasonable Freedom, in the Letter from Sir Tho: Fairfax,
besides many more; which applied to their present practice, do lowdly
proclaim their odious Prevarication toward His Majesty.

In relation to the Kingdom, How strangely have they fallen short of their
Trust? Can their Consciences flatter them, that they were entrusted by us, with
the least thought, that they should enthrone themselves, during life, in those
Chairs, and entaile their Places on their Posterity? yet many of them being put
to it, have intimated thus much; nay, in the House it has often dropped from
them, That it was dangerous to pitch upon a time of Dissolution, though within
these ten or twenty years. Some of them have been so ingenuous, as to say, If
they give way. Another Parliament must be call' within these three years; and
the Kingdom is so totally corrupted, that it is Ten to one, but That would
attaint the Members of This. Many of them, who are Fathers, have by their Power
and Interest already brought in, not only their eldest Children (some in their
Nonage, and Children indeed) but two or three, as the Lord Say, who has three
of his own Sons in the House of Commons. They were entrusted by the people (I
trow) to ease them of their Grievances, establish the liberty of their Persons,
settle the propriety in their Estates: yet let me bespeak them in the words of
one, that has lost his blood in their service, Mr. Lilburne by name, I
challenge them to show one Act, they have done for the benefit of the people.
We feel their little finger heavier then the Loins of the King with all his
Predecessors. They have brought us from the Government of one King, who was
bound up by law, to the Tyranny of 5 or 600 of themselves, nay every petty
Committe-man, every insolent Officer, whose Will and Lust is their Law; so into
an Egyptian Vassalage, a condition worse then that of the Peasants of France,
of the Boores in Flanders, of the Slaves in Turkey, (to use a man's word, of
their own side.) What can we call our own, if one of the Grandees, or his
Friends mouth waters after it? If they Vote to pocket up our Estates, to take
away our Wives, our liberties, our very lives, who can stand before their
Omnipotency?

Let their Officers and Army's be heard, what measure has bin meted out to
them. They were promised Golden Mountains, The Parliament would stand and fall,
live and die with them. Yet when the first Army had set them up, and broke the
ice for them, how dis-honourably was the Lord General, how unthankfully were
the rest laid aside, even without their wages, which they could never obtain
to this day? This last Army had the same doom; but they took better Courage,
and knew their own strength. The Scots (however stroakt with the name of
Brethren to this day) were served with the self-same sauce, and put to retreat
(faster then was for their Ease) from Newarke toward their own Confines, with a
great Body of Horse at their heels.

The City (unto whose blood and treasure they owe their being, and whatever
they have) rings again of their breach of Trust and faith with them. Instead of
Signal marks of the Enlargement of their Privileges, Recompenses for all
their offices of love. Their Works are demolished. The Tower is wrested from
their hands. Themselves besieged in a manner. A Garrison threatened to be put
upon them, their arms to be taken away, (if they durst) Their Trades decayed,
threatened to be quite ruined. Their late Lord Major and Aldermen (some of which
were their fastest friends and Zelots) impeached for their lives upon no
ground. Their whole Common Council menaced. Diverse of their Ablest Members
marked out already for destruction. Nay, the whole City kept in continual
fears of fire or sword, or other violence by them.

The Assembly-men and Ministry give no better account of their faith toward
them neither. How did they tickle them at the beginning of these troubles with
Engagements and Covenants for a Church Government to their content, making them
a glorious Clergy, establishing a free and full maintenance for Preaching
Ministers? Yet their Persons are now more vilified then ever. Their Function
exposed to contempt and scorn. Their maintenance abridged, and that by the
connivance of the Houses, nay the example, private encouragement, if not the
project of their Members.

We will not twit them with their deceitful Ordinances, of self-denial,
(which only broke the ice to ingrossement of all Places and Offices of profit
into Members hands or their Confidents to Distribution of at least 300000l. of
our Estates amongst themselves) Of Accounts of the Kingdom, (by which they have
increased their expenses many thousands without mention to perfect, or call any
man to refund) Of hearing complaints against bribery and injustice of their
Members (whereby they may take notice of the Person that dares question any of
their Houses, and after they have worried him there, by a fruitless and
chargeable attendance, find some advantage to break his back) nor many such
like.

Nor yet stop they there, in falsifications of their own; but they compel
others to break their Oaths and Promises. (I say nothing now of those Oaths
they force upon the Consciences of such men, as had rather trust God with their
Souls, then them with their Bodies and Estates) They have compelled their own
side to break those Articles and Engagements, which they had struck up;
witness the Cessations in Yorkshire, made by the late Lord Fairfax, and that
in Cheshire. Nay, themselves entertained, and by their Ministers persuaded some
Hundreds of Men taken Prisoners at Brainceford, and dismissed by the King, upon
their Oath to bear no more Arms against him, within very few days to vomit
those up again, as unlawful Obligations.

Last of all, Is it not a great part of their Quarrel against the King, that
they cannot enforce him to forget his Oath, whereby he stands obliged to defend
the Church in her Rights and Privileges? that he will not yield up the Laws of
the Land, to be newmodell'd according to their Lusts, and the Power to protect
his Subjects (which he is bound by Oath to do) into their hands, that they may
oppress them at their pleasure? how infinite is this Argument? I pray God, they
have not halted even with him also. We are strongly tempted to believe, that
their Fastings, their Prayings, their zealous and solemn Executions of
Pictures and Crosses, were but Pageantry to deceive the People, rather then
true Devotions to make an Atonement with the Almighty; and perhaps we could
prove it upon many. But God is the only Searcher of Hearts, and to him we refer
them for that matter.

The Charge of Popery upon the King.
This Charge has two Branches; the One of his Inclination to Popery, and
favor of that Religion; the Other of a Concurrence with the Papists to destroy
all the Protestants in England and Ireland. For the former they offer these
proofs,

1. His Letter to the Pope, when he was in Spain.

2. The Articles of Marriage, both with the Spanish and French.

3. That he had an Agent in Rome.

4. That by the Queen and the Earl of Ormond he offered a Toleration unto the
Irish Papists, though he had formerly vowed against it, as also to take off the
Penal Laws.

5. His entertaining of a Nuncio here.

6. His leaving of Blanks with Secretary Windebank, a notorious favourer of
Papists, when he went to Scotland, when he denied a Commission to the
Parliament as they desired. Letters of the said Secretary; whereupon he durst
not endure the Examination, but fled.

The latter is confirmed many ways, as
1. By a pious Design the Queen had in hand, helped forward by a Fast.

2. An Information given upon Oath to the Archbishop.

3. An Attestation of a Servant of the Queen Mother.

4. Speeches of the Rebels in Ireland.

5. Unusual Preparations of Arms and Ammunition, Mounting Guns on the Tower.

Nay, 6. Found in Papists houses.

7. Commissions given them to rise, etc.

The King cleared from the Aspersion of Popery.
Indeed, it was necessary to rake together so many Circumstances, whereby to
pin this vizard on again, which was even fallen off; when the Kings own strict
and plous Life, continual defense of the true Protestant Religion against all
Opposition, and his highest and public solemn Protestations, even upon the
receiving of the Holy Sacrament, being added to diverse strong Presumptions do
assoile him. It is not unknown to us now, that his Father, of blessed Memory,
sending some Ministers into Spain after him, charged them to have a care of
Buckingham; as for his Son Charles, he durst trust him for perseverance in his
Religion. What a slight advantage did the King take to rid his hands of the
Queen's Priests? What strict Commands did he give, that none should be
permitted to enter into her Chapel, who was not her Meniall Servant? We know,
that nor the Queen's own power with him, nor the Mediation of her friends
about him, could extend to dis-place a poor Porter at Saint James's; who for
keeping out a Citizen, that under pretense of being her Servant would have
pressed in, for to go to the Chapel, and for such other strict performances
of His Majesty's commands, had much incensed her.

We remember also his severe Edicts and Proclamations against those of that
Religion in general, his Instructions to his Ministers for their prosecution,
his Banishment of Doctor Smith Bishop of Calcedon. If his under. Officers
failed of their duties, it is but justice to set the Saddle upon the right
horse. What Law did he ever refuse, (nay, has he not called on them to offer)
for the Education of Popish Children in the Protestant Religion, for their
better Conviction, or further Punishment, and that even at times of his
dis-advantage and danger to dis-oblige any of his Subjects? I have heard many
of the Papists revile him, under that notion, that he would give them all up as
a sacrifice for to compass a peace with his Parliament, though they have
remained loyal to him in his extremity.

They themselves have published such Letters of his (never intended for their
view, written in private to his Queen, with whom, if with any one alive, he
would be free sure in that point) wherein he declares himself to be different
in judgment from her. What need we say more? Though at the first, when the war
was commenced, Master Hampden being asked by a Minister, why Religion was made
a cause of it? gave this account, that the people would not stir else; yet
Master Martin has in the House, and diverse other places bin so ingenuous, as
to tell them, They need not lie for a good Cause, It was not Religion they
fought for, but Liberty.

1. The Charge from the Letter to the Pope answered.
1. For the Letter to the Pope, It is so fully answered in a Book called
Vindiciae Caroli; and in another Treatise called, The Pre-eminence and
Privilege of Parliament, that I need not insist thereon. The Prince being upon
a Match with Spain, it could not be passed, in regard of the difference of his
Religion, but by a Dispensation from the Pope. Yet although he had left all
that Transaction to the Spaniard, to avoid intercourse with him, yet the Pope
taking his advantage, writes a Letter to the Prince. Being at this ward, I see
not, how even in Civility (especially considering the Precisenes and
Punctuality of that Nation in all Courtship and Complement) as also in safety
(as being in the hands of Strangers) and to the securing of the Match (the
maine Business he came for) he could forbear to answer it. Yet was it done by
him with that Wisdom and Care, as it might give no offense; and by the
severest Censure of an un-byassed Reader, that understands the Language, not
smell at all of any Compliance in Religion. Moreover, that it might bear no
ill sense, as of a clandestine Correspondence, he was pleased to publish it to
the world.

It is no strange thing to write even to the Turk, (which the two Houses have
offered our Merchants to do for them) or to the King of Morosco, that are
Mahumetans, to Princes of what Nation or Religion soever. But if you do
observe it, this their own Weapon wounds themselves and makes for the King:
for what needed a Dispensation, if the King had been of that Religion?

2. The Charge from the Articles of Marriage with Spain and France, Answered.
The Articles of Marriage with Spain and France are fully satisfied in that
forementioned Book, Vindiciae Caroli; yet if any have not seen or perused that
Book, Let him take this short account here:

1. That a particular Toleration had a former president, even in Q. Elizabeth,
(whom they never durst accuse for a favourer of Papists) in those Articles of
Marriage, which were consented to, with the Duke of Anjou. Where, by the way,
you may take notice, that in her time, Master Stubs, a Lawyer, but a great
Professor, and one Master Page had their hands cut off, for writing a Tract
against that Match, which they had entitled, The Marriage of a Child of God
with the Son of Antichrist. Camb. Elizab. An. 3, 4, 5, and 6.

2. That if the Intelligence were true (which these Accusers take from an
ordinary News-monger or Mercury) of an universal Toleration agreed upon, it was
Intuitu majoris Boni. The Palatinate was to be restored again, and the
Protestants of Germany to be re-enstated in their Possessions upon that
Condition.

3. That this was King James his Act, not King Charles his, who was only
passive therein, and to whose hand these Articles were beaten before his
coming into Spain.

4. That they were never any Prejudice to this Kingdom, because the Match with
Spain was broken, and therefore should be no Objection. The Articles of the
Marriage with France (which went forward) had the same reasons, and so are
answered.

3. That of the Agent at Rome, Answered.
1. The Agent in Rome, if any, was from the Queen, and not the King.

2. Grant it to have been from the King (which is not true) he may surely
claim as much liberty that way, as Q. Elizabeth, who had an Ambassador, or
Agent, namely, Sir Edward Carne, with the Pope in Rome, Camb. Eliz. 1559. at
the beginning of her Reign; yet was never under any Suspicion for it. Kings
have, or ought to have their Espyals and Intelligencers in all places, from
which there is possibility of danger to their Dominions. I have heard, Q.
Elizabeth had, even in the Popes own Family, and in the Colleges of the
Jesuits. Their Projects against us could not better be dis-appointed, then by
thus picking the Locks of their very Bosoms.

4. That of Toleration answered.
That he offered a Toleration to the Papists in Ireland, contrary to his former
Resolutions, was but upon great and pressing Necessity (which has no Law;) and
to that degree of Necessity the two Houses had driven him, so the consequences
were to be set upon their Score, not his own: yet even then, in his Letters
about that Affair (published by themselves) he does insist on it, That the
Bargain may be made as good, as can be, for him. But I have seen other Letters
from one of his Secretaries to the Irish, which I am ensur'd were true; wherein
were these Expressions, after Expostulation of their delays in his Assistance,
He is informed that taking advantage of his low condition, you insist on
something in Religion, more then formerly you were contented with. He has
therefore commanded me to let you know, that were his Condition much lower, you
shall never force him to any further Concessions to the prejudice of his
Conscience, and of the true Protestant Religion, in which he is resolved to
live, and for which he is ready to die; and that he will join with any
Protestant Prince, nay with these Rebels themselves, how odious soever (meaning
his two Houses) rather then yield the least to you in this particular.

The same retorted.
Besides, herein the Parliament does somewhat justify him; For if the Papists
themselves may be believed, they have been solicited formerly to serve the
Parliament, and were promised by some of their Agents an universal Toleration,
and a Repeal of the Penal Statutes, which is the more credible, because Henry
Martin told them in the House, (not long since) That he had a Petition from all
the Papists in England for one, and was their Advocate for it, though
unseasonably. Nay, many of the Independent Writers, (who never received check
for it from the House) do in their Books not only allow, but give reasons for
it. And in the Compositions for Delinquency, (though the two Houses pretended
them to be without Capacity thereof) They were admitted, nay and at lower Rates
and with more favor, then many zealous Protestants, who had been less active
in this war.

5. That of the Nuncio, Answered.
1. The Nuncio's business was merely to the Queen, and he a Layman.

2. It is no Courtship, to forbid an ordinary man's Wife all intercourse with
those of her own Religion, though different from that of her Husband; nor is it
the way to convert her. I am persuaded diverse of both Houses have been guilty
of that Allowance. Yet the Right of a Queen is greater, and it was an Article
of Marriage.

3. It might have been afforded with less Regret for to smooth Her Majesty,
and to take off the Remembrance of the banishment of her Priests.

4. The Man was of so weak Parts, and of so loose a life, that his Company
might have been borne withal the better, to serve as a Disswasive from his
Religion, as the Lacedaemonians used by the apish and uncouth behavior of
Drunkards to possess their young Children with a perfect hatred of that vice.

5. As Soon as it was discovered distasteful, or of danger, he had his Mittimus.

6. That of the Blanks left with Windehank, and of his Letters and Flight,
Answered.
1. Whosoever knows the Custom of the Court, knows it to be no strange matter
of Trust with a Secretary of State, to be employed in any sudden emergency,
when there cannot be recourse unto the King; especially when there are general
Instructions left, and sometimes the very matter made ready, the form only
referred to his discretion. Nay further, there are some of the House of Commons
can testify, how familiar it is for a Secretary of State to entrust the same
with his own Secretaries; and how impossible it is to dispatch businesses of
haste and necessity without some such remedy. I have heard, the like is not
unusual with his Excellency the Lord Fairfax, and other Great Commanders, to
give their Servants of Trust, leave to subscribe their names for them, in
matters of common concernment, I am sure Col. Mainwayring the Passe-maker, (
which was the best Trade he ever drove) in time of greatest danger to the City
and affrightment also, left his Hand and Seal with many of his Servants, to
fill up with the names of such Persons, as they should think fit. Nay, but do
not the Houses themselves daily so, or more in matters of high concernment, by
their Power delegated unto the Keepers of the Great Seal, Privy-Seale, and
their ordinary Courts of Justice, their Secretary of State, and persons
officiating in Trust under them?

2. If he were a notorious favourer of Papists, His Majesty might likely not
know so much of him; Servants being generally studious to conceal their faults
from their Masters.

3. If His Majesty did know it, yet Places of Trust have been often delegated
by Princes to such as have been of a Persuasion contrary to theirs, whom they
have found Persons capable thereof. Even Q. Elizabeth her self did send the
Viscount Montacute upon an Embassy to Spain, in behalf of the Scots, and to
justify the Protestant Religion, though he were a Papist, as Camden has it in
her Life.

Now whereas it is added, the King would not leave any such with his Parliament:

1. The Case is different, if it be meant, with them for passing of Acts, which
were not repealable by himself, whereas the Secretary was accomptable for his
Transactions; and his deeds, They if not answerable to His Majesty's desires,
capable of reversion by His Majesty.

2. There was no need in so short an absence of His Majesty, whilst Bills are
so long in debate, before they come to their Perfection. For His Letters we can
give no account, unless we knew their purport. He might run away justly, and
in providence which every man owes to himself. He saw the House of Commons
begin to ramp upon him, and he knew how easy it was for them to find a staff
to beat a dog withal, and make a just quarrel when they had an edge against
any man.

That of the Plot to destroy all the Protestants in England, Answered.
But the Plot to cut all the Protestants throats is so brim-full of Malice,
that it confutes it self.

1. It is well known, there are not in all above 24000 Papists convicted, in
all England and Wales; allow as many more without that capacity (for sure, when
you shall have deducted the old decrepit Men and all the Women their number
will not be much above.) Now how these Papists should procure Arms, embody
(and no discovery be made of it) so as to become considerable, and if all in a
Body, accomplish the Ruin of above a Thousand for One, is incomprehensible;
yea though each one had the hands of Gerion and Briareus, and in each hand the
Club of Hercules. The Protestants had need first be tamer Creatures, then these
late Broils have showed them to be. In Ireland, where the Papists and Natives
are five hundred to one, what a tough piece of work have they found it, to root
them out? and now we hope they may drink of the same Cup they provided for
Others.

2. The King in that case must be looked on, as void of common understanding,
who would divest himself of the Monarchy over so many Millions of men, that he
might have it, only over 24000 to inhabit this spacious Territory; nay, and
some of them like to come short home.

1. That of the Queens pious Design, Answered.
The Queens pious Design was known to be nothing more then a Contribution, by
way of Assistance to her Husband against the Scots, whom he then looked upon,
as his Enemies. And to that Expedition diverse of themselves, diverse of the
Upper House afforded their helping hand under the same notion, Essex, Holland,
Northumberland, Salisbury, etc. And why was the fault greater in a Wife to
assist her Husband, then in Subjects, their King?

2. That of the Qu. Mothers Servant, Answered.
The Q.M. servant, for ought we know, may lie as well as swear, If it be the Man
we guess at, he is of little credit, even among his own Nation. Nay, the
Ministers and Protestants of their Churches here (though the man pretend to be
under the notion of a Convert, and a Protestant now, though formerly a Papist)
give him but a base report. And we cannot think, it is for nothing, that he
has been bolsterd up, in the murder of his own Wife, under the pretense of
Physic, in the oppression of her Children, which she had by a former Husband,
and in the prosecution of a worthy Gentleman, her Brother.

3. That of the suggestion to the Archbishop, Answered.
The suggestion to the Archbishop, was by one Habernfield, a Bohemian, from a
Priest in Rome, first given to Sir William Boswell in Holland, and so sent
over; in which the principal persons to be made away, were the King and the
Archbishop, for their being so much against the Romish Religion and purposes.
But this Circumstance is (wisely enough) conceald by these Accusers. Can any
reasonable man let his belief so run riot, as to be persuaded, the King should
drive on a Plot, apparently to his own destruction? How blind will malice make?
whither will it not transport?

Of the Irish Rebels words we shall speak in a more proper place.

4. That, of the Arms in Papists houses, Answered.
The Arms and Ammunition in Papists houses, were a Bow and Arrows with one
brown Bill. This calls to our mind the Training under ground, the blowing up of
the Thames, etc. Is it not Impudence even to a Prodigy, to think (now the
Scales are fallen from our eyes) thus to mock and befool us still?

5. That of the Ammunition, and Preparations about White Hall and the Tower,
Answered.
Unusual Provision of Ammunition, fire-workes, etc. about the Tower and
White Hall, mounting Ordinance upon the White-Tower, etc. was made indeed, but
only in Order to security, at that seditious and tumultuous time. Would these
good men think it a just Challenge against them, Now that they have manned
White Hall with ten times the number, and the Mewes to boot, Now that they
have raised Batteries in the Tower, mounted Canon, cleansed the ditches,
brought in a Garrison of strangers, and laid aside or over-sized the ordinary
Guard, That therefore they intend to destroy the Presbyterians, or the rest of
the Kingdom?

6. That of Commissions to Papists, Answered.
Commissions were indeed given to the Papists, but since the war was begun, and
I would feign learn, what Privilege the Papists have, from being employed in
defense of their King; and whether it had been wisdom in us to hazard our
selves, and that the Protestants should spend their Mettle one upon another,
while they sat still and looked on. Yet I cannot compute upon the most severe
survey, that the hundredth Commission was issued unto Papists. What danger
could there be in that disproportion?

7. The Charge against His Majesty of Tyranny.
The third Charge against His Person is of Tyranny, and an Endeavor to enslave
us, which is proved, 1. By His Principles, in regard he holds forth to us in
his Declarations, That he is liable to Account, for nothing he does, to any
man; and that nor one nor both Houses of Parliament can make, or declare a Law.
2. By his Practices, as 1. In attempting to enslave us by the German-Horse. 2.
By the Spanish fleet.

That Charge Answered.
To the first, The Principle which the King holds out, was ever taken for Truth
heretofore.

1. All his Predecessors in this, all Sovereign Princes in other States have
made claim hereto, (and for ought I have heard, were never questioned before
for it.) To pass by King James and all others which might admit exception,
Hear what Queen Elizabeth says, Although Kings and Princes Sovereign, owing
their Homage and service only unto Almighty God, the King of all Kings, and in
that respect not bound to yield account or render a reason of their Actions to
any other but God their Sovereign, yet (though among the most ancient and
Christian Monarchs, the same Lord God has committed unto us the Sovereignty of
this Kingdom of England, and other Dominions, which we hold immediately of the
same Almighty God, and so thereby account only to his Divine Majesty,) We are,
notwithstanding this our Prerogative, moved to declare, etc. In a Declaration
of the causes moving her to give assistance to the Netherlands, printed by her
own Printer, 1585.

2. The Lawyers of the Kingdom have constantly taught us the same, who call
the King Caput and Principium Parliamenti, Pater Patriae, the Head and
beginning of his Parliament, the father of his Country; who also tell us
expressly, Omnis sub Rege, Ipse sub nullo, nisi Deo. Non est inferior sibi
subjectis, and Rex non habet superiorem, nisi Deum, satis habet ad panam, quod
Deum expectat ultorem. The King has no Peer in this Land, and he cannot be
judged. The Regality of the Crown of England is immediately subject to God, and
to none other.

3. This very Parliament has made a tacit acknowledgment hereof, as well as
all others, by taking the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, by making their
Addresses to the King under the notion of his liege men, and most humble
subjects, and by their very Petitions.

4. It has been the practice of all Ages, and was of this present Parliament,
to decline the King, even in those things which had been acted by his Commands,
and to fall upon the Ministers; according to the sense of that Law Maxim, The
King can do no wrong. It were strange now, that the Children might call the
Father to an account, The Heel lift it self against, or the Members question
the Head, The Subject overtop the Sovereign. The Fable has a good Moral,
and I doubt is verified in our times. The Tail of the Dragon once made that
pretense of Governing against the Head; but having obtained the liberty to
Lead, after a great deal of toil led all the Body into a ditch. But this
being granted and proved, how will the consequence ensue? It is not the
exemption from Account, which makes a Tyrant, but owning no Law, making his
Will and Pleasure to be the standard of all his Actions. There is no State,
wherein there is not an ultimate Judicature, which is not to be Accomptable. By
this rule all Government should be Tyrannous.

2. That both Houses can make no Law, they themselves confess, I am sure the
Lord Cook in his fourth book, Printed by their own special Command, does
often. That they can declare a Law is against reason. If the King be necessary
to the making, doubtless he is also to concur in the Interpretation, otherwise
to what purpose does his Council serve? But to arrogate a Power to declare a
Law, contrary to the evident sense or interpretation received ever since it was
made, even though a hundred or a thousand years, is a monstrous usurpation, and
the greatest evidence of a Tyrannical spirit, that is possible. If they have a
power to interpret only according to the evidence of the letter, or former
acceptance, where then is the Privilege? and what need there be a quarrel?

That of the German Horse, Answered.
1. The Horse out of Germany was but in Proposal, never resolved on, much
less put in execution. Now an Embrio is no perfect man, nor a Design to be
esteemed a Fact, much less is a bare Proposal.

2. It appears to be rather the Duke's doing, who at that time took upon him
the managery of most affairs in this Kingdom. And why should they make the
King black with the Dukes faults, if that were one?

But 3. the true design of those Horse, was only to discipline our English,
and make them more expert for foreign Employments (as it may be remembered, we
had diverse old Foot-soldiers and Officers out of Holland for a while to that
purpose) and how unskilful our Nation was therein, as also of what Consequence
it was, Our Army in the Isle of Ree was a fatal evidence; and since that,
their own Armies have felt at Worcester, Edgehill, and other Fights; until
by frequent Experience, and the great pains of some Dutch and Scotch Officers
they were made formidable.

4. The Instruments, whose Counsels were used in this great pretended Crime,
who made the first offer to raise and conduct those Horse, have been harbored
in the bosom of the Houses, and employed in Places of signal trust, as Sir
William Balfours, Dalbiere, etc.

That of the Spanish Fleet, Answered.
Rather then they will want a Charge, the Spanish fleet shall furnish them with
one, though brought into our Havens by mere necessity, being pursued by the
Hollanders, and having spent their Powder. Poor King Charles! How is he
burdened and even pressed down, upon whom not his own Actions only are
charged, but those of his Servants, those of his Courts, those of Strangers;
nay, and those of mere fortune and Contingency? If this expedition of the
Spaniard were by the Kings contrivance or privity, why did he sit still,
permitting them to be assaulted within his own Harbors? why did he suffer his
own Ships to be idle Spectators of their Ruin? How comes it, that there never
followed thereupon the least expostulation for so great a loss, from the King
of Spain? It is well known, the Spaniards were wasted in Flanders, the
Natives began to know their own strength, and were in hand with a Machination
to shake off the Spanish yoke from their necks, in emulation of their Brethren
of the United Provinces. There was but need then of a recruit, which could not
be compassed without sending a strong Fleet to convey men into Flanders; And
this was the Fleet, which we quietly beheld beaten and scatterd. Mean time,
what miserable shifts are these men at home put unto, when they are glad to
catch after such shadows, thereby to bring an envy and hate upon their King?

The whole Charge of Tyrannical Government made good upon Themselves.
1. If it be exemption from Account, which constitutes a Tyrannical
Government, the two Houses cannot wash their hands of it, by their own Rules;
no men pretending to higher Privilege therein; no men seeking to fortify
themselves more, against all possibility of being reckoned withal.

2. If the Characters, which Aristotle in the 4. of his Politics, chap. 10.
assigns, and most other Statesmen unto Tyrannical Rule, be true, the
Parliament have outdone all Tyrants in all Ages.

The Badges are these,

First, To acknowledge no Boundary of Law to their Actions, besides their own
will.

2. To rule by violence over their Equals and Superiors.

3. To regard mainly their own private Vtility, not the Public. Examine their
Proceedings by these Marks, and you shall find them suitable to a hairs breadth.
Is not much of this quarrel for the repeal of Laws formerly established? Does
not the King continually invite, provoke them to this Touchstone? Nay what
law, that stood in their way, have they not suspended, or annulled? Their whole
Ecclesiastical Government is besides, nay against clear law. Their Secular
has been altogether Arbitrary; for what law warrants their Militia, their
dealing thus with His Majesty, their Imprisonments, Oppressions, Extortions?
And what law had they for alienating the Bishops lands, not only from the
Bishops, but from the whole Clergy for ever?

Lastly, (that I be not infinite) what Law to cut off Canterbury's Head, to
murder Tomkins, Challoner? etc.

2. How could they possibly maintain their Power without an Army? do they not
trample and revel it over their Lords and Masters (we will say nothing now of
His Majesty, their Sovereign, whom they insult upon.) Have not they set their
feet upon the Nobility and Gentry of the Kingdom? ruined and undone them?
whereas themselves for a great part are of the basest among the people; Among
whom (except what they can reckon their Places at) a hundred cannot make one
thousand pounds by the year.

3. What have they done for the Public? Though it be a bold, I fear it is a
true Challenge, John Lilburne makes, (which I am tempted once more to observe)
I here challenge them to show me one deed, they have done from the beginning of
their Convention for the benefit of the people. We are sure they have not been
wanting to themselves. All Places of profit are distributed among their
Members. Our moneys, to the sum of 3 or 400000l. are put up in their bags.
Our Persons are at their devotion. Their Privileges are what they list. The
truth is, All the evidences of tyranny against all the Kings of England, until
this present age, could not amount unto so much, as the two Houses have bin
guilty of, within these very few years. Nay, it was impossible, for all the
Kings of England ever to attain unto it; so true a Prophet was even Master
Hampden, who, when some expressed much Impatience at the want of a Parliament,
wished them to pray for a good one; for nothing could undo England, but a
Parliament.

The fourth Personal Charge, That he hated Parliaments.
That he was a Hater of Parliaments, they do back with these Proofs: 1. That he
never called any in twelve years. 2. Prohibited all speech of any. 3. Dissolved
them at his pleasure. 4. Searched the Closets and Pockets of the Members after
Dissolution. 5. Imprisoned others, which proved the occasion of their death. 6.
Even in Parliament, charged 5 of their Members. 7. Offered them violence in his
own Person, attended by a Train of Papists and others. 8. Endeavored to
overawe them, by bringing the Northern Army to London, and that when he had
declared against it. 9. Called a Mock-Parliament at Oxford. 10. Raised War
against this Parliament, which never King did against any, but He. 11.
Vpbraided his own at Oxford with the Name of a Mungrell-Parliament.


The Improbability of this Charge.
1. This cannot be easily admitted for a truth, That the King should hate a
Parliament: if you consider,

1. That he was an Advocate for them in his Fathers time, and by his Endeavor
procured many good Laws for them in his days, which was confessed in the
Parliament, as you may find in the Journall thereof.

2. That to give them satisfaction, he pressed his Father against his
Resolution and Reason to begin a War with the House of Austria, and obtained
it: though King James like a Prophet told him, That it was not their Hate
toward the House of Austria, nor their Zeal to the Protestant Cause, which
moved them to put him upon that suit, But a design to bring him into a Noose;
that being in distress by reason of it, they might desert him, and then make
their Markets of the Crown; And he did particularly acquaint him with the
steps and Gradations, which they would proceed in; first question and strip him
of his Tonnage and Poundage, then bind his hands from making other Provision
for himself; afterward bring him upon his knees to them.

3. Since his Reign, never any King called more Parliaments then He, for so
short a space, notwithstanding those twelve years Intermission.

4. All the Kings of England never offered more compliance, or performed more
Acts of Grace, then He did.

5. Lastly, few Kings have testified a greater desire of correspondence with,
or of condescension to a Parliament, then His Majesty has done by this:

1. In resigning up his faithful Servants, to be disposed of according to
their will, even against his Conscience.

2. In offering them (as it were) a Blanke, Jan. 20. 1640. which is to be seen
in their own Book of Declarations.

3. In giving up so many Bishops (whose Votes for the most part were at his
devotion) to be expelled the House of Lords.

4. Lastly, In the establishment of this Parliament by a Law, during their own
Arbitrament.

1. The Charge from the dis-use of Parliament for twelve years, Answered.
To the first particular, I answer: 1. By way of Concession; that Parliaments
were under long dis-use.

But 2. that it might be out of some foresight and sense of this tumultuous
Spirit in its secret workings, of which the King might think by abstinence and
diet to correct their Luxuriancy. It argues no hate to a Parliament, to desire
it might contain it self in the bounds of its ancient moderation; and so a fair
correspondence be maintained between the Crown and the People. And this Judge
Hutton in his Argument could not choose but touch upon, if you please to peruse
him.

3. Notwithstanding this reason for it, His Majesty had made an acknowledgement
hereof as of an Error, engaging himself to redress it for the future.

Nay, 4. did apply himself to that particular way, which themselves proposed, a
Trienniall Parliament.

5. Further yet, when that gave not satisfaction, by a law confirmed this
present Parliament to the length of their own desires.

2.3. That for Breaking up of Parliaments, and forbidding all Speech thereof,
Answered.
1. Herein His Majesty did no more then all his Predecessors. Look upward, and
you will find it practiced. If it were against the words of a law, yet usage
makes the law of the Kingdom, and supersedes the Letter. Suppose it an Error,
why should it be a Charge upon the King, and never objected unto His Father,
Qu. Elizabeth, Qu. Mary, K. Edward, K. Henry 8. and so upward?

2. The King did never Dissolve any, but upon their own distempers and for
mutinous deportment; and then it was providence to cure an evil in the
beginning, and crush a serpent in the shell.

3. This very House of Commons does at this time entertain within their walls,
one Instrument of the dissolution of the last before this, I mean Sir Henry
Vane, whose false suggestions were the occasion of the Kings Breaking it up. If
you have not heard the story, then take here the plain truth of it:

The Parliament was willing to give the King a sum, in consideration of
Ship Money; and an offer was made, so the King would relinquish his title
thereunto of six Subsidies. His Majesty was willing to comply, and in order
thereunto gave Sir Hen. Vane and others a command to signify so much unto the
House. But Sir Henry, contrary to the directions, demands and insists on
Twelve. Whereupon, the House is put into some distemper; which Sir Henry
represents unto His Majesty with the utmost Aggravation, and some Addition too,
whereupon His Majesty Dissolves it.

Searching of Pockets, and afterward Imprisoning, Answered.
To this we give this account, 1. That it was no Breach of Privilege, when the
Parliament was dissolved. The Elements are but of ordinary use, extra rationem
Sacramenti: by that time they were reduced to their proper sphere; and why may
not the King upon reasons of State, send to search the Pockets and Closets of
any private man? when he found the correspondence between his Kingdom and
himself to be shaken, who could blame him to search the cause of it to the
bottom, that he might prevent it for the future?

Though the King did imprison them, it was in an Honorable way; he made them
such an Allowance, that Master Long has professed, he spent the King 1500l.
there; after which rate perhaps it might be of a Surfeit, that those died, who
are objected.

3. Themselves never made dainty of it to imprison their own Members, during
their Session, without any cause expressed in their Warrants, and without any
Allowance for their subsistence. What was Commissary General Coply imprisoned
for, these six months? Some say, for nothing but telling what a clock it was,
at a Committee. Others have been for as long a time, and for as little reason.

The Kings charging of the 5 Members, answered, and retorted.
1. This is true indeed, that the King did charge or impeach so many of the
House: but then,

2. His Majesty had some reason sure. Whosoever reads the Articles, and
compares the Consequences, will find them high enough, and be convinced of
their truth.

3. If you consider the Kings proceedings thereupon, his Retractation of his
own way and error in the process, if it justled with any unknown Privilege,
his desire of their direction, and (when nothing else would give Content) his
utter withdrawing of the Charge, and if you reflect withal upon what other
Princes have done, what the Law gives out, to wit, There is no Protection for
Treason, you cannot choose, but admire his lenity.

4. This is no more, then they have suffered, if not encouraged the Army,
(their own Servants) to do, unto double that number of their Houses, and some
of the same Members, that had been charged by the King; and this too upon less
ground, if any at all,

5. I could tell them of Doct. Parry, a Member of that House in Q. Elizab.
time* who was not only charged but taken thence, condemned at the King's Bench
for Treason against the Queens Person, drawn and hanged before
Westminster-Hall-gate, at the very time the Members repaired to the House. I
could tell them of more then this, but I pass it over.

The Kings going to the House, answered, and retorted.
1. Though His Majesty went unto the House, there was no assault made or
intended by him, as far as can appear, without their Comment. It had been a
desperate attempt, with so few to set upon so many, and those backed by so great
a power, and had served themselves so far into the affections of the City. If
any wild expression fell from the mouth of one or two of his retinue, why were
they not seized on and questioned?

2. This has been so often acknowledged for an Error by him, yet still
objected by them, that methinks they might blush at this mention of it.

3. What did he do therein, which themselves had not been guilty of before it,
and much outdone since? We remember the robustious Petition of the Porters,
and we know at what rates some of them were hired, by what devices others were
cheated thereinto, it being told them, it was a Petition, that Watermen should
be prohibited to carry Burdens. The Poasting of Names, exposing the Members of
different judgment to the fury of the madding Multitude, was a kind of Force
sure. So were the Shoals of Citizens, who came upon their Invitation and
encouragement to cry for Justice. If those were not, we are certain the
Reformado's were (for many of them smelt ill then, and Horror was seen in the
faces of most) which the Army taxes some Members withal. And the Petitions,
Remonstrances, Declarations, Advance of this Army, with their Interposition
since, are a violence beyond dispute.

Bringing the Army to London, answered, and retorted.
1. None of those Examinations (which we have read over, all of them) do hold
out clearly, that the King did intend to bring them up to London, only to put
them in a posture for his Service.

2. This was limited, according to the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, and
the Liberty of the Subject.

3. It amounted but to a Petition, which is printed, and may be read in the
first Vol. of the Decl

4. This came from the Officers unto the King and those Members of Parliament.
Now in that conjuncture of Affairs, wherein was the King too blame? when the
Soldiers were discontented, the Parliament grew high, there were visible
Symptoms of an intention to model the State anew, to cast out the Government
of the Church. If the King did so far comply with them, as to allow; nay, to
countenance them, by an humble Petition to represent their sense of the
Innovations they feared, and of a Breach of the Laws of the Land, How happy had
it been for us, if it had proceeded and taken place? Is it not the same, which
this Army has accomplished to the destruction of the Law, and dissolution of
all legal Authority?

The Raising of War against them, Answered.
The raising of the War will be Answered in another place. As for the
Aggravation (a thing never done but by King Charles) it is no wonder; since
never King needed before to deal with a Parliament by Arms: One Breath of his
mouth was enough to dissolve them.

The Mock-Parl. at Oxford, Answered, and retorted.
The Mock-Parliament was not to be so slightly thought of. Themselves and their
own men, the Army, appeal to the equitable construction of the Law. And if
so, pray what equity would justify this Parliament about That? The King is
confessedly one Estate, The Lords with him were two for one, twenty or more
Earls, as many Barous, when two Lords made up a House here often, and Ten were
thought a goodly number. Nay the House of Commons there were near upon the
number with those that stayed here. Did the walls at Westminster make a
Parliament? surely, in the equitable construction, those Gentlemen made it much
rather, who were called together by the Kings Writ, and sent by their
respective Counties and Buroughs. But why do we dispute that? Did not many of
these men, that talk thus, flee themselves? Did they not eat up an Engagement
with the Army? Was there not an intention at least of another Mock-Parliament?
If their Return to Westminster had not been so quick and easy, we cannot
forbear to think, they would actually have done the selfsame thing
themselves, which they thus condemn in others.

The Mungrell Parliament, Answered.
The King has sufficiently explained himself for that matter, that he used
that Expression in reference to the Earl of Sussex and his faction, who had
made a breach in that fair Correspondence, that was maintained between them
formerly.

The Charge of Crimes done by his Ministers.
We proceed from the pretended faults, which relate immediately to the Kings
own person before this Rupture with the Parliament, unto those done by his
Ministers, and those especially under this Classis, concern Oppression of us
in our Estates. Of which sort are the Enforced leaves, Privy-Seales,
Coat-and-Conduct-money, Enlarging Forests, Enclosing Commons, Engrossing
Patents, Monopolies, etc.

The Answer to these in general.
To these in general, 1. That they were put in execution in times of great
necessity. The King was engaged in a bloody war, and by the incitement,
encouragement, and promise of this faction of men, and deserted as soon as he
was well entered; the best Revenue of the Crown questioned, if not withheld.
The King of Denmark beaten for want of supply, Germany overrun, the
Protestant cause all over Christendom in a precipice, great Preparations made
round about, Hanibal ad portas. What Irregularities might not be excused in
such exigencies, by that Supreme Law of Necessity, which bears out all
transgressions? 2. None of these were contrived by Himself, many of them were
by his Counsel at Law, many were suggested by Mr. Noy in particular, his
Attorney, a man well versed in the Laws and ancient Records of the Kingdom,
one who could have given a good account of his Actions, and was once thought a
great Champion of the Laws against Arbitrary Encroachments. 3. There was a
Redress offered upon the first Complaint, and the Subject fenced by wholesome
Laws against any such future Attempts. 4. The Instruments who first contrived,
or abetted, and put then in execution, are many of them in both Houses, more of
them in Places of eminent trust: None of them all ever punished upon this
score, but for some other fault. In Particular,

The Privy-Seales, Answered.
His Majesty was so careful to satisfy his Subjects for what they had lent
him this way, that he sold unto the City of London, Land at 12000. l. rent of
Assise, and out of the money due thereupon left and secured in the Chamberlain
of Londons hand the sum of 216000. l. 15. s. 4. d. to the end that out of
this such might be paid, as had formerly lent unto the King, either by
Privy-Seale, or otherwise, which the City made this advantage of (not contented
with such a bargain, though they paid for the purchase, by the very Wood and
Timber upon the ground, as the King was informed;) They sent their Emissaries
into all Countries, where they knew there were any of the Kings Creditors, who
were ignorant of this Assignment, and agreed with them at under-rates, nay for
little or nothing, for the debt they accounted as desperate, and by that means
at once deceived the people of their repayment, and the King of the reputation
of his Justice.

Forests, Answered.
1. The King herein used and followed the advice of his Counsel at Law, and of
the Lord of Holland; yet was his Lordship their Confident, until this quarrel
divided them.

2. What was done herein, was upon Oath, and by due process at Law.

3. His Majesty remitted his clear Right, where the people were troubled, for
instance, a great part of the County of Essex.

4. He allowed them to be bounded by the Countries themselves.

Enclosing of Commons, Answered, and retorted.
1. It was done by virtue of Law, which investeth him with that power.

2. It might have been for the benefit, not of the Kingdom only, but of the
very particular Inhabitants of those respective places, if Instruments had done
their duty.

3. The Parliament keeps those in their possessions still, without refunding
any Compensation to those they pretend were injured.

4. Nay at this time, they set upon a work of Enclosure of more then all the
Commons in England, which have been enclosed these 100. years; I mean the
Draining of the Fennes in Lincolnshire, whereby thousands of poor people are
bereft of their subsistence, The adjacent parts are endammaged by the Torrent
of the waters turned upon them to their vast prejudice.

Engrossing of Patents, and Monopolies, Answered.
That I may Answer these, I shall lay for a Ground, That all Graunts and
Letters Patent of the King of England are not Monopolies; though concerning
Trade, or Manufacture, or the labor of the Subject, or be appropriated to one
man or more, as Charters, Privileges, to Cities, to Towns Corporate, to
Corporations, Companies of Trade, Custome-house-officers, the Registers-office
in Chancery (now enjoyed by Mr. Miles Corbet and Goodwin, two Members) the
Clerks of the Parliament, and many such like; which were unquestionably used to
be granted by the Kings of this Land, in order to the governing and well-being
thereof. But those only, which are notoriously evil before, or discovered to
be so after, and are not for the manner of granting them, but for the matter
accounted invalid. And therefore many great things of high Concernment to the
Commonwealth have justly merited, and to this day do enjoy the warrant of Law
and Authority, which were never confirmed by Act of Parliament, whilst others
of less moment have troubled all the three Estates for an Act of Parliamnet,
as Hunting the Hare, Paving of certain Streets in London, etc.

Now we Answer. 1. That these were suggested by Citizens or men skillful in
those ways and Advantages, which might accrue to the respective Trades or
Manufactures, and so redound to the benefit of the Kingdom.

2. That His Majesty did always make reference of these to his Counsel, and
to others learned in the Law, as his Attorney, Solicitor general, and Masters
of Requests (as diverse yet alive can testify, and Judge Jenkins has testified
to the view of all the world) that they might examine the justice of them, and
their proportion to the established Laws, and that His Majesty has often given
strict charge of great Caution even unto them in their determinations; by which
means multitudes of Monopolies which were by Citizens and others daily
represented and pressed on, were rejected, and the Authors received a Check.

3. That even those Grants, wherein there was no discoverable Inconvenience,
but much benefit pretended to the Kingdom, were for the most part made but
Probationers by him; whereas either in the Patent it self there was limitation
expressed, and a Proviso for their revocation, if they appeared contrary to
Law, or of damage to the Kingdom; or there was a Bond entered into by the
Parties entrusted unto that purpose.

4. That upon any complaint made against them he caused it to be heard
(sometimes did it Personally) at the Councell-Table, where the Lord Keeper and
the rest of the Judges of his Privy Council assisted him; and about the
beginning of the year 1640. when he found the Complaints to multiply against
them, instead of hearing the Patentees, he disanulled their Patents by
Proclamation.

5. That diverse of them are continued until this day, as the Post Office upon
Mr. Prideaux of the House. The Lord of Warwick. The Merchant Adventurers. The
Greenland trade, and many more.

6. That this was done in all Kings Reigns, and Errors of this nature have
been committed, from Ed. 4 Hen. 6. to Queen Elizabeth's time (when they
multiplied to a great excess) and King James; and they may be pardoned a
Prince, as well as the Inconveniences of sundry Acts of Parliament, (which
have been afterward found a Grievance, and so repealed) the three Estates.

7. That many of those, who either sit in the Houses, or are in great Offices
of trust about them, and are their Favorites, were the Contrivers, and
Instruments hereof, yet were never under question; as Sir John Evelin, who had
the first Monopoly of Powder; Sir H. Vane sen. who wiped him of it, and settled
it upon his own servant, when it was the greatest grievance; Sir John Trevor,
who persuaded the King to the Imposition upon Coals; Mr. Saint John's and
Cromwell, who represented and drove on the Draining of the Fennes; the Earl of
Holland, Mildmay, Alderman Woollaston, who managed the Monopoly of
Gold-and-Silver thread; Smith, once Secretary to the Earl of Northumberland,
now in a great Office. I must omit Mr. Whitaker, Alderman Gibbs, Mr. Ralph
Farmer, Sollicitour for Sequestrations in London, Mr. Reading the Lord Majors
Passe-maker, Mr. Jackson Solliciter for Sequestrations in Westminster; and
multitudes of others, to whom they have offered signal favors since that
time, never questioning any of them for their Patents or Monopolies.

Ship Money, Answered.
1. This was first suggested by Mr. Noy for Law, who had few equals in the
knowledge thereof. 2. Examined and approved by the Lord Keeper Coventry, a man
of great learning. 3. Subscribed by all the Judges of England. 4. When it was
questioned by Mr. Hamden, a free debate was allowed before all the Judges (who
give Judgment upon Oath) and the Business disputed Seriatim for many days
together, and at last determined for the King. In which debate (by the way) His
Majesty suffered the great Arcanum of Government, His High-Prerogative, to be
banded by their Lawyers at a Bar, which these men would never permit to be done
by their Privileges, though they do Petition for them in the beginning of
every Parliament. What fairer course could have been taken? What better
confirmation could the best Right any man has to his land of Inheritance have
then this? 5. If themselves had not been convinced of the justice of the
sentence, why did they once offer six Subsidies to purchase the abolishment of
it? Why did they not punish those Judges, which we find they have been ready to
advance; as particularly Trevor, who has nor Law, nor Learning, whom they have
sent at this time upon the Circuit; Judge Bramstone, whom they proposed unto
His Majesty for Chief Justice, nay and Banks, who was a great Instrument
therein, yet one they pitched upon for a place of Eminent employment in their
first Propositions, etc. 6. Lastly, the King condescended to abolish this
Ship Money by an Act of Parliament, and why should this be conjured up against
him?

This Charge of Oppression upon our Estates, by His Ministers and Officers,
retorted.
If these were Oppressions, O what have we suffered since, by those who would
make us believe, they are our Saviors! I dare confidently aver, and can fully
prove it, That neither Daneguelt, Taxes, Loanes, Privy-Seals, Ship Money, etc.
Nor all the Impositions, and grievous Burdens laid upon the Subjects by all the
Kings since the Conquest, and equalize that Mass of Treasure, which themselves
have either in their own persons and to their use, or by their Instruments
under pretense of the public service, squeezed out of the Subjects of this
Kingdom, within these five or six years; and that, for to make good their
bound less Privileges, to establish them eternally in their Tyrannous
usurpation, and to make our selves with our Posterity vassals for ever unto
their vain and shuttle Humors. In particular (to take the blame upon our
selves of what we willingly parted withal, and what by their Cheates were
smoothly invited out of our Purses) Have they not constrained us under the
notion of Loanes and voluntary Contributions to give the twentieth and fifth
parts of our Estates unto them; at other times 60000. l. 100000. l. 50.
Subsidies, etc. which we should much rather have kept, but that the rest had
been too little to expiate our denial? Have they not ravished our Children and
Servants out of our Arms and Houses, and compelled us not only to afford so
poor an Allowance as of Coat-and Conduct-money, but of Horses, Arms, and
diverse Months pay unto them, nay slain some of them that have refused, Women
that have interceded for their Husbands, and Children? Do not they keep all the
Forests in the Kingdom at their disposal, placing Members of their own
therein? If they do not enlarge them, do they not destroy them by cutting down
the fairest Timber Trees, etc. to the Kingdoms damage, though to their proper
advantage? do they not project how to improve them by Enclosures and sales,
through which hundreds, thousands of Families must needs foresee their Ruin at
hand, who had their subsistence thereby? Are they not now in a hot pursuit of
draining the Fenns (to gratify two Members especially) which are a Common? do
they not detain in their hands, what Commons were enclosed? do they not keep
on foot diverse Monopolies and Imposts? Have they not erected some Monopolies
and Offices, which were never before? I will name only the Projectors Office,
of registring Judgments and Recognizances, which in twenty or thirty years
neither King James, nor King Charles could be induced to grant. But have they
not erected one in our Kingdom, which once the Nation could not endure the
name of, and unto which all the rest amassed into one body, are but as a
Pigmey. I mean the Excise, whose benefit is at least 300000l. a year; yet no
public Charge borne out by all this, though all the Revenues of the King, the
Queen, the Prince, the Bishops, the Deanes and Chapters, the Delinquents, etc.
are in their hands, being almost one moity of the Kingdom; though most of the
rich Offices be in their possession; though there be particular Impositions
besides raised for Ireland, for the Scots, for the Army, and indeed for what
not? and though they seize upon that old decryed Grievance of Tunnage and
Poundage, while they take no Ship Money.

The Charge of the Crimes of his Courts, or such as concern Oppression of us in
our Bodies.
The third Charge is in relation to his Courts; and here are laid in his Dish
our Personal Oppressions, as of cruel Whippings, stitting Noses, cutting off
Ears, Fines, Imprisonments, Racks, branding Cheeks, etc.

The Charge answered.
Our Answer is, 1. That these things were done in Courts of Justice, and by
men, who were responsible.

2. That these Penalties were inflicted for high Crimes, such as formerly had
been capital.

3. Upon turbulent and obstinate Offenders, such as these men have not been
able to hold their hands from, since this Session of Parliament.

4. That the Fines, Imprisonments, and rigor of their Sentences were
frequently mollified and abated by His Majesty.

5. That those Courts, from which these things issued, are abolished, through
His Majesty's Grace and Condescension.

6. That none of those Judges has hitherto been punished, if at all questioned
for any transaction in the Star Chamber, or High-Commission-Court. The E. of
Salisbury in the House of Lords, and Sir Hen. Vane sen. in the House of Commons
were men, who gave their suffrages unto that Sentence against Lilburne, of
those cruel whippings against Pryn, Bastwick, and Burton, of those cuttings
and brandings; and when were they charged therewith? was it so much as once
objected against them?

The same, retorted.
These are the severest Courses they can object against His Majesty. But are
these any more then Flea-bitings to what has been done without punishment, or
so much as a Check, by their Committees, Armies, Courts of Justice, nay by
their own Members? The Barbarismes of their Committees (a Name now sufficiently
odious) would fill a Volume bigger then the Book of Martyrs. Their whippings,
their tortures, their Imprisonments, even to the starving of multitudes, of not
a few equal to the best in their respective Countries, upon Shipboard, in
such narrow Cabbins, and other places provided on purpose, that they had not
room to stand upright, or lie at length, until even their Sinews shrunk,
their Bodies were eaten by Vermin; And this for no manner of Cause, but their
Conscience. Nay, we can name the men, who have been sequestered and imprisoned
for five or six years and still are so, yet never heard one Accusation laid
against them unto this day; and others, who have after that been adjudged
Innocent, yet dare not call for reparation of their Estates, or any Amends for
their Sufferance. Their very Army and petty Officers take upon them to
domineer, and play what pranks they list. Among a multitude of their later
Cruelties, Let me tell you one story from Sussex, of a thing done, since all
pretense of Martial-law has ceased, and in a County where they lived gratis,
by a formal process, when most of the Gentlemen of the Shire were present and
interposed. One Mr. Lover, a Yeoman of good fashion, who had formerly served as
their Party, was by a Sentence of a Council of War consisting of one Major
Husbands, one Cornet, and three or four Corporals, at the Marketplace in Lewis
clapped neck and heels together, and used there with that severity, that he
sounded upon the place, and has not to this day recovered his health (though
it were done two months ago.) And this for no cause, but for telling some
Soldiers, when he saw them in his own grounds dipping two lewd women after an
obscene way in a Pond, That he could not envy their Churches such Members; for
they were known to be Whores by all the Country. After complaint of this wrong
made to the House, it was referred to the Officers of the same Regiment to make
enquiry after it, and to punish it; which was done by a Preferment.

Have they not licensed a Villain to wander about the whole Kingdom, who by
Watchings, Fastings, and Tortures, compels poor silly people to confess
themselves Witches, and upon that accusation and proofs as weak, they have lost
their lives? Have they not others to carry away poor Children, who under that
pretense purloine whatever they can lay their hands upon, and send them unto
new Plantations?

Look to their Courts of Justice too, you shall find Westminster Hall, and the
Country too filled with Clamor against them: the poor Client eaten up alive,
crucified with wearisome Attendance; his Purse exhausted by Bribes, his Cause
proceeding, like to Penelope's web, one day forward, and another backward; at
last he has an Order or a Judgment, which signifies nothing, or is the Seal
of his Oppression. And this must be no otherwise, while the Members overawe
the Judges into what Judgment they please; while the Sentence is resolved on
first, and the Cause heard after; they cutting them out such Hallifax-law, to
execute before enquiry. Of Multitudes, let me pick out these three for
Instance, very late and fresh in memory: The Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer
being resolved on against Capt. Burleigh, the Judge was to be chosen. Godbolt
was proposed, but by Master Lisle rejected, with these words, Let Us not have
him; in my Judgment we had best pitch upon Sergeant Wild, he will do the
Business. The Committee of both Houses for Oxford concluded to expel Doctor
Fell from his Deanory of Christ-church, and Vice-chancellourship, before ever
they heard him speak, and assigned his Places to another. But after the Humor
was over, and they conscious to themselves that the Character of Injustice was
very visible upon that Action, the Order was reverst: but within a while after
under the pretense of a formal Process the same thing was done, the same man
established in his room. Judge Jenkins is now condemned to die by an Ordinance,
upon mere hearsay, and before one Witness was examined upon Oath against him,
as far as it can be done by the House of Commons.

The Charge of Ecclesiastical Courts, or concerning Oppression of our Souls.
But they have not done yet. They charge the King with Lording it over their
Souls, no less then their Bodies, leading them captive into Superstition and
Idolatry, triumphing over them by Oaths, ex Officio, Excommunications,
Ceremonies, Articles, new Oaths, Canonical Oaths, etc.

That answered.
To these we answer, 1. That they were done by the Bishops and their Courts;
and why do they baulke the Counselors, the principal Actors hereof, and
blame His Majesty, being for most part but passive, for believing men (who at
least pretended to Sanctity and knowledge) in their own ways and Government?

2. That most of those supposed Crimes and Objections were practiced ever since
the Reformation, and established by the Laws of the Land. Even in Q. Elizabeth's
time you may read, the Oath ex Officio was urged, Ecclesiastical Constitutions
made, Subscription urged, Articles at Visitations given, etc.

3. Those Innovations which were begun, were not so many as were exclaimed on;
and some of them Renovations rather then Innovations; some unjustly censured,
as tending to innocent and due decency in the outward worship of God; proving
offensive not so much for their own sakes, as for the men that used them and
pressed them immoderately, men also otherwise distasted by many; Nor were they
ever practiced but by some particulars, and in some places; nor were they in
Doctrine, or in the substance of Religion, but in the form and Circumstance of
Worship; Besides that all of them have been long since forborne and buried,
therefore maliciously raised up thus again, to throw them in His Majesty's
face.

4. The Power and Jurisdiction of those Courts was extinguished by Act of
Parliament, with His Majesty's consent; though it had been much better for us
to have suffered under them, then under the Remedy.

5. We never had assurance, that the Government intended should not have been
more oppressive and burdensome. Nay, we had great reason to expect, our Whips
should have been turned into Scorpions; and our redress, but as the Proverb
holds forth, Out of the Prying-pan into the Fire. Their Penalties were as high;
the Temper of the Men entrusted with their execution, as keen. Col. Leigh
openly professed at a Committee even against those, that had been Pillars of
their Cause, and Champions for it in the field, It was unfit any of them should
live in the Kingdom. Mr. Edwards in his Gangraena is as tart. Their power of
Excommunication is as large, but allayed indeed with a Liberty of Appeal from
one Court to another, at last of all to the Parliament, which is a Mare
mortuum, that swallows up all Causes, never making a return of any; or at
least a Labyrinth, from whence there is no redemption, but by a Golden thread,
and is Compendium of all grievance.

That Retorted.
But let us grant them their Plea; How much better had it bin for us to have
endured that yoke, and been Lorded over in that manner, then by these men, as
now we are? How many Millions have they brought unto the Brinke of Hell by
their Oaths and Vows? Do not they themselves give us Oaths at their
Committees against our selves, and our dearest friends? Have they not instead
of Superstition in the form of Worship, brought us into a Profanation, if not
an abhorrence of the Worship it self? How many prodigious doctrines, heresies,
blasphemies have they suffered to be broached, abetted, and protected? How many
whole Parishes have they in a manner excommunicated? by taking away Orthodox
Ministers (and such as there was no other exception against, but that they were
of signal piety and learning, and refused to act against their conscience) by
that means not only debarring them from the Sacrament, but all other
ordinances, and exposing them as a prey to Sectaries and Heretics. This Theme
is infinite, if I should enlarge upon it: But because themselves are so short,
I pass it over in the same manner.

A Collection of all their Objections against His Majesty, since the Rupture.
The Objections against His Majesty, since his absence from Parliament, are
reducible to these few heads:

First, Of Commencing war against them, which never King did, but King Charles.

Secondly, Of Refusing Petitions for Peace, and all Overtures, which might tend
to make up the Breach.

The former they labor to confirm:

First, By the Preparations he made beforehand.

Secondly, By the Intelligence they received from abroad; in particular,

1. Raising of Regiments under pretense of the service of Portugal.

2. Ammunition and Guards taken into White Hall, and the Tower.

3. The Lord Digby's appearance at Kingston upon Thames, in a Warlike posture.

4. His Letters to the Queen, advising His Majesty to retire to a Place of
Strength.

5. Cockran's Instructions to deal with the King of Denmark for Forces, which
the King called a Vile Scandal; but yet they were afterward taken in his
Cabinet.

6. Commissions to the Earl of Newcastle, and Col. Leg, to seize on Newcastle
and Hull.

7. Bringing of Ordnance in ballast of Ships.

8. The Queens going to Holland, and by pawning the Crown-Jewels, procuring
Ammunition and Money.

9. Raising Guards, and this, when he protested not to think of War against
his Parliament, getting Subscriptions, Proclaiming them Traitors, setting up
his Standard.

The latter they prove:

1. By his refusing particular Petitions for Peace.

2. His never condescending to any Proposition, they made; though so
reasonable, that they might seem to have resigned up their Judgments, no less
then their Desires, for an Accommodation; and had made seven several
Applications to him, for that purpose; though they never had any Proposal from
him, reasonable for them to accept; which they aggravate in that he would not
hear the Cry of Thousands of Families ruined, which Cruelty it self would pity.

3. By his making advantage of their Treaties; As when he appointed Windsor,
and they were in preparation to a Treaty, he advancing surprised Brainceford;
where his men having committed horrible cruelties, were forced to retire; And
when under color of renewing a Treaty, he sent a Commission to destroy them.

4. That even since He has been in their power, He would not harken to
Propositions sent unto him at Hampton Court, nor sign so much as four Bills,
which were only in order to their Security during a Treaty, since he was in the
Isle of Wight, though those made way to a Personal Treaty upon the rest. To
all which I shall answer.

The General Answer.
That the King did not begin the War, may first be concluded from the
improbability thereof:

1. Themselves assoile the King from that fierceness of disposition and
inclination to war, when they make that Comment upon the Lord Digby's Letter,
who writing to the Queen, among other Passages, has this for one, I have taken
the hardiness to write unto His Majesty, according as his Affairs and
Complexion requires; which they interpret to be a Mildness of Spirit.

2. There was a very vast disproportion between his strength and theirs: for 1.
The Affections of the people, and the wealth of the Kingdom were all at their
devotion; the King being looked on but a-squint (though causlesly) by his
Subjects. 2. The Ammunition and Arms of the Kingdom in their power. 3. The
Navy at their dispose. What King (said our Savior) going to war against
another, sits not down first, and considers whether he be able with his ten
thousand to meet him that comes against him with his twenty thousand? It
could not have stood on this side madness, for our King to harbor such a
Resolution, to meet them, or set on them rather, that had I will not say 20000.
but 200000. against his One.

Secondly, granting their proofs all true, by what Logic does it follow, that
all this was done by the King, with an intention to leavy war against the
Parliament? A Preparation may be for Defense as well as for Assault. We have
not forgotten, that it was one of their own Arguments, whereby they pressed for
putting the Kingdom into a Posture of the Militia under their command, because
they heard of great preparations in Spain, France, Denmark, and God knows
where. At this time they themselves do fortify Newcastle, have farced
thereinto a Garrison of 3000 men, into Tinmouth-Castle 600. etc. But would they
be well pleased with that inference, Therefore they intend to make war against
the Scots? If a Ship at Sea discover a Man-of-War, it is no Defiance to clear
her Guns, open her Port-holes, let down her Wast-cloaths, etc. In Spain, if
one man draw his Sword, all the Company draw theirs also presently, whatsoever
the Occasion be. I have heard of a Gentleman who never sees another take up a
Sword in his hand, to look on, to show, to buy, but straight he draws his own;
and gives this reason, Do I know what the Devil may tempt him to? When His
Majesty perceived such unusual and unseemly Expressions, High and insolent
Demands, No satisfaction he could give accepted, Words uttered in his face,
that he was not worthy to Reign, and those by Apprentices, and by the scum of
the people, The power of the Parliament to Depose Kings, His indeserts for that
high Place, liberally in all Companies made the discourse of their Confidents,
yea of their own Members, The Militia not only demanded, but wrung out of his
hands, His own Ammunition seized on, Towns fortified against him, The Navy
disposed of contrary to his desires, Was it not then high time for him to look
about him, to project his own Safety, to prepare against the Storm thus hanging
over his head? which if he had failed to do, he must have cast himself down at
their feet; and so had he made good what at the beginning of these Troubles
(for want of other Accusation) they spared not to bespatter him withal, That
he was but a degree from an Idiot.

As for the Proofs in particular, they are so frivolous, and yet have had such
frequent effectual Answers in His Majesty's Declarations (which are to be seen
in print, published by Husbands their own Printer, and are so very well known
among us) that I will spare both my self and the Reader the pains to insert
them in this place.

This Charge made good upon themselves.
But to lay the Child at the right fathers door, The truth is, though this
War were the Hand of God upon us all for our Crying sins, and the first Rise of
it were almost as unsearchable as the Head of the Nile, yet are there some
Tracks, that infallibly fasten it upon the Houses. If you will allow the first
defiance to begin the War, it was the Parliaments Remonstrance ( piget
meminisse) sent unto the King at Hampton Court, which some of the wisest
contested against, and among others upon this Ground for one, That it must be
presented upon the point of a sword. If you make it to relate unto the first
Guard, The Parliament raised that, when the King was in Scotland. If to the
first violence, It came from the Tumults at Westminster for justice on the
Earl of Strafford, and for expulsion of the Bishops, acted by the Citizens,
but incited and encouraged by Members of their own House; Besides the
Conducting of the five Members by a just Army to the House by land, and
besieging as well as shooting at White Hall by water. If the first manning of
the Garrisons, it was by the Parliament at Hull; If the first Army, it was
begun by the Parliament under the Earl of Essex, who had an Army of 15000 and
upward, when the King had not one thousand. If the first Blow between them, did
not their Army at Edgehill first give fire to the Cannon? Indeed, we must
acknowledge, the King trod in their steps, sometimes foote-hot, and most an end
wrought by the Pattern, they had cut out for him.

The same thing may further be cleared by the Confidence and Assurance of their
friends, that there could be no war; that it was enough for the Parliament to
raise an Army, the King would never be able to do it, or at least so as to
balance theirs; and then he must lie at their Mercy. Thus ran their discourse
among themselves, this was the Presumption of their Junto then. Nay such
assurance had they hereof, that Mr. Hamden himself (as quick-sighted as the
best behind him) offered to lay an hundred pound to a shilling thereon. Let Mr.
Lilburn speak, if still you are to be convinced, an Agitator at that time, and
one who knew the secrets of their Cabinet, They have engaged the Kingdom in a
bloody War, under pretense of Vindicating the Laws and Liberties of the
Subject, but never intended (God knows) any such thing, but merely by the Blood
and Treasure of the people, to make themselves Lords and Masters over them,
Oppressed man's Oppres. p. 34.

The Kings refusing Petitions for Peace, Answered.
Now to clear His Majesty from the Charge of refusing Petitions for Peace, or
Overtures to that purpose.

1. It can hardly obtain credence with a prudent man, that the King should
turn the deaf ear toward a just Peace, because it was for his own Interest.
Both sides fought upon his score; those that died in the quarrel against him,
were his Subjects. He was the poorer for the very Plunder and destruction, that
fell upon his Enemies. He had three Crowns at stake. His ears and eyes were
continually filled with the desolations of his Country, and the spoil of the
people. In his own Person he was stripped of all the usual Comforts of his
life, and for most part hunted as a Partridge upon the Mountains, and in
continual danger. Whereas our Masters at Westminster continually gained by
that, which other men lost by. How else were it possible, that they and so many
of their servants and Officers should start up into such Estates, from the very
dunghill, or a lost condition? They were at little hazard, some of them being
of an Estate, twice or thrice sold or morgag'd for more then the worth, others
worth nothing. They made sport with the Relations of Burnings and Massacres,
and heard them as some Romance, when themselves sat voting securely at
Westminster, snorting upon their downe-beds, feeding upon the delicacies of the
Kingdom, dividing the spoils of it among themselves, even at least 300000. l.
professedly, (to say nothing now of Clandestine ways, cleanly Cheates,
Offices, etc.) Besides, they were well acquainted with that Maxim of Alexander
of Parma, That when Subjects draw their swords against their Prince, they must
fling away the scabbard.

2. If you revise the pretended Petitions, you will find they were (for the
most part) as great Reproaches, as ever otherwise were cast upon the King, such
as must needs beget a Prejudice, and carry their Answer in their very
Foreheads.

3. They were not Petitions for Peace, but rather Admonitions to the King to
submit, to divest himself of his strength and power to protect his people, for
to sacrifice his friends, to cast himself upon their Mercy. Who could blame
either them for making such Petitions, or the King for denying them?

4. If you know the Ends and Designs they drove therein, so well as we who
sat near the Chair, and sometimes conversed with the Council, you would
rest fully satisfied, that they were rather to get wind of the King, to appease
the people, and win their Affections by a seeming dissembled Affection and
pursuit of what they so much gasped after; when God knows, they never
harbored the least expectation or desire of Condescension from the King; and
that they made no bones to confess among their Confidents.

5. It is false and impudent averment, to pretend that any Petitions (though of
this nature) upon such grounds, were rejected by the King; or indeed had not a
fair answer given, and such a one as in our judgment might have satisfied
reasonable men.

His Majesty's not admitting Propositions Answered, and retorted.
Now to clear His Majesty from that Aspersion of not admitting Propositions, or
making any fit for them to receive. 1. We desire the Reader to take notice of
the several offers the King has made. 1. Before the War was thoroughly
kindled. Jan. 23. 1641. Book of Declarations, wherein he did upon the matter
send them a Blanke. 2. Before much blood was drawn, His Messages from
Nottingham which you may see in the same Book. 3. His Propositions at several
Treaties, at Colebroke, Oxford, Vxbridge, (which last was ingenuously and
without a false Gloss exposed to the world, yet never to this day had any
answer) In most of which never King made appearance of more gracious
Condescension to a disadvantagious Composure, had it been possible. Whereas
they never yet made any, but such as expected from him, 1. To sacrifice his
Honor. 2. To violate his Conscience. 3. To give his fastest friends for a
victime unto the fury of their Enemies.

2. It is too evident a truth, that whatsoever they pretended of an Inclination
to a Composure or making up the Breach, it was but to baffle and gull the
people. Ad populum phaleras. They were resolved to hold the sword naked, and to
throw away the scabbard. How otherwise could they have proved such deaf Adders
to the many gracious Messages from His Majesty (besides the Propositions
mentioned before?) How could they cast behind their backs so many sweet
courting Letters, dispatched one upon another? What Color can they pretend,
for their waving of the French, and Hollanders interposure, when they made
friendly offers of Mediation? Nations, the one to whom formerly the King of
this Land with his disobedient Barons, made reference of their differences: the
other, of our own Profession, maintaining that Discipline of the Church, which
these men dote upon, as their great Diana, and having lately screwed themselves
into the Independency of a Free state; both of them indifferent to our
quarrel; and if any Biasse hung upon the latter, it must be toward the
Parliaments party.

3. Besides it is not quite out of our Memory in this City, That when the
generality of the better and wiser Citizens were assembled at Guild Hall in a
peaceable way to draw up a Petition for Peace, there were twenty or thirty men
with drawn swords (of which Mainwayring's son was one) sent in amongst them to
assault and provoke them to a defense of themselves, and to reciprocal
violence, so that they might have some pretense to charge them with Mutiny and
Riot (as was done by a scandalous and lying paper, afterward put forth by their
Authority;) and that by killing some (as one was served by Harvies own hand)
and imprisoning others, all such hopes or least Motions that way might be
extinguished. Nor have we forgotten, how diverse Buckingham-shire people, being
assembled to like purpose, about the time of Vxbridge Treaty, were dispersed by
their Horse, and some made Prisoners. We pass by many, but these are enough to
demonstrate, who were the most resolved against any peaceable Conclusion.

4. The Circumstances of their Propositions clearly prove, that they were in a
great fear lest the King should condescend (though they were never so
unreasonable) What else should be the meaning of their limiting His Majesty to
six, to ten, to twenty days, but for fear lest any further time and
consideration should make him grant them? And what, of their requiring certain
numbers to be left to their mercy without any name, but by that means to amuse
His Majesty and keep him in suspense, which of his friends should be marked out
for slaughter? And since the Armies march through London, What of their leaving
all such out of their Votes for Indemnity, as had any hand in that Message of
the King of May 12. last, wherein he offered all that possibly could be
offered, or in approbation of it? Observe, how they confess (in their last
Declaration for no more Addresses to the King) that their Propositions sent to
Newcastle were the same in effect with those at Vxbridge, and those at
Hampton Court with those at Newcastle; And yet how much time was spent between
their sending of them?

Brainceford business Answered, and retorted.
Now whereas it is pretended, the King took advantage to assault their Quarters
at Brainceford, while they were in Treaty, our Answer is,

1. That there was no provision made for the suspension of all Hostility,
during that space.

2. That Propositions were but pretended to be framing (which have often taken
up many months in Parliament) not sent unto the King.

3. That they did not accept of the Kings motion, to allow him his own House at
Windsor for his use.

4. That even the day before, there were diverse men drawn out of London into
Kingston, with Ordnance and Ammunition sent toward the Kings quarters; the
Earl of Essex, and Waller, and the Earl of Warwick, were in earnest
preparation to advance; the Countries round about were summoned, and in
preparation to march. Upon which let any reasonable man judge, whether it were
fit, the King should be merely passive and permit them either to surround and
shut him in, or to creep into such Advantages over him, that if he had
over-slipt but that nick of time, he could not have redeemed himself and his
Forces out of their hands.

And since that impertinent passage is foisted into their Declaration, that he
was forced to retire with shame and loss after so much Cruelty committed in
Brainceford, (agreeable to a false relation published at that time by their
Command;) Let all the world know, diverse of this City being witnesses of it the
very next day after, That there was left in that Town, after the Royal Armies
retreat, both abundance of Bread, Drink, and Wine, and also Provinder for
Horse; nor was there any, but here and there a disaffected person, sustained
any considerable loss, which thing bordered upon a Miracle, being very rarely
practiced by any Army especially so ill paid, To lie there 15000 of them
together for a whole day and night, in an Enemies Country, a Town which was
defended against them and taken by assault, and follwed in the rear by a
potent Army, yet to commit no more outrage. I am sure, These men can produce no
such instance on their own side. Now the Parliaments party, when they
afterward came into the Town (I know the men, that saw these things) killed
diverse of the Kings Soldiers, who were left drunk in the streets, and taking
that honest Italian revenge, to send their drunken souls to the Devil (as much
as in them lay) together with their Bodies to the Grave. Also their Soldiers
pulled down diverse houses to the ground, under pretense that their Owners were
of the Conspiracy to bring the Kings Army to the Town; plundered the houses
and shops of others, nay of one who was in service in their own Army, dragged
poor wounded men by cords tied about their necks, pricking them behind with
pikes and swords, twitching some up at a Carts-taile by Roaps about their
necks, then letting them down again, under pretense that they were Irish, and
to make them confess, whereas they were poor Welsh, and could not speak our
language. Moreover they forced Women into the Thames, there pricking them with
their Pikes, and striking them under water, to put them to many deaths at once,
under the notion of Irish women; and all this Inhumanity without any check from
their Commanders.

The Commission under pretense of a Treaty, Answered.
For the Commission to murder them under pretense of a renewing the Treaty (as
they are pleased to style the Commission of Array.)

1. It was only to Arm some of the well-affected loyal Citizens, that they
might vindicate their Liberty.

2. There was small probability, that much Blood (if any at all) should have
been spilt, had the design taken place.

3. It was no more then themselves have done, and sped better in, as at
Shrewsbury, Hereford, Eccleshal Castle, etc. Prosperum and faelix scelus --
Virtus vocatur.

4. Stratagems were never less lawful then open force, against an Enemy.

The Propositions at Hampton Court, Answered.
As for the Propositions they sent unto the King at Hampton Court:

1. They were the same as formerly; and though here and there a word was
mollified, yet in substance they were more unreasonably rigid then the former.

2. They were huddl'd up here, the Scots being not warned of them, but the very
night before, yet appointed to be present at the delivery.

3. They were never intended by themselves for the Kings condescension, only
sent in a formality, and out of a mere purpose to increase the number of their
Addresses. Which was the more apparent, in regard Master Peter's with diverse of
the Army came to quicken the Parliament, by this false asseveration, that they
were very sure, the King would grant them, whatsoever they were. The Solicitor
pressed in the House of Commons for a Compliance in one Proposal, giving this
for a reason, That they might gain the greater Advantage upon the Kings
refusal, as he was assured that he would refuse; but in case the King should
yield, he had a way to frustrate the Advantage, which the Malignants might
expect.

4. That the King might be encouraged to wave them, The Army had presented him
with Proposals, which were much lower, and might better be digested by him;
some say (and those of their own House too) on purpose to indispose him toward
the Parliaments Propositions, and so render him the more obnoxious, to what
they projected against him.

The 4 Bills presented at the Isle of Wight, Answered.
As to the 4 Bills sent to the Isle of Wight. 1. They were protested against by
the Commissioners of Scotland: and who would not look upon it as a strong
dilemma, either to dis-oblige and irritate that Nation with the Presbyterian
current here by his Assent, or the Army's Faction and Independents by his
Assent? who would not judge it better to take in the Interest of both Parties,
and so cut off the danger of further embroyling the Kingdom, which His Majesty
most wisely and Christianly for the prevention of further Bloodshed, offered.

2. Those 4 Bills were Voted by many against their Conscience, who did
ingenuously profess as much, and that they wished, they might not be yielded
to; giving this reason, why they had so passed them, contrary to their Minds,
If they should have given their Vote against them, they must incur the
Imputation of being Enemies to Peace; If for them, a Tyranny would be
established in the Army and Independent Party over the Kingdom.

3. The matter of them was utterly to enslave us all, and put us under the
Arbitrary power of a Faction for ever: for by them a Power should have been
granted the Parliament (which I pray, what is it now in effect, but the Army,
and that Faction?) of Pressing any men without limitation, and of raising what
Sums they pleased, from whom they pleased, toward the Charge, and also of
disposing this strength, according to their will.

4. The King had not only destroyed the Liberty and Property of all his
Subjects hereby, but put Himself also under a Power to compel him not only to
grant the rest of their Propositions in a Personal Treaty, but what else
soever their boundless ambition might have tempted them to demand, without any
provision for His own Honor, or His own and his peoples safety. For every
man can tell himself this plain truth, That who so wears the Sword by right
Investiture, needs no other Law or Logic, and (as the Wiseman answered
Craesus) He that brings the better Steel, will quickly be Master of the Gold
and Silver.

5. The Treaty was not promised to be Personal, but by Commissioners, and that
at the Isle of Wight; who should have been coopt up within such Rules and
Instructions, that they should not dare transgress in a word or tittle,
without recourse to their Masters at Westminster: and His Majesty treated
withal as in a Prison, which must have invalidated the Conclusions between
them, and given his Posterity an advantage which the King himself was not
willing to, that he might establish the peace of the Kingdom upon the surer
Basis and foundation.

6. The Persons, most likely to have been designed for this Employment, were
engaged perhaps to represent the worst sense of the Transactions, to make it
their chief work to incense the Parliament, and to infuse into them a new
Quarrel against the King; as those did, who (being to account for the Passages
at the delivery of the Propositions at Hampton Court, the King having
importuned them to intercede for a Personal Treaty, and in his earnestness
letting fall this Expression, If I may obtain that with my Parliament, all the
Devils in Hell shall not hinder a good Agreement) did thus mis-report his words,
If I cannot obtain a Personal Treaty with my Parliament, all the Devils in
Hell shall not defeat me of my Resolutions. I forbear to tell, how the Passages
were clipped, and the worst part only related in the House of Commons, by the
major part of those, to whom that charge was given from the Isle of Wight.

The Charge in reference to the Scots.
Their Charge against the King in reference to the Scots, is the first of those
that relate to foraine Estates, and this is it:

1. That there was a new book of Common Prayer and Canons imposed on them.

2. An Army was raised to force them to receive these Innovations.

3. The Articles of Pacification were broken, and burnt by the hand of the
Hangman.

4. A new War was leavied, etc.

The Answer to that.
Our Answer is, 1. This was ever before the Impeachment of Strafford and
Canterbury, and others; esteemed the Action of Evil Counselors about His
Majesty.

2. If it were a crime, those men have expiated it by their death, it being a
great part of that burden that sunk them even to the Block.

3. The Scots themselves are satisfied; and why we in England should be so
officious, as to take up their Quarrel, when they sit down themselves, I know
not.

4. These Passages are buried by an Act of Oblivion; which although these men
break thus for their own ends, we shall better observe. And though the King
might be acquitted from what they tax him with herein, yet we had rather suffer
those sparks to die of themselves, then kindle the flame anew, or blow abroad
the ashes.

The Charge concerning Ireland.
In their Charge concerning Ireland, we find they are Industrious, omitting
nothing that can be imagined, whereby to fasten on His Majesty an Allowance at
least, if not a positive command of the Rebellion there: and because they set
so much of their Rest upon that, you shall have most of it, and in their own
words:

It is well known, 1. what Letters the King sent into Ireland, by the Lord
Dillon, immediately before the Rebellion.

2. Where the Great Seal of Scotland was, and in whose hands, when that
Commission was sealed at Edinburgh to the Irish Rebels, who dispersed Copies
thereof with Letters and Proclamations; And we have a Copy thereof, attested by
Oath, with Depositions of those who have seen it under the Seal.

3. Which was promised (by the confession of some of the chiefest of the
Rebels) to the Irish Committee at London, being most part Papists, (which was
thought a good Omen) and since most active Rebels.

4. Upon whose private mediation the King gave away more then 5 Counties,
saying, he expected, they should recompense him.

This answered.
To wipe off this Calumny, 1. It is clear by their own Testimonies, and by the
confession of diverse among the Rebels, That this Rebellion has been upon the
Anvill these many years; some of their Priests acknowledging, themselves had
travailed therein above seven years; others six, etc. which you may learn from
Sir Jo. Temple, in his discourse of the Irish Rebellion, p. 67. (which Book I
shall often and the more cheerfully urge, because he was a Privy-Counsellour in
Ireland, present there at the time of the Insurrection, and long after; a
person dis-obliged by the King, a Parliament Man here, and one that has given
up his name to their Faction, that run most at random.) Now how can this be
admitted by any prudent man, that the King should be so infatuated, as to
conjure up such Devils to disturb his Kingdom, when it was in peace; to
destroy his Subjects, who had no thought of Dis-loyalty toward him (of whom
those that are yet left, for the greatest part, continue firm still) to ruinate
the wealth of that people, which afforded him a considerable Revenue, which
also was to be improved.

2. The same Author is confident, that though their Intentions in Ireland might
be to set up the Popish Government, yet their prime Aim in this Rebellion was
to shake off the English yoke, to settle the power wholly in the hands of the
Natives; the other they made use of, only to draw in poor ignorant people to
sacrifice their lives for them, p. 83. and 66. And he gives one reason for
their Encouragement hereunto, That the Scots had by their Arms and wise
management, drawn His Majesty to condescend unto their entire satisfaction,
both in Discipline of the Church, and the Liberties of the Kingdom. And these
things are attested on Oath by diverse; As in the Examination of one Cook, who
deposed, that Tirlogh Brady should say, All the Irish were risen against the
King and the Counsel, That the Irish would within a fortnight have a King of
their own, the Examination of Alice Tibbs, p. 50. The same deposed by Avis
Bradshaw; that they had a new King by R. Bartar. p. 51. Of the like nature were
many other Examinations taken, That they had the Scots for a president, They
would have the Kingdom in their own hands, Laws of their own, Deputy of their
own, without molestation from another Nation; this was sworn by J. Bigar, that
he heard one Eustace a Commander profess, p. 19. with many other of like
importment, in a Book called a Remonstrance of Passages in Ireland, presented
to the Commons of England, and recommended by the Justices and Council of that
Kingdom. Now they that can think, the King should concur in a design to divest
himself of one of his own Crowns, do certainly under the same thought suppose
him void of Common Reason, without the use of his right Wits.

3. There was never any Officer or man of quality, not the Lord Mac-guire
himself, who was in the contrivement of the Rebellion, that did ever in good
earnest, when he was in the power of the English, and under sentence of
Condemnation, nay at the point of death (which is no time to dissemble) that
ever did affirm the King any way privy thereunto. Though Mac-guire was much
importuned, fairly promised, threatened, nay turned off the Cart, and recovered
again (a fact too barbarous toward a very Rebel) did acquit the King upon his
death (to use his own words) and any other man in England, except one, and he
but a private Gentleman (who came by chance, as he said, to the knowledge
thereof) from being guilty so much as of knowing it.

4. In all His Majesty's Declarations, Messages, Letters, Speeches to the
Parliament, he does not only speak with much abhorrence and detestation of
them, but conjure and excite the Parliament, to relieve his Protestant Subjects
there, and to revenge the Blood that was shed, offering his own Person, and all
other Concurrences therein.

5. It may be added, that most of the Soldiery, employed in that Action, most
of the Ministry, expulsed by the Natives, most of the English Gentry who had
their abode in that place (even Sir Hardres Waller was so, before he came over;
and that so high, that he told the Lord of Ormond, though Sir W. Waller were
his Kinsman, he had learnt to spew such out, as forgot their Allegiance to His
Majesty; and since that, until he saw this Side thrive best, and last of all
the Independents, to whom for their success sake he has glew'd himself) are
but cold friends of the Parliaments, and adhered to the King, at least in their
Opinions; which they could not possibly have done, if they had ground to
suspect, their Miseries to have been derived from him; especially considering
their Necessities, and the hopes they might have from the Parliament of
Subsistence, if not of Preferment also.

Particular Answers to the particular Proofs.
Although by what has been spoken, His Majesty's Innocence be as clear as the
noonday, yet we will be at the pains to follow these men through every step of
their Track.

1. Of the Seal of Scotland to the Rebels Commissioners.
1. It was a wonder, the Scots could be ignorant of it, by whom the King was
sufficiently watched; and only we English at the distance of 300 miles, and
nothing interested therein, should have such Intelligence.

2. It is easily averred; but until we meet with better proof then their bare
word, we have but a poor deal of reason to believe them.

3. Mac-guire upon his Death professed he never saw any, who had as much reason
to see it as any man, having been a prime Agent in the very contrivement of
that Rebellion.

4. If a Commission under the Seal was showed and boasted of, it might easily
be done. What Difficulty was there for them to make one, and afterward set it
to what they pleased? (we know, who did as much, and issued out Commissions
against the King in his Name) What great labor was it to fasten an old labell
to a new Parchment; fair enough to deceive those, who were willing to be
deceived? Nay, how weak had they been, if they had not done so, and done what
else was possible to ensure their own side, to amaze the English, and cast
Bones between us?

5. It is of no more truth, because affirmed by Sir Philem Oneale, or by others
of the Rebels. The same Persons did withal (if these Declarers had been
pleased to quote the whole evidence) affirm, That they were sure of the Scots
to be of their side. Remonst. p. 37. That they had the E. of Argyle's hand and
most of the Nobility of Scotland, ibid. That the King himself was in person
among them. These, and many other of the same bran, Sir J. Temple tells us
ingenuously, were the devices to delude others and to distract us. The Copy of
it and the Oaths may be called in question, when there are no Particulars
named; but if true, they may be suborned on purpose, or be of that false
Commission, which was given them by their own King Tyrone, for so some of the
Examinations do testify, They cared not for King Charles, and had a King of
their own, p. 54. of the Remonstrance.

2. His giving 5 Counties, and other Acts of Grace, Answered.
For those Acts of Grace, implied in the Letter by the L. Dillon, and giving up
5 Counties upon the private mediation of the Commissioners:

1. It argues their ingratitude, not the Kings concurrence; in that they would,
after so much favor, so far dishonor him, and seek his mischief.

2. They were granted at such a Conjuncture of time, that the King had been
taught more lessons then one, against irritating of a Kingdom, or exasperating
of Waspes; and was concerned to give them satisfaction, rather then let them
carve for themselves, according to the Examples they had before their Eyes.

3. These were granted by him, not by private mediation of the Commissioners,
but by the Importunity of both Houses of Parliament, (see Sir Jo. Temple, p.
13.) by whom they were sent, and under the notion of Redress of Grievances; in
which it is worth your notice, (what our Author testifies) That many of the
Protestants in Parliament were made isntrumental to them, under pretense of
Ease and Redress of Grievances.

4. Those Acts were thought necessary by the Lords of the Counsel; and further
Grace, and it is called by our Author, An unbending themselves into a happy and
just compliance with the seasonable desires of the people, and mollifying the
sharp Humors, raised by the rigid Passages of former times.

3. His not Disbanding the Irish Army, Answered.
That the Irish Army was no sooner Disbanded, was 1. upon point of Honor and
Safety to this Kingdom, whilst the Scots kept theirs on foot, it was for
neither to disband, 2. for that Kingdom. Had these men been sent into Spain
(as was intended by the King, and in good earnest solicited by that
Ambassador, but opposed by the Parliament) that place had been disburdened of
so many Pests. How does it reflect upon the King, if the Natives had another
design besides his? I am sure the same Author confessed, that the Natives were
very unwilling that they should be sent into Spain, as much as the Parliament
here.

4. Their Pretenses for the King, Oaths, etc. Answered.
That they pretended to vindicate the King, took an Oath of Allegiance to the
King, styled themselves the Queens Army, or in their Letters of Mart gave in
charge to spare the Kings Ships,

1. It is of no moment, but to show their cunning and care to maintain
divisions among us under that Color. It is not long, since we had such
Protestations taken and enforced; Our Armies at the beginning pretended to
fight for King and Parliament, etc. And we have read of an old Stratagem of
Hannibal, to plunder and ravage all other men's Lands and Estates, except those
of Fabius, whom he most hated, that he might by that means nurse up a
Jealousy in the people against him.

5. The suspense of the Proclamations, Answered.
That it was long ere the Proclamations were issued, and but 40 neither against
them:

1. 'Twas the advice of His Council there, who knew the state of that
Kingdom, better then our Parliament; and who hoped (as Sir Jo. Temple
intimates) that they might have been reclaimed by gentle means, whilst rough
and hard usage might have made them desperately persist in, and grow to a
greater head of violence.

2. Besides that, They thought it wisdom to do more themselves, by giving
Arms even to the Papists of the pale, by dissembling their knowledge that they
had been of the Conspiracy from the beginning, by forbearing Acts of Hostility,
even against professed Rebels in their Country, by kind Invitations of them,
when they had actually imbrued their hands in the Massacre.

6. The Earl of Leicester's Delay, Answered.
1. The Delay of the E. of Leicester was not His Majesty's fault, but the
Parliaments, for when His Majesty had given him Commission and Instructions,
which the Houses called for, examined, and could not quarrel at, yet was his
Lordship kept here six weeks after, without any dispatch or supply answerable
to that employment. Afterward, going from hence to Chester, upon promise that
necessary supply should be speeded after him, he staid there five or six weeks
without any. In which time this unhappy war brake out, and occasioned the King
to send for him for some time.

2. It would have been disadvantagious to the Conquest, while his single Person
not attended with a power answerable would have rendered the Condition of this
Kingdom despicable, and have encouraged the Rebels to more impetuous
Resistance; whereas being in suspense and expectation of a greater supply
against them, then he could have brought, they went on with more Caution, and a
slower pace.

3. At least it could be no more damage to the service, then it was to
supersede his son the Lord Lisle, from execution of his Commission and voyage
thither, until the time of it was near expired, as themselves did.

7. Diverse officers going over by the Kings Pass, Answered.
That diverse Officers and Papists of quality went over into Ireland, by help of
the Kings own handwriting, who there proved active Rebels. 1. Has been often
answered by the King. 2. Might be done to a good purpose, many of them being
public Persons, and making great protestations of Loyalty, might have done
good service in moderating the rest. The Lords of the Council gave to Papists
not only Commissions, but Arms (as you may read in Sir John Temple) that so
they might engage them. 3. Might be done by misprision, or be counterfeited. I
have been credibly informed, that more then 40 Priests and desperate Rebels
went over in one Regiment of their own sending from Chester, and I am deceived,
if some Book printed by License from themselves do not declare as much. Nay
we know at this very present, that Colonel J. Barry (besides others) a notable
Adjutant and Papist is lately allowed by a Pass from their General to go
over into Ireland. These times have taught us, that any Hand or Pass may be so
handsomely dissembled, that it will prove a hard task to discover the Cheat.

8. The Kings refusing to give Commissions to the Lorn Wharton and Brooks,
Answered.
That the King refused to give Commissions to the Lord Wharton and Brooks, as
also that he intercepted Clothes and Ammunition sent thitherward, may have
good satisfaction.

As 1. The War was on foot here, Those two Lords were his avowed Enemies, and
of the Junto against him. There were diverse Regiments raised under that
pretense, which were intended and employed against him. He had been really as
weak, as once they would have made us believe he was, if he had cut his own
throat with his own hands, enabled his Enemies to ruin him, under what
pretense soever.

2. It was neatly contrived to assign Clothes and Ammunition for Ireland, if
they were surpised; but to employ them against him, if they could arive in
safety to their strengths.

Lastly, there was order given to release them by His Majesty.

9. Letters to Muskery, Answered.
1. The Letters from Court to Muskery were from Taaff, and they might be
without Commission.

2. If they were allowed, was it not good Policy to court them into divisions,
or rather back again into their Duties? The Earl of Ormond (a thing
notoriously known) by that means blew Coals between the Rebels, when they
had encircled and distressed Dublin; wherein he prevailed more by putting on
the Fox's skin, then he could have done by that of the Lion, and preserved the
English interest in all that Province, which of necessity must otherwise have
been lost.

10. The Withdrawing of the Ships, Answered.
The King did indeed withdraw some Ships from those Coasts; but 1. It was for
his own necessary defense against them, when they had seized upon the rest of
his Navy. 2. The Posts assigned to the Ships, were not so obnoxious for
importation from Spain and other foreign places. 3. It was not so great an
advantage to the Rebels, as their withdrawing, contrary to Articles, the Ships
appointed to prevent the landing of Irish in Scotland, which they make a shift
to answer their Brethren. 4. Besides we see they can receive Ammunition, and
other supplies even now too.

11. The Commission to Glamorgan, Answered.
The greatest Objction of a Commission to the Earl of Glamorgan and Antrim to
raise Armies for the service of the King. To which we Answer.

1. That it is not well cleared, the King did give any such Commission.

2. That if he did, it was but the employing of his own Subjects in his
service, to which they were obliged by their Allegiance, and he was bound by
the very law of Nature to make use of.

3. It was upon a desperate pinch that he was put unto by the two Houses. Men
will catch at the very Nails of a Planke to save themselves from being
ingulph'd in the Waves; hold even by Thorns to keep above water. He were a
weak man sure, that would make conscience of quenching a great fire in his
Roof, by the hands of Thieves or Murderers.

4. We have often heard, and many too of these great Accusers profess as much,
that they would cast themselves upon any Nation (I have heard, Colonel Morley
and others should say, upon the Turk) rather then let the King subdue them;
And yet their Case was different.

The whole Charge retorted.
Let Us now see, whether all this may not be retorted upon the House of Commons,
and their Confidents. Whosoever will seriously consider, 1. The quarrel which
the Irish made, namely their Liberty and Religion, and Redress of Grievances,
the very same which our Parliament pretended, 2. The Time when, when the Scots
were hardly settled upon their lees again, and the Parliament of England high
flowne already, and advanced in their Contestation, 3. Their Preparatives to
Rebellion, by invading new Privileges, as to determine in Cases Capital and
Criminal, Charging of Public Officers, banding against Greivances, etc. and an
Itch also to have procured a longer (if not a Perpetual) Parliament, if
Possible (which is evident in Sir John Temples relation) under the Authority
whereof it is probable they designed to act afterward, rather then of a
Supreme Council, which was done here, even to the joint prosecution of some
particular Officers, as the Earl of Strafford, etc. 4. Their Proceedings first
to sequester and seize the Goods of those, whom they declared Enemies to the
State. 5. The persons on whom they wreak'd their Malice most, Clergymen and
Officers of State. 6. The Copy they writ by, or at least pretended to write by,
namely, the Scots. 7. The backwardness of our Parliament to send any relief
thither, which was evidenced by their disputes and Punctilio's with the King,
and indeed their denials to assist, without his perfect resignation of himself
to them, seizing money to the sum of 100000. l. to their own use (though
indeed they have paid it since, out of the Kingdoms purse, upon the Clamor of
the people, and notice given of it by the King) employing such forces as were
raised under that notion here in England against His Majesty, Particularly the
Regiment of Colonel Bamfield, of Chidley, and others, suspending the Journey
of the Earl of Leicester first, then of the Lord Lisle thither, a man of their
own Election, until his Commission was almost expired, Pretending to send
over succors since, but letting them lie upon the Countries, until they
become intolerable, and then disbanding them as super-numeraries, The Miseries
they expose their own Army there to (of which they were soundly told by
Captain Cope lately, who charged them in the very House with the death of
Thousands, with the Ruin of more, and with streams of Blood, which cried for
vengeance against them in that place.) To all which if you add, 8. The fierce
prosecution of Strafford, whose continuance in that place, and strict
discipline would have prevented that Insurrection, or crushed it in the shell.
9. Their withstanding the sending of that Army out of the Kingdom which had
discharged it of so many instruments of rebellion. 10. The Profession of diverse
of their Confidents, especially in the Army, That they cannot fight against the
Irish with a good Conscience, That their quarrel is but to enjoy their Religion
and Liberty, And 11. a speech which was uttered before this Rupture, by a true
friend of theirs at Manidowne in Hamp-shire, when the Scots first came into
England, What if this Kingdom should rise for their Property and Liberty, and
Ireland take that Advantage, what will he be King of then? a shrewd speech,
though I believe the man had no foresight of this Combustion, with many other
Circumstances. One would verily believe, the Bustles in England and the
Rebellion in Ireland were like Castor and Pollux, ovo prognatus eodem, hatched
by a Common Council of Parliament and Irish, and that they were mutually
engaged to promote each others Interest. But we must be ingenuous, and allow
them better measure, then any they have yet allowed unto their Sovereign. All
we aim at, is but to open to the world, that there may be full as much, or
rather a great deal more charged on themselves, as to that Business, then
upon His Majesty.

The Charge of Rochel.
We are now in sight of the shore, and shall conclude with the business of
Rochel, which Town (they say) they can fully show, was betrayed by the King,
and so was there a fatal Blow given to the Protestant Cause in France; They
tell us, how he lent diverse of the Navy and Merchants ships to the King of
France, to be employed against those, whom he was engaged to assist; And when
some Commanders disputed his Commands, he gave order to Sir John Penington to
put them into the service of that King, or else to sink them.

That Answered.
1. Herein they impose a blind belief upon us, we have little reason to take
their bare word, (as we hinted before) whose Interest is to deceive us, and who
have done it so often. We never yet could discover in them any such Tenderness,
either in blasting the Kings Honor, or in covering their own shame, as to
conceal any thing, which was to their own Advantage, or his disgrace.

2. How could his Maj. betray those whom he had never taken into Protection, as
at that time he had not done by them, Are they themselves treacherous too, or
have they betrayed the Hollanders, against whom they sent diverse of the Kings
Soldiers taken at Naseby to be employed in the Spanish service?

3. Though it be acknowledged, that there were ships lent unto the King of
France, yet it was not to that purpose, to employ them against the Protestants;
and the King of England was a stranger to the design of the King of France
therein. Q. Elizabeth, when that very Town of Rochel was beseiged by the King
of France, and some of his Subjects with the Duke of Montgomery had releived
it, disclaimed the Act, called them who did it Pirates, professed she would not
protect nor afford them any supply. Camb. Eliz.

4. King James in his life time had in effect promised assistance unto the
French King against any of his Subjects, whatsoever were their Religion or
their pretense.

5. The same thing was done by the States of Holland at the same time, who lent
unto the King of France twenty sail of ships (whereas ours were but seven)
under the Command of Hauthain their Admiral, who did in the same manner demur
at the Employment, (being charmed by some pitiful Letters from Rochel) until
the Rochellers treacherously and unawares surprised and burnt his Vice Admiral;
which roused him up in good earnest, and made him not only set upon, but
wholly discomfit them, by the help of our and other ships. Now it is very
improbable, the Hollanders would have conspired against the Cause of Religion,
and their own Church Discipline, which the French held forth, if there had not
been some other just cause of that War.

6. We might very well be tender in undertaking the Protection of those
Protestants; for it is not quite forgotten, how Queen Elizabeth sent over a
considerable Army to their Assistance, and that upon Articles between them,
which Army of hers was set upon and beseiged by those very men, whom they were
come to defend, and expuls'd out of that Kingdom, and out of New Haven by the
help of the Protestants (who by means of their succors had gotten the better
Composition with their own King) as you may read in Mr. Cambden and others.
Anno 1563.

7. The King did what was possible toward their releife, when he had the
advantage of Hostility against the King of France (which he could not otherwise
have done with any Color either of Justice or Policy) by sending an Army to
the Isle of Ree, by sending two several Fleets to their relief. If all
succeeded not, that ought not to be laid in his dish. For the Means only are
in man's power, God keeping events and Successes in his own. The Horse is
prepared against the day of Battle; but safety is from the Lord. It is very
certain, he did his utmost endeavor; I know those who will testify he gave
the most earnest Injunction possible for their Relief, though it should prove
to the endangering of his whole Fleet. And it is observable, The grudge hereof
has not yet been forgotten by the Crown of France, which in a slye Revenge
has probably helped to raise this Devil of Intestine War in our Nation, and
denied all considerable Supplies to the King of England, in these days of his
distress; yea, though a Daughter of the Crown and her numerous Issue be
involved in the same Calamity.

8. But to give you the best last, The truth and Ground of the whole Business
will be made very clear, and beyond all scruple by this following Narrative,
which I have delivered from honest and understanding Statesmen.

The Palatinate being wrested from the Palsgrave, The Protestants in Germany
almost ruinated, Our King unable at that time by his own strength to relieve
them, there was a League proposed and agitated between the Crowns of France,
England, Denmark, the States of Holland and Venice, against the House of
Austria; and this in good measure was brought toward perfection, especially by
the managery of the Duke of Buckingham. The wise Cardinal of France, making
advantage of those Traverses, and taking Time by the fore-top, deals with the
Duke for supply of these abovementioned Ships. The Duke being Admiral, and
presuming high upon his Masters allowance, commands the Ld. Conway, then
Secretary of State, to write to Penington his Vice Admiral to put the Ships
under the French service, and Seals this Letter with the Signet. But Penington
refusing to do it upon such Authority, the Duke himself as Admiral seconds the
first Letter with his Command: which being likewise disputed, a Letter was sent
with the Kings Name subscribed, and signed with the Privysignet, yet without
His Majesty's knowledge (which was no difficulty, considering the Signet is
usually kept by the Secretary, and that many Blanks are usually and must of
necessity be left in trust with great Officers, especially so great, as the
Duke then was) Nay, I have been informed, that the King, being at Woodstock,
when the News hereof was first imparted to him, and that by Sir John Penington
himself, was in a great rage at it, and not without some difficulty reconciled
unto the Duke about it.

Is it now a rational and just Inference to lay the Miscarriage of Rochel upon
His Majesty's score? Have they so much Compassion toward Strangers, and so
little Justice toward their own rightful Sovereign? Are they so deeply affected
with the wounds given to the Protestant Religion through the sides of Rochel?
Would God they themselves did not stab it ten times more desperately by these
their un-Protestant, un-Christian, unparalleled Proceedings, to the dishonor
of God, the Grief and Anguish of every good Soul, the Joy and unspeakable
Advantage of our common Adversary of Rome.

Hoc Ithacus velit, and magno lucrentur Atridae.

The Settlement which they intend, and the Conclusion.
ANd thus have we examined the truth of their Declaration against His Majesty;
before we conclude, It will be worth while to examine a little the truth of
what they declare for Themselves; We shall use our utmost endeavor to settle
the present Government, as it may stand with the Peace and Happiness of the
Kingdom. I ask, How can they settle the Peace of the Kingdom without a King?
If their Horns should prove as long, as themselves are cursed, and God permit
them to fill up the measure of their Iniquities, by the accession of the Murder
of this King, which we do even tremble to mention, yet have some reason to
believe they do design, One of their Members having professed as much, and
offered himself a Felton for that fact, yet never so much as questioned; And
one Hall, being a Suitor for the Command of a Ship in their Navy, unto their
Committee of Admiralty, was accused for having said, The Parliament were
foolish, that they had not hired somebody to kill the King whilst he was in the
hands of the Scots: It was thereupon replied by Sir A. Haslerigg, Have you no
more against him? let him go to choose, We must have such men as will be
faithful against him; and since that, they gave him the Command of a very good
Ship. Allow (I say they should be able to compass this, How will they trust
the Children of a Father, in whose blood they have imbrued their hands? And how
will they be able to alienate the Crown from that Royal Line? which so many
Millions of this Nation, and the best for Estate, the ablest for Judgment, will
sacrifice their dearest Blood for, being obliged thereunto by many both Sacred
and Civil Bonds? which is incorporated into so many Kingdoms and States abroad,
Scotland, Denmark, France, Holland, etc.

But grant, they may arrive at this Impossibility; What Peace or Settlement
therein can this Kingdom expect from their hands, who have used us or rather
abused us thus, whiles as yet they stood but upon their Good Behavior; while
they were no more then Probationers, or Candidates of Sovereignty? Our Peace
must be to lie down quietly under their Paws, while they like Harpyes do
snatch away the meat out of our Mouths, like Vultures feed upon our live
bodies; whilst (as a wise man said, such Statists use to do) they toss our
heads, our very lives like Tenis-balls, to make them sport withal. Our
Settlement is like to be firm indeed, which must depend upon their Ordinances
(a Lawyer of their own at an Assize could handsomely call it, Jus Vagum and
Incognitum) one of them justling the other daily out of fashion, according as
the vane of their Humor sits. In a word, It is impossible, there should be
either Peace or Settlement, whilst His Majesty is a Prisoner, till there be
mutual Condescendencies, and Provision made for all considerable Interests on
foot, which His Majesty has graciously offered, and by a Personal Treaty
managed with due Christian temper on all hands, may through Gods blessing be
yet accomplished.

The End.

