Reverendus in Cristo pater ac Dominus D. Thomas Dunelmensis Episcopus
Obijt An^o Aetatis 95 Episcopatus 44 Salutis 1659




EPONIKS, OR The Fight, Victory, and Triumph of S. PAVL. Accommodated To the
Right Reverend Father in God THOMAS LATE L. BISHOP of DURESME, In a SERMON
Preached at his Funeral, In the Parish Church of St. PETER at Easton-Manduit in
Northamptonshire, on Michaelmas-day, 1659. Together, With the LIFE of the said
Bishop.

By JOHN BARWICK (now) D.D. And one of his Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.

Romans 8.37. (...).

Phil. 3.17. Brethren, be ye followers together of me, and mark them that walk
so, as ye have us for an Example.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston at the Angel in Ivy-lane, 1660.

To his Sacred Majesty CHARLES the Second By the Grace of God KING of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
May it please your Majesty,
IF my boldness in this humble Address be offensive, it is not the first time
your Goodness has been abused: and I hope that which occasions the fault, will
pardon it. Your Majesty's Titles of Defender of the Faith, and Nursing Father
of the Church, are so just by personal Merit, as well as Royal Descent, as may
make it a fault on the other side equal to this presumption, if I should not
prostrate at your Majesty's feet these Memorials of this Reverend and Learned
Bishop for your Gracious Protection. I am sure it would be so (if I may have
your Majesty's leave for it) not to embrace so happy an opportunity as this
affords me, to acquaint the world with your Majesty's transcendent Goodness,
not only to this late-languishing Church in general (which the world sees, and
admires) but even to the meanest person related to it, whom your Majesty has
been pleased first to preserve, and then promote in it. It was such an
unparalleled act of Goodness as may possibly fall as far short of future
belief, as it exceeds all former precedents, that a Sovereign Prince should be
willing to redeem the life of his meanest Subject with the exchange of one that
had endeavored to deprive him of his own: and it were a great breach of
Charity to all your Majesty's Subjects not to let them see by this one
Instance, how great a measure of happiness they may assure themselves of, by
living in loyal and dutiful obedience to so gracious a King; which duty none
has so great an obligation to teach, as he that was to reap the benefit of that
unparalleled favor, and had hardly lived till this day to give this testimony
to it, if your Majesty's Bounty in sustaining him in prison (when your enemies
had robbed you even of Bread for your own mouth) had not been equal to your
Goodness in the other particular. The world has so long admired these and your
other Transcendent virtues exercised toward your Subjects in general, as now to
be at leisure to look upon particular Instances; whereof there cannot be (the
meaness of the object considered) any more remarkable then these: which as they
have a long time laid a peculiar obligation upon me as your Majesty's Creature
and Beadsman, so they do and will perpetuate it, over and above the Duty of
Loyalty and Service which is common to others with him who is

Your Majesty's most obliged, most Loyal and Dutiful Subject and Chaplain, JO.
BARWICK.
S. Lukes day 1660.
TO THE READER.
READER,
I Cannot much accuse this little Book of not being Primus ad extremum similis
sibi: I rather wonder (among its other faults) it should be guilty of no more
of this, considering in how different air from the rest some part of it
breathed in its birth, though all of it was born in the same Climate.

The Subject of it is a Reverend, Learned and Pious Bishop; and that is all I
can commend it for. If thou can find more in it, the thanks are due to the
Importunity of my Friends; If not, I cannot think worse of thee for being of my
own Judgment.

Yet I must confess my obstinacy to the Press was greater then my friends
persuasions could have counter-ballanced, if I had not received the first rise
of my Adventure from his command who is most concerned in it; and that merely
to obstruct the way to the publishing of what some others had (even then)
written upon the same Subject, as far as concerns the Life of this Reverend
Bishop.

This made me go in a sure, though unusual path: For as far as his Memory would
suggest, I received the Materials from himself (unless it was where his Modesty
caused his silence) and in some particulars, where the difficulty of the
matter, or fear of misunderstanding required it, I drew it into form even in
his lifetime, and read it to him, to the end he might correct the mistakes if
any were.

I instance only in one particular, which I always looked upon with much
Caution, as having heretofore been the object of much misunderstanding to the
hazard of the Peace of the Church And that is, how far this Reverend Bishop was
personally concerned in the Declaration of King James of blessed Memory
entitled, Concerning Lawful Sports to be used, etc. Concerning which, what I
have written, I had not only the Materials from his own mouth, but also his
full Approbation of the Wording and Form of it; from which (if it be not for
some mistake in transcribing or Printing) I have not varied a syllable.

In other particulars, where I could make out the matter, either by evidence of
Fact or public Registeries, or his own Letters, I was unwilling to torture his
great Modesty with unnecessary Questions. I desire no more, but that they may
stand or fall according to the grounds on which they are built. Only let me beg
thus much of thy Charity, as to believe that what I speak as from my own
knowledge, is spoken in Truth and Sincerity.

J. B.

ERRATA.
Page 112. lin. 19. read charging it, p. 116. l. ult. r. of his duty, p. 117.
l. penult. r. here underwritten, p. 118. l. 15. r, Testimony.

The Reader is further advertised, First, That whereas page 109. the Bishop of
Bangor is excepted from the Bishops that signed the Attestation to this
Reverend Bishops Protestation, the said Bishop of Bangor coming up to London
since that sheet was Printed off, has also very readily Subscribed to the
same. And Secondly, That the said Protestation, and all the Attestations
annexed, are by the L. Archbishop of Canterburies command sent into his
principal Registers Office to be preserved as a lasting Testimony of the
evident Truth therein asserted.

The Fight, Victory, and Triumph of the Holy Apostle St. PAVL.
2 Timothy 4.7, 8. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have
kept the faith. Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness,
which the Lord the righteous judge shall give me at that day.


THese words are so exceedingly pertinent to this present occasion, that I
cannot so properly call them a Text of my choice, as of my acceptance, for I
know not any other that could stand in competition with it.

It would be no digression (if the time would permit me) to show you in the
first place, how well the Text might be accommodated to the Day. In the one we
have a battle on earth, that brought St. Paul to Heaven, and on the other a war
in Heaven, which was revealed to St. John on earth: Michael and his Angels,
Apoc. 12.7.
fighting with the Dragon and his Angels in the Epistle for the day.

But because it is the occasion rather then the day, that has caused our
present assembly at this place, I shall confine my discourse only to that: and
then the first thing I shall observe from my Text, is, that it is a part of an
Epistle, sent by the Apostle St. Paul to Timothy an Apostolical person, and a
man of an Apostolical office, whom he had ordained the first Bishop of Ephesus,
Verse 6.
written at such a time when his departure was at hand, upon occasion of those
corruptions which he foresaw would afterward be brought into the Church, by
those that would turn away their ears from the truth, Verse 4.
and would be embraced by the people of itching ears, that would not endure
sound doctrine, Verse 3.
but would heap to themselves teachers after their own lusts; and the end why
the Apostle wrote it was to forewarn him of this mischief, and to instruct him
what he should do upon this occasion, and to strengthen and encourage him, (by
proposing his own example) against whatsoever he should suffer for the
performance of his duty in this particular, in preaching the word, and being
instant in season, Verse 2.
out of season; in reproving, rebuking, exhorting with all long suffering and
doctrine.

And let us but look back one eight days, and we shall clearly see how well
these very words would have become this Reverend person (whose Funeral has
this day occasioned our meeting) to have spoken to every one of us here
present, whether Lay or Clergy; whether such as are in danger to be infected
with those corruptions that are now got into the Church, (which are the very
same for nature, and in a very high degree with those that are here foretold by
St. Paul) or such as by their office and calling in the Church are bound to
oppose them; seeing he was a Bishop, that is, a person of an Apostolical
office, and such an one, whose care, as well as duty it was to oppose and beat
down whatever was contrary to sound doctrine, and to instruct others what to do
upon the like occasions: and that not only by his doings, but also by his
sufferings, not only by his pen and preaching, but also by his Episcopal and
Christian conversation, and that good example which he has left us for our
imitation of him both in his life and death.

Let us then suppose to our selves, what we may reasonably presume he would
have said to us so few days ago; or let us but imagine we hear his Hearse
preaching now to us, what he would then have taught himself, and what doctrine
can we more likely expect from him, then what my Text will afford us, if we
consider it with those circumstances I have already mentioned? Believe it, the
Hearse of a person of his Sacred order and Exemplary piety, will be a powerful
preacher to any devout soul, that duly considers it, and seriously lays it to
heart; and therefore do but listen to that as supplying what was so proper and
likely for himself to have spoken, and you may have a Funeral Sermon (though I
should hold my peace) even from the words of my Text: I have fought a good
fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith: Henceforth, etc.

But yet that I may give you some assistance for your meditations, and some
directions for your practice, let me desire your patience and attention while I
consider these words.

1. First as I find them in my Text laid down by St. Paul.

2. As they may very fitly be accommodated to this Reverend Bishop.

3. As they may be applied to our selves.

The first consideration will represent them to us as a Sermon: the second as a
Funeral Sermon proper for this occasion; the third and last as a Funeral Sermon
useful to our selves.

1. These words as they were written by St. Paul, contain in them these two
general parts, answerable to the number of the verses wherein they are
contained.

1. The work, ver. 7. I have fought a good fight, I have, etc.

2. The wages, ver. 8. Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown, etc.

1. The former consists of three several actions. 1. Fighting a good fight.
2. Finishing his course. 3. Keeping the faith.


2. In the latter we have 1. The wages it self. 2. The play master, and 3. The
payment.


1. The wages are described, 1. A Substantia, it is a Crown. 2. A Qualitate, it
is a Crown of Righteousness.


2. The play master is described, 1. From his person, the Lord. 2. From his
office, the Judge. 3. From his attribute, Righteous Judge.


3. Concerning the payment we may consider, 1. The title we have to it, in the
word (...), give, or (rather) render 2. The time whence it is payable:
Henceforth, that is, from the day of his death. 3. The time when it will be
actually paid, In that day: that is, the day of Judgment.


Here is too large a task for so short a time, as is ordinary for this
exercise; and therefore I must confine my discourse only to the former general
part of my Text, and be brief in that too. More will not be necessary; for let
us but take out this lesson well, and we need not be much solicitous for the
other; let us but carefully and conscionably perform the work, and we may
safely trust God for the wages.

And in this point, that I may speak clearly, as well as briefly; I shall
consider the words, first jointly together, and then severally apart, in
relation to the three several actions already mentioned.

1. As they are taken jointly together, we may observe, that as very often
elsewhere, so here in particular the Apostle alludeth to the manner of
performing the Olympic Games among the Grecians: for my whole Text is a
continued Allegory taken from those sports; and consequently, all the principal
words which are in it, if we consider them in the literal sense, must be
understood as terms altogether Agonistical.

And therefore, as in those Olympic Games, there were several Champions that
contended in fighting, or cuffing, or wrestling, or driving of Chariots, in
such a place of ground, or upon such a stage, for some Honorarie or reward (as
a Crown of Olive or Laurel or the like) before such a person, who sat there to
judge of the sport, and crown him that got the victory: so here in my Text,
(1.) The Agonist or Champion is St. Paul: (2.) the stadium or place where this
prize is played, is the world; (3.) the (...) or Combat, is his labor in the
discharge of his Apostolical office, and patience in suffering persecution for
righteousness sake: (4.) the victory, is his conquest over the Devil, the
world, and the flesh, the hard hearted Jews and idolatrous Gentiles, the
obstinate Heretics and perverse Schismatic, (5.) The (...) or Reward, is that
incorruptible Crown elsewhere mentioned by this Apostle, 1 Cor. 9.25. Jam.
1.12. Apoc. 2.10. 1 Pet. 5.4.
called here the Crown of righteousness, by St. James and St. John, the Crown
of life; and by St. Peter, the Crown of glory: And (6.) the (...), or Judge
that crowns the conqueror, is Almighty God, who is here called, the Lord, the
righteous Judge.

This being premised, as it will add great light to my whole Text, so more
particularly to the two first particulars in the former general part of it, the
Apostles fighting a good fight, and finishing his course. For the Olympic
games consisted chiefly in those four kinds of sport, Alex. ab Alexandr.
Genial. dier. l. 5. c. 8. Nam palaestra pugnis, cursu and lucta certabatur.
formerly intimated, fighting, running, or Chariot-driving, wrestling and
cuffing: and the Apostle plainly alludeth to the two first of them in those two
actions, (my text being a perfect parallel to that of 1 Cor. 9.26. I therefore
so run, not as uncertainly; so fight I, not as one that beats the air:) And
as for the third, that of keeping the faith, it signifies nothing that is
peculiar in it self, but is only a consequent upon the two former actions by
way of constancy and perseverance, as I shall show you hereafter.

2. Having taken this short view of the words jointly together, let us now
proceed to consider them severally apart; and then what we have hitherto looked
upon in the Allegory, we shall see more clearly in the moral, or signification
of it. The acts I told you were three, whereof 1. The first is St. Paul's
fighting, I have fought a good fight, where we may further observe,

1. The Combat it self, in the word (...) certamen.

2. The Quality of it, in that he calls it (...), a good fight.

1. For the former, the word (...), which here signifies the fight or combat
it self, may be taken either Actively or Passively; either for some great
labor and pains in performing a work, or for some great patience in suffering
for such a performance. So it was in the Olympic games, Multa tulit fecitque
puer -- the Agonist must both labor and suffer before he got the victory: and
so it must be with us in our Christian conversation, S. Luke 13.24. Heb. 12.1.
we must both strive to enter in at the strait gate, and run with patience the
race that is set before us. We have our pattern in both from St. Paul: what he
did, is but briefly (and yet not entirely) recorded by St. Luke in the Acts of
the Apostles, though it takes up that whole History for the most part; and what
he suffered can hardly be expressed by his own pen, verse 23. etc.
2 Cor. 11. though what is there expressed will make another man shrink at the
very reading of it.

2. For the Quality of this combat, it was (...) (...), a good fight: and a
fight in those sports was never accounted good, unless it had these two
qualifications. (1.) It must be in a good cause: and (2.) it must be regularly
and lawfully performed.

1. I will not here insist upon the mistake of the Grecians in the former
qualification, concerning the goodness of their cause: a little breath of
popular applause, and a small wreath of Olive or Laurel, together with an
ambitious desire to be counted strong or active, nimble or valiant, was enough
(as they mistook the matter) to denominate their cause good. But as for the
other qualification, which makes (...), a fight to be good, which is (as this
Apostle terms it) (...), to strive lawfully; 2 Timothy 2.5.
that is a thing wherein the similitude will hold both in respect of St. Paul,
and them, and us. For to do what was Bonum, but not Been, was a thing condemned
by the very Heathens. It was nothing worth (even in their apprehension) to
perform a good action, but not to do it as it ought to be done, because Bonum
est ex integra causa, malum ex quolibet defectu; there must be a concurrence of
all the causes to denominate an action good: if it fail in any one circumstance
it loses that denomination.

And now let us reflect our thoughts upon what I said (1.) concerning the (...)
or combat it self, that it consisted both in doing and suffering; and then
(2.) add this to it which I have here observed, that this doing and suffering
must not only be in a just cause, but also after a justifiable manner; and
again (3.) in the last place, let us consider St. Paul not only as a private
Christian, but also as an Apostle of Christ; and then, by laying all these
together, you will have the full extent of this first Act, in the former part
of my Text, both as it was performed by St. Paul, and transcribed by this
Reverend Bishop; I have fought a good fight.

But I must not wrong the subject of my discourse so far, as to speak of it
only in generals; and therefore I shall now proceed to some particular
instances, in which this good fight of the Apostle did consist, wherein he was
so well imitated by the Bishop. And to clear my passage to it, I must first
speak a word or two of the Agonist or Champion St. Paul; I have fought, etc. 1.
Concerning whom, I cannot pass over this one observation, S. Chrysostom. Hom. 9.
in 2 Timothy cap. 4.
which St. Chrysostom has suggested to my meditation: namely, how it should
come to pass that this Holy Apostle, who was otherwise so humble and modest,
should here, and upon this occasion, speak so highly of himself. In other
places, when he speaks of his own person, he calls himself the chief of
sinners; or, 1 Timothy 1.15. Ephesians. 3.8.
at best (...), less then the least of all Saints: and when he speaks of his
office, he dares hardly own it, but says, he is not meet to be called an
Apostle: 1 Cor. 15.9.
and how then comes it to pass, that he should here so far alter his note, as
thus to triumph before the victory? 1 King. 20.11
To brag as if he were putting off his Armor before he had well put it on? To
proclaim with his own mouth what he had done, before he had made an end of his
work? To boast of his conquest before he had encountered his last and worst
enemy, which is death? 1 Cor. 15.26.


To this I answer, that I hope every one that hears me will rest satisfied with
that which satisfied St. Chrysostom in this point, who had studied it
thoroughly, because he had been much perplexed about it ((...)) often times, as
himself confesses; and that is, that these words were not spoken by way of
boasting in himself, but of consolation to his Disciple Timothy. verse. 1, 2.
For when we consider what a heavy charge he had laid upon him to preach the
word, etc. together with the reasons of it taken from those corruptions that
would in time infect the Church, Verse. 3, 4.
which would require in him a great measure of labor and watchfulness, Verse. 5.
and patience in suffering afflictions; we may well think it was now high time
to comfort him with the words of my Text; (and the rather because this heavy
burden would lie more heavily upon him now, then ever it had done before,
seeing the Apostle himself was then ready to be offered up, Verse. 6.
and the time of his departure was at hand;) and this he does by proposing his
own example in the work, and his confident hope of the wages: I have fought,
etc. Henceforth is laid up, etc.

2 Timothy 1.4.
How tender hearted this holy person Timothy was, will appear by his Tears, upon
a small absence of St. Paul from him: and therefore it will not be denied, but
that both it was necessary to comfort him upon this occasion, and that the
words of my Text were very useful to that purpose. But the question may still
(perhaps) be insisted upon, how St. Paul could propose these words as a ground
of comfort to his Disciple Timothy, before he had actually done that work,
which is represented by them, and upon which that comfort was to be grounded?
St. Augustine puts the objection into my mouth (and a part of the answer to it:
St. Aug. de peccat. mer. and remiss, lib, 2. c. 16.
) Quomodo potuit haec dicere, cui adhuc restabat ipsius passionis, quam sibi
jam impendere dixerat, tam magna conflictio, tam molestum and grande certamen?
How could St. Paul say, he had fought a good fight, when in the words
immediately before, he says, that the time of his departure was (but) at hand,
which implies that the greatest brunt of his battle was still to fight, when
he spoke these words? To which I answer,

1. That I will not dispute, whether these words are to be understood of St.
Paul's first answering for his life before Nero, (which was a thing then past
without all dispute) or of his second, which was then to come: If the former,
Vid. D. Ham. in loc. and Baron. Tom. 1. ad An. 59. number. 13, 14, 15.
(as some very learned men are of opinion it was) the doubt will quickly vanish
of it self; but seeing he speaks of his departure as a thing then at hand, (and
not at 9. or 10. years distance) I shall (for peace-sake) take the latter as
granted; and answer,

2. That he had so good assurance and confidence in Gods mercy, as to his
constancy and final perseverance, as he looks upon the work as done already in
effect, while it was but yet a doing; and himself as comprehensor, while he was
only viator; or as a conqueror before the fight was fully ended. Quod futurum
esse praesumpsit, tanquam factum fuerit judicavit, says the same Father in the
same place.

But then for the ground of this assurance and confidence to make that appear
the more clearly, we must (as before) distinguish between the work and the
wages; for these being at several distances, will require several Telescopes to
represent them to our understanding.

1. For the work or fight, he foresaw it plainly as a thing then at hand, both
by what he saw contrived against him at Rome, in Nero's Palace; and also as
being instructed therein by divine Revelation; as some Grotius in loc. and St.
Aug. ubi supra.
learned men are of opinion: and as Historians tell us the like of others since
that time; as (for instance) Pontius Di^c. in vit. S. Cyprian.
St. Cyprian and Vid. Baron Tom. 5. ad An. 407. number. 9.
St. Chrysostom in ancient times, and Mr. Fox. Act. and Mon.
Bishop Ridley, and Life of Bp. Jewel in his works.
Bishop Jewel of late.

2. But then for the victory and wages, I must be cautious in what I determine
upon it. For I dare not say (though Vid. Corn. a Lap. in loc.
St. Anselm does) that he foresaw this by any supernatural revelation of his
own Predestination and Election; such an opinion as this, if it were once
swallowed and applied to our selves, might make us look so high into Gods
unsearchable counsel, as not to see the rubs and precipices in our way to
Heaven: I rather incline to those that direct us to cast our eyes downward upon
our selves, and to look inwardly into our own bosoms; and they will tell us,
that this confidence, as it relates to the wages, proceeded ex fiducia bonae
conscientiae, from the testimony of a good conscience grounded upon the
goodness and sure mercies of God in Christ Jesus; as it was in the case of St.
Ambrose upon his deathbed, Paulinus in vit. ejus.
who was neither unwilling to live, nor afraid to die, only quia bonum habemus
dominum, because he knew he served a gracious master.

All this while I have spoken of the ground of his confidence, and not at all
of the medium, by which the evidence of what he affirms was conveyed to him:
for whether that was a (...) (or full assurance) of Faith, S. Aug. lib. 2. de
peccator. mer. and remiss cap. 16.
or only of Hope, is a question both too ticklish and too large to dispute at
this time; and needless withal, seeing it seems to me to be determined by St.
Augustine long ago, whose authority is very great in a case of this nature; and
his words at large will confirm the substance of what I have delivered upon
this whole point. Ideo talibus verbis (speaking of the latter verse of my Text)
certus securusque gaudebat Paulus, quia de victoria futuri tanti certaminis
certum eum securumque jam fecerat, qui eandem passionem jam illi revelaverat;
non re certissima, sed spe plenissima haec dixit, etc. From which words you may
observe, 1. That St. Augustine understands the words of my Text as an effect of
St. Paul's joy, to comfort his Disciple Timothy, (gaudebat Paulus) and not by
way of boasting in himself. 2. He tells us God had revealed St. Paul's
sufferings to him, ( passionem jam illi revelaverat) that is, his work; but
speaks not a word of revealing his wages, but the contrary: For 3. the
confidence he had of that (he tells us) proceeded ex spe firmissima, from a
full assurance of Hope. And let this suffice to have spoken of the Agonist or
Champion St. Paul.

2. I proceed now to the (...) or fight it self, which we are to understand (as
I formerly told you) (1.) both Actively for what he did, and Passively for what
he suffered: and this again (2.) is called a good fight, both for the justice
of the cause, and justifiableness of the way and means by which it was managed;
and (3.) last of all this good fight was fought by St. Paul, both as a private
Christian, and as an Apostle of Christ.

1. As an Apostle, he fought Actively in what he did, and in this particular he
is set out unto us as a singular Champion, to be admired in some things, rather
then imitated by us. He sustained (and that daily) the care of all the
Churches; he preached Christ, 2 Cor. 11.28.
warning every man, Col. 1.28, 29.
and teaching every man: he labored, striving according to the working* that
wrought in him mightily: 1 Cor. 15.10.
he labored more abundantly then all the rest of the Apostles.

2. As a private Christian he fought Actively; Ephesians. 6.12.
and that against principalities and powers, against the rulers of the darkness
of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places: nay, rather then
want an enemy he would fight with himself, he kept under his body, and brought
it into subjection, 1 Cor 9. ult.
lest when he had preached to others, himself should be a castaway.

And then again, he labored and fought no less in what he suffered, 2 Cor. 7.5.
then in what he did; he had his fears within, as well as his fightings
without: and that again both in respect of his person and office. When he was
called to be both a Christian and an Apostle, they were both comprised under
this general notion of suffering; Act. 9.16.
I will show him how great things he must suffer for my names sake, says our
blessed Savior from Heaven: and we find it verified in him through the whole
course of his life. He suffered shipwreck thrice: 2 Cor. 11.25. Gal. 5.11.
Phil. 3.8.
he suffered persecution; he suffered the loss of all things. He suffered much
more then I can tell you, so much as would almost pose himself to express. And
yet (as though it had been only a sport to him) like the crecket he sung in the
fire; he rejoiced in his sufferings, Col. 1.24.
and thereby filled up that which was behind of the afflictions of Christ in
his flesh. He knew, and made us to know, Heb. 2.10.
that the Captain of our salvation was made perfect through sufferings: and he
knew withal, S. Mat. 10.24.
that the Disciple is not above his master, nor the soldier better then his
Captain; and therefore he was ready to suffer all things, knowing most
assuredly that if he suffered with him he should also be glorified together
with him; Romans 8.17.
and that those light afflictions which were but for a moment, 2 Cor. 4.17.
would work for him a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. To sum
up all in a word, he both labored and suffered; and that both as a Christian,
and as an Apostle: 1 Thessalonians. 2.11.
he labored night and day with his hands, as a private person, that he might
labor in the discharge of his Apostolical office, without being chargeable to
any man.

2. All this while I have spoken of this fight, as it is taken in it self,
merely in relation to the substance of it; but however, by what I have said,
you will see (in part) it was also a good fight for the quality of it.

1. It was good, in respect of the justice of the cause in which he both
labored and suffered, both as a Christian and as an Apostle. S. Chrysostom. ubi*
supra.
It must needs be a good fight (says St. Chrysostom) when we fight (...) for
Christ, whatsoever hardship we endure by it, whether (...) or (...) or (...),
prisons, or bolts, or death it self. It must needs be a good fight when we
fight for the Gospel, Ephesians. 6.16.
against the fiery darts of the Devil, the pomps and vanities of the world, and
the sinful lusts of the flesh: but especially when it is managed by such a
person, as this great Apostle, Phil. 1.17.
who was set for the defense of the Gospel, and that against all opposites
whatsoever, Jews and Gentiles, Heretics and Schismatics.

And such was this fight in my Text; he fought the good fight of faith, 1 Timothy
6.12. Gal. 6.12. S. Jude ver. 3.
and he suffered persecution for the Cross of Christ: he did earnestly contend
for the faith once delivered to the Saints, both by his doings and sufferings.
He fought with beasts at Ephesus, 1 Cor. 15.32.
while he planted the Gospel there; and he suffered persecution at Lystra, Acts
14.19.
while he planted it there. Whatsoever he either did or suffered in any place,
was undertaken and undergone chiefly and principally for the planting and
propagating of the Gospel of Christ, as he was an Apostle; but yet so, as still
to have a care of his own soul as a Christian, that while he preached to
others, 1 Cor. 9. ult.
himself should not become a Reprobate. This for the justness of his cause.

2. His fight was likewise good, for the justifiableness of the way and means
by which he managed it. He gives it as a general rule to all others (...), 2 Timothy 2.5.
to strive lawfully, to manage their fight according to the rules of war,
without which no man ought to be crowned as a conqueror: and therefore, seeing
he speaks of the crown of righteousness, as a thing undoubtedly laid up for
him; we may be sure he would not forfeit his title to it, for want of
performing this condition. Whatsoever good he did, he did it well; and
whatsoever persecution he suffered, it was not only in a good cause, but with
such an excellent mixture of courage and meekness, of patience and comfort, as
might very well become a Christian sufferer, and the cause of God wherein he
suffered. Whatsoever he did in these conflicts, was by the power of the spirit
of God that strengthened him, Phil. 4.17.
(and by that power he was able to do all things:) and whatsoever he suffered,
it was according to the will of God for whom he suffered it: and then come life
come death, Acts 21.13.
all is one to him; he was ready not only to be bound, but also to die at
Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.

Thus much for the first action: I have fought a good fight.

2. The second now follows; (...), I have finished my course, or rather, I have
performed the race: for there is not a possessive in the sentence, and (...)
may as well fignifie to perform as to finish.

And here I take it for granted (though I cannot deny but some are of the
contrary opinion) that the Apostle in these words alludeth to another kind of
game, then he did in the last. In the former words he spoke of fighting or
combating, in these of racing or running. To this he expressly alludeth, when he
tells us he had not run in vain; Phil. 2.16.
to this he earnestly exhorts, when he calls upon us to run with patience the
race that is set before us. Heb. 12.1. 1 Cor. 9.26.
They are clearly distinguished in a parallel text, which I formerly alleged,
and so they ought to be in this place without all question. I know very well
that by finishing his course, some interpreters understand no more, then his
constancy in the fight, till he got the victory: but this is doubtless a
mistake in the phrase: For it is clear enough from several texts, that he was
not a conqueror in one thing only, but in several; that he performed the part
cursoris agilis, as well as boni pugilis; not only of a stout fighter, but also
of a nimble runner; and herein he outstript most of the (...); very few in the
whole list of the Olympic conquerours got the victory at more prizes then
one; as St. Paul did here both in the fight of faith and course of
Christianity. And that again, both as a private Christian, and as an Apostle of
Christ: for the word running is a Metaphor that is applied very significantly
to both in holy Scripture.

St. Paul himself will be his own Expositour, as to this particular, Chap. 5.7.
in his Epistle to the Galatians, where we find that both they to whom he
wrote (who were private persons) had run well, and that he himself, Chap. 2.2.
who was an Apostle of Christ, had not run in vain. Every servant of God is
obliged to run the way of his Commandments, when God has set his heart at
liberty; Psalm. 119.32.
but the task is doubled upon St. Paul as an Apostle of Christ; because his
office was concerned in it, as well as his person. And accordingly it is the
expression of holy David, Psalm. 147.15.
that the word of God runs very swiftly; and both the Prophet Isaiah and
this Apostle tell us, Isa. 52.7. Romans 10.15.
that the feet of them that bring the glad tidings of the Gospel of peace are
very beautiful. Nay, so swift are they, and so beautiful, that what the
Psalmist speaks of the Heavens, the most beautiful and swift of all Gods
visible creatures, is by St. Paul applied to the Apostles; their sound is gone
out into all the earth, and their words into the ends of the world: Ubi supra.
and St. Chrysostom seems to give the priority to St. Paul before all the
rest of the Apostles in this particular; when he compares his course to that
of the Sun, Psalm. 19.5.
which (we know) comes as a bridegroom out of his Chamber, and rejoices as a
giant to run his course: nay, he prefers it before that of the Sun, for the
purity of it, (...), and before that of a Bird for the swiftness: and when we
consider how much the light of the Gospel is to be preferred before the light
of the Sun, and in how short a time this holy Apostle had communicated it to
all the world, from Jerusalem round about to Illyricum, Romans 15.19.
we shall find more of admiration in the work, then of Hyperbole in St.
Chrysostomes expression, though he was a most excellent Orator.

3. And now I have done with those two acts, which had immediate and particular
relation to the Olympic games, St. Paul's fighting and his running. The third
and last which now follows, does not (as I told you) import any thing peculiar
in it self, and yet it is of very great importance; it denotes only a
super-addition of constancy and perseverance to both the other, fighting and
running.

I know very well, that some expositours understand the word [ Faith] in the
common and ordinary literal sense, as it signifies the Christian faith, or
sound doctrine, which this blessed Apostle kept inviolable, though Demas and
others had forsaken him in the defense of it; Verse 10.
and some would not so much as endure to hear of it. Verse 4.
But yet others (and better interpreters) will not allow this to be the
immediate signification of the word. For (in my apprehension) it is very
strange, that this word should be taken in the ordinary literal sense, when all
the rest of the context, both before and after it, must of necessity be
interpreted by an Allegory. It is true indeed, that if by the word [ Faith] we
understand fidelity, (as sometimes it signifies in holy Scripture) it will be
very pertinent to this place, even in the literal sense, and will also
perfectly consist with the Allegory; seeing that the faith (or fidelity) of any
one that either fought or ran in the Olympic games, obliged him to constancy
and final perseverance; without which there was no hope of getting the victory,
or obtaining the Crown for which they contended. And that this is the genuine
sense of the word in this place, is not only probable by these reasons here
alleged, but may be further confirmed by the opinion of the most and best
interpreters, both ancient and modern; and these latter again, both of the
Roman and Reformed Churches. If you desire an instance, St. Aug. de Gra. and
lib. arbit. cap. 7. Primas. Cor. a lap. and Calvin. in loc.
you may have it in St. Augustine and Primasius among the Ancients; and among
the late writers in Cornelius a Lapide and Calvin, to say nothing of the rest.

And now that we have seen the meaning of the word, let us see how well the
Apostle performed the work; and that was in such a way and manner, as became
him to do, and will become us to follow him in it. Acts 24.14.
For it was not the black brand of Heresy, which the Jews would have cast
upon him; nor the reproach of a Babbler under which he suffered among the
Athenians. Acts 17.18.
Acts 24.1, 2.
It was not the information of Ananias the high Priest; nor the accusation of
Tertullus the Orator: Acts 23.12.
It was not the conspiracy of the confederates at Jerusalem; Acts 14.19. and
19.28.

Acts 13.10. and 16.22.


nor the fury of the zealots at Lystra or Ephesus: It was not the subtilty of
Elymas the sorcerer, nor the violence of the Magistrates at Philippi: Acts
25.23. 2 Cor. 11.32.
It was not the splendor of the civil pomp in Agrippa and Festus, nor the
terror of the military power in the Governor of Damascus: It was not any of
these, nor all these, nor any other thing whatsoever, no not the fear of death
it self, that could stop him in his course, or divert him from his fight, while
his life continued. He was constant in both till his mortality put on
immortality, and this life was swallowed up of a better. He did not give over
the fight till such time as he had got the victory; nor cease his running, till
he had obtained the prize: but he kept the faith, till his faith was turned
into fruition: he was faithful in the work, till he received the wages: or at
least till he had got so good assurance of them, as he could say in full
confidence: Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, etc.

2. And this would bring me to the second general part of my Text, but only
that there still remains a second and more peculiar part of my task upon this
first. I have held you hitherto only with a Sermon, I must now make it (1.) a
Funeral Sermon for this Reverend Prelate; and (2.) such a Sermon as may be
useful to our selves, by some brief application, though I hope the former will
in part supply the latter.

And here I know some will expect that I should (as the manner is) give you an
account of his whole life, from his cradle to his grave; but therein I must be
forced to frustrate your expectation. Such a thing may be done where the life
is but of a few years, and most of that life not so much a living perhaps as a
being in the world. But in this case such a thing cannot be expected with any
reason, after so long an exercise of your patience; considering of how long
continuance his life has been (an hundred years wanting five) and how much of
that time he has employed in the eminent and weighty office of a Bishop almost
44. years, (in which respects I think he has not left his equal behind him in
Europe) but especially considering that there is hardly a day in those years,
nor scarce an hour in that day, whereof some good account may not be given, if
I should go about such a thing.

And therefore seeing I must of necessity omit much that might be said in this
case according to custom, I shall confine my discourse to that which cannot be
omitted without violating my Text, and prevaricating in a good cause. And for
the rest (if God permit) I may have occasion hereafter to give the world an
account in some brief narrative of his Life.

You have seen the copy already in St. Paul: I shall now endeavor to show you
how well it was transcribed by this Reverend Bishop, who was as great an
admirer of him as I have known, though indeed no man can sufficiently admire
him. It is this Apostles exhortation to us all, 1 Cor. 11.1.
to be followers of him, as he was of Christ; and it was the special care and
endeavor of this pious Bishop, to yield obedience to that exhortation: we have
already seen (as far as my Text led me to it) how well this Apostle followed
Christ: it now remains I should show you how well this Bishop followed the
Apostle in those particulars I have already insisted upon.

And here in the first place (if I would allow my self that liberty of wandering
from my Text, which too many others assume in the contrary cause) I could bring
my first parallel from their offices in the Church, the one an Apostle, the
other a Bishop, and show you (even from St. Hierome himself, whose authority is
so much urged against Bishops) how little difference there is between them;
seeing (as that Father tells us) S. Hieron. in Psalm. 44. pro patribus tuis nati
sunt tibi filii.] Fuerunt. O Ecclesia, Apostoli patres tui -- -- Nunc autem
quia illi mundo recesserunt, habes pro his Episcopos filios, etc.
Bishops succeed the Apostles in the Church, as a Son does his Father in his
inheritance: and consequently that Idem. ep. 54. ad Marcel. Apud nos
Apostolorum locum Episcopi tenent, etc.
Bishops do now sustain the place of the Apostles: or (to come closer to my
Text) that a Idem. Ep. 1. ad Helidor. Non est facile stare loco Pauli, tenere
gradum Petri, etc.
Bishop is to us instead of St. Paul.

But this is a subject too large for this time, and neither proper for the
place, nor suitable with the Text and my present intention. For it is their
actions and sufferings, their fight and their course, and not their place or
their office which my Text leads me to, to make up the parallel; and even in
that I must stint my discourse from those limits which I first intended.

When I first observed in St. Paul's fight, the substance and the quality of it;
branching the former into his actions and sufferings, and the latter into the
justness of his cause, and justifiableness of the way of managing it; and that
again both as an Apostle and as a Christian; my intentions were to have showed
you in the parallel, what this Reverend Bishop did, and what he suffered, both
as a Bishop and as a Christian; and again, how good his cause was, the cause of
God and his Church; and how Christianly it was managed, without running either
to the 2 Reg. 1.2,
God of Ekron, or to 1 Samuel 28.8
the Witch of Endor, without Dan. 3.12.
worshipping the golden image, or vailing the bonnet to Jud. 8.33.
Baal Berith, without committing murder in the fear of God, or shutting up
Churches for the propagation of the Gospel. And then in the second place, my
intention was to have extended the parallel, to his imitation of the Apostle in
the whole course of his life, in running with him the same race that was set
before them both: and then last of all, to have showed you how well he kept the
faith till his last gasp, both in his fighting and running. And I hope I shall
say something to all these particulars, though neither so largely nor so
methodically as I once intended.

The first thing mentioned by the Apostle here in my Text, is the good fight
which he fought: and the like (according to the proportion of his ability) was
performed by this Bishop.

1. His whole life was a fight, even as he was a man, Job. 7.1.
Militia est hominis vita super terram; but a far greater fight as a Christian,
because it was not against flesh and blood, Ephesians. 6.12.
but against spiritual wickedness in high places. The greater the difficulties
are against which we strive, the greater is the fight, and the victory the more
glorious; and so the case was with him, considered as a Christian, and so it
still is, and ever will be with us. For our enemies in this battle are the
Devil, the World and the Flesh; and all of them completely armed, the world
with power, the flesh with treachery, and the Devil with subtilty. Yet such
has been the power of Gods grace in this great Champion, that he has got a
clear conquest over them all, and left us his good example both for our
encouragement and imitation.

2. But these enemies being common to others with him, (though seldom subdued
by any so well as by him) I shall rather divert my discourse to the other
branch which I proposed, and show you what a hot encounter he did undergo in
respect of his office in the Church as a Bishop; and that both in what he did
and what he suffered. And in this God was pleased to deal very graciously with
him, as indeed he did in all other things; for while he had strength, he wanted
not opportunities to be doing something for the good of the Church; and when
that began to decay, God was still graciously pleased to assist him with a
plentiful measure of his grace, to suffer patiently for righteousness sake.

In all ages the office of a Bishop was enough to engage the person that
sustained it in a fight of action: and of late the very name of a Bishop was
more then enough to engage him in the fight of suffering: I pray God forgive
them that occasioned it. They might have foreseen at first whither it naturally
tended, and cannot but now see what it has undoubtedly brought upon
themselves, as well as others; since the quarrel was improved against all the
other offices of Ministry in the Church, which at first was commenced only
against the Bishops. Nay, the very Church it self (if we look upon her as a
branch of the Holy Catholic Church of Christ, which we profess in our Creed)
is now at last assaulted by those that will allow of no Churches, but of their
own gathering, which is a thing of more dangerous consequence then most are
aware of: I pray God I may be a false prophet in this thing, when I tell you my
fears, that the end of it (if not timely prevented) is like enough to be
confusion and Atheism, which begin already to flow in upon us, or rather to
overwhelm us.

How worthily this our Champion has carried himself in this fight, is a thing
so well known as I shall not need to enlarge my discourse upon it. Witness
those many learned Volumes he has written against all the adversaries of this
poor afflicted Church of ours, of what party soever, especially those in the
Roman Communion. And the manner of his writing brings him very pertinently
under the first branch of my Text in two several respects. For first his
custom was to disarm the enemy (where possibly it might be done) and turn
their own cannon upon them, by making use of their own confessions against
themselves: and secondly, the word fighting was in a manner peculiar to him
above all other polemical divines that I have seen, in that his arguments which
he brings to establish his own cause, are most commonly concluded with a
challenge to his Adversaries.

While he was thus engaged against a puissant enemy in the front, a peevish
enemy from an ambuscado charged him and the rest of his Reverend Brethren and
fellow Champions in the Rear. I cannot but say he foresaw him, because it is
clear he endeavored to prevent his design in his Book of the three Innocent
Ceremonies, printed above forty years ago: but yet I cannot deny, but if all
of us had buckled our selves more vigorously against him before the Cockatrice
egg brake out into such a dangerous serpent, the other Adversary had never got
half the advantage against us which now he has, by making use of these as his
Auxiliaries and Instruments. For whatsoever they may outwardly pretend, they
cannot better be resembled to any thing then Samsons Foxes, Jud. 15.4.
tied by the tails, with firebrarnds between them; though hitherto they look
several ways, they agree well enough to burn up all the good wheat in this
field of our poor afflicted Church.

How careful this our Champion was to suppress this Monster before it was
perfectly fledged, will appear by two Excellent Sermons of his now in print:
the one preached with great applause at Newcastle, (on Romans 13.1.) before it
had got the wing over Tweed; and the other with no less, since that time, in
St. Paul's Church in London: (on 1 Cor. 11.16.) In the former whereof he
teaches the duty of subjects toward their undoubted Sovereign; and in the
latter, the duty of all Christians toward their lawful Superiors in the
Church; the want of which two duties has opened those two great sluices of
Sedition and Schism, which then began to flow in upon us, and since that time
have almost utterly drowned us.

It is the part of a good soldier when he finds his first design not like to
take the effect he desires, to have another in reserve; and our Champion was
not wanting in this neither: for when the Pulpit was shut against him, he put
on a stronger resolution to supply that in private with his Pen, which he was
not suffered to perform in public with his tongue. Printed at Oxford. 1644.
And to this we owe that little Treatise of his (though printed without his
name) entitled Confessions and Proofs, etc. which he compiled from the
suffrages of the most learned Protestants of foreign Reformed Churches, in
defense of the sacred order of Bishops, and which he has since enlarged, and
fitted for a second Impression: I wish I could say the like for two other little
Treatises, which were designed by him, but not brought to perfection, the one
in defense of Infants Baptism, the other against the poisonous doctrine of the
Antinomians.

His Printed Books are so well known to the world, as I need not speak of them;
and therefore I have brought these instances out of his papers, that I may tell
you something more then the world knows of him.

All that I shall need to add is, that while he was engaged in these
conflicts, he was again alarmed by a nameless Romish Adversary, with a mask of
J. S. before his face, and the title of Anti-Mortonus before his Book;
whereunto he had prepared a full and large Answer about a dozen years ago;
though since that time (by some misadventure or other) I find those papers
have lost much of their former perfection.

In these quarrels was he engaged, and charged thus by several adversaries both
in the front and rear, for very many years after his age had exceeded holy
David's span; Psalm. 39.6.
even for a good many years after it was past fourscore, when (in the Holy
dialect) our strength is nothing but labor and sorrow; Psalm. 90.10.
insomuch as (excepting one little Treatise of Gods providence in his
Meditations upon the vision of Ezekiels wheels) we may say he dyed in the
field, though he was not vanquished. Sueton. and Xiphilin. in Vespas.
Mori potuit, succumbere non potuit. That saying of Vespasian [ oportet
imperatorem stantem mori] may very properly be accommodated to this our
Champion, who fought a good fight and kept the faith till he had finished his
course here upon Earth.

All this while I have instanced only in those conflicts which he undertook in
matters of Doctrine; but to make up a complete Christian soldier, there will
be requisite some perfection of manners, as well as integrity of faith; but
much more to make up a good Bishop. And this appeared in him very conspicuously
through the whole course of his life, and will bring in the second Act of St.
Paul mentioned here in my Text.

2. I have finished my course: upon which words I might have just occasion to
speak of the whole course of his life, during the whole time of his pilgrimage
here upon earth, but only that it is a task much too large either for my time
or your patience.

It might perhaps be some satisfaction to your curiosity, but little advantage
to your edification, to tell you either the place of his birth, or of his
education, or of his several offices and dignities in the Church: but to tell
you how much he adorned the place of his birth, and how much he profited under
those from whom he had his education, and how well he discharged himself in
those several places and offices he sustained in the Church, this may and will
be much more useful to us.

And these three have such immediate dependence one upon another, that I need
but speak of one of them for all. For the good discharge of his offices in the
Church declares how much he profited by his good education, and both of these
together will make a new addition of honor to the place of his Birth, (the
City of YORK) though that has been very famous for many generations.

I do not now speak of his great learning, whereof I have given you so many
instances already, but of his singular piety and exquisite carriage in matters
of Morality, which he expressed in a grave, virtuous and Christian
conversation, attended with much sweetness and affability all his life long.
And in this he was so eminent, that none of his greatest Adversaries (and many
great ones he has had) could ever affix any reproach upon him for any defect
in this particular; though their eyes were sharp enough to pry into his
actions, and their mouths wide enough to censure them, if it had been in the
power of malice to have done it.

To say he had no failings, were to deny he was a man: and I knew him so well,
as I could expect but small thanks from him if he were alive, if I should
deifie him now he is dead; nor could I hope to find credence from you in what
I say of him, if I should speak any thing that might justly be interpreted a
flattering of his memory. But however this I dare boldly say of him, that no
man I ever knew was more excusable in his failings then he was. For if we
reduce them to their true original, it will prove to be, that he was so clear
and upright in his own conscience as to think every man truly conscientious
that pretended to be so: he was so real a Christian himself, as made him
unwilling to believe there was such a thing as an Hypocrite in the world.

When I have said this I have prevented all that calumny it self can object
against him: and that will cut off much that would otherwise be necessary to
have spoken of him. For this one rub being removed, the whole course of his
life was so smooth in a godly, righteous, and sober conversation, as will
render him truly one of St. Paul's Disciples; and successor in virtue as well
in office to Titus the first Bishop of Crete; whom this great Apostle
instructs to live soberly, Tit. 2.12.
righteously and godly in this present world: 1. Soberly, in respect of
himself: 2. Righteously, toward all men; and 3. Godly, in relation to God
Almighty. This was the holy Apostles precept, and this was the Reverend Bishops
practice; I mean the Bishop of DURESME, as well as the Bishop of CRETE.

1. He lived soberly, in respect of himself. His meat was neither much nor
delicate, his drink neither strong nor plentiful; and never between meals, till
infirmities of age made it necessary for him. And as for his clothes they were
always as mean, as were worn by any man of his rank and quality whatsoever;
and he seldom had any change, for when he made any new, he usually gave the
old ones away.

In all these he was so far from the least degree of curiosity, even then when
he seemed to represent the person of Moses, as well as Aaron, when his
Ecclesiastical office was attended with a kind of Temporal principality; that
he never troubled his thoughts either with what he should eat, or drink, S.
Mat. 6.32.
or wherewith he should be clothed, nor knew what it would be, till such time
as his servants had provided it for him: and then that which was coursest was
most welcome to himself, though his hospitable table abounded with all manner
of varieties, when the quality of the persons he entertained did require it.

His ordinary saying was that the best Rule for diet was to observe none at
all: but yet the most ordinary course which he used, was to eat but once a day.
He lived a very great number of years, and very few ever husbanded their time
better, for he was never idle with his good will: Wisd. 4.13.
so that if a man may be said to fulfill a long time, that improves his time
well though he die young: how long may we say did he live that numbered so many
years, and misspent so little time as he did? He was often up at his devotion
and study before four a clock, even after he had lived above fourscore years;
and yet very seldom went to bed till after ten, and then had always a servant
to read some Book to him, till such time as sleep did surprise him: and so had
he always when he traveled in his Coach, that his journey might not be too
great a hinderance to his study.

2. He lived Righteously toward all men, without out doing the least wrong to
any, even then when the advantages he had to do it, added much force to the
strength of the Temptation; when his extraordinary power in Temporal as well as
Ecclesiastical affairs within the County palatine of DURESME, might have
afforded him very many opportunities to be partial to some, and oppress others.
I have often heard him speak it with much thankfulness to God that he could say
with Samuel in the integrity of his heart; 1 Samuel 12.3.
Whose Ox have I taken? Or whose Ass have I taken? Or whom have I defrauded?
Whom have I oppressed? Or of whose hand have I received a bribe to blind mine
eyes therewith?

And in this we may the more easily believe him, when we consider his great
equity and liberality: for equity is correctio juris legitimi, a self denial
in his own right, and liberality is the giving away his own estate. The former
he practiced ordinarily in Wardships, Wracks, and Deodands, and upon several
other occasions: rather then any man should think himself aggrieved by him, he
would be the loser himself: he never was Plaintiff in any Law suit but once,
and then let the Action fall when he saw the Declaration drawn up so far above
the truth. And then again for his liberality (which implies his righteous
dealing a fortiore, Psalm. 37.6.
and will make it as clear as the light, without all dispute) it was so great,
as he never cared for money, but to give away, or do some other good with it,
as all those that knew him can abundantly testify.

3. He lived Godly in this present world. His conversation was such for piety
and devotion, as well became a Christian and a Bishop: his fasting, his
Prayers, his Alms and other exercises of Godliness were both frequent and
affectionate. He would often forgo, or at lest much moderate, that one meal a
day, which he ordinarily allowed himself: he would often deny himself some
part of that pittance of time which should have been for his sleep, to rise up
out of his bed and spend in Prayer, as I have heard from those that attended
him in his Chamber. And as for his Almsgiving while he was suffered to enjoy
his Estate he had his Beads-men in Livery at a constant Table, beside what he
gave away at his Gate, and upon other occasions. Nay, so constant was he in
this duty, even then when he had hardly so much left as to afford bread for his
own mouth, that he had always a certain number of poor impotent persons in
constant pension, that came weekly to him for a plentiful allowance when he was
not able himself to go among them to give it: and this will be abundantly
testified by the Poor in all places where (of late) he has lived.

And then for his severity to himself, by way of outward Mortification, it was
so great (though much concealed) as few of his Adversaries (even those that
pretend to make it their work) will be found to go beyond him. It will hardly
find a parellel in this nice and delicate age wherein we live, that a person
who had lived so many years in such great plenty and honor as he did, should
lie upon his straw-bed, even then when he was above fourscore years of age; and
would not be persuaded from it till Cramps and other infirmities compelled him
to it.

In this also he was a true disciple of St. Paul, 2 Timothy 2.3.
who had taught him by precept to endure hardness as a good soldier of Jesus
Christ; and by his own example, (...), 1 Cor. 9. ult.
to keep under his body, and bring it into subjection, lest when he had
preached to others, himself should become a reprobate. So that hence you may
clearly see how true a Disciple of this great Apostle this Reverend person has
been in all his actions, both as a Christian and as a Bishop.

2. And I could show you the like of his sufferings, if the work were not too
hazardous as well as too great for this time. For Action and Passion are
Relative terms; the one cannot be truly understood without reflecting upon the
other: and therefore I must forbear to speak of his Christian sufferings, that
I may the better conceal the unchristian doings of them that brought those
sufferings upon him.

All that I shall say in this particular is this, (wherein I cannot wrong his
Reverend brethren so much as single him altogether from them) that when the
Accuser of the Brethren had got a permission to vent his whole malice in
Calumniating the Bishops of this poor afflicted Church, Apoc. 12.10.
he could not lay any personal fault to the charge of any one of them: all that
he could object against them, was either their office as Bishops, or that
wherewith he deluded the giddy multitude to think was a failing in the exercise
of that office, though now it is evident to most men that will be content to
lay aside their groundless jealousies, that it was a timely foresight of that
mischief (and a providential care to suppress it) which we now see when it is
too late has almost utterly ruined this once flourishing Church.

But as for this Reverend Bishop in particular, there was never any thing laid
to his charge by those that brought his sufferings upon him, but only that he
was a Bishop. And whatsoever he suffered upon that account (he well knew) was
not for evil doing, 1 S. Pet. 3.17.
but for conscience toward God, -- 2.19.
and consequently for righteousness sake; which made him with St. Paul, S. Mat.
5.10. Col. 1.24.
rejoice in his sufferings, even then when he suffered the loss of his estate
and liberty, and which he valued much more, the loss of the free exercise of
his function in the Church; in a word, the loss of all things, Phil. 3.8.
his life only excepted: and for that he escaped very narrowly too, in one of
those -- I know not what to call them, which (contrary to common sense) were
voted no Tumults. But the best was he valued it not in so good a cause as this
was; for he was wont always to sweeten all his sufferings to himself with
blessing God, that no man could take from him either his Mortality or
Immortality.

3. And let this suffice (though much more would be requisite) to have spoken
both of his fight and of his course, whereof the one is now fought and the
other finished; and yet (blessed be God for it) he has kept the Faith in both,
which was the third and crowning act in St. Paul, wherein he was so carefully
imitated by this Reverend Prelate, who was faithful to God both in his duty as
a Christian, and in his office as a Bishop till the very last gasp; and gave a
full testimony of both by his actions, while he had strength and power to
express either.

1. Witness his late Ordinations of Priests and Deacons here among you, whereof
some here present received the benefit, and many more can give the testimony:
and wherein he was so exceeding careful, when he durst not trust either his
eyes or his memory, that he gave the words of benediction, as they were read
unto him by some of those that assisted him in those solemn offices.

2. Witness also his great care and earnest prayers (of which likewise there be
several witnesses here present) that the sacred order and succession of Bishops
might never fail in this poor afflicted and distressed Church.

3. Witness likewise his very great and high esteem of the sacred Liturgy of
the Church of England, which I may justly say attended him to his very grave,
and did not expire with his breath. For I had an express and particular command
from him, not to omit, nor so much as transpose, (as he had observed too
frequently to be done by others) the reading of the Lesson (taken out of 1 Cor.
15.) which the Church has prescribed to be read at the Grave: and which being
read there, while the mouth of the grave is open upon those that hear it, and
while such a spectacle of mortality is before their eyes, (he said) could not
but have a greater influence upon their souls, then any Funeral Sermon he had
ever heard preached.

4. Witness moreover his exceeding great fervor and devotion in prayer,
whereunto he seldom answered with a single [ Amen;] and at which duty he never
kneeled upon a Qushion (I think) in all his life, nor ever prayed but upon his
knees, till he was confined to his deathbed: and even then, would never lie
with his Cap on his head, if he either prayed himself or any other prayed by
him, while he had strength to pull it off with his own hands.

5. Witness (lastly) that great consolation and devotion which he had and used,
in partaking the comforts of the Church to prepare him for his long journey. I
speak not only in respect of the Holy Eucharist it self, as his viaticum; but
also of those preparatives which he used before it, in the presence of many who
are now here present, as to the Profession of his Faith, the stirring up of his
hope, and the exercise (1.) of his charity in forgiving all that ever had done
him any wrong; (2.) of his humility in desiring all men to forgive him, though
he could not remember he had wronged any: (3.) and last of all of his
repentance, wherein he was so exact and punctual, as not to neglect that great
benefit and comfort, which every truly pious and humble soul does reap from the
Keys of the Church, in the Ministry of absolution duly performed, which he
both desired and received. And when he had been partaker of these comforts
himself, he made all those that assisted him in them, partakers of his Blessing
upon them, and prayers for them.

It is an infallible sign the soil is good, when the seed that is sown does not
only forthwith spring up, S. Mat. 13.5.
as that did which fell upon stony places, but also brings forth fruit with
patience in an honest and good heart, S. Luke 8.15.
as that did which fell upon the good ground, and as the case was here. For he
did not only receive the seed with joy for the present, but retained it with
much comfort in the time of his greatest temptation, even to the very last gasp
which was two days after. For while he was able to speak, he testified the
fruit of it by his words, and acknowledged his thankfullness to God for it, and
the unworthy instrument that reached it to him, and to all that any way
assisted him in it: and even after his speech failed him, he signified with his
hand his assent to what was spoken to him, or prayed for him: and I doubt not
but his Devotion, as well as his Understanding, continued as long as his
breath, though neither his tongue nor hand could (at last) express it.

I need not insist any longer upon these passages at his death, though they be
very excellent and remarkable, because many here present were eyewitnesses of
them. I have been thus particular for their sakes, who had not the happiness to
be then with him, that they may learn, by so good an example, what it is to
have a soul within them, and a God above them: and with what care and courage
they ought both to fight and to run, and with what constancy to continue in
both, till they also obtain that Crown of righteousness, which henceforth is
laid up for him in the Kingdom of Heaven.

3. And that we may all of us be followers of him in these duties as he was of
St. Paul, and both of Christ, I beseech you suffer one word of Exhortation, by
way of Application to our selves, (which was the third and last way wherein I
proposed to handle my Text) and then I shall dismiss you.

And in this I shall keep my self so close to my undertakings, as not to use
any other motives to you, then what St. Paul uses to his Disciple Timothy for
the embracing of this doctrine, in the words immediately before my Text: Verse
6.
I am ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand. For (1.) if
this was so powerful an argument to persuade Timothy to be watchful in all
things, Verse 5.
to endure afflictions, and to fulfill his Ministry: and again (2.) if it was
so strong a motive wherewith to forewarn the people to walk warily in those
approaching evil times, wherein men will not endure sound doctrine, Verse 3.
but after their own lusts heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears:
Then surely it cannot but have some influence upon every one of us, (whether
Lay or Clergy) that has any care or sense of his soul and eternal salvation,
so as to work in us a sincere endeavor to perform those duties which are here
required of us respectively by this great Apostle; when we seriously lay to
heart, that not only St. Paul, but this Reverend Bishop also, are not only
ready to be offered, but are offered already; and that the time of their
departure is not only at hand, but actually past, now when we are already
fallen into those perilous times, which the Apostle in this place did only
foresee at a distance.

Give me leave (I beseech you) yet a little more distinctly to apply my motives
severally to the Lay and Clergy here present. And first for you (my Reverend
Brethren of the Clergy,) let me desire you to mark well the force of the
Apostles argument to his Desciple Timothy: I am ready to be offered, and the
time of my departure is at hand, so that hereafter thou can not have either
my counsel, direction or assistance; and therefore do thou watch in all things,
etc. which is as if he should have said, the duty which hitherto has been
required from us both, will hereafter lie wholly upon thee alone to perform;
and therefore be thou the more careful to use double diligence in the
performance of it. Let us (of the Clergy) I say, but take the Apostles
argument in this sense, and seriously lay it to heart; and then without all
doubt it will pinch us to the quick, when we consider how great a blow it was
to a tottering Church, to have so great a pillar removed from it, as this
learned and laborious Bishop was. Certainly now is the time, and this the
occasion (if ever) when we must watch in all things, and pray unto Almighty God
for his grace to enable us to fulfill our Ministry, and his strength to fit us
for enduring afflictions. And more particularly to lift up our prayers for the
remnant that is left. Isa. 37.4.
Psalm. 25.5.
And to be instant with God, that he would call to remembrance his tender
mercies, and still continue to this poor afflicted Church his loving kindness
which has been ever of old: Psalm. 51.18.
and that he would be favorable and gracious unto Sion, and build up the walls
of Jerusalem; Isa. 13.21.
that it may be no longer an habitation for Ziim and Iim, Owls and Satyrs,
birds of darkness, and beasts of filthiness, and other monstrous creatures of
prey and rapine: but that men may dwell there and have it in possession, Psalm.
69.36.
even the men that he has chosen to come near unto him: Numb. 16.5.
that peace may once again be restored and settled within her walls, and
plenteousness within her places; Psalm. 122.7. Psalm. 132.9.
and that his Priests may be clothed with righteousness, and his Saints sing
with joyfulness. And I hope there is none here present either so negligent of
his own Soul, or so careless of the salvation of others that will not heartily
say Amen to this prayer.

2. And then again (Right honorable, and the rest my dearly beloved brethren
of the Layty) let me apply my discourse in one word unto you, and beseech you
also to mark well the force of St. Paul's argument to Timothy in these words: I
am ready to be offered my self, and yet the time will come when they will not
endure sound doctrine, etc. And therefore as it is necessary I should give thee
a solemn charge, Verse 1, 2.
before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, to preach the word, and to be instant in
season, and out of season; so is it seasonable I should give it thee now when
the time of my departure is at hand; that as the weight of the charge presses
thee, so the seasonableness of it may have the better influence upon the people
to whom thou art sent. As if he should have said: though the duty be great
which the people are to learn from thee, yet it will be the more willingly
listened unto, if thou do tell them I left it in charge with thee at this
very instant when the time of my departure is at hand, seeing the words of a
dying man are so strong and powerful. Let them therefore know, that this is my
last exhortation to them; and then they will the more easily suppose me as
present with them, whenever this doctrine is preached unto them.

And if we look upon the Apostles argument under this consideration, I have
still one parallel behind between him and this Reverend Bishop, which is fetched
not only from the words of a Dying man, but even of a dead man: and if the Rich
man's Logic was good, when he desired Father Abraham to send Lazarus to his
Fathers house, to preach to his five brethren; St. Luke 16.27, 28, 30.
because if one should come unto them from the dead, they would repent; I
cannot but hope that what I have yet to say in the person of this dead Prelate,
will have so much influence upon you all (especially of the Laity) as not to
return without some fruit.

I confess I have done with my own Sermon, (it is more then time I should) but
I have still another to preach to you from this Reverend Bishop; and in this I
can easily presume upon your patience, though I have almost wearied it already.
When I call this a Sermon which now I am to deliver, St. Greg. prolog. in lib.
40 Homil. in Evangel. quarundam quidem dictata expositio assistentiplebi est
per Notarium recitata; quarundam vero explanationem coram populo ipse locutus
sum. Idem. Hom. 21. in princip. Multis vobis lectionibus -- -- per dictatum
loqui consuevi, sed quia lassescente stomacho, ea quae dictaveram legere ipse
non possum, etc.
I speak not without my warrant. For when St. Gregory preached his Forty
Sermons upon the Gospels, he penned them all, but read no more of them himself
then eighteen, by reason of some bodily infirmities: the rest were read by his
Subdeacon or Notarie; and yet all of them were then received, and ever since
esteemed and reputed as St. Gregory's Sermons: and in this sense it is that I
call that which now remains the Bishop of DURESMES Sermon, though I read it
to you. It is indeed the most solemn and elaborate Sermon he ever made, being a
profession or Declaration of his Faith, with some wholesome instructions and
directions to all good Christians within the Church of England, though it be
more particularly directed to those within his own Diocese. By the time you
have heard it, you will find it to be a rich supply for many things, which
otherwise I could not have omitted to speak concerning him. It is a thing he
did with much deliberation, and not without some consultation with some of his
Reverend Brethren and others, as to the form and manner of it, and when it was
fitted exactly according to his own thoughts and desire, he solemnly published,
signed and sealed it, in the presence of five witnesses, and annexed it as a
Codicil to his Will; and Febr. 26. 1658.
afterward, when the shrinking of his small estate compelled him to alter his
will to what it is now at his death, he declared this to be The first clause in
his Will, after the commending of his soul to God, and his body to the Earth,
is Nedel, I will that this profession of my Faith, Approbation of the
Discipline of the Church of Christ by Bishops, and Vindication of my own
innocence hereunto annexed, be esteemed and accounted part of this my last Will
and Testament.
a part of it, (which before was only a Codicil,) in the presence of Tho.
B^rwell, Tho. King, and Rob. Gray.
other witnesses: so that upon second thoughts it was not only owned by him,
but also ratified and confirmed more solemnly then before. It follows in
these words.

1. IN the first ages Antiqua quaedam observantia, imo Apostolica traditio in
Ecclessis diu obtinuit, etc. Council. Nicen. 2. Act. 3. Bin. Tom. 3. p. 318.
of the Church, it was a very excellent custom, that whenever any was
Consecrated Bishop of any Patriarchal or chief see, he should by an Encyclical
Epistle give an account of his Faith to his Brethren of the same order and
dignity, for the better strengthening of that Catholic Communion, which the
Bishops and Churches then had, and still should preserve among themselves. And
this (by the way) was an homage as well paid Hoc enim praestitit St. Greg.
magnus, lib. 1. Ep. 24. idquesecundum priscum praedecessorum suoru^ morem:
test Johanne Diacono, in vita ejus l. 2. c. 3.
as received by the Bishops of Rome in those times, which is a sufficient
evidence of a Coordination, but could never have consisted with their now
challenged Monarchy in the Church.

2. And though the reason be different, the design is no less necessary in this
last and worst age of the Church for all Bishops whomsoever to leave some
Testimony of their Faith to the world, when it shall please God to take them
out of it; that so neither their Names may be traduced after their death, nor
any weak Brother misled, by fathering any false opinions upon them, whereof
they were no way guilty.

3. And this I think will be as necessary for me to perform as any other of my
order in some respects, though not so necessary in some other; which is the
cause both why I leave this short account of my self to the world, and why it
is no larger.

4. For though I have sufficiently declared my self to the world, both by my
life and labors, to be a true Orthodox and sincere Christian and Protestant,
according to the Doctrine and Discipline of the Primitive Church, professed
also and practiced in the Church of England, (seeing I have been a writer above
fifty years and have passed through all the orders of the Church, Deacon,
Priest and Bishop: and have been Rector of three Churches* Prebendary in one,
Dean of two, and Bishop of three Diocesses successively) yet I cannot think my
self secure from the malignancy of false and virulent tongues and pens after my
Death, more then I have been in my life: and the rather because I have
sustained the heavy Office of a Bishop so many years in the Church (which some
perverse people make criminal in it self) and have by my writings discharged a
good Conscience in asserting the truth against the opposites on both sides; for
which the Father of Lies will not be wanting to stir up enemies against me.

5. I do therefore here solemnly profess in the presence of Almighty God, that
by his grace preventing and assisting me, I have always lived, and purpose to
die in the true Catholic Faith wherein I was Baptized: firmly believing all
the Canonical Scripture of the old and New Testament, and fully assenting to
every Article of all those three Creeds, (commonly called the Apostles Creed,
the Nicen or Constantinopolitan Creed, and the Athanasian Creed) which in the
ancient Church were accounted the Adequate Rules of Faith, and have accordingly
been received, as such, by the Church of England.

6. As for Counsels, that are free and general, consisting of competent persons
lawfully summoned, and proceeding according to the word of God, (Such as were
the four first, viz those of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus and Chalcedon) I do
reverence them as the Supreme Tribunals of the Church of Christ upon earth, for
judging of Heresies, and composing differences in the Church. And as I utterly
condemn all Heresies that have been condemned by any of them, so I heartily
wish that all the present differences in the Church of God might be determined
by such a free general Counsel as any of those four were already mentioned.

7. The composers of those ancient differences in the Church were Bishops, (as
it cannot be denied) concerning which order, I profess to believe, that ^t was
instituted by the Apostles, who were infallibly inspired by the Holy Ghost, and
approved by Christ in the Revelation of St. John; and consequently to be of
Divine institution, as I have made it evident by a little Treatise already
printed, and could still further manifest it by some papers not yet committed
to the Press. And I had never sustained the burden of that Office above 40,
years in the Church, if this had not been always my judgment concerning
Bishops. I pray God restore them again to those poor afflicted parts of his
Church where either the Office or the Exercise of it is wanting.

8. That the Bishop of Rome has any more power over Bishops then other
Primates and Patriarcks have in their several Sees respectively, is a thing
which I have often and largely disproved in my writings. All that the Ancient
Church did allow him was a priority of order, but no supreamacie of Monarchical
power. And I heartily wish that this, and all other differences now on foot
between us and the Church of Rome, might be decided by the doctrine and
practice of the Church for the first five hundred years after Christ, for that
has been my design in all my writings.

9. If I had not believed upon sufficient evidence, that the succession of
Bishops in the Church of England had been legally derived from the Apostles, I
had never entered into that high calling, much less continued in it thus long.
And therefore I must here expressly vindicate my self from a most notorious
untruth which is cast upon me by a late Romish writer, That I should publicly,
in the House of Peers, the beginning of the last Parliament, assent to that
abominable fiction which some Romanists have devised concerning the
Consecrating Matthew Parker at the Nags-head Tavern to be Archbishop of
Canterbury: for I do here solemnly profess, I have always believed that Fable
to proceed from the Father of lies, as the public Records still extant do
evidently testify. Nor do I remember that ever I heard it mentioned in that or
any other Parliament that ever I sat in.

10. As for our Brethren the Protestants of foreign reformed Churches, the
most learned and judicious of themselves have bewailed their misery for want
of Bishops. And therefore God forbid I should be so uncharitable as to censure
them for No-Churches, for that which is their Infelicity, not their fault. But
as for our perverse Protestants at home, I cannot say the same of them, seeing
they impiously reject that which the other piously desire. And therefore I
cannot flatter those in this Church who have received their Ordination only
from mere Presbyters, Quid enim facit excepta ordinatione Episcopus, quod
Presbyter non facit. S. Hieron, Ep. ad Euagr.
so far as to think them lawfully Ordained. S. Hierom himself reserved to the
Bishop the power of Ordination.

11. Seeing therefore I have been, (as I hear,) so far misunderstood by some
among us, as to be thought to approve of their Ordination by mere Presbyters,
because I once said, it might be vallid in case of Necessity: I do here profess
my meaning to be. That I never thought there was any such. Necessity in the
Church of England as to warrant it, where (blessed be God for it,) there be so
many Bishops still surviving: And therefore I desire them, not to mistake my
meaning in that saying.

12. Wheresoever there is a formed Church, there must of necssity be some set
form of Gods worship; Otherwise it will quickly fall in pieces, as woeful
experience has taught us. And of all forms of Gods worship in the whole
Church of Christ, none in my judgment did ever exceed the Leiturgy of the
Church of England, both for decency edification and devotion, in all the
several offices of it. If the Assemblers themselves that first laid it aside,
could have found any faults in it, their modesty was not so great, (if we may
judge of it by their other actions,) as to have concealed them from the world.

13. Having thus far prevented the uncharitableness of others against my self,
I do here from my heart protest my unfeigned charity to all the world: and more
particularly both toward those Papists and perverse protestants whom I have so
much endeavovred to undeceive, both by my Sermons, conferences and writings. It
was only their errors whereat I was offended: I have always loved and pitied
their persons, and prayed and labored for the right informing of their minds,
and the eternal salvation of their souls.

14. But yet my common charity to them must not supersede my more particular
love and obligation which I have to those truly humble and meek souls in the
Church of England, (and more especially in my own Diocese of Duresme,) who
still stand firm upon the foundation of a sound faith, and continue obedient to
the doctrine of Gods word and discipline of his Church, without wavering either
to the right hand or to the left.

15. And my earnest exhortation to them is, that they would still continue
their former affections, (notwithstanding all temptations to the contrary,)
both to the doctrine, discipline, government, and form of worship of this poor
afflicted Church: Which if I did not believe to be the securest way for the
salvation of their souls, I had not ventured my own upon the same bottom.

16. This is the only Legacy I now can, and the best I ever could leave them,
beside my prayers: Wherein I commend them all to the blessing of almighty God,
and to the glory of his saving grace in Christ Jesus.

I have appointed two Copies of this my Legacy or Declaration, to be written:
The one whereof I do hereby order to be annexed as a Codicill to my will, and
the other to be delivered into the hand of my beloved Chaplain, Mr. John
Barwick to be published in print after my death Both of which I have signed,
sealed, published, and declared this 15. day of April, in the year of our
Lord, 1658. In the presence of Tho Duresme, Thomas Saunders Junior. John
Barwick Cler. Joseph Draper Cler. R. Gray. Evan Davies.



And now you have had His Sermon as well as mine; and may see by it he has not
ended his fight, though he has ended his life: For by this he has set a guard
upon his memory, after his body is in the grave. I might in this thing fitly
compare him to Abel before the flood, Heb. 11, 4.
who being dead yet speaks; Jud. 16, 30.
Or to Samson under the Law. Who slew more at his death then in his life; but
only that I have made choice of St. Paul for the pattern, now under the
Gospel. It is the Gospel rule not to kill, but to save; S. Luke, 9.56.
With St. Paul, to build up the Church of lively stones, (the souls of men,)
and not with Sampson to pull down the house upon our selves and others. To this
it was that St. Paul engaged in all his fights, both in what he did and what he
suffered; and in this it was, that he was looked upon as a pattern and
presedent by this reverend Bishop. How many thousand souls the Apostle has
gained even since his death, is known only to God: And so is it also how many
may still be brought in by this crowning act of this deceased Bishop.

They have each done his part, in their several rank and degree, according to
the proportion of their abilities; And God in mercy will (I hope) supply the
rest both to them and us. They have severally fought a good fight, they have
finished their course, they have kept the faith: and henceforth is laid up for
each of them a crown of righteousness: and so there will be for us also, if we
follow their good example. For it is no peculiar reward to them or any other in
particular; The Lord, the rigteous judge (...) will give, (or render) it, not
only to them, but (as it follows in my Text,) to all those that love his
appearing.

To him therefore with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, three persons and one
God, let us render, (as is due,) all glory, honor, praise, power, thankesgiving
and adoration, this day, and from henceforth for ever more, Amen, Amen, Amen.
A SUMMARIE ACCOUNT OF THE HOLY LIFE AND HAPPY DEATH Of the Right Reverend
Father in God THOMAS LATE LORD BISHOP of DURESEME. Added as a supplement to the
Sermon preached at his Funeral. By the same Author.

Eccles. 7, 1. A good name is better then precious Ointment, and the day of
Death, then the day of ones Birth.

Claudian. Antiquos Evolve duces, assursce futurae
Militiae. --
LONDON. Printed for R. Royston, at the Angel in Ivy-lane, 1660.

The LIFE and DEATH OF THOMAS Lord BISHOP OF DURESME. The Preface.
1. AS the death of Gods Saints is precious in the sight of the Lord: Psalm.
116, 15.
So will the memorial of their lives also be in the hearing of all that are
really his people. And of all his Saints, none can be more precious to him, nor
should be to us. Then those that are most peculiarly honored with that title by
the spirit of God in holy Scripture; Those that are by him called unto, and
employed in some holy office, as well as qualified with Sanctifying grace,
Psalm. 106, 16.
like Aron who was Gods high Priest, and for that reason is emphatically styled
the Saint of the Lord.

2. If there had not been something that is sacred in the office of a Bishop,
Can. 29. (...).
even as it is distinct from the order of Priesthood, the general council of
Chalcedon could not, (as we know it did,) have adjudged it Sacrilege to take
down a Bishop to the degree of a Priest: And whatsoever that was, it was in
this person over and above his sanctity of life, and sacredness of his other
inferior orders of Ministry in the Church. And therefore I may represent this
reverend Bishop to the world as a Saint or holy person, for his Calling as well
as for his life, without any prejudice to the truth; and thereby oppose that
current of Sacrilege which some of late years has much improved, who will not
allow him the title of a Saint, nor none else that is not of their own sect or
faction. See the Sermon at his Funeral.
I have already upon another occasion made some short essay of it; and this is
only to supply what the largeness of the subject and shortness of the time
would not then permit me to speak.

3. And in this I must disclaim all thoughts of by ends, or any other design,
then only by asserting the truth to be just to him, and charitable to others:
That neither his enemies may wrong his good name, nor his friends want some
small preservation of his memory; Nor both of them the benefit of his good
example.

4. I know his charity while he lived had a special eye upon his enemies: and
so shall mine have now he is dead, in convincing them also, as far as I am
able, of their great injustice as well as uncharitableness against him and the
rest of his Reverend Brethren, in vilifying their persons and contemning their
sacred function, to the high displeasure of Almighty God, the great scandal of
Christian Religion, and the extreme hazard of the Church of England, by opening
so wide a gap to Schism and Heresy, and even Athesme it self.

5. How those that so zealously affect the exterpation of Episcopacy, can
arrogate to themselves the title either of Christians or Protestants, is a
thing that may justly be questioned; seeing Bishops were planted in the Church
together with Christianity even by the Apostles themselves, (as is evident from
the concurrent suffrages of all antiquity: Confess. Aug. Cap. ult. de potest.
Eccl. Non petunt Ecclesiae, ut Episcopi honoris sui jactura sarciant concordiam
-- tantum petunt ut injusta onera remittant, quae nova sunt and praeter
consuetudinem Ecclesiae Catholicae recepta.
) And that the first Protestants, (from whom all the rest derive that title,)
did clearly profess in their confession of Auspurgh their willingness to submit
to their Bishops, (even of the Romish Church,) provided they would not impose
upon them such new and unjust burdens as had not been received by the custom
of the Catholic Church: Which none of our present English Bishops ever did;
but the quite contrary was objected against them for their greatest crime.

6. I know that many of the seduced people have repented of these errors
already; and I hope the rest may be brought to repentance, when they see what
persons they were both for life and learning, who sustained the office of
Bishops at that time when the cunning and malice of the Devil did so unjustly
incense the rude multitude against them. I shall confine my self to this one
instance, (leaving the rest for others as occasion shall require,) who was in
as great an hazard of his life in one of those tumults as any, and yet there
was as little objected against him by those that raised them as against any of
the rest.

7. And in what I say of him I shall keep my self to the exact rule of truth,
both for his sake, and my own, and the Readers, and the end I chiefly aim at;
without either flattering his memory, or omitting those passages of his life
which may chiefly qualify his example for our imitation. Only I must beg my
Readers pardon, if the length of his life, and multitude of his employments,
and greatness of his learning, and christian concealment of much of his piety,
necessitate me to omit many things I could not learn, and pass over somethings
I know, and fall much below his merit in what I relate for brevities sake.

8. Having premised thus much, I presume the Reader will expect no Panegyric,
but only a bare, (and that also a short,) narrative of his life, for the
information of posterity and conviction of his enemies, rather then for any
solace to his friends, who could not but know him well enough, seeing he was a
burning and shining light, for so great a number of years here amongst us. And
what I say shall for methods sake be reduced to these three heads.

1. A plain Narrative of the principal passages in his Life.

2. A brief Catalogue of his works.

3. A short Character of his person and Qualities.

CHAP. I. A plain Narrative of the principal passages of his Life.
1. HIs Coat armor and pedigree will show him to be of the same Original and
Stock, with that eminent prelate and wise states man John Morton, Bishop of
Elie and Lord Chancellor of England, afterward ArchBishop of Canterbury, and
Cardinal; by whose contrivance and management the too Houses of York and
Lancaster were united; Whereby that issue of blood was stopped which had so
long and plentifully flowed within the bowels of this our Native Country. And
from hence the judicious Reader will conclude his Ancesters could not be
obscure, (at lest since this Cardinals time,) for such persons as he was seldom
left their kindred without some considerable preferments. Io. Budden vit. Io.
Mort. Archiep.

Cant. page 50. Thomam Mortonum, Et Johanem Mortonum duos ex fratribus filios
Scripsit haredes.


If I were so good an Herald as to trace up his pedigree to those times, it is
possible it would reach to Thomas or John Morton whom the Cardinal made his
Heirs as being Sons to two of his Brothers. Sure I am that Sir. Thomas Morton
of Dorsetshire who reckoned his descent from one of them, sought him out and
acknowledged his kindred, and desired his acquaintance, presently after he
appeared in Print, and long before he ascended to any considerable eminency in
the Church.

2. I am enforced to fetch my compass thus far about, (and when I have done to
sit down with probabilities,) by his great modesty and humility, who would not
receive, nor so much as look upon, a very fair and large descent of his
Pedigree, when it was presented unto him, though he liberally rewarded the
person that presented it. And therefore I shall say no more concerning his
progenitors, and had not said thus much but that his Seall at Arms will
warrant me in it.

3. The place of his Birth was the ancient and famous City of YORK, where
Constantius the Father of Constantine the great died in the arms of his Son,
and where (some say) the said Constantine the first Christian Emperor was
born: perhaps we must understand it, as Emperor, rather then as Constantine;
for questionless he was there first declared Emperor. I might say more for the
honor of that City, but only that it is unnecessary, as well as extrinsecall
to the subject of my writing who needs no such advantages to add any luster to
him.

4. His Parents were Mr. Richard Morton Citizen and Mercer of York, and Mrs.
Elizabeth Leedale his wife, who enriched the World with him on Tuesday the 20.
of March, Anno. Dom. 1564. He being the Sixth Child of Ninteen begotten and
born of the same Parents. His Father was so eminent in his calling, that there
is not at this day, nor has been for many years by past, any Mercer in that
City, who were not his Apprentices either immediately or mediatly. His Mother
also was a Gentlewoman of a very good family, descended from the Valvasours by
her Mothers side: And by whom not only the Valvasours but the Langdales also,
and other Gentlemen of eminent worth in Yorkshire, acknowledged themselves to
be of his kindred.

5. Nor were his Parents less memorable for their Piety and Wisdom, then for
these outward respects: One fruit whereof we have in the Education of their
Children, though I shall instance only in him of whom I now write; Who by their
care and providence was brought up in piety and learning; First at York under
Mr. Pullen, and afterward at Hallifax under Mr. Maud, of whom he always spoke
with great reverence, as a grave man and a good Scholemaster.

6. It would be too great a digression to speak of his Scholefellowes, whom we
may presume to be some better some worse. Otherwise I might mention Sir. Thomas
Cheek on the one side, (not long since deceased,) venerable for his great worth
and Age; and Guy Faux on the other infamous for his Dark lanthorn and villainous
intention to blow up the King and Parliament in the Powder treason, both which
were his Schole-fellowes at York.

7. How well he profited in learning, both at Schole, and in the University,
will appear by his own writings without my observation. Hincmar. in Vit. S.
Remigii. Vt primum disciplinarum capax factus est -- Non modo natu majores,
ingenii felicitate, discendique ardore, sed and morum maturitate singulari
Excelluit.
And though it to be true in him which was written of S. Remigius, that from
the time of his first capacity of learning he out-stripped even those that were
his superiors in age, both in excellency of parts, proficiency in learning, and
maturity of moral virtues: Yet was he not, (as the fault is too common,) cast
as an abortive, either out of the Schole into the University, or out of the
University into the Church. For he took root in the Nurserie at Hallifax till
the Eighteenth year of his age, before he was transplanted into the garden of
the University.

8. But in the year 1582. he was sent to Cambridge and there admitted into St.
John's College, wherein were so many Eminent Scholars at that time, Epist. ad
dict. Col. dat. Ian. 30, 1634. in Regist. Epist. p. 336. -- Quod olim antistes
literarum, divinus ille Whittakerus, Non collegium, sed propter omnium in eo
Artium infignem Mercaturam, Academium ipsam indigitabat.
as he was wont to say it seemed to be a whole University of it self. The
Master of the College was Doctor Whittaker, whose learned writings have
declared his worth in the world, and whom he was wont to quote for that saying.
His first Tutour was Mr. Anthony Higgon, afterward Dean of Rippon, a good
Benefactour to the College otherwise, and in him not only to the College but
also to the University, and the whole Church of Christ. But he being called out
of the College to other more weighty employments in the Church, left this his
Pupil to the Tuition and care of Mr. Henry Nelson, afterward Rector of Hougham
in Lincolnshire, who lived to see his Pupil pass through all the other
Dignities he had in the Church till he came to be Bishop of Duresme, and a good
many years after.

9. But I shall proceed in due order: In the beginning of November, 1584. he
was chosen Scholar of the House into a place of Constables foundation, Regist.
Coll.
(as it is called,) peculiar to his own Native County of York. In the year
1586. He took his first Degree of Bachellor of Arts, Dr. Tyndall, president of
Queens College being then Vicechancellor, Regist. Academ.
and Mr. Smith of Corpus Christi College and Mr. Cowell of Kings College being
Proctours: And three years and some Months after, (viz. Anno Dom. 1590. Thomas
Preston Dr. of Law and Master of Trinity Hall being Vicechancellor, and Mr.
Moutlow of Kings College and Mr. Betts of S. Peter's College, Proctours,) he
took his next Degree of Master of Arts: having first performed all Acts and
exercises respectively requisite to each degree with great approbation and
applause.

10. He continued his studies in the College at his Fathers Charge, after he
was Master of Arts above two years. Regist. Coll.
And then (viz. Mar. 17. 1592.) he was admitted Fellow into a place of the
Foundation of Dr. Keyton, which I cannot mention without his honor to those
that rightly understand the nature of that Foundation. For the said Dr. Keyton
having founded two Fellowships and two Scholarships in St. John's College under
these Qualifications; Regist. Fundat. dict. Col.
First that the persons be elect and chosen of such as be or have been
Choristers in the Chapel of Southwell. And (2.) if none such be found able in
the University aforesaid then, (for I use the very words of the Foundation,)
the same Fellows and Scholars to be chosen of such persons that be most
singular in manners and learning, of what County soever they be that be then
abiding in the said University: Upon this second branch of the Qualification,
was Mr. Morton chosen into one of those Fellowships; And that merely for his
worth, against eight Competitors for the place, who were otherwise all as
capable of it as he, and most of them better befriended: Which he was wont to
recount with greater contentment to himself, then his advancement to any
dignity he ever enjoyed in the Church. And about the same time he was chosen
Logic Lecturer for the University: Which place he discharged with much art and
diligence, as may appear by his Lectures fair written, which I find among his
papers after his death.

11. And now having laid so good a foundation in Arts and Sciences, we may look
upon him in the next place as a builder in Gods Church. And for his qualifying
thereunto, he did not, (as is now too frequent,) run before he was duly called
and sent, but according to the method of holy Church, was admitted to the
sacred order, first of Deacon, in the same year 1592. and the next year after
of Priesthood, by Richard Howland then Lord Bishop of Peterburgh, who had
formerly been Master of the same College whereof he then was Fellow.

12. Having thus received his commission from God and his Church, he was very
ready to assist others in the way of Charity; but not too forward to take upon
himself a particular cure of souls. And accordingly we find him for about five
years after this, continuing in the College, prosecuting his own private
study: and reading to such young Scholars as were committed to his care and
Tuition.

Regist. Academ.
13. In the year 1598. (Dr. Iegon Master of Corpus Christi College being
Vicechancellor, and Mr. Moon of Katherin Hall, and Mr. Sutton of Kings College,
Proctors,) he took his Degree of Bachellor in Divinity. And about the same
year, being presented instituted and inducted to the Rectory of Long Marston,
four miles distant from his Native City of York, he betook himself wholly to
the Cure of Souls there committed to him, which he discharged with great care
and diligence: And yet he did not intermit his higher studies for the general
good of the Church while he attended it. And to that end he had always some
person to be his assistent, whom he knew to be pious and learned, as Mr. John
Price, and Mr. Matthew Levet, who were both formerly his Pupills in Cambridge,
the former afterward a prebendary of Leichfeild, the later of Duresme, and also
Subdean of Rippon.

14. And this assistence was the more necessary because his great parts and
worth would not suffer him to enjoy his privacy in a Country cure. For first he
was made choice of by the Earl of Huntington, then Lord President of the
North, to be his Chaplain, for his dexterity and accuteness in disputing with
the Romish Recusants: For it was Queen Elizabeth's express command to him to
convince them by arguments rather then suppress them by force, and this she
expressed, (as his Lord-ship was wont to say,) in the words of the Prophet:
Nolo mortem peccatoris.

15. But the Earl dying presently after, he returned again to his privacy, at
Marston, where he continued not long before the Lord Sheffeild, (who succeeded
as Lord president,) commanded him to hold a public Conference before his
Lord-ship, and the Council at the Manner house in York, with two Romish
Recusants who were then prisoners in the Castle, the one was Mr. Young a
Priest, the other Mr. Stillington a Layman; Which he performed with great
satisfaction to the Auditory, among whom were many of the chief Gentry and
Clergy of Yorkshire. I have heard there is still in some men's hands a true
relation of that conferrence in writing; But he would never suffer it to be
Printed, because he and his Adversaries engaged themselves by mutual promise,
not to Print it but by common consent, which he never could obtain from them,
though he earnestly desired and sought it.

16. In the year 1602. began the great Plague at York, at which time he carried
himself with so much heroical charity as will make the Reader wonder to hear
it. For the poorer sort being removed to the Pesthouse, he made it his
frequent exercise to visit them with food, both for their bodies and souls. His
chief errand was to instruct and comfort them, and pray for them and with them,
and to make his coming the more acceptable, he carried usually a sack of
provision with him for those that wanted it. And because he would have no man
to run any hazard thereby but himself, he seldom suffered any of his servants
to come near him, but sadled and unsadled his own Horse, and had a private door
made on purpose into his house and chamber.

17. The next year following, the Lord Ever being sent Ambassador
extraordinary by Queen Elizabeth both to the Emperor of Germany and King of
Denmark, he made choice of him, and Mr. Richard Crakanthorp, (famous also for
his learned works in Print,) to be his Chaplains. And Mr. Morton being
desirous to improve himself by seeing foreign Kingdoms, Churches and
Universities, did willingly accept of the employment.

18. He had leave from the Lord Ambassador while he stayed at Breme to visit
some of the chief Cities and Universityes of High Germany. In which travel,
while he was at Mentz he fell into a very familiar acquaintance with Father
Mulhusinus, a learned Jesuit, (who gave him a Book of his own writing,
inscribed with his own hand pro Domino Mortono,) and also with Nicholas
Serarius, another learned Father of the same Society, and Rector of the College
there, (who afterward mentioned him with civility in a Book he wrote against
Joseph Scaliger.) Both these were so well satisfied with his learning and
piety, as to treat him with much courtesy while he stayed there, and to desire
his prayers when he departed thence, and that ex animo too, when he pressed
them to know whether it was not merely out of civility and complement. I cannot
say he found Beccanus in the contrary temper at Colen, though he left him so.
For being gaulled with some Arguments in a disputation between them, he
slighted his prayers as of one whom he miscalled an Heretic. I only instance
in this, to show that many learned men of the Church of Rome, (and some even of
the Jesuits order,) do not in their hearts and private discourses condemn us of
the Church of England for Heretics, whatsoever ever they publicly write or
speak out of design and policy.

19. His stay in these parts was the shorter because the Ambassadors
commission determined at the death of the Queen. But however he improved his
time so well, partly in furnishing his own library with Books at Frankfurt and
elsewhere, but chiefly in his conversation with learned men, and in his
foreign observations, that he always very highly valued that oppertunity.

20. At his return he was solicited by Roger Earl of Rutland to be his
domestical Chaplain. Which profer he was the more willing to accept for the
privacy he hoped to enjoy in a place where he was not known, for making use of
that Treasure of Books he had got in his travells: And the rather because
thereby he was brought so much nearer to London then before, whither he must
have many occasions to travel for the putting forth of such Books as he had
in design to write. For it was not long after that he Printed the first part
of his Apologia Catholica, of which and the rest of his works I shall speak
more particularly hereafter.

21. About this time it was, that the Archbishop of York, Toby Matthews, (that
most exquisit preacher,) conferred upon him a Prebend in that Metropoliticall
Church.

22. In the year of our Lord 1606. Dr. Clayton Master of St. John's College
being then Vicechancellor, and Mr. Raven of Kings College and Mr. Gent of
Corpus Christi College Proctours, he took the Degree of Doctor in Divinity,
with much applause of those that heard him perform his Acts and exercises, and
great approbation of both the professors in Divinity, Dr. John Overall that
profound Scholar, and Dr. Thomas Playfer that accute disputant and accurate
preacher, who were both of them very competent Judges of men's abilities. And
there began that intimate acquaintance he had with the said Dr. Overall,
(afterward Dean of St. Paul's, Bishop of Leichfeild and Coventry and lastly of
Norwich,) which continued between them till it was dissolved by death.

23. About the same time he was sworn Chaplain in Ordinary to King James, and
by him presented to the Deanary of Gloucester the same year 1606. And while he
was Dean there, the Lord Ever above mentioned, then Lord President of Wales,
assumed him for one of his Majesty's Counsel for the Marches.

24. In his first journey to Gloucester, he went by Oxford at the Act-time, and
was there incorporated and admitted to the same degree he had in Cambridge. At
which time he fell into acquaintance with that reverend person and famous
preacher Dr. John King, then Dean of Christ-Church, and afterward Bishop of
London, which afterward grew so intimate that the said Bishop made choice of
him to perform the last offices to him both at his Death and Burial.

25. The same occasion gave him also the oppertunity of being acquainted with
Dr. Raynolds president of Corpus Christi College, Dr. Ayrey, provost of Queens
College, and many other eminent persons in that University. And among others
with Daniel Featley, (afterward Dr. in Divinity,) who that year proceeded
Master of Arts, and performed his exercises with such applause as made Dr.
Morton carry a great friendship toward him ever after, which was answered with
a proportionable reverence on the other side, which he publicly testified in
the Epistle before a Book which he dedicated to him when he was Bishop of
Duresme. And the like respect has been showed to him by other learned men: And
in particular by the late reverend Bishop of Norwich who dedicated to him that
little but most excellent Book called PAX TERRIS.

26. He continued not full three years Dean of Gloucester, till King James
removed him to the Deanary of Winchester, ( viz. in the year 1609.) Where he
succeeded Dr. George Abbot, then consecrated Bishop of Leichfeild and Coventry,
and afterward translated to the Archbishopric of Canterbury. And while he was
Dean there Dr. Thomas Bilson then Bishop of Winchester conferred on him the
Rectory of Alesford.

27. At Winchester he fell into an intimate acquaintance with that pious and
learned man Dr. Arthur Lake then Master of St. Cross, afterward Bishop of Bath
and Wells, as also with Dr. John Harmar warden of Winchester College, and
other learned men whose friendship he very much valued. And at the same time
also Sibrandus Lubbertus, professor of Divinity in the University of Franeker
in West Freisland wrote his answer to the 99. errors of Conradus Vorstius,
which he dedicated to him by the title of Dean of Winchester.

28. In the year 1610. being the seventh year of King James, was held a
Parliament. And at the same time, (as the manner is,) a Convocation of the
Clergy of the province of Canterbury, at St. Paul's Church in London, where
with general applause he preached the Sermon ad clerum upon St. Mat. 5, 13.
Vos estis sal terrae. And should have been the prolocutour to the lower house
of Convocation, but that in modesty he declined it, and the rather to make way
for a friend of his, whom he rather desired might have that office.

29. Upon these and the like public employments, was he constrained to be much
in London, about this time. And when any business brought him thither, he was
importuned by his worthy friend Dr. Overall above mentioned, Dean of St.
Paul's, to take his lodging in the Deanary house. And this gave him the
oppertunity of a very early acquaintance with that very learned and judicious
Scholar Monsieur Isaac Casaubon, who being then newly come out of France was
likewise, (as his great merits required,) very freely and hospitably
entertained and lodged there by the said Dean.

30. And this love thus begun between these two learned persons was never
intermited in their lives nor obliterated by death, as appears by the Monument
set up in the Abbey Church of St. Peter's at Westminster for Monsieur Casaubon,
(he being buried their,) at the charge of this reverend Bishop: The inscription
whereof was composed by that excellent Poet and Scholar Dr. Thomas Goad, Rector
of Hadley in Suffolk.

31. Upon the like occasions and about the same time, he had the opportunity of
entering into a very good acquaintance with several other eminent foreign
Scholars and Divines; As namely Abraham Scultetus professor of divinity in the
University of Heidlebergh and Aulicus Concionator to his Highness Frederick
Prince Electour palatine, John Diodati professor of divinity at Geneva a very
learned and judicious Divine; Peter du Molin the famous preacher at Charington,
and several others, whose worth is very well known by their learned works in
Print.

32. His continuance in the Deanary of Winchester was not so long as he
desired, and yet when he was to be removed from it, and to be consecrated
Bishop of Chester, there was a rub cast in his way by a certain great person;
Not out of any favor or respct to him, but the quite contrary. It was by one
that had reason to know the revenues of that Church so well, as to think he
might be believed upon his word, when he said in some passion to the King, that
Dr. Morton had spoiled one of the best Deanaries in England.

Psalm. 141, 6.
33. And this blow had been received as a precious balm, if it had not broke
the head of his reputation, and of the truth together; because he was really as
unwilling to take the heavy office of a Bishop upon him, as the other was loath
he should enjoy the honor. But however as the case stood, it concerned the
Dean to vindicate his good name from that foull and unjust aspersion. And
therefore acquainting his brethren of the Chapter with it, they were very
forward to give, and he not backward to receive a Testimonial from them under
their hands and sealls, Mr. Brown, Mr. Barlow, Mr. Hurward, and others.
that he had been one of the best Deans that ever had been at Winchester in
their times: and yet some of them were very ancient men, and had long enjoyed
their prebends in that Church.

34. On the other side there wanted not some potent persons in the Court, who
pressed hard upon the King to have him Consecrated Bishop, only in favor of
his successors in that Deanary: Which made him bemoan himself in a Letter to an
intimate friend wherein he complained of an (...), (as he called it,) which had
occasioned his removal out of the dale wherein he could willingly have spent
his days, to set him upon an Hill, etc.

35. And by this I leave the Reader to judge how really he might have said Nolo
Episcopari. Hincmar. in vit. S. Remig. Ad pontificii culmen non tam electus,
quam violentur raptus fuit.

Bed. Hist. gent. Anglor. lib.

Episcopatum suscipere fuit coactus.


If it had not been to clear himself of that blot formerly mentioned, which was
so unjustly cast upon him, I might have said of him as Hincmarus does of St.
Remigius, he was not so properly chosen, as violently snatched up to this
height of Episcopal dignity. And (however) I cannot say less of him, then
Venerable Bede, (who lies buried in the Church where he was last Bishop,) said
of St. Wilfrid, (who was Bishop of the Church where he was born.) He was forced
to take upon him the office of a Bishop.

36. This appeared yet further by the slowness of the proceedings toward his
Consecration. For though the King nominated him for the Bishopric of Chester
in the year 1615. Yet was it the seventh of July, 1616. before he was
Consecrated, partly by occasion of this rub, partly by his own indifferency,
though withal I must say it was partly occasioned by the distance of those
several places, where the things must be respectively performed, which are
perviously required by the Canons of the Church, and Laws of the Land in order
to his Consecration. For the Conge d' esleire, was granted at London, the
Election performed at Chester by the Dean and Chapter; which being signified
back to the King, there wanted still his Royal assent to the Election, and
after that the Metropolitans solemn Confirmation of it, which must be obtained
at York, the sea of Chester being in that Province.

37. The solemnity it self of his Ordination or Consecration was one of the
greatest that has been seen in England in the memory of man; For there were
three Metropolitans respectively engaged in it, beside other Bishops. The
foundation of the whole proceedings was laid, (as regularly it ought,) in a
Faculty from the Archbishop of York: The Act it self was performed in chief by
the Archbishop of Canterbury to whom the said Faculty was directed, and he was
assisted therein by the Primat of Ireland, and the Bishop of Cathnes in
Scotland, beside the Bishop of London and other Bishops of the English Church.
The place where this sacred office was performed was the Archbishop of
Canterburys Chapel at Lambith.

38. But that which made this solemnity the greater was the presence of so many
of the Nobility of England besides many Lords of Scotland that were there;
Which was occasioned in part by a concurrent action that was also solemnly
performed at the same time and place: Namely the Absolution of the Marquess of
Huntley, from the Band of an Excommunication, laid upon him by the Bishops of
Scotland in the High Commission. The particulars whereof, (being perfectly
extrinsecall to my present design,) I shall refer the Reader for them to the
History of the Church of Scotland, Lib. 7. ad. An. 1616.
written by that wise and grave person the late Archbishop of St. Andrews.

39. The concurrence of these two great solemnities occasioned a very great
number of Communicants at the celebration of the Holy Eucharist, of the
Nobility and Gentry of both Nations, beside the Clergy. Whereunto I must add,
(as a thing not to be omitted,) that Prince Radzivils Son of Poland, did also
then communicate, and likewise a Noble man of that Kingdom that came over with
him as his Governor: Who did both of them very much admire the glory and
happiness of our English Church, and the reverend performance of those sacred
offices in her.

40. I have now brought this great light almost to his Candlestick, where his
actions will be so conspicuous and so many, as it will be both unnecessary and
impossible for me to give the world a particular account of them: And therefore
I must content my self, and desire the Reader to be contented also, with a few
of the chief.

41. It fell out with him, as with a candle newly lighted, which is then in
most danger to be blown out. For while necessaries were preparing for his
journey to Chester, and for the accommodation of his palace there he retired
himself to Clay Hall in Essex upon the earnest invitation of that noble Knight
and his worthy friend Sir. Christopher Hatton, and there fell sick of a
dangerous fever though, (blessed be God for it,) it continued not long with him.

42. Being happily recovered of this sickness, he made no delay, but presently
put himself upon his journey toward his great work; And being advanced as far
as the borders of his own diocese, he was met on the way and brought into the
City of Chester by such a great number of Knights and other the best Gentlemen
of the Country, beside the Clergy, as may give a lasting testimony to their
honor, as well as his, in showing such a religious respect to their Bishop.

43. When he was settled there, he found all the inconveniences which he
foresaw, and which made him at first so loath to undertake that weighty office,
and some also which he could not foresee at so great a distance. For beside the
great number of Romish Recusants, which has always been observed in this
Diocese; he found another sort of Recusants, (better known by the name of
Non-conformists,) who though they were not as many in number as the other, yet
had they so much perverseness and obstinacy in them, as made them equal, or
rather superior, in relation to the trouble he had with them.

44. And therefore his first care was to reduce them to their obedience to the
Church, wherein he used no less of fatherly mildness toward them, then
strength of argument against them. For having cited before him such of the
Clergy as were the chief of that party, (whereof the principal ringleader was
one Mr. Hynd,) he first enquired of them the reason of their nonconformity;
which when he understood to be, The use of the Surplice, the Cross at Baptism,
and the Ring in Marriage, he was content himself to endeavor their
satisfaction in a public and solemn conference with them upon all these three
points. But their perverseness frustrating his expectation and desires, in
relation to their own good, his next care was to make his endeavors more
public, for the common good of the rest of their party. And therefore he
Printed a relation of that conference with some enlargements; which he
entitled: The defense of the three innocent ceremonies.

45. And having committed this charitable and learned work to the blessing of
God upon the hearts of the Readers, he betook himself to endeavor the reducing
of the other adverse party, the Popish Recusants, wherein God blessed him
exceedingly considering how great the work was, and how little time he had to
bring it toward any perfection, being Bishop there not full three years. And
of this we have a very authentic and ample testimony from royal authority in
the declaration of King James, concerning lawful sports to be used, in these
words: We were informed, and that too truly, that our County of Lancashire,
abounded more in Popish Recusants then any County in England, and thus has
still continued to our great regret, with little amendment, save that now of
late, in our last riding though our said county, we find both by the report of
the Judges, and of the Bishop of that diocese, (viz. this reverend Bishop,)
that there is some amendment now daily beginning, which is no small content to
us.

46. Having thus fallen casually upon this declaration, it will be requisite to
speak more fully of it, seeing this reverend Bishop was in a peculiar manner
concerned in it. And the case was thus: It was no small policy in the leaders
of the Popish party to keep the people from Church by danceing and other
recreations, even in the time of divine service, especially on holy days, and
the Lords day in the after noon: By which means they kept the people in
ignorance and luke warmness, and so made them the more capable to be wrought
upon by their emissaries: Which gross abuse this Bishop endeavered to redress
in his primarie visitation.

47. But it was represented to King James as a very great greivance, at his
return out of Scotland through Lancashire, Anno. 1617. by some in Court who
were too favorable to that party. And his readiness to hear any complaint
against a thing that carried but the name of a public greivance, incourraged
some to so much boldness the next Lords day after, as even to disturb the
public worship and service of God, by their piping and dancing within the
hearing of all those that were at Church, whereof the King being fully informed
by this Bishop, utterly disavoued any thoughts or intention of encourraging
such profaneness: and therefore left them that were guilty of it to the
Bishops censure; which he inflicted only upon one, that was the head and causer
of it, by way of public acknowledgement of the fault, and penance for it;
having formerly caused the Piper to be laid by the heels.

48. There wanted not some still to complain to the King of the Bishops
proceedings herein as rigourous and tyranicall; considering that the chief
thing they desired was only some Innocent Recreation for servants and other
inferior people on the Lords day and Holy days, whose laborious callings
deprived them of it at all other times: and thereupon to solicit his Majesty
for some favor therein, and the rather because it was the general desire of
most of that Country. Which the King finding to be true upon inquiry, and
willing to give them satisfaction therein, consulted with this reverend person
being the Bishop of that Diocese, how he might satisfy their desires without
endangering this liberty to be turned into Licentiousness.

49. The Bishop hereupon retiring from the Court at Houghton Tower, to his own
lodging at Preston, considered of six Limitations or Restrictions, by way of
Condition, to be imposed upon every man that should enjoy the benefit of that
liberty; which he presented to the King in writing the next day; and which the
King did very well approve of, and added a seventh; saying only, he would alter
them from the words of a Bishop, to the words of a King. It is not to be
omitted that Bishop Andrews attended the King at the same time, and therefore
in all probability was consulted in the same business; but all I can positively
say in it, is what I have here said, and this I can positively say because I
have often heard it from this reverend Bishops own mouth. And upon this it was
that King James published his Declaration of May the twenty-fourth in the 16.
and 51. year of his Reign, entitled [ concerning lawful sports to be used,]
under these following Conditions and Limitations, which I think not amiss to
insert, seeing all of them but one, (which I think is the first,) had their
original and first being from this reverend Bishop, viz.

50. 1. That all unlawful games should be prohibited on Sundays, as Bear and
Bull-bayting, interludes, and bowling at all times by law prohibited to the
meaner sort of people. 2. That all such known Recusants, either men or women,
as abstained from coming to Church, or divine service, shall be barred from
this benefit and liberty; they being therefore unworthy of any lawful
recreation after the said service, that will not first come to Church and serve
God. 3. All that, though conform in religion, are not present at Church at the
service of God before their going to the said recreations, were also debarred
this liberty. 4. All such as, in abuse of this liberty, should use these
exercises before the end of all divine services for that day, were to be
Presented and sharply punished. 5. That every person should resort to his own
parish Church, to hear divine service. And 6. that each parish by it self
should use the said recreation after divine service. 7. And last of all. That
no offensive weapons should be carried, or used, in the said times of
recreation. I have kept my self to the very words of the Declaration as much as
I could.

51. And he that shall duly consider these restrictions, and compare them with
the temper of the people in those parts at that time as they were then wrought
upon by some emissaries of the Romish party; will easily see and grant that
this was in all probability the likest course to bring them to Church to serve
God, and to be instructed out of his word; and consequently to stop the current
both of Popery and Profaness, by allowing them a small latitude for
innocent-recreations thus limited and bounded.

52. I am not ignorant what tragical exclamations some have raised against the
same Declaration, when it was reprinted and published a new by our late
Gracious Sovereign; whether out of faction and malice to traduce him and the
Bishops, or ignorance and inadvertencie in not searching into the true state of
the question, must be left to the searcher of hearts to judge. Only this I
shall add for the betrer information of the misguided people, that, (setting
aside the convenience of republishing this declaration at that time, whereof I
am no competent judge, and which ought not to be measured by the event,) all
the arguments I could ever yet see urged against the Lawfullness of what is
permitted by it, (taking it as it is still, and ever was restrained by these
limitations and conditions,) are grounded upon no other bottom, for the most
part, then the bare name of Sabbath, as it is applied, or misapplyed to the
Lords day. Which being a question still under dispute among learned men on both
sides, I shall trouble my Reader no further about it: and had not thus far, but
only to defend this learned Bishop from the calumnies which some may still cast
upon him in this particular.

53. I shall say no more of him while he was Bishop of Chester, but only, that
the great and unwearied pains he took in this Diocese, and the small revenue
of the Bishopric, and the great necessity there was of advancing Charity, and
maintaining Hospitality, (especially in that place where good Housekeeping is
so much valued and practiced,) moved King James to bestow upon him the Rectory
of Stopford by way of Commendam, for the better support of his charge and
dignity, which he held during the time he was Bishop of this See; and where his
name and memory is still precious among such of the parishoners as are of years
sufficient to remember his being among them.

54. In the year 1617. the Sea of Leichfield and Coventry became void by the
translation of his old friend that learned prelate Dr. Overall, (above
mentioned,) to the Bishopric of Norwich. To supply which vacancy the King was
pleased to have this reverend Bishop translated thither the year after, at the
motion of that great pattern of Episcopal perfection, Dr. Andrews, (above
mentioned,) then Bishop of Elie, who was never known to do the like for any
other, and yet did this without his seeking or knowledge, that he might have
him his nearer Neighbor, (as he said,) and of the same province with himself.
His Tarnslation bears date, Mar. 6, 1618.

55. And here his trouble was not so great as at Chester, though his Diocese
was larger, because the common sort of people for the most part were better
principled by the care and vigilance of his predecessor. But yet he abated
nothing of his former pains and industry, both in Writing, Preaching, and
Conferring with those that were not wilfully obstinat; beside his ordinary
vigilancie in Visiting his Diocese, and care in Confirming such children as
could give an account of their Faith. It would be too large a task for me to
relate the particulars.

56. About the time he was translated to this See, there came over into England
that very learned, though unfortunate man, Marcus Antonius de Dominis
Archbishop of Spalato, primat of Dalmatia, etc. Which, (as he was wont to
glory,) was S^. Hieroms Native Country, as well as his. This great Scholar,
(after he had so profoundly asserted the truth of Christian religion, as it is
professed and practiced in the Church of England, in so many particulars
against the errors and corruptions of the Sea of Rome, in his learned and
laborious Books, De Republica Ecclesiastica; and had also from the Kings bounty
received so great encouragements for his honorable support, as the Deanary of
Windsour and Mastership of the Savoy, besides many rich and yearly presents,
not only from the Bishops and Clergy, but also from the Nobility and Gentery,)
was so far wrought upon by that great Politition count Gondamar, the Spanish
Ambassador then in England, and other instruments of the Sea of Rome, (that
sought his ruin under some specious pretenses,) as to take up a resolution of
returning to Rome; and could not be dissuaded from it by his true friends that
really endeavored his security: Among whom this Reverend Bishop was neither
the least nor last, who very earnestly advised him, both by word and writing,
not to venture himself upon such a hopeless and hassardous journey.

57. The Archbishops pretense was very plausible and commendable, (and how
real he was in it, must be left to God,) namely, to Negotiat an unity in
Religion between the Church of Rome and the Church of England, upon those
moderate grounds which he had laid down, and so well defended in his learned
and laborious works printed here at London. He applauded himself in the
excellency of the work, in removing the Schism; and of the honor in becoming
a Repairer of the breach, and of the reward which is promised to the
Peacemakers. And he thought himself the more likely to go through with his work
by reason of the seasonable opportunity he had at that time when Gregory the
fiftenth, was newly chosen Pope who had been of his old and intimate
acquaintance, brought up in the same Schole and College with him. And however,
he was resolved to make an attempt; because if he failled in it, he hoped he
should lose nothing but his labor. For as for his Indemnity, count Gondamar
had promised him the security of the King of Spain his Master. But how well
that promise was performed will appear by the sequel.

58. While he was swelled up full with this promise and these hopes, the Bishop
of Leichfeild and Coventry coming to visit him, had this ensuing discourse with
him, (among many others,) which I have often heard him repeat with pleasure,
and shall therefore insert it: and the rather because it shows us of how
little authority the Council of Trent would be, if it were not for the terror
of the Inquisition. Leichf. Domine quid tibi in animo est? Anne convertere
Papam? Atque etiam conclave papale? Spal. Quid ni domine? Anne existimas eos
diabolos esse, ut non possint converti? Leichf. Minime domine; nec puto dominum
Spalatensem deum esse, ut hoc possit prestare: Nostin enim concilium
Tridientinum. Spal. Novi domine, and ausus sum tibi dicere, Millies mill sunt,
etiam in Italia, qui huic concillo fidem nullam adhibent.

59. This discourse, (and many other too extrinsecall here to mention,) having
passed between them, they parted friendly. And not long after did this Bishop
reinforce his arguments, with an addition of many more, in a long and learned
Epistle to him. Wherein, (among other motives to dissvade him from his
journey,) he used one, wherein he showed himself a true prophet, concerning the
entertainment he was like to find at Rome. Which proved to be that before he
got to Rome; Pope Gregory the fiftenth, his old friend was dead, and a
successor chosen in his place; by whom this Archbishop was imprisoned in
Castro St. Angelo. Where he died, not without strong suspicion of Murder or
Poison: And his body was afterward burnt, (as of an Heretic,) in Campo Flori.

60. I could here start a problematicall question concerning this learned
Archbishop. Whether or no did he ever retract his works, which he published in
Print? If he did, why did they at Rome burn his body for Heresy? If not, then
they abused him in his life time, as well as after his death, in the Manifesto
which they put forth in his name, which was so learnedly answered by Dr.
Crakanthorp. There is but one way of avoiding this Dilemma, (and that will
bring them into a greater strait then either of the other,) namely that they
burnt him after his death for what he retracted in his life time; and if they
own this, they must withal proclaim their injustice and cruelty to the world.
Let them take it in which sense they will, his reasons and arguments laid down
and urged in his learned works will more condemn their cause, then the
altering of his opinion, (supposing but not granting that he ever altered it,)
can tend to their advantage. His many clear and convincing Authorityes, from
the Holy Scriptures, Counsels, Fathers, Historians, and their own Authors
will be far more argumentative to any indifferent person that is not wilfully
prepossessed; then his own dubious, (perhaps imposed,) authority can
countervaile. His Manifesto, (if it was his,) consists only in affirming or
denying in bare words: In his works, whatsoever is affirmed or denied, is backed
with such convincing and irrefragable arguments, as no man has taken the
boldness in all these forty years since they were written, to undertake the
answering of them.

61. I must acknowledge this to be a Digression, and therefore must hasten the
faster from it. And so I shall also from the rest of the occurrences which,
concerned this Bishop while he governed the Church of Leichfeild and Coventry:
Which were not many of any memorable note, (for as much as I could learn,)
though the time he sat there was above fourteen years. I shall only instance
in two, whereof the one concerned a person that seemed to be more then a man,
the other a Boy that seemed to be little less then a Devil.

62. The former was one George Canner, who like another Didimus of Alexandria,
or Fisher of Westminster, was born blind; and yet was not inferior to either
of them, (the proportion of his age being considered,) either in strength of
parts, or industry in getting of learning, or memory in retaining what he had
once heard. Among the rest of the works of Charity performed by this Bishop
while he was of that See, one was to bring up this youth in good learning, (his
parents being poor and not well able to do it themselves,) which he did first
at Schole, and afterward when he was fitted to receive University learning he
sent him to Cambridge, where he maintained him at his own charge in St. John's
College, and his Vakle with him to look to him. And after he was well grounded
in all manner of secular learning, and had taken the Degree of Bachellour of
Arts, he sent for him into his own family, and there instructed him in the
whole Body of Divinity; And afterward admitted him into sacred Orders, and
placed him in the parish Church of Clifton Canvile in Staffordshire, where he
undertook the cure of their souls, and diligently and laudably discharged the
duty of his place; being a very good preacher, and (which is more) able also to
perform the whole office of the Church, as it is prescribed by the Book of
Common Prayer, only by the strength of his admirable memory.

63. The other instance I intimated; was the Son of one Edward Perry of Bilson
near Woolver Hampton in Staffordshire, from whence he is best known by the
title of the Boy of Bilson, both in those parts and elsewhere. This Boy being
by nature very dull and incapable of learning, and thereupon very unwilling to
go to Schole, was wrought upon by some Romish Priests in those parts to free
himself from that troublesome task of going to Schole, by counterfeiting
himself to be possessed with a Devil; and he had the promise of a very good
reward into the bargain, if he would suffer himself to be dispossessed by their
Exorcismes. But the Devil having steeled his heart, (as his own phrase was
afterward in his confession,) he continued to act the Demoniack both longer and
otherwise then they desired who first instructed him in the art. And in
pursuance of it, he accused a neighboring woman for bewitching him,
notwithstanding she was of the Romish Communion, only because she commonly went
under the suspicion and title of a Witch. And he acted his part so cunningly in
prosecuting the charge against her at the Assizes at Stafford, as the woman did
very hardly escape with her life. The particulars whereof both there in
public, and elsewhere more privately, as also of his exceeding great art in
Counterfeiting, and patience in enduring any thing to keep himself from being
discovered, would be too large a task, and too impertinent here to relate; and
has been by In a book written on this subject by Mr. Rich. Baddleley this
Bishops Secretary: see also Mr. Wilson in his narrative of the life of K.
James, page 170.
others upon other occasions published to the world. All that will concern my
present undertaking is, that this Bishop, being fully persuaded in his own
thoughts that the Boy did but personate and counterfeit in all this, (though so
strangely as made it almost beyond discovery,) and again, that if it should not
be discovered, the poor innocent Woman that was accused of Witchcraft, was in
danger to lose her life, spoke to the Judges that went the Circuit, that he
might have the Boy home with him to his own house at Eccleshall Castle,
assuring them he would use his best endeavors to find out the imposture before
the next Assizes, which he did though not without great pains, difficulty,
wisdom and patience; as the Reader may see in the above mentioned relations.
And afterward upon the Boy's confession and Repentance, he bound him out an
Apprentice to a Shoemaker in Bristol. The man is still living in or about
London, (I think in the parish of St. Martins in the fields,) and I hope has
ingenuity enough as well as memory to testify the truth of all this, to those
that shall make any doubt of it.

64. And now this Reverend Bishop having so well discharged himself of his duty
in those places he had formerly sustained in the Church, it was his Majesty's
pleasure to have him translated to the Sea of Duresme, in the year 1632. (then
void by the death of Dr. John Howson, the last Bishop there,) as to a place of
greater trust and honor, as well as of a greater emolument, then either of the
other Bishoprics, he had formerly enjoyed.

65. For beside the Spiritual and Ecclesiastical affairs as before in his
other Diocesses, he had the care and mannagement of all the temporal affairs
within the County Palatine of Duresme, by virtue of the Palatinate which for
many hundreds of years had been anexed to his Episcopal See. In particular he
had the power of placing and displaceing all the Judges, Registers, Clerks, and
other officers belonging to the Courts of Justice; of constituting the Sheriff
and under Sheriff, Escheters, Feudaries, Coroners, etc. Of commissionating all
Justices of the peace: and likewise of all the Deputy Leivtenants, Colonells,
Captains and all other officers of the Trained Band, within the said County
palatine of Duresme. In sum his power was so great in all temporal affairs
there as it passed for a maxim or general rule: Quicquid potest Rex extra
[Episcopatum] potest Episcopus intra. And yet in the mannagement of all these
great affairs he carried himself with so much justice and equity, for ten
years together before these late troubles put a disturbance in the exercise of
his government, that no complaint was ever made against him to the Parliament,
during all the time that Satan was let loose to sift him like wheat, as well as
the rest of his Brethren of that Holy Order; which is an argument of his
integrity beyond all exception.

66. I except only the case of Mr. Smart, which had no relation to the County
Palatine, nor concerned this Bishop any otherwise then as one of the Judges in
the High commission Court, if the charge had been made good, (as it never was,)
against him or any of the rest. And yet for all that, he was troubled by him,
(very undeservedly if the truth were known,) in a long vexatious suit for a
pretended false imprisonment, though he never could recover any thing upon it.

67. It is a thing too notorious, that the people were wrought upon in some
places to make complaints where there was no cause; and therefore I mention
this the rather to the honor of the Gentry and others of this County that they
could see when they were well: And they are the more to be pitied, in that
respect, in being deprived of that just and moderate government under which
they and their forefathers had lived so happily for so many generations. It is
no part of my present design to enquire how his predecessors administered that
Government, though if it were, it would not any way deminish their honor. And
yet what he did was not inferriour to any of them. I shall here observe some
general rules which he set to himself, because particular instances would be
endless, and they shall be such wherein his own particular profit was
concerned, because his moderation in them, will abundantly satisfy the Reader
concerning his carriage in other affairs, where he had not the like
temptations.

68. I have formerly observed, that he was possessed of Jura Regalia by reason
of the County palatine of Duresme annexed to his Episcopal See: And by reason
of this, beside his Ordinary Rents and Revenues, he had the disposal of all
Wardships; and all Wrecks and Deodans, and other things of like nature were
also confiscated to him: And therein his moderation was conspicuous. And first
for his Fines at the renewing of Leases, he never intermedled in setting them
himself, but referred the business to four Gentlemen of the Neighborhood to
make a moderat composition between him and his Tenants. 2. In wrecks he took
such a small sum of the person that had suffered them, as was not worthy of the
name of a composition; having no other aim in taking any thing then only to
preserve the right to himself and his successors, and assist the destressed
person in the preservation and recovery of his goods from the Neighboring
multitude, who are usually too ravenous in such Cases; herein truly imitating
that of Justinian the Emperor in the like Case: Nolo siscum meum aliena
jactura ditescere. 3. In Deodans, where any man had made himself away; though
by law the whole estate was confiscated in detestationem criminis, to deter
others from committing the like horrid offense; Yet was he so compassionate as
not to exceed a fourth part of the estate in his composition after the most
moderate valuation: not willing to add more misery to the living; who had
incurred so much affliction by the dead. 4. And last of all for Wardships, they
were managed with that tenderness of care and moderation within the liberties
of this Palatine, as none of the Gentry had ever any cause of any wrong done
either to their persons or Estates during their Minority.

69. By these instances of his great compassion and Moderation in administering
the Temporal affairs of the County palatine, even then when the Laws of the
Land would have warranted him to have advanced his own interest much higher
then he did; we may measure, ( tanquam ex pede Herculem,) how much greater his
Fatherly care was for the Spiritual affairs of the Bishopric, seeing that by
the Law of God, the loss of any one soul which he had committed to his charge,
would have been the hazard of his own. I must not enlarge into many instances
to illustrate this; and I need not allege more then this one following,
because it contains so many under it. The thing I mean was his pious endeavors
to redress that gross abuse which is so common, in starving the souls of the
people for want of a sufficient maintenance for the Clergy, by settling some
competent Augmentations upon the smaller benefices within his Diocesses,
whereof the greater half were very meanly endowed Vicaridges, or (which was far
worse) Stipendiarie Cures, some of which not above five pound per annum, and
few above ten pounds or twenty marks.

70. His Interest was so great in that Country, as gave him the advantage above
most of his Brethren to be a leading man in so good a work; and he doubted not
but the rest of the Bishops (who saw the abuse as well as he, but foresaw
withal how odious and difficult a thing it would be to apply a remedy to it)
might the more easily proceed to do the like, when the the Ice was once broken.
Mr. Stephens pref. to S. Hen. Spelmans larger work of Tithes.
He had given a good example long before whiles he was Bishop of Lichfield, in
abating a good part of his sine to increase the portion of the Minister in the
Vicarage of Pitchley in Northamptonshire, as a learned person and exact
observer of such things has told us: and if either his own example or power
could redress a grievance of so bad consequence he was resolved neither of them
should be wanting.

71. And therefore to lay his foundation the surer, in a work of so great
difficulty as well as importance, he applied himself for Council to three of
the most learned and eminent persons that were in England for their knowledge
both of the Common and Civil Law, the Lord Keeper Coventrie, Mr. Noy the Kings
Attorney general, and Sir Henry Martin Judge of the Prerogative Court of the
Archbishop of Canterbury; who all of them unanimously concurred in these four
points.

1. That all Abbots, Priors, and other Religious persons, who had Rectories or
personages of Churches Appropriated to their several Convents were bound by law
(especially since the time of King Richard the second) upon every avoidance of
the incumbent to present an able Clerk, sufficiently endowed out of the Tithes
belonging to the said Rectory, to the Bishop of the Diocese wherein any such
Rectory was, to be instituted and admitted to the cure of souls within the said
Parish.

2. That in case they did not present such a person so endowed within six
Months after any vacancie, then the Bishop of the Diocese might Collate the
said Vicarage jure de voluto, post lapsum temporis, upon any fit person, and
endow it with sufficient maintenance, proportionable to the merit of the person
and quantity of the Tithes.

3. That at the Dissolution of Abbeys, Priories and other Religious Houses, all
such Rectories Appropriate were settled upon the Crown no otherwise, then the
said religious persons formerly had and enjoyed them. And therefore,

4. That the Bishops authority over Churches appropriate was neither taken
away, nor any way infringed, either by the Common or Statute Law; but that he
may now as lawfully appoint a competent Augmentation out of the Impropriate
Tithes, where the Vicarage is not sufficiently endowed, as any Bishop might
formerly have done while Abbeys, Priories, and other Religious houses were in
being.

72. Having thus fully informed himself of his just power in a matter of so
high concerment for the advancement of Christian religion, and the good of
souls, he resolved to put it in practice as far as God should enable him, and
trust him with the event; though he knew it would be a matter of no small
difficulty to revive a matter of that nature that had laid buried in the
rubbish of religious houses ever since their dissolution. And because he was
willing to show his own good example as well as his power, he began (as charity
directed him) at home with the parish of Bishop-Aukland, so called from one of
his houses, the Castle there, (wherein there then was (and great pity it is not
still) a Chapel inferior to none of any Prince in Christendom;) here he
augmented the stipend of the Mother Church from 16. pound per annum to
fourscore; and the Chapels belonging to it from about six pounds per annum to
thirty; intending to extend the like Episcopal care in some proportion over all
the rest of his Diocese. But this being such a fatal blow to the Prince of
darkness, was not like to take the wished effect in the midst of this crooked
and perverse generation. And therefore it is no wonder so pious a work should
become abortive by the Scotch invasion, which then immediately followed; and
after that the rest of those troubles and desolations which have given such a
mortal wound to a glorious Kingdom and a flourishing Church, as makes our
friends pity our misery, and our enemies rejoice at our folly.

73. I cannot acknowledge any digression in all this, seeing it is one of the
principal passages of his life, and such an Heroical action as I could not
possibly omit it. But if any shall accuse me of a voluntary digression in what
now follows, I shall freely confess the fact, and submit to the Readers
pardon. I know I am here engaged in a Paradox, (as that word is taken in the
proper sense, for a truth not commonly taken notice of,) but that might pass
well enough, if it were not that I have stretched so far beyond my own last,
and entrenched upon the noble profession of the Law, in a point which
self-interest and prepossession has rendered very ticklish. Only this I have
to plead for my self, that what I say here is no more then a bare report of a
matter of fact: and I am the more imboldened to report it, because I find it so
consonant to what that learned and judicious Antiquary Sir Henry Spelman has
delivered as the Law of England in this very In his larger works of Tithes
chap. 29.
case. I am as unwilling to put a fallacy upon the Reader, as to conceal the
truth; and therefore (though I take the liberty to digress a little) I shall
set down his own words, so far as they concern the point in hand; and that also
with his own Apology and Submission to the learned Masters of the Law, p. 161.
that I do it not asserendo docere, sed disserendo quaerere.

p. 153.
74. The appropriation of a Parsonage (says this excellent Author) was no more
at first but a grant made by the Pope -- to an Abbat, Prior, Prebendary, or
some other spiritual person, being a body politic and successive, that he and
his successors might for ever be Parsons of that Church; that is, that as one
of them dyed, another might enter into the Rectory, and take the fruits and
profits thereof, without further trouble of Admission, Plowd. f. 500.
Institution, or Induction.

75. But shortly after Deans and Chapters -- obtained like Licenses to them and
their successors, p. 152.
who being a body Corporate consisting of a multitude, could not jointly
perform this function, and in particular none of them was tied unto it. Then
was devised, that by their common Seal (which is the tongue of their
Corporation) they might appoint a Deputy or Vicar to do it for them, which
invention gave the wound unto the Church, whereof it bleedeth at this day, etc.

76. By this window crept the Vicars into the Church, p. 153.
who for the most part were some of the Monastery whereunto the Appropriation
belonged, till the Statute of 4. H. 4. cap. 12. provided, that in every Church
so appropriate a secular person [viz. a Priest that was not a Monck] be
ordained Vicar perpetual, Canonically institute and induct in the same, and
COVENABLY ENDOWED BY THE DISCRETION OF THE ORDINARY, to do divine service, and
to inform the people, and to keep Hospitality there -- and that no religious [
that is, none that was a Monck professed of any religious Order] be in any wise
made Vicars in any Church so appropriate, etc.

77. Thus came Vicars to get a lock out of the Parsons fleece -- But yet
notwithstanding they were thus endued before this Statute: for in a Synod
holden at (...) for the Province of Canterbury. Anno 1222. cap. 18. it was
ordained that less should not be assigned to a perpetual Vicar then five marks
a year in Rent; which in the proportion that the rents of that time hold to
this, cannot be less then thirty or forty pounds a year, etc.

p. 157.
78. It appears by that which is before showed, and the circumstances thereof
(as this learned Author goes on) that the appropriating of a Parsonage, or the
endowing of a Vicarage out of it, do not cut the Parsonage from the Church, or
make it Temporal, but leaves it still spiritual, as well in the eye of the
Common Law, as of the Canon Law. For if it became Temporal by the
Appropriation, then were it within the Statute of Mortmain, and forfeited by
that very Act. But it is agreed by the 21. Ed. 3. fol. 5. and in Plowd. Com.
fo. 499. that it is not Mortmain, and therefore does continue spiritual. For
which cause also the Ordinary and Ecclesiastical officers must have still the
same authority over such appropriate Churches, as they had before those
Churches were Appropriate. Therefore in the year 1252. Robert Bishop of Lincoln
by Commission from Innocent 4. not only enlarged the endowments that before
were made to diverse Vicarages, as he thought good, but endowed others out of
those Appropriations which had no Vicarages endowed, to the great
coffeehouse of all the Approprietaries of that time, as appears by Matthew
Paris. And therefore also the Statute of 15. R. 2. cap. 6. and that of 4. H. 4.
cap. 12. that ordained that in Licenses of Appropriation in the Chancery it
should be contained, that the Bishop of the Diocese in EVERY CHURCH so
Appropriated, should PROVIDE BY HIS DISCRETION that the VICAR were Well and
sufficiently endowed. 15. R. 2. c. 6.
COVENABLY ENDOWED, divine service performed, and a CONVENIENT PROPORTION of
the fruits thereof yearly DISTRIBUTED to the POOR of the Parish; did but agnise
and affirm the spiritual end whereunto these Parsonages were appropriated, and
the authority the Church had still over them notwithstanding such
appropriation, commanding the Bishops to see it executed.

79. Thus far this learned Author concerning the nature of Appropriations, and
the Bishops power over them while they belonged to Religious houses. And as for
the time since the dissolution, he proceeds on thus.

80. The Statute [of 27. H. 8. c. 28.] says, p. 161.
that the King shall have all such Monasteries, Priories and other such
Religious houses of Moncks -- as were not above 200.l. a year -- in as large
and ample manner as the Governors of those and such other Religious houses
have, or ought to have the same, in right of their Houses, etc. -- whereupon he
infers, p. 154.
that though the statute changed the owner, yet it changed not the nature of
the thing. The Monastical persons had them before as spiritual livings, and now
the King must have them in as large manner, but still as spiritual livings.

81. And again to the same effect -- neither do I yet find where this power
[viz. of granting Augmentations] is taken from the Bishops; p. 158.
for the Statute that gives those appropriate Churches to the King, says not
the King shall have them as temporal lands, or discharged of the Bishops
jurisdiction, but that he shall have them as the Religious persons had them,
that is, as spiritual livings, and consequently subject to the jurisdiction the
Bishops before had over them; and then are they no otherwise in the hands of
the Layty.

82. Hitherto this learned and judicious Author whereunto I shall only add
(which I wonder he did omit) that both in the aforementioned Act of 27. H. 8.
c. 28. and likewise in the other Act of 31. H. 8. c. 13. (where the rest of the
Monasteries, etc. which were above 200.l. per annum are confirmed to the King)
there is this express salvo: saving to all and every person and persons, and
bodies politic, and their heirs and successors, and the heirs and successors
of all and every of them (other then the said late Abbots, Priors, etc.) all
such right, title and interest -- Synods, Proxies, and all other profits, as
they or any of them have, claim, ought, may or might have had, in or to the
premises, or any part or parcel thereof (and PERSONAGES APPROPRIATE are
mentioned expressly as a part of the premises in the Statute of 31. H. 8. c.
13.) in such like manner, form and condition, to all intents, respects,
constructions, and purposes, as if this Act had never been had, ne made. From
whence I conceive it is no unreasonable inference to conclude that whatsoever
power the Bishop of the diocese had over Churches appropriate before the
dissolution of Monasteries, he had and has over Churches impropriate after.
And then I have no more to say (as to this particular) but to beg my Readers
pardon once again for this long digression.

83. I have now brought this view of the life of this Reverend Bishop to the
precipice of his outward splendor; though neither his glory nor happiness
incurred the least diminution by his future sufferings: for he was never more
happy in his own thoughts, nor more glorious in the eyes of all good men then
in being exercised in those troubles, whereof the continued series of public
affairs afforded him a perpetual opportunity from this time till his death. The
particulars whereof were so many, as I shall only cull out two for instances:
the one whereof was in conjunction with eleven of his reverend Brethren, the
other peculiar to himself alone.

84. I must make my passage to the former of these through those confluences of
the rude multitude at Westminster at the beginning of the late Parliament,
which I hope may now be called by their proper name, Tumults without offense;
and were never thought otherwise by any, but those that had sacrificed their
understandings and tongues to the Votes of the House of Commons. When I know a
more proper term for the like overture of reformation made at Ephesus, when
some cried one thing, some another, Acts 19.31.
and yet the greater part knew not why they were come together, I shall most
willingly apply it nearer home. I am sure there could hardly be a fitter
parallel to that at Ephesus, then these at Westminster, in one whereof this
Reverend Bishop was in extreme hazard of his life, by the multitude that were
beckoned thither by the contrivers of our late miseries: whereof some cried,
pull him out of his Coach: orhers, nay he is a good man: others, but for all
that he is a Bishop. And I have often heard him say, he believed he should not
have escaped alive, if a leading man among that rabble had not cried out; let
him go and hang himself, which he was wont to compare to the words of the Angel
uttered by Balaams Ass, though the rudeness of the expression argued more of
the Ass then the Angel.

85. Upon these and the like violations of the liberty and freedom essential
to all the members of Parliament, whereby the Bishops were necessitated to omit
the discharge of their duty in the House of Peers, according to their ancient
right before the name of Parliament was known in England, and according to the
several Writs by which they were summoned to that Parliament; twelve of them
(whereof this reverend person was one) meeting together to consult and advise
how they might make the discharge of their duty, and the enjoyment of their
safety consist together, agreed upon a Petition to the King, wherein they did
remonstrate some of those violences offered to their persons, and the just
fears they were in by those tumults; and did Protest their dissent from all
Laws which should be enacted, till they might attend the service of the House
with freedom and safety; and the Nullity of them that should be made, while
the Parliament was under such a force, as themselves and their Brethren (being
one of the three estates,) could not attend the service of the house without
the apparent hazard of their lives, or to this effect.

86. And though it was the known and continual practice of the House of Peers,
that any one member of it might enter his dissent upon record from any thing he
disliked though it had already passed the House; yet was this Protestation of
the dissent of all these twelve Reverend Bishops aggravated with so much
virulence by the leaders of the faction, as to get them charged with High
Treason by the House of Commons for it, and committed to prison upon it; and
yet after they had got the Bill to pass against the Bishops sitting in
Parliament, they let the accusation fall without ever drawing it into a formal
Impeachment, as being ashamed of ever having it brought unto a Legal trial,
where Council might be heard on both sides. And upon this occasion did this
Reverend Bishop and the rest suffer about four months imprisonment; though it
is true indeed the place of his and the Bishop of Lichfield and Coventries
imprisonment was the house of the Huisher of the Black Rod, whereas the other
Ten were sent to the Tower: but whether this was in favor to these two as
being very old, or to the person to whom they were committed as being then
reputed rich, may best be conjectured by the excessive charge they were at
there, more then the other in the Tower.

87. And though this Fact was never permitted to come to a due examination
according to the ancient and known manner of proceeding at law in cases of
Treason, (though it was earnestly desired and endeavored by these Reverend
Bishops,) yet were they so far prejudged by it, as to make all the twelve
liable to Sequestration for it, as that word bath been abused of late for the
taking away of a man's whole estate Personal and Real. Which yet had not been
half so grievous to them, if they had not seen an occasion taken thereby to rob
God of the patrimony, as well as of the moveable goods of their several
Churches; which was shared among those that had long gaped for it, or made the
price of blood by being put into the Treasury out of which the War was
maintained. I pray God it may never be laid to their charge.

88. But to let this pass as the common cause of this once flourishing Church,
I shall return to this Reverend Bishop in particular, who being discharged from
his first Imprisonment returned to his lodgings in Duresme House, and there
attended his Devotions and study, till such time as his adversaries thought fit
to give him another occasion to exercise his patience under a second captivity,
for which the snare was thus prepared.

89. It was represented to the House of Commons by some of his back-friends as
a matter of much prejudice to their affairs, that he should still have in his
custody the Seal of the County Palatine of Duresme. (The method and motive were
both of them near of kin to that which Jezebel practiced to get Naboths
Vineyard, 1 King. 21.
though I shall forbear the mention of any particular Person.) The House
hereupon sent a Committee of their own members to demand it; and the answer he
returned was in the Negative, but yet as well sweetened with civil expressions
as he could make it; and among other things he desired the Interposition of the
House of Peers (for it was while they sat) for their fuller satisfaction;
which they rightly interpreting to be an Appeal from those that were not his
competent Judges to those that were, sent for him by their Sergeant at Arms to
appear at their Bar; which he did, and made it evident to them. 1. That it was
not a Seal transmitted from Bishop to Bishop successively, but one that had his
own Arms and Impress cut upon it. 2. That to part with it could not but be of
great prejudice to several persons within the County Palatine of Duresme, whose
estates depended upon it, both by way of Patents for Offices and Leases for
Lands. He added also 3. That it might be prejudicial to himself and
successors, and to the Person by whom he received the power to make it. Which
being a very reasonable Plea, (though the last part of it was not very
acceptable to them) the House had nothing to object against it, and so dismissed
him for that time. And yet manet alta mente; his adversaries that could not
then have their wills on him, retained their malice against him till another
opportunity.

90. And that fell out not long after upon this occasion. The right Honorable
the Earl and Countess of Rutland having always carried a very Reverend respect
to this good Bishop, and he no less honorable esteem of them and that noble
Family, desired him to perform the holy Office of Baptism to a sweet young
Lady which God had then newly blessed them withal; which he did (as he always
judged a Bishop ought to do) exactly according to the order of the Church,
prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer. And this being taken notice of by his
old adversaries, and much aggravated by some Zealots of the contrary persuasion
(whom I hope God has forgiven) was complained of to the House of Commons, as a
thing superstitious, idolatrous, or I know not what.

91. It is a hard case when the Commons must teach their Bishops (whom God has
placed over them in chief as the guides of their souls) what is superstition
and idolatry. But the world being then turned upside down, it was the less
wonder the case was so in this particular. And accordingly having sent for him
as a Prisoner to their Bar, they patched up this fault to the former to make an
Accumulative crime of both together, and so committed him prisoner to their
Sergeant, under whose custody he continued about 6. Months before he could
obtain his enlargement.

92. Having thus fallen upon a discourse concerning the Sufferings of this
Reverend Bishop in relation to the Parliament, it will not be amiss to enlarge
it a little farther, so as to take in a business pretended to be done in the
late Parliament, wherein he had been a deep sufferer in point of his
Reputation, if he had not lived to clear himself of it: the case was thus.

93. In the year 1657. came forth a Book said to be Printed at Rouen, entitled
[ A Treatise of the Nature of Catholic Faith and Heresie] wherein the Author
(or Authors) N. N. has conjured up the old overworn fable of the Nags-head
Ordination or Consecration from the place where it was first hatched; and
imposes the patronage of it upon this Reverend Bishop in these words.

Chap. 2. Sect. 3. p. 9.
94. In the beginning of the late Parliament some Presbyterian Lords presented
to the Upper House a certain Book, proving that the Protestant Bishops had no
Succession nor Consecration, and therefore were no Bishops, and by consequence
had no right to sit in Parliament. Hereupon Doctor Morton pretended Bishop of
Durham, who is yet alive, made a Speech against this Book, in his own and all
the Bishops behalf then present: he endeavored to prove succession from the
last Catholic Bishops, who (said he) ordained the first Protestant Bishops at
the Nags-head in Cheapside, as was notorious to all the world, etc. Therefore
the said Book ought to be looked upon as a groundless Libel. This was told to
many by one of the ancientest Peers of England, present in Parliament when
Morton made his speech: and the same he is ready to depose upon Oath. Nay, he
cannot believe that any will be so impudent as to deny a thing so notorious,
whereof there are as many witnesses living as there were Lords and Bishops,
that were that day in the Upper House of Parliament.

Sect. 28. p, 36, 27.
95. And again in the same Chapter. Whereas Doctor Morton pretended Bishop of
Durham affirmed publicly in the Upper House that the first Protestant Bishops
were Consecrated at the Nags-head; this answer all the rest approved by their
silence, and were glad to have that retiring place against the Presbyterians,
who proved clearly that they were not Consecrated at Lambeth, as Mr. Mason
pretends, etc.

96. These are the Authors words: and they have already been proved to be so
notoriously imposterous and false in a Book written by the accurate pen of the
right Reverend Father in God the Lord Bishop of Derrie, that I might have saved
my Reader this trouble, but only that I measure this action by what I know was
the mind of this Reverend Bishop while he lived, who was so exceedingly
sensible of the wrong done him in this particular, that he never thought any
thing too much to vindicate himself from it. And this is evident by his
tripling his guard against it: first in that Codecil annexed to his Will which
is herewith published; then by a Letter to Mr. Gunning, desiring him to take
notice of the injury in a Book which he was then preparing for the Press: and
last of all in a Formal Protestation made by him in the presence of a public
Notarie before several competent witnesses; and attested unto afterward by all
the Bishops now surviving, who sat in that Parliament, (excepting only the
Bishop of Bangor, who lives so far remote in Wales, as he could not
conveniently be sent unto;) and likewise by as many of the Temporal Lords who
sat in that Parliament, as with any convenience it could be presented unto;
and last of all by all the Clerks that attended in the House of Peers, and who
are sworn officers to keep true and perfect Records of what passes there. The
form whereof and of the Attestations annexed to it, are word for word as
follows; and for the other circumstances of that Action, I shall refer the
Reader to my Preface before the Learned Bishop of Derries Book above mentioned.

The Bishop of DURESMES Protestation.
97. WHereas I am most injuriously and slanderously traduced by a nameless
Author calling himself N. N. in a Book said to be printed at Rouen 1657.
entitled A Treatise of the Nature of Catholic Faith and Heresy; as if upon
the presenting of a certain Book to the Upper House in the beginning of the
late Parliament, proving (as he says) that the Protestant Bishops had no
Succession nor Consecration, and therefore were no Bishops, and by consequence
ought not to sit in Parliament; I should make a speech against the said Book in
my own and all the the Bishops behalf, endeavoring to prove succession from
the last Catholic Bishops (as he there styles them) who by Imposition of hands
ordained the first Protestant Bishops at the Nags-head in Cheapside, as was
notorious to all the world, etc. I do hereby in the presence of Almighty God,
solemnly protest and Declare to all the world, that what this Author there
affirms concerning me is a most notorious untruth and a gross slander. For to
the best of my knowledge and remembrance no such Book as he there mentions, was
ever presented to the Upper House, in that or any other Parliament that I ever
sat in: and if there had, I could never have made such a speech as is there
pretended, seeing I have ever spoken according to my thoughts, and always
believed that Fable of the Nags-head Consecration to have proceeded from the
Father of Lies, as the Authentic Records of the Church still extant, which
were so faithfully transcribed and published by Mr. Mason, do evidently
testify. And whereas the same impudent Libeller does moreover say, that what
he there affirms was told to many by one of the Ancientest Peers of England
present in Parliament when I made this [pretended] speech, and that he is ready
to depose the same upon his oath, and that he cannot believe any will be so
impudent as to deny a thing so notorious, whereof there are as many witnesses
living as there are Lords and Bishops that were that day in the Upper House of
Parliament, etc. I answer, that I am very unwilling to believe any Peer of
England should have so little sense of his Conscience and Honor, as either to
swear, or so much as affirm so notorious an untruth. And therefore, for the
justification of my self, and manifestation of the truth in this particular, I
do freely and willingly Appeal (as he directs me) to those many Honorable
persons the Lords Spiritual and Temporal yet alive, who sat in the House of
Peers in that Parliament, or to as many of them as this my Protestation can
come to, for a true Certificate of what they know or believe concerning this
matter: humbly desiring them, and charging upon their Souls, as they will
answer it to God at the Day of Judgment, that they will be pleased to testify
the truth and nothing but the truth herein, to the best of their knowledge and
remembrance, without any favor or affection to me at all. I cannot reasonably
be suspected by any indifferent man of denying any thing that, I know or
believe to be true, seeing I am so shortly in all probability to render an
account to the Searcher of hearts of all my words and actions, being now (at
the least) upon the Ninty fifth year of my Age: and I acknowledge it a great
mercy and favor of God, that he has reserved me thus long to clear the Church
of England and my self of this most notorious slander, before he takes me to
himself: for I cannot imagine any reason, why this shameless writer might not
have cast the same upon any of my Reverend Brethren as well as me, but only
that I being the Eldest, it was probable I might be in my grave before this
untruth could be taken notice of in the world. And now, I thank God, I can
cheerfully sing my Nunc dimittis, unless it shall please him to reserve me for
the like service hereafter: for I desire not to live any longer upon Earth then
he shall be pleased to make me his instrument to defend the truth, and promote
his glory. And for the more sosolemn and full confirmation of this my Free and
Voluntary Protestation and Declaration, I have hereunto set my hand and seal
this seventeenth day of July, Anno Dom. 1658.

Signed, Sealed, published and declared in the presence of Tho. Duresme. Tho.
Saunders Senior. Tho. Saunders Jun. Jo. Barwick Cler. R. Gray. Evan Davies.



98. Hereunto was added the Attestation of a Public Notarie ( subscribed with
his hand, and Signed with his Notarial mark and Motto) in these words: I Tobie
Holder, public Notarie, being requested by the right Reverend Father in God
Thomas Lord Bishop of Duresme, at the House of Thomas Saunders Esquire in the
parish of Flamestead in the County of Hertford, in the year of our Lord, Month
and Day above specified, was then and there personally present, where and when
the said Reverend Bishop did sign, publish and declare this his Protestation
and Declaration above written to be his Act and Dead: and did cause his
Authentick-Episcopal Seal to be thereto affixed, in the presence of the
Witnesses, whose names are there subscribed. And did there and then likewise
sign, publish, and declare as his Act and Deed, another of the same Tenor
written in Paper, which he signed with his Manual Seal in the presence also of
the same witnesses. All this I heard, saw, and therefore know to be done. In
testimony whereof I have subscribed, and thereto put my usual and accustomed
Notaries sign.

Tob. Holder.

99. To this Protestation were annexed these three following Attestations, from
the Bishops, Temporal Lords, and Clerks.

The Attestation of the Bishops.
WHereas we the surviving Bishops of the Church of England, who sat in the
Parliament begun at Westminster the third day of November 1640. are requested
by our Reverend Brother, the Lord Bishop of Duresme to declare and attest the
truth concerning an Imputation cast upon him, in the Pamphlet of that nameless
Author mentioned in his Protestation and Declaration here prefixed: and whereas
we are obliged to perform what he requesteth, both for the justification of the
truth, and for the clearing of our selves of another slanderous aspersion,
which the same Author casts upon us, as if we had heard our said Reverend
Brother make such a speech as is there pretended, and by our silence had
approved what that Libeller falsely affirms was delivered in it: we do hereby
solemnly Protest and Declare before God and all the world, that we never knew
of any such Book presented to the House of Peers, as he there pretends, nor
believe any such was ever presented; and therefore could never hear any such
Speech made against it as he mentions, by our said Reverend Brother, or any
other, much less approve of it by our silence. And if any such Book had been
presented, or any such Speech had been made, there is none among us so
ignorant, or negligent in his duty in defending the truth, but would have been
both able and ready to have confuted so groundless a Fable as the pretended
Consecration of Bishops at the Nags-head out of the Authentic and known
Registers of the Church still extant, mentioned and faithfully transcribed and
published by Mr. Mason so long before. For the Confirmation of which Truth, and
Attestation of what our said Reverend Brother has herewith Protested and
Declared, we have hereunto set our hands;

dated the nineteenth day of July, Anno Dom. 1658. Guil. London. Will. Bath and
Wells. Ma. Elie. To. Oxon. Jo. Roffens. Br. Sarum.



The Attestation of the Lords Temporal.
100. WE of the Lords Temporal, whose names are he under written, who sat in
the Parliament begun at Westminster the third day of November 1640. being
desired by the Bishop of Duresme to testify our knowledge concerning an
Imputation cast upon him about a Speech pretended to be made by him in that
Parliament, more particularly mentioned and disavowed in his prefixed
Protestation: do hereby Testify and Declare, that to the best of our knowledge
and remembrance, no such Book against Bishops as is there mentioned, was
presented to the House of Peers in that Parliament: and consequently that no
such Speech, as is there pretended, was or could be made by him or any other,
against it. In witness whereof we have signed this our Attestation with our own
hands.

Dated the nineteenth day of July, Anno Dom. 1658. Hertford. Dorchester.
Lindsey. Rutland. T. Southamton. T. Lyncoln. W. Devonshire. E. Manchester.
Berkshire. Cleveland. Monmouth. Hen. Dover. M. Newport. F. Willughbye. J.
Lovelace.



The Attestation of the Clerks of the House.
101. WE whose names are hereunto subscribed, being Clerks in the Honorable
House of Peers during the Parliament begun at Westminster the third day of
November 1640. who, according to our several places and Offices, did give
continual attendance in the said House; and, as our duty required, did
respectively and particularly observe whatsoever was debated and concluded in
it; do hereby Testify and Declare, that, to the best of our knowledge and
remembrance no such Book was presented to that honourabe House, nor any such
Speech made in it, by the Reverend Bishop of Duresme or any other, as are
mentioned and disavowed in his Lordships Protestation and Declaration here
prefixed. And therefore we have freely and voluntarily given this our
Attestation for the Confirmation of the Truth of what is affirmed and declared
by the said Bishop in his said Protestation. In witness whereof we have
hereunto set our hands:

Dated the twenty seventh day of December, Anno Domini, 1658. Jo. Brown
Cleric. Parliamentorum. Jo. Throckmorton. Sam. Smith.



102. This is so full a vindication of this Reverend Bishop from this foul
aspersion, and so clear and honorable an Attestation to the cause of the
Church of England in point of Succession, that I cannot see what more needs be
added to it, excepting only this ensuing Certificate out of the Journal of the
House of Peers, which I must ascribe to the great pains and civility of Mr.
Scobel, who after a long and diligent search, wrote these following words over
against the place where the objection is made Page 9. in the Margin of the
Book which I have in my custody.

Upon search made in the Book of the Lords House, I do not find any such Book
presented, nor any entry of any such Speech made by Bishop Morton.

Hen. Scobell Clerk of the Parliament.


103. And now (I speak it unfainedly) I know not what N.N. can reply to all
these clear Testimonies either in truth or modesty, but only by confessing his
error. If all these persons of Honor and ingenuity (after such a solemn charge
laid upon them by this pious Bishop to speak nothing but the truth in
sincerity) must be thought to conspire together in a Lie, rather then his
Ancient Peer shall incur the suspicion of being mistaken, yet the Authentic
Record of the proceedings in the Lords House will sufficiently justify them
against that Calumny. Or if (on the other side) the journal of the House shall
be condemned by N.N. either as imperfect or obliterated in this particular, yet
the Readers, (even of the Romish persuasion) will be satisfied (as many of them
as will be satisfied with reason) that this is a poor and groundless shift,
when they shall seriously consider these concurrent testimonies of so many
persons of all ranks and orders, that are most likely both to know the truth
and remember it. But both of these concurring together, will make it as clear
as the sun at noonday, that either N. N. or his Ancient Peer is mistaken.

104. And hence I conceive, it is, that N. N. (as I here) in a late reply
(which I have not yet seen) to the abovementioned Book of the learned Bishop
of Derrie, has not the confidence to deny the truth of what is both there and
here testified; but only betakes himself to the last reserve of a bad cause,
downright railing; venting all the malice he can upon the innocent Ashes of
this deceased Bishop. Wherein I shall not gratify him so much, as to make
(even) that return which Michael the Archangel did to him that suggested this
Topic to him; S. Jude ver. 9.
but rather that which better becomes a Christian, and was taught us by our
great Master, both by his example of (...); and by his precept to love and
Bless, 1 S Pet. 2 23. S Mat. 5.44.
and pray for him.

105. It is more then high time that I return from this digression to the
remnant of the life of this Reverend Prelate, which cannot be much now that we
have seen him so near to his Nunc dimittis. All that I shall need to say
further of it (though I glance a little back upon it) will be only this; that
from the time this great light was not suffered to shine upon his Candlestick,
he did burn the more zealously under his bushel, both in his Devotion toward
God, and his Charity toward all men, even his enemies that caused this
Eclipse; which offices (together with his uninterrupted laborious course of
study) became thence-forward his whole work. This he performed at Duresme House
in the Strand, till he was thrown out thence by the Soldiers that came to
Garrison it, a little before that horrid fact was committed upon the person of
our late gracious KING, which the greatest masters of language can never find
out a proper word bad enough to express it by. And after that, being importuned
by the earnest solicitation of his honorable friends, the Earl and Countess
of Rutland above mentioned, he became a part of their care and family at
Exeter-house in the Strand for some short time. But being loath to live at the
charge of others, while he was able to subsist of himself, and thinking the
Air of the Country might better suit with his declining years, then of the
City; he left those Honorable persons (though not without much grief to them)
and betook himself to sojourn first with Captain Saunders in Hertfordshire, and
after with Mr. Thomas Rotheram in Bedfordshire, till by the great civility and
earnest importunity of that Noble young Baronet, Sir Henry Yelverton, he went
with him to his house at Easton Manduit in Northamptonshire; where he found all
the tender respect and care from the whole family which a Father could expect
from his Children, till after some few months he rendered up his happy soul
into the hands of his Heavenly Father.

106. If any shall be so inquisitive as to desire to know (which reason rather
then curiosity may tempt any man to) how a person so open handed as he was both
in his Hospitality, Liberality and Charity, should be able to subsist so long
without being burdensome to any, after his being deprived so many years of all
he had, and spending upon the stock, and yet continuing in some repute: I
answer, that his case in this particular was not much unlike that of Elias
while he was fed by the Ravens, 1 King. 17.6.
which are of themselves Birds of prey, and more apt to pluck the meat out of a
man's mouth then to bring it to his hand: as of old, so here once again, God was
pleased to turn the hard rock into a standing water, Psalm 114.8,
and the flint stone into a springing well; and indeed aqua ex silice is the
best resemblance of what he got back from them that had taken from him all that
he had.

107. The case in brief was thus: when the great contrivers of the ruin of the
Church had prevailed so far in the House of Commons as to get a vote for the
dissolving of Bishoprics, and selling the Lands that belonged to them; those
among them that abhorred the fact, though they wanted power to oppose it, yet
prevailed so far upon the rest, as to get a feather stuck down where the goose
was stolen: they obtained another vote of the House for some yearly allowance to
the present Bishops during their lives, though in effect it proved far short of
what I am bound in charity to believe many of them intended. I shall instance
only in this Reverend Bishop, whose repute was so great among his very enemies,
as to have 800. l. per annum voted to him, which was a far greater proportion
then to any of his suffering Brethren, and yet signified very little in the
conclusion. For while he was able to subsist without it he never troubled
himself with looking after it; and at last when his pressing necessities put
him upon this hard choice either to look after this or be burdensome to his
friends, making choice of the former, he procured a Copy of the Vote: but found
it to contain no more then only that such a Sum should be paid, but no
mention either by whom or whence. And by that time he could procure an
Explanation of the Order to make the pension payable out of the Revenues of his
own Bishopric, all the Lands and Revenues of it were sold or divided among
themselves. Only by the importunity of his friends he obtained an Order to have
1000. l. in part, paid out of their Treasury at Goldsmiths Hall, with which
he paid his debts, and purchased to himself an Annuity of 200. l. per annum
during his life, upon which he has subsisted ever since.

108. This Annuity was granted at first by the Honorable the Lady Savile in
the Minority of her son Sir George, and afterward confirmed by himself when he
came to years. And it was a great providence of God that this good Bishop fell
into the hands of persons so just and noble as both of them are; seeing it is a
thing too frequent that Annuities are so ill paid as the steed may starve
while the grass grows, unless the fear of Law facilitates the payment, which
was a thing he could hardly have been induced to make use of, as appears by the
whole course of his life.

109. But as the case was here, such remedies were so far from being necessary,
as he never mist of the money at the time and place when and where it was
payable. And indeed there was such a generous contest between a Pious Bishop
and a noble Baronet, as the one was troubled at nothing more then that he had
not an estate to repay what he had received over and above the strict value of
the purchase (though it was made at an equitable rate when it was first
granted;) and the other was so sensible of his worth and sufferings, as to
profer the pension for the Quarter current at his Death, (in case he left not
an estate sufficient to bury him like himself) after he had repayed double the
sum received for the purchase: which yet his Executour durst not accept of,
because he desired to do all things according to what he either knew or might
reasonably presume, was or would have been the mind of this pious deceased
Bishop.

110. This mention of his Executor may possibly suggest to some so much
curiosity as to expect something from me concerning his Will. But seeing he
has been necessitated to frustrate that expectation himself, I must also of
necessity do the like. I have already met with that enquiry (though out of
self-interest, not curiosity;) and must still adhere to my answer, That no man
can expect any thing considerable in the Will of a person deceased, who made
his own hand his Executors while he lived. This Reverend Bishop, in this
particular was much of the temper of his great kinsman the Cardinal and
Archbishop of Canterbury above mentioned, Antiq. Brit. in vit. Jo. Morton.
Caeteris suis necessariis admodum parce legavit quia ejus liberalitaetem in
vivis uberrime senserant.
who chose rather to enrich his kindred and servants in his lifetime, then at
his death; or rather of William Warham (who succeeded him not long after both
in his Metropolitical See and Chancellourship of England) of whom I well
remember I have read, though I have forgot where, that (lying upon his
deathbed) he called for his steward to let him know what money he had, and
understanding from him it was but thirty pounds, Triginta aureos.
he thanked God for it, and said his time was then come, for he never desired
to die richer.

111. It is true indeed this Reverend Bishop had somewhat more money by him at
his death, according to the number of pounds, though less according to the
value and proportion of money now to what it was then. But to be sure he dyed
far poorer in Estate, for his debts were either none or desperate, which is all
one: and his goods were either plundered, or sold (not excepting his Books) in
his lifetime. Of that small remnant which his professed enemies, and seeming
friends, and urgent necessities had left him, he gave 40. l. to the one of his
servants that attended him at his death, (having abundantly provided for the
other in his life) and ten pounds to the poor of the Parish where he dyed, and
his Chalice with a Patin for the cover (both double guilt) to the noble Baronet
in whose family he dyed, for the use of his Chapel lately built. The rest
(deducting some small Remembrances) he ordered for his Burial, which though not
much above one hundred pounds was so well husbanded (though I say it) as to
have a small remnant for a Monument at his own charge; which though of
necessity it must be far below his worth, yet will it be such a one as will
suit better with his great modesty, then one much more sumptuous at the cost of
another: and will tell posterity he dyed a Confessor in a good cause and bad
times, (to the great reproach of a wicked and ungrateful generation) though the
year he dyed in should not be written upon it.

112. I cannot here omit to mention again the chief Legacy of his Will; that
which he designed for the common good of all pious and sober Christians, living
in the Communion of the Church of England, but bequeathed (as his pastoral
charge required) more particularly to those of his own Diocese of Duresme. And
this was paid in part by his Executor in the conclusion of his Funeral Sermon,
and will be more fully discharged now that both that and this are made public
in print, and therefore I refer the Reader to that place for it.

113. Having thus carefully disposed of all outward things in order to his long
journey seven months (and of some of them seventeen) before he took it; we
may reasonably presume he did the like much more carefully and timely in
relation to those things which concerned his Spiritual and Eternal welfare.
For, beside the principles of Christianity, he had also his great Calling,
Learning and Years to mind him of his great account at a little distance. And
he had studied the point so well, as it became a very familiar saying with him
for many years together before his death, that he had Vitam in patientia, but
mortem in desiderio: till at last God was pleased to Crown his desires with
what he had patiently waited for so long a time. The knife that cut the thread
of his long life (beside old age which is an incurable disease) was an
infirmity with which he had wresled for a long time, though it had much
exercised his patience, and impaired his strength. It was an Hernia or Rupture,
which at last falling down more violently then ordinary, became so painful to
him, as he could not endure to have it reduced. Hereupon he was cast upon his
deathbed for a month wanting three days; during which time God did
wonderfully supply him with a great measure of patience and other Christian
virtues requisite for his condition in that extremity, (as I have See above in
the Funeral Sermon.
elsewhere manifested, and shall not here repeat) till at last God was
graciously pleased to grant him his last and (infinitely) happiest Translation
from the vale of misery to a Throne of glory, this he obtained the 22. day of
September 1659. in the 95. year of his Age, being the 44. of his Episcopal
Consecration, and 28. of his Translation to the Sea of Duresme.

114. Upon the eight day after his death, being the Feast of St. Michael the
Archangel, his Body was solemnly interred (according to the Order of the
Church of England) in the Chancel of the Parish Church of St. Peter at
Easton-Manduit, where he dyed. And though his Estate was so small as could not
well consist with any solemn Invitation to his Funeral, yet had he so great
respect from the Neighboring people of all ranks and qualities, (for all he
had been so short a time among them) that some of the Nobility, many of the
Gentry, and most of the Clergy did freely and voluntarily give their attendance
at his Funeral solemnity, the chief of them carrying up the skirts of the Pall,
and the rest in due rank and order accompanying his Body to the grave, where
now it rests in Peace till a glorious and happy Resurrection, shall once more
Translate it to life everlasting.

Animam quidem Christus, Scripta possidet Ecclesia.
CHAP. II. A Catalogue of the Books written by this Learned Bishop.
1. HE led his life in a holy and chaste Celibate, being never married to any
beside God and the Church, which he had committed to his care and trust: so
that what is usually added to the History of other men's lives concerning their
Children, may and must be spared in this, seeing he never had any but such as
were spiritual whom he begat to God in the Gospel of Christ.

2. And yet if we look upon the Issue of his brain, those learned works he has
left to the world, we shall find him more fruitful in them then his Parents
were in the issue of their Body, though that was very remarkable. They had
indeed nineteen Children, he left above twenty several volumes in Print, and
several others that wanted only his last hand, and some not so much, but only
the obstetrication of the Press to bring them into the world. It is true indeed
that many of his Fathers issue have multiplied into a numerous posterity; and
so had His also, but only for this paradox, that their strength caused their
Imbecility: for if his Books had been less unanswerable, they had produced
Replies and Duplies before this time, considering how long it is since most of
them were published, as will appear by this ensuing Catalogue.

1. APOLOGIA CATHOLICA par. 1. Land. 1605. 4o.

3. This was the first fruits of his great labors in writing, which he
dedicated to God and the Church under the patronage of that wise Prelate
Richard Bancroft then L. Archbishop of Canterbury.

4. But before the second part of this laborious work could be fitted for the
Press, that horrid design of the Gunpowder Treason occasioned another little
Treatise, which he dedicated to the Seduced Brethren, and entitled,

2. An exact discovery of Romish Doctrine in the case of CONSPIRACY and
REBELLION: or ROMISH POSITIONS and PRACTICES, etc. London, 1605. 4o.

5. And yet not long after he published and dedicated to King James his Book
entitled,

3. APOLOGIA CATHOLICA Par. 2. Land. 1606. 4o.

6. The forementioned Book entitled Romish Positions, etc. did not a little
gall those that were concerned in it: in so much as a nameless Author was
provoked by it to return a Moderate answer to it, as he styled it. Whereunto
this Learned Author presently returned a Reply, which he dedicated to King
James. The subject whereof was concerning the Rebellion and Equivocation of the
Romish Priests and Jesuits: and the Title

4. A full SATISFACTION concerning a double Romish Iniquity, etc. Land. 1606.
4o.

7. And here steps in Mr. Parsons the Jesuit upon the stage under the mask of
P. R. to vindicate his dear friend the Moderate Answerer in his two Positions
of Rebellion and Equivocation, by a Book which he wrote and called A Treatise
of Mitigation. But he, having a very dexterous wit, very handsomely skipped
over the former Position, that of Rebellion, and betook himself to vindicate
their other Practice of Equivocation. I will say nothing of his Blasphemy in
attributing Equivocation to our B. Savior himself, because I have heard he
afterward repented of it. All that concerns my present purpose is, that this
Learned Author returned a very acute Answer to him, which he dedicated to
Robert Earl of Salisbury, and entitled,

5. A PREAMBLE unto an ENCOUNTER with P. R. the Author of the deceitful
Treatise of MITIGATION. Land. 1608. 4o.

8. Against which Book and some others written by this Learned Author, Mr.
Parsons having made a reply under the title of A sober Reckoning, etc. he was
answered in a Book dedicated to Prince Henry, and entitled,

6. THE ENCOUNTER against Mr. Parsons, Land. 1609. 4o.

9. But while this Book was in Writing and Printing, before it could come
forth, one of the Champions died, and so the combat fell to the ground.

10. During all these skirmishes with so nimble an Adversary as Mr. Parsons,
this Learned Author was not afraid to engage himself in a much hotter battle
against a whole Army of Apologists led out into the Field under the conduct of
Mr. Roger Brereley: Parque (novum) fortuna videt concurrere bellum
Atque Virum --
Only this encouragement he found, that as his great friend Archbishop
Bancroft put him upon the work, so Doctor James took the pains to examine some
of his Quotations in the University Library of Oxford. This Answer to the
Protestants Apology was dedicated to King James, and entitled,

7. The CATHOLIC APPEAL for Protestants, etc. Land. 1609. fol.

11. This learned and laborious work gave such a deadly blow to his Romish
Adversaries, as none of them hitherto (and yet it is above 50. years since it
was written) have ever been so hardy as to attempt any Answer to it. And
therefore it is no wonder if we find this learned writer so much retired for
some years after, prosecuting the private course of his own positive studies,
excepting only that at the very same time he wrote another little Book, which
he entitled,

8. An Answer to the Scandalous Exceptions of THEOPHILUS HIGGONS. Land. 1609.
4o.

12. The next Controversy he had was with some Adversaries of the contrary
Principles, the Non-conformists of his own Diocese, while he was Bishop of
Chester, (whereof one Mr. Hynd was the ring leader) whom he first labored to
convince by a Conference: but finding them very perverse and obstinate, (as
that is too usually their temper) he wrote a very excellent Book by way of a
Relation of that Conference, concerning the use of the Surplice, Cross after
Baptism, and Kneeling at the receiving of the B. Sacrament; which he dedicated
to the Marquis of Buckingham, and entitled,

9. A Defense of the INNOCENCE of the three CEREMONIES of the Church of
England, etc. Land. 1619. 4o.

13. This Book, though it was very strongly fortified with many excellent
Arguments, was nevertheless impugned by a nameless Author, generally supposed
to be Mr. Ames, which occasioned a very acute defense of it, written by Dr.
John Burges of Sutton-Coldfeild in Warwickshire, by the Kings Command: and
printed in the year 1631.

14. And now this trouble being taken off his hand, and committed to the
management of such an accurate pen, this Reverend Author betook himself again
to his former studies, in his former way of controversy with his Adversaries
of the Church of Rome. And the first Champion he singled out was no less then
their Achilles, Cardinal Bellarmine, and the subject of the Controversy no
meaner then that of the Authority and Dignity of Kings, and the Person that put
him upon the work no worse then the most learned of Kings, which infused so
much generous spirit into him, as he performed the work so excellently, that
the Book has not in 40. years found any so hardy as to Answer it, and (which
is more) that King James appointed it to be read to his Son (our late most
incomparable Sovereign) to whom it was dedicated, while he was Prince of Wales.
It was written against that Book of of Cardinal Bellarmine which he inscribed
De officio Principis Christiani, and entitled,

10. CAUSA REGIA. Land. 1620. 4o.

15. The next Book he published, he dedicated to the same Gracious Prince, then
newly advanced to the Crown upon the death of his Father of happy memory. The
subject of it was, whether the Roman Church be the Holy Catholic and
Apostolic Church, the Mother and Mistress of all Churches, out of which there
is no salvation, which he proves at large in the Negative. The Title of it is,

11. The GRAND IMPOSTURE of the (now) Church of Rome, etc. The second Edition
enlarged, was printed at London 1628. 4o.

16. And here it will be necessary to advertise the Reader, that there is an
Answer written against this Book by a nameless Author (or Authors) under the
mask of J.S. which he calls Anti-Mortonus, whereunto as yet no reply is
published, though there was one prepared for the Press within a year after the
Adversaries Book first came to this Authors knowledge. Whereof the reason is
this: the design of the reply being thus largely laid; First to re-print the
Book it self, and then, after every section excepted against, the exceptions of
J. S.: and last of all this Authors reply to those exceptions; the Book hereby
grew so voluminous as no Bookseller durst adventure the charge of Printing it,
especially in such a dismal age of the Church as has been of late, wherein
those that desired to read such Books had not money to buy them, being
sequestered and stripped of all their estates; and those that succeed in their
Benefices, have generally no affections to such studies, being led in this (as
in most other things) by their own interest, which directs them only to such
studies as may qualify them for the Pulpit. This is a sad truth which the
Adversaries know well enough to be so, and have not a little contributed unto
it: and I hope this will satisfy every moderate and indifferent man, that it
was the infelicity, not the negligence of this learned and laborious Author
that he should thus be necessitated to dye in debt to his Adversaries.

17. It was some years after before his next work came forth; and well might be
so, considering how large and laborious it was. And yet it was reprinted with
Additions in the year 1635. This Book he dedicated to all learned men,
especially of the two Universities, Cambridge and Oxford, and entitled,

12. Of the INSTITUTION of the SACRAMENT, etc. (by some called) the MASS, etc.
Land. 1635. fol.

18. But before this second Edition saw the light, there were some strictures
written upon the former, by a Romish Author under the name of an English Baron,
which occasioned this Author to write another little Book which he dedicated to
the Lord Ar. Baron, entitled,

13. A DISCHARGE of five Imputations of MISALLEGATIONS, Land. 1633. 8o.

19. The next Book he wrote, was not against any particular adversary, but yet
upon a particular subject, which he thought was too generally mistaken at lest,
if not abused. He dedicated it (as his Book of the Mass) to both the
Universities and other learned men, intituling it,

14. ANTIDOTUM adversus Ecclesiae Romanae de MERITO EX CONDIGNO venenum,
Cantabrig. 1637. 4o.

20. But here steps in a particular Adversary, and that a person of eminent
note and learning, if by C. R. we are to understand the Bishop of Chalcedon.
And though his Book contained not much when it appeared, Annis jam triginta
duobus praeter fluxis, a quo, etc. Replic. init.
it had been, or might have been very long in contriving, being written against
the first Book that ever this Author published, the former volume of his
Catholic Apology, which he had printed above (as he says 32. but I believe
it is the mistake of the Amanuensis or Printer for) two and forty years before,
vid sup. Sect. 3
viz. in the year 1605. This Book occasioned a brief Velitation from this
Author in defense of his former work, (for he thought it deserved no more)
which he dedicated to all Scholars of the English Seminaries beyond Sea, and
entitled,

15. REPLICA, five Refutatio Confutationis C. R. etc. Land. 1638. 4o.

21. Having thus wiped off this great Adversary, he betook himself to a review
of his Book concerning the Mass, which he altered so far, both for Matter and
Method, as well as Language, as it may justly challenge a peculiar place among
his works. It was dedicated to King Charles the first, and entitled.

16. DE EUCHARISTIA Controversiae Decisio. Cantabrig. 1640. 4o.

22. But before this came forth, he had an occasion to Preach before the King
at Newcastle, May 5. 1639. which he performed so well, that he was commanded to
print his Sermon. The Text was, Romans 13.1.

17. Let every soul be subject, etc. Land. 1639. 4o.

23. About two years after he was solicited to preach at the Spittle in
London, April 26.

18. A Sermon on the Resurrection, Land. 1641. 8o.

24. The next year after ( viz. Jun. 19. 1642.) upon the like solicitation, he
preached at St. Paul's that excellent Sermon upon I Cor. 11.16. But if any man
seem to be contentious, etc. since printed, and entitled,

19. The presentment of a SCHISMATIC, Land. 1642. 4o.

29. His next Book that was printed, came forth both without his name to it,
and knowledge of it, thought not without his full consent to it ex post facto,
and that testified in an Authentic manner in the Codicil annexed to his Will.
It was written in defense of Episcopal government, and sent to the late
Reverend and learned Primate of Ireland, who committed it to the Press with
some other excellent collections of his own upon the same subject, the title of
it is,

20. CONFESSIONS and PROOFS of Protestant Divines, etc. Oxford 1644. 4o.

26. I come now to the last Book he lived to publish, the subject whereof was
his Meditations upon Gods providence, a very fit study for his declining years
in these sad times, during his solitude and retirement, being a thing both
comfortable to himself and profitable to others: the title of it is,

21. EZEKIELS WHEELS, etc. Land. 1653. 8o.

26. Having been thus large (I wish I could not say tedious) in a bare
narrative of what Books he has left in Print; I shall not wrong either the
Author or Reader so far as to continue this discourse any longer upon my weak
commendations of them. My only advice shall be in the words of my great Master;
COME and SEE. Joh. 1.39.


27. And yet beside these already Printed, there are a considerable number in
Manuscript: some in my custody which I found by him at his Death; and some
(that I hear of) in the hands of others; all of them once intended for the
Press, whereof some have lost their first perfection, by the carelessness and
negligence of some that should have kept them: others want his last hand and
eye to perfect them; and others only a seasonable time to publish them. And he
might and would have left many more (considering how vigorous his parts were
even in his extreme old Age) if the iniquity of the Times had not deprived him
of most of his Notes and Papers.

28. There were in his own hands at his Death (and they are still in mine)
Anciently Written M. S.

1. Tractatus, DE EXTERNO JVDICE INFALLIBILI, ad Doctores Pontificios, inprimis
vero ad Sacerdotes Wisbicenses.

2. Tractatus DE JUSTIFICATIONE. Two Copies, but both imperfect.

3. Some Papers written upon the Controversy between Bishop MONTAGVE and the
GAGGER, Imperfect.

4. A Latin Edition of his Book called the GRAND IMPOSTVRE. Imperfect.

5. Another Edition of both the parts of his Book called APOLOGIA CATHOLICA.

29. Books lately Written, M. S.

6. The above mentioned ANSWER to I. S. his ANTIMORTONUS, Imperfect.

7. The above mentioned Treatise concerning EPISCOPACY, revised and enlarged.

8. A Treatise concerning PRAYER in an UNKNOWN TONGUE.

9. A Defense of INFANTS BAPTISM, against Mr. Tombs and others.

10. Several SERMONS.

30. But I must be so just to the Reader as to give him this Advertisement
concerning these two last Books. First, that his Sermons are not yet perused,
so that I know not yet whether any of them will be thought fit for the Press.
And secondly, that he himself had laid aside his thoughts of Printing his
Treatise of Poedo-Baptism, Dated Jan 29. 1654
upon a Letter which he received from the late Reverend Bishop of Exeter, to
whom he had committed the perusal of those Papers; the reason I shall set down
in the very words of the Letter, which I have still in my hand.

31. -- I profess (my Lord) it rejoices me to see your wonted Genius so lively
acting in this Masculine Child of your old age; but I crave this leave of your
Lordship to express my thoughts, that having perused your Papers twice over,
and with them both Mr. Tombs and his Adversaries Rejoinder to him; I find the
cause is carried farther by these men's Altercations, then could be foreseen
when you wrote this Confutation. And thereupon he advises him to supersede the
publishing of it, though otherwise (he says) it might have justly claimed the
birthright before the other disputes, etc.

32. Beside these M. S. Books which I have in custody, I hear of some others in
other men's hands. viz.

11. A Relation of the CONFERENCE above mentioned, held at YORK by him with Mr.
Young and Mr. Stillington.

12. A further Confutation of R. G. in Defense of the Articles of the Church of
England.

33. These are all I hear of in particular for the present. What other things
of his there may be, I know not: only I understand by a letter from his old
servant and Secretary Mr. Richard Baddeley, that he has some things of his in
writing which he thinks may be fit for the Press; but whether some of these
already named, I know not. There have been so many things of late obtruded upon
the world under the name of Authors of great fame and reputation, that I must
once for all give the Reader this Caution, that in case any thing shall
hereafter be Printed in the name of this learned Author, it may not be reputed
his, unless it have my approbation of it.

34. I have almost wearied my Reader with a bare Catalogue of his Works: what
then would it be to read them all? But especially what was it for him to write
them? For what Possidius says of S. Augustine in this case, may very well be
applied to this learned Bishop for a Conclusion to this Chapter: In vit. S. Aug.
Tot and tanta eruditionis and ingenii sui edidit Monumenta -- ut vix Cuncta a
studiosissimo quolibet volvi and cognosci queant.

Legenda Scripsit, Scribenda fecit.
CHAP. III. A short Character of his Person and Qualities.
1. I Am not ignorant how hard a task this third and last part of my
undertaking would be, if I should be operose in it, for the same reason, that
none was thought so fit to write Caesar's Commentaries as Caesar himself. But
this is a thing may the more lightly be passed over, both because he has been
a burning and shining Light upon so eminent a Candlestick for so many years, as
renders him very well known to most men; and because I had not only his
permission, but Command to write what now I do, on purpose to prevent the over
lavish expressions, by way of Panegyric, which he feared, and forbad from
another hand, which will obliged me both to moderation and brevity in what I
shall speak of him; and last of all because I have upon another occasion made
some Essay toward this work already, Sermon at his Funeral.
which the reader will find here prefixed.

2. At that time the Text which confined my discourse, led me wholly to make it
appear how well he had studied, and how diligently he had practiced the example
of S. Paul: and therefore it would be superfluous in me now to enter upon any
large discourse, to show what a Paraphrase his life was upon 1 Timothy 3. and Tit.
1. verse. 6, etc. and how perfectly his Episcopal Qualifications answered those
Rules which that great Apostle there prescribes as the Standard or Touchstone
whereby every Bishop ought to be tried and examined. For the greater will
presuppose the lesser a fortiore; and therefore he that had made the Apostles
Life the rule of his own, may well be presumed to have taken out those
inferior lessons which are indispensably required in every Bishop.

3. And yet because I must of necessity use some Method in what I have to say,
and cannot have a better then what is there laid down by this Great Apostle,
Orat. de S. Athanas.
and was taken notice of by S. Gregory Nazianzen in the like case; though I
will not enlarge my Discourse to a Commentary upon the place, I shall use the
particulars of that Text (especially the chief of them) for the heads of my
discourse, though not in the same method and order, And when I have thus
weighed him in the balance, and by the shekel of the Sanctuary, and found him
full weight. I shall add a word or two concerning the (...) or Superpondium;
For as the former will show he wanted nothing that is indispensably required in
a Bishop, so will the later, that he had superadded so much to it, as we may
list him justly in the rank of very good Bishops. And I shall make out all
this, as near as I can, by particular instances; that neither his enemies may
complain that I flatter his memory; nor his friends, that I obtrude my own
fancies and conjectures upon the world in stead of real Truths.

4. For the first Qualification, I shall have no occasion to give offense to
any, because it is Negatively set down. [ A Bishop must be blameless.] So that
whosoever shall accuse him upon this first branch, is bound by the Law of
Nature to make his charge good against him; and if we take in likewise the
Custom of the Romans, that the person accused shall have the Accusers face to
face, Act. 25.15.
and licenee to Answer for himself concerning the crime laid against him: I
shall still have the less cause to be sollicitous in this business. For there
is nothing in his Writings whereof he has been accused, wherein he has not
cleared himself in the judgment of the impartial Reader: and if there be any
new Charge to be laid against him, the only competent Tribunal will be that of
the Righteous Judge of all the earth, at the General Assizes of the World,
where alone the parties may appear face to face. And as for his Life, he was in
that (by the tacit consent of his greatest Enemies) (...) 1 Timothy ^.2.
irreprehensible; or even (...) Tit. 1.6.
sine crimine, if we take the word [ Crime] in the proper sense, not for sin,
(for no man 1 S. Jo. 1.10.
is without that) but for such scandalous sins Aquin. in Loc.
as make a man justly liable to Accusation and Infamy; in which sense multi
sine crimine sunt, as St. Augustine S. Aug. lib. cont. duas Ep. Pelagianor.
Multi sine crimine sunt, and fine querela vivunt, sed nemo sine p^ccato.
tells us: and in that rank I doubt not but we may reckon this good Bishop.

5. For he had improved this Qualification to so high a pitch, as to make it
also take in another, and make him have a good report of them which are without
1 Timothy 3.7.
the Church: for of that rank I must conceive those to be, who by their Schism
cut themselves off from her Communion. And such were those Phanaticks who in a
tumultuous manner assaulted the Bishops going to, or coming from the Parliament
at the beginning of our troubles; thereby then declaring that Schism, which
since they have more avowedly professed. Yet these, even in the heat of their
zeal spared the life of this reverend Bishop as a good man, though they had
once the opportunity, See above Chap. 1. sect. 84.
and wanted neither will nor power to have pulled him in pieces as a Bishop; of
which I have already given an Account.

6. What I here prove by particular Instances might be demonstrated a priore,
by taking in another Ephscopal Quality which was in him, [ a Bishop must be
(...)] which though it be rendered [ Sober] is not of necessity to be understood
of that sobriety which is opposite to Drinking, which was provided against in
the word (...) (though that See the Funeral Sermon. p. 30, 31.
also was very conspicuous in him) but must be taken in that other sense as
Sobriety signifies Prudence in moderating the passions of the mind, and
reducing them under the rule of Moral Virtues, which are said by the
Philosopher to be knit together in Prudence. Arist. Eth. l. 6. c. 13.
This in it self maks a man's soul very beautiful; but when it is seasoned, and
elevated, and enlivened by the Grace of God, it makes it like the Kings
Daughter, Psalm. 45.14.
all glorious within. The former is never more conspicuous then in Government:
but without a superaddition of the later, there can be no such thing as the
Government of souls in order to eternal salvation, S. Greg. Nazianz. Apologet.
1.
which is therefore called by the Father, the Art of Arts, and Science of
Sciences. And yet both of them were in this reverend Bishop in no small
measure, as is evident to the world, so as I need not stand to prove it.

7. By the former of these he had learned, even from a Heathen Philosopher,
that (...), Plutar. lib. de Doctrina prin. cipum.
Secular Rulers, (and much more Spiritual) were like so many Diamonds, wherein
if any spot appear, it will make them liable to be slighted and spoken against.
And by the later, that the least spot upon the pure linen of the Ephod would
be conspicuous, that a small crack in Aarons Bells would quite damp the sound.
And therefore to secure the outward Acts of his great office, he began first
with the internal actions of his own soul. He took the Apostles Method for his
direction, to take heed first to himself, and then to the stock, Act. 20 28.
whereof the Holy Ghost had made him overseer. He was no stranger to that maxim
which St. Bernard taught Pope Eugenius the fourth, (formerly his Disciple,
though then his superior) that the government of the Church, though it be a
work both spiritual and necessary, may by continual attending to it, somewhat
abate, if not quite choke the spirit of inward devotion; and that the charity
of a Bishop toward the Church, may divert, or at least cool somewhat of the
heat of that charity which a devout soul should carry toward God: Which made
this good Bishops Charity begin at home, in the purifying of his own heart, and
rectifying his life, that he might in all things show himself a pattern of good
Works: and become both (...) and (...), blameless in this life, Tit. 2.7.
and irreprehensible in his office. Because (as the same St. Bernard. lib. 4.
de consid. ad Eugen. in fine. Oppertet to esse forma^ justitiae, Sanctimoniae
speculum, pietatis exemplar.
Father tells us,) a Bishop must be the pattern of righteousness, the mirror
of holiness, the samplar of piety: and another S. Chrysostom. Hom. 3. in Act. Apost.
before him, that others may sometimes find an excuse for their sins, but a
Bishop cannot; and a S. Greg. Naz. Apologet. 1.
third before them both, that it is a fault in a Bishop not to be the best of
men.

8. From this root of Christian Prudence (as it knits together all Christian
Virtues) did also proceed those several branches of other Episcopal Qualities,
which were so conspicuous in this Reverend person; And in the first place that
(...) which St. Paul requires in every Bishop; 1 Timothy 3.3.
which the Latin renders by the word [ Modesty] and the English by [ Patience]
and may possibly signify both, if we examine the word by the opposition it
has to those four Negative Qualities with which it is there environed. A
Bishop must not be a striker, nor so much as a Brawler, but (...), or Patient:
and again he must not be given to filthy Lucre: nor so much as Covetous; but
(...), a person of Equity, and Moderation: And so the case was in this reverend
Bishop in all these particular instances.

Lib. 1. cont. Pelagian.
9. He was neither striker nor brawler, but patient. He was (...) even to St.
Hieroms pitch of the sense of the word; Sine jurgio, not quarrelsome, so much
as with his tongue, much less with his hands. In the greatest trial of his
temper that ever he had, the news of the Vote that the Revenues of the Church
were to be sold (which was much more harsh to him then any thing which did or
could concern himself) all he returned was in the words of that Mirror of
Patience: The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, Blessed be the name of
the Lord: Job. 1.21.
which he repeated three times over before the company he then was in, and how
often afterward in private (for presently he retired himself to his prayers) is
known only to the searcher of hearts. And yet, for all this command he had over
his own passions in this great trial, I have often heard him plead for, or at
least extenuate the passion of Old Eli, who upon the mention that the Ark of
God was taken by the Philistims, fell from off the seat whereon he sat, and
brake his neck, 1 Samuel 4.18.
and died.

10. Again, he was (...), as that is opposed to being covetous and greedy of
filthy lucre; and of this we have a convincing testimony from the emptiness of
his purse at his death; which afforded him only the discharge of a moderately
decent burial, with a very little or no overplus. If all the men of England had
been of his temper; Diog. Laer. in vit. ejus.
we might have said of them (as Anacharsis of the Grecians) that they made no
other use of money then only to account with. And this appeared by his very
exemplary Hospitality, Liberality, and Charity to the poor.

11. Hospitality is a Duty enjoined to all men, which are able to perform it, 1
Pet. 4.9. Romans 12.13. Heb. 13.2.
both by St. Peter and St. Paul. And the later of these two great Apostles
makes it a Characteristical note, and consequently an indispensable
Qualification of a Bishop in his Epistles both to Timothy and Titus, 1 Timothy
3.2. Tit. 1.8.
which of necessity must presuppose an estate wherewith to perform it. To
reconcile these together, and show how Hospitality may be a common duty of all
Christians, and yet peculiar to a Bishop, we must take in St. Hieroms
distinction of the magis and minus. That which will pass for a Christian duty
in another man, will hardly arrive to the pitch of a moral virtue in a Bishop.
S. Hieron. epist. ad Ocean. Laicus unum aut duos aut paucos recipiens, implebit
Hospitalitatis officium; Episcopus nisi omnes recipiat, inhumanus est.
For (as that Father tells us) A-Lay-man that entertains one, or two, or a few,
has performed the duty of Hospitality; but a Bishop is not so much as humane,
unless he entertains all. And even in this height did this Reverend Bishop
perform this duty: of which this one instance may suffice, that he entertained
the King and his Court, and (at least the Officers of) his Army, all at one
time in the first expedition toward Scotland; which cost him above 1500 l. in
one day, as (I have heard him say) his Stewards Books would make appear. Of
which I think there will not be found many parallel acts in the way of
Hospitality (as this was) in any History ancient or modern; especially
considering how plentiful and cheap all manner of provisions are in that place.

12. I cannot make a better transition from his Hospitality to his Liberality
then by one usage he had which did participate of both: namely, that there
seldom came any Scholar to him, whether Foreign Traveller or English Native,
whom he did not receive and entertain with free Hospitality, and dismiss with a
considerable sum of Money (proportionable to the parts and merits of the
person) to bestow upon some good Books to keep in remembrance of him.

13. His Liberality (considered in it self) was both great and good: large for
the extension, and very well regulated for the intension of it, as aiming at
some public good, and especially the advancement of Learning or piety. He
builded a Free School at Bishop-Aukland, and endowed it with 24 l. per annum,
which is more by so much then ever he purchased to himself, for that was just
nothing. And it was very rare if he had not some plants in the Garden, as well
as in the Nursery of Learning and piety, which he watered at his own charge;
especially if they were of more then ordinary hopes. I shall instance only in
Mr. Canner Chap. 1. sect. 62.
above mentioned, and one Mr. Lo (of whom I shall speak hereafter) both of
them of singular parts, whom he maintained at his own charge in that College
which had so happily afforded him his own education.

14. What his love and gratitude was to that College, will appear by the next
instance of his Liberality (with which I shall conclude this particular) in
giving so many excellent Books to it, to the value of four, if not five hundred
pounds; with an intention at last to bestow 100 l. per annum upon it while he
lived, provided they might be Books of special worth, Regist. Epistolar. dicti
Collegii p. 371.
and not for superfluity, etc. as his Letter to the said College of Aug. 30.
1639. does expressly declare; and would most undoubtedly have performed it, if
the iniquity of these late times had not disabled him, as will appear by his
great Love to that College, and their no less gratitude to him expressed in
Ibid. page 351. -- qui ita annuus in teipsum redis, ita (...) beneficia
repetis, ac si novissima quaequc munera recentiore fulgore castigares. Et page
359. Tam frequentia sunt erga nos beneficia vestra, tam perpetuis choreis in
orbem acta, ut ducat ilia gratitudo nostra, nec anbela tamen liberalitati tanta
responders possit, etc.
other Letters written by them to him upon those occasions.

15. What we commonly call Charity toward the Poor is nothing else but a branch
of Liberality, terminated to such an object; And in this he was as eminent as
in any other Episcopal virtue. Vide supr. page 33.
His principal care was (with St. Augustine Possid. in vita ejus Pauperum prima
illi semper cura erat, eisque abunde succurrebat.
) to provide for the poor in a plentiful measure; which he practiced (with St.
Chrysostom Vita ejus apud Garsium. ad diem 14. Sept. In pauperum inopia
sublevanda mire beneficus fuit -- cum ipse interim tenuissimo victu vitam non
tam sustineret, quam afflixit.
) with a denying himself those things that were convenient for him, and
extended it so far till he had almost reduced himself to the same Quality. He
had learned from St. Hierom St. Hieron. Epist. ad Ocean. Gloria Episcopi est
pauperum opibus providere; ignominia Sacerdotis est propriis studere.
that the glory of a Bishop consisted in a provident care of the Poor; and his
shame in studying to enrich himself; and therefore his design was, to lay up
his Treasure in heaven by a faithful dispensation of that Treasure which God
had given him upon earth.

16. By these Instances (and others too many to insist upon) it will clearly
appear how perfectly that Character will agree with this Reverend Bishop in
these particulars, In vita Jo. Mortoni. page 300.
which the Author of the British Antiquities gives his great Kinsman the
Cardinal of Canterbury: In pauperibus crebris Eleemosynis refocillandis,
indigentium liberis in literis studiisque alendis, notis atque familiaribus
promovendis -- pietatem, libera. litatem and munificentiam summam declaravit.

17. We have no English word that better expresses (...) (taken in its full
latitude) then [ Equity] which in the true notion of it is defined to be
Correctio juris legitimi, Aristot. Ethic. lib. 5. c. 10.
a Moderation of strict Justice; And how eminent this Virtue was in him, I have
elsewhere so fully observed, Supra cap. 1. sect. 68. and Ser. page 32.
as I shall but need to add one instance more in this place.

S. Mat. 23.24.
18. It is the fault of too many among the modern as well as the ancient
Pharisees, to strain at a Gnat and swallow a Camel; to be exact in trifles,
even to scrupulousness, the better to cover their Injustice in matters of
higher concernment. But this was not his temper; for his Equity was never
greater then in the highest Court of Justice, the Parliament, while he sat
there; wherein he was always led by Conscience, not drawn by Faction. It was a
most imous Slander, which the contrivers of our late troubles cast both upon
the King and Bishops, that He should urge them to Vote at his pleasure, or they
gratify him with their Votes, beyond or beside the rules of Justice, Prudence,
or Conscience. How clearly both He and They foresaw, and how carefully they
endeavored to prevent that Inundation of popular faction which afterward bore
down both King, Church, and Kingdom, is a thing which the world sees (now when
it is too late) was necessary for Him and Them, and others to do. But farther
then these rules this Reverend Bishop (nor I think any of the rest) never sided
with any party in Parliament: but carried himself so indifferently between the
King and the Subject, as if he had been another Solon; Justin. lib. 2.
of whom it is observed, that though he himself sustained the place and office
of Archon, yet was he always of such an equal temper between the Senate and
Commons of Athens, that neither party could think themselves neglected by his
siding with the other. Which Equity though on the one side it proved no better
then a Pearl cast before Swine, S. Mat. 7.6.
yet on the other it was so well accepted, that we have the words of our late
most gracious Sovereign that glorious Martyr, for it, not long before his
(...), (...). chap. 17.
that he never thought any Bishop worthy to sit in that House who would not
Vote according to his Conscience. And that these were not his thoughts then
first taken up upon this business, is a thing so evident, that I have heard
this Reverend Bishop very often magnify his Majesty's gracious disposition,
who did not only leave it free by permission, but give it under a Command to
him (and I make no question, to the rest likewise) that he should use the
liberty of his own Conscience in Voting in Parliament.

19. But there is yet more contained in the word (...) then I have yet
observed, For the Vulgar Latin in this place renders it Modestia, which
signifies Modesty and implies Moderation, both which were very observable in
this Reverend Bishop.

20. First, His Modesty was remarkable in refusing the Honor of being a
Bishop, till a kind of Necessity cast it upon him, Chap. 1. sect. 32, 33, 34,
35.
and yet undertaking the work when it did, as I have already showed. In this
particular he was perfectly of the same temper with S. Gregory Nazianzen, S.
Greg. Nazianz. Apologet. 1. (...).
who would neither take a Bishopric before it was proffered, nor reject it when
it was, because (as that Father has resolved the case) the one is an effect of
Rashness, the other of Disobedience, and both of Ignorance.

21. Secondly, His Moderation was very great in order to matters both of
Doctrine and Practice: Supra p. 43.
whereof there are so many clear instances given in that excellent codicill
annexed to his will (and herewith printed) that I should have very little to
add here, if it had not been for a Question concerning that Codicil which was
put to me by a reverend and learned person that heard it read both at his Death
and Funeral, Dr. Samuel Bolton, now one of his Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.
whereunto I shall now publish the Answer I then gave, though I suppose the
Question proceeded chiefly from curiosity.

21. The Question was, Why this Reverend Bishop had not in all that Codicill
declared any thing of his opinion concerning the matters of Controversy
between the Remonstrants and Anti-remonstrants? And though the Answer was
easy, That I could give no account of the Actions, (much less of the
omissions) of another man, especially my Superior, yet I added withal (and
gave him some Instances of it) that I conceived his great Moderation made him
unwilling to interpose in that controversy.

22. My Instances were, 1. That ever since I had the happiness to be near him,
I had found him very reserved in his Discourses upon that subject. 2. That
though he had a very high esteem of Mr. Calvin, yet (in a discourse with a very
learned Lay Gentleman, Mr. Lawrence Maydwell.
whereat I was present) he much disliked Mr. Calvin's opinion concerning
Reprobation, and would not believe he was so rigid in it, as it appeared he
was, upon perusal of the place. And 3. I showed him (afterward) the Duplicat
of a Letter which I found among the papers of this Reverend Bishop to the late
most Reverend and learned Primat of Ireland, Bishop Davenant.

Edit. Cantabr. 1650.


concerning a passage in Corvinus which the late Reverend and learned Bishop of
Salisbury has objected and answered in his Book entitled DISSERTATIONES DVAE,
etc. p. 201. whereupon he says (in that Letter) he must have a Melius
inquirendum, to find out the subtlety, how creatio hominis damnandi non sit
subordinatum medium ad damnationem, etc. By which it appears his Moderation
in that Controversy was greater then that of the learned Bishop of Salisbury,
though he was one of the British Divines at the Synod of Dort, who surpassed
all that were there present for Moderation.

23. I cannot omit one instance more of his Moderation, (which relates to
practice, as the former did to Doctrine) because there are still some that are
willing to mistake him, and to abuse that repute and reverence which he has in
many good men's minds, to the ingendring of jealousies concerning those ancient
practices which have been derived from the Fathers, and continued by
uninterrupted custom in his Majesty's Chapel, and Cathedrals, and in many
Colleges and other places. And because I will not go beyond my warrant in what
I shall say upon this particular, I shall keep me to the express words of a
letter from him to St. John's College in Cambridge (dated the 20. of April,
Registr. E stol. page 343.
1635.) which stands still upon record in the said College, and was thus
occasioned.

24. I have formerly mentioned one Mr. Lo, a person of very good parts, but
especially of a singular Memory, Supra sect. 13.
whom this Reverend Bishop maintained in that College at his own Charge: when
he came to be capable of it, the Bishop was desirous, and the College willing
to make him one of the Fellows; only he had been wrought upon by some that
labored to inveigle so hopeful a young man to their party, to express some
dislike to the Ceremonies and practices then used in Gods public Worship and
service. Whereof this Reverend Bishop being informed by a Letter from the
College, returned his Answer to them, expressing the same dislike of him in
this particular which they did. His words are these: LOVM nostrum quod attinet,
saepe equidem inaudivi per totam Universitatem vestram extare prorsus neminem,
qui Ceremoniis illis, quarum ego innocentiam sartam tectam olim defendendam
suscepi, repugnet aut reluctetur. Quod si vero gestui illi flectendi se versus
sacram Domini mensam hic juvenis adversetur, me multo seniorem habebit sibi
utique adversarium: Nec sane immerito. Cum, etc. And then he proceeds on to
prove his assertion by reasons and Authorities, which would be too long here to
insert.

25. There are still some other Qualifications of a Bishop, which I have not
yet mentioned, whereof one is that he must be (...); 1 Timothy 2.9.
And the word being rendered [ Modest] in the margin of our English Bible, makes
it to be of so much affinity with the last, as to view it in the next place.
The Vulgar Latin translates it [ Ornatus] which St. Hierom tells us signifies
such a person as keeps a Decorum in his motion, Epist. ad Ocean. Ornatus
vocatur qui decorum servat, in motu, incessu, habitu, and sermon.
walking, habit, and speech; which is all comprised in our English phrase in
that place, A person of good behavior. And this complex Qualification was so
eminent in him, that his greatest enemies could not tax him of the contrary in
any branch of it. His motion was upright, his walking sprightfull, his speech
grave and sober, and his habit Episcopal, even then when it was hazardous to be
seen in a Clerical garment: wherein he was decent in his lowest ebb, and never
excessive in his highest tide. As St. Augustine usually took his example from
St. Cyprian, so did this Reverend Bishop from both. With Possid. in vita S.
Aug. c. 16. Vestis ejus, aliaque and corporis and cubiculi ornamenta, nec
nitida nimium, nec abjecta plurimum erant -- vest honesta, and nequaquam a
vulgari consuetudine temporis illius abhorrente, utebatur:
St. Augustine, he was neither too spruce nor too mean in his bodily apparel
and furniture of his house; and for the fashion, it was such as was commonly
used by others of his own rank and quality: And with St. Cyprian S. Greg.
Nazianzen. Orat. 18. in Laud. S. Cypriani. In vestitu philosophiam, in
Congressibus gravitatem cum humanitate conjunctam, pari intervallo a vilitate
and arrogantia remotam, etc.
(beside the comeliness of his Apparel) there was in his carriage such an exact
mixture of gravity and courtesy, as carried him in an equal line between pride
on the one hand and meanness of spirit on the other.

26. It is not without cause that I have fetched down this Practice as high as
St. Cyprian and St. Augustine, seeing the contrary corruption began to infest
the Church even in those ancient times, which extorted very grievous complaints
from St. Ambrose S. Ambr. de dignit. Sacerd c. 6.
and St. Gregory S. Greg. Hom. 17. in Evangel.
of bringing the Bishops and Clergy into contempt: And would much more excuse
me (now that the fault is grown almost epidedemical) if I should take the
liberty to make a Digression upon the same subject. For it is that which the
very Vulgar cry shame at to see the professors of the Law from the Judge to the
Petty Attorney and Clerk, and the Citizens from the Mayor to the Sergeants and
Yeomen, preserve the gravity of their places by their Gowns and other ancient
formalities; and only the Clergy (whose office it is or should be to teach all
others by their example as well as doctrine) should throw them aside, and
expose themselves to the just censure of levity and inconstancy; and their
places and callings to the great hazard of scorn and contempt. Ezra. 3.10. See
also Ezr. 2 69.
The Priests among the Jews preserved their ancient and proper Apparel even
after their return from Captivity: And S. John wore his (...) (which was a
peculiar Clerical habit) even in the times of Persecution. Polycrat. apud
Eusebius. Hist. l. 3. c. 31.
And long experience ever since has confirmed it unto us, that such helps as
these are very necessary to preserve that reverence and respect which is due
from the People to their Bishops and Clergy.

27. I shall not abuse the Readers patience by insisting upon those
Qualifications of a Bishop which were so conspicuous in him, as none can be
ignorant of them: As that of being the Husband of one wife, whereas he never
was of any, leading his whole life in a holy Caelibate; or (...), which whether
we render Vigilant (as in the English) or Sober (as in the vulgar Latin) will
be all one as to this particular; seeing he was sober in his person, and
vigilant in his office.

28. And this also will supply another Qualification, that he was not given to
wine, which he never drank but at meals, and that sparingly, till extreme old
age made it necessary for him by way of Physic to drink a glass sometimes in
the interim, to cheer his spirits and warm his stomach. 1 Timothy 5.23.
Timothy the Bishop of Ep^esus was so abstemious as not to drink wine without
the Apostles command; but this Bishop would hardly drink any with it, even then
when his stomach and often infirmities required it.

29. Now these Qualities being so conspicuous in him, we may easily believe
there was nothing wanting in him which the Apostle requires, 1 Timothy 3.4. For
his single life gave a supersedeas to that part of it which requires that a
Bishop should have his children in subjection with all gravity: And his
vigilance and good example in abstemiousness and sobriety made him (...), a
good ruler of his own house (as well as (...), a good Bishop in the Church)
even then when his family was so numerous, as would have taken up a man's whole
endeavors to govern it. He had no children but those whom God had given him in
the Gospel, which made him have the more fatherly care of his servants, whom he
loved as his children, and had them in subjection with gravity. These he
educated and instructed so well, that he could require nothing in the flock
under his charge, whereof they might not see the pattern in his own family S.
Hieron. Epist. ad Ocean. Sed quod populo praecepturus est, prius a domesticis
exigat.
which was (as S. Bernard Lib. 4. de confid. ad Eugen. Interest gloriae
sanctitatis tuae ut quos prae oculis habes, ita ordinati, ita fint informati,
quatenus totius honestatis and ordinis, ipsi speculum, ipsi fint forma.
advises) the mirror and samplar of all honest conversation and good order.

30. This made the Right Honorable the now Earl of Lindsey, Lord Great
Chamberlain of England, make choice of his Family as the fittest place for the
education of one of his Sons: and many of the chief Gentry (to say nothing of
the Nobility Sir Charles Fairfax son to Ferdinando Lord Fairfax was his
Gentleman Huisher.
) thought it not below them to get their Sons received into his service; which
was indeed rather an Academicall institution in piety virtue and learning, then
any servitude.

31. There was not one Qualification of a Bishop required by S. Paul that was
not conspicuous in him; And of all others there must be much Ignorance or
Malice in the mistake, if any shall say he was (...), which signifies a
Novice, or newly Baptized Christian; not heri Catechumenus, hodie pontifex, S.
Hieron. Epist. ad Ocean.
as S. Hierom paraphraseth the word. And therefore this is not to be understood
of a man in respect of his age, but of a Christian in respect of his growth in
grace. For in the ancient Church, when the office of a Bishop was of more
consideration then the honor, there was respect had to the strength of Body as
well as of Minae, in the person that was chosen to that heavy charge: so that
maturity of parts and aptitude for Government was more regarded in such a
person then multitude of years. S. Paul himself that prescribes this
qualification to Timothy, made Timothy Bishop of Ephesus even in his youth: 1 Timothy 4.12.
S. Ambrose Baron. in vit. ejus.
was chosen Bishop of Milan at 42. years of age; S. Augustine Idem ad Ann. 395.
of Hippo at 41. Remigius Lippelous in vit. ejus.
of Rhemes at 22. Vigilius Vit. ejus apud Cassandr.
of Trent at 20. yet all of these were excellent Bishops, and famous men in
their generations.

32. It is not therefore to be imputed as any blemish to this reverend person,
that he should ascend to the honor of being a Bishop in the two and fiftieth
year of his age; but rather esteemed as an honor that he was so soon fitted
for so great a work. For he was no Novice in the literal sense, because (being
baptized in his Infancy) he had been trained up in the Discipline of
Christianity 52. years: S. Greg. lib. 4. ep. 50. Nunc inter Neophytos
deputan^us qui adhuc novus est in Sancta conversations.
nor in the vulgar sense, being a person of great learning, and then in the
full strength of his parts and age: Nor in S. Gregory's sense, as it signifies
a man that is but a New-beginner in sanctity of life and conversation; for he
was a person of exemplary piety from his youth. 1 S. Joh. 2.16.
S. John reduces all manner of sin to three Heads, the lust of the flesh, the
lust of the eyes, and the pride of life: in all which he had got so clear a
victory over himself, that what S. Gregory Nazianzen says of S. Cyprian in
these particulars may very fitly be applied to him: S. Greg. Naz. Orat. 18:
(...), etc.
The Discipline of his Mind was great in opposition to Covetousness and
Ambition, and the Discipline of his Body was no less in purity of Conversation.

33. That which is generally reputed the greatest Qualification of a Bishop, is
that he must be (...), apt to teach, and this I have reserved for the last
place. S. Hilary S. Hill. lib. 8. de Trin. Summa omnium virtutum Episcopalium
est scientia and doctrina.
calls it the chief of all Episcopal virtues, Theophylact Theophylact. in Tit.
1. Doctrine est virtus est Character Episcopi.
makes it the very characteristical note, and the Council of Trent Conc. Trid.
Sess. 5. c. 1. Potissimum Episcopi munus, est Praedicatio verbi Dei.
it self the principal office of a Bishop. I cannot therefore without too large
a repetition of what I have already said, make it appear in every respect how
well this Character befitted him. He that is apt to teach indeed, must be a
person 1. Of great Learning, (and so was he, as his Works will declare.) 2. Of
great Industry; and his was so great, that the Emperor Severus (who dyed at
York where he was born) may seem to have infused his Genius together with his
Motto [ LABOREMVS] into him. And that not only before, but also after he
ascended to the height of Episcopal Dignity, as if that other Motto of another
Emperor Julius Maximinus.
had been his rule, [ QVO MAJOR, EO LABORIOSIOR] S. Augustine Possid. in vita.
S. Aug. Episcopali munere suscepto, multo ferventius, and summa cum authoritate
in opus Evangelii incubuit.
was his pattern in many Episcopal virtues, and amongst others in this; that
the higher he ascended in the Church the more painful and industrious he was in
his Office, Wherein he was so indefatigable, that what is said of his great
kinsman the Cardinal and Archbishop of Canterbury, was very true concerning
him: Jo. Budden in vita ejus. page 6. Vires supra mensuram corporis; neque
aliunde magis, quam de laboribus reparandae.
His labor was his recreation.

34. When I can see a man learn without Rules, I shall think he may be apt to
teach that is not observant of Order. That this Reverend Bishop was apt to
teach in this respect also, is clear from that great respect he carried toward
the Governors of the Church who were his Superiors either in Learning, or
Ecclesiastical Dignity; and such were those that were most eminent for piety,
wisdom, and learning in that age, viz. Archbishop Bancroft, Archbishop
Matthews, Bishop Andrews, Bishop King, Bishop Bilson, Bishop Overall, and many
others.

35. To this head I may also referr that intimate acquaintance which he had
with all the learned men of his time, whether Equals or Inferiors, whereof I
have already given some instances Supra cap. 1. sect. 24, 25, 27, 29, 30, and
31.
, and might here allege many more, not only of Natives but forraigners, as
Spanhemius, Rivetus, Willius, and others; from whom I found several Letters at
his death among his papers, full of reverence and respect to him.

36. Nor can I here omit the great care he had to advance piety and learning,
not only by his own pains in Writing, Preaching, Catechizing, etc. but also by
his Chaplains, whom he chose with much care, treated with great respect, and
promoted with all cheerfulness. His precedent herein might possibly be S. Hugh
the Bishop of Lincoln, Vita ejus apud Surium. Suscepio igitur praesulatu, prima
cura and sollitudo ei fuit ut viros Sapientia and scientia instructos, atque in
timore Dei probatissimos, suo lateri adhiberet. Horum consilio and auxilio
fretus pastorali munus perquam strenue executus est.
commonly called Hugo Carthusianus, whose chief care was after he came to be
Bishop, to have men of Wisdom, learning and piety always about him, both to
counsel and assist him in that great office. I could here give the Reader a
Catalogue of very many and worthy persons who were sometimes related to him in
the capacity of Chaplains. But all the rest will excuse me if I make one
instance for all, in so eminent and worthy a person as the Right Reverend
Father in God, the late Bishop of Exeter, who was his Chaplain, and by him made
Archdeacon of Coventry, and afterward Prebendary of Duresme, the later of
which places was so considerable, that he held it in Commendam with his
Bishopric until his Death, which makes me wonder the more the learned Author of
his life should take no notice of either of them.

37. When I speak of his Chaplains, I must not omit the great care he had in
disposing those Dignities and other Ecclesiastical Benefices, whereof he had
the Right of Patronage, which he seldom conferred upon any but those of whose
worth he had a particular knowledge, and most commonly his own Chaplains. There
are as few exceptions against this general rule in him, as in any that had so
many places to dispose of as he had; and the persons were always such as were
of approved worth for piety and learning, which is another Topic to show that
he was (...).

38. When a thing is done Vigorously and Effectually, it will well deserve the
name that it carries; (otherwise not) and such was his aptness to teach. For
his diligence and vigor in Teaching, I cannot better resemble him to any then
Socrates; of whom Plutarch tells us, that he taught not only when he was in the
Chair, or at his set hours of reading -- but even when he played, when he eat
or drank, in Campo, in Foro, in Carcere; he made every place a school of
learning and virtue. And I make use of this resemblance the rather, because
this Reverend Bishop in his Writing, did so much resemble the manner of
Philosophizing of that excellent Philosopher, which was not so much by using
Arguments of persuasion, Cicero de Invent. lib. 1.
as by choosing to work something out of what the Adversary had granted.

39. But that which shows he was (...) indeed was the fruit and effect of his
labor and learning, in reducing several persons of great learning and parts
from the Errors of the Romish profession, into the Communion of the Church of
England. For instance, Mr. Theophilus Higgon, a very learned man and a smart
writer, afterward Rector of Hunton in Kent: Mr. Redman a Priest, afterward
Curate of Congleton in Cheshire: Dr. Crofts, a learned man, now Dean of
Hereford; Mr. Tobie Swinborne, heretofore brought up in the English College at
Rome, afterward Doctor of the Laws, and a very excellent Scholar: Mr. Hulse,
Mr. Matthews; the Lady Cholmeley, Wife to Sir Henry Cholmeley, with diverse
others whose names I may possibly have forgotten.

40. But however I must hasten from this subject: for having made it thus
clearly appear how well this Reverend Bishop held measure with S. Paul's
Standard, I must remember my promise to cast a glance upon those gifts in him,
which God was pleased to cast in over and above, both by his own immediate work
of Grace, and mediately by Natural endowments; for in both these God had
vouchsafed him good measure, shaken together, and running over: insomuch as we
may compare him with the best examples of the holy Bishops and others of all
ages for some eminent gift or other.

41. I shall begin with his Predecessor, that most pious and famous Bishop of
Duresme, St. Cuthbert, and compare them in their beginnings. For what Venerable Bede (whose ashes lie inshrined in a now-defaced Tomb in that Church) says of
the one, Bed. Hist. l. 4. c. 27. Cumpuer adhuc, and ingenii acumine, and mirae
agilitate membroram praeditus, puerilibus ludis certaminibusque, ut fert illa
ae^as, admodum deditus, allos fere omnes dexteritate quadam in quovis certamine
superabal -- Nullo saltu, cursu vel lucta failgatus est, etc.
is very true of the other: even in his childehood he had not only an excellent
sharpness of Wit, but also a strange activity of Body, wherein he excelled all
his fellows in sports and games, especially in leaping, running, and
wrestling. This venerable Author says nothing in particular of St. Cuthberts
Football playing, and yet I hope the Reader will excuse it, if I here pass
not over in silence how active this Reverend Bishop was therein in his younger
years, seeing the fame of it continued till his old age, and ascended so high
as to come to the Kings Ear. For he was once asked by King James whether it was
true, that he struck up the heels of six men so speedily one after another,
that the last was down before the first could get up again; which I have heard
him say was true though the report which (seldom fails on that side) had
doubled the number.

42. But letting this pass, Lib. 3. c. 155. Vultu decorus, and quaedam mixta
jucundicate se veritas -- unde bonis erat affabilis, superbis and negligentibus
terribilis.
I proceed to his riper years, wherein the Character which Trithemius gives of
the above mentioned Venerable Bede, does paint him out to the life; for he also
was a person of a comely countenance, wherein there was such a mixture of
sweetness and severity, as did very much encourage those that were good, and
terrify those that were proud and negligent.

43. My intention is not to Hatter his memory, and therefore when I go about to
compare him with Ancient holy Fathers of the Church, I must profess my meaning
to be, not to make a parallel, but only to show in some few instances how near
he attained to their perfection. I cannot say (as St. Hierome of Hilarion) that
he laid upon a Mat spread on the ground till his dying day: S. Hier. in Vit.
Hilar. Super nudam humum stratumque junceum usque ad mortem cubitavit: nec
mutavit alteram tunicam, nisi eum prior penitus stissa est.
nor that he never put on new clothes till the old ones were worn to pieces:
but I may truly say, he laid upon a straw-bed when he was past S. Hilarions
age (who lived but about 80. years) and he seldom wore a new garment but he
gave the old one away. And as for the Character given to St. Hierome himself by
the Author of his life, it will well agree with this Reverend Bishop, that he
laid hard, because he would sleep no more then only to satisfy the necessity
of Nature; that his clothes were but course and ordinary, Vit. S. Hieron. apud
Garsium die 30. Sept. Somnus non ad delicias, sed ad Naturae capitur
necessitatem: in duro non in mollibus cubat, and vili pallio non precioso and
nitido tegitur indumento -- canis jam totus aspersus nihil ex studiorum
assiduitate remittit -- non minu^ ad orandum alacris, quam ad legendum
promptus. -- mirum erat in corpore jejuniis and aetate consumpto tantum
Spiritus tantum vigere fortitudinis.
and that in his old age (I may truly say when he had outlived St. Hierom many
years) he remitted nothing of his pains and industry in his studies, nor of his
alacrity in his prayers; insomuch that it was a wonder to see a body that had
sustained so much fasting and labor to be so full of vigor and fortitude.

44. When I compare him with S. Hierom in point of Age and Vigor, I cannot pass
by what the same Father has left recorded of Paulus Concordiensis, a person of
100 years old, S. Hier. epist. 21. ad Paul. Concordiens. Oculi quo lumine
vigent? Pedes imprimunt certa vestigia, auditus penetrabilis -- Vox sonora,
corpus solidum and succi plenum: cani cum rubore discrepant, vires cum aetate
dissentiunt.
after whose example God and nature had much fitted this Reverend Bishop. For
his sight was good, considering his great years; He could walk very well; his
hearing was quick; his voice was clear; his body solid and full of moisture;
the whiteness of his head, and ruddiness of his face could hardly be imagined
to be in one and the same person. I verily believe no Physician in the world
would have judged him to be of above half the Age he was, if he had only
considered the plumpness of his flesh and smoothness of his skin, without
looking upon the whiteness of his hair.

45. I think he has hardly left his equal behind him of any Bishop in the
world for multitude of years either as a Man, or as a Bishop: And if we look
over all Histories, we shall not find many precedents, if we take them both
together: Simon (the second Bishop of Jerusalem) lived (I grant) till 120
Fulgos. lib. 8. cap. 14.
, But he fell far short of the years of this reverend person as he was Bishop:
on the other side, St. Athanasius Patriarch of Alexandria Qui totos 46. annos
Alexandriae Ecclesiae pontificatum egregia cum laud gessit. Sr. Cyril. epist
ad Presbyt. etc. in Act. Synod. Ephesians. cap. 1.
, and St. Wilfrid Archbishop of York Obiit Anno aetatis 74. Quindecies ternos
postquam egit Episcopus annos, i. e. Episcopatus anno 45. Vid. Bed. Hist. Ang.
circa Anno Dom. 709.
exceeded him, the one two years, the other one, as Bishops; but they fell far
short of his age as a Man. I cannot call to mind any that exceeded him in both,
except St. Remigius Archbishop of Rhemes Vit. ejus apud Hincmarum, In
Episcopatu annos 74. sanctissime exegit. Idem ibid. Nonaginta quidem sex cum
compleverat annos, Splendid^ lux nostras deseruit tenebras.
, whose case I think is singular, as being made Bishop in the 22. year of his
age, and so continuing till the ninety sixth.

46. But it was not the Age of this Reverend Bishop that was so remarkable as
his vigor and indefatigable industry in his old age; wherein he was a (...),
an Iron-side, another Hercules (as Laertius speaks of Cleanthes.) It was a
Miracle that Moses should continue the vigor of his sight, and natural force
till he was 120 years old, Deuteronomy. 34.7.
and would be thought little less then a Miracle, that any of half his age
should now enjoy them: and yet this Reverend Bishop found very little defect in
any of his Senses (except only a little in his sight) till death deprived him
of them all: What Suidas says of Servilius the Consul; and the Father of
Ausonius the Poet, of himself, was very applicable to this Reverend Bishop,
when he was older then either of them: Nonaginta annos baculo sine, Corpore toto
Exegit cunctis integer officiis.


47. It is possible (I might say probable) that the smalness of his stature
might give him some advantages above other men in this particular, (for the
lesser the Body is, the more easy it is to be actuated by the spirits) And
then, Plutarch. de Institut. liber.
if he had lived before Archidamus the King of Sparta this Example might have
preserved that King from the Mulct which the Ephori imposed upon him, for
marrying a little Wife, (utpote non Reges, sed Regulos daturus.) For however
some in those ancient times might dote upon Bulk more then Virtue (as appears
by the great Statue of little Lactius the Poet at Rome in Aede Camaenarum) yet
it is sure enough there have not been more famous men, Plin. lib. 34. cap. 5.
then some of no great stature, as the instance of King Pipin in the French
History, and King Edgar in our own, will make manifest. It is often seen that
he that is Staturae exiguae, Joseph. Antiq. lib. 18. c. ult.
is animi excelsi: so it was with Asinaeus the Captain of the Jews, as well as
with these two famous Kings: and so was it likewise with this Reverend Bishop.
Macrob. Saturnal. l. 2. c. 3.
Insomuch as Cicero's jest may very fitly be applied to him (if we consider his
Body and Soul apart) which he made upon his Brother Quintus when he saw so
great a picture (and yet but half way neither) drawn for so little a man; Major
est dimidius quam totus; His inward and invisible part was greater then any
would have thought the whole person to have been.

48. But I have given so large an account already of his inward and invisible
part in the two foregoing Chapters, in relation both to his Life and Doctrine,
that I may now be excused if I sum up both of them in that Character which
Venerable Bede gives of his predecessor St. Cuthbert, Bed. Hist. lib. 4. c. 28.
Commissam namque sibi plebem, and orationibus protegebat assiduis, and
admonitionibus salubriter ad coelestiae vocabat: Et (quod maxim Doctores
juvare solebat) ea quae agenda docebat, ipse prius agendo praemonstrabat.
that as he discharged the duty of a good Bishop both in his daily prayers for
the people committed to his charge, and his wholesome exhortations to them; So
he taught them nothing by his words, whereof he did not give them a good
example in his actions.

49. And this excellent Method of teaching by his Deeds as well as his Words,
was no new thing in him, but a constant habit of Virtue of very long
continuance: For it was so remarkable in him as to be publicly taken notice of
in a Sermon preached at St. Paul's Cross 50. years ago, and since printed, Mr.
Theophilus Higgons Recantation Sermon at S. Paul's Cross, Mar. 3. 1610. page 46.
wherein we have these words: The learned and venerable Dean of Winchester (for
that was then his Title) of whose Knowledge and Charity I have had so much
experience, that whether he be Melior or Doctior, a better Man, or a more
learned Divine, I cannot easily resolve: only I can resolve with Seneca, that
of these two commendations, O virum Doctum, and O virum bonum, the later does
excel the first.

50. This being a Truth so publicly avowed so many years ago, will both
acquit what I have here said from all suspicion of flattery, and excuse my not
engaging any further upon this subject. And therefore all I shall now add to
what I have said, shall be one instance, which will above all other demonstrate
that he was Vir bonus, and that is the Crown of Martyrdom, which he came so
near to attain unto, that some even in the first and best ages of the Church
have had their Memories celebrated as Martyrs ever since, for doing no more
then what he did.

51. In the days of Valerian the Emperor (as the Martyrologie Martyrol. Romans
ad diem 28. Febr. Commemoratio sanctorum Presbyterorum, Diaconorum and aliorum
plurimorum, qui tempore Valeriani Imperatoris, cum pestis saevissima
grassaretur, morbo laborantibus ministrantes libentissime mortem oppeliere;
Quos velut Martyrs religiosa piorum fides venerari consuevit.
tells us out of unquestionable History Dionys. Alexandr. epist. ad Heracem
Episc. apud Eusebius. Hist. lib. 7. cap. 16, 17. Vid. Baron. in Martyrol. Romans
ibid.
there was a very great and infectious Plague, and yet notwithstanding,
several, both Priests, Deacons, and many others, did most willingly lay down
their lives, that they might be assisting to those that were infected with this
contagious disease: And for this reason are continually commemorated as Martyrs
upon the 28. day of February.

Vid. Baron. Annal. Tom. 2, ad An.
52. Though St. Cyprian had not attained the honor of a particular Martyrdom,
his heroical Charity in this particular (for his example was eminent in this
action) would have honored him with that title; and however it (has and) ever
will superadd a peculiar luster to his Crown of Martyrdom. It is none of the
least causes why Cardinal Borromeus Vit. ejus apud Gars. ad diem. 3. November.
Quia Meminerat boni Pastoris esse ponere animam pro ovibus -- tempore
contagiosae pestis Mediolani, ab anno 1566. ad finem usque 1567. non raro amore
creditae sibi plebi^, discrimini mortis objecit vitam.
was honored with the title of S. Charles of Milan, that in the years 1566,
and 1567. when the Plague was so hot among the people committed to his charge,
he frequently discharged the duty of their Pastor, in visiting them with the
hazard of his life. And then sure it will much more redound to the immortal
honor as well as happiness of this Reverend Bishop, that he did the like upon
the like occasion, not so much out of Duty as Charity, to those that were not
of his peculiar charge, but only his Countrymen and fellow Citizens; whereof I
have already Vid. supra. chap. 1. sect. 16.
given the Reader a sufficient account.

53. And now nothing remains but to sum up all I have said concerning this
Reverend Bishop in this short Elogie. He was a Saint in his Life, a Doctor in
in his works, a Confessor in his sufferings, and a Martyr in this his last
mentioned Heroical Charity: (...) (as was said of S. Athanasius) a holy and
irreprehensible Martyr; Constable. Imp. epist. ad occident. Synod. 6. Act. 18.
and this Martyrdom undertaken in the full vigor and strength of his age, and
not when Age or Infirmities had made his life a burden to him, but so long
before his Death as may equal the ordinary space of another man's life. Insomuch
as we may conclude that absolutely of him which Cassianus speaks only with a [
Pene] concerning S. Athanasius; Jo. Cassian. lib. 7. de Incarnat. cap. ult.
Prius indeptus est MARTYRIS meritum, quam CONFESSORIS caperet dignitatem.

In MEMORIA SACRA
Heic vivit usque, and usque vivat Quem Ecclesia MARSTONIENSIS, ALESFORDIENSIS,
STOPFORDIENSIS, Rectorem Sedulum; EBORACENSIS, Canonicum Pium; GLOCESTRIENSIS,
WINTONIENSIS Decanum Providum; CESTRIENSIS, LEICHF. and COVENTR. DUNELMENSIS
Praesulem Vigilantem Habuere.

Qui, Post plurimos pro Sancta Ecclesia Christi Catholica,

THE END.

