Godly-Fear: OR, THE Nature and Necessity of FEAR, And its Usefulness.

BOTH To the Driving Sinners to Christ, AND To the Provoking Christians on in a
Godly Life, through the several Parts and Duties of it, till they come to
Blessedness.

By R. A. Author of Vindiciae Pietatis.

Heb. 12.28. Let us have Grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably with
Reverence and Godly Fear.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Sprint and Brabazon Aylmer, at the Bell in
Little-Brittain; and at the three Pigeons in Cornhil, 1674.

To the Reader.
READER,
THe following Sermons, tho set together into one Treatise, were preached upon
diverse. Texts of Scripture; and therefore thou will the better bear it, if thou
find not that exactness of Method, nor that evenness of Style which thou do
expect. All the Parts of it concenter in the same Design, tho some of them seem
a little more remote from it. Such as it is, the Whole is offered thee for thy
Use; accompanied with the Author's Prayers for a Blessing from Heaven upon it
and thee.

Thine in Christ, R. A.

The Contents.
THe Text opened, Page 1 The Doctrine Propounded. Page 3 The Doctrine Expounded
in two particulars, viz. 1. What that Fear is to which Blessedness is
pronounced, and what there is in it. ibid. 1. It has Understanding in it. Page
6 2. It has Faith. Page 9 3. It has Love. Page 11 4. Aversation from Evil.
Page 13 5. It has Foresight. Page 14 6. It has Forecast. Page 17
2. What that Blessedness is that is pronounced to this Fear. Page 24 The Man
that fears shall have Sufficiency. Page 25 Security. Page 26
Use. Of Information, Exhortation, and Direction. For the carrying on whereof,
Understand, I. The Opposites of this Fear; these are 1. Rashness. Page 32 2.
Audacity. Page 35 3. Security. Page 36
Amos 6.1.3. Woe be to them that are at ease in Zion, - that put far away the
Evil Day, opened at large. Page 40 II. The Grounds or Reasons why Men Fear not.
These are, their 1. Ignorance. Page 47 2. Unbelief. Page 50 3. Presumption.
Page 53
A twofold Presumption; 1. Of the goodness of Men's present state. ibid. 2. Of
the happiness of their future state, whatever their present state be. Page 76
III. The Grounds or Reasons why we should Fear. Page 84 These are, 1. Because
of our Ignorance. ibid. 2. Because of the deceitfulness of our hearts. Page 92
3. Because of the weight and importance of the Work we have upon our hands.
Page 109 4. Because of the great Treasure we carry with us, whereof we are in
danger of being robbed and spoiled. Page 127
IV. What things we should especially Fear. Page 133 These are, 1. Our
Delilah's, or our Beloved Sins. ibid. How the Beloved Sin may be known. Page 134
2. Our Jezebel's, or our painted Sins. Page 138 3. Our Isaac's, or every
Beloved Creature. Page 140 4. The Cross or Affliction. Page 146 1. How the
Cross is not to be feared. Page 147 1. Not out of tenderness to the Flesh.
ibid. 2. Not out of faintness of Spirit. Page 151
Some Cordials to preserve from fainting. Page 152 2. In what respects the
Cross is to be feared. Page 156 1. Fear a surprisal by the Cross. ibid. 2. Fear
the Temptations of the Cross. Page 158

5. The Curse or Everlasting Damnation. Page 159
The Fear of the Curse will 1. Quicken our Fear of Sin. Page 164 2. Quench our
sinful Fear of the Cross. Page 169
The Fear of the Curse pressed in particular upon Unconverted Sinners. Page 171
By showing, 1. What the Curse is. ibid. 2. That Unconverted Sinners are at
present under the Curse. Page 177 3. That there is great hazard that they may
never escape it. Page 178
V. How we should improve this Fear. Page 193 Answered in three Directions.
Direct. 1. Fear and Search. ibid. Search, 1. What good thing there is in you,
whether there be sincerity in your Hearts toward God. Page 196 1. How by
searching to work to this Fear. Page 200 Five Considerations to make afraid.
Page 201 1. There are preparations for Grace, which are not Grace. ibid. 2.
There are Images of Grace, which are not Grace. Page 208 3. There are some
properties of gracious Persons, which are no certain Evidences of Grace. Page
209 4. There is no one Grace, which is really so, which will put us out of
doubt. Page 212 5. Whatever you have short of Saving-Grace, it may go back,
and you may be reduced to a worse State than ever you were in before. Page 213


Objection against putting Christians in Fear answered. Page 218 2. How this
Fear will work toward a farther search. Page 221 Three infallible Marks of
Sincerity, to settle the fearing Soul. 1. A resolved choice of God for our
Portion and Happiness. Page 257 Five Marks to prove the sincerity of our
choosing God. Page 260
2. An actual embracing of Christ, as he that shall bring us to God. Page 272
The sincerity of our close with Christ evidenced by our hearty consent to him.
Discovered; 1. By our approbation of him and his way of Salvation. Page 273 2.
By our acceptance of him. Page 275 3. By our dedication of our selves to him.
Page 276

3. A giving up our selves to the practice of a Godly Life; endeavoring to
follow God in Holiness, without 1. Allowing our selves in any known sin. Page
281 2. Allowing our selves in the neglect of any known duty. Page 283

2. Search what evils there are found in you. Page 292 Direct. 2. Fear and
beware, Page 297 1. Fear and hide. ibid. 1. What we are to hide. 1. Our Sins.
ibid. 2. Our Souls. Page 303
2. Where we are to hide, viz. in Christ. Page 304 3. How we may hide our
selves in Christ. ibid.
2. Fear and flee. Page 309 1. Flee out of a state of Sin. Page 310 2. Flee all
sinful practices. Page 315
Direct. 3. Fear and follow after. Page 305 Applied, 1. To Unbelievers; to whom
the general Direction is, Follow after True and Saving-Grace, in fear of
falling short of it. Page 306 Two particular Directions. ibid.
2. To Believers; to them the general Direction is, Follow on toward
Perfection, in fear of falling back from, or walking unworthy of that Grace
wherein you stand. Page 313
Particular Directions. 1. Follow on the Work of Mortification in Fear, lest
whatsoever Wound Sin has received, it should recover and get head again. Page
314 2. Nurse up the Grace that is in you, and let it have its perfect Work, in
Fear of receiving the Grace of God in vain. Page 343
That you may not receive the Grace of God in vain, but may grow up to
fruitfulness therein; Follow after, 1. Power. Page 352 2. Activity. Page 354 3.
Severity. Page 356 4. Simplicity. Page 365 5. Ingenuity. Page 370 6.
Spirituality. Page 372 7. Pleasure. Page 376

ERRATA.
There are some Literal and Verbal Mistakes, and some mis-pointings, which by
reason of the Author's absence, the Reader is desired to correct with his Pen.
Besides these,

P. 343. at the beginning of l. 26. add the Figure (2). But the chief faults
are in the paging, viz. After p. 224. instead of 225. is 257. and after p. 320.
is p. 305. and after p. 320 again is 337. But in the Book it self there is not
any thing out of its proper place, but all comes in in its order, the only
error herein being in the Figures of the Pages.

Godly Fear: OR, The Nature and Necessity of Fear, and its Usefulness, etc.
PROVE. 28.14. Happy is the Man that fears always.


YOU will not expect that I spend time in enquiring after the connection of
these words, with the foregoing, or the following parts of this Chapter, if you
consider the Book in which they are found, The Book of Proverbs; wherein many
precious Truths are laid and packed together, but not connected together, this
Book being rather a Golden Mine than a Golden Chain.

The words of the Text are an entire Proposition which may be logically
resolved into, 1. A Subject, [the Man that feareth] together with the
Circumstances of time [alway]. 2. An Attribute, or something affirmed
concerning this Man [happy], he is an happy Man.

For the opening of these words briefly.

[Happy] or blessed, or as it is in the Original, O the blessedness, O how
blessed! he is a very happy Man, [the Man that feareth] that is, say some, The
Man that fears all the evil that is before him; the misery that is before
him, the danger that he is in. Say others, The Man that fears God, according
as it is expressed, Prove. 23.17. that is, in the fear of God all the day long.
Others, that walks cautelously and warily; Qui prospicit ne quid temere
aggrediatur, nec absque debita deliberatione and consilio, solicit cavens, ne
quid boni omittat, nec in malum ruat. He that walks with Counsel and Care, that
he neglects not his Duty nor fall into danger. Put all these Interpretations
into one, and you have the full sense of the words. He that walking under an
awe and reverence of God, and a sense of the danger he is in, wisely and warily
orders his steps, that he be not surprised by Sin or by Wrath.

[Alway], The Caldee renders it, Omnia, that fears all things, that fears
himself, his Eyes, his Ears, his Tongue, his Table, his Estate, his Business,
his Company, his Friends and his Enemies; that is, as far forth as they may be
Inlets, or Instruments, or Temptations to Sin, and so may expose him to danger:
But the word is [alway], that fears at all times, that is never secure.

The Doctrine that I shall hence insist upon is this.

Doct. A Life of Holy Fear is a Blessed Life.

In the opening hereof, I shall more particularly enquire, 1. What that Fear
is, to which Blessedness is pronounced. 2. What that Blessedness is, which is
pronounced to this Fear.


In the handling whereof, I shall together give in the proof of the Doctrine.

1. What that Fear is to which Blessedness is pronounced. There is a Fear that
is our weakness; As, 1. the Fear of the faint-hearted, a natural pusillanimity
or cowardice; there are such weak Spirits in whom every little danger, or but
the shadow of a danger, shakes their Hearts, and puts them into anxieties and
disquiets. In what perpetual bondage do some timorous Spirits live! how
restless are their hearts, like the troubled Sea that cannot be at rest, every
little gust raises a storm! In what a daily and hourly succession of vexing
disquiets do they live! 2. The Fear of the Scrupulous, about some supposed
moral Evils which concern their practice; who through weakness of
Understanding, or the abounding of Melancholy, do often fancy that to be Sin
which is no Sin, and thereby fright themselves off from the use of their
Liberty, and sometimes from their very Duty. Every Morsel that they eat, every
Garment that they wear, they are afraid lest it be too much, or too good, or
too fine, etc. and thereby scruple themselves out of their convenient Food, and
all comely Apparel. Some poor Melancholic Christians dare not pray; for fear
of taking the Name of God in vain: dare not come to the Table of the Lord at
all, for fear of coming unworthily.

In this Fear there is a mixture of Good and Evil; there is something Good, an
aversion from Sin, and tenderness of running into it; and there is something
evil, a sinful mistake, counting that evil which is not evil; as we may not
call Evil Good, so neither may we call Good Evil; this weakness, as it is evil
so it is mischievous too, it leads us into Sin; we may sometimes sin for fear
of Sin, and it brings us into Bondage; we may say concerning this fear of Sin,
as the Apostle does concerning the fear of Death, Heb. 2.15. There are some,
who through fear of [Sin] are all their life time subject to Bondage.

Of the two, it is much a less evil than the other extreme; better a scrupulous
Conscience than a dissolute Conscience; better strain at a Gnat than swallow a
Camel; there is less danger in being frighted at a Bugbear, than not afraid of
a Bear; whatever there be in Nicety, it is a virtue in comparison of
Licentiousness! yet this Fear, this groundless and mistaken Fear, is an evil
and to be suppressed.

There is a Fear which is Men's great wickedness; a Fear of Religion and
Righteousness; a Fear of the Labors and Severities of Religion, and of those
Sufferings it may expose them to. Sometimes Men Fear the Yoke of Christ; they
dare not be his Disciples, his Yoke they doubt will be too heavy for their
Necks. To be tied up so short from every Sin, from all their Carnal Liberties
and Pleasures to be held so close to painful Duty, and to such constant Duty,
the foresight of it scares them back from Christ, they dare not be his
Disciples. I would be a Christian, but I am afraid how I shall ever be able to
bear his Yoke.

But mostly they Fear the Cross of Christ; they have heard what Christ expects,
Matthew. 16.24. If any will come after me, let him take up his Cross; and they
see that it so falls out, that no sooner is the Yoke taken upon the Neck, but
the Cross is presently laid on upon the Back. He that will be a sincere
Christian must be a suffering Christian. All that will live godly in Christ
Jesus must suffer Persecution, 2 Timothy 3.12. Must they so? Then serve Christ who
dare for me. They dare not be Followers of the Lamb, for fear of being a prey
to the Wolves.

There is a Fear which is Men's Punishment; the Fear of the Guilty, a guilty
Heart is a terror to it self, a Magor-missabib, Fear round about, and makes
almost every thing else a terror to it. Prove. 28.1. The wicked flee when no Man
pursues, his guilt still dogs him at the heels, the terrors of the Lord fall on
him, and horror and astonishment take hold of him. All these Fears are men's
misery; and it may be said, with respect to these, Happy is the Man that never
fears.] But what is the Blessed Fear? or, what is there in it? In short it is
this,] It is such on aversation of the Heart from all manner of future Evils,
whether of Sin or of Misery, which we apprehend our selves in danger of, as
puts the Soul upon making the best Provision it can for its security against
them.] The Matter or Object of this Fear is Sin, together with all the Fruits
of it. The Form or proper Nature of it, is an aversion, or starting back, or
shrinking in from it. The Effect of it, is to put the Soul to its shifts for
its own security against it.

There are employed or included in it these following Particulars.

1. There is Understanding in it. Psalm. 111.10. The fear of God is the
beginning of Wisdom; a good Understanding have they that do it. They are wise
and understanding Men that Fear. As we Love not, so neither do we Fear, but
whom or what we have some apprehension of; our Affections follow our
Apprehensions; as our Love (we cannot love but what we apprehend to be good) so
our Fear, we cannot fear but what we apprehend to be evil. Our mistakes are the
ground of the inordinate workings of our Affections; when we apprehend that to
be good which is not good, we love what we should not love; when we apprehend
that to be evil which is not evil, we fear what we should not fear; when we
apprehend that to be good which is evil, we love what we should fear; and when
we apprehend that to be evil which is good, we fear what we should love.

The reason of our sinful Fear is our Ignorance. Ignorance both causes us to
fear when we should not, and leaves us without fear of what we should fear.

1. Ignorance is the reason why we fear what we should not. How is it that
there is so much Fear of Men in the World? Why, it is, because we understand
them not; what a vain thing, what a weak thing they are, how short their power
is, and how little it is that Man can do.

Did we know more, how great the Power of God is, how terrible the Wrath of God
is, sure there would be more fear of God in the World: And did we know how
little there is in the Power of Man, and in the Wrath of Man, we should ease
our selves of much of that Carnal Fear which now torments our Spirits. Isa.
2.22. Cease ye from Man, whose Breath is in his Nostrils, for wherein is he to
be accounted of? [Cease ye from Man] as from trusting in him, so from fearing
him, [for wherein is he to be accounted of?] How little is it that he can do
for or against you? There Is little help in him, and there is little hurt that he
can do. Men pretend to be great, and make great boasts of their Power. So did
Pilate to Christ, John 19.10. Know thou not that I have power to Crucify
thee, and I have power to Release thee? What, art thou so sullen and so
stubborn that thou will not speak to me? Consider Man the Power of Liberty and
Bonds, the Power of Life and Death are in my hands. Do thou not know me? Yes
I know thee well enough, says Christ; Thou have no Power but what is given
thee, and therefore limited thee from Above. It Is for those that know thee not
to fear thee, I know thee well enough.

2. Men's Ignorance is the reason why they fear not what they should fear. Why
is it that the ungodly fear not S n? O it is because they know it not. Psalm.
14.4. Have the workers of Iniquity no knowledge? Sure enough they have none, for
they eat up my People as they eat Bread; such Morsels would scald their Mouths,
they would not dare to be such Persecutors and Destroyers of the People of God,
they would be afraid to touch them if they did but know what they did.

How bold are Sinners upon Sin? How venturously do they run on? They Lie, they
Swear, they commit Adultery, they Covet, they Defraud, they Oppress, they
Persecute. But how is it that they are not afraid to do thus? O! they know not
what they do.

They are the Men of Understanding, that Fear to transgress. Christians, those
whose Minds are enlightened, dare not do as others do; they see what Sin is,
they see it to be an unclean thing, odious and abominable in the sight of God;
they see it to be a dangerous and deadly thing. They know God, and thereby
understand Sin, which is contrary to him. They know the kindness of God, and
the terrors of the Lord, and see that Sin is an unworthiness, and abusing of
kindness, and disobliging of goodness, that makes a forfeit of the Divine Love,
and exposes to his Wrath and Indignation.

They know the worth of a Soul; they have learned from their Lord, Matthew.
16.26. that the whole World is not a price for it, neither sufficient to be its
Ransom, nor to recompense its loss. They live in the Invisible World, and have
taken a view both of that life which is the reward of the Righteous, and of
that Death which is the recompense of the Sinners.

They see that Sin is the loss and the death of the Soul, the only poison that
can kill that immortal part; by this alone Immortality is swallowed up of
Death. They understand that sin, as it is the Worm that gnaweth at the root of
all their hopes for hereafter, so it is the Wormwood which imbitters all their
Comforts here; this is the Rust that cats out all their Treasures, the Moth
that frets out all their Garments, the Stain that marrs all their Beauty: In
fine, this is it that has filled the World with vanity and vexation of Spirit,
and Hell with torment. And hence it is that they fear it and fly from it. Do
thou not fear Sin? Sure thou do not know it. O what a light thing does the
World make of it to sin against God! how open do our hearts lie to it! how
easily does it beset us! we are surpised by it every day and hour, Sin lies at
the door, lies in wait for us; in our Fields, in our Houses, at our Tables, in
our Closets; and how often does it take us and carry us away for Captives? and
still we make nothing of it; neither feeling the mischief it has done us, nor
fearing those ruins which it is further bringing upon us. We can talk of the
evil of Sin, of the folly of it, of the filthiness of it, but we cannot tremble
at it; sure we do not know it, whatever we talk. The World would be all up in
Arms against this Enemy, or else betake themselves to their heels, running away
from it, were it thoroughly understood.

2. There is Faith in this Fear. It is but little that we can see of the evil
of Sin; our understandings at the best have much dimness upon them; the
weakness of our sight is helped out by Faith. Faith helps us to see with God's
Eyes, it looks on all things as God looks on them. The Lord has told us what
he sees in Sin, what a Snare it is, what a Serpent it is, what a Plague it is,
and what a Womb it is, big with all manner of Miseries and Mischiefs, which
it is bringing forth upon us. God's Mouth is Eyes to Faith; by Faith we
understand that it is even as it has been told us of the Lord.

Faith helps us to a present view of Sin, and to a foresight of all that is
behind; of all those Floods that this Serpent is casting out of his Mouth to
devour the Soul; that Woe and that Wrath it is bringing upon Sinners, both here
and hereafter. Future Evils that depend not necessarily on certain Causes, are
no otherwise clearly to be discerned but by the Eye of Faith. And from this
Faith this Fear arises; as the Apostle, 2 Cor. 4.13. We have believed and
therefore have we spoken; so may it also be said, We have believed and
therefore fear. Heb. 11.7. [By Faith] Noah being warned of God of things not
seen as yet, was moved with Fear. Sinner, art thou yet secure? is the Evil of
Sin yet unseen by thee? and thereupon is it but a light thing to thee? Can
thou make a mock of Sin? Can thou make a sport of Sin? can thou take thy
rest in Sin, and make a Tush at that Wrath that Sin is bringing upon thee?
Believe God; What is it that the Lord has spoken of it? God says, It is an
evil and bitter thing, Jer. 2.19. A Root bearing Gall and Wormwood, Deuteronomy.
29.18. Like that Star which fell from Heaven, Rev. 8.11. whose Name was
Wormwood, and which turned the Waters into Wormwood, of which Men died because
they were so bitter. God says, It is an heavy thing which has brought the
whole Creation into Bondage, under which it groaneth and travelleth in pain,
Romans 8.22. God says, The Soul that sins shall die, Ezekiel. 18.20. Though the
Devil says, He shall not die; though Men's hearts say, It is a matter of
nothing; and because it is a common thing, count it but a very small thing, and
can flout at others Fears. Yet God says, They are Fools that make a mock of
Sin, Prove. 14 19. And God says thus, not only concerning some particular Sins,
the most notorious, and those of the deepest die, Murders, Adulteries,
Blasphemies; the World will say the same of these, He that does such things is
worthy of death. But God speaks it of Sin in Specie, the whole kind of it,
little or great, the least sinful words, even vain words, the least sinful
thoughts; yea, even of Sin in semine, the inward brood and spawn of Sin that
lies in the heart, the evil dispositions and inclinations of the Soul, which
have not broken forth into Act; the word is general; Romans 6.23. The wages of
Sin is Death. Believe God, believe and tremble.

3. There is Love in it. This Fear has love lying in the bottom of it, from
whence it arises; both the love of God and goodness, and that natural and
innocent self-love which God has planted in us, and it is not our Sin but our
Duty to maintain.

There is a Fear concerning which the Apostle says, 1 John 4.18. Perfect Love
casts out Fear; but of this it may be said, sincere Love works Fear. Fear
is Love's Servant, whose Office it is to preserve what and whom we love, from
being offended, hurt, or lost. He that loves, will fear to lose or grieve, what
and whom he loves. Do thou love God? thou will fear how thou displease or
offend God. Do thou love thy Soul? thou will fear to lose it. As in good
things temporal, Do thou love thy Friend? thou will fear to disoblige him.
Do thou love thine Estate, or thy Name, or thy Health? thou will fear
whatever may prejudice thee in them. So in good things Spiritual, our Love
will set our Fear to be a guard about them. It cannot be, but where there is
Love and an hazard of losing what we love, there will be Fear.

Sinners are without Fear about the Matters of God and of their Souls. Tell
them of losing God, they fear it not; Why so? Why if they do, they love not God
so well, but they can spare him well enough. Tell them of the danger of
displeasing and offending God; It moves them not, they bear him no such good
will as to fear to grieve him. An upright and honest Heart, and a good
Conscience, they have no such regard to it, as thence to be withdrawn from any
course that may hinder or deprive them of it.

It Is to little purpose to reason thus with them. Take heed of Sin, 'twill rob
thee of thy God, 'twill defile thy Conscience, 'twill disgrace thy Profession,
'twill break thy Peace: This has little weight with them, nor ever will, till
they have more love for Spiritual Things.

'Twill hardly move them to tell them, your Souls will be lost, farewell to all
your hopes of everlasting Life, if you take not heed of Sin; they love their
Lusts better than their Souls.

They love this World, they love their Money, and their Ease, and their Carnal
Liberty; and hereby it appears they do, they are afraid of whatever may
prejudice them in these things. In times of Persecution for Righteousness-sake,
they Fear Religion as the Devil, they Fear Holiness more than Hell, they dare
not be Godly for fear their Righteousness should be their ruin.

Our Love sets all our Affections on work. What we love, if it be absent, we
desire it; if it be possible to be had, we hope for it; if we have it, we joy;
if we lose it, we grieve; if we be in danger of losing it, we Fear.

Friend, Thou say thou love God, thy Soul, a good Conscience; what; and in
such daily danger of losing all, and yet art not afraid? Thou say thou
love not the World; thou have an Estate in the World, and art eagerly hunting
after more, and wilt make any shift thou can to secure and increase it, but
yet thou hopest thou do not set thy heart upon it; But why then art thou so
often in Fears? Thou art afraid of Christ, afraid of Conscience, thou dare
not be an open Disciple, a bold Professor, because thou know not what it may
cost thee; and do thou yet say thou love not the World? Thy fear, Man, of
what thou think will prejudice thy worldly Interest, this Fear is a sign
thou love.

The Saints Fear Sin, yea and all temptations to it: Why so? O it is because
they love their God and their Souls.

4. There is in it an aversation from evil, both from Sin, and all the Fruits
of Sin. The three former Particulars, are the causes of this Fear, but this is
in the Nature of it. The Understanding discovers sin, 1. To be an Evil, a
corruptive Evil, that will defile and pollute the Soul; a destructive Evil,
that will undo and destroy it. 2. To be an evil hardly to be escaped. It sees
the Soul to be in danger of it every day and every hour; Evil as Evil, is not
the Object of Fear, but Evil that we are in danger of. Evil as Evil, is the
Object of Hatred, not so of Fear; there is no Fear of Sin in Heaven, because
there is no danger of it. To hear of the Plague, or Sword, or Famine, or
Earthquakes, or Fire in the Indies, or any other remote parts of the World,
this does not move Fear, it is far enough off us we are in no danger of it. But
when the Plague is in the Town, when the next House is on Fire, then we are
startled. 3. To be an Evil not to be endured, an intolerable Evil: Hereupon the
Heart shrinks back from it, and is in pain, till it can be secured against it.

5. There is foresight in it. Fear is of future Evil, apprehended to be coming
on; Prove. 22.3. A prudent Man foreseeth the Evil. This prudent Man is the very
same with this fearing Man, as appears by the next words, [and hides himself]
it is Fear that makes Men hide.

A bold Sinner is blind and cannot see afar off, 2 Pet. 1.9. (...), pur-blind,
that can see things very near, but through the weakness of his Eyes cannot see
at a distance, he is but shortsighted. Sinners are Men for the present, and
they look not to what comes after. But says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 4.18. We look
on the things that are not seen; as on the Good things, so on the Evil not seen.

He that Fears God, sees what is out of sight to the blear-eyed World. He sees
Evils in the beginning of them, he sees Midnight in the Evening, he sees the
Winter in the Autumn; He sees Evils in the causes of them, he sees the Storms
in the Cloud, the Birth in the Conception.

James 1.15. Lust when it has conceived brings forth Sin, and Sin when it is
finished brings forth Death. What is there in a Thought? What is there in a
Lust, or an evil Motion? Who would fright himself with Fancies says the
Pur-blind World? I, but what will this Thought or this Lust bring forth? Who
knows, says the Fearing Soul, what a numerous Brood may spring forth out of
this pregnant Womb? Lust when it has conceived brings forth Sin; any Sin, the
worst that can be imagined, multitudes of Sins, all manner of Iniquities. Lust
will bring forth Sin, and what will Sin bring forth? Why, Sin when it is
finished brings forth Death. A prudent Man foreseeth all this, sees Sin's
last in its first, its Fruits in its Root; he sees the product and issues of
things that do appear; the burning down of the House, in the first Spark that
kindles in the Thatch; in the entrance of the Thief in at the Door, he sees all
the rifling and bloodshed that afterward follows.

Sinner, how is it that thou art so secure? Friend, what see thou? Some it
may be will answer as the Prophet's Servant when he first went up to Carmel, 1
Kin. 18.43. I see nothing. Others will answer, as he did at his last going up,
I see a Cloud, but it is but a little one no bigger than a Man's hand. But the
Prophet saw a great Rain in that little Cloud. Sinner, thou that yet see
nothing, nothing to trouble thee, nothing to make thee afraid, look again and
again, even unto seven times: Do thou yet see a Cloud rising? do not say it
is a little one; take heed, if thy foresight do not, thy sense will quickly
tell thee what a Storm there is in it.

Christian, how is it that [thou] art so secure? where be thine eyes? art thou
blind also? Do thou not see the Spark in the Thatch? Do thou not see the
Thief at the Door? Have thou a Treasure within? have thou a God, a Conscience,
a Soul? have thou Grace, have thou Peace, have thou Hope? And do thou not see
the Thief breaking in, and the Fire breaking out, that Lust that is in thine
Heart, and the Temptations that are at the Door, ready to steal away or burn up
every good thing thou have? How is it that there is no Cry heard within thee,
Fire, Fire; Thieves, Thieves? Look to thy self, save thy self, O my Soul, from
the mischiefs and miseries that are coming upon thee.

We may give a Judgment of what Sin is bringing forth, by observing what it
has brought forth: Fear will conclude, that what has been may be; It Is like
to be my case which has been the case of others. What has Sin done upon the
World? How has it filled them with all Unrighteousness, Fornication,
Covetousness, Wickedness, Maliciousness, Envy, Murder, Debate, Deceit,
Malignity, etc. Romans 1.29. What Fools, and Bruits, and Stocks has it made
them, fit for nothing but to be Fuel for the Eternal Fire.

And what has it done even upon Christians, or the Professors of Christianity?
How low has it held many of them? so low, that they can hardly tell whether
they are alive or dead; and those that have seemed to be gotten up a little
higher, how often has it pulled them down again, even to Death's Door. Some
Professors it has slain outright. The Christianity they seemed to have is
dead and buried. O Friends, when you see what Sin and the Temptations thereof
have done to others, is it not to be feared what it may do to you? May I not
say to you, as Peter did to Saphira, (if you look not the more carefully to it)
Acts 5.19. The Feet of those that have buried thy Husband, are at the Door to
carry thee out. The same Sins, the same Temptations that have slain your
Friends and buried them, behold their feet are at the Door waiting for your
Souls also. Open your eyes a little, and look who there are round about you;
Behold the Pleasures of Sin waiting for you, behold the Gains of
Unrighteousness waiting, behold your Carnal Friends and Sinful Companions,
behold the Persecutions, and Scoffs, and Scorns, the Bonds, and Imprisonments
that are waiting at the Door; and what wait they for, but to carry out your
Souls also dead, to those that you have seen slain before you? Have thou seen
what has become of others, and do not therein foresee what may become of
thee, and can thou yet be secure?

Christians, you are Men of like Passions, and subject to the same Temptations
with other Men; there is the same Pride, the same Lust after the World, the same
love of Carnal Pleasures, the same fears of Fleshly Sufferings rooted in your
Natures: And do you not feel these Evil Roots sometimes budding, these Fires
kindling? And have you not often suffered loss by them? Yet you hope you have a
little Faith, some Love to Christ, some Hope toward God, some Conscience of
Sin, some Affection for Things Above; let Lust alone awhile, venture on upon
Temptations awhile; and O what leanness of Soul, yea, what Sickness, yea what
Death may it bring upon you! What Carcasses may these living Souls quickly
become? Lift up your eyes and look before you, foresee the Evil before you be
surprised and swallowed up by it.

6. It has forecast in it. Fear will make to beware, 'twill put us to our
shifts, 'twill set us a considering, and contriving, and casting about, how we
may best escape the danger we are in. Fear has care going along with it, 2
Cor. 7.11. The Fearless ones, are the careless and the heedless ones. A fearing
Christian will be a circumspect Christian; he looks to his Steps, and takes
heed to his Ways that he sin not, Psalm. 39.1. He will keep his Enemy in his
Eye, that he fall not upon him at unawares. He is tender of transgressing, and
therefore keeps his Watch, and stands upon his Guard continually. He sees he
walks among Temptations and Snares, and therefore looks diligently to his Foot
that it be not taken in the Snare. He sees how loose and heedless Christians do
smart for their folly; he sees that Prevention is better than Repentance; and
therefore though he will repent when he is fallen, yet he would rather make as
little Work as may be for Repentance; Rejoicing that he has been kept from
Iniquity, he prizes at a higher rate than repenting of Iniquity.

A Prudent Man is a Provident Man. I see, says the Fearing Soul, I see I am in
danger; my Soul is in danger, my Life is in danger, I stand in Jeopardy every
hour. Evil is before me, and it may come upon me ere I am aware. And what if it
should come upon me? Put the case I should be overtaken, overtaken of Sin,
overtaken of Wrath, how bitter will then my Folly be unto me? Nay, there is no
[may be] in the Matter; Evil will come upon me, and I shall not escape, if I
look not the better to it. But is there no way to prevent it? Is there no
security from the Snare, no refuge from the Storm, no shadow from the Heat?
Must I fall? must I sin, and be miserable, and perish, and is there no remedy?
How may I escape? What Is to be done to save my self from evil? These are the
fore-castings of the Fearing Soul. And when they have found him out his Way,
they hold him to it; when they have discovered a Refuge, they hasten him in.
The Manslayer needed no other Monitor, the Avenger of Blood at his Back, and
the Fear in his Heart, put him to his Heels to hasten to the City of Refuge.

Heb. 11.7. By Faith Noah being warned of God of things not seen as yet, (of a
Deluge or Flood of Waters) moved with Fear, prepared an Ark to the saving of
his House. Mark it, his Faith moved his Fear, and his Fear put him on providing
an Ark against the Waters. A Flood comes to wash away wickedness from the
Earth, and to drown all the Sinners thereof. This Faith foresaw an hundred and
twenty years before it came; and thereupon Fear cries out, O for an Ark to save
from the Waters! It Is no time to lie still and sleep, it is no time to sit
eating and drinking, to be marrying and giving in marriage; an Ark, an Ark must
be prepared to save from the Flood.

Let me here by the way put in a word or two to this Age and Nation.

Has God said nothing? Does Faith see nothing of a Flood coming upon us? Is
there such a Deluge of Sin amongst us; and does not that prophecy to us of a
Deluge of Wrath? Lift up your Eyes Christians, stand and look through the Land,
Eastward and Westward, Northward and Southward, and tell me what you see.
Behold a Flood comes, a Flood of Sin is already broken forth upon us, the
Fountains of the great Deeps are broken up, and the Windows of Hell are opened,
and is there not a mighty Stream of Iniquity running down, even from all
Parties among us? From one Party, the openly profane, Behold a Flood of Atheism
and Infidelity; amongst those that still bear the Name of Christ upon their
Foreheads, what multitudes are there that are Pagans in Heart and Life? A Flood
of Oaths, and Curses, and Blasphemies; Are there not many Men become like that
Beast that arose out of the Sea, Rev. 13.1. having the Name of Blasphemy upon
their Heads? A Flood of filthy Lusts and stupendous Adulteries; What a new
Sodom is there sprung up out of the Ashes of the old, and has not the Younger
outdone the Deeds of the Elder? A Flood of Fury and Rage is broken forth, such
a Flood as the Serpent cast out of his Mouth after the Woman, Rev. 12.15.
Persecutions raised upon those that separate themselves from the filthiness of
the Land.

And besides these Streams that come by the way of the Wilderness, behold
another Stream that rises even in the Garden of the Lord; the Waters of the
Sanctuary are become a muddy Stream and a troubled Sea, that casts up Mire and
Dirt. A mixed Stream comes forth, Divisions, Contentions, Quarrellings,
Heresies, Hypocrisies, Unrighteousness, Unmercifulness, with but a very little
Truth and Righteousness among. The Waters of Grace and Peace, the still Waters
are but low Waters, and run so softly, as if the Fountain were quite dried up;
and instead thereof, Pride, Haughtiness, Headiness and Uncharitableness, how do
they swell amongst us, and rise higher every day?

In this Flood of Sin, how easy is it for him that has eyes, to see a Flood
of Wrath even running in upon us to consume us from off the Earth: But all this
while, where be the Noah's amongst us? What preparations is there making for an
Ark against the Flood? How is it that we are so secure? There be many amongst
us that are crying, A Flood, a Flood comes, can our Land any longer bear the
Iniquities of it? Can the Soul of God but be avenged of such a People as this?
But how few of us are there heard crying, An Ark, an Ark, to save us from the
Flood? And of those that cry an Ark, how very few are there that are preparing
an Ark? How is it that we are not every one shifting for our selves, and hiding
our selves from the Evil to come? I do not mean shifting, to hide our selves by
our Wits, much less by our wickedness; woe to such shifters who make shipwreck
of Faith and a good Conscience, to save themselves from drowning, who choke
themselves in the Mud, to save themselves from the Waters. But how is it that
there is no more care taken to hide our selves in God, to imbarque with Christ,
and to lodge our selves in the Ark of the Covenant of God? What hiding place
have we but Christ? What Ark can we have, that will bear us up above the
Waters, but the Ark of the Covenant? there we may be safe; in Christ, and out
of danger; in Covenant with God, and out of fear of the Wrath of God.

How is it that there is no more enquiring, Am I in Christ? am I in Covenant?
have I broken my Covenant with Death, and disannulled my Agreement with Hell?
Am I no longer in League with my Sins and this evil World, have I broken with
them all, and am I gotten within the Bond of the Covenant of God? If I think I
have, yet am I not mistaken? Many Souls have been mistaken, have thought
themselves within, who have yet dyed without; and am not I mistaken also? Is
the thing sure? Is Christ mine indeed?

How is it that there is no more asking the way to the City of Refuge? How may
I get into Christ? Or how may I know whether I be in Christ or not? O how is it
that we do not awaken our slumbring Spirits, and call upon our careless Hearts!
Come on, O my lingering Soul, make haste, get thee up to the Rock; to Sanctuary,
to Sanctuary; Awake thou Sleeper, carest thou not that thou perish? Come my
Soul, enter thou into thy Chamber; hide thy self till the Indignation be
over-past.

How is it that there is no more such care taken? Are we so solicitous as we
should be about this matter? How is it with [you] Friends? Are you busy in
considering, and fore-casting, and enquiring how you may escape? What is it
that your fear of a Deluge has put you upon, to provide your selves against
it? Is there any more circumspection and heedfulness in your goings? any more
tenderness of Sin? Are you throwing off those weights that will sink you with
the multitude? Are you busy in breaking down your Sins, and building up your
selves, in hope of the Salvation of God? Behold how generally our other Matters
do still take up our Time and Thoughts; we are building of Houses, and planting
of Vineyards, and Buying and Selling, and Marrying and giving in Marriage,
seldom giving our selves leave to think of a Flood that is coming to take us all
away. O fear, and let your fear set you on work to save your selves from Misery
and Ruin.

The foolish World laugh at this Fear; What jealous-headed melancholic Souls
are these? What Dreams and Fancies do they fright themselves withal? And so did
the old World doubtless laugh at Noah, to see him such a Fanatic to amuse
himself and others with such a strange conceit of a Flood, and to go build an
Ark to save himself from that Dream of a Deluge. What laughing and mocking
think you was there then amongst them, to hear this Preacher of Righteousness
to Preach, and prepare for such a strange incredible thing? Such mockings are
there of the Men of this World, at the fears and preparations of the Saints,
against the Judgments of God. I, but when the Ark was finished, and Noah and
his Family gotten in, and the Flood came in earnest; when they saw the Rain
pouring down, the Waters swelling, the Seas roaring, and tumbling in, in whole
Mountains of Waters upon them; where was the laugh of the World then? What a
cry was their laugh then turned to? Let Sinners laugh at last when they shall
see all these things come upon them, when the overflowing Scourge comes, and
they shall then see the derided Saints gotten into the Ark, and themselves left
out to perish in the Waters.

Well, by this time you may see what this Fear is, or who is this Man that
fears. The Man of Understanding, that so knows God, his Goodness and
Severity; that so knows Sin, its Malignity, and the Misery that it exposes to;
that so believes God, that has such a love for God and his own Soul, and such
an aversation from Sin; that so foresees the danger he is in, of running into
Sin, and falling into Misery, that he wisely and warily looks to himself, keeps
himself from Iniquity, and hides himself from those Mischiefs and Miseries,
which the rest of the World foolishly venture upon, and are destroyed by in the
end. This is the Man that fears, this is the happy Man.

2. What is that blessedness that is pronounced to him that fears? Happy is
the Man that fears. To Happiness two things are required.

1. Sufficiency. 2. Security.
1. Sufficiency. He that is in want is in misery; whatever he has, how
greatly soever he abounds; yet if he has not all that he needs, yea, all that
he desires; In the fullness of his Sufficiency he is in straits, The pain of
what he desires and has not, imbitters the pleasures of what he has. No
Sufficiency, no Satisfaction, short of Satisfaction, so far short of Happiness.
He must have all things that would find rest in any thing; He that possesses
whatever he can desire, that is an happy Man, only to this must be added,

2. Security. What we have to day, may be lost to morrow. He that has most,
and holds it by such an uncertain Tenure, is so far from finding rest in what
he has, that he may be in greater perplexity than he that has nothing.
Therefore can there be no happiness in any thing under the Sun; for besides the
insufficiency of these worldly things, (the whole Earth is too little to fill
the Soul, all this great World is not enough to fill the little World, Man) but
besides this, were they sufficient, what security can be had for the
continuance of them to us? They are all but casualties, they come and go, they
have all their Wings, and who knows how soon they may take their flight? At the
best, The things that are seen are but Temporal, 2 Cor. 4.18. There must be
permanence and durableness in the matter of our Happiness. The durable Riches,
the enduring Substance, an Inheritance that fades not away, and there must be
security against their being lost or taken away.

Now this is the happiness of him that fears, he has sufficient, and what he
has is in safety.

1. He has a sufficiency. This Fear, as appears from what has been spoken, is
a Religious Fear; the Fear of God is sometimes taken for all Religion; here
only for one particular Branch of it, yet such as argues the Truth of Religion,
and intitles the Soul to the whole income and revenue of Religion. He that
knows, believes, and loves God, and therefore fears and flies from Sin and
Wrath, is certainly a Godly Man, and shall have his Inheritance with the Just.

The first Sermon that ever we read, that Christ Preached, begins with an
enumeration of the Beatitudes of this very Man. He shall inherit the Earth, he
shall be comforted, he shall be filled, he shall obtain Mercy, he shall see
God, his is the Kingdom of Heaven. All these Graces that are there mentioned,
Poverty of Spirit, Purity in Heart, hunger after Righteousness, Meekness, etc.
are the particular Qualifications of this very Man. And we may write down after
that Copy, Blessed is the Man that fears, for his is the Kingdom of God;
Blessed is the Man that fears, for he shall be comforted, he shall obtain
Mercy, he shall see God. This is the Man who shall inherit all things, Rev.
21.7. and shall want nothing, Psalm. 34.10. He is provided for, for Soul and for
Body, for this Life and that to come. The Promise is his Portion, and in the
Promise there is all things. There Is Bread in the Promise, and Clothes, and
Houses, and Lands, and Friends; there is Grace and Glory in the Promise. And to
have an Inheritance in the Promise, is to him as good as to have it in hand,
and in some respects better. Thou art a Fool, Soul, who say with the
Prodigal, Give me my Portion; it is better where it is, God will look better to
thee, than thou to thy self.

2. He has Security. All that he has is in safety. He that has most, and is
in danger of losing all, as (I said before) is in greater perplexity than he
that has nothing to lose. The Poor Man sleeps in more quiet than he that has
his House full of Treasure, if he be in danger of the Robber. Enough is not
enough, 'twill never content whilst there is hazard of losing all. The Man that
fears has enough, and all he has is in safety; Prove. 1.33. Whosoever hearkneth
to me, shall dwell safely, he shall be quiet from [fear] of evil. He that
fears shall be most free from fear, the Fear of God will fortify him against
the Fears of the World.

Particularly consider these two things.

1. The Matters wherein his Happiness lies are sure. The Mercies of God are
sure Mercies, that will neither fade away, nor can be taken away. If there be
uncertainty in what a Christian has of this World, he is well enough
notwithstanding; these are not his Happiness, he may be as happy in his
greatest penury, as in his greatest plenty. This is easily said, O that it were
but soundly believed! What a calm and serene state might Christians then live
in in the greatest tempests.

The Matters of a Christians happiness are sure and certain Things. The portion
of the World is not capable of being made sure. As one says well; The World
flies, Mr. Gouge.
sometimes it pitches upon one Family, and then how happy do they account
themselves; shortly after it takes its flight thence, and away to another, and
thence to another, and another; and who knows whither? Come to a Family this
year, and behold as Job 21.10. Their Bull gendereth and fails not, their Cow
calveth and casts not her Calf. Their Fig Tree blossoms, their Vine
flourishes; there are Flocks in the Fold, there are Herds in the Stall, and
then they are all merry and at rest: They send forth their little Ones as a
Flock, and their Children dance; they are clothed with Purple and Scarlet, and
fare sumptuously every day; they take the Timbrel and the Harp, and rejoice at
the sound of the Organ. Come to the very same Family a few years after, and
all is gone, and then their Purple is turned into Sackcloth, their Music into
Mourning, and their Mirth into Heaviness.

The World runs upon Wheels. The Wheel of Providence is ever turning; now one's
at the top of the Wheel, and then another comes up, and he that was just now at
the top, by and by tumbles and the Wheel runs over him. How often do Rich Men
break, and Poor Men get up for a while in their rooms, and then tumble down
after them? To day then have an Estate, and dwell at ease in thine own
cieled House; but who can tell where he may find thou to morrow? To day thou
live, and art in health, and nothing ails thee; to morrow thou may die,
the Grave may cover thee, and Worms may be feeding upon thee. Such an uncertain
World this is, and at such uncertainties are the things thereof, and there is no
preventing of it. It cannot be otherwise, the wisest, the wariest, the most
provident and industrious Man in the World, do what he can, can never be at a
certainty for two days together. The Thief, the Moth, the Fire, Sickness and
Death, may quickly divide betwixt him and his portion, and take away either him
from it, or it from him. But the Treasure of the Man that fears God, is a
Treasure that fails not, an enduring Substance.

2. His very Fear is a means to keep what he has in safety. Jer. 32.40. I will
put my Fear in their hearts that they shall not depart from me. Though when God
has hold of us, he will never lose his hold; yet he holds us by certain Cords,
which should they break or give off, we should certainly be gone and be lost.
One of these Cords is Faith, 1 Pet. 1.5. We are kept by the mighty Power of
God, through Faith, unto Salvation. Another of these Cords is this of Fear. I
will put my Fear into their hearts that they shall not depart from me.
Whereupon we may say also, We are kept by the mighty Power of God [through
Fear] unto Salvation. God makes use of our Fear of losing all, to prevent our
loss. As if we should cease to believe, so if we should cease to Fear, we
should be undone at last. Upon a little loosening of this Cord, how often do we
suffer great loss? When we take head, and grow bold and venturous; when we do
forget our danger, and so lay by our Armor, how much mischief do we run our
selves into? Have thou never lost thy Peace, and all sense of the love of God?
Have thou never lost thy Affections, and all thy delight in God? Have thou
never fallen by thy folly into Sin, into a vain and carnal frame, into a dead
and barren state, and thereby provoked the Lord to withdraw and hide his Face
from thee, and been cast back in the state of thy Soul? Do thou not often see
this to be thy case? thou winkest if thou do not; why, thou should not have
been so venturous, thou should have feared in time, and all this mischief
might have been prevented. Whilst Fear stands Sentinel, the Enemy has the less
hope of making an Invasion upon thee. But where this Fear is not, that Soul
dwells like the wealthy Nation, Jer. 49.31. without care, and having neither
Gates nor Bars, and so becomes a booty and a spoil to the Enemy. Where Care is
the Gate, and Fear has bolted the Gate, there all is in safety.

This Fear may expose and make more obnoxious to temporal Evils; How much do
Christians often lose by their Fear? They lose their Friends, and lose their
Estates and their Liberties, and sometimes their Lives, upon this very account,
that they are afraid to sin against God. And yet all this while they are in
safety, and when they have cast up their Accounts, they find they are no
losers, though they have lost all that ever they had; their Souls are in
safety, and that is enough to save them harmless under all their Sufferings. He
whose Face is filled with the contempt of the Proud, whose back is bowed down
that the ungodly may go over it, whose Name is made a scorn and derision, whose
Goods become a booty and a spoil, and his very Life becomes a Sacrifice to the
rage of the cruel, if he does but come off with the safety of his Soul, that is
enough to make him abundant recompense for all. As Christ says, Matthew. 16.26.
What shall it profit a Man to win the whole World and lose his own Soul? So may
it not be said, What shall it prejudice a Man to lose all the World if he save
his own Soul? Thou know not what a Soul is, what the Salvation of a Soul is,
thou know not what Eternity, what that Life and Death means, who can not
say, Let me escape that Death, let me obtain that Life, and it is enough. O
study the World to come more, secure to thy self the eternal Inheritance, and
then thou will say with the Psalmist, whatever thy condition be here, I will
lay me down in peace and take my rest, for thou, Lord, make me dwell in
safety. But more of this hereafter.

By what has been said, it appears, that the Man that fears, is an happy
Man, and wherein his happiness lies.

It Is true, that in this World he is but inchoatively and incompleatly happy;
but an happy Man he is: As he that is Heir to a great Estate, even whilst he is
under Age, and has little in possession, may be said to be a Rich Man,
especially if he be under the care of a faithful Guardian; no less may a
Christian, even in his nonage, be said to be an happy Man. There Is no happy
Man in the World, if this be not he; When he is at lowest, it is better with him
than with the best of Sinners. Some Sinners will grant their Conscience tells
them so, that he that fears God, will have the best of it in the other World;
but yet they conclude, that themselves have the better of it here. But they are
mistaken, even in this Life, a Godly Man has the better of Sinners. He knows
little of God, he has little understood the Joy of Faith, the Pleasure of
Love, the Ease of Sincerity, the Peace of Conscience, the Gain of Godliness,
that would exchange lives with the best of Sinners here in this World. The very
hopes of the Saints fill them with more joy than the greatest possessions of
the ungodly. I had rather take my lot with Job on the Dunghill, than with
Nebuchadnezzar on his Throne; with Lazarus in his Sores and Beggary, than with
Dives in his Purple and delicate Fare; with Paul in his Bonds, than with
Agrippa and Bernice in their Pomp; with that Prisoner at the Bar, than his
Judges at the Bench. He that is otherwise minded, is guilty of one of these
absurdities, either to think that God is not better than Creatures, or that the
ungodly enjoy as much of God, as those that are Godly. If God be better than
the World, if God be the present Portion of the Godly, and of them alone, then
he that fears God is the happiest Man even in this Life.

But O what will his blessedness hereafter be! What advantage will he have of
Sinners in the other World? When the comparison shall no longer be betwixt God
and the Creatures, betwixt the fullness of Heaven, and the fatness of the Earth;
when the Question shall no longer be, which is best, peace of Conscience, or
the prosperity of the World, the hopes of Glory, or the pleasures of Sin; the
worst of Saints, or the Sinners best: But the question will then be, Which is
the best, the Pleasures of the Saints, or the Plagues of Sinners; the Fruition
of God, or Reprobation from God; the Joys Above, or the Pangs Beneath? Then
let it be considered, then shall it be discerned who are the happy Persons,
those that Fear God, or those that fear him not.

Use.
The Application is that which I chiefly intend, and this shall be by way of
Information, Exhortation, and Direction; I shall put them all together. For the
more effectual carrying on whereof, I shall inform and warn you; 1. Of the
Opposites of this Fear. 2. Of the Grounds or Reasons, why men Fear not. 3. Of
the Reasons why you should Fear. 4. What you should Fear. 5. How you should
improve this Holy Fear.


I. The Opposites of this Fear are; 1. Rashness. 2. Audacity. 3. Security.


1. Rashness, Hastiness or Headiness in our way. Fear will make Men consider.
'Twas good Counsel which the Town Clerk gave in the Tumult, Acts 19.36. that
they did nothing rashly; Eccles. 5.2. Be not rash with thy Mouth, neither let
thy heart be hasty to utter any thing before God. The Apostle reckons hasty
ones among the dangerous Persons, 2 Timothy 3.4. Men shall be heady, precipites,
running headlong on their course, acting not upon Counsel, but their sudden
apprehensions, or any strong impulses of their hearts; at all adventures,
whether it be right or wrong. Fear will make Men wary, and advised what they do.

Christians, if you would walk safely, look before you, speak nothing rashly,
do nothing rashly, weigh your Thoughts and Intentions before you let them pass
into action. How many Evils does rashness and headiness run us upon? Those
words which in an heat we have let fly, some of our hasty Carriages and Actions
have sometimes cost us many days sorrow and repentance, which had we been
cautelous, and a little better advised, might have been prevented. Sometimes a
sudden passion arises, and out it goes in angry and froward words, setting all
in an uproar and combustion; by and by our hearts recur upon us, and then we
wish, O that I had bit my Tongue, and not given it such an unbridled liberty.
Sometimes we break out into rash censures of those that it may be are better
than our selves; whereupon when we reflect, we are ashamed that the Fool's Bolt
was so soon shot, and wish we had been judging our selves when we were
censuring our Brethren. Take heed you mistake not rashness and headiness, for
Zeal; I would not cool Godly Zeal, there is too little of it in the World. We
need the Spur more than the Bridle; the Bellows, nor the Bucket. We may not
quench true Zeal, the Lord be merciful to us, there is not so much of it to be
found; we had more need cast on Oil than Water upon that Holy Fire; Zeal for
Truth, Zeal for Righteousness and Holiness; how happy were it if there were
more such Flames, if all our shining were also burning Lights? But Zeal must be
regular; as for the Matter of it, it must be always in a good thing, Gal.
4.18. So it must be managed with good Counsel and Caution; mistaken Zeal is a
Fire that devours that good that it pretends to promote.

But as you may not run headlong upon that which has the face of Good, much
less upon that which is apparently evil. It Is dangerous to be heady in the
Matters of God, wherein, in case we are right, we can never over-do; but much
more mischievous to run headlong upon Sin; Jer. 8.6. Every one turned to his
course, as the Horse rusheth into the Battle, without fear or wit. O the
witless mad-headed multitude of Sinners in the World, how do they rush on upon
their wickedness? they will neither ask Counsel nor take Counsel, but on they
will at a venture, come of it what will.

Stand Sinner and fear, fear and consider; what is it thou art doing? whither
is it thou art running? thou will on thy Way, thou will after thy Lusts, and
after thy Companions; thou will after these Riches, and these Pleasures,
there is no stopping thee, nor putting thee to pause upon it; thou art all in
haste, and impatient to be advised: But yet for all thy haste, take heed of
what comes after, thy Bargain is not like to be so good as to require such
haste; hasty Bargains seldom want woe. Whatever is done rashly, seldom comes
to any other issue, but either Repentance or Ruin. Qui ante non cavet, etc. If
thou will not Fear, thou will shortly find what it is to be thus headstrong and
precipitant.

2. Audacity, or fool-hardiness, or mad venturousness upon known dangers. This
is of kin to rashness, but is not the same. It is the other extreme to
Cowardice; the mean betwixt both is Fortitude. The Fear we are now treating of,
is not opposite to Fortitude as Cowardice is; it is not from pusillanimity, but
from magnanimity that we thus fear. The most Heroic Spirits most fear to be
base; Exodus 1.17. Those worthy Midwives feared God, and feared to sin against
God, and therefore feared not the Wrath of the King.

And as this Holy Fear does not argue faintheartedness, so neither does that
audacity argue fortitude. Is it valor or madness for a naked Man to run upon
an Army of Enemies? Such Desperadoes as kick against the pricks, and run upon
the Pikes of Divine Vengeance, who knowing the Judgment of God against them
that do such things, will yet run their course of In quity, not fearing of
Judgments, laughing at Reproofs, Threatenings and Warnings, and deriding those
trembling Hearts that dare not run on with them to the same excess of riot.
What gallantry of Spirit do they count themselves to have arrived unto?
Gallantry of Spirit! what to dare the Almighty to his Face? to challenge Death
and Hell to meet you in the Field? for the Briars and Thorns to gather
themselves to Battle against the devouring Fire? Sure if ever you come to your
wits, you will understand how mad you have been.

Sinner, dare thou continue in thine unbelief and impenitency, when thou
know that he that believes not, shall be damned; he that repents not,
shall perish for ever? Dare thou to walk after thy Lusts, fulfilling the
desires of the Flesh and of the Mind, when thou know that they that live
after the flesh, shall die? Thou know what the place and the portion of the
Proud, of the Covetous, of the Liars, of the Hypocrites is, and yet dare thou
continue in the number and the way of these Men?

Do thou dare to go down quick into the Pit, to take up thy dwelling in
everlasting Darkness, and thy lodging in the Eternal Fire? Awaken from this
Folly, put away this madness from thee; Awake and tremble to think what a
desperate adventure thou have hitherto run.

If you should see your Children in sport jumping over a boiling Furnace,
dancing on the Battlements of a Tower, or in a frolic, standing on tip-toe on
the Weathercock of a Steeple, how would your Bowels turn, your Bones tremble,
and all within you shake and shiver? And will you yet be more venturous and
foolhardy your selves? If ever you come to your selves, you will be your own
Wonder and Fear.

3. Security, Carnal Security. Security is often taken for Safety. To have our
Estates, or our Peace, or our Souls secured, is the same as to have them all in
safety. Job 11.14, 15. If iniquity be in thine hand, put it far away, then
shall thou be secure, because there is hope, and thou shall take thy rest in
safety. This Carnal Security is a retchlesness or carelessness of Heart; to be
without sense of our danger, and without solicitude for our safety. The cares
of this Life, and the Pleasures of the Flesh, do stupifie the Sinners of the
Earth; do lay their Souls a-sleep, and bind up their senses, so that they
neither fear nor mind what is like to come upon them. This was the case of the
old World, in the days of Noah, Luke 17.27. They did eat, they drank, they
married, and were given in marriage, till the day came that Noah entered into
the Ark. Their sensuality laid them all a-sleep, and they never dreamed of that
Flood that came and destroyed them all. It is said of the Men of Laish, Judges
18.7. They dwelt careless, after the manner of the Zidonians, they were quiet
and secure. They neither feared Enemies, nor made any provision against them,
but left themselves open to the mercy of any Invader. Secure Sinners lay
themselves open to all manner of mischiefs; the Tempter may come, the Avenger
may come upon them before they are aware; and he that may come will come; The
Lord of that Servant will come in a day when he looks not for him, and in an
hour when he is not aware, and will cut him in sunder, and appoint him his
portion with Unbelievers, Luke 12.46.

O how sick is this World of this Lethargick Distemper! We cannot say, as once
'twas said, Isa. 33.14. The Sinners in Zion are afraid, fearfulness has
surprised the Hypocrites. Behold the Sinners all asleep, and who is there among
the Hypocrites that fears? But how is it with you Sinners, are you in no
danger? Is there no Devil in the World? or is there no fear that he intends to
hurt you? Is that Lion that used to walk up and down seeking whom to devour, is
he now confined to his Den, so that he cannot hurt the Earth any more? Are your
Lusts, those Lion's Whelps, grown tame? Do they no longer war in your Members?
Does the World cease to be a temptation and a snare, and are you out of danger
of that Perdition and Destruction, in which it draws its Lovers? Is there no
danger of your becoming Proud, or Covetous, or Sensualists, lovers of Riches,
lovers of Pleasures more than lovers of God; or is it no harm if you be so? Nay
what woeful Work has been made upon you already? What inrodes and invasions
have been made, and are not your Souls already taken Captives? Behold that
ignorance and folly, that impotence and weakness, that enmity and perverseness,
that malice and envy wherewith your hearts are already filled, and that
stupidity and senslesness under all these evils that appear upon you; What does
all this portend? Does it speak good concerning you? Does it say thus
concerning you, these Men are in an happy state, there is no fear to Men in such
a case? no fear of the Covetous, no fear of the Drunkards, and the Liars, and
the Scoffers, they are all happy Men. Consider Man, whither does Lust lead but
to Sin, and whither does Sin lead but to Death and to Hell? Be not mistaken,
that is the Lake, that this whole Herd of Swine, being driven by the Devil, are
running headlong into. Friends, this is the very case that the World is brought
into, it lies in Wickedness, and runs upon Vengeance. And yet, behold, all
at quiet, all secure; no news, nor noise, nor fear of danger, but all in peace.
Do thou not find, Sinner, that none of these things move thee, or put thee to
any trouble or care. And is this sleepy Evil, the Disease only of the World?
Are there none to be found, in the Churches of God, sick of the same Disease?
Is there that watchfulness, that jealousy that should be upon those that
profess themselves Christians, and to have escaped the pollutions of the World,
through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ? Do these Virgins
always stand with their Loins girded, and their Lights burning? Do not [our]
Souls also lie open to the temptation? is not our foot often taken in the
snare? What means the dimness of our Light, the damp that is upon our Love, the
spots upon our Faces, the clouds that we sometimes find upon all our Comforts?
What means our poverty and leanness, our frequent decays and backsliding? How
has this World crowded in with so much of its Cares and Lusts, and has seated
it self so near the Throne of God? Are there no worldly Professors, no
covetous, greedy Professors? Is it a sign thou have stood upon thy Guard, that
there are so many Thorns sprung up, so many Thieves stolen in before thou were
aware? Do thou not see how thou art surprised daily, and met with at every
turn? Do thou not often confess this to the Lord, and complain against thy
self, what an uneven, unstable Soul thou art, and how many, and how great thy
Falls and Corruptions are? and have thou not still abundant matter of the same
Complaints to make? Who would think 'twere possible, that such a soul should
yet be secure and careless? Have thou caught so many a Fall for want of fear
of falling, how then can thou but Fear? And yet after all this, after this
sinning and falling, and confessing, and complaining, how quickly is all
forgotten, and about the World again we go to our Businesses, to our
Recreations, to this Company, to that, any whither, whither our Hearts or
Occasions lead us, leaving our selves as open to every Temptation that meets
us, as if we had never suffered by it?

This Evil, as it is a common, so it is a dreadful Evil; there is a Woe denounced
against it, Amos 6.1. Woe to them that are at ease in Zion. [To them that are at
ease] that is, to th m that are secure, as you have it in the Margin [In Zion]
in the Church of God. Woe to the secure Israelites, to secure Professors;
there is no Privilege, there is no Profession that will secure the Secure from
the Woe and Wrath of God.

It Is a wretched thing to behold a secure Worldling, secure Aliens and
Strangers from God, who know not the Judgments of God; but to see a company of
secure Israelites, of secure Christians, to whom it has been said, Awaken thou
that sleep, stand up from the Dead, save thy self from that misery that is
coming upon the World; this is indeed a woeful and a wonderful thing. Thou that
have been warned so often, that have been preached to, and prayed over, and
have been as a Brand pulled out of the Burning, and yet no more to dread the
Fire; thou that have tasted of the bitterness of Sin, and felt the smart of it,
and have had thine Eyes opened to see what it is preparing for thee; thou that
can talk, sometimes of tenderness, of watchfulness, of care and heedfulness,
and of the constant necessity thereof; art thou a secure careless Soul? Woe be
unto thee.

Verse. 3. We have a particular Instance of one piece of this Security, [that
put far away the evil day] which because it has an influence upon the
maintaining of this whole Disease; I shall enlarge a little upon it.

By the Evil Day, understand the day of retribution or recompense; whether it
be the day of tribulation in this World, or the day of Death and of Judgment.

There is a double putting this evil day afar off. There is a putting it, 1.
Far from our Reins. 2. Far from our Loins.


1. Far from our Reins; That is, from our Thoughts and Consideration; as Jer.
12.2. Thou art near in their Mouth, and far from their Reins. Thou art much
spoken of, but little thought on. Thus Men put the Evil Day far off, when they
do not think of such a day; it is out of sight and out of mind with them; it is
the least of all their Thoughts, that there is an evil day coming. The thoughts
of such a day, would have the same effect, as that cry that was made at the
coming of the Bridegroom, Matthew. 25.6. At midnight there was a Cry made,
Behold, the Bridegroom comes; and this cry turned Midnight into Morning; all
the Sleepers awakned, and arose, and trimmed their Lamps.

How is it Friends that there is not such a Cry made every Day and every Night?
How is it that your Hearts do not still cry in your Ears, The Day of the Lord
is near, the Judge is at the Door, the Avenger is at the Heels, Behold the
Bridegroom comes? O this seldom enters into our Hearts, this Day of the Lord
is far from our Reins.

If the Evil Day were kept nearer us, 'twould make Evil Works keep farther off.
If when Men are jolly, and merry, and mad after their Lusts, and drunken into a
dead sleep in their Sins; If whilst others are idle and slothful, are retchless
and supine in their Spirits and Ways, laying by all care and circumspection
over themselves, giving themselves up to the heedlesness of their sluggish
hearts; and hereby led out into those sins and vanities which are the Fruits of
such Security, if such Thoughts should arise in their Minds, and sit close upon
their Hearts; How shall I answer for this in the Day of the Lord? Is not the
Day of the Lord coming? Is it not near? May not the very next day be the Evil
Day? And if it should prove to be so indeed, what a case am I in if my Judge
should find me thus? How would such Thoughts scatter away Iniquity, and scare
such drowsy Souls out of all their ease and slothfulness?

Friend consider, thou know what a life it is thou ordinarily live; Art not
thou one of those that art at ease in Zion? art not thou the Man that dwell
careless, that art quiet and secure? have not thou left thy Soul, like that
City that has neither Gates nor Bars? is not that heart of thine left open
Night and Day? let the Tempter come when he will, he may find easy entrance?
Is not thine heart open to Temptations, yea, and open to Wrath and Vengeance?
Would thou be content the Day of the Lord should find thee thus? Art thou
sure but that Day may find thee thus? Would not such a Voice from Heaven, Thy
Day is come, strike thee into horror and amazement, and strike through thy
easy lazy Soul, as a Dart through thy Liver? O why will thou not try, what
some thoughts of that Day might do, whether it would not persuade thee to a
wiser course, and put thee into a better case, against it comes indeed?

It is a strange thing that it should be possible for Sinners, (that believe
the Scriptures) not to think of a day of recompense. Have thou not heard? do
thou not read, that the Wages of Sin is Death? do thou not know that every
working day must have its pay-day? Can thou be Sowing daily, and never think
of Reaping? And have thou not learned, That as thy Sowing is, such must thy
Reaping be? that an evil Seed-time, will bring forth an evil Harvest? Can
thou be Sowing Tares, and either not think of Reaping at all, or think of
Reaping Wheat? Is this all the wit thou have? Be not deceived, as Men Sow so
shall they also Reap; he that Sows to the Flesh, shall Reap Corruption; he
that Sows to the Spirit, shall Reap Life Everlasting, Gal. 6.7, 8. Know it in
time, and throughout thy Sowing, think of thy Reaping-Day.

2. Men put the Evil Day far from their Loins. That is, though they do think of
the Judgments of God, and as such, as both may overtake them, and if they fall,
will fall heavy upon them, and grind them to Powder; yet they count 'twill be a
great while first, there may be time enough to prevent them, or at least the
distance they apprehend of them, from them, makes them the less to be feared or
regarded; Eccles. 1.8. Because Sentence against an evil work, is not executed
specdily, therefore the Heart of the Sons of Men is fully set in them to do
evil. Because Judgment is so long a-coming, therefore they grow bold in their
Sin, as if 'twould never come. Not till after a long time, is almost the same
with them, as never at all. As if because the Bench and the Gibbet, stand not
both together, because the Sin and its Sentence, the Sentence and its Execution
are not on the same day, therefore there will be no Sentence, no Execution; as
if because it is Sunshine to day, there were no fear of a Storm for many days
after.

The Thoughts of Sinners, are like those words of Rebellious Israel, Ezekiel.
12.27. The Vision that he sees is for many days to come, and he Prophesies
of the Times that are far off. Those Scoffers who walk after their own Lusts, 2
Pet. 3.4. demand, in derision, Where is the Promise of his coming? Where is the
Promise, that is, where is the Threatening of his coming? The same word that is
a Promise to the Saints, is often a Threatening to Sinners. Where is the
Threatening of his coming? There has been much Preaching and Talking of the Day
of the Lord, of a Black Day that is coming to pay all our Scores; this has been
foretold a long time agone, even in the days of our Forefathers, who are yet
gone to their Graves in peace; and behold to this day, after the revolution of
so many Ages, we see no sign of it, but all things are still as they were, and
Men may sin at as cheap rates now as they did then. Those Rebel Jews, Isa 5.19.
That drew Iniquity with Cords of Vanity, and Sin as it were with Cart-ropes,
are so bold as to say, Let the Day of the Lord come, let it hasten that we may
see it; let the Counsel of the Holy One of Israel draw nigh that we may know
it. Such Infidels were these Rebels become, that they made the Threatenings of
the Lord a mere Mock, or a Dream, or a lying Vision, that would never come to
pass.

But even among those that do believe that there is such a day a-coming,
wherein the Lord will confirm the Word of his Servants, and perform the Counsel
of his Messengers; even amongst them there are who say, Yet the Lord may delay
his coming; I may have time enough to repent before it comes; not considering
that though to day it be said, [Time enough], yet to morrow the word may be
[Too late, too late], though now the word be [My Lord delayeth his coming], the
next word may be [He is come], the Day of the Lord is come, and I must no
longer escape. O my foolish Soul, thou thoughtest such a day might come, but
did thou think it so near? Woe, woe, unto me, the Day of Vengeance is come, in
a day that I thought not of, in an hour that I was not aware, He is come, he is
come, to cut me in sunder, and to give me my Portion with Hypocrites. It is
fallen unto me, as to some Women with Child, my Time is come before my
Reckoning was out.

Friends, Is there nothing of this kind of Security also to be found, even
among those that take themselves to be wiser than this Bedlam-World? How is it
with many Professors of Religion? Do we live in hourly expectation of the Day
of Retribution? Are we so vigilant, and so circumspect in our daily course, as
Men that do believe that the Day of the Lord is at hand? How did thou live
yesterday? did thou carry it so as if that should have been thy last day? How
do thou behave thy self to day? Do thou now carry it so, as if thou
expectedst to hear, This night shall thy Soul be taken away? Do thou hear
daily, as if thou were hearing thy last Sermon? Do thou pray daily, as if
thou were making thy last Prayer? Do thou not sleep daily, and sin daily, as
a Man that presumes on many days to come? Do thou never venture on a little
sin, or on remisness in thy Duty with this thought, it will but be repenting of
it after? Would thou dare to do what sometimes thou do, would thou dare
to neglect what sometimes thou do neglect, were thou sure there would be no
time for repentance? Would thou be so proud as thou art, or so covetous as
thou art, or so vain or so slothful as thou art, if thou did not count upon
more day before thee? Dare thou never lie down one night in an unrepented
Sin, for fear of what may be before the morning? O what Holy Days, what
Sabbath-Dayes would every day be, did we but daily think this may be my
Judgment Day!] But do thou use to think so? Thou have thy fleshly designs
already laid for to morrow, and next day, and next year; to morrow thou say,
thou will go to such a City, to buy, and to sell, and to get gain; next day to
such a Fair, next day to such a Feast, to make merry with thy Friends; and
there thou go, and eatest, and drinkest, and tradest, and so thou meanest to
go on from Year to Year; and all this, it may be, without such a thought [if
the Lord will], or [what if I should not live till to morrow]. Do thou go up
and down with thy Reckoning in thy Bosom? Is thine Account made ready? and do
thou carry it upon thine Heart wherever thou go? Do thou charge it upon
thy self to do nothing, but what thou would be found doing? To go no whither,
but where thou would that thy Lord at his coming should find thee? Do thou
use to say to thy self, I would be loath to be found among the sluggish and
slothful Servants, among the Hypocrites and deceitful workers, among the loose
and profane ones; and therefore take heed, O my Soul, how thou be of that
number, or Companion with them. How can I be sure, but if I venture to lie, or
play the sluggard or the hypocrite, but I may be found so doing? How can I be
sure, if I venture to have fellowship with the Ungodly, but I may be found
among them? Thou will say, it may be, It Is possible I may be found there, but
it is not likely I shall, I hope I shall not, and so for once thou will venture
it. Why this is thy Security, thou art one of them who put the evil day from
them.

Well now these are the Opposites of this Fear, Rashness, Audacity, and
Security.

II. The Grounds or Reasons of Men's Fearlesness, or why they fear not, these
are especially these three; 1. Ignorance. 2. Unbelief. 3. Presumption.


1. One Reason why Men Fear not, is their Ignorance. This I have spoken
somewhat of before, and shall therefore speak the less now.

Blind Men have most cause of Fear of any Men; if they stand upon never so safe
ground, yet for ought they know, danger may be near. If danger be never so
near, and never so great, yet being not able to discover it, there is the less
hopes of escaping it; whether they are in danger or out of danger; there is
still place for Fear, because they know not where they are. Blind Men, of any
Men, have most reason to Fear, and yet the Spiritual Blind are most out of
Fear. Men's Ignorance, as it puts them past feeling, Ephesians. 4.18, 19. so it
puts them past Fear; they have so little light, as not to see the evil that is
before them, and they have so little wit, as not to suspect the evil they see
not.

There is not any thing before them, or round about them, but they have need
enough to fear it. Their very Hopes and Confidences, and the Refuges that they
trust upon, if they knew what they were, would be formidable enough to them.
Their Harbors in which they shelter themselves, are Rocks at which they split
and dash themselves, their very Supports are their Snares.

What is the Hope of the Sinner? It may be his Religion is his Hope; and what
is his Religion? He believes there is a God, and is no Atheist; he trusts in
Christ, and is no Infidel; he is a Protestant and no Papist; he prays and
fasts, he is sober and honest, and harms no Man, and is no Publican; and this
is his Righteousness, upon which he ventures his Soul. But if he knew but what
his Belief and his Trust is, how far short of the Faith of God's Elect; if he
understood what his Prayers and his Fastings are, rather Images and Shadows,
than the Things themselves; if he knew what lies and deceits, what a rotten
Thread they are upon which he hangs his Hopes, and his Soul, 'twould make his
Confidence his Terror. But he is ignorant, and is not able to say, Is there
not a lie in my right hand?

I would not take off Sinners from Praying and Hearing, and other Exercises of
Religion; I would not disgrace that little Morality, that Temperance, Truth,
Righteousness, that is found in any of them; 'twere well if all the Sinners of
the Earth were Praying Sinners, and Hearing Sinners, if there were more
morality found amongst the Unbelieving World. Prayer is a Duty, and our way to
God; Righteousness is a piece of the Image of God in Man; a Jewel will sparkle,
though it be set in a Swine's Snout. It Is pity that they that have any thing
of God, should have so much of the Devil, that they in whom any little good is,
should make such ill use of it as to undo themselves by it. But what are the
Prayers, what is the Religion and Righteousness of these Men? What Carnal
Devotion, what a Formal Religion, what blind and lame and sick Sacrifices do
they satisfy themselves with? which have nothing of Truth or Spirit within, no
nor so much as a face or form of serious Godliness without. Yea, what is their
Repentance, but a cold asking forgiveness, without either forsaking, or so much
as seriously confessing their Sins? What is their Righteousness, their
Innocence and Harmlesness, they bless themselves in? It may be no more but
this, they are less wicked than some others. Here is the Hope and the Trust of
these blind Souls; But did they understand what Wood, Hay, and Stubble, what
broken Reeds, what Cobwebs these are, their very Trust would be their Dread.
But because they think it is right, and sound, because they think their Sand on
which they build, is a Rock; this Babel, this confused and indigested heap of
Rubbish, is their strong Tower, because they have not so much Light as to
discover what Refuges of Lies these are; therefore it is that in the midst of
danger they are out of fear.

The best of Sinners, if they understood it, is enough to make them afraid; and
if their best be so, O what would their worst be! If their Religion be
dangerous, what is their Irreligion? If there be so little hope in their
Prayers, what is there in their mocking at Prayers? If they have reason to
dread their Repentance, how would their Impenitence look? If what they account
their Righteousness will be their Ruin, what will their Wickedness be, what
will their Oaths, and their Blasphemies, and their Adulteries be?

But whatever they be, or whatever danger they be in, by the one or the
other, by their Services or their Sins, by their Peace in Sin, or their War
with God, they know it not, and so go on their way in quiet and secure.

2. Another Reason why Men Fear not, is their Unbelief. The Belief of a God, as
it will make good Men Hope, so it will make evil Men Fear. He that believes
that God is, can hardly but believe that he is the Rewarder of the Righteous
and the Sinner. If there be a God, there is a Judge; He that is the Maker, is
certainly the Governor of the World; and he that is their Governor, is their
Judge. If there be a God, he is Holy, and therefore a lover of the Good, and
hater of the Evil. If there be a God, he is Righteous, and will neither condemn
the Innocent, nor hold the Wicked guiltless. If there be a God, he is
Omniscient and All-seeing, there can be nothing, whether Good or Evil, that can
be hid from his Eyes. If there be a God, he is Almighty, able to save and to
destroy. As his Eye will find out, so by his Power he can revenge all
ungodliness and wrong. If there be a Judge, one that is Holy, Righteous,
All-seeing, and Almighty; if there be a Judge, then there shall be a Judgment,
wherein every Man must give an account of himself, and receive the reward of
his doings, whether they be good or evil, Romans 2.6. 2 Cor. 5.10.

It Is Men's Atheism that lies at the bottom of their Security in sinning. The
Devil would have found it hard work to have filled the World with so much
wickedness, if he had not first filled it with Atheists and Infidels. Sinner,
how is it that thou dare be as thou art, and live as thou do? How can
thou eat, or drink, or sleep, for very fear? Do thou not see how much
wickedness thou compassest thy self about withal? What are thy Sins, but so
many Devils or worse, and art not thou afraid of the Devil? Whether thou art or
no, Remember that there is a God. Can that Holy One but hate such a Beast as
thou art? Does not the All-seeing One see thee, will not his Eye find thee out?
Will not the Almighty one be too strong for thee? Art thou stronger than he,
and able to stand it out against him? Is there not a Judge to sit upon thee,
before whose Bar thou must be brought forth to answer for all thine
ungodliness? Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right? Will he either
destroy the Righteous with the wicked, or will he spare the wicked with the
Righteous? There is a God Sinner, there is a God, believe and fear.

The belief of the very being of a God, would make Sin to be feared; But what
will the belief of what God has said? The Word of God has more plainly and
fully declared, (beyond what might be gathered out of the bare notion of a God)
what the Sinners of the Earth must expect to receive from his hands.

Why, what is it that the Lord has spoken? Search the Scriptures, that is a
Book (as to impenitent Sinners) like Ezekiel's Roll, Ezekiel. 2.10. Written all
over with Lamentations, Mourning, and Woe. Herein is the Wrath of God revealed
from Heaven, against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of Men, Romans 1.18. Who
has appointed a day wherein he will judge the World, Acts 17.31. Who will
appear in flaming Fire, rendering vengeance on them that know not God, and obey
not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. Who shall be punished with everlasting
destruction, from the Presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of his Power, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8, 9. Who shall be cast into the Lake of Fire, Rev. 20.15. These and
many more like words are written against Sinners in the Scriptures of God. O
were this Word believed, that it is indeed the Word of God; O were this God
believed, that he is not as Man, that he should lie, or as the Son of Man, that
he should repent, but will certainly perform, and do according to all things
that are written in this Book; This would make the stout-hearted to faint, and
the strong Sinner to bow down at his Feet. But because of Men's unbelief,
therefore the Hearts of the Sons of Men are fully and fearlesly set in them to
do evil.

O what Metal are believing Sinners hearts made of! What, do thou believe
the Scriptures, and yet not afraid to transgress? Believe thou that God
resists the Proud, and yet does not thy Pride make thee afraid? Believe thou,
that by thy lying, and covetousness, and oppression; or but by thy vain life,
thy walking after the flesh, and fulfilling the lusts thereof, thou art
treasuring up Wrath for thy self against the Day of Wrath? and yet dare thou
go on? can thou be quiet and secure? Sure that heart of thine is a very stone
within thee. One would think it were not possible for such Sinners as believe
the Scriptures, but we should find them all fallen upon their Faces, smiting
upon their Thighs, shivering and quaking for fear of the Wrath of God, and the
Judgment of the Great Day. But can thou hold up thine Head, and keep on thy
way, and mock at Fear? Sure either thy Belief is Unbelief, thou believe not
what thou think thou do, or else thy heart is as the nether Millstone.

3. Another Reason why Men Fear not, is their Presumption. As Men's Unbelief, so
some Men's Belief is the Reason why they do not Fear. Presumption is Belief
without a Bottom, an House built upon the Sand, a Spider's Web spun out of
their own Hearts; strong confidence founded on the weakness of a conceit, or
the belief of a lie. This Presumption may be either, 1. Of the goodness of Men's
present State; Or, 2. Of the happiness of their future State, whatever their
present State be.


1. There is a Presumption of the goodness of their present State. It is some
Men's unhappiness, that they believe themselves to be happy; their great danger,
that they believe themselves to be out of danger. Some Unbelievers, and
impenitent Sinners, take themselves to be Believers and Converts to Christ;
some that are the Children of Hell, believe themselves to be the Children of
God. This was the case of those Jews, John 8.39. who said, with great
confidence, Abraham is our Father, we are the Children of Promise; and verse.
41. We have one Father, even God. Whatever thou accountest us, we are the
Children of God.

And this Confidence Men sometimes grow up unto, upon little search or
examining whether it be so or no. Nay, it may be the Reason is, their not
examining at all how it is with them. Their case may be so extremely bad and
unsound, that a very little search would break down all their confidence. There
are multitudes that are persuaded, it is well with them, upon no other ground,
but because they cannot tell how bad it is with them; and therefore they
understand not their misery and danger, because they never searched nor looked
into themselves, nor ever spent a serious thought about the state of their
Souls. It is a wonderful thing that Men can so easily satisfy themselves in so
great a case, as multitudes do.

Let a Minister of Christ come to deal with such Persons, let him go from House
to House, from Man to Man, amongst the rude and ignorant Multitude, how far may
he go, how many may he enquire of, e're he meet with one that is so much as in
doubt but all is well?

Let him ask, How is it with your Soul? what hope have you in God? Why I doubt
not, but by the Grace of God my condition is good, I hope in God all is well
with me.

Let him go farther and ask, But are you not mistaken? are you sure you are
not? No, I do not question, but by the Grace of God, my Soul is in a good
condition.

Let him yet enquire, What ground and reason can you give of the hope that is
in you? and it may be all the answer that will be given, amounts to no more
than this, I hope because I hope, I am persuaded because I am persuaded, my
Mind gives me so, mine Heart tells me so, I can have no other thought, but that
it is well, and shall be well with me.

There Is many a Man that is like unto that Man pointed out Deuteronomy. 29.19. who
though he hears the words of God's Curse, blesses himself in his heart,
saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the imaginations of mine own
heart. Though God speaks never a good word, though the Scriptures speak never a
good word of such; though God curses such a Man, yet his own heart blesses him.
Though God says to him, Thou Fool, thou Belial, thou Infidel, thou Child of
the Devil, yet not a word is heard from his own heart, but, an honest Man, a
good Christian, and a Child of God.

There is sometimes to be found, a poor trembling Christian, whom the Devil
sets a cursing himself, when God does bless him; that calls himself Hypocrite,
Unbeliever, a Castaway and Reprobate from God, though God calls him Beloved,
and highly favored; and so there is that blesses himself whom God has cursed.

It Is vain to tell him, Thus says the Lord, or to bid him search the
Scriptures, hearken to what the Lord God will speak; or to say to him, as
Jehoshaphat to the King of Israel, 1 Kings 22.7. enquire of the Prophet of the
Lord. Does God, his Scriptures, his Ministers, speak any good concerning thee?
It Is vain to speak thus to him. Thus says mine heart, is more with him, than
Thus says the Lord. Thus my mind gives me, is enough to make him dis-believe
the God of Truth; he will rather make God a liar, than not believe his lying
heart.

Consider this, Sinners, whether this be not your case; God says, The
Ignorant, the Unbelievers, Liars, Swearers, the evil Workers and Impenitent,
are the Children of the Devil, and shall never inherit the Kingdom of God. And
yet thou, though thou can not say but that thou art ignorant, impenitent, an
evil worker, given up to thy hearts lusts, and hardened in thy way, wilt not be
persuaded but thou art a Child of God. God says thou art none of his, and thou will still say thou art to his Face. Just thus was it with those Jews
aforementioned, John 8.44. Christ tells them to their Faces, Ye are of your
Father the Devil; and proves it to them, for, says he, The Lusts of your
Father ye do; and you are just like your Father, he was a Murderer from the
beginning, and a Liar and the Father of it; and what else are you? And yet
behold the confidence of the Men; No, we are Abraham's Seed, and the Children
of God.

Sinner, who-ever thou art, that art doing the Lusts, and working the Works of
the Devil, Christ speaks this very word to thee, which he here spoke to those
Jews, Thou art of thy Father the Devil. If yet thou say I hope not; God is
my Father, and I am his Child, there is that Presumption that may keep thee
from fearing, till thou too late feel the Wrath of God seizing upon thee. This
Presumption, that it is so well with thee already, (that if it be possible I may
make thee afraid of that which keeps thee from fear) know for a certain, it
will endanger so to hold thee in thy wretched state, that it is never like to be
better with thee than it is. This is it which hardens thee against Counsels and
Reproofs, slights the tenders of Mercy, and out-faces the terrors of the Lord;
this shuts up thine Ears and thine Heart against the word of Reconciliation,
and does nonplus all the importunities of the Ministers of the Gospel. Let
them bid thee believe, thou art a Believer already. Let them command thee to
repent, Thou have done it; let them warn thee to fly from the Wrath to come,
and this is all the Fruit, thou tellest them thou art already passed from Death
to Life. The confidence that thou art well enough already, is like to make the
Preaching of Christ to be of none effect to thee.

And because this is such a brazen Wall as keeps Christ and Grace out of the
Heart, and resists and repels all those Arguments which the Word makes use of
to persuade to Christ and Life, I shall make some batteries upon it as I pass
along.]

The first step to Conversion is Conviction. Conviction is Presumption broken
down, and the breaking in of that Fear which makes way for Faith. There are in
Conviction these three things; 1. Illumination. 2. Redargution. 3.
Consternation.


1. Illumination; the enlightening of the Mind, the opening of Sinners eyes, and
making their Sin, and the danger that it exposes to, known unto them; the
convincing Spirit brings the Commandment before them, by which is the knowledge
of Sin, Romans 7.7. and verse. 9. When the Commandment came, Sin revived, and
appeared to be Sin, and exceeding sinful, verse. 13. It could be no longer hid,
nor any longer be looked on as a light thing, but a very dreadful thing to be a
Sinner; the truth is, we none of us know Sin as it is, some Light has broken
in upon our Hearts, but it is but little in comparison, and thereupon we can be
venturous so far upon it, and too easily go out with it, and lick our selves
whole when we have sinned; but if we knew the Heart and the Tail of this
Scorpion; what malignity there is in it, and what comes after, 'twould make us
tremble and take heed: When the Spirit of the Lord brings the Commandment to
us, and lays Sin by that, 'twill look with another face than now it does.

2. Redargution. The Spirit of God not only shows what Sin is, and what a
fearful thing it is to be under Sin, but withal proves and demonstrates to
Sinners, whatever their confidence has been of the contrary, that they are
under Sin; when the Commandment has done its work to discover Sin, and the
evil of it, then Conscience is brought forth to do its work, to witness the
Sinner guilty. Have thou not sinned? let Conscience speak; does not thine own
Heart tell thee of thy Lying, and of thy Swearing, and of thy Coveting, and of
thy company-keeping, and a World more of such evils that thou have lived in?
And have thou ever been purged from thy Sins; have thou repented and turned
from thy evil Ways? thou know thou have not; thou art in love with Sin, in
a league with Sin, and live to this hour in the practice, and under the power
of it. Is this the Man that has been so confident of the goodness of his
state, whose heart has blessed him, and promised him that no evil shall befall
him? What, a Sinner and yet at peace? What, an impenitent Sinner, and yet so
confident thou shall have peace? Thou must die, foolish Soul, thou must be
judged and condemned, and suffer the vengeance of Eternal Fire; there is no
shifting it off or escaping it, it is a plain case, the Evidence is full and
undeniable; lay it to heart, for of a truth, thou art in an evil case.
Here-upon as the effect of this Conviction, follows,

3. Consternation. Now the bold Sinner is knocked in the Head and laid on his
back; now his old hopes give up the Ghost, and Fear and Astonishment take hold
upon him. This Convincing Spirit, is the same which is called the Spirit of
Bondage working Fear, Romans 8.15. And when he is thus broken by Fear, and
feeling all his hopes and supports falling under him, gives himself for a lost
and undone Man; then he is made ready to the hand of him that comes to seek and
to save that which is lost. He from whom just now, nothing was heard, but God I
thank thee, I am not as other Men; is now brought to his, O wretched Man that I
am, who shall deliver me?

Presumptuous Sinner, thou art never like to be happy, till thou be undone;
there is no hope of thee, till thou be overcome of Fear. O cry unto the Lord to
cure thee of thy confidence, to work thee to harder thoughts of thy present
state, if ever thou look it should be well with thee hereafter. What, do
thou yet retain thine old confidence? will thou yet do all thou can to
maintain that good opinion of thy state, which thou have hitherto had? what
do thou herein do, but resist that Spirit of God who would but break thee,
that he might build thee up for ever? Will thou not be undeceived? will thou
not be convinced? will thou never know thy danger, till it be too late to be
prevented?

But how shall I do to get mine heart awakned out of this dangerous state? Why,
would thou be delivered? Then,

1. Dread Presumption more than ever thou dreadedst Conviction. Every hard
word, every close word from a Minister of Christ, how do Sinners shun it, and
hide themselves as much as they can from it? Fear the fair speeches and smooth
words that thy false heart speaks to thee, more than the sharpest rebukes thou
receivest from the Mouth of God. Be willing to know the worst of thy case,
before it be too late to be recovered. Be afraid to be deceived, flatter not
thy self, and be afraid of the flatteries of others. Know it to be safer for
thee to think worse of thy self than thou art, than to think it better than
it is.

2. Wait for, and help on as much as thou can, a thorow-Work of Conviction
upon thee.

1. Give heed to, and improve the convincing Word. Heb. 4.12. The Word of God
is quick powerful, and sharper than a two-edged Sword, piercing to the dividing
asunder of the Soul and Spirit, of the Joints and Marrow, and is a discerner of
the Thoughts and Intents of the Heart. But as quick and powerful as this Word
is, yet it will not cut nor pierce unless it be duly heeded. Therefore as the
Apostle speaks in another case, Heb. 2.1. We ought to give the more earnest
heed to the things which we have heard; to every thing, to every word that the
Lord speaks; not only to his sweeter and softer words, his promising and
comforting words, but to his sharper and harder words, his convincing and
threatening words; every word of God is needed by us, and no word will do its
work if it be not heeded.

Thou should, when thou hear such words as these, He that commits Sin
is of the Devil. He that does not Righteousness is not of God. The Unrighteous
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. He that walks after the Flesh shall
die. He that has not the Spirit of Christ is none of his. If any Man love the
World, the love of the Father abides not in him. Except a Man be born again, he
cannot see the Kingdom of God. Except ye repent, ye shall all perish.

Thou should, when thou hear such words, consider whose words are these;
Is not this the Word of the Lord? Thou should bethink thy self, to whom does
the Lord speak thus? Is it not to me? Am not I one of this number? Am not I
Unrighteous? Am not I a Servant of my Flesh? Has not my Life been a wicked
Life, a worldly Life, a mere carnal Life? Have I been born again, and become a
new Creature? Have I the Spirit of Christ? Is this proud Spirit, this froward
Spirit, this vain Spirit, this lying contentious Spirit, is this the Spirit of
Christ? Have I repented of my Sins, and returned from my sinful and foolish
ways? Speak, O my Conscience, do not lie to me, but tell me truth, how do
thou find it? Sure I have been a Sinner, and a worldly and wicked liver, and I
cannot find that I have repented, or been Newborn, and become a new Creature
to this day. How then can I conclude, but that God has spoken this word to me,
Thou art the Man that shall die, and shall not see the Kingdom of God? And how
can thou but take these words from his Mouth into thine own, and confess, I
am the Man?

2. Pray for the Convincing Spirit. The Word without the Spirit can do nothing,
neither convince nor comfort thee: When God sent a Word into the World, he sent
his Spirit along with it to make it prosper. He was promised to be sent to this
very end, amongst others, to Convince the World of Sin, John 16.8. O pray for
this Spirit; when thou hear a word that strikes upon thy sore, lift up thine
Heart to the Lord, let thy Spirit, thine Almighty Spirit, set home this Word
upon mine Heart. I hear such a word as makes both mine Ears to tingle, and I
cannot deny but it belongs to me; but for mine Heart, I cannot get it to stick;
let the Spirit of the Lord sharpen this Nail, and drive it home. Here Is a poor
Minister does what he can, speaks as plainly, as closely, and as powerfully as
he is able, does what he can to startle me, and to humble me, and break me;
But, poor Man, he cannot do it, this Heart is too deep for him to reach it, too
hard for him to pierce it; But where is the God of mine Heart? O let the Spirit
of the Lord take the Pulpit, and set an edge upon this two-edged Sword, that
its Iron may enter into my Soul. Cry thus unto the Lord; Say not as once Israel
did, Let not the Lord speak to us any more, but let Moses speak; Let this be
thy Prayer, Let Moses speak, and the Prophets, and Pastors, and Teachers speak,
but let the Lord speak also, and then there is hope I may hear.

3. Receive and retain the convincing Word, when it comes. Do not pray, Lord
speak, and then turn away the Ear; Lord come in, and then shut the door against
him; pray for the Holy Ghost, and then see, that you resist not the Holy Ghost.
What the Apostle advises concerning the word of Exhortation, Heb. 13.22.
[Suffer] the Word of Exhortation, will be much more needed here, suffer the
Word of Conviction. It is a Word that will not be suffered by them that need it
most. The proud and stubborn heart, either rises and swells, and flings it back
in the Preacher's Face, or at least it builds a Fort against it; sometimes a
Fort of Unbelief; I cannot believe my case is so bad; and sometimes a Fort of
Faith, (such a Faith as it is) I believe in Christ, and therefore as wicked as I
am, through him I hope to be saved.

Friends, give the Word a free passage, let it have entrance into your Hearts;
and how hot work soever it makes there, let it abide till it has finished its
Work. Give it time, hold upon thine Heart the sense of the misery and danger,
the Word has brought thee to, till the end be obtained. The sharpest Plaster
will not raise a Blister as soon as it is clapped on, it must have time to work;
and though it smart, it must be kept on till the work be done. Some Foolish
Patients, if it put them to pain, will tear it off and throw it away. Sinner,
has the Word smitten thee, and cut thee to the heart? has it made thee raw,
and clapped on a Plaster of Fire, the sense of Wrath and Judgment? Has it made
thee, who once were a strong confident, and would not suspect but thou were
in a safe and happy state; has it made thee now to feel the Wrath of God
abiding upon thee? Do thou feel thy Peace broken, thy Hopes and thy Carnal
Confidence broken down? Make them sure, never let them be built again; beware
how thou ever recover to thy old Presumption again, but hold that Fear upon thy
heart, till there be a. new and a sure Foundation laid, upon which thou may
be built up in hope of Eternal Life.

Some foolish Sinners, when God has discovered their unsoundness, and
afrighted them with those dreadful Consequents that they see running in upon
them like a Flood, their desires and endeavors are after present ease and
quiet; if they can make a shift to be at rest and at ease for the present,
(however it may be with them here-after) that is all they look after; they are
more for hiding themselves from their Fears, than from their Danger; and glad
they would be, if they could but get them back into their former state, wherein
they felt no trouble, nor feared any evil. Some smitten Sinners, that are
pursued by the Terrors of the Lord, will often do, as the stricken Deer that is
hunted by the Dogs, he will thrust himself, if it be possible, among the Herd,
that there the Dogs may lose him. When the Word has terrified a Sinner, and
Conscience dogs him at the heels, so that he can be nowhere at rest, away he
will into the Herd amongst his Companions, with whom he was used to be merry,
in hope to forget his trouble; his Carnal Friends will advise him, and he is
ready enough to take their advice, to try what he can do, to drink away sorrow,
and laugh away all his trouble; and this, it may be, may yield him a present
relief, yea, and reduce him to a more secure and senseless state than ever
before, wherein he may abide, and never know fear or trouble more, till he be
brought to the King of Terrors, and all the evils he formerly feared, be come
upon him to the uttermost, and he can no longer escape.

Beware of this folly, Sinner; Has God convinced thee of thy Sin, and thy
Danger, and pierced thy very Entrals, with a sense of that Wrath that hangs
over thy head? Do not seek ease, in any other way, but by the removal of the
cause of thy Fears. Be not such a Child as to think of hiding thy self from
danger, by shutting thine eyes from seeing it. It Is a poor Cure of a Disease,
thy being laid to sleep, that thou may feel no pain.

Beware of running into the Herd again for ease: When God has smitten thee,
will thou to the Devil for a Cure? Keep thy Sore open, and do not skin it over,
whilst the Core still remains within. Sinner, thou were once far from fear or
trouble; thou could once follow the World, and follow thy Sins, and live in a
constant neglect of God and thy Soul, and nothing of all this troubled thee: Is
this the state thou would return to? Is it not safer to be a wounded than a
secure Sinner? an awakned than a sleeping Sinner? Choose rather to live in God's
Fire, than the Devils Mud; in God's Purgatory, than in the Devil's Paradise.
Will thou rather die of thy Lethargy, than endure those cuttings and
scarifyings which might save thy Life? If thou art for ease, whether it be to
Life or Death; or if thou would purchase thy Peace on such terms as thine
everlasting Ruin, then return to thy secure Presumptuous State.

Objection.
But I have confidence in God, and yet I hope I am not Presumptuous. I have
good grounds for my Confidence. I have been convinced of my Sin; I have
believed in Christ, and have joy and peace in believing, and by the Grace of
God, do now go on my way, rejoicing in hope of everlasting Salvation.

Answer.
1. But have thou examined the grounds of thy Confidence, whether they be sound
or not? Have thou put thy Faith to the Trial, whether it be indeed the Faith of
God's Elect? What enquiry have thou made into that change that is made upon
thee? Thou may examine, and yet be unsound. Examination is a means to
discover sincerity, but no mark to prove it. But do thou not examine, and yet
conclude thy self sound? Dare thou trust thine heart, without trying it? What
is Presumption, if this be not, to conclude thy self to be what thou never
provedst whether thou art or not? though self-examination be no mark of
sincerity, yet non-examination is a shrewd sign of Hypocrisy.

2. Do thou never suspect thy self to be unsound? Does thine Heart never
shake? Art thou not sometimes afraid, lest thy Confidence should deceive thee,
lest all thy Hopes and thy Joys should prove a Delusion? Thy very being without
Fear, is ground enough to make thee afraid.

When we observe how far many have gone in the Profession of Religion, to how
high Seize they have arrived, what a face of Holiness has appeared in
their Lives; and how great Peace, and what raptures of Joy they have had in
their Hearts, and yet at last, by their total Apostasy from Christ, they have
proved that they were all this while under a Delusion; when we consider such
sad Instances, whereof we have seen so many, what does this speak unto us, but
in the words of the Apostle, Be not high-minded but fear? Do thou not yet
Fear? Sure I am afraid of thee.

I will not say, how it may be with here and there one of the most grown and
experienced Christians, those of the first and highest Form in the School of
Christ, but for such as are but newly come in, or whatever their standing be,
are but of low stature; by how much the more out of doubt they are, by so much
the more it is to be doubted that they deceive themselves.

3. To answer more particularly. There are more mistakes than one that
Professors of Religion may be subject to.

1. They may be mistaken in Faith, and count that to be Saving-Faith which is
not so. 2. Though they have the true Notion of Saving-Faith, yet they may be
mistaken in themselves.
I shall speak more at large to this afterward, yet this word or two I shall
put in here.

1. They may be mistaken in Faith, and count that to be Saving-Faith which is
not so. That definition of Faith given by some Antinomians, That it is a
believing that we are justified and shall be saved, has doubtless deceived
many. For,

1. If this be Saving-Faith, then one of these absurdities will unavoidably
follow; either that all Men are not bound to believe, with a Saving-Faith, or
that some Men are bound to believe a lie. Is there any Man, to whom the Gospel
is Preached, that is not bound to believe in Christ? Is it not their Sin, who
refuse Christ when he is tendered to them? Let these two Scriptures be
considered, 1 John 3.23. This is the Commandment, that we should believe in the
Name of his Son Jesus Christ; and Job. 16.9. He shall reprove the World -- of
Sin, because they believe not in me.

Now if all Men be bound to believe, and this be that belief they be bound to,
to be persuaded they shall be saved; how can it be avoided, but that some are
bound to believe a lie? Are all Men in a state of Salvation? Are all the
Children of God? Has the Devil never a Child in the World? Not one, if this
Doctrine be true, that all are bound to believe they shall be saved, and yet
none are bound to believe a lie.

2. If this be Saving-Faith, then happy are multitudes of the ungodly World.
Who more confident that they shall be saved, than many ignorant and impenitent
Sinners, amongst whom the first and most difficult Work of the Ministry lies in
this, to break down their vain Confidence? Much of our hardest work might be
saved, if we found the Sinners of the Earth under a desperation of Salvation in
their present cses. It Is this that is the great block in our way, and keeps
back our Word from reaching their Hearts, that they will not be persuaded
otherwise, but they shall to Heaven when they die.

But shall they be saved indeed who believe they shall? what, every one of
them, the believing Hypocrite, the believing Drunkard, the believing
Impenitent, even the very final Impenitent? Can Charity it self be so blind, as
to think that not one of those Confidents ever died impenitent? And can this be
counted the Gospel-Faith, that will justify final Impenitents?

Come ye Hypocrites, come ye Earthworms, come ye blind and brutish among the
People, lift up your Ears and Heads, here is a Gospel (if it were but true)
according to your own hearts; Fear not to be as wicked as you will, only
believe you shall be saved, and you shall be saved.

But is this Gospel? I know the consequences of this Doctrine will be abhorred
by its Assertors; But how can they be evaded?

Diverse other Errors there are concerning Faith, which may lead Men into
damnable mistakes, too long to mention.

2. Although they have the true Notion of Faith, yet they may be mistaken in
themselves. They may think they have it when they have it not.

There are not a few, amongst those that profess Religion, who understand
aright what Faith is, what a real Work of Grace means, and wherein the Truth of
Christianity stands, who yet understand not their own hearts. There are who do
not think that to be something which is nothing, who yet may be of those of
whom the Apostle speaks, Gal. 6.3. who think themselves to be something when
they are nothing, and so deceive their own selves. The Heart of Man is deep and
dark, who can know it? Jer. 17.9. we have need of other Light than our own, the
searcher of Hearts alone can help us to understand what there is within us.

The Heart of Man has many Devices, Prove. 19.21. it has so much folly, as to
study to make the best of its case, being loath to see the worst; and it has so
much subtilty, as to put the best side outward, and to hide the worst out of
sight. Many Men's great labor in Religion, is to persuade themselves that all
is well; instead of a plain-hearted and impartial enquiry, whether they be
upright or no, their business is, only to study Arguments to prove they are so.
They will search out all the Arguments they can imagine for it, but they dare
not look too far into the Objections against it. We would fain comfort our
hearts, and thereupon greedily catch at every shadow that looks well, but dare
not critically examine that which seems to speak good concerning us, whether it
speak truth or no. The great question is, whether there be Grace in our Hearts
or no? and we are so willing to believe there is, that we dare not look too
deep, lest we should find there is none. The labor and trouble that a
conviction of our unsoundness would put us to, is so unpleasing to us, that we
do all we can to save our selves that trouble. If we be sound, we think the
work is done; now we may sing, Return to thy Rest O my Soul, but if I should
find my self to be short of sincerity, how much labor would it require to get
to be sincere?

Now hereupon, the heart being so partial and overly in studying its case, what
wonder is it that it should be deceived and mistaken? what wonder is it that he
should think himself something, who is nothing, who is too willing, and has so
many devices to make his nothing look like something? And that it is so, that
there are many that are thus deceived, there is too great evidence in the World.

There are many that can deceive none but themselves, and yet themselves they
can deceive. Every one that sees them, sees the very marks of an Hypocrite upon
them; no body can think well of them but themselves. They have taken to
themselves the Name, and have something of the Complexion of the Children of
God, yet their spot is not the spot of his Children. Their Complexion is rather
a Paint than their natural Visage, and their spot looks out through their
Paint. Whilst there is the Profession of a Christian, of the Faith of a
Christian, of the Hope of a Christian, what is there to be seen of the Holiness
of a Christian? if there be a Paint of the Holiness too, yet he that observes
it, may see Sin looking through it. The Humility that appears, the Meekness,
the Spirituality, the Heavenliness of Mind, are all but a varnish. The Leprosy
that has fretted and eaten into the Wall, will break out through the Plaster,
wherewith it is whited over. It Is possible it is true, that others may be
deceived in them also; these Pictures may be so drawn to the Life, that every
one may take them to be living Souls, and yet while they have a Name that they
live, they may be dead, Rev. 3.1. Grace is Truth; a real thing, not a shadow or
paint. This Truth is in the inward parts originally; Thou love Truth in the
inward parts, Psalm. 51.6. [thou love Truth] not Shadows or Images, but
Realities [thou love Truth in the inward parts] inside Truth, a true Heart, a
pure Conscience; he is a Christian which is one inwardly, Rom 2.29.

Grace is Life, the Life of God it is called, Ephesians. 4.18. It is a Vital Power,
that forms the Heart into the Image of God, that spirits and acts the whole
Man, and that exerts and produces those Vital Operations which are according to
God, and resists and works out that corruption which is contrary to God.

Grace is a Law; a Law in the Heart, Jer. 31.33. that commands and governs both
it and the Life, contradicts and overcomes that evil Law, the Law of Sin that
wars in the Members.

Grace is the fixing of the Heart upon God; the returning and coming back of
the Soul from that vanity, after which it had lusted and gone awhoring, and the
pitching of it upon him as the Center of all its Hopes, Aims, Desires, and
Motions. It comes down from Above, even from the Father of Lights, and it
fetches up the heart to him.

Grace is the healing of Nature; our participation of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet.
1.4. a Principle of Holiness in the Heart, which is the health of the Soul, and
whereby it purges it self of all that corruption wherewith it was leavened and
infected, and is reduced to that better Temperament from which by Sin it fell.

Grace is the establishment of the Heart in Good, Heb. 13.9. the firmness of
the Soul; its being wrought to a good consistency; it does not leave the Soul
hovering, and wavering, and hanging betwixt Good and Evil, but unalterably,
though not perfectly, settles it upon Holiness and Righteousness. Though there
be degrees in firmness, some weaker Christians are but unstable Souls, in
comparison of those that are more deeply rooted, and more strongly fixed upon
God and Godliness, yet the very weakest of real Christians, are so unalterably
fixed upon God, and his holy Ways, that nothing in the World can so far change
their Minds, as wholly to bring them back; but the main bent of their Hearts
and Course is still for Holiness and Righteousness.

Now are there none among the Professors of Religion that know all this, and
much more, yea, and feel something within which they judge to be the Babe
springing in the Womb, the Life of God begotten in them, the New Creature
brought to the Birth and brought forth; in whom all this is but a false
Conception, and proves an Abortion at last?

Brethren, since there may be such mistakes, either the taking that for Faith
or Grace which is not so, or the taking your selves to have it within you when
it is not there, (many have been thus mistaken, damnably mistaken, have gone
down to the Chambers of Death, full of the hopes of Eternal Life) since it may
be thus, beware that none of you be thus mistaken.] Beware of taking that for
the Faith which will save your Souls, which does not save you from your Sins.
Beware of venturing your Lives upon the strongest persuasion, that Christ is
your Life, especially while you find that Sin is not dead. Beware of trusting
to an outside Christianity, that dwells in the Head or upon the Tongue, whilst
the Flesh and the World still have the possession of the Heart. Beware of
trusting to that Godliness which has somewhat touched and affected the Heart,
but is but slight and shallow, and is not gotten deep into the Soul. Beware of
trusting to that for Godliness, that is but a weak and feeble thing, that has
no life nor power in it, but is a dead thing, that does not put forth it self
in Vital Operations, that is over-top'd and held captive by the Law of your
Members; that is made use of to comfort you, but is not suffered to govern you,
but is kept as an underling, and made to stand aside and give place to the
Pleasures and Inclinations of your Flesh, that is laid up to help you in your
need, and till then laid by, that it hinder you not in your Carnal Interests or
Designs.

Take heed of counting that your Grace, which leaves you under the power of
your old depraved Natures. Is not thy natural pride and haughtiness subdued?
Do thou continue froward, envious, of a fleshly and earthly heart, as thou
wast used to be? does the old Stream run still? or if it be at times bayed up,
does it ordinarily break down the Bay and run its wonted course? Fear that
Grace that is thus overpowred by Nature.

Trust not to that for Grace, which is a wavering, in and out thing; that has
no consistency in it, but leaves thee a ductile sequacious Soul, carried about
hither and thither with every Wind, and apt to be variously snap'd, according
to the several temptations or circumstances thou art in. Some Men's Godliness
keeps pace with the Times, is upon the Wing, or hangs the Wing, according to
the encouragement or discountenance of the days they live in. If Religion has
gotten the Wind on its side, then they go on prosperously, and hang forth all
their Sails, and will as soon strike Sail when the Wind is contrary. Some are
Holy only in Affliction; when they are low and in trouble, when they are sick
and in pain, and like to die, then O what complaining of Sin, what pretendings
to Repentance, what breathings after Grace; then Reading, and Praying, and
Meditations, and Discourses about the other World come in request; but when
they prosper again, and are in health, all their Religion is laid by and
forgotten. Others are Godly only when they are pleased, and all goes smoothly
on with them. Every little gust of Affliction blows all their Grace off its
legs. Some Men's Religion is much according to what their Company is. Who more
zealous, and savoury and lively, when they fall in amongst the Zealous? and yet
at other times, as flat, and as carnal, and as vain as others, scarce a Thought
or a Word of any thing that good is, when it will disgust the Company.

If this be all the Religion thou have, take heed of venturing thy Soul upon
it, or of growing confident that this is Grace or Godliness.

And that which is Grace indeed, that Truth in the Inward Parts, that Life of
God, that new Law in the Heart, that fixedness upon God, that health and that
firmness of the Soul in Good; Beware you count not your selves to have attained
it before you have. Be sure before you be confident, whilst the case is
doubtful, suspect your selves; whilst you hope the best, fear the worst. Put it
out of doubt, by searching more narrowly, and a more diligent improving. True
Grace, where it is weak, is hardly discernable, the narrowest search will not do
it. Whatever Arguments there may be for, there will be so many Objections
against it, that will darken the evidence of them. The Confidence of a truly
gracious Soul, that is but weak, may be a kind of Presumption, though he does
not presume, he has what he has not; though he has it indeed, yet his
Confidence that he has it, may be a kind of Presumption, because the Evidence
is not so clear that he can rationally bottom a peremptory conclusion upon it.

To conclude this matter; Art thou persuaded that thou have Faith, and that
there is a gracious saving change wrought upon thee? Fear that thou may be
mistaken; and in this Fear, search whether thou art mistaken or no, lest thou
also at last should be found, and have thy portion with the Presumptuous and
self-deceiving Souls. But of this more in its place.

2. There is a Presumption on future Mercy, how bad soever Men's present
condition be. There are some self-condemned Persons the Die of whose Sins is so
deep, that it cannot be varnished over, nor hid from their own eyes; their
Consciences pass Sentence upon them for Hypocrites and Ungodly; and yet, though
they see they be stark naught, abominable Branches, reprobate Silver at
present, they are still without Fears, but it shall be well with them
hereafter. Though their Consciences condemn them, yet they hope God will
justify them. Conscience charges them as God did those ungodly ones, Psalm.
50.17. Thou batest Instruction, and casts the Word of the Lord behind thee;
when thou saw a Thief, thou consentedst to him, and have been partaker with
the Adulterer. Thou have been a Thief, an Adulterer, a Liar, a Scoffer, a
Slanderer, these things thou have done; Can thou deny it? Or as Jer. 2.23.
How can thou say I am not polluted? How can thou say I am not a
Transgressor? See thy way in the Valley, trace thy Footsteps, consider the
course of thy Life, and see if all thy ways do not speak thee a wicked Man.
But though Conscience charges them thus, and they cannot deny the Charge, but
are forced to acknowledge all is true, and to confess, if there be ever a wicked
Man in the World, I am one; if there be ever a vile Person in the Earth, I am
one; if there be ever a graceless one under Heaven, I am the Man: yet though
they know that they are wicked Ones, and have no Grace at present, they still
presume they shall have Mercy at last. God is a God of Pardons, if he should be
extreme to mark Iniquities, who then shall stand? God is a merciful God; for
whom did Christ die but for Sinners? Woe be to the World if God were no more
merciful, if Christ were no more gracious than Men speak.

This was the Confidence of those pointed at before, Deuteronomy. 29.19. Who bless
themselves in their Hearts, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the
imagination of mine own heart, and add drunkenness unto thirst. Mich. 3.11. The
heads of the People judge for Reward, the Priests thereof teach for Hire, the
Prophets thereof divine for Money, they build up Zion with Blood, and build up
Jerusalem with Iniquity. Here were a wicked Generation, Perverters of Judgment,
Covetous, Oppressors, Bloody Men. What could these Men think of themselves?
Could they be ignorant that they were abominable in the sight of God? What hope
can they have of themselves? Yes, they have hope, yet they will lean upon the
Lord; yet they trust in God, no evil shall come upon them.

This is a more common case than is imagined; Men could not be so hardy nor so
venturous upon a course of known Iniquity, as we see them to be, did they not
maintain in their hearts a secret hope of Mercy; yet I shall have Pardon, yet I
shall have Peace, the Lord I trust will spare me, notwithstanding all that I
have done. But let such Men consider, that by this their hope of obtaining
Mercy in a state of Sin, 1. They make the Scriptures a lie. 2. They make Christ
to do the Work of the Devil.


1. They make the Sciptures a lie. Thou doubtest not but that thou shall be
saved; But what art thou? It may be thou art an ignorant Soul all this while,
one that know not God nor his Gospel. But what says the Scriptures of such?
Look into Job 18.21. Surely such are the Dwellings of the Wicked, this is the
Place of him that knows not God. Where is his Dwelling? what is his Place?
Look back into the former verses, verse. 14, etc. His Confidence shall be rooted
out, it shall bring him to the King of Terrors; -- Brimstone shall be scattered
upon his Habitation -- he shall be driven from Light to Darkness, and chased
out of the World. This is the place of him that knows not God. Thou say
no, this is not my place; my Confidence shall never be rooted out, it shall
bring me to the King of Glory; I shall go out of Darkness into Light, I shall
see the Salvation of God. What do thou herein say, but Scripture thou lie;
this is not my place, this dark and dismal Habitation shall be none of my
Dwelling; I shall dwell with God in the Land of the Living? It may be thou art
one that walk after the Flesh, a Person of a carnal worldly Life; a
Drunkard, an Epicure, an Earth-worm, given to thy pleasure, and ease, and
mirth? a vain Person, yea, and one of the most vile of the Earth; and what
says the Scriptures of such? Why, look into Romans 8.13. If ye live after the
Flesh ye shall die. Colos. 3.5, 6. Mortify therefore your Members which are
upon the Earth; Fornication, Uncleanness, inordinate Affections, evil
Concupiscence, and Covetousness; for which things sake, the Wrath of God comes
upon the Children of Disobedience. Romans 2.8.9. Indignation and Wrath,
Tribulation and Anguish upon every Soul of Man that does evil. Psalm. 9.17. The
Wicked shall be turned into Hell, with all the Nations that forget God.

Thou art a wicked Man, thou can not say but thou art, and yet thou art
persuaded thou shall to Heaven when thou die. What then do thou make of the
Scriptures? do thou not herein say, it is a lying Word, there is no heed to be
given to what it speaks? Whilst the Saints build their hopes on the Truth, what
are thy hopes built upon, but on a supposition of the falsehood of the
Scriptures? And so this Word must prove; the Word of that God that cannot lie,
must prove a false Word, or thou will be damned for ever.

2. They make Christ to do the Work of the Devil, to help to fill the World
with wickedness. Whilst God sent Christ to destroy, these make him to do, the
Works of the Devil. They make the Savior of Sinners, to be the Minister of
Sin; they make him not only a Friend of Sinners, but a Friend of Sin; and what
is the Devil more? It must no longer be said, that Christ came to make an end
of Sin, to redeem from all Iniquity, to fulfill all Righteousness; but to
countenance and encourage Sin, and to fill the World with Unrighteousness. What
Doctrine would the Devil preach other than this, Fear not to Sin, God is
merciful; Continue in Sin, for Grace has abounded?

If there were any ground for such an hope, we must quite invert the Gospel;
and whilst the Apostle tells us, Tit. 2.11, 12. The Grace of God, which
brings Salvation, has appeared to all Men, teaching us, that denying
ungodliness and worldly Lusts, we should live righteously, and soberly, and
godly in this present World; It must be now written for Gospel, The Grace of
God teaches us to deny all Godliness, and to indulge to worldly Lusts, and to
live wickedly, and filthily, and ungodlily in this present World, and yet still
to look for the Blessed Hope, and the glorious Appearing of the great God and
our Savior Jesus Christ. Is this the Doctrine of Christ? It must be so or thou
art undone. And if it be, what difference betwixt the Doctrine of Christ, and
the Doctrine of Devils?

Presumptuous Sinner, stand and tremble. If the Word of God be not a lie, If
the Holy Jesus came not to build, but to destroy the Works of the Devil,
there is no hope for thee, but if thou continuest thus thou must perish for ever.

Who shall bring thee into the Holy City? who shall intercede and appear before
God for thee? Will Christ do it? will he ever bring up the Servants of the
Devil, and set them before the Throne of God, and say concerning them, These
are my Redeemed Ones? These Liars, these evil Beasts, these slow Bellies, these
Wantons, these Earthworms, these blind and brutish Souls, these Rebels that
all their lifetime set at naught all my Counsels, and rejected my Salvation,
these are mine, I pray thee set the Crown upon their Heads, for they are
worthy? Will Christ ever present such a Brood as these to his Father? Will he
plead for entrance for such as these? Can thou imagine that Christ would not
blush and be ashamed, to bring such an unclean thing as thou art before his
Father at last, and say, This is my Child, I pray thee let him live in thy
sight? Will he say to the Father, O that Ishmael might live before thee? that
these Bondmen, and Bastards, and Belials, that never knew thee, nor cared for
thee, that never minded any such thing as Religion and Godliness in the World,
but mocked and scoffed at all that did, that would never be persuaded to seek
the Lord, or serve the Lord, but all their life long, gave themselves up to
serve their Lusts and the Devil, Let there be an entrance for these into the
Everlasting Kingdom? as black as they are, and as resolute as they were, never
to be washed and made white with the Blood of the Lamb, yet they are mine, take
them in. Sinner, if it were possible that Christ should thus plead for thee,
(if thou be found in that day in the case that now thou art) by all the Power
and Interest he has in Heaven, he could not prevail for thee. He might as well
prevail for Cain and Judas, yea, for Beelzebub himself, with all those black
Legions which are already in Hell, and fetch them up from the Deep to sit upon
Thrones of Glory, as ever he could prevail for thee. It Is against the
determinate Counsel and Purpose of God, against the Design and Tenor of the
Gospel of Grace; Christ had never any Commission from his Father, to save or
speak one word for any one Soul that lives and dies in his sins.

Objection.
But I will repent and turn from my Sins hereafter; how-ever I live now, I do
not mean to die so, I will reform and amend my ways, and then I shall have
Mercy.

Answer.
This also is thy Presumption; Thou neither wilt nor can. Thou will repent
thou say, but how long have thou said so, and yet the time comes not. When
will thou? Can thou repent when thou will? Either thou can, or thou can
not; If thou can, why not now? Is it too soon for thee to be wise, and to be
happy? Can thou spare God, and his Grace and Favor, till hereafter? Have
thou not enough of the Devil yet? Art thou content to be his Bond-slave, to be
made such a Fool and a Beast by him, yet awhile longer? Do thou choose to
leave thy Soul in hazard of Eternal Fire, for a few days more? If thou were
hungry, or naked, or harbourless, would thou say, it is time enough yet to
have Bread or Clothes, or an House to put mine head in? If thou were sick of
the Stone, or the Gout, or the Colic, would thou say, Let me lie a while, a
little more torment, a few more of these Pangs and Gripes? It Is more madness
than all this, to say, Yet a little longer for Sin, and the Curse of God, and
under the Power of the Devil.

If it be not in thy power now to repent, then how dare thou presume on an
after-Repentance? Will it be more easy hereafter, when thy Sin is grown
stronger, and thy Soul is grown weaker, and thine Heart harder, and put farther
off from Repentance? I will return and step over to Christ at last. It Is all
one as if thou should say, I will run from mine House, and my Home, and my
Friends, as far as I can, all day, but I mean to step home again at night. Why
Man, thou art a days journey from home, and can thou step back in a minute,
what thou have been running out all the day? Have thou been running from Christ
all thy Life long, and yet is there but a step betwixt thee and him? Thou have
been hampering thy self in the Net, and tying thy self to the Threshold of the
Devil; have been still knitting Knot upon Knot, all along thy time, to make thy
self sure to him; and can thou unravel in an hour the Webs thou have been
weaving, the Knots thou have been tying all thy life long? It Is true, it is not
impossible; the Divine Grace may help at the last; but it is a strange thing,
and so exceedingly unusual, that it is utterly improbable, that thou that have
been sinning all thy life, in Presumption upon Repentance in thy last hour,
should not then find it flying as far from thee, as thou do now from it.

Presumptuous Sinner, thou that go on in thy Sin, and countest upon
Repentance at last, it is even such another piece of folly, as to count upon
Mercy at last without Repentance: Thou may almost as well conclude, that God
will pardon thee though thou never repent, as that God will give thee Grace to
repent at last, who wilt not now accept of it.

And thus you have the Grounds and Reasons why Men Fear not; It is from their
Ignorance, Unbelief, and Presumption.

III. The Grounds and Reasons why we should Fear.
These are such as follow;

1. We have reason to Fear because of our Ignorance. Men's Ignorance is the
reason why they Fear not, (as before) and yet it is a great reason why they
should Fear. Who have so great reason to fear as the Blind? Every Bush may be a
Thief, every Sheep may be a Wolf, every Lamb may be a Lion; for ought he sees
to the contrary, every step may be into the Ditch, or into the Fire, or into
the Water; wherever he stands, or sits, or dwells, he knows not who or what
may be near him; and have not such Men reason to Fear? Particularly by reason
of Ignorance.

1. We know not our way. 2. We know not the Dangers that are in our way.
1. We know not our way. John 12.35. He that walks in darkness, knows not
whither he goes. Whither art thou bound Soul? Thou art a Traveller, but to
what City, to what Country art thou traveling? O, I am going to Canaan, to
the New Jerusalem, I am traveling Heavenwards. But do thou know the way to
that good Land? Some of the most ignorant will answer, as Christ said to his
Disciples, Wither I go I know, and the way I know; when the truth is, they
neither understand the one nor the other.

The way to God, though it be a strait way, and leads directly on by a line,
yet it is hard to hit upon. If I were to give but one general direction for
finding the way to Heaven, this should be it; Take your first turning upon the
right hand, and then keep strait on, without turning either to the right hand
or to the left. The way that thou art now going is to Hell, but there is a
turning on the right hand just before thee; Repentance, which is our turning
out of the way of Death, into the way of Life; take that turning, and then turn
no more, but keep strait on to the end of thy Life.

But as strait a way as the way of Life is, it is not so easy to keep us in
it. There are many turnings out on either hand; and at every Turning stands a
Deceiver, calling to Passengers as they go, Turn in hither, this is the way,
walk in it. The Pharisee stands at one Turning, and says, This is the way, The
Law of Carnal Commandments, the formal and superstitious observation of the
Externals of Religion. The Hypocritical Zealot stands at another, and says,
This is the way, The Spirituals of Religion, believe in Christ, love God, and
then live to thy self. The Sectary, of whatsoever Sect he be, says, Here is
Christ, this is the way of Life, turn in hither, be one of Us and thou shall do
well. The Flesh stands and cries, Hearken to none of these, they are all blind
Guides, and will lead thee into their own Ditch; come take this great and
beaten Road in which thy Forefathers have gone before thee; Follow the Wise
Men, and the Learned Men, and those multitudes that thou see going before
thee; Trust in the Mercy of God and trouble thy self no farther. And the Devil
stands at every one of these Turnings; and if he can but persuade thee to take
one of them, it comes much alike to him which it be.

Now what shall a poor ignorant Soul do in this case to hit the right, when
there are so many false ways? He does not know the way himself, and he is like
to meet with so many false Guides, how can he but Fear he may be misled and
lost?

It fares with these Ignorant Souls, as with the Hosts of the Syrians, that
were going to Dathan to slay Elisha, 2 Kings 6.19. Elisha smites them with
blindness, and then leads them whithersoever he pleases. Out he goes to them
and tells them, This is not the way, neither is this the City, come along with
me and I will bring you to the Man whom you seek, but he led them to Samaria.
This blind Host thought they had been right, and going to Dathan; but when
their eyes were opened, they saw themselves betrayed into Samaria, into the
hands of their Enemies. Poor blind Soul, thy hope is Heaven, that is thy
journeys end, thy Home to which thou say thou art traveling; and thou
perswadest thy self thou art in the way thither, but for all this thou may
be mistaken, thou may be going to Samaria, to Sodom, to Hell and not to
Heaven, thou art in darkness, and know not whither thou go; thou do not
know thy way, how then can thou but fear whether thou art in the right way or
the wrong?

2. By reason of Ignorance, we know not the dangers in our way. If we have some
apprehension that the way is dangerous, yet we know not in particular where the
danger lies, and so, ere we are aware, may fall into it. Some young Travelers,
though they be told they be going a dangerous Road, yet know not the dangerous
Places, nor the dangerous Persons that they fall upon; a Thief starts up out of
a Bush where they never suspected him, and when he comes, by his fair Language
and Carriage, they take him for a Friend, and suspect not he comes upon any
evil Intention, till their loss too late teach them what he is.

What harm is there in such a vain fashion, in such a questionable recreation,
in Cardings, Dicings, Dancings? What harm is there in a little carnal Mirth, or
in vain and merry Company? they be not Drunkards, nor Swearers, nor Adulterers;
there is nothing amongst them but honest mirth and pleasantness, what hurt is
there in that? why, what harm is there in falling among Thieves? what harm is
there in being robbed of all thou have? have thou never been a loser by such
friendly Thieves? have thou lost none of thy precious Time amongst them, which
thou could ill spare? nay, have they not stolen away thy heart? It may be
thou have found thou were of a better Spirit, when thou came amongst them,
thou had some sense and savor of God and Religion upon thine heart, and some
holy seriousness and tenderness; and when thou returnest, thou see it is lost,
thou have left all thy Religion behind thee. Is this no harm; when thou had
been served so once, would thou be content to be served so again?

If thou had a cup of pleasant Wine before thee, and one should tell thee,
Take heed, there is poison in the Cup, would thou say, what harm is it if
there be? If one should meet thee in a Wood or a Desert, and should offer thee
Money, or Pleasure, or whatever thou will; if thou will be ruled by him, and
do what he would have thee; and a Friend should tell thee, this may be the
Devil that comes to truck with thee for thy Soul? would thou say, what harm
is it if it be the Devil? what harm will it be to take his Money or his
Pleasure?

Why this may be the case; In all those little things (as thou countest them)
there may be poison in the Cup, there may be the Devil in the Company; the
Pleasures that are before thee, the Money that is before thee, these may be the
price the Devil is offering thee for thy life. May it be so? I, but I do not
think it is so, my Soul may be safe enough for all that; why therefore fear that
there may be such danger, and you never know or suspect it.

Nay, this Devil lies still in wait, not only in those places and ways, which
look like suspicious places and suspicious ways; but he is everywhere at hand,
even where he is least suspected. When could Men think themselves more secure
from the Devil, than when they are with God in Duties and Ordinances? But does
he never meet them there? Has the Devil never met thee in thy Closet, or in
the Congregation of the Lord? How is it at this very hour? Now that we are come
together before the Lord, now that the Lord is instructing us, and warning us
of the danger we are in; Is there not one standing behind, and out of sight,
either stealing away your hearts from minding the Warnings, or else
contradicting the Word of the Lord? Come, ccme, these are but words and
conceits, the Devil is far enough off, thou art in no such danger of him; are
there no such whisperings in none of your ears at this time? Why, whose Voice
is this? you little think whose it is; It Is the Devil that thus speaks, to the
end you may lose this Warning, and so he may have his advantage upon you. Lord
open the eyes of these Men, (to use that Prayer for you, which the Man of God
did for his Servant, 2 Kings 6.17.) So the Lord opened his eyes, and he saw all
the Mountains full of Angels, Chariots of Fire, and Horses of Fire. If God
should so open our eyes, I trust we should see this House full of the Angels of
God ministering to us, but withal we should see this House full of Devils
attempting to mischief us; a Devil at every Ear, a Devil at every Heart, trying
his skill to stop the one and harden the other, from receiving this Word of the
Lord. We are never an one of us more secure, than Joshua the High Priest, of
whom we read, Zech. 3.1. That when he was standing before the Lord, Satan stood
at his right hand to resist him. You Will say again, it may be, you do not think
it is so, why therefore Fear, that the Devil should be so near, and so busy
with you, and you neither understand, nor will believe it though it be told
you. Such Ignorance is cause enough of Fear.

If any of you should have been told, ten or twenty years ago, how the Devil
would serve you, how he would hinder any word of Counsel or Instruction from
prospering with you, how he would hold you under this Ignorance of God, and
hardness and impenitence of Heart; you would have been like enough to answer, I
hope not, I hope to get more of the knowledge of God, I hope God will bring me
to Repentance one time or other, I hope his Word will prosper with me. And yet
you see how it is, he has sufficiently played the part of a Devil with you, you
were not so blind, or so dead, or so hard in your hearts many years ago, but
you are every way as bad or worse at this day; and because you had not this
foresight, to discern that thus it might be, had you not the more reason to
Fear it would be so?

And what say you now as to the time to come? If it should be said unto you at
this day, He that has dealt thus by you hitherto, will be like enough to deal
as bad or worse by you, to the end of your days, so that you shall never be
brought to Repentance, nor ever recover your selves out of the snares of the
Devil; will you yet again say, I hope not, I fear it not? that very word is
enough to make you tremble. If the God of this World had not blinded your
Minds, he could never have thus hardened your Hearts.

If you that have known Christ, and have been in Christ, many years ago; If
some of you should have been told, that if you looked not the better to it, the
Devil would meet you at the very threshold of Christianity, and hold you there
from making any farther entrance in, would keep you Babes and Infants in the
Grace of God, that he would keep you all this time, so weak in the Faith, so
cold in your Love, so barren in your Life, that all this while you should have
gotten no more victory over this World, and the fleshliness of your Minds and
Hearts, nor no more intimate acquaintance with God and your own Souls than some
of you have at this day; If when you had been told, you were in danger of being
served thus; If you had then answered, I do not Fear it, I should have made
bold to tell you, You do not know what a Devil he is with whom you had to do;
and now that you may know him better, by observing how he has dealt by you
hitherto, you will at length, I hope, learn to Fear.

What if the Devil should now appear to you in some bodily monstrous shape,
would it not fright you? Why, you may see his foot, though you do not see his
face; you may see him in what he has done in his temptations of you, and the
unhappy success of them upon you, in that ruinous state your Souls are hereby
in; and surely, Friends, to those that understand him, The Devil in a secret
temptation, is more formidable than the Devil in an Apparition; the prints of
his Hoofs, are a more dreadful sight than the Horns of his Head.

2. Another reason why we should Fear is, because of the deceitfulness of our
Hearts. Whatever our dangers are from without, whatever designs or devices
the Devil or the World have against us, yet if all were true within us, if our
Hearts were true to us, our hazard were not so great; but, says the Prophet,
Jer. 17.9. The Heart of Man is deceitful above all things. So that we may not
only say with the Prophet, Micah 7.5. Trust ye not in a Friend, put not
confidence in a Guide; but with Solomon also, Prove. 28.26. He that trusts his
own Heart is a Fool. The deceitfulness of the Heart stands; 1. In its
Treachery. 2. In its Subtilty.


1. In its Treachery. The Heart of a Man is false to it self, it is like the
Devil, a lying Spirit, there is no believing it whatever it speaks. It Is full
of all guile, and will, if left to it self, betray it self into the hands of
its Enemies.

2. In its Subtilty. It is a crafty Heart, it has many plots and devices to
deceive; Prove. 19.21. There are many devices in Man's Heart. It has much of
the Devil in it; not only of the falsehood of the Devil, (as before); It is a
lying Spirit; nor only of the uncleanness of the Devil, this also is the wicked
one; nor of the malice of the Devil, It is the Enemy; but of the cunning of the
Devil, of the subtilty of the Serpent, This Serpent also is more subtle than
all the Beasts of the Field. It Is true, it is also a silly Heart, easy to be
beguiled; it is so subtle as to beguile, and yet so silly as easily to be
beguiled; like those false Teachers, 2 Timothy 3.13. Deceiving, and being deceived.

The great and most mischievous deceits of the Heart, are its self-deceivings,
Jam. 1.22. deceiceiving your own selves; and verse. 26. deceives his own heart.
God cannot be deceived, and if Men be deceived in us, there is not so very much
in that; but the most mischievous deceits, and which are most to be feared, are
its deceiving of it self.

1. God cannot be deceived; He is the searcher of the Heart, Jer. 17.10. he
knows what is in Man, better than the Spirit that is in him. God is greater
than our Hearts, and knows all things. Our Hearts can tell us more of
ourselves, than all the World can tell us; but God can tell us more of us, than
we of our selves. He has a Key to every Chamber, a Window into every Corner, a
Candle to search into our inmost parts. All things are naked and open before
him, with whom we have to do, Heb. 4.13. He sees all that is lodging in us; all
the Lusts of the Heart, yea, and all the Thoughts of the Heart are open to his
Eye. Jer. 4.14. How long shall vain thoughts lodge within you? He sees what
there is a doing within us. What good the Heart is at any time a-doing; any
good desires that are a-working, any gracious designs that are going in the
Heart; he sees what evil there is a-doing; an evil Motion cannot wag, a Lust
cannot stir, but his eye is presently upon it. Isa. 1.16. Put away the evil of
your doings [from before mine eyes], that is, put it quite away, cease to do
evil; if it do but continue, though never so much in the dark, yet it cannot be
hid from mine eyes.

What are these hearts of ours often a-doing in secret, which no others, and it
may be not our selves take notice of? When our eyes are closed, our hands are
quiet, our tongues are silent, God knows what there may be doing within. There
may be devilish devices contriving within, there may be dark counsels beneath;
Heart may be Swearing, or Lying, or Stealing, or Coveting, or committing
Adultery, whilst there is no noise of any such thing without. Yea, whilst the
Tongue is praying, the Ears are hearing, the Eye is lift up to Heaven, the
Heart may be in Hell, or on Earth, in the Field, in the Shop, in the Market, or
who knows where; but God's Eye is upon it.

Friends, Who knows where our hearts are, or what they are a-doing at this
hour? It may be, now God is a-preaching to you the Doctrine of Holy Fear, of
Holy Watchfulness and Circumspection; some of your hearts may be un-preaching
all that God speaks; may be preaching Liberty, Licentiousness, Slothfulness,
Security to you, and telling you, there is no such danger, and no such need of
Fear as has been preached unto you.

Or if they do not contradict the Word that the Lord has spoken, yet it may be
they divert you from minding it, by telling you some impertinent Stories about
other things; filling your heads with your business or pleasure, cutting you
out your Work for to morrow. Look inward, Friends, see if you can find your
Hearts within, or whether they be not gone abroad you know not whither. But
wherever they are, or whatever they are doing, the Eye of the Lord is upon
them; Men may dissemble, and deal deceitfully with God, but they cannot deceive
him.

2. If they deceive Men, it is not so greatly considerable. Though that may be
our wickedness too. If we hide our selves from others, if we be better, or if
we be worst than they apprehend us to be, there is not so much in that. The
Heart is cunning at this also in deceiving of Men; by palliating evil
intentions, with fair and specious pretenses; by seeking them out corners to
sin in, waiting for the twilight, or the darkness to be a covering for them; by
smooth words and fair speeches, beguiling the Hearts of the simple, by a kiss
of the Mouth, when there is war in the Heart, by putting the best side outward,
putting on the clothing of a Sheep upon a Wolf or a Bear, the face of a Saint
to cover the Soul of a Devil.

What is the Hypocrites Praying, or Fasting, or Alms, or savoury Language and
Discourse? What is all this for? It Is but the Clothing his Heart has provided
him, to advance and set him up in the opinion of others? it is to serve his
pride or his covetousness, and to hide the poverty and rottenness which is
within, out of sight. Beloved, are there none of us guilty upon this account?
Whose Religion, and the Exercise thereof, are a mere carnal Design, whose
Duties are a mere Device to beguile Men into a good Opinion of us, to raise up
or keep up our Reputation amongst them? Is it not thus with some of us?

Soul, what have thou been doing to day? O, I have been Praying, and Hearing,
and Fasting, or keeping a Sabbath to the Lord. No, thou lie, thou have been
juggling, and cheating, and deceiving of Men. If these have been the Work of
thy Tongue, or thine Ears, or thine Eyes, to pray, to hear, to praise the Lord;
thine Heart has found other work to do, it has been making a Garment of these
Prayers and Praises to dress up it self in, thereby to commend and set it off
before the Spectators; or it may be, to hide or carry on some treacherous or
wicked Design, which needed such a covering.

The Heart is thus busy to deceive Men, but still its greatest and most
mischievous deceitfulness, lies here, in deceiving it self. It is an horrid
wickedness to deal deceitfully with the Lord, to dissemble and lie unto God. It
is folly to be false to him who we know will discover the cheat and its highest
impiety. What is Iniquity, if Hypocrisy be not? And what Hypocrisy like
mocking or lying unto God? It is Men's great sin to deal deceitfully with Men;
But that which I would now lay before you, as a special reason why we should
Fear our hearts, is their self-deceivings; And how much Fear should be upon us,
upon this account, will appear when we have considered these three things.

1. About what Men's Hearts deceive them. 2. By what Men's Hearts deceive them.
3. Of what Men's Hearts deceive them.
1. About what do Men's Hearts deceive them? And that is about that they are
most deeply concerned to mind or regard. Particularly, 1. About Matters past,
in their self-reflections and reckonings. 2. About matters present, in their
Judgments or Opinions of their present case. 3. About matters to come, or their
Determinations and Resolutions for the future.


1. Men's Hearts deceive them, about matters past, in their self-reflections and
reckonings. It may be sometimes an eye may be cast back upon what is past, and
such a word may be heard within, Soul, what have thou done? how have thou lived
all thy time hitherto? what Evil have thou done, or what Good have thou done?
The Heart presently makes its return; and though it has not the Conscience,
will make bold with the words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4.4. I know nothing by
myself, I know no hurt that I have done; or it may be, like those unfaithful
Officers, who bring in their presentment, Omnia been, it will answer, I have
done all things well, I have lived an harmless and an honest life. The little
good that has been done, looking on it by a false Glass, it sees it double to
what it is; every Mite is a Shekle, ever Shekle is a Talent; here it will be
sure to over-reckon: And all the Evils that have been done, for an hundred or a
thousand, it takes the Bill and writes down ten, or it may be but one, and that
a little one; and perhaps it buries them all in the land of forgetfulness. As
Sin had an Act for Toleration before, so it must now have an Act of Oblivion.
And by this hiding of Sin it comes to pass, that Repentance also is hid from
Men's eyes; No Man repented, nor said, what have I done? Jer. 8.6. The
not-saying what have I done, much more the saying, I have done nothing amiss,
will be a Bar against Repentance; And that is the usual issue of this falsehood
of the Heart, about matters past, it holds under Impenitence.

2. Men's Hearts deceive them about Matters present, or in their judgment of
their present states. What art thou? a Child of God, or a Child of the Devil? a
Believer, or an Unbeliever? a sound Believer, or an Hypocrite? Men's hearts will
be civil with them, and give them good language; A Child of the Devil, a
Reprobate? These are hard words that will not be born, and shall not be
uttered; whether it speaks true or no, it will be sure to speak good to them.
O, a Child of God no doubt, an honest, and therefore an happy Man. Though
perhaps it neither knows what God is, or what a Child of God means, nor what
the difference is betwixt the Children of God and the Children of the Devil.

A faithful Heart will be (as I said before) a self-suspecting Heart, and such
it should be. The Word tells us, there is Chaff in the Floor as well as Wheat,
there are Tares in the Field as well as good Corn. Now when the question is
put, which is the Chaff, who are the Tares? Men's Hearts should answer, as the
Disciples did, when Christ told them there was a Traitor among them, Mat.
26.21. they all answered. Lord is it I? Lord is it I? Men and Brethren, there
are Infidels among you, there are Hypocrites among you; If I should speak thus
from the Lord to this Congregation, this Question should run even through the
whole Company; Lord is it I? am not I an Hypocrite? am not I one of these
Unbelievers? But what do your Hearts say to you? O, I thank God it is not I, I
am none of them; Hypocrites there are, but my Soul is upright. If a whole
Congregation should be thus spoken to one by one, may be some of the best among
them, that had least reason to suspect themselves, would cry out, Lord, is it
I? I doubt I may be an Hypocrite, I fear how it may be with me; but for the
most, and possibly the very worst among them, they would never stick to answer,
I am none of them, I thank God I have an honest Heart, and am upright before
God. Whence comes this now to pass? Why, that Heart of thine has played the
Devil with thee, and deceived thee.

3. About Matters to come. If the case be so plain, that the naughtiness of the
Life past, and the unsoundness of the present state cannot be hid, then the
Heart promises better things de futuro. I Will look better to it hereafter,
though I cannot at present, yet after a while I mean to become a new Man; stay
but a while, and I will be sober; stay but a while, and I mean to have done
with this vain or worldly Life, and to live in all things as becomes a
Christian. Thus it promises, and its Promises must be taken. If I turn at last,
'twill be well enough, and turn I will shortly, I mean no other; and this must
satisfy and be instead of present Repentance. How much credit there is to be
given to such a Promise, the experience of many sufficiently tells. But though
it has been a known Deceiver, yet still it is trusted.

You that profess Religion, that own Christ, and hold Communion with his
Saints, and are visibly walking in the way of Righteousness; If you should be
asked, How long will thou hold this course, will thou hold out to the end? To
day thou art with Christ, but where will thou be tomorrow? Now with the
Disciples, but will thou never go over to the Scribes and Pharisees? Thou
may feel the smart of Christianity, thou may become a Reproach and made a
Prey. The Shepherds may be smitten, and the Flocks may be scattered; will thou
not then forsake Christ, and run over to the Tents of the Uncircumcised? God
forbid, says the heart presently; Turn from the Holy Commandment, deny Christ?
No, though I die with him, I will never deny him. I, but there was one spoke as
much before you, 'twas the word of Peter's Heart, Mat. 26.35. And yet you know
what followed; Consider him, and fear how it may be with you.

2. By what will our Hearts deceive us? By any thing in the World; there is
nothing comes a-miss to them, but some evil use or other they can make of it,
either to entice to Sin, or to harden against Repentance, or to lay a-sleep in
Security, or to build us up in Presumption. The Heart is such an Adversary,
that can fight at any Weapon; such a Mountebank, that can make its Composition
of any Ingredients, that can make a Poison of any Medicine, some way or other
it can make use of any thing, to serve it in its deceiving work.

By what did Eve's Heart deceive her? By an Apple. By what did Achan's Heart
deceive him? By a Wedg of Gold.. By what did Sampson's Heart deceive him? By a
Whore. By what was Esau deceived? By a Mess of Pottage. By what do poor Men's
Hearts deceive them? By their Want and Penury. By what do rich Men's Hearts
deceive them? By their Abundance and Variety. By what do evil Men's Hearts
deceive them? By their Lusts they are drawn aside and enticed. By what do good
Men's Hearts deceive them? Sometimes even by the Good that is in them. The Heart
of Man can make a Snare of every Creature, Condition, Relation, or Comfort, can
make a Net for Souls of the coursest or of the finest Thread; can undo them, by
their Friends and by their Enemies, by their Prosperities and by their
Adversities, by their Sins and their Rigthousness. Where-withal may this Man be
enticed to Sin, to neglect Christ and his Soul? Some Men's Hearts find that a
Harlot will do it; others, that a drunken Companion will do it; others, that
nothing but Gold and Silver will do it; others, that applause will do it; some
that Idleness, others that Business, some that Friends, others that Enemies;
some that Prosperity, others that Affliction, will be the likeliest
Temptations; and accordingly it manages its deceiving work.

Our Hearts can deceive us by the best we have, by our Virtues, by our Duties,
by our Privileges; and this is often the most dangerous deceit. The more
generous the Wine in which thou receivest thy Poison, the more deadly the
Potion.

Some Hypocrites Hearts tell them they are sincere; But how can they make them
believe it? Why, if the Heart may not be believed for its own word, the Word of
God must be brought to witness this lie. Does not the Scriptures say, Romans
10.9. If thou confess with thy Mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe in thy Heart
that God raised him from the Dead, thou shall be saved? And do not I believe
the Resurrection of Christ from the Dead? Do not I confess and acknowledge it? I
be ieve it with all mine Heart, I confess it before all the World; and
therefore without doubt I am in a state of Salvation.

If this will not do, but the Heart perceives there must be more in that belief
than a notional Assent, there must be more in that Confession than a verbal
Acknowledgment, than its Virtues, and Duties, and Privileges; its Prayers, and
Hearings, and Alms; its Sobriety and Temperance; its keeping of Sabbaths, and
attending upon Ordinances, must all be called forth to testify: Am not I of
God? Am not I in Christ? Let my Prayers speak, let mine Alms speak, let my
Temperance, let my Patience, let my Sabbaths speak whose I am. I keep the
Sabbath, whilst others pollute it; I hear, whilst others forbear; I pray and
fast, whilst others neglect both, and therefore sure it must be well with me;
when yet it may be, the Man is ignorant of the Spirit, and a secret Enemy
against the Power and Purity of Religion all the while.

I might multiply Instances of the several sorts of the Heart's deceivings, and
show that there is nothing, but in some way or other, may be made use of to
beguile us.

3. Of what may our Hearts deceive us? Even of all we have. Of what did our
first Parents Hearts deceive them? Of their Portion in God, and their place in
Paradise. Of what did Esau's Heart deceive him? Of his Birthright and the
Blessing. Of what did Sampson's Heart deceive him? Of his Locks and of his
Life. Of what did that Fool's Heart deceive him? Luke 12.20. Of his Soul. Isa.
44.20. A deceived Heart has turned him aside, so that he cannot deliver his
Soul.

You that believe your selves Saints, are apt to think, that whatever you be
deceived of, yet your Souls are safe, and therefore that you have no such need
to Fear as other Men. But it may be you may be deceived in this, and this very
confidence, That thy Soul is safe, may prove its eternal loss. But if you
should come off at last, with the Salvation of your Souls, yet how many
desperate hazards do you run of losing them, by harkening to these evil Hearts?
How much of your time do they steal away, which was given you for the working
out your Salvation? How many Duties have they lost you? how many Ordinances
have they lost you, which the Interest of your Souls could ill have spared?
What a dead, and dark, and carnal, and loose Spirit have thou sometimes been
bewitched into, wherein God has been laid by, Soul has been forgotten,
Conscience has been laid a-sleep, and all care about the things of God, has
been swallowed up of the cares of this Life? Is it nothing to thee to be in
such a case? Does it not grieve thee to think whither thou art fallen? and art
thou not afraid what the issue may be? whether ever thy Soul may be lifted up
out of this Pit, whereinto it is sunk so deep in mud and mire? But if thou
should be asked now, Friend, how came thou in hither? who has led thee
into this Dirt? who has cast thee into this Pit? May be thou will be ready to
answer as Eve did, The Serpent beguiled me in; or as Adam did, The Woman
deceived me in; thou will find some else to father thy Faults upon; the Devil
deceived me into this case, the World deceived me in, evil Company deceived me
in; Like enough they did, But what could they all have done, if thine Heart had
not joined with them? The hand of Joab is in all this; thine Heart is the Joab,
that has dealt this subtly and deceitfully with thee.

1 Kings 22.20. Who will persuade Ahab (says the Lord that be may go up and
fall at Ramoth Gilead? I will go (says the Devil) I will persuade him. But
wherewith will thou persuade him? I will be a lying Spirit in the Mouth of his
Prophets; Go up and prosper, go up and prosper, that shall be the word that
shall do it. There Is no fear of falling at Ramoth, thou shall prevail against
thine Enemies, and return a Conqueror. If it shall be said in like manner, who
shall persuade this foolish Man to go on his evil ways, that he may fall and
perish? I will go, says his Heart, presently, I Will be the Devil to persuade
him; But wherewith will thou persuade him? O, I Will be a lying Spirit within
him. I Will make him believe he shall prosper, and have peace in his way, he
shall not fall, nor shall hurt come unto him.

Go, says God, to the Devil, and take heed, he says not so to that false
Heart of thine; Go, thou shall persuade, and thou shall prevail. Thou shall
entice this idle Person, thou shall harden this vain or this careless Person,
and he shall hearken to thee, he shall follow thee till he fall and perish.

Christians, we have every one of us such an Heart as this, that is too ready
to go upon such a wretched Errand. Have we not suffered much by it is treachery?
Has it not often trip'd up our heels, or turned us out of our way? Has it not
betrayed us out of our Refuge, and led us aside after lying vanities? Though
Grace has been some security to us against it, yet has it not often been too
hard for all the Grace we have? Who is there of us that dares stand forth and
say, My Heart, I hope, is no such heart; It is better than to deal thus with
me; I dare trust it, it is a plain and honest heart, there is no deceit or guile
found in it? Is there ever a one of you that dare say thus? What complaints are
there everywhere heard against it, even amongst the best of Christians?] But O
what do Sinners hearts deceive them of? What a price is there in Sinners hands,
if they had an heart to it? There Is the Blessed Gospel before them, exhibiting
Christ, and Pardon, and Life to them; they have the Scriptures before them;
they have Sabbaths and Ordinances amongst them; but behold, they can make
nothing of them. The Gospel is opened, and yet it is hid from them; Christ is
preached, but it is not accepted by them; they can live ander the preaching of
the Word, be conversant at Prayers, Fasts, Sacraments, a whole Age together,
and get nothing by them; they can dwell by the Wells of Salvation, and get not
one drop of Water; live by the richest Mines, and get not a dust of Silver;
walk in the Sunbeams, and see never a gleam of Light; come into the
Storehouses, and yet starve for want of Bread; can get neither Grace nor
Knowledge, but remain blind and dead, under all that Light that has shined unto
them.

But how is it, Sinner, that it is thus with thee? Whom have thou to blame but
thine own Heart? This has been telling thee, either that thou have no need of
Christ, or his Grace, or that thou have time enough before thee; or else has
diverted thee from giving heed to the Word of Life, by finding thee so much
other work to do; and hereby thou see how it has left thee; It has hitherto
lost thee a Christ, lost thee a Gospel, lost thee Sabbaths and Ordinances, and
is just losing thee thy Soul. This Heart is it that would not suffer thee, when
thou have been commanded to accept of Christ, or deliver thy self up to him.
Any else that comes to demand it, thy Soul is presently delivered up. Let Lust
come and require, Deliver up thy Soul to me; Let thy Companions come and
demand, Deliver up thy self to us; Let the World, or let the Devil demand,
Deliver up thy Soul to me; let me have the rule and the government of it, and
up thou resignest it presently; any but Christ may have thee for asking.

Will the Men of Keilah deliver me up? said David once, 1 Samuel 23.11. Will they
Lord? or may I trust my self with them? Trust them not, says God, they will
deliver thee up. Do thou ask, will mine Heart deliver me up? deliver me up to
Lust, or to the World, or the snares of the Devil, or may I trust it? Trust it
not, it will deliver thee up. But to Christ it will not deliver thee up.

It will be telling thee, that Christ is an austere Man, and thou shall find
him an hard Master; 'twill show thee the Yoke and the Cross; How severe is his
Government? how short his Allowance? how hard will be the usage thou must
expect of him, or for his sake? And thereupon it will suggest, how much it does
befriend thee, in refusing to deliver thee up to him. It will never tell thee
of thy need of Christ, of the gain that will come in by him; thou must not be
suffered so much as to think of that; if thou turn aside at any time to commune
with him, or to look within the Vail where his Treasures lie, it calls thee off
presently, or throws in the World, its Cares or its pleasures upon thee, to
thrust out and turn thee aside from all such thoughts, lest he should gain thy
consent and good liking. Thus thine Heart has served thee all thy days, so
that hitherto thou will none of Christ; and thus it is like to serve thee to the
end of thy days, till there be no Christ, nor Mercy, nor Salvation to be had
for ever.

And thus have I given you a short hint of the deceitfulness of the Heart; and
is not such an Heart to be feared? Is such an Heart to be trusted? an Heart
that will deceive you, about every thing that you are concerned to mind; about
matters past, present, and to come; that will neither let you consider what you
have done, nor know what you are, nor think what is like to become of you
herafter? that will deceive you, by every thing you have to do withal; that can
make every Relation, every Companion, every Condition, every Comfort, every
Cross, every Creature, a Gin and a Trap to take your Souls? that will deceive
you of all that ever you have; that like those Locusts and Caterpillars (the
Plagues of Egypt) will not leave any green thing in you? that will deceive you
of your selves, of your lives; of that Christ, of that Gospel, which is all you
have for Eternity; that will lie at you every day, every hour, as Delilah at
Sampson, to betray you into the hands of the Philistines, and cast you into the
eternal Prison? Have you such an Heart? have every one of you such an Heart?
have you proved by so long experience, what mischief it has done you already,
and yet not afraid?

O Christians, let us get more acquaintance with these Hearts of ours; if we do
not fear them, it is because we know them no better. Let us observe them daily
at their work, what colors and fair pretenses they have to palliate and lead
unto Sin, what shifts and excuses they make for the neglect of Duty; what
delays and puttings off, from the minding our necessary and most weighty
concerns; and what wiles and devices they have to lull us and hold us fast
asleep, whilst our opportunities of obtaining Mercy, steal by us and are lost.
Know this Heart of thine more thoroughly, and then tell me if thou do not fear
it?

If there be an Absalom in the Court, a Sheba in the City, a Judas in the
Company, a Thief in the House, is there not cause of fear? Thou have a Judas in
thy Breast, a Thief in thy Bosom, thou have not an Heart within thee, if thou
have not a mortal Enemy that seeks thy life.

As I said before, so I say again, Study and observe your Hearts more; believe
the Truth of what has been said; or if you will not believe your Ears, believe
your own Eyes, believe your Experiences and Observations, (if you have been so
wise as to make any Observations upon your selves). Indeed that is the reason
why we are so hard to believe, our Hearts are so bad, because we have no more
observed them: Have you observed, have you considered how they have dealt with
you? Who is it that has kept you back from Christ, and short of the Grace of
God? or at least, Who is it that has kept you so low and so barren, and such
aa ill Steward of that Grace which you have received, has not thine own Heart
had the great hand in it? Be not deceived, it is the same Heart still, and is
like to take the same course.

That which has hindered, does hinder thee; that which has deceived, does
deceive, and will deceive; thou can never be secure from it whilst thou
continuest in this World. Wherefore, O my Soul, since I cannot be out of
danger, let me never be out of fear. Let Fools be secure and at rest, but as
for me. Let me pass the time of my Sojouring here in Fear.

3. Another reason why we should Fear, is, because of the weight and importance
of that work which we have to do in the World. What is our Work here? wherefore
are we born, and live upon this Earth? It Is to serve the Lord in the saving of
our Souls. The Lord that made us, may and does require our whole Service; as
there is none besides him to whom we owe our Being, so is there none other to
whom we owe our Service. Him only shall thou serve, Mat. 4.10. And God has so
ordered the matter, that we cannot better serve our selves, than by serving of
him; this is the Work of God, which he requires of us, to work out our own
Salvation. Phil. 2.12. The best Men are the greatest self-seekers. It Is a piece
of self-denial, which God never requires of any Man, To neglect his own Soul.
God would have all Men to be saved, 1 Timothy 2.4.

There are two Lords that are served in the World; God and the Devil. The great
Service that the Devil has to be done, is to destroy Souls; his Name is the
Destroyer, Rev. 9.11. and his work is to destroy; and this is it which he
imposes upon all his Servants, to destroy every Man his own Soul. God is the
Savior, so called, Isa. 45.15. and his whole work that he has to be done by
his, is Salvation-work.

Friends, the first and great Service that God has for every one of you to do,
is to look well to those Souls of yours, to recover your selves out of the
Snares of the Devil, that you may obtain everlasting Salvation; if you can but
acquit your selves so in this World, that you get safe to Heaven when you die,
God will say to you, Well done, good and faithful Servant. It Is true, we have
every one of us more Souls than our own to look too; I not only Ministers
(whose special work it is) but every one should do what he can to save the
Souls of others; but our first Service is to look to our own Souls. Our
Charity, and so our whole care, must begin at home. Deuteronomy. 4.9. Take heed to
[thy self] and keep thy Soul, [thine own Soul] diligently. As Christ says,
Luke 16.12. He that will not be faithful in that which is another, who shall
trust him with that which is his own? May we not much more say here, he that is
not faithful in that which is his own, will be much less faithtul in that which
is another. He that serves the Devil in destroying his own Soul, is not like
to serve God in the saving of others Souls.

Well, this is your work you have to do in the World, To serve the Lord; And
this is the Service that God expects, That you save your own Souls. Whatever
you are faithfully doing this way, you are therein serving God. You may be
saving your Estates, and therein serve the Devil; you may save your Names, and
save your Lives, and therein serve the Devil; but when you are saving your
Souls, you are still serving the Lord. The working out of our Salvation, is not
only the business of our Religious Duties, but of all the Actions of our whole
course. We are not only to Believe, and Repent, and Hear, and Fast, and Pray
for our Lives, but to be carrying on our Salvation-Work in every thing we do.
As we may say, whether you Believe, or Repent, or Pray, or Hear; so also,
whether you Eat, or Drink, or whatsoever else you do, do all to the Glory of
God, and your own Salvation. Our future state, whether we are for Life or for
Death, is not to be determined by some few of our better Deeds, but by the
tenor of our whole course; look what thy Life is in this World, so shall thy
Judgment be.

We are here in this World, upon our good behavior for the other World; and
the short time we have here, is all we have for Eternity; our Everlasting Life
or Death, will be determined by this little inch of time. Do in your day the
Work you were sent into the World for, and you live and are blessed for ever;
spend your time in idleness, or impertinencies, live in the neglect of God or
your Souls, let your great Work be left undone, or but half-done, and done
deceitfully, and you die without remedy, die eternally.

And do you not yet see what cause you have to Fear? If you were doing any
thing of this World's Business, and knew your Life lay upon it, 'twould make
your hand shake. Psalm. 2.11. Serve the Lord with Fear. Phil. 2.12 Work out your
Salvation with fear and trembling. Why should we Fear? why should we Trembie?
Why, because there is so great a Work lying upon our hands. What if this Work
be done, and well done? Then you are made for ever. What if you neglect or
miscarry in this Work? Then you are lost irrecoverably. It Is a matter of Life
and Death that you are every day and hour upon; how can you think such a
thought without a trembling Heart?

What a mighty influence would this consideration have upon your Duties? When
you go to Pray, whether in the Closet, or in the Family, or in the
Congregation, were you persuaded that your eternal state were so much concerned
in it, would you not fear how you trifled in so great a Duty? and would not
this Fear command in all your Powers, to join in so important a Service? how
would it stand at the door, and keep out all those straggling thoughts, that at
such times use to be thrusting in? Would such hasty and cursory Praying, such a
flat and formal Devotion, which you ordinarily take up with then suffice you?
you would sooner sweat than sleep at Prayer, your Hearts would burn within you,
and not freeze, as they too often do; Tongue-Prayers, and Knee-Prayers, and
Eye-Prayers, would be of as little account with you, as they are with God; all
the Males in your Flock would be brought in, you would not dare to offer to the
Lord a corrupt thing. You would take your best time, and time enough, you would
put forth the utmost of your strength, you would not make your Souls to wait
the leisure of your Flesh, or to take its leavings. It must not then be what
you can spare from the World, what you can spare from your business or your
pleasures that will do the turn; your eating time, your sleeping time, your
working time, must be taken up this way, rather than want time for God and your
Souls. Do thou complain of sleepiness in Prayer, of wanderings in Prayer, of
want of time for Prayer? Think, Man, what Prayer is for; how much there is
depending on the faithful discharge of it; and see if this does not work such a
Fear upon thine Heart, as will both find thee time, and keep thee waking.

When you go to hear the Word, if you considered, I am now hearing for my Life,
the Lord God has brought me before him, that he may tell me words whereby I
may be saved; the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven are now opening to me; the
most High comes down to show me the Path of Life; that Word that falls from the
Preacher's Lips, is the Word by which I must be saved, and the Word by which I
must be judged; it is the Everlasting Gospel I come now to hear, which is all I
have for Eternity; I must stand or fall, live or die, according to the success
of this Word upon me. As this is the only Word of Life, so this may be the only
time of Life; God knows whether this may not be the last Warning, the last
Instruction, the last Tender of Grace and Mercy that I may have for ever;
whether my harkening to, or letting slip what I shall hear from the Lord this
day, be not that which must give the final determination of mine Everlasting
State. What would such thoughts, (did they sit close upon our Hearts, when we
come to hear the Word) what would such thoughts work? would they not command
thee, take heed how thou hear, give heed to the things thou hear, fear
how thou let them slip? Would a deaf Ear, a wandering Eye, a roving Imagination
be then endured by thee? Would thou then suffer, as ordinarily thou do,
those wandering Birds to catch up the incorruptible Seed as it falls upon thee?
would it not send thee home with a trembling Heart, at all such times when thou
have left all thou heardst behind thee?

Consider, Friends, where are you at this present? what makes you here this
day? Let me reason with you a little before the Lord; How is it that all your
Spirits are not standing upon the Watchtower, whilst the King of Glory passes
by? How is it that all your Ears, and Eyes, and Hearts, are not waiting for
him? why sit you here all the day idle? Do you not understand what Work it is
you are upon? O take heed to your selves, Salvation and Damnation are before
you, and one of the two you are certainly working out. Is it indifferent to you
which of the two it be? is it all one to please God or to provoke him? to get
you nearer, or to put you farther off from the Kingdom of God? What think you
of such praying, and such hearing as you content your selves with? Will the
living God be served with such spiritless Duties? Is Death your way to Life?
Are these dead and heartless Duties? Is this dead praying, and dull hearing,
that upon which you will venture your Souls? Will you pray your selves into
Hell? While you have in your hands the Key of the Kingdom of Heaven, will you
lock the Door with it, and shut your selves out? Whilst others are swearing,
and lying, and coveting, and cursing themselves to Hell, will you be hearing
and praying your selves thither? whither else will such dead Duties carry you?
certainly such blessing is as cursing, such hearing is as hardening the Ears,
such praying is as blessing an Idol. Will God regard Mockers? Will God be
served with Wind and Words? O tremble! fear lest you not only lose all your
Duties, but be irrecoverably lost by them.

Again, what an influence would this Consideration have upon all the actions of
your Life, if you understood and were sensible that all that ever you do, has
such a respect to your eternal state, that according to it, your final Sentence
will be. Wherever you are, whatever you are doing, you are serving God or
the Devil, you are working for Life or for Death. There are no indifferent
actions (considered, in individuo, and with their Circumstances) that make
neither one way or other, all our motions are either upward or downward.

Our Life is our Race, and every Action of our Lives is a step backward or
forward, our going in or out of our way. Nay, onr very doing nothing is doing
something; if our ease or rest be idleness, it is serving the Devil; if it be a
refreshing for our Work, it is serving God. We may be in a sense serving God
when we be a-sleep, and we may also by our sleep be serving the Flesh and the
Devil. We are ever either laying aside our Weights, or laying on more Weight;
we are making us Wings, or making us Chains; helping our selves on, or
hindering us in our way. We are in this World as Merchants trading for
Eternity. Our whole Life is a treasuring up good or evil for our selves against
the last day. We are always either buying or selling, buying the Truth of
selling our Souls; we are upon the Exchange every day, and hour, either
changing better for worse, or worse for better; every inch of our time, is our
Talent to trade withal, and we are still laying it out to our gain or our loss.

Our Lives are our Seed-time; we are still sowing to the Harvest; what we sow
in Time, we must reap in Eternity. Our Eating and Drinking, our Working and
Playing, our Talking and our Silence, will one way or other spring up to our
hands hereafter.

Do you understand this, Friends? Do you consider it? O what manner of Persons
should we then be, what wary and circumspect Lives should we live? Would not
this, if it were considered, dam up that stream of Iniquity that runs down
through all our course? Would our covetous practices, our fraudulent and
unrighteous dealings; would that lying and scoffing, that self seeking and
flesh-pleasing, which take up so much of our time; would this hold up the head
against such a sense of the influence they must have upon our eternal State?
Should we then spend so much of our time in doing wickedly, or doing nothing?
would it not find us other Work, and work enough for our Time, our Tongues, and
our Hands, and our Heads, and all our Powers? But we do not consider or
understand.

When you are walking in the vanity of your Minds, after the Lusts of this
World; what do you use to think of this? or do you think nothing of it? I, so
it is indeed, you will not then think what you are doing, but stand and pause
awhile; when you are serving your flesh, can you think now I am serving the
Lord, now I am working out my Salvation, now I am providing for my Soul, and
laying up against the time to come? Dare you say, now I am sowing for Eternity,
this is that which I would reap in the other World? This Mirth and this
Jollity, this Pride and this Idleness, this Laughter and these Lies; Let these
and the Crop they will bring forth, be my Harvest hereafter? Would not the
thoughts of such a Harvest, make you dread such a Seed-time.

Or else can you say, The time that I spend thus I can spare from my Soul, that
care's taken already, Christ is sure, Heaven is sure to me; Now for the flesh,
and mine ease, and my pleasure now for this present World, I have done enough
for that to come? Or else will you say, These days of my Vanity and
Earthliness, will, I hope, be left out of my Reckoning; my Prayers and my Alms,
the good that I have done is so much, that my evil Deeds and Days will be over
looked and past by?

But must not every Day, must not every Work be brought to Judgment? Does not
the Righteous and All-seeing God book down all? Is not the Sin of Judah
written, as well as their Tears and Duties? Is not every thing noted in his
Book? And must not all things that are written therein, be read in that day?
Can thou look on this, and not fear continually every day? 1 Pet. 1.17. If ye
call on the Father, who without respect of Persons, judges according to every
Man's Work, pass the time of your sojourning here in Fear. If you had to do
with a God that would never call you to a Reckoning, whether you served him or
not, or how much or how little you served him, or whom else you served besides
him; if you had to do only with such a God, the matter were not then so much
how you lived and spent your time: But if ye call on the Father, if you serve
such a God, who will reckon with every one of you, and for every thing you have
done, you had need look better to it; Pass the time, the whole time, of your
Sojourning here in Fear.

Beloved, if your own Souls were not so highly concerned, yet this
Consideration, That the Work of your Lives is, to serve the Lord, would work
you to Fear.

If you were upon some Service for a Prince, or a great Man of the Earth,
suppose it were but to make him a Garment, would you not fear how you sullied
it, or bungled upon it? Or if it were but to keep his Garden, would you not
fear how you let it run to ruin? What is this God whom you serve? Is he not a
great God, the King of all the Earth? Is he not an Holy God, and a Jealous God,
that looks to be sanctified, and to be the Fear and the Dread of all those that
serve him? Isa. 8.23. The Service of God is often expressed in Scripture, by
fearing of God. Cornelius, Acts 10.2. was said to be a Man fearing God; that
is, the same as a Man that served the Lord: And the Apostle exhorts, Heb.
12.28. That we have Grace in our Hearts, whereby we may serve God acceptably,
with reverence and Godly Fear. Thou servest the Lord, but would thou that thy
Service be accepted with God? Then serve him with Fear.

Therefore, to the end to hold this Fear upon you, I shall add this Counsel.

Through your whole course, and all the parts of it, carry this express Notion
upon your Hearts, That you are serving the Lord in all that you do. Do all you
do as the Servants of the Lord, and look on every Duty as the serving of him.
What the Apostle requires of the Servants of Men, is the Duty of every one of
the Servants of God; Col. 3.23, 24. Whatever you do, do it heartily [as] unto
the Lord, for ye serve the Lord Christ.

When you go to pray, think with your selves, this is a Duty which I ow to God.
I am going into my Closet, upon a Service I have to do for God there: When you
give an Alms, or when you teach or instruct your Families, think with your
selves, these are Services which I have to perform, not only to my poor
Brethren, to my ignorant Family, but I ow them to the Lord, and to him I will
perform them; I have a Service to do for God amongst the Poor, I have a Service
to do for God in my Family; God has bid me Feed the one and Teach the other,
and to whomsoever I do it, I Will do it as unto the Lord.

And in like manner, in all the matters of your Life, in the ordering of your
whole Conversation, let this be still in your Eye, and upon your Heart, God
has sent me forth as his Servant into the World; I have no business here but
for the most High; I am born for him, I am fed, I am clothed, I live for him;
all that ever I have are the Talents of my Lotd, committed to me to use and
improve for him. I am Debtor to no other, I am Servant to none else; whatever
goes out any other way, this is no less than unfaithfulness to him, whose I am;
and now I go bound for him; for his pleasure I was made, and to him I am
devoted; this Life of mine, and every day of it, and every breath of it, I
consecrate to the Lord; his Servant I am, and it is no Work for me, that I
cannot call serving the Lord.

What would such a Sentiment upon the Heart bring forth? What care, yea, what
watchfulness, yea, what fear would it produce? What, shall I serve the Lord
with that which cost me nothing? Shall cheap-Service, and easie-Service, and
lazy-Service, and eye-Service, be all that the Lord God shall have of me? I
dare not serve my Governor so, and how will my God take it? But what, shall I
divide my Service betwixt the Lord and any other Master? shall my Flesh be
served, shall my Pride be served, shall my Covetousness, shall Men be served?
shall this Heart, or this Time, or this Estate be divided betwixt the Lord and
them? How if the Lord find me in another Field, in another House, or upon other
Work, than whither he sent and appointed me? How if he find any of his Talents
wasted, his Goods conveyed away to another Master? how will he bear it? Yea,
how shall I bear it? Art thou not afraid, O my Soul, how this will be born, and
what a Reckoning thou may be brought to for it? O, let me fear to be such an
evil Servant, that I may not fear the evil Servant's doom; let me continually
fear, every day, that I may prevent the fear of the Reckoning-Day. Such a
standing Impression, would this Notion of our being engaged in Service for God,
kept constantly upon the Heart, produce.

This Notion, mingled with all our Thoughts, Duties, and Ways, and the Holy
Fear it will bring forth, will not only hold us to constant Service, but will
put us upon the highest and best Service. What is the Lord whom I serve? Is he
not one who looks for all I have, and is he not worthy of all I have? What an
honor is it to be the Servant of God, and what a terror to be none of that
number? He is the best Master, he is worthy, he is worthy of the very best I
have. Fear, and be ashamed, O my Soul, to put him off with any thing that is
not worthy of him. What will an ingenious Spirit fear, more than to be base and
unworthy.

Should you ask such a Person, Why are you so exact, and so tender, and so
circumspect in your way? Why are you so busy, and so studious, and so
laborious in your course? Why can you not, as well as others, take up with a
lower and more remiss way of Religion? O, I dare not be so unworthy; I am the
Servant of God, and through his Grace, I will serve him the best I can. He that
is most Holy, and most Circumspect, that keeps the closest to his Work and his
Rule, he is the best Servant to God; and as I am obliged, so I am resolved,
through the help of God, to do him the most Honor, and the best Service I can.
I should be a Wretch, a vile and unworthy Person, if I were otherwise minded.

The great God has but few Servants in the World; has he taken me into the
number of those few? O, what shall I render? how can I be sufficiently thankful
for that Grace? God has but few Servants in the World, and the fewer the more
serviceable have they need to be. The Devil has many Servants, he has those
that serve him in every House, in every Town, there are whole Countries that
are wholly peopled with the Servants of the Devil; and their Work is, to do all
the dis-service and dishonor they can to God; to cherish the Flesh, and foment
the Lusts thereof, to fill the World with wickedness, and to trample upon all
that is left of God in it. What multitudes has the Devil that serve him
everywhere, and how busy are they at their Work? God has but a few Servants,
and since he has made me one of them, I Will do him the best Service I can. Such
a blessed and quickening influence, would such abiding thoughts have upon all
the People of God.

As 'twould be on the contrary, If Sinners would carry this thought upon their
Hearts, I am every day serving the Devil, it would be a Bridle to hold them in;
so if People kept up such a thought, I am serving the Lord, 'twould be a Spur
to quicken them on. Such a thought upon Sinners Hearts, I am serving the Devil,
would strike such a fear, as would drive them quite backwards. The very same
fear, which would animate Saints, would strike Sinners dead in the Nest.

If a Sinner that is going to the Alehouse, would seriously consider, and ask
himself, Whither am I going, and upon whose Errand? And his Heart should
answer, I am going to the Alehouse to serve the Devil; the Devil has some
Servants at work there for him, at their Drinking-work, Swearing-work,
Scoffing-work, and I am going among them to help on the Devil's Work: And if
others that are serving their Covetousness, or their Pride, or their Envy, if
their Hearts should tell them, This also is serving the Devil; the Devil has a
great Work for thee to do, to damn that Soul of thine, and as many others as
thou can; The Devil would have thee to Hell with him, and hang up that Soul
of thine in Chains of Fire. This he cannot do, unless thou will put thine own
hand to the Work, and now he has brought thee to it; in the course thou art
now taking, thou art doing the Devil's Work, to destroy thine own Soul. Such
thoughts would put Sinners to a stand, or at least slacken their pace.

If the Devil should possess a whole Country of People, as he has sometimes
possessed some particular Persons, and should set them a pulling down their own
Houses, a burning their Corn and their Cattle, a tearing their own flesh, a
pulling out their own Eyes, a butchering their Children, a pulling out one
another Throats; who would no the afraid to go dwell in that Country, to be
hired to that cruel Work? Why, Sinners, it is worse work than this that the
Devil has set you upon, and you are now a-doing; He has set you on work to
stab every Man his own Soul, to strike in Darts through our Livers, to kindle
those Fires that will burn to the bottom of Hell, and to cast your selves
headlong into those Eternal Flames. Had thou such a thought as this upon thy
Heart, did thou but consider that this is it thou art doing, 'twould cool the
heat of thy Lust, and hold thee back, at least from much of that wickedness
thou art rushing upon.

And so it would be here, if Christians did consider what it is that they are a
doing, in their following Holiness and Righteousness, that they are herein
serving the Lord, and that in his recovering and saving Design; O how would it
provoke them on! How is it that thou art such a slow-belly, that thou art such
a drone, and such a slug in thy Work? Is he whom thou servest worthy of no more
than this? Pluck up thy Spirits Man, thou art upon Service for the God of the
whole Earth, and upon the noblest Service that thou art capable of; thou art
sent forth upon the same Service, for which the Son of God was sent into the
World, to save Souls, and to destroy the Works of the Devil; Jam. 5.20. If God
should have employed thee but in those lower Works, that Christ did for the
Bodies of Men, to open the Eyes of the Blind, to unloose the Tongue of the
Dumb, to cast out Devils, to heal the Sick, and raise the Dead; would thou
have been so unwilling, and so backward at such Works? Thou art upon greater
Works than these, to save thine own Soul, and those that see and hear thee.

God has made thee one of that Chosen Generation, that Royal Priesthood, that
Holy Nation, who are to serve him, by showing forth the Virtues of him that
has called them, 1 Pet. 2.9. To bear his Name, and to set forth his Praises in
the World; thou art set up as the Image of God, as the Epistle of Christ; thou
art sent forth as a Factor and Agitator for God, to negotiate for him in the
Earth; to bear up his Name, to propagate his Gospel, to enlarge his Kingdom;
Art thou not afraid to trifle in such noble Works?

Think, O my Soul, what it is thou art for, and for whom thou live; Shall I be
as the Ox that eats Grass, or as the Swine that lies in the Mud, and tell
the World, behold your King? This is the Image of your God? Shall the Epistle
of Christ be nothing else but a Blank or Blots? Shall the Factor for Heaven
have so much of his Occupation for Earth? Shall I teach Men to despise, and
pollute, and blaspheme that worthy Name, which I am entrusted to advance and
exalt? Shall any little that I do, suffice me in so great a Trust? Come on, O
my Soul, remember thou servest the Living God, and therefore let me do him the
best Service I can. Can thou be too Holy? Can thou be too Circumspect and
too Active? I may be too sluggish, and too silent, and too shie, and too
shamefaced; but can I be too busy, a too zealous for the Living God? Can I say
of my best, this is too much? Can I say of any thing less than my best, this is
enough? It Is the Lord God whom thou servest, fear to be unworthy. This is the
advantage of our carrying this thought upon our Hearts, I serve the Lord, it
will put us upon the best and highest Service.

Give me leave to add another Advantage, (though not of so proper consideration
here); This thought, whilst it provokes us to the highest, will yet comfort us,
touching the least and meanest of all our Services. Some poor weak Christians,
are apt to discourage themselves in all they do, from this, that it is so very
low and little that they do. I am a poor Creature, it is but little that I have
to serve the Lord withal, I am ignorant and of weak understanding, I have not
the Parts nor Gifts that others have; I might possibly serve the Lord better,
were it not for this Fear which is upon me; I am afraid to speak of God, or of
the Things of God; I am of slow Speech, and rude Language, I cannot express my
self to any purpose; I am ashamed of my teaching my Family, of my praying in my
Family; I do it so brokenly and confusedly, that I fear I do more hurt than
good in it.

I but, poor Man, as weak as thou art, and as weakly as thou do, what thou
do, if thou do what thou can, This is serving the Lord; and whether it be
little or much, if thou can but truly say, This is serving the Lord, thou
may be comforted in it.

If Sinners considered that their little Sins were serving the Devil, 'twould
make them afraid of the very least transgression. Some Sinners are not so great
Sinners as others, they are not guilty of those higher and more notorious
Crimes that some others are, and this quiets them and keeps off Fear from them.

Thou art no Drunkard, thou say, nor no Adulterer, nor no Blasphemer; I, but
do thou not live a carnal, vain, careless, earthly Life? and is not this
serving the Devil? Though thou do not serve the Devil in the Alehouse, or
the Whore-house; though thou do not serve the Devil with Oaths, and Curses,
and Blasphemies, yet is it not the Devil still thou servest? Thou servest thy
Covetousness, thou servest thy Pride, and thy sensual Appetite; thou neglectest
Christ and thy Soul, and is not this serving the Devil? Such a thought, upon
the most harmless of Sinners Hearts, yet I serve the Devil, would make him
afraid. Is it a light thing to serve the Devil? Though I be not numbered among
the chief of Sinners, though there be others worse than I, yet am not I under
the same Master? Though I be among the hindermost of the Company, yet am not I
one of them? This Life I live, is no serving God, and therefore it is doubtless
the serving of the Devil. Take heed, O my Soul, If the Devil can but hold thee,
'twill be all one, whether it be by greater or smaller Cords; the Devil is
dragging thee to Hell, and so he can but get the thither at last, it will be
upon the matter all one to him whether it be by greater or lesser Sins. Though
he cannot persuade thee to ride post into the Pit, yet if he can but toll thee
in, that shall suffice him, though it be but by a slower pace.

Now as such a thought, I serve the Devil, would afright the least of Sinners,
so will such a thought, I serve the Lord, comfort the least of Saints. But this
by the way.

4. Another Reason why we should Fear, is, because of the great Treasure we
carry about with us, whither-ever we go.

Christians are Travelers, and they travel with charge about them. This World
is a dangerous World, the Passengers through it are in danger of falling among
Thieves, which will spoil and rob them of their Treasure.

A Christian carries more Riches about him than the whole World is worth. He
has the whole Gospel within him, he has the two Tables of the Covenant, his
Heart is the Ark, in which they are laid up. He has Christ in him, the Fruits
of his Blood, his Pardon and Reconciliation; the graces and comforts of his
Spirit, his evidences for Heaven; all the Records of the gracious Transactions
betwixt God and his Soul, the Pawns and Pledges of Divine Love, the King's
Broad-Seal, and the Earnest for Glory; all the Income of his Faith, the Returns
of his Prayers, all that he has gotten, all the Manna he has gathered, the
Hidden Manna, the White Stone, with the New Name, he carries all his Riches up
and down with him, whither-ever he travels.

Have thou any Divine Light in thine Heart? any love for Christ, any zeal for
God and his Gospel, any Tokens of his Love, or Tenderness of his Honor? Is
there Peace, or Joy, or Hope within thee? All this thou art in danger of being
robbed and spoiled of.

This is the Design that Satan has upon thee, this is the Errand of every
Worldly Lust, of every Temptation, every Companion, every Carnal Relation,
every Change of Condition, every Carnal Pleasure, all thy Earthly Possessions;
the Devil has set them in ambush, and they lie in wait for thee, to rifle thee
and spoil thee of all that ever thou art worth.

Have thou never fallen amongst these Thieves, and suffered great loss by them?
Have thou been robbed, and art thou not afraid thou may again? Will not thy
loss make thee more wise and wary?

How many Instances have there been of secure and unwary Christians, who,
whilst they have been venturous upon Temptations, have trusted themselves
amongst their vain Companions, indulged themselves a more free, and jolly, and
easy, a more remiss, and flesh pleasing Life, or a more busy drudgery for
this World, have, (as to their sense at least) lost all they had for the other
World; Who when they have come a little to themselves, fall a mourning out
Naomi's bitter Song; Ruth. 1.20. Call me no more Naomi, but call me Marah; I
went out full, but I returned empty. Whilst mine Heart was tender, and mine Eye
jealous; whilst I kept my watch, and kept my distance from this World and its
Temptations; O, what Light, Love, Peace, Joy, did then shine upon and possess
my Heart? then I had a God, whom I could call mine own; then I had a Jesus, and
could lean upon my Beloved; then I could believe, love, serve, delight in,
enjoy, and praise the Lord.

But woe, woe to me, how is it now? Whilst I allowed my self a little more
boldness, with this Flesh and this World, I have even lost all ere I was aware.
I am fallen among Thieves, and what have they left me?

O mine Ease, my Pleasures, my Money, my Lands, which I have turned aside to,
how have you served me? Whilst I have been loving, and following, and serving
you, how have you rewarded me? Ah me, they have taken away my Lord, and I know
not where they have laid him. Grace is not, Peace is no more to me, a good
Conscience, where is it become? I can neither Believe, nor Love, nor Pray, nor
Hope, nor any thing else, but Fear and Lament. O had I feared always, this Fear
had never come upon me.

Christians, Are there no such Instances, no such Cases in the World? And is
there no fear that this may be any of your cases? Do not [you] also travel with
Charge? have you not a Treasure within you? What, have you been Professors so
long, Believers so long; have you been Hearing, and Praying, and Fasting, and
Laboring all this while, and have not gotten something you would be loath to
lose? And is not the World still as very a Thief as ever? Does not the Devil
lie in wait for you as well as for others? Is not his Eye upon that Chain about
thy Neck, that Jewel in thy Bosom, and those Bracelets upon thy Hands, the
Graces that appear upon thee? and has he not a mind to beguile thee of them
all? Are his Temptations so weak, or art thou so strong, that thou need not
fear them? As I told thee once heretofore, so I now tell thee again, He that is
so weak as not to fear Temptations, is certainly not so strong as to resist
them. Look to thy self, they are all standing at the catch for thee; thy
Companions are catching, thine Estate is catching, thy Businese is catching,
thy Pleasures are all catching at thee, to spoil thee of all that ever thou
have.

Objection.
But he that has nothing, has no need to fear the Thief: As for me (says the
Sinner) I have nothing to lose, neither Grace nor Peace; it is for the Rich to
fear, but I am so poor that I cannot be poorer; my Estate is so bad, that the
Devil can hardly make it worse than it is; I need not fear whither, or among
whom I go, I cannot come amongst those that are worse than my self; why then
should such an one as I Fear?

Answer.
1. Have thou nothing to lose? thou have the more to get. Art thou content to
be thus poor for ever? Hitherto thou have no Grace, thou have no part in
Christ, nor the Salvation of God; but what if thou should never have? That
which has kept thee from Christ hitherto, and so wholly void and empty of the
Grace of God hitherto, is like to keep thee so for ever; and, O what if it
should do so? If the Devil and this evil World should serve thee all thy days,
as they have served thee to this day? What if thou should continue thus
blind, and thus hard, and in such a poor and wretched state of Soul to thy
dying day? Dare thou go down thus to thy Grave? Dare thou stand thus in the
Judgment? When it shall be then demanded of thee, What good have thou done, or
what good have thou gotten, would thou stand speechless? Consider in time,
the less thou have, the more thou have to get.

2. Thou have yet much to lose. As poor as thou art, thou may be poorer; thy
case is not so bad but it may be much worse than it is. For,

1. Thou have a day of Grace to lose. Though thou have no Grace, yet thou have
a day of Grace; thou art yet under the means; thou art yet in a possibility of
Grace, as wretched as thy state is, it is not desperate. The Word is nigh thee,
the Door of Mercy is yet open; Behold the Lord stands at the Door and knocks;
behold, he calls thee, Come unto me and be saved; what is thy time for? Does
not the Lord say, as Rev. 2.21. I give this Sinner space to repent? What are
Sabbaths, Ordinances, Ministry for? Is not the Acceptable Day yet proclaimed?
Is not the Word of Reconciliation yet preached unto thee? and do all these give
thee no hope, no opportunity of obtaining Mercy? What if these were all lost
and gone? if it were said unto thee, Time is past? What if thou should never
hear a Sermon more, never keep a Sabbath more, never see the face of a Minister
of Christ more? if thou should never again be instructed or invited to
Christ, but should be irrevocably given up to a Reprobate Mind, and an Heart
that cannot repent? Is it nothing to thee, that Repentance is yet preached to
thee, in the Name of the Lord Jesus? that the Ambassadors are still before thy
Door, beseeching thee from the Lord, and praying thee in Christ's stead, Be
thou reconciled to God? How would such a Day be prized in Hell? If the
Ministers that are now sent to thee, were sent down amongst those damned Souls
that are bound in Chains of Darkness, to carry down the Gospel to them? O, if
those miserable Souls might have one Sabbath more, one hour of Grace more, one
Sermon more of Repentance and Reconciliation preached unto them, how would
their shrieks and howlings be turned into shouts and acclamations of joy? Why,
Sinner, thou have yet the Blessed Day before thee; when it is past and gone,
then thou will know, too late, of what price it was.

2. Thou have a Soul to lose. As poor as thou art, thou have yet that which is
more worth than all the World; Matthew. 16.26. Thou do not know the price of a
Soul, who say, Thou have nothing to lose. Sinners value their Souls at a low
rate, it is the cheapest pennyworth that the Devil can buy in the World; Men
sell them as cheap as Esau sold his Birthright, for a Mess of Pottage; as the
Rich Men sold the Poor, for a piece of Silver, or a pair of Shoes: a Soul for
a Lust, a Soul for a Whore, a Soul for a Name; the lowest price the Devil bids,
will hardly be refused.

But as low as Men rate it, a Soul is worth a Kingdom; all the Kingdoms in the
World will not buy it from his hands, who knows it is worth. All the Crowns, and
Scepters, and Thrones, and Dominions of all the Earth, put all together, one
poor Soul will weigh them all down. And this is it, O Sinner, that thou have to
lose, and yet do thou say thou have nothing to lose? How can thou also but
live in Fear? Yea, who in the World has greater reason to fear than thou? Is
thy Soul so precious? Is thy Soul in danger of being lost? Is it so near gone,
almost past recovery, every day, every hour, ready to drop down into that Pit,
from which is no Redemption; How is it that such a thought shakes not thy Soul?

IV. What you should Fear.
It Is too long to tell you of every thing that is to be feared; Fear especially
these Things following.

Fear 1. Your Delilahs, or your beloved Sins. 2. Your Jezebells, or your
painted Sins. 3. Your Isaacs, or any beloved Creature. 4. The Cross, or
Affliction. 5. The Curse, or Damnation.


1. Fear your Delilahs, or your beloved Sins. You have reason to fear every
Sin, greater Sins, smaller Sins, common and ordinary Sins, strange and
unaccustomed Sins; there is no Sin so gross, but it may be thy Sin; and there is
no Sin so small, but it may be thy undoing; there is no Sin so great a stranger
to thee, but one time or other it may give thee a visit; thou may be tempted
to that Sin, which thou wast never tempted to in all thy life, thou may be
overcome of that sin which thou never committedst all thy days before. Say
not of any sin, this I fear not; it may be the next that comes; and if it come,
thou have that within thee may bid it welcome. Fear all Sin, but especially
fear thy Beloved Sin; Fear whatever thou love in all the World, but
especially the Sin of thy Love; there be some Sins that that thou can better
spare, and what thou can better spare, thou need least to fear.

But what is this Beloved Sin, or how may I know which it is? It Is worth your
enquiry, and I shall give you the following marks or discoveries of it, by
which you may understand, both what Sin it is that is your Beloved Sin, and how
great reason you have to fear it.

1. The Beloved Sin has easy entrance. The Apostle calls it, Heb. 12.1. The
Sin that does easily beset us. It lays Siege to the Soul, and it has an easy
Siege of it; it lies not long without the Walls, the Gates are quickly thrown
open to it; whenever it comes to the Door, it is usually let in at the first
knock. Strangers may be made to wait, or be sent packing, but this Friend must
be fetched in and bid welcome; the Devil may save his labor to tempt to this
Sin, it self is temptation enough. It is the Familiar of the Heart, one of its
nearest Acquaintance.

2. It has the command of all. The Beloved-Sin is the Master-Sin; it is by love
that Sin rules; whatever has gotten thy love, has therein gotten the
dominion in thee. Love thou God? then at his command thou art. Love thou
Sin? then this becomes thy Lord, thou will deny or keep back nothing it will
have. This Herodias may ask what she will and she shall have it; not half, but
all, not the Baptist's Head, but thine own Head, and Heart, and Soul, and Life,
all must be sacrificed to it. All the good thou have, and not only this, but
all other Sins and Lusts must stoop to it and serve it. For instance, If Pride
be the Master-Sin, the whole Man, and all that ever he has, must be Servants
to it; yea, and every other Lust must either serve it, or give place to it.
Covetousness, must get in Wealth to maintain it; Envy, must throw Dirt in
others Faces that would eclipse it; Curiosity, must provide it of Ornaments,
all the parts and powers of the Soul, all its virtues and inward Endowments,
all the actions of the Life, must all be made use of to serve and uphold it.
Meekness, Temperance, Patience, Charity, Chastity; Preaching, Praying, Fasting,
all our Religion must be pressed to do homage to this Idol; and whatsoever
would be a disgrace, whether it be good or evil, must be laid aside, or trodden
under-foot. If it be a disgrace to be covetous, Pride will be content to be
poor; if it be a disgrace to be quarrelsom, Pride will be peaceable; yea, if it
be a disgrace to be proud, Humility must serve it for a Covering and Ornament.
If it be an honor to be Godly and Conscientious, the Proud will be a
Professor; and if it be a disgrace or reproach, then farewell to Religion,
Conscience hide thine head. Every thing must be entertained or rejected,
according as it may serve or hinder it, and this Pride must have the ordering
and disposing of all.

If Covetousness be the Master-Sin, then all we are or have must be at its
command. The Sensual Appetite must be denied, and Hunger and Thirst must be
born for its sake; Expensive Pride, or Wasteful Prodigality, must no longer be
endured; Slothfulness and Idleness must by no means be indulged to; All our
time, wits, parts, strength; all those vices, injustice, oppression,
unmercifulness, must be hired to gather in Dust, to feed this greedy Worm. And
the like may be said of any other Beloved Sin, it has the command of all.

3. It must have no check nor control. The Beloved must dwell in quiet, do
what I will, and none must say to it, What do thou? Like that Fondling
Adonijah, of whom it is said, 1 Kings 1.6. His Father had not displeased him at
any time, nor said, Why have thou done so? The Darling must be dandled, but
never corrected or questioned; or if there be a necessity, and it cannot be
avoided, that some check be given it, then the same charge must be given as
concerning that other of David's Fondlings, Absalom, 2 Samuel 18.5. Deal gently
with the young Man. Not too harsh, not too close; Nay, my Sons, it is not well
that I hear of you, said Eli to his wicked Sons, 1 Samuel 4.24. And that is the
hardest word that will be born.

4. It Is the last that is parted with. Reuben shall go, and Simeon shall go, and
Judah shall go; but must Benjamin go to? My Son shall not go down, said once
old Israel, Genesis 42. this Pride let it go, says the covetous Man, and this
Sloth, and this Pleasure; but must this Mammon and my Heart be parted? it shall
not go. This Covetousness, let it go, says the proud Man, and this Ease and
this Pleasure, but shall this Honor and these Ornaments go? If I be put to
Labor, I can bear it; or if I be Poor, I can bear it: I can work hard, or fare
hard, but I cannot be despised; though my Estate be brought low, and my Back be
bowed down, yet my Spirit will not come down; this Pleasure I can spare, and
this Ease, and this Honor, says the peevish, but I cannot help it to be angry
and impatient when I am provoked, Nature will have its vent; any thing but
this, but in this thing, the Lord pardon me, I cannot help it.

5. It Is often the parting penny, betwixt Christ and the Soul, betwixt the Soul
and Life. It Is the last that is parted with, and sometimes 'twill never be
parted with. Christ must go, and Life must go; the Soul must die, rather than
this Sin not be saved alive. Doubtless there are Souls in Hell, that have
parted with much, and would have parted with all but this one thing, their
Beloved Sin; and for the sake of this they perish everlastingly. Was it not the
care of that young Man that came to Christ for Eternal Life? Mark 10.21. He was
fair for Life, only Christ tells him, One thing thou lackest. Get thee loose
from the love of this Earth, and Heaven shall be thine. O, says his Heart, I
have too much to lose, and I love it too well to part with it so; sorry I am I
cannot: I have a good will to thee, I have a mind to live, abate me but this
and I will be thine; but if this may not be, away he goes, sorry he must die,
but yet choosing Death, rather than the loss of that Idol, his great Estate.

Now, Friends, Is not such a Sin to be feared? that will find such an easy
entrance that has the command of all, by which your Souls and Consciences, all
your Parts and Powers, all your Time, and Estates, and Ways, are governed and
disposed; that must do what it will, without check or control; that you can so
hardly get rid of, and will so greatly hazard your foregoing for ever your part
in Christ; if any thing in the World be like to keep you off, or draw you back
from him, this is it that will do it, your Beloved Sin; Is not such a Sin to be
feared?

Well, by what has been said you may find it out, and know which it is; or it
may be, there may be more than one of them; some Sinners serve many Masters,
and know not which is the chief. Fear all your Sins, and do what you can to
find out the Master-Sin, and take heed of it wherever you meet it. Never
count thy self in the least safety; whilst that Lust is alive, reward it as it
would serve thee; Put thy finger upon the right Head, and then say, Thou must
die Jonathan; thou must die, O my Sin, or my Soul must die by thine hand. But
of this more hereafter.

2. Fear your Jezebels, or your painted Sins. An Enemy in a disguise is the
more to be feared, as his advantage against us is the greater. The Devil is a
Painter, that can limn some of the foulest Vices into the form of Virtues. As
he can put an ugly vizor upon goodness, and with this foolish World, make Light
pass for Darkness, Holiness for Hypocrisy, Tenderness for Troublesomness, Zeal
for Pride and Fury; so can he paint Sin into the form of Godliness.
Covetousness must go for Frugality, Profuseness for Liberality, Sinful
Compliance for Civility, Sinful Connivence for Modesty, Lukewarmness for
Moderation, Cowardice and Faint-heartedness for Prudence and Discretion.

Have thou never a painted Jezabel with thee? No Lust, nor Vice, which thou
allowest thy self in, thinking there is no harm in it? Fear this Harlot, that
looks more modestly than her that has her whorish Heart on her Forehead. Who
is on the Lord's side, who? Throw her down. Have thou any thing within thee
that is for Christ indeed? Let it down with this Jezebel. Pull off the Harlots
Vail, and cast her out. Come in, yea rather, Get thee out thou Wife of
Jeroboam, why feignest thou thy self to be another? Is this thy Frugality or
Providence, to hoord up and hold back what the Lord calls for from thee? Is
this thy good Husbandry? Too good an Husband to be Merciful; too good an
Husband to be a good Christian: Get thee out thou Wife of Jeroboam, get thee
out Covetousness, why feignest thou thy self to be another? Is this thy
liberality, to spend thine Estate upon Harlots, or thy loose and vain
Companions? Must thy luxury and thy riot eat up all thou have? Is this thy
casting thy Bread upon the Waters, to throw it down those filthy Kennels? Get
thee out Prodigal, why feignest thou thy self to be another? Is this thy
civility, to have fellowship with the unfruitful Works of Darkness, to hold
friendship and intimacy with the lewd ones of the Earth, to have a kiss for the
precious and the vile? Get thee out Ambo-dexter, why feignest thou thy self to
be another? Art thou remiss and indifferent in the Matters of God? Art thou
cowardly, and faint-hearted, where his honor is concerned; and is this thy
Moderation or thy Prudence? Get thee out Laodicean, why feignest thou thy self
to be another?

Friend, pull off the Mask from the Face, and see what is under. Thou know
not what mischief thou may suffer, where thou suspected no harm; Fear a
pretended Friend more than an open Enemy.

3. Fear your Isaacs, any beloved or over loved Creature. Fear not only the
sins of thy love, but the Sons of thy love; the latter will be temptations to
the former; thou may receive hurt from that which has no hurt in it; an
Innocent Child may be an Idol, and so may thine Husband, or thy Wife, or any
Friend thou have. Wherefore honor thou thy Sons above me? 1 Samuel 2.29.

Fear, lest thy love to thy Friend make an abatement upon thy love to thy God;
thy love to thy Children should cause thee to abuse thy God and them, by the
neglect of that dury of Reproof and Correction thou owe them; take heed that
thy tenderness to them, make thee not cruel to them and thy self; By nursing
their untowardness, thou nourishest those Thorns that will pierce through thine
own Soul.

Take heed thou have never an Isaac in all the World, not one Child, not one
Relation, concerning which, if God should say to thee as to Abraham, Genesis 22.
Offer up this Isaac whom thou love; or if Christ require of thee, as he does
of all his Disciples, Forsake Father or Mother, forsake Husband or Wife,
forsake Son or Daughter; take heed lest thine Heart should answer, No, I will
not offer them up, no, I cannot forsake them. What thou can not part with,
may be the parting of God and thy Soul.

And as any Beloved Friend, so any other Creature or Affair that thine Heart is
set upon, may be a snare to thee. Fear that House that thou love, thy
pleasant Habitation; Fear thy Money, and thy Fields, and thy Flocks, thy Meat
and thy Drink that thou love; those Businesses and honest Employments thou
take most pleasure in. Thy good things may become thine evil things; thy
Table may become thy Snare, thy savoury Meat may become thy Poison, and that
which is given thee for thy good, may be an occasion of falling. Thy Money may
be thy Poverty, and thine honest Labors, when thine Heart is too much in them,
may be more mischievous than Idleness. How many foolish Souls are there, whom
their Love has held Prisoners to this Earth, and Exiles from Heaven; to whom
their good things have done more mischief, than things apparently unlawful
could ever do them?

How is it, Christian, that thy Soul is so seldom Above? O, thy delights are
below. Whence is it that thou have suffered so great loss in the matters of
thy Soul? That whatsoever thou do in the Matters of Religion prospers no
more; that so small increases, and so many decays are to be found upon thee?
Thou have not been among the Drunkards, nor have been partaker with the
Adulterers; thou have not been walking in the Counsel of the Ungodly, nor
standing in the way of Sinners, nor sitting in the Seat of the Scornful, thou
have been no Liar, or Scoffer, or Oppressor; these things thy Soul abhors. O,
but thou have been an Idolater; thine Heart has found thee out some Idol in
the Earth, some Friend, or some Farm, or some honest Business, or some innocent
Pleasure, (as thou thoughtest) and has so chained it self to these, and been
so taken up in the service of them, that hence it is with thee as it is. God has
opened his Store to thee, and filled thine hand with good things, and thou have
opened thy Mouth, and so filled thine Heart with them, that it is even chok'd up
by them, and all Spiritual Good is even strangled within thee.

But will thou thus requite the Lord, O unworthy Soul? Shall he be a loser by
his Bounty? VVilt thou become worse, for that he is so good? VVilt thou abuse
Love? What is an abuse of Love, if not this, that the more he loves, the less
he is beloved of thee? the more he gives, the less be returned; what was given
to draw thine Heart, does carry it away from him? Shall it be said, thou
would have been a better Servant, if he had not been so good a Master? If he
had not given thee so great an Estate, so good a Wife, so dear a Child, thou
would have loved him more, and served him better than now thou do?

Friends, if what you Love be not also your Fear, it will be like to be your
Sin and your Misery. 'Twill draw your Heart from God, and so 'twill be your
Sin, and 'twill provoke God to snatch it away from you, and then 'twill be your
Misery. Whatever thou over-lovest, if the Lord mean thee good, look for it, to
be stripped and bereaved of it. He will touch thee in the Apple of thine Eye, he
will try thee in thine Isaac, and will tear off that Jewel, that entices thine
Heart from him. And by how much the more thou love, by so much the greater
will the parting torment be.

Good old Abraham had an Isaac, and in this Isaac he must be tried, and an hard
trial he had; which how cheerfully soever he went through, yet consider the
Circumstances of it, and then think what piercing trouble thy love to Creatures
may bring upon thee.

Genesis 22.2. Take now (says God to Abraham) thy Son, thine only Son Isaac [whom
thou lovest] -- and offer him up for a Burnt-Offering. Had thou been in this
Abraham's stead, what a Dagger in thine Heart would this Word have been? How
would thy love to thine Isaac have risen up, and reasoned with the Lord thus?

If the Lord will have a Sacrifice, may not some other Creature be it? All the
Beasts of the Field are his, and the Cattle upon a thousand Hills. Is there
none amongst all these, wherewith the Lord will be pleased, but must he have a
Man for a Sacrifice?

If he will have me Sacrifice a Man, may not a Stranger be the Man? Or if he
will have one of mine own House, may not a Servant, or one of their Sons be
accepted? If it must be a Son of mine own, may not Ishmael the Son of the
Bondwoman be he? Must it be mine Isaac, and none but he? And why Lord is this
word [whom thou lovest] added? What yet more load? 'Twould be some ease, if I
could now forget my love, and must this be now remembered? This is the Dart that
kills my Soul.

But if this Son of mine, this only Son [by my Wife] this Isaac whom I love
must go, must I my self offer him up? must mine own hand be upon him? If this
Isaac must be the Sacrifice, must none but Abraham be the Priest? O, what will
the Country say of me, Is Abraham become a Murderer? And how shall I hold up
my face to Sarah my Wife at my return? What shall I say to her, when she asks,
Where is the Child? where is Isaac my Son? O my Bowels, my Bowels, I am pained
at mine Heart, mine Eyes fail, my Soul melts, my Livey is poured out on the
Earth. How shall I say, Isaac is not, the Child is dead, and dead by mine own
hand? How would Father and Mother fall together, and swoon and die as wounded
in the streets?

How cheerfully and courageously soever, the good old Man behaved himself,
under all these astonishing Circumstances; yet, O think, how it would have been
with thee, had thou been this Abrabam, and let that thought put thee in fear,
concerning whomsoever thou dearly love.

Consider a little what the unhappy Fruits of thy own love are;

God says to thee, Take now thy Child, or thy Children, not and offer them up
to me for a Burnt-Sacrifice, but take and bring them up for me for an Holy
Seed; Instruct them, Govern and Educate them for me. Whose are all these that
are in thine House? Are they not all mine, my Sons and my Daughters? and
wherefore have I sent them thee? Is it not with this charge, Keep these Souls
for me, bring them up for me? It Is not for Bread only, or for Clothes, or for
Trades, or for Portions that they are come into thine House, it is that they may
be instructed to the Kingdom of God, and bred up to eternal Life.

Now how do thou keep this charge of the Lord? Do thou Teach them? Do
thou Govern them? Or are they not left a rude and unruly Company? But what is
in the fault? Is not thy love in fault? Thou art so fond a Father, that thou
can not find in thine Heart to impose upon them any thing that they like not,
nor can be so strict or severe as is needful to them. My Child is sickly, or
unapt to learn, and I cannot put him so hard to it; My Child is wayward and
disorderly, but I doubt how it would be with him if I should cross or correct
him; I am fain to let him have his Will more than I would, for fear I should
discourage or break his Spirit. I have but one, or but two, and if these should
miscarry, what would become of me?

Why now, thou sees what reason thou have to fear thy love, which is such a
Tempter to thee to disobey thy God, and to tender the honor of thy Child more
than the honor of thy Maker. If there be ever a one of thy Children that thou
love above the rest, that must be let alone to be the rebellious Child.

God says to thee, Take not thy Child, but thy Bread, and thy Flesh, and thy
Money, and Estate, and offer these up to me. Cast thy Bread upon the Waters.
Draw forth thy Soul to the hungry. Give unto him that asks; lend unto him
that would borrow of thee; feed, cloth, harbor; for my sake do it. And yet
how little goes out at his Word, either to Beggars or Borrowers? No, thou
love what thou have too well to part with it so.

God says to thee, Take but this Ram, or this Goat, thy Sins and thy Lusts,
slay them and offer them up. No, thou will not do it. Thou love thine Enemies
too, and they also must be spared. Though they will not spare thee, nor any
thing thou have; thy Time, thine Estate, thy Name, and all that thou have must
be Meat for thy Lusts; yet behold, they are loved, and must be spared, thou will not deliver them up.

God says sometimes to thee, Not take thou thy Child, but let me take him, be
content that I lay mine hand upon him, and smite him with Sickness or Death.
No, thou can not bear it, but take on, and murmurest, and art impatient,
and wilt not be comforted or quieted.

Some Parents can better bear it that the Devil should take their Children,
than that God should take them. If the Devil takes thy Child, and makes a
Prodigal Child of him, makes a Drunkard of him, or a Rioter, if evil Company
carry him away from thee into the Paths of the Destroyer, thou can bear it
with more patience, though possibly it be some trouble to thee. At least, if
the Devil take him, and only make him a greedy Worldling or Muck-worm, though
that make him a sure to Hell as Prodigality, yet this thou can bear with
ease. Though we may sometimes hear Parents say, I had rather my Child had been
dead, it would not have been such an affliction to me to have followed him to
his Grave, as it is to see him buried alive in Lewdness and Debauchery; yet to
see him held by the Devil under a blind Mind, under an hard and impenitent
Heart, so he be civil, and sober, and thirty for this World; though he be but a
civil Infidel, a thrifty Unbeliever, this is not so heavily taken: But let God
lay hands upon him, and take him away out of the World, and then no other noise
is heard in the House, but such as was heard in Ramah, Matthew. 2.18. Lamentation
and weeping, and great mourning, Rachel weeping for her Children, and would not
be comforted, because they were not.

4. Fear the Cross, or Afflictions. You Will say, this is strange counsel; the
Scripture give the quiet contrary; Fear none of those things which thou shall
suffer, Rev. 2.10. Fear not them that kill the Body, Luke 12.4. I shall
therefore show, 1. How we are not to fear the Cross. 2. How we are to fear the
Cross.


1. How we are not to fear the Cross. Now the Cross must not be feared, either,
1. Out of tenderness to the Flesh; or, 2. Out of faintness of Spirit.


1. The Cross is not to be feared out of tenderness to the Flesh. By the Flesh
understand, both our Bodies of Flesh and out fleshly Lusts.

1. Not out of tenderness to our Bodies. It Is this which makes us shrink from,
and shun the Cross, that it is such a trouble to our outward Man, that it puts
it to so much pain and hardship. The Soul suffers not immediately by any thing
that Man can do unto us, but as it partakes in the sufferings of the Body. If
our Bodies could bear with Ease their own Infirmities, the Soul could not feel
them; what the Body cannot endure, makes the Soul sick, because of its
tenderness toward it. Upon this account it is that we fear bodily Afflictions,
but thus it must not be. A Christian is a Soldier, and Soldier must not fear,
but endure hardness. 2 Timothy 2.3. Endure hardness as a good Soldier of Jesus
Christ. It is not for tender Persons to be Soldiers; hunger and thirst, cold
and weariness is their ordinary lot; and their hardness must be their Armor
against all. It is not for tender Persons to be Soldiers, and therefore it is
not for Christians to be tender; the most tender of Sin, of any Persons in the
World, but not so of Sufferings.

There are several kinds of Sufferings we may be exposed to; some fall at a
greater distance, when we are smitten only in our Goods or Estates; others come
nearer, and touch our Flesh and our Bones; and these are they that are hardest
born: The Devil, in his tempting Job, knew which was the tender part, and
therefore reserves that for his last trial. Job 2.5. Put forth thine hand now,
and touch his Bone and his Flesh, and he will curse thee to thy face. And if
this tender part once becomes hardy, then thou art a Soldier fit to fight the
Devil and his Armies. Christian, be not tender of thy Flesh, and then thou will
not thence fear Sufferings.

2. Much less is the Cross to be feared, out of tenderness to our fleshly
Lusts. Here let three things be considered; 1. The Intention of the Cross, is
the Destruction of the Flesh. 2. It Is this corrupt Flesh that makes the Cross
to pinch. 3. This Flesh is no such Friend to us, that for its sake the Cross
should be feared.


1. The Intention of the Cross, is the Destruction of the Flesh. Afflictions,
as ill-favouredly as they look, come to us upon no ill intent; it is to save us
from that which is worse. God delivers his People up to the Cross, to the same
end for which the Church was to deliver up Offenders to the Devil, for the
destruction of the Flesh, that the Spirit may be saved in the Day of the Lord
Jesus. Sin must be put to death, and it must be put to the same death which
Christ was put to, it must be Crucified. Romans 6.6. Our Old Man is Crucified
with him. [Our old Man] I, that is the Male-factor that must be executed on the
Cross. God would have the Souls of his People to live and thrive; in warm
weather the most hopeful Blades are even chok'd up with Weeds, then come the
Frosts, to kill the Weeds and save the Corn.

2. It Is this corrupt Flesh that makes the Cross to pinch: It Is the Flesh
that is struck at, and it is that that smarts; Afflictions would fall more easy
on mortified Hearts. Dead Flesh cannot feel. And therefore it is, that whatever
complaints and groanings are heard from mortified Christians, it is usually much
more for their Sins than for their Sufferings. Their Medicine is sharp, and
puts them hard to it at first to bear it, but when it has a little conquered
their Disease, much of its tartness is allayed. It Is their Sore or Disease that
makes them so full of pain.

What Is the reason that losses in Men's Estates, the spoiling of their Goods,
that Poverty so vexes their Hearts, and puts them into such fits of Impatience?
O, it is their Covetousness and the Cares of this Life, that are the Teeth of
Poverty and Want. Had we once mortified our earthly Members, and learned in
every Estate to be content, how easy would losses be?

What Is the reason that contempt and disgrace raises such a storm in others?
It Is their Pride that cannot be patient. He whose Heart is humble, can be
content to be humbled and laid low. The like may be said in all other
afflictive cases; it is Lust that makes Affliction tedious.

3. The Flesh is no such Friend to us, that for its sake we should fear the
Cross. It Is near us it is true, and cannot suffer, but we our selves suffer and
are pained in it; But so it is, with an Ulcer in the Body, it is in thine own
Flesh, and whatever smart is felt, it is thou that feel it; but would thou
therefore fear to have thy Wound cured?

Christian, would thou have thy Lusts live? Do thou not pray for their
Destruction? Do thou not sigh and groan under them? Do thou not wish, and
wait, and hope, and long for thy Redemption from them? Do thou count them as
Enemies, and art thou afraid of that Weapon, that is now put into thine hand to
avenge thee of thine Enemies?

Objection.
I would be glad this Flesh might die, but O may it not be put to an easier
death? It Is not their death that I fear, but those Instruments of death that
are so tormenting.

Answer.
1. Then save thy self that torment, by laying thine own hand upon them.
Prevent thy need of the Cross, by doing its Work thy self. Let it be thy daily
Work, by Faith; by Prayer, by Watchfulness, by Self-denial, by Temperance, by
Meditation, by Resolution, and such other gentle means, by degrees to destroy
thy Lusts thy self; save the Cross its labor, by doing its Work to its hands.

2. Must they die an easy death? What, or else will thou not that they die at
all? Will it be so easy for thy Soul to die by their hand, that thou will
rather venture on that, than a little present trouble? Shall thy right hand, or
thy right foot, cast thee and carry thee to Hell, because it would be painful
to cut them off and cast them from thee? Is it become so easy to thee, to be
in bondage to these Egyptians, that thou will rather serve at the Brick-kilns,
than venture for thy Redemption on the hazards of the Red Sea, or the hardships
of the Wilderness? Fear this Flesh more than thou do, and that Servitude it
holds thee under, and that future Misery it is dragging thee to; Fear this more,
and then thou will not fear thy Redemption, by what means soever it be brought
about. Thou will not say, Deal gently with mine Enemy, deal tenderly with this
Flesh; Let it die Lord, let it die; let me be delivered from the Body of this
Death, and I will not prescribe to thee for the way and means.

2. Fear not the Cross out of faintness of Spirit-Faint not when thou art
chastned, says the Apostle, Heb. 12.5. much less beforehand, before the
chastning comes.

I shall put in a word or two, as Cordials, to preserve from fainting. Let
these two things be considered.

1. The Lord is his Peoples God. This is his Covenant with them; Jer. 30.22. I
will be your God, and you shall be my People. Let us consider a little, what
great support this Promise yields. I will be your God. What Is the meaning of
that? What is there in this more than every one may lay claim to? Is he not the
God of all the Earth? Is he not the Sinner's God? Is he not the Drunkard's God,
the Atheist's God, the God of them that say in their Hearts there is no God? He
is so; The God that made them, the God that rules them, the God that Judges and
will Condemn them.

This is a word of terror to the ungodly World. I am their God, that is, I am
above them; as high as any of them are, I am higher than they, and will bring
them down to the Dust of Death.

But what is there in this word as to Believers? What means the most High,
when he speaks this word, I will be your God, to them? The meaning is this, I
will be your God in Covenant, I will be your Friend and your Father, your
Portion and Heritage, your Rock and your Refuge for ever. I am the Almighty
God, and able to save you from all your distresses; I am the All-sufficient
God, and able to supply all your Wants and Necessities, and whatsoever I am all
is yours.

Now Friend, when God says I am thine, what matters it, who or what can say, I
am none of thine. Suppose the gods of the Earth should say to thee, Away, we
are none of thine: Suppose thine old Friends and Acquaintance should say, Stand
back, we are none of thine: Suppose thy nearest Relations, thy Father, or thy
Brother, or thine Husband, or thy Wife should say, We are none of thine:
Suppose thine House and thy Country should cast thee out, and say, neither are
we thine: Yet this one word from the Lord, but I am thine, how would it support
and abundantly satisfy thy Soul?

2. None so well know this ordinarily, that the Lord is their God, as his
suffering People. It may be thou will say, Ah this word, this word, I am thine,
what a good word is here? O were I but sure it were spoken to me, what then
should I fear? Let the Lord but speak thus to [my] Soul, I will be thy God; and
then let the World and the Devil too, speak what they can; we will be thine
Enemies, if God be thy Friend; we will curse thee, if God bless thee; we will hunt
thee, if God harbor thee; we will stick in thy sides, if God be in thine heart;
we will lay thee low enough, if God exalt thee; we will be thy death, if he be thy
life. Well, even do your worst, were I but sure the Lord has said this word to
me, I will be thy God, I will not fear though ye all be Devils unto me.

But O here is my great trouble, it is this which sinks my Soul, and makes mine
Heart to faint within me; I see the World running against me, I see Troubles
running upon me, and I am in great doubt whether God has spoken this word to
me, I will be thine.

Do thou doubt? Do thou not know whether God be thine? Why the day of
Adversity, that is the time when thou may be most like to know it.

There are none ordinarily that so well know that the Lord is theirs, as his
suffering People. For, 1. God does often show himself in a Storm, who hid
himself in the Sunshine. 2. The Sufferings of the Saints, will be the Proof of
their Sonship.


1. God does often reveal himself in a Storm, who hid himself from us in our
Sunshine. Our days of Darkness, are often the times of Light and Love. Light
from Above is most needed, and will be better accepted when it is darkest below.
The hatred of the World, does usually usher in the tidings of Divine Love. When
thou art led into a Wilderness to be tempted and tried, there thou may
expect he will speak comfortably to thee, Hos. 2.14. Why art thou afraid of
Affliction? Would thou not be glad to know the Lord is thine? Follow him into
the Wilderness, and that may be the Vineyard where he will show thee his Loves.

2. The Sufferings of the Saints will be a Proof of their Sonship. Heb. 12.7.
If ye endure chastening, God deals with you as with Sons. Our Sufferings for
Christ, will be the evidence of our Sincerity to him. Prove that thou love
Christ above all, and thou therein provest that God is thine; and what greater
evidence that we love Christ above all, than this, that we can part with all
things for him?

But then indeed it is necessary, that we be well assured, that it is from Love
to Christ we suffer; there are Carnal Motives that may carry Men far into a
suffering State. Pride may do much this way, or we may take up our Crosses for
company. Some that are engaged with a suffering Party, the fear of the reproach
of deserting them, may make them ashamed to desert them; they may expose
themselves to suffer reproach, for fear of reproach. That Idol, their own
Names, may be the God for whose sake they suffer.

Such Suffering only as will prove thee to be Godly, will prove that God is
thine. If you should suffer the loss of all things, and be utterly ruined and
undone in the World, and all this upon the account of Christianity. If you
should suffer Death for the Name of Christ, and yet not have the Love of Christ
in you, as it is clear from 1 Cor. 13.3. Men may do; though you should be thus
persecuted, and rejected of, and trodden under-foot of Men, yet at last you may
be reprobated of God, and perish everlastingly.

This would be a dreadful thing in all your Sufferings, to have such a thought
upon your Hearts, That you that profess Christ, and those that persecute you
for it; you that come together to Pray, and Hear, and Fast, and those that
Curse and Swear against you for it, may fall into the same Condemnation; and
yet doubtless so it will prove in the end; If you love not the Lord Jesus in
sincerity, whatever you suffer for him, you and they must dwell in the same
Fire together; may be theirs may be the hotter, but the same Hell must hold
Persecutors and Hypocrites.

Bare suffering therefore will not be your evidence for Heaven; But yet
Christians that are sincere, and knew it not before, the Cross may prove their
sincerity. Grace is never so well known as when it is put to the trial. Your
Sufferings will be your trials; the trial of your Faith, the trial of your
Love, 1 Pet. 1.6, 7. that so what lay in the dark before, may now be found unto
Praise and Glory.

What say thou now, how can thou faint under such Expectations? Will thou
fear to be comforted? What greater comfort, than to have it proved to thee that
thou art of God? And when will that proof be made with the greatest evidence,
but when thou art tried in the Fire? It Is the Wind that discovers the Wheat,
and the Fire that proves the Gold.

2. How we should fear the Cross. To this I shall answer in these two
particulars.

1. Fear a surprisal by the Cross. 2. Fear the temptations of the Cross.
1. Fear a surprisal by the Cross. Fear lest it should overtake you unawares.
The coming of the Lord to visit us, is never so terrible as it is, when it is as
the coming of the Lord of that evil Servant to reckon with him; Luke 12.46. In
a day that he looked not for him, in an hour that he is not aware. Luke 21.34.
Take heed lest at any time your hearts be overcharged, -- and so that day come
upon you unawares.

God sometimes summons before he smites. Amos 4.12. Thus will I do unto you,
and because I will do thus, prepare to meet thy God O Israel. But sometimes he
comes, as he said he would, to the Church in Sardis, Rev. 3.3. I will come on
thee as a Thief, and thou shall not know what hour I will come upon thee.

This coming of the Lord finds some, as the coming of the Bridgroom Mat. 25.
found the foolish Virgins, all asleep. Others it overtakes, as David and his
Armies did the Amalekites, 1 Samuel 30.16. it finds them eating, and drinking,
and dancing, and making merry. On others it comes, as the news of Sisera's
death came to his Mother and her Ladies, finding them full of expectations of
prosperity and triumph. Judge. 5.28. The Mother of Sisera looked out at a
Window, and cried through the Lattess, why is his Chariot so long a coming? Why
tarry the Wheels of his Chariot? They answered, Have they not sped? Have they
not divided the Prey? To every Man a Damosel or two, etc. They were full of
expectations of his return in triumph; but the next news they heard of, was of
the Nail and the Hammer, wherewith he was smitten dead to the ground. O what
confusion and astonishment did this bring upon them?

How few of us are there, Friends, that can say of the troubles that befall us,
as Job did of his, Job 3.25. The evil that I feared is come upon me? But how
very few of us can say, The Evil that I am prepared for is come upon me? it
found me on my Watchtower, and standing upon the Guard. I am ready, I am
ready; ready for Sickness, ready for Poverty, ready for Bonds and Imprisonment,
or any thing else that may befall me.

O how unready do we mostly stand? And what sad work do Afflictions make with
us, when they find us unready? Then we take on, and fret, and murmur, and
despond, and are at our wits end. We can neither believe, nor pray, nor hope,
nor submit. We that were just now full, and at ease, and at quiet, basking our
selves in that Sunshine that was upon our Tabernacle, promising our selves,
that our Mountain is made so strong, that it shall never be moved. On a sudden
we are all Earthquakes and Clouds, and like the troubled Sea that cannot be at
rest, but casts forth Mire and Dirt. Every Wind that blows upon us from
without, raises such a tempest within, that we forget that we are Christians or
Men, suffering our Hearts to boil up into Passions or Impatiencies, or to sink
into such Despondencies, as if our hope were utterly cut off and perished from
the Lord. These and such like are the Fruits of our Surprisals by the Cross.
Has this never been thy case? Fear lest it be.

2. Fear the Temptations of the Cross. There Is a double Temptation chiefly to
be feared. In our Troubles, especially such as befall us for the Name of Christ,
we are in danger, 1. Of Pride. 2. Of a Fall.


1. Of Pride. As Men may be proud of their Grandeur in the World, so also of
their Poverty and Contempt. As we may be proud of our Virtues and Services, so
also of our Sufferings. The Soldiers Wounds and Scars are his Glory and
Boasting. It is an honor to suffer for Christ, and some of us cannot bear this
honor, without being exalted above measure; we cannot be cast down, but we are
apt to be puffed up. Some of the Heathens have sacrificed their Lives for their
Countries good; and yet not so much for their Countries, as for themselves, to
purchase to themselves a Name and Renown. And is there no such vanity to be
found amongst Christians? Fear this wickedness, which will both spoil you of
the comforts of your Sufferings, and lose you your reward.

2. Of a Fall. Afflictions (such I mean as befall us for the Gospel's sake) are
Temptations to Apostasy, and backsliding from Christ. Fear lest the Cross
should be the parting point betwixt Christ and your Souls; lest it should be
with you, as with his Disciples of old, who accompanied him to his Sufferings,
and there forsook him and fled.

I have elsewhere spoken of the danger and dreadfulness of Apostasy, and shall
therefore forbear to speak more of it now.

5. Fear the Curse; or the Wrath and Everlasting Vengeance of God. Luke 12.5.
Fear him, which after he has killed, has power to cast into Hell. Fear not
Man, for he can kill but once, when he has killed the Body, he has done his
worst; but God can kill, and kill again; can smite the Body into Dust, and the
Soul into Hell. I say unto you, Fear him. Consider here three things.

1. To whom this warning was given thus to fear. And that is not to the
multitude of his Hearers only, whereof there was so great a throng that they
trod one upon another, but especially to his Disciples. He began to say to his
Disciples, first of all, v. 1. and I say unto you my Friends, v. 4.

2. What was the special reason he here uses to urge and press his Disciples to
fear God; and that is the Power of his Wrath, because he can cast into Hell.

3. What was the special matter of that fear he presses them to; and that is,
lest he that can do it, should do it, should actually cast them into Hell. And
this must be so, otherwise there had been no force in the consideration of his
Power, to work to this Fear; for they might have replied, Though God can damn
us, yet why should we fear ever the more, upon that account, whilst we are sure
he will not? And so his Argument from God's Power to destroy, had come to just
nothing. Who would fear Damnation ever the more for that God has power to damn
him, if he were out of Fear that he would ever do it? Therefore the sense must
be, Fear God lest he should cast you into Hell.

Heb. 10.13. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.
There is an afflicting Hand of God, and there is a revenging Hand of God, and
both are to be feared; even the afflicting Hand of God is terrible. Heb. 12.5.
Despise not thou the chastening of the Lord. Make not light of that, thou
may find it heavy enough. God is terrible in his Judgments that he executes
on the Earth. He makes the very Earth to tremble, when his Hand is lifted up.
Those Hearts are harder than the Rocks, that will not rent when God smites. The
afflicting Hand of God is to be feared, but especially, and that which is here
meant, It is a fearful thing to fall into the revenging Hands of the living God.

Heb. 12.29. Let us have Grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably, with
Reverence and Godly Fear; for our God is a consuming Fire. The Lord Christ is
sometimes resembled to a Refining Fire, Mal. 3.1, 2. The Lord whom ye seek
shall suddenly come into his Temple. -- But who may abide the day of his
coming, and who shall stand when he appears? For he is like a Refiners Fire,
-- and he shall sit as a Refiner and Purifier of Silver. He shall purify, he
shall save his People from their Sins, yet so as by Fire. God has his
Purgatory as well as his Hell; though not according to that Popish Dream, a
Purgatory after this Life; Death will put an end to this purging Work in this
Life; He has his Purgatory, and his Purgatory has its Fire; it is hot passing
under the purging Work of God. But who can stand before him when he appears
as a Consuming Fire? Who can dwell with the Devouring Fire, with the
Everlasting Burnings? Isa. 33.14.

[Let us have Grace] that we may serve God with Fear. It Is not for Sinners
only, but for Saints also, to fear the Wrath of God. Those must, and these
will: Grace will teach them to Fear. Hell is not so terrible to any, as to
gracious Souls; those that most prize the Love of God, will most fear his
Wrath. And the Lord looks it should be so, God will not be a loser by his
Grace; he would not lose the awe of his Threatenings, by making us the Children
of Promise; he would not have it forgotten that he is Righteous, by those that
have tasted that he is Gracious.

And the People of God have need enough, whilst they are Children, to be kept
in Fear, they are and must be, while they are under Age, under this severe
Tutor. They are too apt to be proud, and wanton, and froward Children, and have
need, not only of the Cross on their Backs, but of the Curse in their Eye, to
keep them in order. How sad is it with us, notwithstanding all those afrighting
Arguments which God uses? How foolish, and peevish, and unruly are we,
notwithstanding that double recompense of Reward, the Glory to come, and the
Wrath to come, that is set before us? O what should we be, were there no such
Arguments to be used with us?

Say not it is Mercenary to look on the Crown as the encouragement of Holiness,
till it can be said, it is Mercenary to be governed or quickened by Love. What
is it to have respect to the recompense of Reward, but so to eye the Love and
Joy of the Lord, as to feel the Power thereof, oiling our Wheels, and drawing
our Souls on after it?

Say not it is Servile, and that which must not be allowed, that those that are
Sons should make use of the Curse as a bridle to Sin. This Beast must be dealt
with as a Beast; Lust must be bridled and fettered with Fear, which will never
be charmed or constrained by Love.

Heb. 4.1. Let us therefore fear, lest a Promise being left us, of entering into
his Rest, any of you should seem to come short of it. Whilst we take
encouragement from the Promise, the Promise of Entrance, let us take heed, by
the fear of falling short.

Is there no fear of falling short? Art thou already so established and
assured, that there is no doubt or hazard remaining of thy miscarriage? Are all
the Enemies of thy Salvation so secured, that thou may now spare any piece
of thine Armor? Have thou out-grown the use, or the need of any of the
Counsels and Caveats the Scriptures give? Look inward, see what a treacherous
Heart thou have lying there, undermining thine hopes; Is there never a Worm
still gnawing at thy Root? Are thy Lusts all dead, and is there no doubt of
their Resurrection? Is there no guilt upon thine Head, nor guile in thine
Heart? Has neither Flesh, nor World, nor Devil any Power in thee? Is the Army
totally broken, and is there no question of its rallying upon thee? Art thou so
fully resolved for Holiness? does the stream of thy Soul, and the bent of thy
Life run so strongly and so evenly after the Lord, that thou have a standing,
infallible, and uninterrupted evidence of thy Sincerity, and an undoubted
Security, for thy perseverance to the end? Is there not room for such a
question, What if I should fall short? Art thou gotten beyond all possibility
of miscarrying for ever? Friends know, that a possibility of falling into the
Wrath to come, were that Wrath thoroughly understood, would work more fear, than
a certain expectation of all the Torments and Miseries of this Life. O Fear!
Have thou Faith? Believe and Fear. Have thou Hope? Hope and Fear. Have thou
Joy? Rejoice with trembling. Rejoice in hope of the Glory of God, and tremble
and fear his Wrath and Vengeance.

There will be this double use and advantage, (besides others) of this fear of
the Curse.

1. 'Twill quicken our necessary fear of Sin. 2. 'Twill quench our sinful fear
of the Cross.
1. This fear of the Curse, will quicken our necessary fear of Sin. Yea, and of
all the temptations to it. Sin is the sting of Death, and this Death is the
sting of Sin. How bitter would Sin taste, how ghastly would it look, were this
Gall that lies in its Belly, this sting it carries in its Tail, discovered and
heeded? Thou would quickly be filled with thine own ways, did thou but see
what stands at their further end. That Bed of Scorpions, whither Sin is
dragging thee, would make every Sin as a Snake or Adder.

And of all Sins, 'twould strike the Heart with the greatest fear of its
beloved Sins. These are they especially, under which Hell lies in ambush for
us; these are Hell's strongest Ropes, by which it pulls in Souls. Has any Sin
cast a Cord of Love about thee? That Is it that is like to be the Rope to draw
thee to the Slaughter. Thou can get loose from many Sins at pleasure, but
take heed, that foolish Heart of thine will die for its Beloved.

If thou ask, What would thou have, O my my beloved Sin? What come thou to
me so often for? Why take thou up thy dwelling so near mine Heart? It will
answer, O it is to please thee, that I am so often with thee. I know thou love
me, I am the delight of thine Heart, and the pleasure of thine Eyes, thou can
not be content without me.

I am that Ease, or that Wealth, or that Credit that thou love; Is there not
a league betwixt me and thee? Am not I the nearest Friend thou have? Thy
Health, and thy Welfare, and thy Soul, are not so dear as I am to thee; thou
love me, and therefore it is I come, that thou may have what thou love;
But what have thou now to say to it?

No, no, Traitor, it is my Life thou seek, it is my Soul thou come to steal
away and devour. O, I dread thy fawning Face, thy smiles are Darts in mine
Heart; I tremble at thy wooings and embraces. Get thee gone Harlot, thy
kindnesses are deadly kindnesses; What means that Dagger in thine Hand, whilst
thou thus kissest me with the kisses of thy Mouth? It Is my Death thou art
designing, I must die if I will any longer love thee; and what Death must I
die? Is it a short and easy Death that thou art betraying me to? No, no, it is
a bitter Death, and it is a lingering Death, an eternal Death that thou art
preparing for me. This Heart has been underground, in the dark Cavern of
Pitch and Brimstone; I have been in the Deep, and viewed those Chambers of
Death, where thou lodgest thy Lovers: I have sent down my Spies, my thoughts
have been below in the Belly of Hell. I have beheld how they lie in that Pit,
roaring, and yelling, and blaspheming, raving mad with the anguish of their
burning Souls; I have seen the very Smoke and Fire that devours them, the
burning Teeth of that everlasting Worm that gnaws their Hearts, and the fury
and rage of that Serpent that deceived them in. O, my Soul quakes, my Bones
tremble, terror and astonishment have taken hold of me, at the Description my
thoughts have brought me up of that place of torment. And thou, O my beloved
Sin, even thou art it that art most like to carry me down and bury me there. If
I die that Death, 'twill be by thy hand; if I run my self into that Fire,
'twill be for thy sake. Away from me thou proud Heart, get thee gone
Covetousness, or Sensuality, or Slothfulness, or whatever the Name of my
Beloved be; I dare not have any more to do with thee; I fear thee more than
ever I loved thee; I fear where thou may lay me before tomorrow, if I should
suffer thee to lodge but one night more with me. Such dread of thy beloved Sin,
would a fear of the Curse work in thee.

Friends, consider, Are there yet any Sins that have such power over your
Hearts, are your Spirits so chained by them that you cannot get loose? O, look
to those Chains of Fire, into which by this Chain of Love, your Sins are
dragging you. Are you afraid of the Curse of God? Are you afraid to burn? Are
you afraid to be racked, and torn, and gnawn, and groun'd under the Milstones
of eternal Vengeance? then be afraid of Sin. Let Hell be your Fear, and Sin
will be your Fear; let Sin be your Fear, and it will be no longer your Love. If
you will not fear this Fear, if you will laugh at Hell, you will sport at Sin.
If you fear not to be Cursed, you will less fear to be Wicked; if you fear not
Hell, you will hardly fear to be Devils on Earth. O, Sinners, steep all your
pleasant Morsels in that Vinegar and Gall; spice all your stolen Waters with
that Pitch and Brimstone; strew all your pleasant ways with those Serpents and
Adders, which will bite and sting your Souls for ever. Mingle all your Carnal
Delights with some such deep thoughts of what they are betraying you to, and
then go on after them without fear if you can.

And as this fear of Wrath will work a fear of Sin, so will it also work the
same fear of temptations to Sin. Sin and Temptation lead the same way, though
Temptation be one remove farther back; Temptation leads to Sin, and Sin to
Death. He that fears the Fowler, will fear the snare of the Fowler; he that
fears the Hunter, will fear his Dogs and his Toyls.

Get a fear of the Land of Darkness, and you will fear to be Companions of such
as are traveling thitherward; fear the Plague, and thou will be no company for
them, whose dwelling is in the Pesthouse. Afraid of Hell, and yet never well
but when thou art amongst those Decoys that are enticing thee thither!

What are the Allurements of Sinners to the Ear of him that has Death and
Wrath in his Eye? Let them entice thee, Come, Let Us be merry, let us to the
Alehouse, or the Tavern, or to a Play; Let Us feed to the full; let us cloth our
selves with the best; let us on with the Purple and Scarlet, and fare
deliciously every day: Come along, cast in thy Lot among us, What art afraid
of? Cherish thy Flesh, please thine Eyes and thy Humor. What will such
Enticements do upon such an Heart? 'Twill be all one as if they should say,
Come let us go Hang our selves, or Drown our selves, or Stab, or Poison our
selves. Come, let us make our Souls over to the Devil, and write our selves free
among the Dead; let us get us down quick into the Pit. What would thine Heart
answer other than this? Away, O my Soul, have thou nothing to do with these
Men, come not into their Secrets, no nor so much as into their Company. The
like success would all other Temptations have. He that is afraid of Passion,
would shun Provocation; he that is afraid of Covetousness, would be afraid of an
over-busie Life in the World, etc.

O Friends, how venturous are we! how little fear of Sin! And if there be any
fear of Sin, how is it that it brings forth no more fear of Temptation? How
seldom do we consider, This Company may be a snare unto me, God knows with what
loss I may come off from them? This Garment, or this Ornament, or this Fashion,
may be a Temptation to me, my proud and vain Heart cannot bear it? this
over-thrifty, or over-busie Life, may be my undoing? this full Table, how can I
allow it to my self, who am given to Appetite? I must lay a Law upon my Belly,
and put a Knife to my Throat, when I see delicates and such variety before me.

Where almost is this tenderness and wariness to be found? Yea rather, is it
not despised and decryed, as foolish scrupulosity where it is? Go Hypocrites,
blot that Petition out of thy Prayer, Lead us not into Temptation; Never mock
God with such a Prayer against Temptation, whilst thou deridest them that fear
it. Study Hell more, till thou have more fear of Sin; study Sin more and thou will not slight Temptation.

2. The fear of the Curse, will much allay our sinful fear of the Cross. The
greater will swallow up the less. The torment of the Stone, will make us forget
the aching of a Tooth. Who will fear the barking of a Dog, that hears the
roaring of a Lion? Moses and Aaron's living Serpent, swallowed up the Serpents
of the Magicians, Luke 12.4, 5. Christ there prescribes the Fear of God, as a
cure of the Fear of Men.

As it is on the other side, The Favor of God casts a contempt on the
Flatteries of Men; the rising Sun puts out all our Candles, it is in the night
only that Gloworms shine. The more lively hopes of the Glory to come, darken
the Glory of this present World; the respect to the recompense of Reward, makes
to despise the pleasures of Sin. What is a Comet in the daylight? What is a
Cottage to him that has a Crown in his Eye? What are Meat, and Drink, and
Clothes, and Sports? what are all the blazes of these crackling Thorns, to the
Light of the Countenance of God? Have thou Faith? Has thy Faith given thee a
prospect of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light? Sure thou have little of
it, who still blessest thy self in the Earth. Get thee nearer the Lord,
acquaint thy self more with him; say thou unto him, Stand thou at my right
hand, and thou will say to the World, sit thou under my footstool.

Carnal Men make the World their God and their Heaven; when Riches increase,
and Friends abound, and they are compassed about with pleasures, then their
Hearts are glad, and their Glory rejoices. But how comes this to pass? Alas,
poor Men, this is the best they know, they never saw nor understood any higher
things than these; when they arrive to a plenteous and prosperous Estate, they
are at the top of their delight, because they are come to the top of what they
understand. The Saints have higher things in their Eye, they are gotten within
ken of the Invisible Glory, and can therefore write upon all things under the
Sun, Vanity of Vanities.

In like manner in the present case, As the favor of God will eclipse the
World's Sunshine, so the Terrors of the Lord will make all the World's storms
to vanish away into a Mist. The darkness of the Shadow will be lost in the dark
of the Night, the point of a Sword will heal the prick of a Pin.

O, what shall I do? The Devil is come down, and has great wrath; the World is
all in a flame against me; the Lions roar, the Bears and the Wolves are abroad
after the Prey; I am despised, and rejected, and trodden under-foot of Men; I am
persecuted and hunted up and down this Wilderness, and am become a Runnagate
and a Vagabond in this Earth; I have lost my Friends, lost mine Estate, and
they seek my Life also to take it away; O, what shall I do? what will become of
me?

Thou art in an hard case indeed; but have thou not greater things than that to
trouble thy self about? How is it with thy Soul? Is not there a doubt, that the
Wrath of the Almighty may be hanging over thine Head? Art thou in no danger of
being rejected and reprobated of God? of falling into the eternal Prison, of
being driven into everlasting Banishment? What do thou stand vexing and
frighting thy self with the Wasps and the Hornets? Look down, look down to the
Serpents and Scorpions, that thy Soul is in danger of falling in amongst. Take
heed, take heed, lest the eternal God cast thee into his Prison, lay thee in
his Irons. Let thy Soul dwell more amongst these greater Fears, the Terrors of
the Lord, and thou will not so much mind the Terrors of Men. Thou will not
regard the buzzings of those Hornets, if thou fear more the bitings of those
Serpents. Sanctify the Lord God in thine Heart, let him be thy Fear, let him
be thy Dread, and then thou will be more able to say, I will not fear what
Flesh can do unto me.

Now because this is the great Fear, and that which will not only secure us
from unnecessary fears, but most powerfully stir up all other necessary Fears,
I shall enlarge a little further here. And that this great Fear may be the more
effectually wrought upon the Hearts of those to whom Fear especially belongs,
I shall take the Hammer, and drive home this Nail, upon those who are in
greatest danger of the Curse of God; The unconverted Sinners of the Earth. In
order whereto, I shall show more particularly, 1. What the Curse of God is. 2.
That all unconverted Sinners are under the Curse. 3. That there is great danger
that they may never escape it.


1. What the Curse of God is. It is called in Scripture, sometimes the Wrath of
God, sometimes the Fury of God, sometimes the Vengeance of God, and his Fiery
Indignation. The Curse of God is properly his Will to punish and plague, and
take vengeance on Sinners. You may call it, God's Ill Will against Sinners.
God's Blessing is his Good Will, and his Ill Will, this is his Curse. Joseph's
Blessing, The good Will of him that dwelt in the Bush, Deuteronomy. 33.16. is the
Portion of all the Saints; and in God's good Will is every good Thing; the
precious Things of the Earth, and the fullness thereof, yea, and the precious
Things of the Heaven also. Psalm. 30.5. In his favor is Life. And in God's Ill
Will is every evil Thing; thou need no more to make thee perfectly miserable
than this, that the Almighty bears thee ill Will. It Is an Affliction to be
under the ill Will of Men; for a Child to have the ill Will of his Father, for
a Wife to have the ill Will of her Husband, for a Man to have the ill Will of
his Neighbors, for a Subject to be under the ill Will of his Prince. But
whatever there be in this, God's good Will will make amends for all; though
all the Family where thou live, yea, though all the Country bear thee ill
Will, if God bear thee good Will, thou art a blessed Man. If thou have the good
Will of all the World, and only God bears thee ill Will, thou art cursed with a
Curse.

This Curse of God is; 1. Revealed in his Word. 2. Executed in part, in this
World. 3. Pronounced in the last Judgment. 4. Executed in full, in the World to
come.


1. The Curse of God is revealed in the Word of God. Romans 1.18. The Wrath of
God is revealed from Heaven, against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of
Men. It is revealed from Heaven, that is, by the Law of God. The Law of God
binds Sinners under the Curse of God, and declares to them what this Curse of
God is.

2. The Curse of God is in part executed in this World. The Curse followed Sin
close at the heels, and is executed on Sinners here;

1. In temporal Plagues. There is a Curse upon the Creatures, which were made
for their use; Genesis 3.17. Cursed is the ground for thy sake. The whole Earth,
with all things therein, has something of the Curse cleaving to it; whereupon
though it still be useful, yet there is something in it that is noxious to Man.
Upon their labors, which often become fruitless, and ordinarily irksome and
tiresome. In the sweat of thy face, thou shall eat thy bread, Genesis 3.19. Upon
their Estates, sometimes blasting and devouring them, entering into their
Houses, and eating out the Timber thereof, and the Stones thereof; or else
turning them into temptations and snares. Upon their Bodies, Sin wounds and
bruises in Sickness and Death.

2. In Spiritual Evils inflicted upon the Souls of Sinners. The Curse of God,
not only falls upon their outward Man, but enters into their very Hearts, upon
which the Lord most signally executes this Curse, by leaving Sinners, and
giving them up to blindness of Mind, to a reprobate Mind, Romans 1.28. to
hardness of Heart, Isa. 6.9. to the power of their Lusts, Psalm. 81.12. whereby
they are filled with all unrighteousness, and reserved as in Chains under
darkness, to the Judgment of the great Day.

Sinner, thy blindness, thine hardness, thy walking after thy Lusts, in the
Counsels of thy wicked Heart, this is the Curse of God upon thee, thy Sins are
thy Curse. And that Impenitence, and that reprobate Mind which God gives some
Sinners up unto, is their sealing under the Curse. God sometimes curses Sinners
in this Life, as Christ cursed the fruitless Fig Tree; Mat. 21.19. Never Fruit
grow on thee for ever. Be thou never good for any thing, never good Thought,
never good Motion come into thee, never a drop of Dew or Rain fall upon thee,
never a Bud or Blossom spring up in thee, nothing prosper in thee, but be thou
barren for ever of every good thing; let that Soul wither, and perish and die
for ever. This Curse is the most dreadful of all Curses above-ground, and the
very next to Hell.

3. The Curse is pronounced in the last Judgment; in that terrible Sentence;
Matthew. 25.41. Depart from me ye Cursed, into everlasting Fire, prepared for the
Devil and his Angels. Now that, if it be possible, Sinners may be awakened out
of sleep, and be wrought to this Fear, I shall a little open the Mouth of the
Pit, by opening this fearful Sentence. [Depart from me]. Depart whither? why
whithersoever it is, it is sad enough that it is, depart from me, from Christ.
Christ is the Life; it can be no less than Death, to depart from Life.

[Ye Cursed], You that are bound under the Curse, you that have been filling
your selves with Curses, clothing your selves with Curses, treasuring up Curses
to your selves all your time against this day, Get you gone with your Curses
upon you; your Sins be upon you, your Guilt be upon you, your Blood be upon
your own Heads for ever. Ye are cursed with a Curse, bear ye that burden for
ever and ever.

[Into everlasting Fire]. And now you see whither it is they are to depart. I
told you but now, that it is Misery enough, that they must depart from Christ,
and from the presence of the Lord. If Sinners were to be sentenced down to this
Earth again, sent back to their Fields and Vineyards, to their Alehouses and
Whore-houses, to the best of their dirty pleasures here below; yet this, that
they are sent into banishment from the Presence and Paradise of God, when God
shall so far open their Eyes, as to let them see what they have lost, this
would be an unspeakable torment to them. But this is not their place; when they
are taken hence, they shall return hither no more, they must bid an eternal
farewell to all their carnal and brutish ease and pleasures; their Houses and
their pleasant Places shall know them no more for ever. God will not leave them
so much as the least of the left hand Blessings, not a drop of Water to cool
their Tongues; It Is into the Fire they must go; The pain of Fire is the most
tormenting of all the pains we know, and therefore made use of to shadow out
those inexpressible intolerable pains, to which the ungodly shall be sentenced
in that day. [Everlasting] Fire. What not yet at the bottom? No, this Gulf has
no bottom, they shall be ever knowing, and yet never know the worst of their
Case, whatever they feel; the worst is still behind, because Eternity is still
behind; they shall never have ease nor rest again, but shall be tormented night
and day for ever and ever.

[Prepared for the Devil and his Angels]. These are their Companions in their
Tribulation. Must we into the Fire? But may we not have good Company in the
Fire? God may be in the Fire with me. So he was in the case of the three
Confessors, and then the fire could not burn. No, it is the Devil that will be
with you in the fire, to torment and to be tormented with you for ever. What is
it to dwell in an Earthly House that is haunted with the Devil? What terror do
they live in, whose dwelling is in haunted Houses? How are they scared, and
frighted, to see the face of that Dragon, though shaped into the most beautiful
form? Those that tremble so, to see the Devil in their own Houses, what will it
be to them, to be carried with him into his House, where he will be unclothed
of all his Vizors, and no longer appear in the snape of a Man, no nor of a Lion
or Bear, but will show himself a Devil. [And his Angels]. All the Legions of
those unclean and damned Spirits, together with all those damned Souls their
fellow-Sinners. All the filth and garbage of the Earth must lie rotting and
stinking together in that dismal Hole. All the Atheists and Blasphemers, all
the Adulterers and their Whores, all the Rioters and Drunkards, that have spent
so many Days, and sat up so many Nights at the Wine and the strong Drink, shall
now be filled with the Company they loved, and shall have an everlasting Night
to lie drinking up the Wine of the Wrath of the Almighty, and of the Lamb, and
suck up the dregs and bottom of that deadly Cup, which the Fury of the Most
High has mingled and appointed for them. This is their Sentence.

4. The Curse is executed in full in the World to come. Mat. 25.46. And these
shall go away into everlasting punishment. Of this Sentence there will be, 1.
no Repeal or Reversing, it is the final Sentence, and must be executed. 2. Nor
will there be any Reprieve, but as the doom is past, away they immediately go
into the place of Execution. Esther 7.8. As the Word went out of the King's
Mouth, they covered Haman 's Face; and away presently they carried him to the
Gallows and hanged him up. As soon as ever this Word is spoken, Depart from me
ye Cursed, etc. Down they are tumbled into that Fire prepared for them, which
the Breath of the Lord, as a River of Brimstone, does kindle and make to burn
for ever. Lay all this together, and then you will know what the Curse to be
feared is.

2. Unconverted Sinners are under the Curse. We are all by Nature Children of
Wrath, cursed Children, Ephesians. 2.3. All the World is become guilty before God,
Romans 3.19. The whole World lies in wickedness, 1 John 5.19. and he that lies
in wickedness, abides in Death, and the Wrath of God abides on him. This
wicked and cursed state, is naturally the state of every Man, and whosoever is
not Converted, he is under this Curse to this day. Not only the firstborn of
Sinners, the worst and most monstrous among them, whose Iniquities have marked
them with a Curse in their Foreheads; but every Sinner, the most harmless
amongst the whole Rout, every one of them, the Wrath of God abides on him; and
if he should die, and go out of the World in such a case, there is no hope of
him but he must perish everlastingly.

How unsuitable are the jocund and merry Hearts of Sinners, to their state and
condition? These Sons of Death, are most of them Sons of Laughter, the jolly
ones of the Earth. When you pass by the Tents of evil Men, and behold them
drinking and dancing, singing and sporting, and rufling it out in their
gallantry, as some of them do; or find them sleeping at their ease and out of
fear, as it is with others of them; would you not say, Is this the noise, is
this the guise of Men appointed to Death? Is this the sound of the Vessels of
Wrath? Are these the Guilty Ones, and the Cursed Ones, whose Souls are in
Chains, dragging down to the horrible Pit? One would think, by their Faces and
Carriages, by their merry Days, and quiet Nights, that the Sinners of the
Earth were fairest for Heaven, that they had shot the Gulf, and were past
danger of miscarrying for ever.

But what art thou, O Sinner? To whom do thou belong? Whither art thou
falling? What is thine Inheritance, or thy Portion from the Lord? Consider the
Scriptures, Psalm. 11.6. Upon the Wicked he shall rain Snares, Fire and
Brimstone, and an horrible Tempest; this is the Portion of their Cup. This
shall be their Portion hereafter, but what is their Portion here? John 3.18. He
that believes not, is condemned already. And Joh. 3.6. The Wrath of God
abides on him. Every unconverted Sinner is under the Curse.

3. There is great danger he may never escape or be delivered from it. If he
never be Converted, he can never escape. The Devil shall as soon break Prison,
and make an escape from Hell to Heaven, as thou who die an Impenitent, can
escape falling into that Prison. Mat. 18.3. Except ye be converted, ye cannot
enter into the Kingdom of God. Continue Unconverted till thou die, and it is
impossible thou should escape.

And there is very great danger, that thou that art yet an Unbeliever, and an
Impenitent to this day, may never be a Convert to thy dying day. This is the
last hope thou have, that however it be with thee at present, yet hereafter
thou may be brought in. But know that whatever hope thou have of that,
there is a very great hazard that it may never be; which will appear if thou
consider these three things.

1. The multitudes of those that miscarry, that die in final Impenitency, and
so perish everlastingly, to a very few that are Converted and Saved. 2. The
constant miscarriage and succeslesness of all the means that have been hitherto
used for thy Conversion. 3. The potent Adversaries, and the mighty opposition
they make, and will make against thy Conversion.
1. Consider the multitudes of those that miscarry and die Impenitents, to a
very few that are Converted and Saved. The Scriptures tell us, That there are
but few that shall be saved. The real Converts are but a little Flock; Luke
12.32. Mat. 7.13, 14. Strait is the Gate, and narrow is the way that leads to
Life, and few there be that find it. But wide is the Gate, and broad is the way
that leads to Destruction, and many there be which go in thereat. Shall we
believe our own Experiences? How many poor Souls do we see in the World, who
walk on in the courses, and after the Lusts of this World, some in a blind and
ignorant State; some in Lewdness and Luxury; some in Covetousness and
Sensuality, in Carelessness and Carnal-security; who after a long course that
they have thus run, at length drop into the Grave, and go out of the World,
without the least token of sound Repentance: How many such Instances have we of
Men going Unbelievers and Impenitents out of the World, to here and there one
that gives any hopeful testimony of real Conversion? The number of Converts, to
them that die in Impenitence (even in the judgment of the greatest Charity) is
but a very small number.

Now, if any of you were sick of some dangerous Disease, as suppose the
Pestilence, which were so generally mortal that it swept away whole Families,
unpeopled Towns and Countries, and but here and there one did escape with his
Life; if any of you were sick of this deadly Disease, would you not conclude
your Life were in danger? would you not be afraid you should not escape? O this
Plague of the Heart, how much more mortal is it than the Plague of the Flesh?
What multitudes does it sweep away into the Pit, when but here and there one is
left for Life and Glory?

2. Consider the constant miscarriage and succeslesness, of all the means that
have been hitherto used for thy Conversion. This is not the first time thou
have been preached to; thou have been warned of thy Sins, thou have heard of
Christ, and been persuaded to come into him long before this day, and not once
nor twice, but it may be all thy days; And what has been yet done upon thee?

Behold Man, after so long a time, yet thou art in thy Sins, yet thou art
blinded and hardened, and running the same course as heretofore. O how little
hope is there that that same Word should work at last, that has hitherto done
nothing upon thee! Will the Sword of the Spirit be more like to cut to the
Heart, after it has been so long blunted upon thine Iron Neck? Will the Devils
Tenure be weakened by Prescription? Will he the easier out, by having so long
held possession? will this old Man grow weaker through Age? will thy Disease
grow more curable by continuance upon thee? or is it likely, the very same
Remedies will prevail at last, which have been so long used in vain?

If you were under some bodily Disease, and had used all the means that can be
had; If you had had Physician upon Physician, Medicine upon Medicine; the best
Physicians, the best Medicines, and still you were as short of a Cure as ever:
If one Physician should have come and prescribed to you, and you would not take
his Physic, or if you took it, yet it would not work; If after him should come
another, and another, and still no success, but your Disease should continue,
yea, and grow under the hands of all your Physicians, would you not conclude
your case were deadly, and but little hope left that you should be recovered?

Consider Sinners, what has the Lord hitherto done? what Ministry have you
had? how many Physicians have been trying their utmost skill upon you,
convincing you, warning you, beseeching you to turn from your Vanities to the
Living God? Has not the Lord God, by the Ministry of his Servants, been
dealing with you, and treating with you these many years about this thing? and
yet how far off? how ignorant of Christ, how obstinate against Christ, and how
resolved for your old ways? What, and yet for all this, so much without fear,
that all will be well at last? Look to your selves, and know for certain, that
by how much the more means have been used, without success, by so much the more
desperate is your case grown.

It Is true, the Lord may make his Word to Work at last, to convert an obstinate
Sinner, an old Sinner; He may do that by small means, which greater and more
likely means have not done, the last stroke may break the Flint, the last Arrow
may cleave the Pin, the last Word may do the Work, when so many have been lost
and done nothing: But when there are so many Instances to the contrary, when it
is so very seldom seen, will thou not only put thy self upon such a desperate
adventure, but remain without fear of any hazard?

At most there is but a Peradventure for it. The Servants of Christ must be
patient, in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves; if
[peradventure] God may give them Repentance, 2 Timothy 2.25. When we are sent
forth to Preach to Sinners in the Name of the Lord, this is all we have for it,
(as to any particular Persons) Who can tell what God may do? whether he may
bless our word to them or not? Peradventure he may, and peradventure he may
not. Now that the Word is once again Preached to you this day, peradventure it
may prosper upon some of you, peradventure you may hear, and be humbled, and be
converted; Who can tell whether some or other of you may not? But there is a
great doubt whether it may be so with thee or no, either now, or ever
hereafter; what, and yet not afraid?

3. Consider the potent Adversaries there are, and the mighty opposition they
make, and will make against thy Conversion. Know and lay to heart these three
things; 1. If all that the Devil can do to hinder thee, will prevail, Thou
shall never be Converted. 2. If all that thine own flesh can do to hinder thee,
will prevail, Thou shall never be Converted. 3. If all that the World can do to
hinder thee, will prevail, Thou shall never be Converted.


1. If all that the Devil can do to hinder thee, will prevail, thou shall never
be converted, nor escape the Wrath and Curse of God. The Devil is great with
Sinners, he can rule them at pleasure; 2 Timothy 2.25. They are led captive by him
at his Will. The Devil's Will is a Law to Sinners, and such a Law as they are
willingly subject to. The Devil's Government is not like to displease Sinners,
for his Law is, That every one should please himself; He looks for no more,
than that every one should do what is right in his own Eyes. Therefore shall
this Bramble be King, as long as Sinners can carry it. If it should be put to
vote in the World, who should be Ruler, God or the Devil, the Sinners of the
Earth would give their vote for the Devil; as for the Lord God, they would say
the same concerning the Father, as once those wicked Ones did concerning the
Son, Luke 14.19. We will not have him to reign over us. The Devil is mighty
with Sinners, he is their Prince and their Ruler; as far as God lets him alone,
he can order them at pleasure; they will follow this Lion whither ever he goes.

And this Devil is an Adversary to Souls, they shall certainly die and be
damned, if he can do it; 1 Pet. 5.8. He walks up and down seeking whom he may
devour.

Sinner, when do thou mean to return into the way of Life? When will thou to
Christ? The Devil has such power with thee, that if God leave thee to thy
self, thou art never like to come to Christ till he be willing to let thee
come. And when will that be? Who is it that has kept thee from him all this
time? I will tell thee, when he will drag thee to Christ; but by his good will,
thou shall never go before. If he can but hold thee from him, till the
Judgment, then he will drag thee before him, to receive thy Sentence for all
thine ungodliness. When the Season of Grace is over, then thou may go, but
if he can help it, never till then.

2. If all that thine own flesh can do to hinder thee, can prevail, thou will
never be converted. Consider here two things; 1. Thy Flesh is against it. 2.
Thy Flesh has great power with thee.


1. Thy flesh is against thy Conversion. Romans 8.7. The Carnal Mind is enmity
against God; It is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be.
Particularly; 1. The Interest of the Flesh is against it. 2. The Inclinations
of the Flesh are against it.


1. The Interest of the Flesh is against thy Conversion. By the Flesh, I mean
corrupt Nature, called often Flesh in Scripture. Our carnal Minds, the Will of
the Flesh, our fleshly Desires and Dispositions, and all the Lusts of it. This
Flesh is concerned against God and the Lord Jesus Christ. Christ comes to
Crucify the Flesh, Romans 6.6. 1 John 3.8. For this cause the Son of God was
manifested, that he might destroy the works of the Devil. No more Gluttony, no
more Drunkenness, no more pleasing our Eyes, or our Throats, or our Appetites,
Christ will have Lust starved, and no longer pampered. Christ will allow
Necessaries, but his way is to keep the Flesh low; he will allow good Bread,
and Bread enough, but often it is but coarse, and such as Lust will never be
contented with, nor ever prosper by.

Hereupon the Flesh is concerned against Christ, to resist him, and to do
whatever it can to keep him out. Who comes there? says the Flesh, when Christ
knocks. Who is it that calls after thee? To whom art thou joining thy self?
What, to Christ? Will thou hearken to him? then farewell all. No more Mirth and
Pleasure, no more Ease or Jollity, no more Credit or Gain; Look to thy self,
all is a going, and will be gone if Christ once sets footing in thee. Christ
tells me, (says the fleshly Heart) I shall find favor with God, I shall
obtain the pardon of my Sins, and all the good things of the other World, if I
will hearken to him. But who will keep me alive in this World? I must have
Money, and Meat, and Drink, and Credit, and Friends, or else I am like to have
but a poor Life of it here. The blessings of the other World will never help me
to live and prosper in this World; I cannot feed my self, nor cloth my self, nor
provide for my Family, with the promises and hopes of good things to come; and
God knows, how little else Christianity will leave me. I am like to be but a
poor, hunger-bitten, melancholic, forsaken Soul, if I hearken to Christ. Away
(says the Flesh) no more treaty about any such thing, which does so evidently
tend to thy prejudice and undoing.

2. The Inclinations of the Flesh are against it. The Flesh hangs toward Earth
and Sin, and is contrary to God and Holiness. Romans 8.5. Those that are after
the Flesh, do mind, or savor, the things of the Flesh; and so do hang back
from things Spiritual and Heavenly. What is this way of Life that Christ calls
me to? It Is quite contrary to me, my very Nature disgusts it, my temper and
genius is against it. I was never acquainted with, nor accustomed to such a
way, and I cannot abide it. This preciseness, and this scrupulosity and
tenderness, I have more mind to laugh at it, than submit to it. It even turns
my Stomach to see the folly of it in others, and I hate to be such a fool my
self. I should be glad of the Salvation of Christ, but sure I shall never
endure his Discipline. I am willing to save what I have, and to make the best
of what is before me: and that I am sure Christ will never suffer me, and
therefore run after him who will, he must have me excused.

Do thou know, O vain Man, what it is to swim against the Stream? and do
thou not feel thine inward Stream running against Holiness and serious
Christianity? O when art thou like to come to it? Art thou not yet afraid it
may never be? especially when thou considerest; That,

2. The Flesh has great power with thee. In Sinners, the Flesh is the great
governing Principle; it bears rule in the whole Man. It Is their Lord and their
Law, and hence they are called, the Servants of Sin, Joh. 8.34. and said; to
live after the Flesh, Romans 8.13. Whatever wickedness is done by them, it is
the Flesh that commands them to it. Whenever the Heart works to Envy, or works
to Wrath, or to Pride, or to Covetousness, it is the Flesh that sets it thus on
work. It is no more I that do it, but Sin that dwells in me, Romans 7.17. And
whatever good Works are hindered, it is the Flesh that hinders them. Romans 7.19.
I find a Law, that when I would do good, evil is present with me, so that the
good that I would I do not. It Is said of the Regenerate, much more true is it
of Sinners. Bid a Sinner Repent, alas he cannot; bid him Pray, he cannot Pray;
Bid him turn to Christ, and trust in Christ, and follow him; alas, poor Man, he
cannot, his Flesh is against it, and has such a rule over him, that he cannot
resist it. The Devil rules without, and the Flesh rules within, and who can act
against two such potent Rulers?

By the way, Sinners are in a poor case the while, that are under two such
potent Governors, the Devil and Sin. How is it possible, O Sinners, you should
be so secure, when the Devil is your King, and has set up that young Devil,
Sin, to be his Viceroy? If you saw a poor Man cast into a Den, and there
committed to the custody of a Lion and his Whelp; would it not pity your Heart
to think, in what a case that poor Man were betwixt two such Keepers? Sinner,
Sinner, Look to thy self, Behold the Lion and his Whelp; thy Soul is in a more
dreadful case, under the command of Sin and of the Devil, than thy Carcass
would be, under the Paw of those Ravenous Beasts; Save thy self from these
Murderers.

3. If all that the World can do, to hinder Sinners Conversion, will do it,
they will never be Converted. The World is against it, (the evil Men of the
World, I here mean) they are all against the Conversion of Sinners.
Particularly; 1. The Spirit of the World is against it. 2. The Examples of the
World are against it.


1. The Spirit of the World is against it. The whole World is of the same
Spirit, which the Scribes and Pharisees are said to be of, Mat. 23.13. They
shut up the Kingdom of God against Men, and neither will enter in themselves,
nor suffer those that are entering to go in. They are all of another Kingdom,
and thereby Parties against Christ and his Kingdom; they are for making
Proselites, but it is for Hell, not for Heaven.

This Spirit of the World is a Spirit of Envy and Hatred against Christ and his
Followers, Joh. 15.19. And this evil and envious Spirit, is that which vents it
self in those Scoffs, Reproaches, and Persecutions, which they let fly and
raise against every Soul, that so much as looks after serious Christianity. How
full is the World of Experiences of this kind? No sooner is any Soul awakened
from his Sins, making out after Christ, and showing himself among the
Disciples, but presently the Birds of Prey are picking at him; His carnal
Friends, will dissuade and discourage him, the Ishmaels and Nimrods will be
upon his back, mocking and reviling, hunting and persecuting him. Christ tells
us, Luke 15.10. There Is joy in [Heaven] over one Sinner that repents; But
what is there in Hell, or in the World, the Territories of Hell? O they are all
in a rage, the Devil is madded, when he has lost a Captive, and resolves if he
will be gone, not to let him go, without some marks of his Fury and Rage.

Sinner, thou art yet under the Power of the Devil, and it may be thou may
never make an offer to be gone, but wilt abide with him in quiet till he carry
thee home with him to his place; But if ever thou should make an attempt to
be gone from him, and to join thy self to Christ, behold he has a whole World
of Instruments ready, either to block up thy way, or stick in thy sides; And
art thou not afraid, if it should come to this, that thou should rather abide
as thou art, than adventure on such Discouragements?

2. The Examples of the World are against it. How great is the power of
Example? the whole World is much governed by Examples. Laws can do little in
comparison of what Examples can do. There is a great influence that good
Examples often have upon Men's Minds and Manners. Therefore Christ did not only
make a way into the Kingdom by his Blood, nor only show us the way in his
Doctrine, but also led us the way by his Example, 1 Pet. 2.21. Therefore also
the Ministers of Christ are required, not only to feed the Flock by their
Instructions, and to rule them by good Discipline, but to be Examples to the
Flock, 1 Pet. 5.3. And therefore also Christians are required to give a good
Example to the World, and one to another. It Is a vain thing for us to exhort
one another, Be humble, be sober, be meek, be merciful, whilst we our selves
are proud and unmerciful, passionate and revengful; Give a good example, if you
would do good by your good words; let not your Feet tread down, what your Lips
build up; destroy not by an evil Life, what you build by good Counsel. Thou
that teach another should not steal, do thou steal? Thou that say a Man
should not commit Adultery, do thou commit Adultery? Romans 2.21, 22. Thou that
say to another, Swear not, Lie not, give not place to Wrath, speak evil of
no Man, Do thou the same thing? Thou do more mischief by thy evil Works,
than ever thou art like to do good by thy good Speeches.

O (by the way) let us learn to bewail, and to be ashamed of our evil Examples
that we have given. Ah Wretches, that ever any People should be charged
concerning any Professors, as the Disciples were once charged concerning the
Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 23. Do as they say, but do not as they do. Shall
this evil World have occasion to speak thus of any of the Preachers or
Professors of Christianity, Beware of them, follow not after them; for behold,
they bid Men beware of Covetousness, and yet who more covetous? They bid Men
beware of Pride, and yet who more proud? They charge it upon others to be just,
to be true, to be meek, and yet who more fraudulent, more false and peevish
than themselves? O how much mischief do poor Sinners suffer by the evil
Examples of some Professors? Good Examples draw mightily, but evil Examples
more. But yet the evil Examples (of Professors) are not they by which Sinners
are in the greatest danger of being kept back from Christ (though these be
pernicious enough), but the evil Examples of the World. Sinners are of the
World, and they are professedly for following of the World. Now what Examples
do the profane World set before them? whither are they leading them? Are they
making toward Christ, and running from their Sins unto God? Does not the
Stream run quite contrary? And does it not pass for a sufficient Encouragement
to them in their evil ways, to think they do but as their Forefathers did
before them, and as their Friends and their Neighbors do?

See how the Example of the World is urged against following of Christ, John
7.48, 49. Have any of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees believed on him? But this
People who knows not the Law are cursed. What do ye mean ye foolish People to
follow this Jesus? Do ye see any of the wise Men, or great Men, do any of the
Rulers believe on him? And will ye think your selves wiser than they? Go not
after him, be none of his Disciples.

And is not the same Argument urged upon Sinners daily? Why should you trouble
your heads about these Matters? About Repentance, and Regeneration, and
Conscience, and making sure for the other World? Do the Pharisees, and
Highpriests, do the great Men, and the wise Men, trouble themselves about any
such Matters? It Is true, there are a sort of People which know not the Law, a
company of ignorant Souls, an heady and a giddy Generation, that trouble
themselves and the World about these things; but what heed is to be given to
them, a company of despicable, simple Souls? Do any of the wise or great Ones
take this course?

Sinner, think with thy self, what a mighty influence this sort of Argument
has had upon thee hitherto? The World despise the Gospel, the World neglect
Christ: The World are for the Flesh, for Liberty, and Care, and Pleasures, and
Idleness, and against the Spirit of Christianity, the Stream runs downwards
toward Sin and Hell; and hitherto thou have been swimming with the Stream,
have gone with the Multitude, and have troubled thy self about Christ and
Religion as little as any of them. O tremble to think what great danger thou
art in, that thou may still run down that Stream, and never stop till thou
fall into that Gulf, from which there will be no Return or Redemption for ever.

Now Sinner, lay all these things together, and then judge if thou have not
reason to fear thou may never escape the Wrath and Curse of God. It is
evident, that whilst thou art unconverted, thou art under the Curse; Well, but
yet thou hopest that one time or other thou may be Converted; But how great
fear is there thou may not? All the ungodly World are against thy
Conversion; thine own Flesh and the Devil are against it; all these will join
together to hinder it if they can. And besides all the means that have been
hitherto used, prosper not; thou have been Preached to, thou have been Prayed
over, thou have had many years of Warnings, and yet nothing has prevailed. And
what multitudes are there that have been in thy case, that have stood it out to
the last and died in their Sins, to here and there one that have been Converted
and Saved? Sure thou art in a fearful case, that Curse that hangs over thee,
there is but little hope but it will light upon thee, and abide upon thee for
ever. O fear this Curse, fear it in time, that if it be possible thou may
take warning and fly from the Wrath to come.

V. Lastly; How should we improve this Holy Fear.
And now I am fallen upon that which I chiefly intended in the choice of this
Subject. This Fear will be of general use, and of great advantage for the
engaging us in, and the more succesful managing of the whole business of
Religion and Christianity, in all the parts and duties of it. I have a large
Field before me, but I shall insist only upon these three general Directions.

1. Fear and Search. 2. Fear and Beware. 3. Fear and Follow after.
Direction 1.
Fear and Search. It will much help us to the understanding of our Work, if we
could once get to an understanding of our state; to the understanding of our
state, a search is necessary, and no such narrow search is like to be made, as
when we search with Fear; therefore let the first Direction be, Fear and Search.

Let Fear set you on searching, and let it assist you in your search; let it
follow you into every Corner both of your Heart and Life. Fear is suspicious,
and Suspicion will be inquisitive; it will not take up with Reports or
Appearances, but will inquire diligently whether Matters be so or no.

Christians know that they must pass under the search of God, and their fear
how they shall abide his trial, will put them upon the more narrow trial of
themselves.

Besides the great trial that will be in the last and general Judgment, which
we use to have a special eye unto, in all our trials of our selves, there is a
search which God makes into us even in this life; And he searches us, 1. By
his Eye. 2. By his Hand.


1. By his Eye. Psalm. 11.4. His Eye behold, his Eyelids try the Children of
Men. Jer. 17.10. I the Lord search the Heart, I try the Reins. God searches
not as Man searches, by enquiring into that which before was hid from him; his
searching is no more but his beholding; he sees the Heart, he beholds the
Reins; God's very sight is searching. Heb. 4.13. All things are naked and open
to his Eyes, (...), dissected or anatomized. He has at once as exact a view of
the most hidden Things, the very Entrails of the Soul, as if they had been with
never so great curiosity anatomized before him.

2. By his Hand; that is, by his Judgments and Chastisements, which he sends
forth to try them that dwell upon the Earth, Rev. 3.10. Zeph. 1.12. I will
search Jerusalem with Candles. Every Arrow which God shoots, is a Candle to
search out Men's Iniquities. When God sends a Sword, or Famine, or Pestilence
upon the Earth, these are the Lord's Searchers, which he has sent forth to try
the Children of Men.

A fearing Christian will search himself, that he may approve himself to the
search of God's Eye, and that he may prevent the search of his Hand. God's Eye
is upon me every day, proving mine Heart and my Reins; I doubt he may see what
he will not like in me: Search, O my Soul, what there is that may offend, and
whether there be not something in thee also which the Lord loves. God's
Searchers are coming abroad, and who may abide the day of their coming? Is not
Poverty to be feared? Is not Sickness to be feared? Is not Sword, or Famine, or
Fire, to be feared? O what sharp work may these Searchers make upon me? Since
it is so hard to endure, let me do what may be done, to prevent this kind of
trial of the Lord, by trying my self. But especially this Fear will put us upon
a search of our selves, with respect to the severest Trial, in the final
Judgment of God.

But what must we search for? Why what is it that thou do Fear? tell me that,
and that will tell thee for what thou must search.

There are two things especially which thou have to fear, 1. Lest there should
not be found in thee that good thing which may evidence thee to be approved of
God. 2. Whatever Evils there be in thee at which the Lord will be offended.


Fear this Fear and it will set you a searching accordingly.

1. Fear lest there should not be, and search whether there be Truth and
Vprightness in thine Heart toward God; whether the Seed of God, his special
Grace has taken root in thee. The Ploughers have been ploughing, the Sowers
have gone forth to sow, but what Seed has there fallen upon mine Heart, and
what Root has it taken there?

Such a search should not be made without fear. The Apostle, 2 Cor. 13.5.
exhorting to this Work, Examine your selves whether ye be in the Faith, prove
your own selves, does in the next words fright them to it. Know you not your
own selves how that Jesus Christ is in you except you be Reprobates? Why should
we examine? What if we be not in the Faith? Why you know what, says he, then
you are Reprobates. You are Reprobates if ye be not Believers. Do ye know what
it is to be under a Divine Anathema? to be in a state of Reprobation from God?
is there not a doubt that this may be found to be your case? O how can you but
search whether it be or no? And how can you but fear, while you are making such
a search? Are you not afraid to let your selves go unsearch'd? Do you not
tremble till you know how it is with you? And how can you set upon so great a
Work without a trembling Heart?

Beloved, It is a strange thing, and it is a lamentable thing to observe, what
stupendous Security there is upon the Hearts of Men concerning the state of
their Souls. There Is no need of searching, with the most they are already
satisfied. It Is well with my Soul, says one; I shall have peace, says
another; I do not doubt of Mercy, through the Grace of God, says a third: and
so go on through a whole crowd of Sinners, and you may have the same account,
every one at peace, every one already satisfied. But how came you to be
satisfied in so great a Case? Have you ever searched whether Matters be so well
with you? or else, how can you but fear that you may be mistaken?

And what if you should be mistaken? How strongly soever you are conceited of
your uprightness, how impregnable soever your confidence is at present,
notwithstanding all your boastings of your integrity, yet God will not take you
upon your words; trust your selves if you will, yet he will not trust you, you
must be tried what you are; Romans 14.12. Every one of us to must give an account
of our selves to God. Yet he will not take the account we give, without trying
whether it be a true account; 2 Cor. 5.10. We must all appear before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, (...), we must be made manifest and laid open, (as the
word imports) that it may plainly be seen what we are. And this severe search
that shall be made in the Judgment, the Apostle calls in the next verse, the
terror of the Lord. 'Twould shake the securest Hearts, to understand what a
through search will be made of them in that day.

God will bring all things to light, God will lay all in the Balance. What a
dreadful Word was that to that King, Dan. 5.27. Thou art weighed in the
Balance, and found wanting. What if that should be your case at last? if God's
Light should find you to be Darkness, if God's Balance should find you too
light? What if, whilst you count your selves Children, God should find you
Bastards; if whilst you count your selves Vines, he should find you Thorns; if
while you count your selves Believers, Beloved, and Chosen of God, that day
should declare you to be Infidels and Reprobates?

What if it should be so? you are stark Fools, and worse than mad, if you think
such a question may not be put, What if I should be mistaken? Is such a mistake
on which your eternal state depends, of so little consequence with you, as not
to need such a question to be put about it? Are you so little concerned how
matters shall go with you in the Judgment? Are you so little concerned what
your final Sentence shall be? which of you for Life, and which for Death? who
for Blessedness, and who for Burning? What Rocks are those Hearts of yours, if
they do not rent and quake for fear? And if you do fear to think, what if I
should be mistaken, let that Fear set you a searching, whether you have
hitherto been mistaken or no.

Beloved, whether you fear or no, give me leave to tell you, I am afraid
concerning you. 1. Some of you, I fear there are, upon whom there has been no
good wrought, no nor any thing done toward it; not a Clod broken, not a Thorn
rooted out, not a Grain of good Seed fallen upon your Hearts. Upon whom the
Lord has been ploughing, as upon Rocks, sowing as upon Heaths, hammering as
upon Anvils, hewing as upon Iron; who with those Rebels, Isa. 48.4. have Brows
of Grass, and Iron Sinews; who have hitherto resisted the Holy Ghost, and put
from you the Word of Life; whom both the Seed and the Showers that have fallen
upon you, have left hard and barren, bringing forth nothing but Briars and
Thorns; In whom Oaths, and Lies, and Drunkenness, and such like, are all the
Fruits that have been brought forth; who are far from God, and yet far from
fear; whom a very little search might be enough to convince you, that you are
in the Gall of Bitterness, and the Bond of Iniquity. If you would but cast an
Eye upon God's Glass, your foul Faces would quickly show you what you are.

O Sinners, if you your selves yet fear not, let others fears concerning you,
thus far prevail with you, as to cast a serious Eye upon your selves. Make a
little enquiry, Is it not thus with me? Is not my Soul in this very case? If I
should ask, Where are my Sins? Behold, they compass me round about; they are in
mine Heart, and in my Mouth, and my whole Life is filled up with Iniquity. But
if I should ask, Where is my Faith? where is my Repentance? where is the new
Heart and the new Life? Where is the Knowledge, and Love, and Life, and Fear of
God? What could I say, what answer could I give? Make a little enquiry thus; a
very little, to a Man in thy case, methinks should be enough to convince and
awaken thee.

2. Others of you I fear there maybe, upon whom the Lord has been at work, but
the Work is not yet brought through. Upon whom though the Plough has entered and
made some sign, yet it has not gone deep enough; though the Thorns, some of
them, are cut down, yet their Root remains; though the Seed of God has
fallen upon you, and some Blades have sprung up, yet it has taken no root;
upon whom though there appear some dawning toward the Day, yet you are not
come to Sunrising.

As for you, it is a mercy that there is something done, especially if there be
still more a-doing. It is a mercy that the Lord has made a motion of Love to
you, and that he is not totally rejected; that there is a Treaty for Peace,
whereof you have so far accepted, as to yield to a Cessation of Arms, and a
forbearance of those open Acts of Hostility against God which have been; that
the Drunkards are become sober, that the Swearers now fear an Oath; that the
Enemies of God, and of all Righteousness, are now content to hear of a
Reconciliation. This is a mercy.

Much more, That any of you are so far convinced of the misery of Sin, of the
excellency and necessity of Religion and Godliness, that you are wrought to
some good liking of the Holy Ways of God, and are wishing, and waiting, and
making out after the Lord. This is a Mercy, because there is hope, that he that
has brought you hitherto, will bring you on farther and farther till he has
brought you home. But yet there is matter of great fear too, lest presuming you
have already attained, you should sit down short of Saving-Grace, and so perish
at last.

With a special respect to such as these, I shall show, 1. How such Persons may
be wrought to this Fear. 2. How this Fear will work to a farther Search.


1. To work this Fear in such, let these following Particulars be considered;
1. There are preparations to Grace, that are not Grace. 2. There are Images of
Grace, that are not Grace. 3. There are some properties of gracious Persons,
that are no certain Evidences of Grace. 4. There is no one Grace, that is
really so, which will put us out of doubt. 5. Whatever we have, that is short
of Saving-Grace, it may go back, and we may be reduced to a worse State than
ever before.


1. There are preparations to Grace, that are not Grace. God usually takes
time, and leads Men on to Christ by degrees; we are not presently Converts, as
soon as we cease to Bedlams. There may be awakenings of sleepy Souls, there may
be enlightnings of dark Souls, there may be shakings of obdurate and hardened
Souls, which though they may have a tendency to farther good, yet may be far
enough short of it. There may be the pangs of travel, which may never bring to
the Birth. In particular,

1. There may be Conviction of Sin, and yet no Grace. Conviction is not
Conversion. Ahab was once a Convinced Person, and so was Judas also, but never
Converts.

2. There may be a good Opinion of Grace, where there is no Grace. The Way of
Christ may be right in your Eyes, and yet your Hearts not be upright in his
Eyes. You may be persuaded in your Hearts concerning the Way of Godliness, that
this is the Good Way, that this is the Right Way, and an Excellent Way; that
the Life of a Christian, led according to the Rules of the Gospel, is an
Excellent Life; Romans 2.18. Thou know his Will, and approvest the things that
are more Excellent. And to this good Opinion Men may be wrought, 1. From the
Self-evidencing Light of that Holy Doctrine, which prescribes and requires
Godliness. 2. From the convincing Lives of the Sincere Professors of Godliness.
3. From the Self-condemnation that is to be observed in all other ways.


1. From the Self-evidencing Light of the Doctrine of Godliness. The Doctrine
of Christianity proves it self to be of God, by that Divine Light that shines
forth in it, there is a stamp of Divinity imprinted upon it. Is God an Holy
God? So is this Doctrine an Holy Doctrine. Is God a Merciful and Gracious God?
So is this Doctrine, a Doctrine of Mercy, a Doctrine of Grace; there is Grace
and Mercy runs through the whole Body of it; nay, they are the very Soul and
Life of it. Is God a God of Wisdom? The Doctrine of Christianity is the Wisdom
of God in a Mystery. Is God a God of Truth and of Righteousness? Such is the
Doctrine of the Gospel; that not only is according to Truth, and reveals the
Righteousness of God, but requires Truth and imposes Righteousness upon all
that will embrace it. What is more contrary to this Word of Truth than a Lie,
or than Hypocrisy and Guile? What is more contrary to this Word of
Righteousness than Unrighteousness? Does the Word of the Gospel allow any
Iniquity? Is there any guile found in it, or any toleration whereof in its
Professors? Does it not command all Righteousness, and condemn all
Unrighteousness? even while it justifies the Sinner, it condemns the Sin. This
Religion is pure Religion, and undefiled before God, Jam. 1.25. Teaching us,
that denying all ungodliness and worldly Lusts, we should live righteously,
soberly, and godly in this present World, Tit. 2.13, 14. Now he that knows that
God is an Holy and Wise God, a God of Grace, of Truth, and of Righteousness,
and does but understand the Scriptures, may, without any great difficulty, be
led into a good opinion of that Godliness which is there held forth and
required.

2. From the Convincing Lives of the Sincere Professors of Christianity. I do
not say, from the Lives of all Professors; some Professors of Christianity
there are, who are not Christians. Some such there are amongst Professors, who
are disorderly walkers, whose Ways are so evidently contrary to their
Profession, as if the Devil had led them into their Christianity, on purpose to
disgrace the Gospel; and it is like enough, 'twas his doing indeed, to make
Professors of them. This Tempter may tempt Men into Religion, as far as may
sewe his own ends, and Men's Lusts may make them Disciples. Such, I mean, who
while they pretend to the Spirit, do walk after the Flesh, who hold the Truth
in Unrighteousness, Romans 1.18. who are proud, self-conceited, self-willed,
heady, giddy, wandering and unstable Souls; like crooked Lines, that in some
points touch with the Rule, but for the most part do swerve from it, on this
hand and on that. Who are scrupulous about some smaller Matters, which they
fancy to have an appearance of evil, and yet allow themselves in apparent
Evils, straining at a Gnat, and swallowing a Camel, insisting much on some
Circumstances, and neglecting the weightier Matters of the Law, like those Mat.
23.23, 24.

It Is but little that Godliness is beholden for the good Opinion it has
obtained to such as these; But to the sincere and single-hearted Professors,
whose Lives are a Copy or Pattern of wholesome Doctrine, holding forth the Word
of Life, exemplifying the Holy Rules laid down in Scripture, and showing forth
the Virtues of Christ before the World. Who are in the World, as he was in the
World; who live by Faith, and walk in Love, being humble, meek, peaceable,
merciful, temperate, true, righteous and holy, in all manner of Conversation.
These are the Persons whose Lives do commend Godliness to the World; and force
their very Hearts, many of them, to acknowledge: Sure this is the Way of God
that these Men walk; it cannot be but God is in them of a very truth; sure
these are the Servants of the Living God, this is Religion indeed; if there be
any way of Life this is the way.

It Is true, this way is everywhere spoken against by the malicious, but the
more like to be of God for that; So 'twas in the Apostles days, Acts 28.22. As
for this Sect, we know it is everywhere spoken against: Mark it, Christianity
was counted by the malicious but a Sect or a Faction, and Christians but
Sectaries; so they were counted and called, about 1600 years ago, and therefore
it is no disparagement if they be counted so still.

But says the considering Sinner, let them be called what Men please,
Sectaries, Seducers, Hypocrites, or what else malice can invent; yet as it was
said of Christ, John 10.21. These are not the words of him that has a Devil;
so it may be said of his Followers, Call them what you will, yet these are not
the Lives of Schismatics or Hypocrites, these Men are the Servants of the most
High God, and their way is the way of Life.

3. From the Self-condemnation that all other ways carry in them. If this be
not the way of Life, there is none; if these be not the Servants of God, there
are none such in the World. For where are they else to be found? Are the
Ignorant, and the Earthly, and the Irreligious, are these the Religious? Are
the Carnal, and the Formal, and the outside Worshippers, that will give Christ
the Cap and the Knee, and yet can Drink, and Riot, and Swear, and Scoff, are
these the sincere Worshippers of God? This must be the Good Way, or which else
can it, with any tolerable probability, be imagined to be? Surely if this be
not it, we must even all count to be damned, for there is no other, that so
much as looks like the Path of Life.

The Atheist must say, I am not in the way to God, this Fool has said in his
Heart, There is no God.

The Pope with his Doctrine must say, I am not the Way, I am Antichrist, it is
Christ only that brings us to God.

Formality must say, I am not the Way, for God is a Spirit, and they that
worship him, must worship him in Spirit and in Truth, John 4.24.

Profaneness must say, I am not the Way to God, I am the Way of Death, and my
steps lead down to Hell. If there be any Way of Death in the World, profaneness
is it.

Drunkards, and Swearers, and Revellers, and Rioters, if their Consciences may
but have the privilege of their Tongues, will tell you, we are all out of the
Way, we must take another course than the Devil and our Lusts will yet suffer
us, or else woe to us that ever we were born; We would be loath to die in the Way
we live in, we must turn a new Leaf or we are undone. These do not so much as
pretend to be in the Way of Life.

Well, thus far now a Sinner may come; by beholding the Self-evidencing Light
that is in the Doctrine of Godliness, the convincing Lives of the Sincere
Professors thereof, the Self-condemnation that is in all other Ways, he may be
led into a good Opinion of Sincere-Godliness. And this Good Opinion is but a
little ground gotten toward it, It is not Godliness to think well of it.

3. Sinners good Opinion of Godliness, may beget good Inclinations toward it,
and good wishes after it. Happy are those Souls that are in Christ, who walk
not after the Flesh but after the Spirit; O that my Soul were among them, I
could even find in mine Heart to be one of his Disciples. I am in a strait
between two, (as the Apostle said in another case, Phil. 1.21.) and what I
shall choose I wot not; fain I would be a Christian in earnest, I see it would
be best for me to be so, and O that I were! But on the other side, how shall I
bear the Labors and Sufferings of that way? What shall I do? what shall I
choose? I would be a Disciple of Christ, but I am afraid what may come of it.

4. Sinners good Opinions and good Inclinations, may bring forth some
ineffectual Attempts and Endeavors; they may set forth after Christ; their
enlightened Minds may set their Hearts upon them, and cause them to fall a
reasoning thus with themselves; If this be the good way, why should not I walk
in it? Is a Godly Life such an Excellent Life? can I approve it in others? can
I pronounce them blessed who so live? Come, my Soul, put in for a part in
Christ, resolve once what thou will do, stay not in these Uncertainties, hang
no longer betwixt Heaven and Hell; speak the word once, Will thou be for
Christ? Shall the Sincere Christians God be my God, their Hopes my Hopes, their
Life my Life? Shall I cast in my Lot among them, and take up my Lot with
theirs? Come along, venture after the Lamb, venture for the Blessedness to
come; set to Praying, set to Hearing, give thy self to the study and practice
of that blessed course which thou know will have its Fruit unto Holiness,
and its end Everlasting Life. And yet after all this, little or nothing may be
done.

These now are fair Preparations to Grace, but this is not Grace. Conviction is
not Conversion; the approving, and liking, and wishing for, and making some
ineffectual Attempts and Offers at Godliness, this is not choosing and embracing
it.

2. There are Images of Grace, which are not Grace. There is a form of
Godliness which is not Godliness, 2 Timothy 3.5. An Image is not the same, an
Image of a Man is not a Man, the Image of a Christian is not a Christian. The
Image of Christ is a Christian, but the Image of a Christian is no Christian;
as great a likeness as there is, yet there is as great a difference also as
betwixt Living and Dead.

There is something like Faith which is not Faith, something like Repentance
which is not Repentance; something like the New Man, and is not it, but the Old
Man new dressed up; and so like it may be, in Complexion, in Language, in
Carriage, that it is often taken to be the same. The Pangs of Travel may bring
forth, but when all comes to all, it may be but a dead Child; there may be all
the Parts, the Head, the Eyes, the Hands, and every Limb, but no Life; and yet
when it is but newly brought forth, it may be hard to discern whether it be
alive or dead; so difficult is it to discern between Common and Special Grace;
so many Counterfeits have there been found, which have both been Deceivers and
deceived, as is enough to make the Hearts of many Christians indeed to shake.

3. There are some Properties of Gracious Persons, which are no certain
Evidences of Grace; but may be found also in Hypocrites. Nothing can evidence
the Truth of Grace, but that which is so adaequately proper to Saints, that it
cannot be found in an Hypocrite. Whatever maybe found in an Hypocrite, can
never certainly prove me to be no Hypocrite. Assuring Marks must be
distiguishing Marks, such as separate betwixt the Precious and the Vile; and
nothing can distinguish the Sound from the Unsound, but that which the Unsound
cannot attain. As it is said of some Sinners, Deuteronomy. 32.5. Their Spot is not the
Spot of his Children; So may it be said of all Saints, Their Grace is not the
Grace of his Enemies; and we can never come to give a clear and comfortable
Judgment of our selves, till we find something in us, which is not to be found
in any Hypocrites in the World.

But some Properties there are of Sincere Christians, which may be found in
Hypocrites; which yet some Divines have somewhat unwarily made use of, and
proposed for Peoples Trial of their States.

Indeed it is much to be wished, that we were more exact and cautelous in this
Matter, than many of us are at this day. Though good use may be made of
probable. Evidences, yet should we declare to our People, which are but
probable Marks, and which are certainly concluding. Of those Properties of
Christians, which some Divines have formerly given as Marks of Sincerity, I
shall mention three; 1. Prayer. 2. Hearing the Word. 3. Reforming the Life.


1. Prayer. This is a property of a Sincere Christian, He is praying Person.
Behold be prays, 'twas said of Paul, when he was a young Convert, Acts 9.11.
The whole Generation of the Saints, are called, Psalm. 24.6. a Generation of
Seekers; This is the Generation of them that seek thee. But are there no
praying Hypocrites, as well as praying Believers? See Mat. 6. Will he always
call upon God? says Job, Chap. 27.10. But though he will not pray always, yet
will he never pray?

2. Hearing the Word. This also is the property of Christians, they are Hearers
of the Word. Joh. 10.27. My Sheep hear my Voice.

3. Reforming the Life. 1 Cor. 6.11. Such were some of you; that is, Drunkards,
Revilers, Covetous, Fornicators, etc. but ye are washed. Ye are now reformed
Persons; and are there no reformed Hypocrites? Every Reformation is not
Sanctification.

It Is a good sight to see Men that once lived like Heathens, and never called
upon God, to set upon a course of serious Prayer. It Is a good sight to behold
others, that not only neglected the Word, but mocked at, and persecuted those
that heard it, to be now become constant Hearers themselves. It Is a good sight,
and a comfortable, to behold those that were once loose livers, Drunkards,
Swearers, etc. to become Reformed Persons, to see some see Men from Persecutors
to become Pofessors of Religion; these things are a good fight, but they are no
sure sign of Sincerity. Men may Pray, and Hear, and be much reformed in their
Lives, and yet be short of Christ.

The neglect of Prayer and Hearing, and the going on in a course of Sin, are
certain signs of a wicked Man; Thou that prayest not, and wilt not receive
Instruction, and hate to be reformed, art thou a Saint? Thy gross neglects,
and thy evil doings, are Satan's Marks upon thee. Art thou still going on in
thy wickedness? How can thou say or think but that thou art of the wicked
One? Yet the performance of these Duties, Praying, Hearing, and somewhat of
Reformation, are no certain signs that thou art of God.

A total and thorough Reformation, a withdrawing our selves from every evil
way, a resigning up our selves to the Government of Christ, and the Conduct of
the Spirit, and an actual care and endeavor to walk uprightly according to the
Truth of the Gospel, is the best and last proof of our Sincerity. But much
Reformation there may be in the Life, and yet the Heart not right with God.

Beloved, while we are comforted over you, and rejoice that there is so much
done upon many of you, as there is, that there are so many Praying Ones among
you, who were wont to neglect Prayer; that there are so many of you to be found
at a Sermon, who were once more like to have been found in an Alehouse,
(blessed be God that there is such visible Reformation among you, both of your
Persons and Families). Besides those of you that have given a good proof of an
inward Saving-change, even this that appears upon others of you, is a comfort
to us; Yet beware how you venture your Souls upon this, though hopeful, yet I
doubt but partial Reformation; and all this notwithstanding, fear lest you
should, and look diligently that you do not fall short of the Grace of God at
last.

4. There is no one Grace that is really so, if it be alone, that will put us
out of doubt concerning our state. There is no one Mark by which we can give a
certain judgment of our selves, without the concurrent testimony of other Marks
with it. The Graces of God in us, must give mutual testimony each to other,
before any of them can give clear testimony to us. Our Love must prove our
Faith to be sincere, our Holy Obedience must prove our Love to be sincere,
before either our Faith or Love will prove either themselves or us to be so. If
I have the very Faith of God's Elect, and I yet question whether I love or no;
If I feel I love, and cannot prove it is in sincerity by my Obedience, neither
the one nor the other will give me confidence before God. One Grace wanting,
will be an Objection against those that appear. I believe, but sure I fear,
it is not with Faith unfeigned, because I cannot find I love, and so in the rest.

Not but that any one Saving-Grace, wherever it is found to be such, is an
infallible Evidence of Sincerity; But still the doubt will be, whether this
Grace I find, be Grace indeed; and unless it be witnessed, by the concurrence
of other Graces, that doubt is never like, in an ordinary way, to be clearly
resolved. Therefore that Exhortation of the Apostle, Add to your Faith Virtue,
and to Virtue Knowledge, and to Knowledge Temperance, etc. 2 Pet. 1.5, 6. is
necessarily to be minded, in order to the obtaining that Assurance which the
Apostle in the following Verses, directs and exhorts with diligence to follow
after.

5. Whatever you have, and yet all short of Saving-Grace, it may all go quite
back, and you may return to a worse estate than ever you were before. The
unclean Spirit that is at present gone out, may return again, and thy latter
end may be worse than thy beginning. Let us a little consider that Scripture,
Mat. 12.33, 34, 35. When the unclean Spirit is gone out of a Man, he walks
through dry places, seeking rest and finds none; then he says, I will return
into my House from whence I came forth; and when he is come, he finds it
empty, swept, and garnished; then goes (...) and takes with him seven other
Spirits more wicked than himself, and they enter in and dwell there, and the
last state of that Man is worse than the first. Though this Text be
parabolical, and was intended against that wicked Generation, yet is it
applicable to particular persons still.

[When the unclean Spirit goes out of a Man.] That Sinners are so vile and
abominable, it is from that wicked Spirit, Satan, that dwells in them. Every
Sinner is a possessed Person, possessed of a Devil. When they are a little
reformed, they seem for the time to be dispossessed; but there is difference
betwixt the Devil's going out, and his being cast out: Satan may a little
withdraw from Souls, as to the Impetus or violence of his Suggestions and
Operations, whilst still he holds his Dominion.

[He walks through dry places]. What these dry places may be, is not so easy
to determine; some by these loca arida, understand loca v^^na, void and empty
places, the Deserts and Wastes of the Earth, where he finds no Body to tempt or
molest. But could Satan think to find rest there, where was no House for him to
lay his Head in? Would the Tempter wast time in seeking whom to devour in those
wast places, where he knew well enough there were none to be found? he knows too
well where Sinners dwell, to go to seek them where they are not; more like to
find the Devil in a Market, than in a Wilderness. This therefore seems not to
be the sense.

May I give my conjecture? Why may not these dry places be the Saints on Earth,
the Fountain of whose Blood is dried up? in whom the Sun has dried up their
Dirt and Mire, in which this Swine loves to wallow. Satan may have his Walks
through the best of Men, but these are no Habitation for him. The Devil, with
the Swine, has his Habitation in the filthy places, in the Mud and Mire; or
with the Behemoth, of whom it is said, Job 40.21. He lies under the shady
Trees, under the covert of the Reeds in the Fens. He loves to be in the Shade,
where no Sun comes to disturb him; in the Moors and in the Fens, where he may
have Mire enough to tumble in. Miry moorish Hearts, dirty Fennish Souls, are
the Dens of Devils; the Saints in comparison of these are dry places.

[He seeks rest]. This notes two things.

1. When the Devil is gone out of any Person, he is never at rest till he is
gotten in again, either thither whence he went out, or into some other
Habitation where he may do mischief. Like Children, like Father; as it is said
of them, so it is much more true of him, he rests not but in doing mischief.

2. The Devil loves to dwell where he may be at rest. That is, not from Work
(his Work is his rest) but from Resistance or Opposition. In carnal and unclean
Hearts, the unclean Spirit may be at rest; there is nothing to disturb or give
him disquiet. He may dwell at ease, and rule and domineer at pleasure. Nay if
he please he may be at rest, not only from Opposition, but from Work too; he
may take up such Habitations for his Houses to sleep in, his Work goes on
whether he wakes or sleeps. Wicked Hearts do the Devil's Work to his hand, he
may save himself much of his labor, they will run on to Death and Hell,
without the Devils driving them.

Foolish Sinners are apt to think themselves secure from the Devil, they live
in I constant calm, and find no such buffetings and blusterings of the Devil
upon them, as some of the Saints do, but are in quiet and at peace, and
thereupon are confident there is no Devil near them.

But stay Friends, not so confident; cast an eye upon Luke 11.21. there you may
read, When a strong Man armed keeps the House, his Goods are in peace. It is
not because the Devil is not near you, that you hear no more of him, but
because he has you sure enough, and needs not keep a stir to make you surer.
Do but offer to depart and make an escape, give but a shake at his Yoke to get
it off, and get you away toward Christ, and then you shall find whether the
Devil be at hand or no. He is at rest in thee, Sinner, and that is the reason,
thou hear no news nor noise of him; he has thee safe enough, or else thou
should be sure to find, he were not far off from thee.

[Seeking rest and finds none]. He goes through these dry places, from Saint
to Saint, from Heart to Heart, in hope to find entertainment, but is still
disappointed. Here Is little rest for me to be had; these dry places, I see, are
no place for me; Here Is such watching, and wrestling, and warring against me,
such jealouses and suspicions of me; so much praying and complaining against
me, that thre's no stay for me here.

This, whether it be the Truth of the Text or no, I will not peremptorily
determine; but a certain Truth it is, The Devil seeks entertainment in the
Saints, but cannot find to his mind.

[Then he says, I will return to mine House from whence I came out]. Well, I
see, there is no hope of rest for me here, but I know whither I may go, and be
welcome, I Will back to my old Habitation.

[And when he is come, he finds it empty, swept, and garnished]. A little
cleaner and handformer than when he left it, the Devil can allow Sinners a
little Reformation. But though it be a little cleaned and garnished, yet it
lies empty still; there is no other Tenant has taken it up, though the Devil
went out, yet Christ was not let in, but there it lies void for the next that
comes.

[Then goes he and takes seven other Spirits more wicked than himself, and
they enter in, and dwell there, and the last state of that Man is worse than
his first]. Beware of a returning Devil; the Devil at his return, often makes
seven-sold worse work than before he did.

Friends, it may be there be some among you, in whom the unclean Spirit has
been ruling and spurring, and riding you post on, upon all manner of
wickedness; Drunkenness, Whoredom, Swearing, Cursing, and all manner of
Abominations; But at present it may be, he is for a season departed, and has a
little withdrawn from you; and now you are grown more sober, and temperate,
and chaste; much reformed of what you once were; you are swept and garnished;
you have laid by your former profaneness, and taken up the Profession of
Religion, and put on a Form of Godliness; there is a better face upon you, and
upon your ways; and now you think all is well, you are become new Men, and your
state is happy.

But do you not stand empty still? Has Christ taken up these Hearts, for his
own Habitation? If the Unclean Spirit be gone out, is the Holy Spirit come in?
How much soever you are Reformed, of what you have been, are you transformed by
the renewing of your Mind? Are you not only garnished with common Grace, but
are you furnished with special Grace? Is Christ within you? If not, O take
heed, the Devil may come about again, and make his re-entry upon you, and then
you have not been so wicked heretofore, but you may become seven times more
vile, and your latter end may be worse than your beginning.

Beloved, I hope and am persuaded, that there are diverse among you, from whom,
through the abundant Grace of God toward you, the unclean Spirit is not only
withdrawn, but cast out; that you are not only a little overly swept and
garnished, but established in the Grace of God. I hope and believe, that there
are many here in whom the Holy Spirit has gotten such footing, that the Devil
shall never come in again, to set up his Throne, or take up his Rest in you;
But yet I warn you, especially the younger Professors among you, to maintain a
Godly Jealousy of your selves, and to fear how it may be with you.

Now Friends, consider what has been said; Are there Preparations for Grace
which yet are no Grace? Are there Images of Grace, which yet are no Grace? And
may they be so well like, that they are often taken to be the same? May you
have many Properties of Sincere Christians, and yet be no Christians? May all
you have of them, go back, and come to worse than nothing? Believe this, and
see if it work not fear in you.

Objection.
But is this the Work of a Minister of the Gospel, to fill poor Christians
Heads and Hearts with Doubts and Fears? The Word of the Gospel is a Word of
Peace, a comforting Word; and that is the charge laid upon the Ministers of the
Gospel, Isa. 40.1, 2. Comfort ye, comfort ye my People, speak ye comfortably to
Jerusalem, cry unto her -- that her Iniquity is pradoned. And the poor People
of God have need enough to be comforted, they have fears enough from the World,
and their own evil Hearts, and do you make Christ to be the Minister of fear to
them also? Our Doubts are our Sins, our Fears are our Infirmities, and do you
go about to nourish our Diseases? The Word of Christ is the Food of Souls, and
it is but poor feeding for Christ's Sheep to feed them with Fear.

Solution.
1. All are not Christ's Sheep, that are found in Sheeps Clothing; the Devil
has some Goats in Christ's Fold. All are not Israel, that are of Israel, Romans
9.6. And whilst it is really a question, whether thou be not one of the Devil's
Goats, he does thee no harm, that puts thee in fear whether thou be or no. This
fear is not to fright thee out of the Fold, but to fright thee into a Sheep. I
shall do thee no harm, if I can fright thee to Heaven.

2. What Is one Man's Meat, may be another Man's Poison; and what is one Man's
Poison, may be another Man's necessary Meat. All Christians are not of a like
Spirit, and what is poison for some may be proper for others. Same poor, broken,
melancholic Souls are all fears, and must have Comforts preached unto them;
others are secure, confident, and yet careless Ones, and these have as much need
of terror. Comforts preached to the doubting and distressed Ones, may be poison
to the secure and careless, and yet for the sake of the distressed, they must
be preached; and terror preached to the secure, may be poison to the
distressed, and yet they must be preached for the securers sakes.

The Ministers of the Gospel must be good Stewards, giving to every one their
Portion, Luke 12.42. Comfort to whom comfort belongs, and fear to whom fear;
On some have compassion, making a difference; others save with fear, Jude 22,
23. And as Ministers must give, so People must take every one their own
Portions; as Ministers must divide, so People must apply the Word of God
aright. Let every Man take his own Portion, and not be catching at that which
is another's. There is too great an aptness in the distressed, to lay hold on
those words, that are spoken to the secure; if there be ever an afrighting word
in a whole Sermon, that is my Portion, says the Distressed, this Word belongs
to me; and so the secure are too ready to lay hold on those healing and
comforting words, which belong to the broken and distressed; both these Evils
must be heedfully avoided; but whether People will apply the Word of God aright
or no, there is no help for it, but Ministers must divide it aright, and give to
every one their Portion.

3. There is an awaking fear, that quickens to our Duty, and prepares for
comfort, and this will lightly hurt no Body; and there is a disquieting and
discouraging fear, that disheartens to Duty, and deprives of Comfort, and this
will do no Body any good.

4. This Fear I am preaching to you, will lead you to the better and surer
hope. These Doubtings will be of great use to put us in the way of getting
above our Doubts. As there is a Confidence which will end in terror, so there
are Fears and Doubtings, the Fruit whereof will be Quietness and Assurance for
ever. This will more fully appear in the next Particular, wherein I am to show,

2. How this Fear will, work toward a farther search. Hitherto I have been
endeavoring to work this Fear upon Professors Hearts, concerning their States;
and now I shall show how this Fear will work.

The Fear lest our Souls should be yet unsafe, will, 1. Put hard to come to a
certainty; And to this end will, 2. Put us close upon a more narrow search. 3.
Put in Objections in order to the making all clear and plain.


1. It will put hard to come to a certainty; nothing short will satisfy it.
Fear has pain in it, the fearing Christian is in pain till his Doubts be
resolved, and this pain will press him to make sure. He will be thankful for
Probabilities, and will make the most of them; as a drowning Man will catch at
every Twig, that may keep his Head above Water, till he can get better hold. A
Christian that Fears, will not make nothing of Probabilities, nor yet will take
up with them instead of Certainties. The Confident Sinner will venture all upon
conjecture; if his Heart do but speak him fair, and tell him he is safe, that
shall satisfy him. It Is an amazing thing to consider, what broken Reeds Fools
do stay themselves upon. Fear will make all as sure as it can. And there is
some hope in that, that we ae bent upon making sure; He that will not rest in
uncertainties, is in the fairer way to come to a certainty.

2. Fear will put us on close upon the narrowest search. It will not take up
with Reports or Opinions, but will search the Records, whence it may be like to
get satisfactions. And there are two Books of Records that will be enquired
after and looked into, the Book of the Scriptures, and the Book of Conscience.
In one, the Book of the Scriptures, it will examine, what are the plainest and
most certain Marks of Sincerity; when it has found a Mark, it will enquire,
May not this be also in an Hypocrite? and will not pitch on any thing, but that
which cannot be found in any Hypocrite in the World: Then it enquires into
Conscience, and compares the two Books together.

The word tells me, He that is in Christ is a New Creature. 2 Cor. 5.17. He
that is born of God, is a Believer, 1 John 5.1. Is a lover of God, 1 John 4.7.
He that loves, does keep the Commandments of God, and his Commandments are not
grievous, 1 John 5.3. The Children of God are Children that will not lie, are
meek, merciful, holy, harmless. The Disciples of Christ, are such as deny
themselves, take up their Cross, and follow him. These and suchlike are found
in the Scriptures, to be the signs of the Children of God.

And what say thou O my Conscience, are these things found in me? Where is
my Faith? What Love have I for God? What witness to my Love, in my Obedience?
What Truth, Mercy, Meekness, Humility, Patience is to be discerned in me? Come
forth O my Graces, where are you? Show your selves in the light of the Sun. And
what can you testify O my ways for me? Speak Conscience, what is the life which
I have lived, Is it a life of Faith, a life of Love and Holy Obedience?

If Conscience speaks in the affirmative, and gives in its answer, through the
Grace of God, I find it thus with me; Then

3. Fear will make Objections, and put in farther Questions. It Is true, he that
is a New Creature is in Christ; he that believes and loves and obeys the
Lord, is born of God; and I find that there is something in me, that looks like
the New Creature, that looks like Faith and Love, etc. But may not all these be
but the Images of Grace? Is my Faith the very Faith of God's Elect? Do I love
the Lord Jesus in sincerity, do I obey from the heart that form of Doctrine
that is delivered to me? May there not be as great a change upon an Hypocrite,
may not Hypocrites believe, and love, and obey, as far as ever I have done? And
until the matter be brought to this issue, that there is something found, such
a Faith, such a Love, such Holy Obedience, as cannot be found in Hypocrites;
till then, this Fear (which will ever suspect the worst) will nor give over,
but still will come on, with question upon question. How shall I know my Faith
is right, and how shall I prove my Love and Obedience to be sincere? I am still
at a loss, and in doubt how it is with me.

By this time you may see, what an advantage there is in this Fear, to help us
to a right understanding of our states, it will never rest searching, till we
be clearly satisfied.

Well, but now you will say, will you leave us here. Shall our Fear still
follow us with' How may we know? How may we prove, that all this is in
Sincerity? Will you not help us out here? what can you farther say, that may
nonplus our Fears, and quiet us against such anxious and troublesome [How may
I know's]? may there nothing be brought forth to our help, concerning which it
may be said [by this thou may know] even all that thou desire.

To this I answer, it is hard to bring up a Christian, in this imperfect state,
to such full and infallible, and satisfactory evidence; of the soundness of his
state, that he should never again need to put the question, How may I yet make
a fuller proof of my self? yet such marks there are laid down in Scripture, and
such helps there are, for the clear discerning of them, as may put a Christian
beyond all perplexing and disquieting Doubts and Fears.

And to the end I may, both the better assist the Fearing Christian, to
out-grow his groundless Fears, and also may more effectually stir up the Fears
of the unsound, I shall a little enlarge here, and lay down the most
distinguishing Marks I find in Scripture, to bring the Soul to a settlement.
Though I have endeavored something this way in my Vindiciae Pietatis, yet I
shall here also say something to this purpose. Now the marks that I shall lay
down of true and saving-Grace, shall be these three.

1. A resolved choice of God for our portion and Happiness. 2. An actual
embracing of Christ, as he that shall bring us to God. 3. A giving up our
selves to the practice of a Godly life.
The first mark,

1. A resolved choice of God, for our portion and happiness. Here our fear will
be putting in, for satisfaction in 2 particulars: 1. How may I know, that he
that has chosen God, is indeed a Godly man? 2. How may I know, that I have
sincerely chosen God?


To the first Inquiry, I shall give in the answer from Scripture and Reason.

1. From Scripture; This is the choice that the Scripture Saints, have been
recorded to have made. This was Moses his choice, Heb. 11.25, 26. Choosing
rather to suffer afflictions with the people of God, then to enjoy the
pleasures of Sin. -- For he had respect to the recompense of reward. This was
David's choice, Psalm. 16.2.5. O my soul, thou have said unto the Lord, thou art
my Lord. The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance. This was Asaph's choice,
Psalm. 73.25, 26. Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and there is none upon Earth
that I desire besides thee. -- God is the strength of mine heart, and my
portion for ever. This was Mary's choice, Luke 10.42. Mary has chosen the good
part which shall never be taken from her. There are but two parts, one of which
every one chooses; the good part, and the evil part. The good part is God, and
things above; there is none good but one, that is God; and there is nothing
good, but one thing, the grace and good will of God; the evil part, are all
things below: All the good things of the world, are the evil part; a good
Estate, a good Name, a good House, good Friends, though they be good in their
kind, yet are an evil portion, and he whose portion they are, is an evil man,
Psalm. 17.4. Mary was a good Woman, and it is evident she was so, for she made a
good choice: she chose the good part, which shall never be taken from her.

2. From Reason. There are two things included in this choice of God, that are
infallible evidences of a godly man. Our choosing of God for our happiness,
includes in it,

Our preferring of God above all things.
Our being made like unto God.
1. Our preferring of God above all things. Every man will choose the best;
that is, that which he judges best, and loves best. The reason of men's choice
is, their liking that which they choose, better than that which they refuse. He
that neglecting God, chooses this world for his portion, therein takes the
Crown off the head of the Lord, and sets it upon the world, and says of it,
this is better for me, then God; he that neglecting the world, chooses God for
his portion, therein says, God is better than all.

2. Our choosing of God for our happiness, infers our being made like unto God.
Every man chooses for himself, according to his own heart. It Is the heart that
makes the choice, and it chooses that which is most suitable to it. The heart
that chooses God, it is a sign, both that it likes God best, and is made like
unto God.

As by men's particular choices, here below, you may judge what spirit they are
of; he that chooses the pleasures of the flesh, shows himself to be of a
sensual heart; he that chooses riches, shows himself to be of a covetous heart;
he that chooses the honors and pomps of the world, shows himself to be of a
proud heart; so in men's general choice, he that chooses for himself here below,
proves himself a worldly-minded man, and he that chooses for himself above,
therein appears to be of an Heavenly mind. He that has chosen God, it is a sign
that he is made like unto God, it is divine grace in the heart, that has made
the choice.

There Is one of these two ruling powers in every heart, Nature or Grace, and
look which of the two has the rule, it is that which has the casting voice, in
the choice that is made; and each of these, do choose what is suitable to them.
Corrupt nature chooses what is suitable to it, and finding nothing in God, nor
in all the world to come, that will please it, it chooses for it self below;
And a gracious heart chooses what is most suitable to it; and finding as little
to content it in this world, as a carnal heart does in Heaven, therefore gets
it up, and takes its lot above. Nothing will content grace, but God and Glory,
and nothing but grace, can be content with God alone. The heart of man will
never be carried up to Heaven, to pitch there, till there be something of
Heaven, first let down into it, to fetch it up.

Now, he that prefers God above all, and is made like unto God, is certainly a
godly man; and thus the first enquiry is answered. It is evident, that he that
has chosen God is a godly man, for this is laid down, as a special character
of the Saints in Scripture, and in this choice of God, is included, our
preferring God above all, and one being made like unto him.

2. How may I know that I have sincerely chosen God? Here lies the main doubt
to be resolved. There be many that say, God is my portion, I have chosen him
for my inheritance, and they think as they speak, and yet do but deceive
themselves; I hope I have sincerely chosen the Lord, but yet am in fear, lest I
also may be deceived. How may I know whether it be so or no? To this I answer,
you may know that you have sincerely chosen the Lord, 1. If you have chosen him
deliberately. 2. If you have chosen him absolutely. 3. If you carefully pursue
your choice. 4. If you measure your [present] happiness, by the communion you
have with him, and the clearness of your title to him. 5. If you be willing and
resolved, to forsake all things for his sake.


1. If you have chosen God deliberately; if your choice be not in a sudden fit,
but be the result of the deepest consideration. Sudden bargains are often, as
suddenly repented of. A light unadvised choice, is not like to hold, and while
it holds, there is no great heed to be given to it. Some men are such unstable
Souls, that their whole life almost, is nothing else but choosing and changing,
when we choose understandingly, and deliberately, when we have thoroughly
considered the great reasons for our choosing God, his worthiness and
excellency, and our own necessity; and have also weighed all the
inconveniences thereof, and all the objections against it, and do find, that
the reasons for, do infinitely overballance all that can be said against it,
and hereupon determine for God, that is like to be found a sincere choice.

2. If you have chosen him absolutely, as that which you will stand to, to the
last, whatever inconveniences may follow. When there are no ifs nor ands, no
reserves in your heart, nor place lest for repentance. When your choice runs
not, as Jacob's conditional vow, Genesis 28.20. If the Lord will be with me, and
will keep me in the way that I go, and give me bread to eat, and raiment to put
on, so that I return to my Fathers house in peace, [then] the Lord shall be my
God; but without any such if's, whether he will feed me or no, cloth me or no,
let him do with me as he will for that, I am resolved however, the Lord shall
be my God.

And indeed, so was Jacob too, however the words sound. This was never intended
by him, as the condition of his Religion, (there is no other condition of that,
but if, or since the Lord will be my God, he shall be my God) Jacob was in bond
to God before, and here he enters into a new bond, lays a new obligation upon
himself, every one of these Mercies, shall be so many new cords, to bind me
fast to the Lord; but whether these new cords were added or no, whether the
Lord would keep, or feed, or cloth him, or no, 'twas never his intent, but his
old bond should stand however, that the Lord should be his God.

And as there are no reserves, nor conditions in this our choice of God, so is
there a resolution against repenting of our choice, whatever should happen. A
Christian chooses once for all, chooses and changes not. His choice of God is
like to Gods choice, Psalm. 110.4. I have sworn and will not repent, says he,
concerning Christ. The gifts and calling of God, much more the Election of God,
are without repentance, Romans 11.29. where we choose God absolutely, we leave no
place for repentance.

3. If you carefully pursue your choice. Thus was it with Paul, who had chosen
for himself above, and taken his aim at the right mark, the prize of the high
calling of God in Christ Jesus, he says, Philip. 3.12, 13. I follow after, I
reach forward, I press to the mark. Some vain men persuade themselves, that
they have chosen God, and yet seldom or never look after, nor take any care to
obtain, and make sure of him whom they have chosen; they choose God, but never
follow God, nor take the way that leads to the blessedness to come. Sincere
choice, takes in both end and means. When the choice of our hearts does govern
the course of our lives, and does effectually bend our course toward the
obtaining of him, whom we have chosen; when this becomes our main drift and
scope; This I pray for, this I wait for, this I labor for, this I live for; I
have nothing else to do, but to serve and make sure of God; if I can but so
live, as to please God here, and get to Heaven when I dye, whatever I miscarry
in, it is all I look for; this argues such a choice of God, as will certainly
argue us to be of God. To choose God, and yet to live to our selves, to choose
Heaven for our portion, and yet to have our conversation in the earth; an idle
and inefficacious choice, that does not effectually command us after him, whom
we have chosen, but let us run our old carnal course, is a vanity and a
delusion.

4. If you measure your [present] happiness, by the communications of God to
you, and the clearness of your title to him. He that has chosen God for his
happiness, look how much he possesses, and enjoys of God, and to what degree of
clearness he is come, concerning his Evidences for Heaven, to such a degree of
happiness, he counts himself to have arrived; whilst he can love, and please,
and serve the Lord, and maintain a confidence of his acceptance with him, so
long he can rejoice; when he is estranged from God, he is as a man undone.
Therefore is it, that Christians set themselves to get as much of God here, and
as sure a claim to the inheritance of the Saints in light, as possibly they
can. Every one would make as sure of happiness as he can, and would be happy as
soon as he can, would get, as much as may be, into present possession.

Hence are those breathings, and thirstings, and rejoycings of the Saints,
which we read of in Scripture. As the heart pants after the water brooks, so
pants my Soul after thee O God; my Soul thirsts for God, for the living
God, Psalm. 42.1, 2. My Soul thirsts for thee, my Flesh longs for thee --
thy loving kindness is better than life -- My Soul shall be satisfied as with
marrow and fatness, when my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips, Psalm. 63.
O that my ways were so directed, to keep thy Statutes. O let me not wander
from thy Commandments, Psalm. 119.5.10. For in keeping them is great reward,
Psalm. 19. I have set the Lord always before me, because he is at my right
hand, I shall not be moved; therefore mine heart is glad, and my glory
rejoices, Psalm. 16.8, 9. Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon
me; thou have put gladness in my heart, Psalm. 4.6, 7.

Christians can never have good days, longer than they are walking with God,
and beholding his face in righteousness; this is their Heaven on Earth. The
reflection of the face of God, in his Holy Image, that appears upon them; the
irradiations of his Holy Spirit, and the light of his countenance, whilst they
are walking in the Law of the Lord; the prospering of their Souls in the grace
of God, and the comforts of the Holy Ghost, this is the sunshine of their
lives. Their countenance is fallen, their heart is sick, they reckon themselves
among the dead, when God and their Souls are parted. He has no part in God,
that can live comfortably without him.

It Is true, the pleasure that the Saints take in God, is more or less,
according to the different degrees of their love to God; and accordingly will
the sense of his absence be more or less. There is a desiring love, which is
the highest attainment of some weaker Christians, and there is a delighting
love, which is the attainment of the more grown Christians. The purer and
stronger the love, the greater pleasures comes in, from the object of it, and
the more impatience follows from its distance, and estrangement from it. The
love of weaker Christians puts forth, in thirstings after the Lord, but they
taste but little of the sweetness; but the more grown can sit down under his
shadow with great delight; yet neither the one nor the other, can be at ease or
contented without him.

Again, there is a difference in the Natural temper, and constitutions of
Christians; some are naturally of lively and warm affections, and of a cheerful
and serene Spirit; others are of more flat, and dull, and heavy spirits, and
this will make a difference upon their sense of things Spiritual. Yea, and the
same persons, at several times may be differing from themselves, by reason of
bodily distempers or occasional discomposures, which may have such an influence
upon their Spirits, that they may at such seasons, not only have lost the
sweetness of Divine communion, but the sense also of its want; and those very
duties, wherein they were wont to have delightful converse with God, may seem
the most uneasy and wearisome work of their time.

But yet, whoever he be, that in ordinary, can be satisfied, at ease, and be
merry, whilst he is a stranger from God, and neither finds pleasure in him, nor
takes comfort in pleasing of him; this man can never conclude that God is his
portion. He that is least in the Kingdom of God, will doubtless be able to say,
Lord whom have I in Heaven, yea, [or in Earth] besides thee.

Sinner, thou say, that thou also have chosen the Lord; but how is it that
he is no more looked after, or regarded by thee? How is it that thou can live
so much without God in the world, and find no miss of his presence? Art thou
content to be miserable whilst thou live here? or have thou chosen two
portions, this world to be thy portion here, and God only for hereafter? I,
that is the truth of the case; thou foreseest that this world will not last
always, but thou must after a while, be gone and leave all behind thee;
whilst these things will last, thou will take up with them, but when they fail
thee, thou countest upon God at last; and so he must only stand by as thy last
refuge; when all else is gone, then God must be thy happiness. Is this thy
choice of God, when thou can only say, Rather God than nothing? So I may be
sure of thee hereafter, I care not for thee now?

He that has not chosen God for his happiness in both worlds, has sincerely
chosen him for neither. Can thou say, thou have chosen him for thy happiness
in this world also, when thou can count thy self happy without him? can
thou want communion with him, and yet be at hearts ease? can thou take the
prosperities of this world, to supply the want of a God? the smiles of fortune,
instead of smiles from Heaven? will thy twilight or candlelight serve thee
instead of Sun-light? Can thou quiet and comfort thy self thus, God is none
of my acquaintance, but I have good acquaintance enough in the world? God is
angry with me, but I have many good friends about me that bear me good will? My
work for Heaven goes but sadly on, but yet I prosper and thrive in the Earth? I
have none of the best hearts, I confess, but yet I have a good House, and a
good Estate? 'twould be sad indeed if I had nothing either above or below,
either within or without me, if both Heaven and Earth had cast me out; but
whilst one of them holds, it is well, mine own Cisterne is full, and so long I
can spare the Fountain. Can thou comfort thy self thus? Deceive not thy self,
God is not the portion, thine heart has chosen; thou will never find rest in
any thing else, who have pitched on him as thine only happiness, and till thou
have made him alone, thou have not made him at all, the portion of thy Soul.

5. If you are willing and resolved to forsake all things for his sake. God and
this world, are proposed to our choice, and this is included, in the very
nature of choosing, that one be taken and the other left; it is not choosing, to
take both, one of the two must be parted with, or neither can be said to be
chosen; and so the word tells us, Luke 14.33. Whoever he be of you, that
forsakes not all that he has, he cannot be my Disciple.

This seems to be an hard word; but is it so indeed? Is it hard to part with
all our Brass, and to receive it in Gold? to exchange our rags for better
clothing, our husks for better seeding? What is Earth to Heaven? Is all thou
have in the world, too great a price to redeem thy Soul from Death, and to
instate it in everlasting blessedness? If these things could redeem thee,
would thou say, it is too much to give, this Earth is more than Heaven is
worth?

But farther consider, It is not so hard as it seems to be; for, what is it to
forsake all that we have? God would not have us to throw away our Estates, and
make our selves voluntary Beggars; to give away our Houses, and take up our
Habitation in Dens or Caves; to give away all our bread, and our clothes, and
leave our selves to hunger and nakedness.

God would not have us to break the peace with the world, to disoblige and fall
out with all our friends, and to become strangers to our own flesh; God would
not have us studiously to offend Father and Mother, to despise Brethren and
Sisters; to be undutiful or unnatural, to be surly, and rude, and uncivil to
any, and thereby create our selves enemies, and trouble; it is for the honor of
Christianity that we behave our selves sweetly, and courteously, and dutifully
toward all; and it is the Interest of Christianity, that those that fear God,
be good Husbands, and provident, and have Estates to serve him withal in their
generations. This is not the meaning of our forsaking of all, to cast our
selves into voluntary poverty, or studiously to make our selves the objects,
and reproach of the world.

That forsaking of all, which is necessary to, and will prove our sincere
choosing the Lord, must be,

1. In esteem and affection; so as no longer to account or love any thing we
have, as our portion and happiness. God will not allow us two portions, one for
the Flesh, another for the Spirit; one for this world, another for the world to
come; God will be all in both worlds. As we may not serve two Masters, Luke
16.13. So neither may we have two portions; we cannot serve, and we may not
love God and Mammon. God will be all or nothing to us, he will as soon allow us
two Gods, as two portions; when we make the world our happiness, we make it our
God; and then we make it our happiness, when we prize it too highly, love it
too dearly, seek it too hotly; when we prize, or seek, or love the world more
than God, or otherwise than in subordination to him.

2. In vote and resolution, to let all go at the good pleasure of God. To
forsake all, is to get the heart loose from all, to stand with a mind prepared,
and ready to part with all whenever God will. To be able heartily to say, If
God will have it so, I am willing to be poor, and every way as low as he
pleases. Now I live in credit, but if God will have it so, I am willing of
contempt and disgrace; now I have friends, but if God shall see it good to
leave me no friend in the world, I am content; now I live, and am in health,
and prosper, and flourish, but whenever the Lord will, I am content to wither,
and suffer, and die for his Name.

A willingness to be poor, whenever God will have it so, this is a forsaking
our riches; a willingness to be in disgrace, to lose our friends, or our lives
at the pleasure of the Lord, this is our forsaking all these. He that will lose
his life or estate when God calls him to it, in his account, he does lose it;
there be more Martyrs in the world, than have suffered at a stake; if thine own
heart has given thee to the flames, as a witness or Sacrifice to God, it is
accepted with him, as if thou had been actually offered up.

Abraham's intention and attempt to offer up Isaac for a burnt-offering, was
the same thing with God, as if he had done it, and had this testimony from the
Lord, that he did it, Heb. 11.17. By Faith Abraham when he was tried, offered
up Isaac, Genesis 22.16, 17. Because thou have done this thing, and have not
withheld thy Son, therefore blessing I will bless thee.

Friend, art thou willing to be undone, willing to lay down thy life, when e're
God shall put thee to it? God will say the like to thee, because thou have done
this thing, therefore blessing I will bless thee, as it is on the other side, he
whose heart withholds himself, or any thing that he has; that will rather deny
Christ, than suffer for him; he whose heart is against it, and will not offer
himself up, though he should never be tried, or put to it, the Lord will say to
that man, because thou have done this thing, have forsaken me, rather than thou
would suffer for me, therefore cursing I will curse thee. O how many
Apostates in heart are there, who did never actually Apostatize, but would have
done it, had they been put upon the trial? Heart-Martyrs shall be accepted, and
Heart-Apostates shall be rejected, even as they that are actually such.

3. In practice or execution, so as actually to let all go, whenever God does
call for it. Particularly,

1. To suffer the loss of all, whenever it comes to be a case, that we must
either suffer or sin. Whosoever has sincerely chosen God, will choose affliction
rather than iniquity. Elihu, Job. 36.21. would prove Job to be an Hypocrite, by
this, that he had chosen iniquity rather than affliction; and if he could have
made good the antecedent, that Job had made such a choice, the consequent would
have been strong against him.

It Is true, every act of Sin, nay of sinning deliberately, and that when the
temptation to it is is not great, does not certainly evidence us to be
Hypocrites; the Lord be merciful to us all, if it were so: the best of men turn
aside too often, from God to Sin, even when we are not much tempted to it, by
suffering. But however, this is the principle, that every one that is sincere,
proposes to himself to live by, to suffer rather than to Sin, to lose all that
he has, rather than lose his integrity; and his ordinary care and endeavor
is, that his practice be according to this principle.

2. To use all as God would have him. He that will not give an Alms, will much
less give himself for a Sacrifice; he that cannot spare his bread to the Lord,
how will he spare his life? He that bestows and employs all that ever he has,
according as God by his ordinary providence, calls and appoints him, that lays
up, and lays out, only according to Gods order, has herein done that thing
which will give him great ground of confidence, that he has an heart, that
will let go all whenever he is called to it.

The second Mark.

2. An actual embracing of Christ, as he that shall bring us to God. It Is
Christ alone that must bring us to that God whom we have chosen. 1 Pet. 3.18.
Christ also has once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might
bring us to God. Joh 14.6. I am the way, the truth and the life; no man comes
to the Father, but by me. And every one that comes unto him, he will certainly
bring to the Father.

Now for the trial of our sincere embracing of Christ, I shall put it upon this
one thing, our hearty consent to Christ. Christians are joined to Christ in a
marriage union, Hos. 2.19. and it is consent that makes the Marriage. Consent to
Christ is our will to have him, and our willing Christ, is our taking and
embracing him. Genesis 24.58. when Rebekah was asked the question, Will thou go
with this man? Will thou have Isaac for thine Husband? She said I will go;
there is her consent: and that is the condition upon which Christ becomes ours;
whosoever [will] let him take of the water of life freely.

Now our unfeigned consent unto Christ, includes in it, and will be evidenced
by, Our approving of Christ. Our accepting of Christ. Our dedication and
yielding our selves up to Christ.


Only I must tell you, there is one thing that is necessarily pre-required to
this consent; and that is, a distinct knowledge of Christ; a knowledge of his
person, who, and what manner of person he is; a knowledge of his proper place,
in which he stands, and his proper work that he is to do, in order to the
bringing us to God; as in general, that he is the Mediator betwixt God and Man;
in particular, that he is our Prophet and Teacher, sent to us from God, to show
us the path of life; that he is our Priest and Sacrifice, that he is our King
and Ruler. A knowledge of the conditions that he imposes, and the Laws he gives
to them that will be his Disciples, and that expect salvation by him; as, to
believe and obey the Gospel, to repent and be converted. These things must be
first distinctly known, otherwise in consenting to Christ, we do we know not
what, we subscribe to a blank. Our close with Christ must be an understanding
close, otherwise it signifies nothing.

This being premised, I shall now show;

1. That our consent to Christ notes, our approving and good liking of Christ.
Therefore we read, that Peter in his Preaching Christ to the Jews, that he
might Preach them to Christ; endeavors first, to gain their approbation of
him; and that he might be approved of them, he tells them, that he was approved
of God, Act. 2.22. Ye men of Israel, here these words, Jesus of Nazareth, a man
approved of God among you, by signs and miracles. If he could not have assured
them, of Gods approbation of him, there had been little hope of gaining their
approbation; and if he had not their approbation, there had been no hope of
their acceptance. The same Apostle tells us, 1 Pet. 2.4. that he was disallowed
of men; and those that disallowed, despised and rejected him. He was to the
Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness, 1 Cor. 1.23. But as for
them that are called, they had other manner of thoughts of him; to them he is,
Christ, the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God. They might have been invited
long enough, before they would have come, if they had not been first persuaded
that he is the Power and Wisdom of God. Will thou consent unto Christ? he must
have thy approbation, or he can never have thy consent.

There must be an approving and liking of his Person; of his personal
excellencies, and worthiness to be embraced. Men must be well satisfied, both
of his sufficiency, that he is able to save to the uttermost, those that come
to God by him; and of his faithfulness, that he will do it. He that is not
satisfied, that it is safe venturing upon Christ, will never be persuaded to it.

There must be an approving and good liking of his whole way of Salvation; of
all that he has done, of all that he has suffered, of all that he demands and
requires in order hereto. And as they must be able to say, He has done all
things well; so must they say also concerning what he requires, Good is the
Word of the Lord. What does the Lord require? will he be trusted? will he be
loved? will he be obeyed? will he have me for his servant? my estate, my time,
my strength, my body, my soul, to be all at his Service? Good is the Word of
the Lord, it is but right it should be so, it is best thus to be his.

2. Our consent to Christ, notes our accepting him. Approving is not all, he
may be approved and yet rejected, video meliora proboque etc. there are who
approve the things that are excellent, and yet will not embrace them, Romans
2.18. there must be an accepting of Christ, as well as an approving. There is
An assent to a Proposition, and A consent to a Proposal.


1. There is an assent to a Proposition. As to instance in that of the Apostle,
1 Timothy 1.15. Christ came into the world to save Sinners. There may be an assent
to this, that this is a true saying, and worthy of all acceptance, which is
short of accepting. It Is one thing to say, I believe and am persuaded in my
heart, that Christ is a Savior of Sinners, and is worthy of all acceptance,
and another thing to say, I accept him.

2. There is a consent to a Proposal. Christ is not only declared in the Gospel
to be the Savior of Sinners, that chosen one, that mighty one, upon whom their
help is laid, but there is an offer made, of this Jesus unto Sinners, who are
all invited to look unto him, to come unto him and be saved, Matthew. 11.28. and
also assured, that whosoever come unto him, and believe in him, shall not be
confounded, 1 Pet. 2.6.

In the Preaching the Gospel, the Lord not only gives us this record concerning
his Son, that in him is Eternal life, and that he that has the Son, has life,
1 John 5.11, 12. but withal makes this proposal to every Sinner, will thou
have this Jesus? shall this Savior be thy Savior? if thou will have him, thou
shall. Do not say now, sure he is worth the having; if redemption from death,
if everlasting life, be worth the having, then Christ is worth the having; but
say on, will thou have him? shall it be a match betwixt Christ and thy Soul?
shall he be thine, and will thou be his? Does thine heart say, I will, I
accept, I henceforth take him for mine own, and will trust my self with him; I
put my life into his hands, here my Soul shall pitch. Upon this stone which is
laid in Sion, will I adventure all? Does thine heart say to all this, I will?
this is thy sincere consent to Christ, provided that there be.

3. A dedication, and giving up the Soul to Christ. The matter that is to be
consented to, is, not only that Christ be ours, but that we be his. Our consent
that he should be ours, is our taking him, and our consent that we should be
his, is our giving our selves to him. It is said of the Macedonian Christians,
2 Cor. 8.5. they gave themselves to the Lord. This giving our selves to Christ,
has in it, the giving him The right of us. The possession of us.


1. The giving him the right of us. He has indeed a right to us already,
whether we give our selves to him or no; he has bought us, and paid for us, we
are his by purchase, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. Ye are not your own, ye are bought with a
price. And yet though we be his already, he expects that we give our selves to
him; he loves the claim by gift, above that, which comes only by purchase; and
therefore he requires, Prove. 23.26. My Son give me thine heart. Thou may
say, it is not mine to give; what have I to give to the Lord? All is his
already, I am his, with all that I have. The Father has given all to the Son,
and he has paid dear enough to purchase the Lordship of me. Well, though thou
be his own already, can thou not say, Take me then, Lord take me as thine
own? It Is more than rebellious Sinners will say, though they be his by right,
yet they will rob him of his right, and hold back his own from him. They give
themselves away from Christ, to the Devil and to the World. They might say to
these, when they demand, give me thine heart, it is not mine to give; but they
will not say so here, but whether it be theirs or no, away they give it.

But Christ expects, that thou which have given away his right to another, have
given thy self to the world, and the lusts of thy flesh; should fetch thy
self back again from these, and restore thy self to him. And indeed our giving
our selves to the Lord, is but our acknowledging his right to us, and our
making restitution, our restoring to him his stolen goods. Go, carry home
thine heart to him, and deliver it up; and when he says to thee, it is not
thine own, take the word from his mouth, true Lord, it is not mine own, it is
thine, and here it is for thee, take it to thee; and till thou do this, he
will none of thee. He will be thy Lord and thy Judge, whether thou will or no,
but he will not be thy Savior without thy consent; thou shall be his vassal,
but can never count thy self his Disciple till thou pass over thy self to
him, by thine own act and deed.

Sinner, thou say that thou art Christ's, but how came thou to be his? O!
he has redeemed and bought me, thou say. But is this all? So he did Judas,
he bought that Traitor, that sold his Master; what, have thou no better claim
to Christ, than that Son of perdition, and will this comfort thee? Consider
man, though Christ has bought thee, have thou not gone under hand, and sold
thy self away from him? have thou not let in Sin and the Devil into Christ's
right, and will thou yet say, I am the Lords? the Devil will tell thee, thou
art mine, the world will tell thee, thou art mine, and thine own Conscience may
tell thee, I fear it is too true, I am the Devil's indeed, I am the World's
indeed, for I have given my self to them, and I never yet fetched my self back,
and restored to Christ his right; which yet thou must do, before he will own
thee for his Disciple.

2. The giving him the possession, and the use of us. Christians are called the
possession of Christ, Ephesians. 1.14. the purchase and possession, and it is we our
selves that must put him into possession. Therefore are we required, to yield
up our selves to him, Romans 6.13. to yield up our selves to the Spirit of
Christ, that he may sanctify us, and fit us for our Masters use, to yield up
our selves to the authority and government of Christ, to be used and employed
in his Service, Romans 6.16. His servants ye are to whom ye obey. Thus to give
our selves to Christ, is to give our selves to Christianity; to give our selves
to God, is to give our selves to the practice of Godliness; to be actually
employed and used by the Lord, in all that he has for us to do.

Christ, thou say, has the right of thee, but who has the possession of
thee? Thou have given thy self to Christ, but have thou given thy self to
Christianity? thou call thy self his Servant, but do thou obey him as his
Servant? art thou given to the works of Christ, given to Praying, given to
Hearing, given to Holiness? he has thy name, but who has the use of thee? to
him thou have devoted thy self, but by whom art thou employed? thou have parts,
thou have strength, thou have an estate, thou have time, but upon whom, or upon
what, are all these actually bestowed? will thou say, thou have given thy self
to Christ, when the Devil has still the possession, or the world and thy flesh
have still the use of thee, and of all that thou have? Do thou serve this
world, and walk after the flesh, and yet wilt comfort thy self with this, that
thou have given thy self to Christ?

Brethren, there may be a damnable mistake here, and you that are professors,
look to it, that none of you be thus mistaken, to your everlasting ruin. It
may be, thou have sometimes gone into thy closet, and there falling upon thy
knees, have said, possibly with some affection, Lord I am thine, I here give my
self to thee, Body and Soul, and all that I have, to be thine for ever; and
when thou have thus done, away thou go, rejoicing and comforted. But shortly
after, the sense of this transaction is worn off, and the power of it utterly
lost, and about the world thou go as aforetime, walking at the same vain,
carnal and careless rate, as thou were used to do. What do thou think of such
a dedication? Have thou sincerely dedicated thy self to Christ, when thou
suffer sin and the world still to have the possession, and the use of thee?
Art thou sincerely given to Christ, when thou art not given to Christianity?
art thou given to Christianity, who art still so given to thy flesh, given to
thy will, given to thine appetite, given to pleasure, and ease, and idleness?
Trust not to any closet-Transactions, how solemn or affectionate soever they
be, that have not so much power as to bring thee in, and deliver thee up, and
actually engage thee in the Service of him, to whom thou have thus passed thy
self over. But of this indeed, it is most proper to speak, in the next mark.

The third Mark.

3. A giving up our selves to the practice of a Godly life.

That a Godly life is necessary, to prove the sincerity of our choice of God,
and our close with Christ, is sufficiently evident from what has been said in
the two former marks; now it remains, that I add something for farther trial,
whether the life which we live be indeed a Godly life.

I have spoken to this, in the third mark of the truth of Grace which I have
given in my Vindiciae pietatis, to which I must refer you, and shall now only
add,

That he that lives a sincere Godly life, has such a standing care, to please
God in all things, that he resolves and endeavors, 1. Not to allow himself in
any known sin. 2. Not to allow himself in the neglect of any known duty.


1. He that lives a sincere Godly life, makes it his care and endeavor never
to allow himself in any known sin. Romans 7.15. the evil that I do, I allow not.

Now there may be a double allowance of sin,

1. Positive, when we have such a lust after any iniquity, that our hearts, not
being able to bear a restraint, do give themselves a toleration for it.

2. Interpretative, when we commit or live in any known sin, and connive at our
selves in it; and though we do not peremptorily resolve, for continuing this
liberty for it, yet neither do we resolve against it. Non-resolution against
sin is the door left open to it; when we do not hate nor resist it, when we
pray not, watch not, strive not against it. It may be we wish in the general,
that we could overcome, and avoid every iniquity, and are content that God
should effectually restrain us by his grace, so it be, without putting us to
the trouble and labor of laying any painful restraint upon our selves; yet
when any particular sins come, and we are tempted to them, they find the door
left open to them, we wink at them, and swallow them down; even this must be
interpreted an allowance of them. He that sees the Thief at the door, though he
do not say, pray come in, yet if he shut not the door against him, is accessory
to his own Robbery. It is a vain thing for thee to say, the evil which I do I
allow not, when thou do nothing to withstand it. If thou will not resist,
thou do thereby invite the tempter and his temptations.

Grace, in the nature of it, is an enemy against Sin. These two are contrary,
Gal. 5.17. and though it be too weak wholly to overcome, yet will it make
opposition against it. It Is true, that actual allowance, especially of some
lesser sin, is not utterly inconsistent with the truth of grace, in this our
imperfect state; but he that resolves not to watch against, to strive against
every sin, that has any standing reserve of a liberty for any one (in this
thing the Lord pardon me) how dwells the grace of God in him?

Men's allowing themselves thus in any sin, is an argument that they are in a
league with sin; and he that is in a league with any sin, his heart is not
right with God. Our engaging our selves to the Lord, does necessarily include
in it our breaking with sin; and our walking in friendship with God, is our
living in the defiance of Sin. Have thou friendship with Sin? where is then thy
friendship with God? Do thou say thou have not friendship with Sin, nor art
in any league with it? how is it then, that it has such free access to thee?
Consider it well, did thou maintain in thine heart, an enmity against sin,
thou would take more heed, how thou gave it entertainment: Will thou open
thy bosom to a viper? would thou spread forth thine arms to a Serpent? sure
thou art of kin to these venomous beasts, or thou would never allow them
such freedom with thee. It is at least a shrewd suspicion that thou art of the
seed of the Serpent, or thou would never take into thy bosom these young
Serpents, thy lusts to be thy play-mates. And if thus thou do, and thine
heart will not hear of being totally shut of its liberty with them, the case is
then plain, thou art in such a league with sin, as will conclude thee out of
Covenant with God.

2. He that lives a Godly life, does heartily resolve and endeavor, never to
allow himself in the neglect of any known duty.

By duties I mean, not only those special acts of worship, Prayer, Hearing,
etc. but all acts of obedience to the will of God; both those more general and
complexe Duties, of working out our salvation, of walking as becomes the
Gospel, of making sure our Calling and Election, etc. and every particular duty
comprehended under these; those which have a more immediate respect to God, our
living in the faith, fear, and love of the Lord; those also which have an
immediate respect to our selves: our living soberly, temperately, in patience,
etc. and those which respect others: doing good to all men, admonishing,
reproving, comforting, showing mercy, etc. as there is occasion, and we have
opportunity. As we are Christians, we are indebted to others, to our Families,
to our Neighbors, to our Friends, and to our Enemies. I instance in all these,
in special, in second-table Duties, both because there can be no proof made of
the uprightness of our conversations, without looking into particulars, and
because there are many professors who pretend to great heights in the matters
of the first table, who in second-table duties, are sadly remiss and negligent.
Even these latter, are so essential to true Godliness, that whatever proofs we
seem to have of our sincerity, our neglects of these, especially our allowed
neglects will call all into question.

Those that will live Godly in Christ Jesus, must live in all good Conscience
toward God, and toward men also. God will have his people to stand complete
in his whole will; that they may herein both approve themselves in his sight,
and also show forth his virtues before men, so that the world may see that the
spirit of Christianity is not a fanatic and feeble thing, but has a power in
it to make a visible and universal change, in the manners and ways of those
that are possessed with it, that Christians may appear to be the mercy, and the
blessings, and the beauty of the world. That Countries may see, that Families
may see that it is a mercy that there are some Godly ones among them; that the
unbelieving Wife may see, that it is a mercy to have a believing Husband; that
Grace has made him better natured, more loving, more gentle, more tender of
her good; that the unbelieving Husband may see, what a blessing it is to him to
have a believing wife, that grace has made her both a better woman, and a
better Wife; more meek, more patient, more careful to please her Husband; that
the unbelieving Families or persons may find that it is a comfort and advantage
to them to have so good a Master, to live by so good a neighbor, that pities
them, that prays for them, and even Preaches to them, by his holy life and good
example.

To be professors of Christianity, and yet to be all one in our conversations
toward others, as quarrelsome, as contentious, as unmerciful, as unsavory and
unuseful as those that pretend to no Religion; to have those about us to say,
if there be grace in them, it is all one as to us, as if there were none; it had
been all one for me, if my Father, or my Master, or my Husband, or my Wife, or
my Neighbor had never meddled with any thing of Religion; he is the same man,
she is the same woman, as proud, as pettish, as unkind, as unmerciful, as
negligent of my good, that it could not have been worse with me, if there had
been no such thing as Religion in them. What do thou think of all the
Godliness thou have, if thou give occasion to have it thus said of thee?

Well all these particulars, and every other thing required in the Word of God,
I understand by duties.

Now this is a man of a Godly life; he who having chosen God, and embraced
Christ Jesus the Lord, does set his heart in all things to walk uprightly
according to the truth of the Gospel, without allowing himself in the neglect
of any thing, that he knows pro hic and nunc to be his duty; whose prayer it
is, Hide not thy Commandments from me, whose study it is, to know the whole
will of God, and whose endeavor it is to walk in all the Commandments of God
blameless; this is a man of a Godly life. This is according to the plain intent
and meaning of his covenant with God, and this is his faithfulness in the
covenant. Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect unto all thy
Commandments. [Then shall I not be ashamed] that is, then shall I be upright
in the way, and have boldness both before God and Men, [when I shall have
respect] that is when it is in mine heart, to do thy whole will, without giving
my self leave, to turn aside, either to the right hand or the left.

He that Lives in the neglect of the acts of worship, that prays not, and
hears not, he that neglects the general duties, that sets not himself to seek
the Kingdom of God, to work out his own Salvation, to walk as becomes the
Gospel, but takes up with a careless, carnal, worldly, sloathful life; whether
he finds he allows himself in these great neglects, or thinks he does not,
though his heart smites him, and will not suffer him to be quiet, or go out
with such a life in peace, the very neglect, or not engaging in these great and
most necessary duties, does prove him an ungodly man; and 'twill not help this
man to say, I allow not my self in these neglects, for wherever there is
grace, there will be praying, and hearing, and something done toward the
working out our Salvation. 'T will never be found any man's godliness, that he
allows not himself to live thus ungodlily, when yet he does it. Though he gives
not himself a deliberate toleration, if yet his heart take leave, to live thus
without God in the world, his ways will betray him, whose and what he is.

Yea and those, that do something in those great and general duties; yet if
they allow themselves in the neglect of any particular duties, that they know
to be such, in the neglect of Righteousness, in the neglect of Mercy, in the
neglect of their Families, and the duties they owe to them, in the neglect of
Neighbor or Strangers, and the duties they owe to them, and can wink at, and
dispense with themselves herein, such men can never prove but their Religion is
vain.

Art thou a Godly man, who art an unrighteous and unmerciful man? Art thou a
good Christian, who art no good Husband? Art thou a good Woman, who art an evil
Wife? Art thou a good Man, who art a bad Neighbor, and give thy self leave
to be so? Art thou a Godly man, whom halting after the Lord, must serve thee
instead of walking with God? Art thou a follower of Christ, who wilt have him
abate thee some of his demands, abate thee truth, abate thee mercy, abate thee
self-denial, or if he will not abate it to thee, any thing that thou likest
not, thou will abate it to him? Is this to be undefiled, or entire in the way
of the Lord? will God call that uprightness, which cannot be called integrity?
and that sure cannot be counted integrity, which advisedly leaves out any one
of the Commandments of God.

But now he that gives himself to Prayer, Hearing, and praising the Lord, who
makes it the scope and business of his life, to please God, and make sure for
eternity, studying and endeavoring to approve himself in every thing, to him
who searches the heart and tries the reins, and to keep himself unspotted of
the world, this is a Godly man, this is Religion indeed.

Though through infirmity, in many things he fall short; he prays, but is sick
of his praying, he hears, but is ashamed to think how he hears; his Spirit is
so often clouded and clogged with corruptions and infirmities, that he can feel
no life, nor take any comfort in any thing he does; though by the power of
corruption and temptation, he be at times put besides praying, and other
duties, and be sometimes found in the field, when he should have been in his
Closet, in the Market, when he should have been at Church; though he find his
heart too often, running off from his work, and slinking away after his earthly
businesses, and gains; and the vigorous prosecution of his design for heaven,
be sometimes intermitted; though he sometimes fail in the ruling of his spirit:
in the governing of his thoughts and passions, and hereupon be surprised, by
fits of pride, or of anger or impatience, (the more it is thus, the more
doubtful will he unavoidably be, touching his state: and therefore dread to let
thy lusts get head, or take encouragement from their word) yet if the bent of
his heart and his course be toward the Lord, and his intention and endeavor,
be to fulfill after him, not indulging but judging himself, for all his
failings, and striving within himself, to stand complete in all the will of
God, this man is a godly man: and because he will not pardon himself, God will
certainly pardon, and overlook all his infirmities and failings, and graciously
accept him in Christ Jesus, to whom be glory for ever, amen.

Now brethren, to gather up all that has been said, (for I would not have you
to try by one, but by all three marks laid down) and so to bring this trial to
an issue. That soul that has deliberately, and absolutely chosen the Lord for
his portion, resolving to stand to his choice, and not to change for ever, that
makes it the business of his life, to pursue his choice, and counts it the
only happiness of his life to serve and enjoy that God whom he has chosen;
and for his sake is willing to suffer the loss of all things; that so heartily
approves of Christ, and his Gospel, that he accepts, and adventures his soul,
and his hopes, upon him alone; that has so dedicated himself, and given up,
both the right and the possession of himself to him, that he accounts himself
no longer his own, but is a servant and follower of Christ in righteousness and
holiness of life, heartily resolving and endeavoring, never to allow himself
in any known sin, nor in the neglect of any known duty; though his weaknesses
be great, his falls and failings be many, this man is beyond all question, a
sincere godly man.

Do thou yet fear, whether thou be the man? let that fear, set thee a
searching once and once again; let it follow thee into thine heart, and through
all thy ways; let it lay thee in the balance, and compare thee with this
pourtraicture of a godly man, which is now set before thee; if this will not
serve to quiet and satisfy thee, I know no more to say to thee, but that thou
diligently set thy self, by increasing in the grace of God, and outgrowing thy
sinful weaknesses and failings, to outgrow thy fears and thy doubts.

And when at length thou art come to a clear judgment, that this is thy case,
then, Son be of good comfort thy sins are forgiven thee; if God have ever a
child, if there be ever an heir of the Kingdom of heaven in the world, thou art
one. If thou be not mistaken in thy self, but this be a true character of thee,
I am mistaken in the Gospel, if, thou be not a Godly and a blessed man. Thou
have sincerely chosen the Lord, and that is a sure sign that he has chosen
thee, John 15.16. Thou art sincerely come unto Christ, and therefore he will in
no wise cast thee out, John 6.37. Thou orderest thy conversation aright, and
therefore, to thee will he show the Salvation of God, Psalm. 50.23. Thou shall
see the good of his chosen, and rejoice with the joy of his people, and glory
with his inheritance.

And now methinks, there should be a parti-colored face, upon this mixed
company, some of you methinks, should have the joy of the Lord in your
countenances, and his praises in your lips. What, has the Almighty brought me
hitherto? has he indeed taken me for his own, and marked me up for life? has
he given me an heart to pitch upon him, and to accept of his son, and thereby
witnessed that I am accepted of him? Is this his very Image which is to be seen
upon mine heart and life, and may I now say with boldness, I am my beloveds and
my beloved is mine? bless the Lord O my soul, and all that is within me,
bless his holy name.

Others methinks, should be sighing and shaking for fear. These are the blessed
of the Lord, but O in what case am I? woe is me, if none be the Lords but those
that have thus chosen him for theirs; if none be the redeemed ones of Christ,
but those that are his followers in holiness, and righteousness, O I dread to
think, whose I am! Have I chosen the Lord? am I a follower of Christ? woe woe
is me, it is too evident that I have chosen earth and vanity and am a follower
after lies. Ah wretch that I am, are all my hopes, is all my confidence now at
last come to this?

Sinner, how is it that thy soul is not yet in sackcloth and ashes, that
trembling and astonishment has not taken hold of thee? Art thou yet in quiet,
art thou yet at ease? Is it nothing to thee, to see thy self without Christ,
and without God in the world? or can thou wink so fast, that thou can not
yet see that this is thy very case? sure thou have lost either thine eyes, or
thine heart, if thy fears are not yet fallen upon thee.

As for you O beloved, whom these marks have proved to be the Lord's, Rejoice
in the Lord ye righteous, and again I say rejoice; and study to confirm and
establish your hearts in the joy of the Lord, by walking worthy of that grace
wherein you stand.

And thus I have dispatched the first branch, of the first direction. Search
what good there is in you, or whether there be the grace of God in truth in
your hearts.

2. Search what evils there are found in you. You that have made a through
proof of the grace of God in you, by what has been already said, this part of
the direction which yet remains, is intended, as to you, to humble you under,
and make you more watchful against those evils which yet remain.

But its chiefly intended to that sort of professors, who having but slightly
searched themselves, have gotten up to a confidence, that they are the children
of God.

In order to your making a further discovery of your selves, besides what has
been already hinted to the same purpose, let me advise you to search yet
deeper, what sins and corruptions there may be found in you, you hope there is
the good seed sown, but what tares are there to be found in you? Some tares
will be found in the best fields, some weeds will remain in the best gardens;
but search if there be no ranke-weeds, such as use not to be found in the
garden of the Lord, whether there be no gross, nor reigning sins with any of
you; or if any such be, whether they be suffered to grow and get head, and
overtop, and choke those hopeful blades, when ever they appear, is your hand
upon them to pluck them up, or your foot upon them to tread them down: Deal
faithfully, and pass through all your fields, mark and observe your ways, and
see what you can find.

Or if your life be clearer than it has been, and you find not much above
ground, search what is under ground, dig down to the roots; descend into your
hearts, and when you go down into these deeps, go down trembling, to think what
you may find there, though you have washed your face, and wiped your mouth, and
cleansed your hands, yet fear what you may find below. Men that go down into
the bottom of a deep Well, or into some dark vault, or cavern of the earth,
they go down trembling, there may be toads or snakes, Jym and Ohim may dwell
there; and you also know not, what you may find in your deeps. Tremble as you
go down in search after the evils of your hearts. If there be no oaths nor
lies, no murders, or adulteries, in your lives, yet there may be whole nests
of them, in your hearts. See if there be no Images of Jealousy set up there,
before which all within you fall down and worship; if there be not another God
within, besides him that has gotten the name without. Search narrowly, from
room to room, from corner to corner, it may be you may find such evils, as may
amaze and astonish you.

If the Lord should lead you through your hearts, as once he led the prophet,
Ezekiel. 8.5. etc. from place to place, and first showed him the Image of
jealousy, and then by an hole through a wall, and a door, led him further,
where he saw every form of creeping things, and abominable beasts, and all the
Idols of the house of Israel pourtrayed upon the wall, and the ancients of
Israel worshipping them; and leading him yet further, he saw more and more, and
greater abominations than these. If you should thus go in search through your
hearts, God knows, what abominations you might find, which yet you have not
discovered nor suspected. It may be, you may find the world sitting upon the
throne within you; and if there be not the form of every creeping thing, yet
all the beasts of the field, your horses and your oxen and your Sheep, may be
pourtrayed and engraven upon your hearts, these temples of the Lord, may be
made stables, and stalls, and folds, and barnes, where your cattle and your
corn may be lodged and laid up; nay possibly you may find them dunghils, full
of Toads and Adders; lies and adulteries, and all manner of unclean lusts may
be breeding in them. Or If you find nothing else, see if that Image of
Jealousy [Self] be not found behind the curtain, sitting upon the throne of
God, with a crown of pride upon its head, and all within you, even your very
religion, doing homage to it, and being made its servants.

Friends, you little think what an inside you may have, whatever your outside
be. Dig through the wall, look through the hole, and enter by the door, and
search with trembling, lest, where you hope to find Christ and the spirit of
grace, you should find the unclean spirit with his abominations.

There have been many in the world, who have been taken for sincere converts,
yea, and eminent Christians, in whom the devil has seemed to be slain at the
first shot, the old man has seemed to be knocked down, at the first blow; and
all on a sudden there has appeared a spring tide of holy joys and heavenly
affections, and their souls have been, as it were caught up into the third
heaven, as soon as they have gotten their heads up out of the mud and mire; and
yet after awhile, the old man gets heart again, and those lusts which had been
laid asleep for the time, have risen, up and gotten head again, and that filthy
fountain, which was thought to have been quite drained, and damm'd up, has
broken its bay, and cast out as great a flood of iniquities as ever there was
before.

O fear, lest it should be thus with thee, lest whatever there be at top, there
be that lying at the bottom, which may undo thee for ever: lest sin and the
devil be only laid asleep, but not slain; lest, though the enemy be beaten out
of the field, he be but only beaten into his hold, where he still fortifies
himself. And be sure though he should have lost his outworks, yet whilst he
makes good the strong hold, though the channels be swept and cleansed, yet if
the sink be choked up with mud and filth; though the issues of the Apostumes be
stopped and dried, yet if the bag and core be not gotten out; though thou have
quite another face, and seem quite another man than heretofore, though every
one that sees thee rejoices in the change that is made upon thee, and with the
greatest confidence proclaims the, A convert, a disciple, an Israelite indeed,
and thou blessest thy self in thine own heart, saying, Now I have peace yet is
there that within, which will break down all thy hopes, and make thy friends
ashamed of their joys they once had over thee. Fear lest this should be thy
case, and get thee down into thine heart, and search yet again, whether it be
or no.

Brethren, I would not check the least buds of the spring, I would not nip the
first blossomings, toward true grace and peace; I would cherish the least of
the new creatures of God, from the first springing of the babe in the womb; O
that every soul among you, were come so far onward, as the little ones among
you. God forbid, that any of you should be discouraged or frighted back, by
your being put in fear, that you are not yet come home. But however, he that is
gotten up to a confidence, that the work is done, that he has the seed of God,
and the life of God within him, let him search if there be not such hidden
wickednesses within him, which he never minded, nor thought on, that may give
him just ground to fear, and in fear to put it again to the question, whether
his estate be so good, and so sure as he concluded it.

Direct. 2. Fear and beware. That Is a special use of fear, to make to beware.
Fear sin and beware of it, fear the wrath of God, and beware, that it fall not
on thee. Particularly.

Fear and Hide. Fear and Flee.
1. Fear and hide. When our first parents had sinned, and were afraid, Genesis
3.7.8. They went and hid themselves, from the presence of God, among the trees
of the garden. Its true, 'twas but a poor hiding place, that they found, there
was never a tree in all the garden, that had shade enough, to hide them from
the all seeing eye; but yet you see how their fear works, it made them to hide.
Prove. 22.3. A prudent man foreseeth the evil, and hides himself. If you ask,
what or when, or how shall we hide, I answer,

1. Get your sins hid. Psalm. 32.1. Blessed is he whose sin is covered. There is
a covering of sin, which proves a curse. Prove. 28.13. He that covers his sin
shall not prosper, there is a covering it, by not confessing it, or which is
worse, by denying it. Gehazi's covering; a covering of sin by a lie; and there
is also a covering of sin by justifying our selves in it; I have not done this
thing, or I did not evil in it, all these are evil coverings, he that thus
covers his sin, shall not prosper. But there is a blessed covering of sin.
Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven and whose sin is covered,
forgiveness of sin, is the hiding it out of sight, and that is the blessedness.

There is an uncovering of sin, which is something toward its covering. He
that confesses and forsakes his sin shall have mercy, Prove. 28.13. confession
is the way to remission. Sin is never hid till it be thus opened

There is an impudent opening of sin, and a penitent opening of it.

1. An impudent opening of sin, Isa. 3.9. They declare their sin as Sodom, they
hid it not; they are naked and are not ashamed; they make their boast of sin,
and glory in their shame.

2. There is a penitent opening of sin, and that is, by confessing it, and
condemning our selves for it; and this is the opening, that is the way to hide
it. Confession leads on to repentance, and repentance to remission, the
confessing penitent carries his sin to Christ for a pardon, and that is its
covering. In that time the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there
shall be none; and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found. Jerem.
50.20. [in that time] in what time? why in the day of pardon, as in the last
words of the verse. [shall the iniquity of Israel be sought for] who will seek
for it? will God rip up old sores? will God rake up old quarrels? who will seek
it? why 1. Whether God seek it or no, to be sure, the accuser, Satan will be
seeking for it. Yea and 2. God also, the justice of God, in a sense, maybe said
to seek for it, the righteousness of God will (as I may so speak) have inquiry
made, if any sin still stand upon Isreal's and Judahs score; if any uncancell'd
bills, or uncrossed scores, may be found against them, but what ever enquiry be
made in that day, the day of pardons, there shall be none found. Their
remission is such a covering of sins, as righteousness will not look through,
to revenge them.

Beloved, get your sins thus hidden, see that they do not lie open to the
revenger; confess them, repent of them, get you to Christ for a pardon. Do not
deny or extenuate them, it is sad covering sin with sin, that will be as the
diping the wool in the furnace the second time, the dye will be the deeper. Get
the Covenant, the blood of the Covenant for a covering. Carry your sores and
your ulcers open before the Lord, for his covering. LORD it is a vain thing for
me to deny it, or to excuse what I have done, it cannot be excused; I have done
foolishly, I have done wickedly, and mine iniquity is marked before thee, I am
an unclean thing, all wounds, and bruises, and putrefying sores. A covering
Lord a covering to hide this unclean thing out of sight, a garment Lord, a
garment rolled in blood, to hide the shame of my nakedness.

Friends, are your sins hid? yes, mine are I hope; but what covering have thou
gotten? There are five sorts of coverings (besides those already mentioned)
under which men's sins are often hid.

1. A covering of ignorance; they know not sin to be sin, the blind see not
their own spots, and thereupon think there are no spots upon them; their
darkness serves them for a covering Thou that say thine heart is clean, it
may be it is for want of eyes, thou see not what an heart it is, when do we
hear ever a word of complaint, or confession from thee? There is no soundness
in my flesh, (says the psalmist) because of thine anger, nor rest in my bones
by reason of my sin, my wounds stink and are corrupt, my loins are filled with
a loathsome disease, and there is no soundness in my flesh, Psalm. 38.3. etc.
Such are the complainings of the righteous, but when do thou complain? thou
art whole and sound, thou say; I but it is because thou art blind, thou
think so; if God should open thine eyes, thou would see such sights, as
would amaze thee.

2. Oblivion, or their own forgetfulness, whilst men's sins are fresh in their
memory, they are sometimes afraid, but after a while, they are forgotten, and
all buried in Oblivion. Thou a good Christian? thou an honest man, and have
done no harm? remember thy self, look to the days of old, call back the things
that are past. Where were thou at such a time, and such a time, what were thou
then a doing? call to mind thine oaths, and thy lying, and thy drunkenness and
thy companions in sin. Have thou done nothing amiss? rub up thy memory, and
that will help thine eye sight.

3. Hardness of heart, some sinners can feel nothing; and they can see nothing
but what they feel. Nothing is evil with them, but what is uneasy, nothing is
sin, but what smarts. The Apostle tell us, Ephesians. 4.18.19. That men without
understanding are past feeling, and sure those that are without feeling, are so
much the more past understanding; the brawn upon their hearts, is a film upon
their eyes. See thou nothing to trouble thee? O hard heart! what, such a
drunard, such a scoffer, such an earthworm, such a prodigal, and yet see thou
nothing to trouble thee? if God should but smite this rock, that would open
thine eyes.

4. Some hide their sins, in other men's greater sins, by looking on the greater
blazes of other men's sins, their own embers, that lie most under the ashes are
not seen. If they can say with the Pharisee, I am not as other men, they will
not see, but they are honest men, and no hurt found in them.

5. Others will hide their sins in the Church, will take up some little
profession of religion, and make so much reformation, as will give them
admission into a congregation of Christians, or it may be but into a sect or
party, that call themselves Christians; to whom when they have once joined
themselves, there is an end of their old sins. If they have gotten a new skin
upon them, and are hanged on, as members of the body of Christ, (as they think)
then they go for new men, and all their old things are vanished away.

But sinners, are these the only coverts, in which your sins are hid? in your
ignorance, in your forgetfulness, etc. From whose eyes will these coverings
hide them? will they hide them from Gods eyes, or is it only from your own
eyes? Is this all you need, to hide your selves from your selves? woe be to
those men, whose sins are open before the eyes of the Lord, and only hid from
their own.

Will any of these coverings hide them from the Lord? Because you see not, does
not God see? because you have forgotten, has God forgotten? O if there were
such a book of remembrance, of all that you have done, presented to you, as is
written against you before the the Lord, how pale would your faces grow? If God
should now come in amongst us, and read over to each sinner, the roll that is
written against him, what a trembling congregation would this be: how would you
look one upon another, as men astonished! how would you strike upon your
breasts, and smite upon your thighs, and speak trembling, men and brethren,
what shall we do! what ease would it be to you, when you hear so much written
in your own books, to think there is more written against some others? And what
if you be gotten into the church, and your sins be buried under the shadow of
the Altar, under your profession of religion? will not God see them there?

Consider sinners, are your sins repented of and pardoned? has the Lord cast
them behind his back, and blotted them out of his book? you have made a shift
to blot them out of yours, but what if they should be still found on Gods book?
nay is it not certainly so, do they not all stand there against you, even all
the sins you have committed in your lives? O look ye out for a better covering;
have ye, have ye, cry for a pardon, sue out an act of oblivion from heaven,
look unto Jesus, get your sins nailed to his cross, and buried in his grave.
Repent and be converted that your iniquities may be blotted out, and in that
day, the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none, and
the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found.

2. Get your souls hid; hid with Christ in God. I flee unto thee to hide me,
Psalm. 143.9. I will trust in the covert of thy wings, Psalm. 61.4. Christ will
be no hiding place for your sins, unless your souls also take sanctuary in him.
Get thee in to Christ; if thou be found in him, thy sin shall not be found.
Hide thee from Christ, in Christ; in the blood and bowels of Christ a Savior,
from the fury and wrath of Christ a judge. Great is the wrath of that day;
there will be no enduring, and there can be no escaping that wrath, but by
himself. Woe be to those that shall then be found out of Christ, in what ever
else they be found. The kings of the earth, and the great men, the Rich men and
the Captains and the mighty men (that are found out of Christ). shall hide
themselves in dens, and the rocks of the mountains, and shall say to the
mountains, fall on us, and to the rocks, cover us, and hide us from him that
sits on the throne, and from the wrath of the lamb, for the great day of his
wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand, Rev. 6.15.16.17.

O sinners, you that have ventured it, to stand out from Christ hitherto, look
before you, to that great day that comes; you that neglect the Mercy, think how
you can possibly escape the Wrath of the lamb. Trust not to the secrecy of
dens, to the mercy of mountains, to the might of rocks; these will all be as
deaf to your cry, as you are to the cry of the Lord. Now you have a rock before
you, which will then be a rerefuge; put you into the clefts of this rock, and
the indignation shall pass over you, stay out at your utmost peril.

Wretched souls, how is it that it is so hard, to persuade you in to Christ? How
is it that the clifts of this rock, have so long opened to you, yea that the
rock has followed you, and cried after you, put in hither and you shall be
safe, and yet so few have been persuaded in? Lord how few! how many still stand
without, and it may be, are mocking at the fears of them that are gotten in.

Sinner, how can thou think without a trembling heart of being found out of
Christ, in that great day of his wrath? O fear, fear and beware, fear and hide;
hide thy self in Christ, and then thy great fear will be over, There is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ, Romans 8.1.

But how may we hide our selves in Christ? I answer, 1. Cry unto him to take
you in. 2. Consent to him while he offers to take you in.


1. Cry unto him to take you in; to sprinkle you with his blood, which alone
will save you from his wrath, say, but with a better heart, and in a better
sense, than they did, in the words of those Jews, Math. 27.25. His blood be
upon us, and our children.

There Is a double sense, in which these words may be spoken, 1. The guilt of
his blood be upon us, 2. The atonement of his blood be upon us.


It Was in the first sense that those wicked Jews imprecated, his blood be upon
us, let the guilt of his blood be upon us, let our own souls answer for the
fact, of putting him to death.

Beware sinners, that that precious blood be not thus found upon you.
Impenitent sinners, the guilt of Christ's blood is upon them, they are his
betrayers and murderers, and by their impenitence in sin, they allow the deeds
of those wicked ones that crucified him.

What Is said of Apostates, Heb. 6.6. is chargable upon all impenitent sinners,
They crucify the Son of God afresh, for.

1. It was sin that did crucify Christ, both as the meritorious cause, and as
the instrumental cause, it was the sin of the Jews that set them on work.

2. There is such malignity in sin, that if it were able, would fetch Christ
out of heaven again, and put him to death again.

3, Impenitent sinners stand with this weapon in their hand, to do their worst
toward the repeating this wicked fact.

4. There is in the crucifying of Christ, a putting him to death, and a putting
him to shame; the former they would do, and the latter they do, once and once
again. What a shame was it, that his crucifiers cast upon him, in crying out,
not this man but Barrabbas, Impenitent sinners do the like; in turning from
Christ to thy sin, thou also say, not Jesus but Barrabbas; these murderers
for me, not Christ but my lusts, and wickedness; and though there be not such a
word in thy mouth, yet this is the cry of thy fact, the guilt of his blood be
upon me.

Sinners, your going on in your sins, is a kind of doing that wicked act, of
crucifying Christ, once and once again. Every oath that you swear, every lie
that you tell, every scoff that you cast out, against Christ and his ways; is
your crucifying him afresh. This is the voice of your sins, crucify him,
crucify him; on with his mocking robes and crown again, spit at him and buffet
him again, scourge him again, up with him to the cross, and nail him, and
pierce him again. Every sinner is bringing in more thorns, and more nails,
and more vinegar and gall, and more spears to thrust him thorough. Here, take
my thorns, says one, take my nails, says another, take my sponge and my
spear says another, and strike to the heart. And the cry of this your fact is,
the guilt of his blood be upon us. Tremble O impenitents, did you ever think
that there there had been so much in your impenitence as this?

But 2. There is the Atonement of Christ's blood, and in this sense it is, I
exhort you to cry; his blood by upon me; let that blood of sprinkling, which
speaks better things than the blood of Abel, as it is peace and a propitiation
for sinners, so let it be upon me. Beg of Christ to take you in, and make you
partakers of the merit of his blood, of the virtue of his blood, whereby your
iniquities may be pardoned, and purged away; that when they are sought for,
they may not be found. Go sinner, go unto Jesus, lift up thine eyes, lift up
thy voice, stand crying at his door, Lord open to me, Lord take me in among thy
pardoned ones, let the blood of the lamb be sprinkled upon me.

2. Consent to Christ, whilst he offers to take you in, you may know what is to
be done, to get in to Christ, by considering over that special mark which I
have already given you, to prove your being in Christ. It Is your consent, that
will prove you to be in Christ, and the same which will be your evidence, will
give you entrance in him.

Sinners, give your consent to Christ; get your hearts to approve of him, to be
will satisfied, that it is safe venturing upon him, that he is a sure refuge,
that both can and will hide you from the wrath to come. Accept of Christ; If
you be satisfied that it is safe venturing with him, make your adventure,
embarque with this faithful Pilot, and with him trust your selves. Dedicate and
give your selves to him, as his right and property, and be sure he will hide
his own. Speak unto him this hour, here I am Lord, no longer mine own, I here
pass away and make over my self unto thee for ever; take me as thine own, for
thine I am resolved to be; take me for thine, own, and take care of me as thine
own, I am thine save me. Give him the right, and give him the present
possession of you; rise up this day ye servants of the Lord, and go and serve
him. What will thou have me to do Lord? how will thou have me to live? speak
Lord, i will henceforth know no other voice but thine; this world shall be no
longer heard, against the voice of Christ, this flesh shall be no longer heard,
against the voice of Christ, depart usurpers, I am neither mine own nor yours,
what have I any longer to do with you? I am Christ's, and him only will I serve,
and through the help of the Lord I will go from this place, bound in the
spirit, and resolved in mine heart; to be governed guided and employed by him
alone. This is the full and settled purpose of mine heart, and O that this my
resolution may be attended with such an effectual power, that may make a
present actual change upon my whole course and way of life. Well I will go in
the strength of the Lord, and let me find the presence and the power of the
Almighty with me. O that I might not go out of this house, nor be seen in the
streets, but the tongues of those that see me, might say, where has this man,
or this woman been this day? what has been done to them? whence is this
strange change? Is not this the man that was born blind? Is not this the
cripple that sat for alms at the beautiful gate of the Temple? said they once:
is not this the man that lived in blindness, and in ignorance of God? is not
this he, that was such a lame, halting, trifling vain walker? how do we see him
to have his eyes open, and living in the grace and power of God? what a change
is here? how comes this to pass? surely this man has been with Jesus; surely
he is become one of the Lords, and the spirit of the living God is in him.

What say you friends, are you now for such a change? come and give your selves
thus to the Lord, and then fear not, to commit your selves to his custody;
trust him for your pardon, trust him for protection, leave the care of your
souls upon him for ever. Faithful is he that has called you, and will take
care of you. Now you have a sure title to him, and are hid in his blood, and
this blood of the lamb, shall be to you as the scarlet line on the window of
Rhahab, was to her, Josh. 2.18. or as the blood of the Paschal lamb sprinkled
on the lintels, and door-posts of Israel, Exodus 12. your certain security, that
the indignation shall pass over you, and the destroyer shall not hurt you for
ever.

2. Fear and flee, the ordinary effect of fear is flight, and the reason of
flight is fear. There are three things in flight. 1. There is departure in it;
be gone, get thee up out of this place said the Angels once to Lot, Genesis 19. 2.
There is haste in it. Flight is a departure in haste. Haste thee, stay not in
all the plain. 3. It Is in order to an escape, escape for thy life, escape to the
mountains.

Flee sinner, flee away from thy sins and live. What day thou hidest thee in
Christ, thou must leave thy sins behind thee, or if thou carriest them to
Christ with thee (which comes all to one) it must be only to be crucified,
particularly, 1. Flee out of thy state of sin. 2. Flee from the practice of sin.


2. Flee out of thy state of sin, to say no more in this place to fright thee
to thy heels, know that thy state of sin is a state of bondage, Act. 8.23, thou
art a mere bondslave to the devil and thy lusts. Do thou not feel the chains
on thy neck, and the fetters on thy feet? art thou not made to serve under
thine enemies, whom thou can not find in thine heart but to obey, tho it be
to the cutting of thine own throat? Thou art not left at liberty, to act as a
Christian, according to the Gospel, no nor as a man according to thine own
reason and conscience, but art made a mere brute of, to serve the pleasure of
the devil and thy lusts. Art thou content to live and die such a slave? behold,
the whole world is for liberty; what groanings are there under oppression, what
outcries against impositions, and invasions, upon rights and privileges, and
what impatience of vassalage and servitude? and can thou be so patient, of
the impositions of lust, and thy vassalage under the devil? can thou dwell
for ever, under the usurpers? is there any tyranny like that of thy will and
lust? is the worst of servitudes only, easy to be born? arise thou slave,
shake off thy fetters, get thee up out of thine house of bondage.

It is not barely a cessation from the acts of sin, that I am now pressing you
to; (let him that stole, steal no more, let him that was a swearer, or a liar,
or a drunkard, swear no more, put away lying, and turn away from the wine and
the strong drink) but get you free from your state of sin, get you up out of
prison, cease not only from doing the work, but continue not under the dominion
of the devil, be no longer the practiser, no nor the prisoners of sin.

Christ came not to make your prison more clean or more easy, to cast out some
of your filth, or to get you an abatement of some of your drudgery work, but to
bring forth the prisoners out of prison, Isaiah. 42.7. Christ calls not to the
prisoners, to take their rest, or to do their masters work by halves, no nor
barely to let it all alone; but he says to the prisoners go forth, Isa. 49.9.

Sinners are not only employed, and set on work by sin and the devil, but they
are sold under sin, held under sin, shut up under unbelief. They are prisoners,
not only by constraint but by consent also, they are voluntary prisoners, they
have made a league with sin, and are its covenant-servants; they are not only
prisoners to Satan but to their own hearts, the heart of man is become so very
a devil, that it is its own jailer; the devil cannot commit a sinner into safer
custody, than by making his own heart his keeper.

Sinners, those hearts of yours are become such Devils incarnate, so
desperately set against Christ, so deeply engaged in soul-damning works, that
if God should leave you to the custody and conduct of your own natures, these
will lead you on to your damnation. It Is now become natural to sinners, to hate
the Lord and his way of life; Sin has made such changelings of them from what
they originally were, that it is their nature to play the fools, and the beasts;
it is their nature to be proud, to be froward, to be malicious, it is men's
corrupt nature, that so strongly enclines them, to follow the Devil and flee
from Christ. The Chicken does not more naturally follow the Hen, and flee from
the Kyte; than Sinners do follow that Kyte, the Devil, and flee from Christ.

As it is said of the Devil, Joh. 8.44. When he speaks a lie, he speaks of
his own, so may it be said of sinners, when they do wickedly, they do of their
own; when they lie, and swear, and mock, and riot, they do of their own. Their
inward part is very wickedness, Psalm. 5.9. Their hearts are a fountain of
iniquity, Jer. 6.7. As a fountain casts forth waters, so she casts forth
wickedness. She casts forth her wickedness, not only continually, as a
fountain casts out waters (the fountain runs night and day, Summer and Winter,
from year to year) but with the same freedom also, there is no need of the Pump
or the Bucket, to fetch it up, it flows forth of it self.

Such a state as this, are sinners in; they are Prisoners, and voluntary
Prisoners, natural slaves; whose servile spirits are altogether suited to their
servile state; who whilst they continue thus, are fit for nothing else but to
be made slaves of, they are fit for no other Master but the Devil, for no other
work but wickedness. Corrupt nature is their chain to bind them to the Devil,
and his cord to drag them to destruction.

Art thou not afraid, Sinner, to stay any longer in such a state? sure thou
do not know where thou art, or thou could not but fear. When Christ
intends to fetch sinners out, he first makes them to see where they are. Isa.
42.7. He opens the blind eyes, and brings forth the Prisoners from the Prison.
He opens their eyes, not barely that they may see their way out, but that they
may see, what a Prison it is they are in, what a vile Prison, what a strong
Prison, what Irons there are upon them, and what a dark hole, and dismal
dungeon, there is in the bottom of it, into which they are dropping, and unto
which they are reserved in these chains and fetters. There Is little hope of
persuading sinners out, till upon the sight of their misery and danger, they
are afraid to continue longer there.

O I am afraid, and yet I cannot get loose; why what is it that hinders thee? O
this evil heart holds me in, whatever danger I am in, this evil nature will
venture it all, rather than go to Christ. All within me cries in mine ears,
stay, stay where thou art, this bondage is liberty, in comparison of that state
that Christ would bring me to. Ay, that is it indeed, this corrupt nature is thy
Prison and thy Jailer; and till the power of nature be broken, till the stream
of nature be turned, till those bars and gates be cut in pieces, the fleshly
will and its lusts, by which thou art holden in, there will be no getting
forth. Thou have been called back often, and yet thou go on as thou did;
how comes this to pass? why thy nature leads thee on, thy nature holds thee
fast, Hos. 6.7, You [like men] have transgressed, you like men have been
hardened; you have done like your selves. Like men! like brutes or stocks
rather, why that is the same, man is become brutish, and his foolish heart
turned into a senseless stock, and yet this heart must have the custody and
government of thee.

O flee every one of you, flee away from your selves, arise, escape for your
lives; is this the state out of which you are so loath to depart? Men and
Brethren, save your selves from this woeful state. O generation, who has
forwarned you, that you should flee, (shall I say?) nay, who has bewitched
you, that you will not flee from the wrath to come? Get you up, get you up out
of this evil state. How is it that you stir not? how is it that we yet hear no
such cry among you, Master save us, we perish. Thus says the King, Come out;
will you say, no, but I will dye here? Flee Sinners,

1. As Lot out of Sodom, though you must leave all behind you; all your
substance, all your kindred and acquaintance; the fire and the brimstone is
coming, get you gone and leave all behind you.

2. As Israel out of Egypt, whatever difficulties be in the way; the Mountains,
the Red Sea, the Wilderness, could not keep Israel to the brick-kilns. God will
make a way through the Sea, through the most astonishing difficulties if you
will venture to follow him out. Say not it is hard, say not it is impossible to
escape; the Mountains shall be made a plain, the Sea shall become dry Land, the
wilderness shall become a fruitful Land, to the followers of the Lord.

3. Flee as men out of an house all on fire, or a sinking ship, in haste. Say
not 'twill be time enough to morrow, or hereafter; the house burns, the beam is
falling, the ship is sinking, away, away, e're it be too late. It Is no time to
stand delaying, it is no time to stand deliberating, Shall I, shall I? To day if
you will hear his voice, it is high time to awaken out of sleep.

Rise up every man and woman, shake off your fetters, slay your keeper (some
Prisoners have broken Prison by knocking their Jailer on the head) get this old
heart slain, and get you a new heart, when that is once done, then you have
broken Prison, and your souls are escaped.

2. Flee the practice of Sin. Say not I am now in Christ, and my sin shall
never separate me from him. If Christ do not separate thee from thy sins, thy
going on in them, will prove thee separate from Christ, Isa. 1.16. Put away the
evil of your doings from before mine eyes, cease to do evil. An evil life,
argues an evil state, thou have no part in Christ, who art still going on in
thy wickedness; the practice of sin does both evidence and uphold the power of
sin; what clearer evidence that sin is Lord still, than when its Laws are
obeyed? who can think that the root is dead, whilst the branches bear and
flourish? How is a tree known, but by its fruits? Its true, that Moss and
Mushromes, and such like excrescencies, may grow out of the best trees, but yet
it may be still said of all trees, By their fruits ye shall know them. Do men
gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? Do men gather Gourds of Vines, or
Hawes of the fig tree?

2 Timothy 2.19. Let every one that names the name of Christ, depart from
iniquity. Art Thou in Christ, who art not turned from thy sins? Do not say, I
hope I may be, (however) hereafter, and so indulge thy self thy liberty in sin,
till Christ come and set thee free; but whether thou be in Christ, or yet short
of him, put away iniquity from thee; let there be a present forbearance of the
acts of sin, and that will be a means to destroy its habits; as it is with some
plants, by cutting them off above ground, you may kill the roots. Do not say, I
will be a Drunkard, till God give me a new heart, I will go on in this
swearing, and lying, and mocking, till God work a change upon this evil heart;
this is thy resisting the work of God, and such a wicked resolution as may
provoke the Lord to leave thee for ever, under the power of Sin and the Devil.
Whatever thou be, go presently and put away every iniquity from thee, greater
or smaller, open or secret, corporal or spiritual wickednesses, have done with
them all. Do not only lament, or mourn for sin, but fight against it, and the
best fighting is by flying. The Soldiers of this world when they flee once,
the fight is lost; but Christ's Soldiers never fight well but when they fly;
when you fly sin you have won the field; when the Devil flies, he is overcome;
when you fly, you have overcome.

Flee all sin, but especially your beloved and accustomed sins, remember what I
have said of these already. Be not the men you have been used to be, do not the
evils you have loved to do. I do not yet mean, that you should only change your
sins, forbear covetousness, and turn prodigals, give off your drudgery for this
world, and give your selves to idleness, forbear profaneness, and turn
hypocrites, but put away all iniquity, especially your accustomed and beloved
sins.

Friends, whenever you see your old sins, that have gotten your hearts, coming
upon you, and assaulting you, as suppose pride, suppose covetousness, or sinful
anger, or the like, which you have been used to be overcome by, whenever you
find your selves tempted to any of these again, let your hearts startle at it,
Here comes my deadly enemy. I know you of old, what a snare you have been to
me, what a mere slave you have made of me. I remember how it has been with me,
all the time that I have been governed by this covetousness, led by these
companions, commanded by these passions, or this fleshly appetite; these are
they, that kept me back from Christ, that thrust out every good thought,
quenched every good motion, resisted every good word, that was spoken to me.
When the Word of God, the Ministers of Christ, and mine own Conscience called
upon me, Go foolish Soul, join thy self to Christ, make thy peace with God,
accept of Grace, submit to Mercy, turn at his reproofs, such was their power
over me and I was so bewitched to them, that I could not bring mine heart to
hearken to the Lord.

And are [you] come to me again? tempting me and enticeing me again after you?
what, shall I be a Drunkard again? an Earth-worm, an Epicure, and flesh-pleaser
again? Away, away, I have done with all iniquity, but especially I must have an
eye to you, I dare not touch with you for my life, and therefore come my soul,
put on thine armor, stand upon thy guard, and resist them. And in special call
up fear to thine help, and set that for thy Sentinel against them.

Fear will quickly espy, and will give the alarm to the Soul. Rise Sampson, the
Philistines are upon thee. Rise Soul, the Devil is at thy back, sin lies at the
door; Fear will espy, and will not slight the danger we are in. The flesh
counts sin a friend, that comes to do it a kindness: or if it be apprehended as
an enemy, that is like to do the Soul a mischief, presumption will tell you, the
mischief may not be great; if it make a breach upon thy peace, it is but
repenting afterward, and that will make it up; whatever wound it makes upon
thy heart, it may soon be healed; the best that is, may be drawn aside and yet
do well enough.

Or if Conscience say, it is not to be made light of, it is a dangerous and
deadly enemy, yet security will tell you, the enemy is yet afar off, take thine
ease, and trouble not thy self before the time. When the tempter is come,
'twill be time enough to look about thee.

But now fear will hold sin in constant suspicion, and it will ever suspect the
worst, look to thy self, he is at hand that betrays thee, sin lies at the door
watching for entrance, and if it get in once, God knows what mischief it may do
thee, e're ever thou get clear of it.

Whatever mischief sin has done to any person in the world, thy fear will
suspect it may do as bad by thee. How many Souls has this pride made to fall
into the condemnation of the Devil? How many Souls has this covetousness
drowned in perdition and destruction? How many Souls has this evil company led
down into the deep? What did Nebuchadnezzar's pride do by him? why it drove him
from men, amongst the beasts of the field. How did lust and luxury serve the
prodigal? It fetched him out from his fathers house, and left him at the Pigs
trough. Whether did the rich man's gluttony carry him? from the pleasures of
his Table to the torments of Hell. What kindness did Gehazi's bribes do for
him? they smote him a leper. What advantage did Achan's Gold, Judas his Silver,
Ananias his lie, bring to them? was not death all their wages? yea, it will put
it to be considered, what sin has done, not only to particular persons, but to
Kingdoms and Nations, to Countries and Cities. what brought it on the whole
world? A flood of waters to destroy them. What on Sodom? It burnt it to ashes.
What on Shiloh? Destruction and Devastation. Look to thy self Soul, this same
enemy that has made such woeful work every where in the world; this very enemy
stands watching at thy door; every little sin that comes, thou know not who,
or what may be at its heels: Do thou not see Sword, and Famine, and
Pestilence following after it! behold the Devil leading on the Van, and Death
and Hell bringing up the Rear.

O what easy admission and entertainment (notwithstanding all this mischief
sin has done) do fearless Souls ordinarily give unto it? It Is suffered to come
upon them as it will, to lodge with them, and dwell with them, and walk with
them. It meets them at every turn, at their Tables, their Beds, in their Shops,
in their Fields, and yet it is with them, as if there were no enemy near. If
your houses were haunted with the Devil, you would flee out of them; if you saw
Death in every cup of excess, if you saw a toad in every gluttonous dish, would
you not be startled at it, if you saw Robbers and Murderers at your heels,
would you not run for it? How is it that you are not running for your lives?
Fear and you will run. How is it that you are no more carefully enquiring,
which way may I take to escape? there is such a sin, or such a sin that is upon
me every day, how may I get rid of it? Fear, and that will both put you upon
asking, and help you to find out your way to escape.

But oh how is it, that there should be yet any pleading for, or excusing sin
in the world! such fools there are every where found, who are only afraid of
their friends, who are watching and fighting against their Remedy; who fall
foul with a friendly admonisher, with a faithful reprover; so far from taking
heed of sin, that they can hardly take it well to be bid to take heed of it.
Let any one come and say to them, Friend, do thou well to be angry? do thou
well to be idle and vain, to be thus heady and wilful in thy way? And it may
be instead of an [I thank you for your friendly warning] this shall be all,
[What's that to you? look to your self, and meddle not with me] Shame upon this
folly and madness. Fear Sin as you ought, and you will never fly in the face of
a faithful reprover.

To conclude this direction; if you will but hearken to me in this one thing, so
fear as to flee Sin, you will at once escape all that can hurt you. If I bid
you flee from a Serpent, a Cockatrice may meet you; if you flee from the Sword,
the Famine may meet you; if you flee from the Famine, the Pestilence may devour
you; if you flee from the wrath of Man, the wrath of God may fall on you; only
flee Sin, and you are out of danger for ever.

Direct. 3. Fear and follow after. This Direction will concern, The
Unbelievers. The Believers.


(1.) For Unbelievers, who are yet void of the Grace of God, my word to them
shall be this; Follow after true and saving Grace, in fear of falling short of
it. Heb. 12.15. Looking diligently, least any man fail of the Grace of God.
This Direction has been in part prevented, in what has been said in the two
former: our seeking to get into Christ, and to get out of a state of sin, is
the same in effect as to seek after Grace. What I shall add to what has been
said, shall be only these two words.

1. Let your aim be at Sincerity, and be sure you take not up with any thing
that is short of it. This, I take it, may fairly be accounted the sense of that
counsel of Solomon, Prove. 23.23. Buy the Truth. The words may as well be
rendered, Buy Truth, or Sincerity; get an upright heart, whatever it cost you.

Truth is sometimes taken objectively, for the Doctrine of Truth; the true
Doctrine of Godliness. Sometimes it is taken subjectively for Sincerity and
Integrity, that Truth in the inward parts, which God loves, Psalm. 51.6. Both
may be here intended, but especially the latter. It is pernicious and dangerous
to fall short of either, but especially of the last. To be false to our
Religion, is more dangerous of the two, than to be of a false Religion. An
hypocritical Christian is in a worse case than an honest Infidel; there is more
hope of some conscientious Papists, than of licentious Protestants.

Buy Truth. Whatever you miss of, whatever it costs you, get Sincerity and
Uprightness. To buy it, here notes, 1. To make it our own. Make Religion your
own; not only by getting a right Notion of it, a clear understanding, wherein
the sincerity of Godliness lies, nor barely by holding the truth, and owning it
in a bold profession, (there are that hold the truth in unrighteousness) but by
getting it formed and engraven upon your hearts, and subjecting all your powers
to the Authority and Government of it; not only holding the Truth, but
suffering the Truth to take hold of you, and to form you into its own image.
This is to make Religion our own. 2. To buy, notes, to make it our own by way
of Exchange, by parting with, and doing away whatsoever is inconsistent with it.

Buy sincerity whatever it cost you; it may cost you much ere you can get it.
It must be bought, though not by a price; a price you have not to give; all
that you have is not of that value to be a price for Grace. But though you have
nothing to buy it with as a Price, yet you have something to part with as a
Condition, without which you cannot obtain; all that you have must go for it,
Luke 14.33.

I have spoken much already, to show you wherein Sincerity stands; study well
those marks I have laid down, for Christians to prove themselves by, and then
propose it to your selves, never to give over till you are gotten up to that
spirit and life of Godliness, that will abide the trial of those marks: Resolve
to pursue it to the utmost, whatever it may cost thee. If thine Estate must go
for it, let it go; better be poor than ungracious: if thou must lose thy
Friends, bid farewell to them all; better be an Abject than an Hypocrite: if
thy Name and reputation must go, let it go; better be a Reproach than a
Reprobate: if thy sloth and beloved ease must go, and it will cost thee labor
and pains, as certainly it will; buckle to thy work, better Labor than eternal
Poverty. Stick at no terms, whatever the Lord imposes, submit to it. Let me
have Grace Lord, and let it stand me in whatever thou please. Take from me
what thou will, impose on me what thou will, only help me to bear and perform,
and I am content, so that I may be partaker of that Grace which accompanies
Salvation.

Friends, let me again beseech and exhort you, thus resolvedly to follow on
after sincerity and soundness, and beware you do not conclude you have obtained
before you have, and so fall short at last. Once more let me remember you of
what I have already told you, There are preparations for Grace which are not
Grace, there are Images of Grace which are not Grace, there is something like
Faith and like Repentance, which are not the same.

Have you set out after Christ? has the Lord awakened any of your Souls? is
the sleeping Devil roused, and has he raised such storms as he sometimes does
at his casting out? Does Conscience stir? has it worried thee out of thine
old sleep and security? Has the great Shepherd sent forth his dogs, thy fears,
after thee, to fetch thee in? and is thy Soul now in motion toward Christ? art
thou put upon praying, and hearing, and considering thy ways, and attempting
an amendment? Have thou thus set out after the Lord? O take heed thou take not
up thy rest here, follow on till thou obtain.

Friends, it is great pity, that any of you should come so far, and yet not come
thorough, but perish in the way. Take encouragement from what is already done,
but take not up your stand here: count not this all, and yet do not count it
nothing. Man, be of good courage, the Lord who has brought thee hitherto, has
therein said to thee, as to that Scribe, Mark 12.34. Thou art not far from the
Kingdom of God. O thank God for that word; the next word may be, The Kingdom of
God is within thee. What within a step of Christ? O take courage and put on,
one stroke further, and thou have shot the gulf; a little more Prayer, a little
more Labor, and the work may be done. Follow on after the Lord, and hope in
God; behold how he comes, leaping over the Mountains; behold the Father of
this poor Prodigal, running to meet his returning Son. The Sun of
Righteousness, (behold) is even rising upon thee; O shall the Sun go back, or
stand still? Cry to the Lord, Arise, shine upon this dark and benighted Soul,
bring in that light of Life, which is already dawning upon me. O let not Sin
and the World, now thou art gotten so near, pull thee back or hold thee at the
door. Come on, come on poor Soul, the salvation of God is near, even ready to
be revealed upon thee, the Lord stands waiting to be gracious to thee. Whilst
thou can not say, I have already attained, follow after, and thou shall
attain, and apprehend, and be apprehended of Christ; I will not say as Moses,
Stand still, but go on, and thou shall see the salvation of God.

But yet, as there is hope, so there is also hazard; thou art still between
hope and fear, let both join together, and force out thy stronger cries, When
Lord? when Lord? I see thou have dealt graciously by others, now one's brought
in, then another, but my Soul still sticks; though something be done, yet how
little is it? woe is me^, I am but as a Cake half baked, half persuaded, half
resolved; O when shall this almost come up to altogether? Shall this be the
day, when it shall be said, Salvation is come into this heart? O come Lord,
when so many be taken, let not me be left; when so many be brought home, let
not me be left at halfway; though I have been so long a coming toward thee, I
doubt I am not yet come to thee; though I be come to thy door, do I not
hitherto stand without? Lord take me in, Lord take me in, make me one of thy
Disciples, an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no guile.

Cry thus, lift up each one his Soul, and beg this Grace of the God of Grace.
Beg and believe, believe and hope, hope and run, and wait for the Salvation of
the Lord; but pray in fear, run in fear, wait in fear, lest after all this, you
should fall short of the Grace of God. Heb. 4.1. Let us therefore fear, lest a
Promise being left us, of entering into his rest, any of you should seem to come
short of it.

2. Take encouragement to seek Grace from the Promise of obtaining. Matthew. 7.7.
Ask, and it shall be given you, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be
opened to you; for every one that asks receives, etc. Jam. 1.5. If any of
you lack Wisdom, let him ask it of God, who gives to all men liberally, and
upbraideth not, and it shall be given him. If any man lack Grace, let him ask
it; he that will not be a Beggar shall ever be poor. Let him ask, and it shall
be given him; it is not to be had without asking, and it is to be had for the
asking. There are four especial Encouragements in this Promise.

1. The Lord [giveth] He is not like to him that sets up himself above God,
Antichrist, who Sells all he has; God gives, you shall have it freely, without
money and without price, Isa. 55.1.

2. [To all men] to any man that asks, and asks aright, to the worst as well as
the best. Those that need it most, if they be duly sensible of their need, are
most like to speed; the emptiest Vessels are those that God will fill, the
foulest Vessels are those that God will cleanse; he will give Grace to any
(that seek it as they ought) to the worst as well as the best.

3. [Liberally] A drop is more than thou deservest, but if thou will, the whole
Fountain shall be thine; thou, as poor as thou art, may have Grace, and have
it in abundance: these dry trees, these pining and perishing and starveling
Souls, that sit lamenting your poverty, go to God and you may all have enough;
every Vessel shall be filled with the water of Life.

4. [And upbraideth not] he will not upbraid any man, nor upon any account,
that is a serious suitor to him. 1. He will not upbraid any man, with boldness
or sauciness. If a poor man come to a Prince, to beg any great Favor from him,
what is his ordinary entertainment? What a saucy Fellow is here? here is a bold
Beggar indeed, get you gone, you are a saucy fellow; God will not upbraid any
of you so, you may come boldly to the throne of Grace. 2. He will not upbraid
any man with his unworthiness; Sirrah you are a Rebel, and mine Enemy; remember
how you have carried it to me; and besides, you are such a poor and
inconsiderable thing, that you are never like to do me much service, if I
should give you never so much; get you gone: thus men upbraid, but God will not
do so; he has gifts for Rebels, Grace for his Enemies, the unworthiest among
them all; he has put them into the hands of his Son, on purpose to distribute
amongst such. Psalm. 68.18. How is it Sinner, that thou have gotten no grace all
this time? how is it that thou art not yet before the throne of Grace, a
begging for it? O I am an unworthy wretch, a vile sinner, a rebel against God,
sure he will not look upon such a one as I; No? yes, he will look upon any one
that comes, he upbraideth no man. 3. He will not upbraid any man with coming
too often, or asking too much. He will not say as men to Beggars, Why you were
here but yesterday, my door can never be empty for you. He will not say, Can
you not be content with a little? will not one Alms suffice you? God will
rather say, why have you stayed so long ere you came? why have I heard no
sooner? or why hear I no oftener of you?

Go Sinner, speak to the Lord, for that poor graceless Soul of thine, beg thy
pardon, ask his Grace and Mercy; knock at his door, and lie at his door, take
no other answer but an Alms; God does not use to send away his Beggars, that
will not be denied, but sooner or later he will surely give unto them.

(2.) For Believers, who have already obtained Grace in truth, my word to them
shall be, Follow on toward perfection, in fear of falling back from, or
walking unworthy of that Grace wherein you stand. Have thou obtained Grace?
have thou so indeed? May be, now thine heart will be ready to say to thee, Fear
not, thou art now out of danger of miscarrying for ever, thou art passed from
Death to Life, and shall not come into condemnation. But yet take heed, for,

1. If thou be so secure from condemnation as thou think thou art, yet thy
Fear is one of those necessary Means by which thou must be preserved from it.
As the Apostle says concerning Faith, 1 Pet. 1.5. so may we say concerning
Fear, We are kept by the mighty power of God [through Fear] unto salvation.
Consider that Scripture, Jer. 32.40. I will put my fear into their hearts, that
they shall not depart from me.

2. If thou be indeed secured from wrath, art thou secured from sin also? Is
there no fear that sin may hurt thee, though thou should not die for it? Is
there nothing to be feared but Hell? is there no fear but that of a Slave? If
thou be a Child of God, is there no fear of disingenuity and unworthiness? If
thou be his Servant, is there no fear of ill husbandry? if thou be his
Disciple, is there no fear of non-proficiency? He has nothing of Christ, that
thinks nothing is to be feared, but wrath and damnation.

Fear Sin, fear to be unworthy, unthankful, unfruitful, fear sinful decays,
and declinings, and negligences, and in that fear follow on toward perfection.
Particularly,

1. Follow on the work of Mortification, in fear lest whatsoever wound sin has
received, it should recover and get head again. Have thou gotten it a little
under? make it as sure as thou can, though thou have gotten over Jordan, and
have set thy foot on the banks of Canaan, yet the Canaanite is still in the
land, and will be a briar and thorn unto thee. Thou will never have peace, thou will never prosper in the Grace of God, but according as thou prosperest in thy
war against sin. Do thou ever design to come to any thing in Religion, and
to grow up in the Grace of God? Let thine eye and thine hand be upon this
adversary, which will otherwise certainly keep thee down, and it may be bring
thee much lower than thou art this day.

It Is with Grace in an unmortified heart, as with poor Israel in Egypt, it is
under Oppression. The taskmasters were upon Isreal's backs, to keep them in
bondage; they were not their own men, to do as they would, they could not go
and serve the Lord, their tyrants would not suffer them: and thus it is like to
be with thee. Romans 7. When I would do good, evil is present with me. O these
Egyptians have me in hold, I am so captivated to the Law of sin, that I cannot
do the thing that I would. What an hard servitude am I under? wretched man that
I am, who shall deliver me?

Only, betwixt oppressed Israel and this oppressed Israelite (the new
Creature) there is this difference, Israel, by how much the more they were
oppressed, by so much the more they grew and multiplied; 'twas more than all
Egypt could do to keep them barren. But Grace will never grow and fructify
under the oppression of Sin; Grace oppressed by affliction, will prosper and
grow, as Israel did; Christians are seldom in such a thriving state as when
under trouble; and that may comfort us under all the oppressions of men; we may
be as holy under them all, we may serve the Lord as well, it may be, better, we
may enjoy the Lord as much, it may be more, in our afflicted, than in our
prosperous state. But under the tyranny and usurpation of sin, Grace cannot
thrive; 'twill hardly be kept alive whiles lust so lords it over it.

When the poor Soul under this oppression of lust, groans and cries, as poor
Israel did, Let me go, let me go, that I may serve the Lord; the flesh
possibly, when in a fright, (as the Egyptians did when they were smitten with
their plagues) may say, Go, go and serve the Lord; be as holy as thou will, get
thee up out of Egyt, get thee on toward Heaven. But then shortly after when
the fright is over, it falls on again, and it may be, doubles the bondage. Go
serve the Lord: To your work, says the flesh; or it may be, To your play, you
shall not go. Or if the Soul has gotten a little more liberty than ordinary,
these Egyptians will after it again, Israel can never get free, and be let
alone to serve the Lord indeed, till the Egyptians be dead.

It Is in vain to hold a treaty with our flesh, to make terms and to article
with it, for a larger allowance; till this enemy be dead, thy Soul will never
prosper, nor go comfortably on its way. Get Egypt into the Red Sea, let thy Sin
be drowned in that Sea of Blood, the Blood of Christ; that is the only Ocean in
which Sin will drown and die; when thou have it there, then that oppressed
thing within thee will grow and increase mightily, when Sin is dead, then Grace
will thrive.

Grace in an unmortified heart, is as a spark of fire in green wood, it will
not burn, all the blowing it up will hardly keep it alive, the sap and moisture
of the wood will choke it; when the sticks are dried, then 'twill burn. O what
a flame of holy Affections, what a flame of Love and holy Desires would break
forth! what burning and shining Lights should we be, if these green Faggots,
our lusts, were dried up and withered? when you are dead to sin, then you shall
be alive unto God, Romans 6.11.

Christian, art thou nothing concerned for that little Grace that is in thee?
preserve it, for it is thy Life; and look upon thy lusts as its Oppressors and
Murderers, that would strangle the babe in thy womb; and never count thy self
secure, till they be dead which seek this child's life. Say within thine heart,
I go in fear of my life, of them; there is no binding them to the Peace, or the
good Behavior, they are thy mortal Enemies, and thou can have no security
but in their death.

But how shall I do to get my sins mortified?

Why, first let me ask thee, art thou so sensible of the evil of them, and the
mischiefs thou art like to suffer by them, that thou dare not let them live?
Art thou so heartily afraid of them, that nothing less than their death will
give thee quiet? Art thou more afraid of thy living lusts, than of the labor
and the smart that their death will cost thee? who would bear the cutting off
of a limb, an arm or a leg, that is not sensible that his life is concerned
in it? This mortifying work is one of the most painful works of a Christian;
It is not so difficult to tell you how you should do it, as to make you willing
to do it. Physicians sometimes have an harder task, to persuade to the taking
of the Physic, than to cure the Disease when once the Patient is willing; and
when no other Arguments will prevail, it is Fear at last that must do it. Art
thou in such a fear of thy Disease, that this does swallow up thy fear of thy
remedy? Art thou for the death of sin, how painful soever it may be to thee?
Why if thou art in good earnest, then take these following Directions: 1. Lay
the axe to the Root of sin. 2. Put a Knife to the Throat of sin. 3. Put a
Bridle on its Jaws. 4. Set thy Foot on the Neck of sin.


1. Lay the Axe to the root of sin. When Christ appeared in the World, to cut
off impenitent sinners, it is expressed thus, Matthew. 3.10. Now also is the Axe
laid to the root of the tree; every tree that brings not forth good fruit, is
hewn down. Sure enough the tree must down, when it is cut up at the root. What
was to be done by those sinners, do thou by sin, lay the Axe to the root. There
are sometimes some hopeful assaults made against sin, which yet prosper not,
because the blow goes not to the root; the branches may be lopped, the Acts of
sin may be cut off, the Drunkard may cease from his Wine, and the Adulterer
from his Harlots; swearing and lying and oppression, may be all cut down as to
what appears; but soon after, all these branches and evil fruits may sprout
forth, and grow up again; the root was not touched, whatever was done upon the
boughs. The heart-Adulteries, and heart drunkenness, the swearing and lying and
oppressing heart, the root of all these wickednesses remained untouched. Let
that inward corruption of Nature, which is the root of Actual sin, be first and
most effectually laid at. The root of sin is to be destroyed, By the Word of
Christ. By the Blood of Christ.


1. By the Word of Christ. Heb. 4.12. The Word of God is quick and powerful,
sharper than any two-edged Sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul
and spirit, of the joints and marrow. It reaches to the inwards, and pierces
the Entrails. Like the Lightning, it will melt the sword in the scabbard,
'twill break the bones, 'twill slay the babe in the womb. When they heard this,
they were pricked in their hearts, Act. 2.37. Friends, do not open the Ear
only, but open the Breast to the Word, set the point of this Sword to the very
heart of your sins, and count not that it has done its work, whatever
slaughter it has made of your sins without, till the Soul of them, the inward
pravity of your Natures, and the inward lusts immediately issuing thence, have
received their mortal wound.

2. By the Blood or Death of Christ, Romans 6.6. Our old man is crucified with
him. Ay, that is it that must do it; it is Christ crucified that must crucify
sin.

We read Mark 5.29. of a Woman, that had been many years afflicted with an
issue of Blood, who by the influence of Christ, through the touch of his hemme,
had the fountain of her blood dried up, and so her bloody issue cured. The
irruptions and breakings forth of lust into action, are as so many Issues of
blood running upon us; the workings of pride, the workings of Covetousness,
sensuality, and the like, are a filthy flux, so many unclean issues, or
running sores upon us. Those that sport themselves with their sins, are as men
that make a sport of their filthy ulcers and unclean diseases.

Now the way of cure of these unclean issues, may be illustrated from that
Scripture. There are three things to be noted in the cure of that woman.

1. The bloody Issue was cured by the drying up the Fountain of her blood.
These filthy fluxes of lust and wickedness, will never be cured, till their
Fountain be dried up, till the Body of sin be destroyed.

2. The fountain of her blood was dried up by virtue issuing from Christ. There
went out virtue from him, it is said, upon which the woman was cured. Sin can
never be slain but by virtue and influence from Christ: Therefore he is said to
be a fountain opened for sin and for uncleanness, Zech. 13.1. Here Is a Fountain
prepared against a Fountain; and a fountain of blood against a fountain of
blood; the blood of Christ is a fountain opened, to drayn out and dry up our
fountain of iniquity. 1 John 1.7. The Blood of Jesus Christ his Son, cleanses
us from all sin.

3. The virtue of Christ was received, and the cure wrought, by a touch of the
hemme of his garment: that is, by the faith of the woman, who said, that is,
who believed, If I may touch the hemme of his garment, I shall be whole. Her
faith was it which got out the virtue, as Christ himself afterward testifies,
verse. 34. Thy faith has made thee whole.

Friends, would you be healed of your plagues? Go to Christ for a cure. Put
forth the hand of faith and touch: touch, not the hemme of his garment, but his
side and his heart, his hands and his feet; touch this Jesus as a crucified
Jesus; Christ can heal you with a touch, but he will not touch your diseased
Souls, unless your faith first touch him.

We read, Numb. 21. that a look of a stung Israelite (which was the same thing
with this woman's touch) on the brazen Serpent, got out such virtue from him who
was signified by that Serpent, as cured him of his sting. Christ looked on by
faith, will not only heal thee of the sting, but will kill the Serpent, that it
shall never smite thee with such a deadly sting again.

Go to Christ sinner, say within thy self, If I can but touch him, I shall be
made whole; look to the brazen Serpent, and both thou shall be healed, and the
fiery Serpent slain. Believe that there is such virtue in Christ, as will do
the cure, and lay hold and rely upon him for it. Bring thy unclean fountain to
that fountain which is opened for sin and for uncleanness, and thou shall
certainly find that this blood of Christ shall cleanse thee from all sin.

Thou that art a Saint may set thy Probatum est to this remedy; thou have
been with Jesus, and thy Faith has made thee whole; thine Old man is crucified
with him, and the body of sin is destroyed; only, because the cure is but
begun, and must be perfected by degrees, by the same remedy, as long as thou
live in this imperfect state; by renewed acts of faith upon the blood of
Christ, expect thy total cure. From the continual issuing forth of the same
virtue, by which sin has received its deaths wound, let it die daily, till it
cease to be for ever.

2. Put a knife to the throat of sin. My meaning is, cut it short of that
Provision that would feed and nourish it. The old man is given to Appetite, and
you know what the counsel is in that case, Prove. 23.2. Put a knife to thy
throat, if thou be a man given to appetite. Look how many lusts there are, so
many sorts of feedings there are, to keep them in heart: Pride must have
ornaments, or honor, applause, respect and observance, and for want of other
feeding, 'twill feed upon thoughts, upon our self-reflections and dotages; any
vain conceit of some worth or excellency we find in us. Covetousness must have
money, houses and lands, the hopes of getting, and the content of possessing
them. Sensuality must have carnal pleasure and mirth, wine and strong drink,
and dainties and varieties, etc. and whilst the flesh may have its lust, it
grows headstrong and imperious, there is no way to keep it tame, but by keeping
it short of what it craves. Make no provision for the flesh, (says the
Apostle, Romans 13.14.) to fulfill the lusts thereof. And you may observe it,
that he prescribes this as a remedy to cure those intemperances, riot and
drunkenness, chambering and wantonness, strife and envying, mentioned ver. 13.

It may be thou complainest sometimes of thy corruptions, of the impetuousness
of lust, of the unruliness of thy spirit, and confessest it, and prayest
against it; but whilst thou prayest, thou can not find in thine heart to
make thy lust to fast, it must have its provision still allowed it. It may be
even when thou art praying against thy pride, thou letst it feed upon thy very
Prayer; thy eloquence or affectionate Enlargement, or any thing thou
apprehendest to be praiseworthy, this must be meat for thy pride. It may be
thou prayest against thy covetousness or sensuality, but as soon as thou art
off thy knees, away thou go, to work for the one, or to thy play to please
the other. When some of thy last words are, lead us not into temptation, it may
be thy very next steps may be running into temptation; this is but mocking of
God, and deluding thy self. If thou would prosper against this enemy,
whilst thou stormest it by seeking to God, starve it by denying thy self.

3. Put a bridle on its Jaws. My meaning is, restrain it from its actings; if
thou can not prevent its conception, strangle it in the birth; if the fire be
kindled within, yet give it no vent: allow not the lust of thine heart, the
privilege of thy mouth, or the command of thine hand: if thou can not
restrain thy covetous desires, yet hold in from covetous practices; if thou
love the wine and the strong drink, yet withhold the cup from the lip; if
thou can not so easily rule thy spirit, yet bridle thy tongue; the fire of
passion does not waste by spending, but rather increases: the ordinary
preventing and restraining the acts of sin, will weaken its habits. I have
heard some persons vainly speaking at this rate, when I have anger in mine
heart out it must, and then I am friends; and so take it for their virtue
rather than their sin, that they cast out all their mire and dirt in a storm,
because then a calm follows. Thou fool, have thou conquered thine unruly
spirit, by suffering thy self to be thus conquered by it? what do thou think
of him that conquers his lust by going to an Harlot? when thou have eased thy
stomach, by thy Bedlam-language, then there is a calm; but thou neither
considerest the sin of letting fly thine angry words, nor yet wilt mind that
the fire will kindle the sooner, for that it finds so easy a vent. Damme up
the furnace, and that is the best way to quench the coals.

4. Set thy foot on the neck of Sin. Have any of thy lusts fallen before thee?
make them sure, tread them under thee, that they rise not up again; do not
slight them as conquered enemies, which now thou need no more to fear; those
which are now under thy foot, if thou look not well to them, may be Lords over
thee again. Has the Lord humbled thy proud heart, broken thy unruly spirit,
and seemed to turn a Lion into a Lamb? whilst thou say, I hope I shall
never be proud again, never be so froward or peevish again, whilst thus thou
hopest, thou shall not, yet still fear lest thou should; whilst sin has
any life in it, thou art still in danger; as we use to say of dying men,
whilst there is life there is hope; so may it be said of these dying beasts,
while there is life there is fear. Let that fear be as the foot upon their
necks, to prevent their rising and return upon thee.

Well, thus set upon sin, let it be destroyed; reward it as it would serve
thee, and because it will be long a dying, let it be killed all the day long,
draw not back thine hand, whilst its life is left in it.

O what an advantage will the death of of sin be to the life of holiness! when
the body of sin is dead, 'twill stink; dead bodies will do so, and all the
issues of it will be noisome and loathsome to thee. Lust is never deadly, but
when it lives, and is sweet and pleasant; when it dies and stinks, and is
become an annoyance to thee, it will be the less thine hindrance; it has now
done its worst, the more it offends, the less it will hurt.

Do thou find sin sweet? Is it still a pleasure to thee? beware of it, it is
a sign it is still alive; it would stink if it were dead, thou would nauseate
it, thy stomach would rise against it: O this stinking pride, this stinking
covetousness, these stinking pleasures, away with them, my very soul is sick
with the stench they make, and when sin stinks, then holiness will be pleasant,
and the work of holiness a delight: the very severities of Religion will be
sweet, when the pleasure of sin ceases.

The death of sin is all our diseases cured, the lean and consumptive Soul will
now revive and recover, and be strengthened for its work. The crucifying of sin
is the casting off our weights that hang on to hinder us in our way, Heb. 12.1,
2. Let us lay aside every weight, and the sin that does easily be set us, and
run with patience the race that is set before us, it is ill running with weights
upon our backs. Lust is such a weight upon the Saints, as Conscience is upon
sinners; some sinners Consciences, make them drive heavily on, in their way of
sin; when they can once knock off this weight, when they can kill Conscience,
and get themselves rid of its checks and controuls, then they rush on upon
iniquity, as the horse rusheth into the battle; let the Saints serve their
Lusts as Sinners do their Consciences, and then they may run with patience the
race which is set before them.

There is a sore evil that is seen under the Sun, Sinners all upon the
Tantivie, riding post toward Hell (O how sprightly, O how hot are they upon
their chase of sin and vanity) and poor creeple-Christians, but barely wagging
on, by a Snail-creeping motion, heavenward. O it is a sign that the weights do
yet hang on; thou art yet heavy laden, thou carriest too many bundles of
thorns upon thy back, too many burdens of earth and flesh upon thine heart, to
make any have heavenward; lay aside these weights, tread down these worldly
lusts, throw off these worldly cares, and carnal desires and delights; yea, get
this carnality which is the body of Sin, and the very soul of that body, to be
slain and crucified with Christ, and when thou art dead with Christ, thou shall
live the better to him. He that is dead, is freed from sin, Romans 6.7. and verse.
18.22. Being made free from sin, ye then become the Servants of Righteousness,
and so shall have your fruit unto holiness, and your end everlasting life.

O what a visible improvement should we quickly see on the professing world,
did we prosper more in our mortifying work; then would the languid and
pale-faced Saints have blood in their cheeks, and more spirits in all their
veins: the young man within would be fresh and ruddy, were the old man once
well laid; then would the Plants grow up into Trees, and the Shrubs into
Cedars; then will the lame man leap as an Heart, and the tongue of the dumb be
loosed; then would this vile image of earth and flesh vanish and disappear, and
the Spirit of Glory and of God would more visibly rest upon us, and we should
go forth, as the Sun out of his Chamber, and rejoice as the strong to run our
course: Then should we be seen to be a Royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a
peculiar people, showing forth the virtues of him that has called us, out of
darkness into his glorious and marveilous light. Then, when the pricking briar,
and the grieving thorn, that pride, that earthliness, and carnality, shall be
thus cut in their very root, when all our fleshly fooleries and dotages, and
all the vexations, pets and passions of persons and parties shall shrink in and
wither, then shall all those daughters of the morning, Faith, and Love, and
Mercy, and Meekness, and Humility, Peace, and Gentleness, lift up their heads
in our Gates, and we that have been the reproach and dishonor, shall appear
the Children and Glory of our Father.

Go therefore presently to the Lord Jesus, carry these Malefactors to the
Cross; get the Spear to be thrust through the heart, and nail every member of
this body of sin, there let them perish and dye, and then shall you see the
beauty of holiness looking forth as the morning, fair as the Moon, clear as the
Sun, and terrible as an Army with Banners. Only to this I must add,

Nurse up the grace that is in you, and let it have its perfect work, in fear
of receiving the grace of God in vain. When the Lord gives grace, he lays the
same charge upon us as Paul on Timothy, 2 Timothy 1.14. That good thing which was
committed to thee, keep by the Holy Ghost. Our grace is to be kept by us, As
Nurses. As Stewards.


1. As Nurses, By our cherishing and improving of it; the weeding of the
Garden, will be the thriving of the Flowers, but they must be nourished, as
well as cleared of weeds; rotten weeds will be soil for the Herbs, but they
must be warmed and watered also, by the influences of the Sun and Clouds. In
order to our nourishing of grace, are all our Receiving duties; such as are
Prayer, Hearing, Sacraments, etc. our being conversant aright in these duties,
are our sucking in, and feeding upon that milk, and that bread of life, by
which grace grows. As pleasant as our food is, and as great a delight as there
is in feeding upon it, we are froward Children, and have need of the rod to
fright us to the breast: God that has provided such food for us, and has made
us under such a constant necessity of it, will be angry with us if we slight
it. If the sense of your own need do not, let the fear of the divine
displeasure bring you carefully and diligently to attend on his means, and so
to attend that you may grow thereby: Come to the Word, come to Prayer, and
other Duties, not only in obedience because you have a command for it, but come
in hope and expectation of growing by them because you have a promise. Look not
on them only as parts of that homage which you owe to God, but as means to
obtain from God, and whereby you may grow up unto him. Attend thus, and attend
with diligence; be afraid to trifle; worship God with reverence and Godly fear.
Fear as it is a bridle to sin, so will it be a spur to every duty.

Christians, Is there no fear you may be faulty here? Consider how it has
been, consider not only what you have done, but how you have done it, and what
you have gotten. I have been a Disciple of Christ, an hearing Disciple, a
praying Disciple, but cui bono? what advantage has it been to me? Do I thrive?
does my Soul prosper? what discernable difference is there, betwixt me that
pray, and hear, and come to the Table of the Lord, and them that hear not, and
pray not? what, have so many years duties brought me in no more than I had when
I first began? Am I as much a babe now, as when I sucked my first milk? Have I
lain at dry breasts? at wells in which there is no water? or what is the matter,
that after all this time, I find no more improvement? Sure there has been
nourishment ministered, they are full breasts, they are the wells of Salvation
that I have been at; but foolish Soul that I am, I have but played with the
breasts instead of sucking, and with the bucket instead of drawing; and hence
it is, that it is no better with me. Methinks the fruit thou find'st of such
trifling, methinks that lean and starveling Soul of thine should call upon
thee, to look to it, and make a better use of such precious means as are before
thee. Show me not the meat, but show me the man; tell me not, thou have been
waiting at the gates of Wisdom, thou have been feeding by the Shepherds
tents; tell me not how far, or how often thou go to hear; tell me not that
thy house is an house of Prayer; that thy Closet, that thy Family, that thy
Bible can witness for thee; the blindness of thy mind, the coldness, and
carnality, and vanity of thy life do sufficiently evidence what a poor feeder
thou have been, whatever good meals thou have been at. Tremble to think that
such means as thou have had, should leave thee in such a case as thou art this
day; and since thy wonted course will not do to fetch thee up into a better
case, what remains, but that thou bethink thy self, and henceforth resolve to
put on to another manner of care and diligence; and never again satisfy thy
self with any kind of performances whatsoever, that do no more answer their
end. Awaken from thy drowsy Religion, and henceforth pray not as at other
times, hear not as in the former days, but stir up all thy powers, engage all
the grace thou have, call up all the faith, the hope, the love, the desires
thou have, make all the strength thou can, and bow thy self with thy might
before the Lord, open thy mouth wide, and thus wait on him, until he come and
rain down righteousness upon thee, and thy Soul become as as a well-watered
Garden, and as a Spring of waters, whose waters fail not.

2. As Stewards. Keep what thou have for use, our receiving duties are for our
returning duties: Get in, in order to laying out, and be faithful in laying out
well, whatever you have received. The Rivers must pay themselves as a tribute
to the Ocean, from which they arise and are filled; To whom much has been
given, of them much is required, Luke 12.48. and to whom any thing is given, be
it much or little, so much must be returned; those that are rich in grace, are
thereby enriched unto good works, and those that are enriched unto good works,
must be rich in good works, 1 Timothy 6.18.

What have thou, that thou have not received? and what have thou received, that
thou owe not for? and what account will thou make, if thou set not thine
heart to pay what thou owe? if our first enquiry be, what have I received?
our next must be, what have I done? or, what have I to do? What do you more
than others? said Christ to his Disciples, Math. 5.47. I have not done by
others, as I have done by you; they have not been taught as you have been
taught, they have not been fed as you have been fed; they have not seen, nor
heard, nor tasted, what you have done; think not that it can be born, that you
do no more, nor no better than they, Coloss. 2.6.7. As ye have received Christ
Jesus the Lord, so walk in him, rooted and built up in him, and established in
the faith, as ye have been taught, abounding therein with thanksgiving. Is
Christ in thee? let the life of Christ be made manifest in thy life; as he was,
so be thou in the world; he went about doing good, go thou and do likewise.
Have thou faith? have thou the love of Christ in thee? where is thy work of
faith? where are thy labors of love? have thou been filled with the fruits of
righteousness, with meekness, humility, mercy, patience? let them all have
their perfect work, that thou may be entire, lacking nothing.

Our first fruits must be brought forth upon our selves, our first care and
business must be, to work out our own Salvation, to keep, every one of us, our
own vineyard. Thou have an heart of thine own to keep, and a tongue to keep,
and eyes and hands to look to, and govern well; thou have thy thoughts, and thy
passions, and thine appetite, and thy Conscience, and thy conversation to take
care of; and the grace thou have received, is firstly to be exercised upon thy
self. But though thy work begin there, yet it must not end there; thou have thy
family to govern, thou have thy father's family, the household of faith, to look
after; yea, and thou have a larger charge than this, as thou have opportunity,
do good to all; Gal. 6.10. thou art set to be a guide to the blind, a light to
them that are in darkness, an instructor of the foolish, a teacher of babes, an
example of the believers; yea, and of the unbelievers also, in word, in
conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity.

Now Christians, know your work, and set to your work; serve the Lord with the
best you have, and serve the Lord with all you have; and all this in fear, lest
you should receive the grace of God in vain. I beseech you, says the Apostle,
take heed of that, 2 Cor. 6.1. I beseech you, that you receive not the grace of
God in vain. Then the grace of God is received in vain, not only, when nothing
is done by it, but in a degree it may be said to be received in vain, when its
fruits are not proportionable, there is not so much done as might have been
done: When he that has received ten talents, brings forth no more fruit than
might have been brought forth with five; when he that has received five
talents, has done no more good, than might have been done with two; all our
receivings that are over and above the proportion of our fruits, all the
overplus of them, is received in vain. He that is a knowing Christian, if he
lives not to better purpose, than a Christian of little knowledge; he that is
an ancient experienced Christian, if he be no more useful in his life, than he
that is but a babe, that which he has received above what this babe has
received, is received in vain, and the Lord may say to him, wherefore is this
waste?

What, art thou a man of knowledge, and have had such long acquaintance with
God, and such experiences of his special love and kindness to thee, and do
thou keep all so much to thy self, that thou art of little more use in thy
generation, than a child? Has the Lord taken thee into his heart, showed thee
his loves, comforted thee in Prayer, counseled thee in his Word, feasted thee
at his Table, caused his grace so to abound toward thee, and made thee glad
with the light of his countenance, and all for no more but this? has he
furnished thee, and fitted thee for every good work, and yet art thou thus
barren and unfruitful? An unuseful and unactive spirit in a Christian, is an
unhappiness, and an unworthiness, which yet possibly some that are none of the
lowest form for seize, may have reason enough to charge themselves
withal; and to conclude, that though they have not altogether, yet they have
very much received the grace of God in vain.

Brethren beloved, let us study, and let us learn that wisdom which is from
above, which is full of good fruits, dare not to be found among the barren of
the flock, nor of those trees which do little better than cumber the ground.
Once more let me put the spur to the side: What if the Lord should come among
his fig trees, and find so little fruit upon thee? art thou not afraid, thou
might hear that word, Cut it down, why cumbreth it the ground? Consider
friend, what fruits are there found upon thee? the fruits of the flesh, may be,
are still hanging on; what clustres are there of them? hatred, variance,
emulation, strife, wrath, envying, pride, covetousness, what a vintage is there
of these wild grapes? but where are the fruits of the spirit? what a small
gleaning is there of them to be found, and what shrivelings are those that are?
would thou that thy Lord should find it thus with thee? we read Cant. 4.16.
when the Church was in a thriving fruitful state, she prayed, Let my beloved
come into his Garden, and eat his pleasant fruits. Do Thou make that Prayer?
O no, I am afraid he should come and find me thus; thy Prayer is more like to
be, Let my Lord delay his coming. But how long must he stay? thine heart would
shake within thee, to think that he should find thee thus; but when, O when
shall it be better with thee? Take this pruning hook (fear will serve thee for
such an use) and lop off these evil fruits, that the fruits of righteousness
may spring up in their room. When shall the Roses and the Pomegranates bud?
when shall the fragrant spices flow forth? those blessed fruits of the Spirit,
love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness,
temperance, when shall these sprout once?

Christians, do you not wish 'twere better with you? can you bear your own
barrenness? Is not this vain, empty, fruitless life an offense to you? do you
not confess it is low water with you? do you not complain of your uselessness
and unprofitableness? But shall this be all? shall we never have better fruit
to bring before the Lord, but our confessions and complaints of our want of
fruit, but our self-bemoanings, and self-judgings for our barrenness? Better
this, than nothing, but when shall it be better? when shall we hear the voice
of joy, and praise, and thanksgivings to the Lord, for blessing our fields with
increase? when shall we be able to say, See O Lord, thy blood has not been
shed in vain? thy spirit has not been poured out upon me in vain? Behold the
winter is past, and the spring comes on; the flowers appear, the fig tree
puts forth, and the vines with the tender grapes give a goodly smell; Behold
the fruits of that blessed blood and spirit in the reviving of this dead heart,
in the fructifying of this barren heart. My Soul make thy boast of God; though
I have nothing of mine own, but what I loath and am ashamed of; yet here is,
through rich mercy, something of his fruits I have brought forth; yet not I,
but the grace of God which was with me, and his grace has not been bestowed on
me in vain.

Come on thou withering Soul, cry out with the Spouse, Awake thou North Wind,
and come thou South, blow upon my Garden: let the Spirit of the Lord breath
upon me, that my Spices may flow forth, and my fruits may appear; and then thou
may go on, now let my beloved come into his Garden, and eat his pleasant
fruits.

I cannot enumerate the particular fruits that you should bring forth, they are
all the fruits of righteousness; but in hope that after all that has been
said, your fear of being found among the barren, may prepare you to receive
some farther instruction for your growth, and fructifying in every good work: I
shall only lay before you seven things, which if they be in you and abound,
will make you that ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge
of our Lord Jesus Christ. Follow after, 1. Power. 2. Activity. 3. Severity. 4.
Simplicity. 5. Ingenuity. 6. Spirituality. 7. Pleasure.


1. Power. Grace in the very being of it, includes power, 1 Cor. 4.20. The
Kingdom, or grace of God is not in word, but in power. Natural men have natural
powers, but there is nothing of spiritual power in them; wishes and velleities
they may have, after that which is really and spiritually good. O that I could
forsake this world, and crucify this flesh, and follow God, and walk worthy of
the Gospel in all things; thus they may wish, and desire, but for their hearts
they cannot come to it; they cannot bring forth their wish into a will, nor
their will into performance. The least child of God has more of the power of
God in him, than the most knowing and the very best of natural men: all the
parts and virtues of a natural man, do fall as much short (as to this spiritual
vital power) of the least of Saints, as a dead man does of a living child.

But yet, where there is grace in the beginnings of it, in comparison of what
it may grow to, its power may be small, and its strength may be but weakness.
How great is the power of the healthy above the sickly and faint? how much is
the power of a man above the power of an infant? It Is well thou art alive, but
will thou still be but a child? O what weakly Souls are many amongst the living
Souls! How ordinary is this complaint, To will is present with me, but how to
perform I find not. O how many frustraneous attempts, and ineffectual offers do
we make at an holy fruitful life; we wish for more care, and more diligence,
and more usefulness; but still we fall short, we are reaching toward, but
cannot reach to it. We judge our selves for our failings, we groan under our
imperfect duties, we are sick of those corruptions that are mingled with them,
but we cannot overcome them; we lament our barrenness, we hunger and thirst
after more fruitfulness, and yet we cannot obtain: we cannot do the good that
we would, we cannot forbear to do the evils that we would not; so weak is our
heart, that though we can weep over our falls, and failings, yet we cannot
amend them.

But art thou not afraid to continue thus? what if death should overtake thee
thus? how would thou dye, when thy sin is so much alive? yea, how can thou
live in any peace, whilst thou see thou live to so little purpose?
Therefore my Brethren, let me exhort you in the words of the Apostle, Ephesians.
6.10. Be ye strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Put forth the
power that you have received, and trust on God for more. Put forth that power
that you have, and that's the way to increase your strength. Do not make your
selves to be weaker than you are; say not, it is for want of power, that it is no
better with you, when it is for want of care and industry; much more certainly
might be done, if we were better Stewards of what we have: Let there not be a
pretense of weakness to excuse your laziness; do what thou can, thou can do
more than thou do; and if indeed thy strength be but small, thou know
whether to go for more. Study well, and lay hold on that word, Isa. 40.28,
29.31. Have thou not known? have thou not heard, that the everlasting God, the
Lord, the Creator of the ends of the earth faints not, neither is weary? --
He gives power to the faint, and to them that have no might, he increases
strength. -- They that wait on the Lord, shall renew their strength, they shall
mount up with wings as the Eagles, they shall run and not be weary, they shall
walk and not be faint. Christians, let it not suffice you, that you are men of
understanding and good affections, get a Spirit of power, as well as of love
and of a sound mind.

2. Activity. An unactive spirit is next to impotence. Awaken from thy liveless
wretchless temper; put away sloth thou sluggard, will thou still be a drone?
this drone has a sting, thine own Soul will feel it, sooner or later, that thy
sloth will sting thee to the heart.

Christians, let it appear, that the spirit of the living God is in you, by
your sprightfulness and vivacity. Shall the evil spirit be the only active
spirit? shall sinners flow forth in vanity and wickedness, shall their filthy
waters be such a quick and running stream, and shall the waters of the
Sanctuary, be but as a standing pool? Be bent for holy action, be prepared and
ready for every good work. It Is said Ephesians. 2.10. that Christians are created
unto good works: in the very make and constitution of the new creature, we may
read its use and end; we are new made, for this very end and purpose, we are
adopted and prepared for an active useful life, for those good works which God
has ordained that we should walk in them. Thou had need stir up thy self,
and put thy self on, lest thou quickly come to question, whether thou be a new
creature or no, if thou continuest so backward, and unready to that, for which
the new creature is.

Have thou grace indeed? blow off the ashes from that living coal, that it may
burn and shine out in a gracious life. Fire it the most active of all the
elements, it will not be enclosed, but will find a vent for its flames; sure
thou have little of that divine fire in thine heart, that can so easily keep
it within.

O what wonders are sluggish Christians! Life without motion, Fires that burn
not, Suns standing still, Souls condensed into the gravity of Carcasses, the
winged Spirits become as the creeping things of the earth; when shall these
immortal sparks recover and come to themselves? Christians be impatient with
these your slothful hearts; let there be no sleep in your eyes, till your
sleepy Souls be awakened. Be ashamed that you who talk, what God has done for
you, should have no more to say of what you have done, or are ready to do for
him. Set every wheel in motion, and thereby fit them for more easy motion, let
them stand no longer still; fear, lest your rust should eat out all your
strength. Be henceforth for an active life; bethink the time, that has been
run out in sleep, and now awaken and begin to live in good earnest.

3. Severity, or strict and painful holding our selves to our rule. Christians
must be men of action, but they must not act wildly or loosely, and at all
adventures, but their actions must be regular, they must be punctual and strict
to their rule. Christ's commands, some of them are hard sayings, and will put
the flesh hard to it; but whatever they be, they must be submitted to, Matthew.
28.20. Teaching them to observe [all things] whatsoever I have commanded you.
As Christ is severe in his impositions upon us, so Christians must be severe in
their impositions upon themselves, and must not abate to themselves a title of
their hardest duty. Christians must be rigid; to be rigid in the way of any
party of them that are, or that call themselves Christians, is an evil. A rigid
Presbyterian, a rigid Independent or Anabaptist, are such in the wrong of their
brethren: but it is a duty, and an excellency to be a strict and rigid
Christian; provided, that our rigor be more to our selves and to our own flesh,
than to all the world besides.

Now to bring you to this Severity, let me exhort you to these three things.

1. Fear to be offended at the severities of Religion. 2. Fear to baulk any
thing of the severities of Religion. 3. That you may not fear the severities of
Religion, fear the severity of Christ against Irreligion.
1. Fear to be offended at the severities of Religion. Blessed is he that shall
not be offended in me, Matthew. 11.6. The fear of Christian strictness, is that
which keeps back many a Soul from Christ. A Christian! who that understands
what it is to be a Christian, will ever be able to bear it? It Is too hard
service for me to yield my self to; to put my self under such a Law, as ties me
up so short, from all that mine heart desires, and holds me so close to things
so contrary to me, how can I endure it? The attempting an universal change, of
the scope, the customs, the pleasures, and the whole way of my life, how
grievous are the thoughts hereof? the matter of my design, the nature of my
work, the temper of my society, to whom I must join my self, being all
spiritual and heavenly, how contrary are they to me? The forsaking my Friends
and Companions, the abandoning my pleasures, the bounding my liberty, the
bridling mine Appetite and Passions, the laying a law upon my senses, the
watching every word of my mouth, and every thought of mine heart, the holding
my self on by line and by rule, in a way of constant painful duty, without any
allowance of the least turning aside, to the right hand or the left, no though
it were to the saving of my life, who can with patience think of it? All these
things are against me. How many Souls have there been in the World, whom such
forethoughts of Christianity have kept back from Christ, and held under the
power of the Devil?

But though it does not prevail thus far upon thee, thou will adventure after
Christ however, though thou do not say in thine heart, this yoke is not to be
born, and so throw it away, yet possibly thou may say, it is hard to be born,
and think much of it, that less might not suffice: Thou will yield to it in the
general, but too often when it comes to be a Case, that thou thy self art put
harder than ordinary to it, thy flesh flings, and throws, and murmurs, and
thou art for the time ready to bethink, and repent of thy Christianity. Has it
never been thus with thee? Fear lest it should, and still remember, Blessed is
he that shall not be offended in me. That is, not so only as not to renounce
me, but not so much as to complain or groan, or drive heavily under me. Good is
the Word of the Lord, that is a word becoming the heart and tongue of a Disciple.

2. Fear to baulk any of the severities of Religion. It Is one thing to say,
(even in the heart) Good is the Word of the Lord, and another thing to submit
cheerfully to it, when it comes to the pinch. By severity, I mean, not
unreasonable roughness or rigor to our selves, the unnecessary afflicting or
macerating our bodies, by selfwhippings and scourgings, or Penances, going
barefoot, or in sordid and vile raiment, as it is used in the Church of Rome;
but by severity, I mean, strictness and exactness to our Rule, whatever pain or
prejudice it may cost us, or expose us to. Our holding our selves closely to
every duty, in special to those harder duties, of selfdenyal and mortification;
the taming of our flesh, the beating down our bodies, and bringing them in
subjection, by temperance and necessary abstinence; those ungrateful duties,
admonishing, reproving, withdrawing from offenders, and whatsoever else our
Lord has imposed upon us. Particularly, there is,

1. Severity in imposing upon our selves; when we are not partial in the Law,
taking only Christ's easier words, and leaving out the harder, but do charge our
whole duty upon our selves; and when we do not deal too gently or remissely
with our selves, only telling our hearts, this is thy duty, and it would be
good for thee to observe it, but do deal more closely, and charge it home; See
to it, O my Soul, that thou keep the charge of the Lord; It must be done, dare
not for thy life to favor thy self, or spare thy flesh, by neglecting thy duty.

2. Severity in observing and performing our whole Duty. When we are not only,
not like the Scribes and Pharisees, Matthew. 23.4. Who bind heavy burdens, and
lay them on other men's shoulders, no nor such as bind heavy burdens for our
own shoulders, and yet not touch them with one of our fingers; but whatever
Conscience bids us do, that we observe and do. It Is one thing to lay good
Laws, and prescribe good Rules to our selves, and another thing to observe
them. We must yoke our selves to our work, and go on diligently under the yoke.
We must not only not quarrel with our rules, as too strait for us, but keep
touch with them, and not indulge our selves the least swerving from them. Some
Professors there are whose Religion is all in their Rules, and their Rules they
have only in their Books or their heads, and but little in their hearts; who
would be excellent Christians, if their lives were according to what they
prescribe to themselves. When they are in secret upon their considering work,
they propose holy Rules, and make good decrees: oh if they were but observed,
what Christians would they be; but when they come abroad their Rules are left
behind them, and it may be never remembered, till they return to their Closets
again; O what a difference is there, betwixt the same persons in their Closets,
and in the Fields or Markets? Friends, they are not strait rules, but strict
practices that our Lord requires.

3. Severity in reckoning. When we make every day a Judgment day, and reckon
with our selves as God will reckon with us, strictly. God will bring every work
to Judgment. Of every idle word men must give an account. Greater sins,
smaller faults, our commissions, and our omissions, the matters of fact, and
the circumstances of them must be reckoned up. Nothing must slip our
reckonings, but what has slipped our memories, and we must keep that Register
carefully.

4. Severity in censuring and judging our selves for our sins and failings.
When we will not wink at our faults, no nor mince or excuse them, 'twas my
oversight, or 'twas my weakness, but rebuke our selves sharply, I have done
foolishly, I have done naughtily, gathering up all the circumstances that may
give our sins their due aggravations, and so passing our censures accordingly.

Such a strict and punctual course as this, has a formidable aspect, not only
to sinners, but even to some of the sincere weaklings among Christians. But
however it looks, baulk it not, nor any part of it. Will you pinch upon
Conscience, because that would pinch upon the flesh? will you deny Christ,
rather than deny your selves? Every shuffling or shifting off a known Duty, is
a degree of denying of Christ. Have thou given [thy self] unto Christ, and will thou deny him any thing he will have of thee? Must this flesh be spared in his
cause, who spared not his Life for thee? Did he say, it is too hard to obey,
it is too hard to suffer, it is too hard to die, may not less than my Blood, than
my Soul serve their turns? And yet will thou say, It Is too hard to serve him,
it is too hard to live wholly to him, may nothing less than all I have serve,
may not something, may not a little suffice him? This flesh will be like enough
to say so, it is too hard, it is too much that Christ requires, something may be
spared to my ease, to my appetite, to my credit, and will grumble and murmr,
if it may not. But shall thy Soul say, after this saying of thy flesh?

Does thy Soul say, It Is but reason that Christ should have all, it is but
reason that Christ alone should be served, and served in every thing, and to
the utmost that he requires? It is best for me, that I be wholly his, the very
severities of Christ will be better to me, than the liberties of the flesh; the
pains of Christianity, than the pleasures of Sin; let me have the weariness of
the Saints, rather than the ease of Sinners; let the yoke of Christ wring,
rather than be thrown off? Does not thy Reason and thy Conscience speak thus in
thee, and yet must the grudgings and repinings of the flesh carry it?

Christians, if it be better to be a Disciple of Christ than a stranger, if it
be better to be a close and a thorow-pac'd Disciple, than to bungle and halt,
if it be the strictness of Christianity, out of which its sweetness grows (the
more exact conformity, the more sweet communion with Christ) if there be meat
in all his work, and his hardest work be the most savoury meal, then O why do
we so wrong our selves, by keeping aloof and following him by halves, taking up
with the easier parts, and slinking away from that which is more difficult, and
thereby feeding only on the husk and shell of Christianity, leaving the kernel
to those that will be so wise as to take pains for it.

Friends, shall we yet be for strictness? will you resolve, will you venture
upon it? who are there of you that will yet be persuaded to follow after the
Lord? that will be exact Conformists? that will be close Disciples, punctual
Christians, punctual in your words, punctual in your practices, whose hearts
shall say now according to the Apostles words, Phil. 1.27. My Conversation
shall be in all things as it becomes the Gospel; mine eye, and mine aim, and
mine endeavor shall be, to stand complete in all the wills of God?

O that there were such an heart in us! But O the fearful heart, O the
sluggish heart that we still feel within us. O these poor and low spirits, that
have no ambition for the excellencies of Religion, and cannot bear its
difficulties. What a pitiful maimed thing is the Religion of many Professors?
how little is there in it? what easy, lazy, sleepy Disciples are they? how
unequal are their spirits, how uneven their goings, how weak are their hearts,
how slow are their motions Heavenwards, and how often do they step aside, to
save themselves from labor or trouble? Never a little hotter service is in
sight, but their flesh calls them off, and away they go presently after it.
When is it that that voice is heard within thee, Pity thy self, spare thy self,
but it does prevail? Such a word, It is not for mine ease, it is not for my
credit, or it is not safe for me, what a mighty charm is it, to still and
countermand the loudest calls of Christ and Conscience?

But consider friend, whose voice is it that speaks thus to thee? why whose
voice was it that spoke the like words to Christ, when he spoke of his
sufferings, Matthew. 16.22. Be it far from thee Lord, this shall not be unto
thee; Pity thy self, Master, and let it not be thus unto thee: whose voice was
this? Christ tells us whose in the next words, Get thee behind me Satan: 'twas
the Devil that spoke thus, by Peter's mouth; and it is this same Devil that by
the mouth of thy flesh, speaks the like to thee. Why man, art thou afraid to
hearken to Christ, and art thou not afraid to hearken to the Devil?

Beloved, we are few of us so much Christians, as to be able to endure
hardness, and therefore it is we are so easily and so often called off. Well,
but however, as little as we have attained, let us put on after it. Inure your
selves to hardness, and that is the way to endure it. Be severe a while, and you
will be the better able to bear severity; Fear in good earnest, how you ever
again baulk a Duty, and after a while you will find, that the hardest Duty is
not to be feared.

3. That you may not fear the severities of Religion, fear the severity of
Christ against Irreligion. Thou can not bear the work of Righteousness, but
how will thou bear the wages of Unrighteousness? if thou can not be tied up
so strait by the cords of his Discipline, how will thou endure the chains of
his indignation? If the severities of his service, be to thee a
stumbling-stone, the wrath of the Lamb will be a millstone; if this stone fall
upon thee, it will grind thee to powder, Matthew. 21.44.

Sinners let their tongues run at a wild rate, I must have my ease, I must have
my liberty, I was never in bondage, and cannot now endure it, to come under
such a severe restraint: But thou that professest thy self to be one of his
Disciples, will thou say as these say, I cannot bear it, I cannot endure it?
Can thou burn? what think thou of the everlasting severity? Consider what
thou do, either submit to Christ's Pastoral Rod, or fall for ever under his
Iron Rod, wherewith he will crush thee to pieces, like a Potters Vessel.

Why is this the case? must I bow or burn? must I come under his Government, or
be ground under his Milstones? O I have done; no more reasoning with flesh and
blood, no more picking quarrels with Religion, whatever there be in it, I dare
not but submit to it all, for fear a worse thing come unto me. Well, but will thou submit then? will thou set thine heart to all his words? will thou set thy
Neck to all his works?

This is the third thing now I exhort you to follow after; Severity and
strictness in the ways of the Lord, which because it has something more of
asperity and roughness in it, than those that follow, there will be so much the
more need of Fear, to bring us to it.

4. Simplicity. Severity may be in Hypocrisy; the Scribes and Pharisees were
severe, severe in their Fasts, disfiguring their faces, looking with sad and
dejected countenances; severe in the observation of the Rites, Customs and
Traditions of their Fathers, yea and of the Letter of the Law of God; there
were very strict sects of them, Act. 26.5. and yet they were Hypocrites.
Simplicity notes, The Heart in our work. Singleness of heart.


1. Simplicity notes Heartiness in our Work; nothing is plain and honest but
that which is hearty, doing the Will of God from the heart, Ephesians. 6.6. Ye have
obeyed from the heart, Romans 6.17. My Son give me thy heart, Prove. 23.26. What
is it to give God the heart? This is one thing comprehended in it, to give him
the heart for a servant, or to serve him with the heart. He that gives God the
heart, gives him the best he has, and gives him all he has; the heart will
command the tongue, and the hands, and the time, and the Estate, to be all at
his service; which way the heart goes all goes. Serving the Lord with the
heart, is serving him in good earnest; we do but play with duty, we do but mock
God, where the heart is not; it is only serving him in spirit, that is serving
him in truth.

Friends be real, and in good earnest in what you do: let all your Religion
come deep, let your Prayers and your Praises, and all the exercising your
selves to Godliness of life, be the streamings and issuings forth of your
hearts to the Lord. Whatever you do, do it heartily as unto the Lord. Serve
the Lord, as you have been used to serve your flesh, in good earnest. What you
have done for your Estates, what you have done for your Names, or for your
safety, you have done it heartily, and shall that only which we do for God, and
for our Souls, be done without an heart? what is God? what are our Souls and
the concernments of them, that they should be thus put off? Is this heartless
service all that God is worthy of? will he accept it at our hands, or is it no
matter whether he accept it or no? Is this spiritless service answerable to the
worth of our Souls, and the weight of Eternity? will you venture all upon
shadows and lies? Are we but in Jest, when we talk of a God, or a Christ, or a
World to come Are our hopes and fears about hereafter, but delusions and
dreams? Do you believe from the heart, and dare you not obey from the heart?
How can you say, you believe there is a God indeed, that of a very truth there
is such an Heaven, and such an Hell, in one of which your immortal Souls must
dwell for ever? how can you believe such things, and not feel your very
inwards, even all the Powers of your Souls, engaged about them? Am I speaking
to those that believe not, is it not to you that believe, that I now direct my
words? Consider friends The God in whom you believe, is a Spirit, and will be
served in Spirit and in Truth; God is a great God, and infinitely worthy of the
best, and of all you have; your Souls are precious, eternal Life and eternal
Death are serious things, and which of these two will be your lot, is a
serious question; and sure these most serious things, do call for your most
serious and hearty attendance upon them. Away with all guile and hypocrisy,
provoke not the jealous God, fool not away your Souls by trusting to lies.
Worship God in the Spirit, lift up your Souls in your Prayers, chasten your
Souls in your Fastings.

And as your Souls must be in your Lips, in your Eyes, in your Ears, while you
are solemnly worshipping of God, so let your Hearts be in you Hands too, in all
that you have to do. Let your heart have an hand in all the actions of your
lives. Eccles. 9.10. Whatever thine hand finds to do, do it with thy might;
that is, do it with all your heart; the heart is the might of the man. God is
the strength of the heart, and the heart is the strength of the man.

Sinners, when they go forth upon service for the Devil, they carry their heart
in their hands. Micah 7.3. They do evil with both hands, earnestly.
[Earnestly,] there is the heart in their hands. They do their worst that God
will suffer them. Thou have done iniquity, as thou could, Jer. 3.5. as much
as ever thou were able. As Sinners do their worst, so let Christians do the
best they can.

Whatever thou have to do for thine own Soul, by gathering in, and treasuring
up against the time to come, do the most and the best thou can; be as hearty
in laying up treasure in Heaven, as ever thou have been in laying up treasure
on Earth. Whatever service thou have to do for God in thy generation, by doing
good to others, do it with all thine heart. In your instructing, admonishing,
counselling, reproving; in your working righteousness, in your showing mercy;
in your promoting and encouraging any good work, or preventing evil; in your
propagating serious Religion, in your pulling poor sinners as brands out of the
burning, and rescuing them out of the power of the Devil, in compelling the
straggling and wandering Sheep into the Fold of the Lord, or whatever else you
have before you, do it heartily as unto the Lord.

What a world of good might a generation of hearty Christians do in the World?
how many Souls might be the better for them? how many Families might bless God
for them? The blessing of Souls ready to perish, might come upon them; they may
be the blessings of a whole Country; they may be Lights to the World, and Life
to the dead; Eyes to the blind, Tongues to the dumb, Feet to the lame, and
strength to them that have no might; the Kingdom of God, the Gospel of Christ,
would be advanced and adorned by them, and the Synagogues of Satan even
depopulated and destroyed. And how greatly would this both abound to their own
account, and tend to their own improvement in the Grace of God?

But woe to many of us, yea and to the poor world also, because an excuse must
serve us instead of an heart, (we want time, we want parts; either opportunity
or ability we have not; thus we talk, when it is an heart only that is wanting.)
Hence it is we stand so many of us like ciphers, a company of useless and
insignificant Souls, which the Gospel and the Interest of Christ might spare
and find little miss of in the world. Friends, do but find an heart, and that
will find you time and ability, for other manner of service than hitherto you
have done. Well, this is one thing employed in Simplicity, Heartiness.

2. Singleness of heart. Singleness of heart notes, both plainness of heart,
without juggles and cheats, or pretensions of what is not intended, and oneness
of heart (as I may so speak) that does not divide it self betwixt more Lords
than one, more Ends than one, but runs out one way; that has but one to serve,
and but one thing to do. But of this having spoken largely elsewhere, I shall
say no more here.

5. Ingenuity, with good will doing Service, Ephesians. 6.7. this good will notes
that good nature, which by grace we are wrought to, inclining and disposing, us
to a more noble and free, to a more cheerful and ready serving the Lord. An
ingenuous Christian does not only serve the Lord really, and without guile, but
readily and cheerfully; it is sweet to him to do good: he bears good will to God
for himself: he feels the infinite goodness and worthiness of the Lord to melt
and draw forth his Soul toward him: the name and honor of God is in his
heart, and is so dear and precious to him, that he feels something within him,
prompting him to all manner of expressions of love and duty to him. He is
become good natured, and so not only in point of gratefulness, he returns love
for love, good will for good will, duty for kindness, which he has received;
but it is a pleasure to him, to return good will for goodness, love for his
worthiness to be beloved. The name of God he would have to be above every name;
it is his delight, and therefore his desire, that as the Lord is infinitely
honorable, so he should be abundantly honored; the very thing, the magnifying
and exalting the Lord, is the great thing that sits upon his heart, it is a
pleasure to him that God is pleased, and this he loves that God should be loved
and served; and hence is his care, hence are his labors, this is the
springhead of all his duties, and God is the Ocean into which his streams do
run. He speaks for God, and works for God, and lives for God; he studies to be
holy and righteous, he is busy and industrious, he is watchful and painful,
and fruitful in good works, that he may thereby show forth the virtues of him
that has called him, and glorify his Father which is in Heaven. He
understands and feels, that what he thus does for God, is to himself also, and
will abound to his own account and everlasting blessedness, and the good will
he bears to his own Soul, and the hopes he has of his own reward, are as oil to
his wheels, but his good will to his God, is the main spring that sets them all
a going: O follow after this blessed frame, get you such an ingenuous Spirit,
and then how sweet and easy will the very severities of Religion be? The
nearer you come up to this, by so much the less need will you have of that
fear, which is so necessary to bring you hitherto. Fear will now resign up to
love, to do its work more immediately by it self. Not but that there may be
still some use of it, more or less; so long as there is sin before us, and any
danger of our falling into it, so long will love cause us to fear; but as we
are more grown up above the power of sin, and are not so greatly in danger of
it, so fear abates. By how much the more perfect love, by so much the more
hatred of sin, and so much the less fear of it. Love will now make as effectual
a resistance against sin, by Hatred, as it did before by fear; and for our
course of duty, we shall now run, not with patience only, but with
cheerfulness, the race that is set before us; a cheerful willing horse will the
less need the rod or spur.

6. Spirituality. This and the former are twins, and grows up together. How fit
is the spiritual man, and how free will he be for spiritual work? The new man
is a spiritual man; he is such from his birth, Joh. 3.6. that which is born of
the Spirit is Spirit; but whilst he is a child, there is so little of spirit
appearing in him, that the Apostle sticks not to call him carnal, 1 Cor. 3.1. I
could not speak to you as to spiritual, but as unto carnal [even as to babes in
Christ] but as this Child grows up toward a perfect stature, so he becomes
more spiritual from day to day; and accordingly he prospers in his work.

O Christians, get you to be of a more elevated raised spirit, through the more
abundant diffusion of the spirit of Grace upon your hearts. Live more in the
contemplation of God, Behold his face in righteousness, and you shall be
satisfied with his likeness, Psalm. 17.15. 2 Cor. 3.18. Beholding as in a glass
the glory of the Lord, we are changed from glory to glory, into the same Image.
Hereafter we shall be perfectly like him, because we shall see him as he is, 1 John 3.2. and by how much the more we see him here, by so much the more like
him. Acquaint your selves with God, divine converses beget intimacy in Heaven,
and none so Heavenly as God's intimates; we are too great Strangers in Heaven,
to have much of Heaven upon our hearts; distance breeds difference, by being
such strangers, we become more alienated from the life of God. There is nothing
more ordinary, than to receive the tincture of our society upon our hearts; we
like our acquaintance, and are apt to grow like them. Be familiar with the
spiritual God, and you will become more spiritually minded; no such advance
toward divine conformity, as divine communion; conformity will prepare for
communion, and communion will increase conformity.

Christians, Be spiritual, your work is spiritual; it lies in the exercise of
spiritual Graces, in the performance of spiritual duties, in the offering up
spiritual Sacrifices. Your encouragements are spiritual encouragements;
spiritual privileges, comforts and rewards, favor and acceptance with God,
fellowship and friendship with God, peace of Conscience and joy in the Holy
Ghost.

What are all these spiritual works, and spiritual encouragements, to carnal
hearts? how unfit is the spirit of a brute for the work of a man? and how
unsuitable is the Spirit of a man, (the carnal mind) to the work of a
Christian? They that are in the flesh (fleshly men) cannot please God, Romans
8.8. 1 Pet. 2.5. Ye also, as lively stones are built up a spiritual house, an
holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus
Christ. Sowing of fields, planting of Orchards, buying, and selling, and
trading, are as proper works, for the beasts of the earth, and as much they are
like to do at it, as blessing, and praising, and serving the living God, to
carnal men. Sinners, you also come together to pray, and hear, and Sing, and
serve the Lord; but you are like to make as good works of it, as to the spirit
of these duties, as your Cattle would do, at building your houses, or keeping
your markets; and by how much the more any amongst Christians are like you, by
so much the more unskilful are they like to be at the work of God.

And what are spiritual encouragements, to carnal hearts? how little would it
quicken and provoke carnal men, on in the Service of God, to tell them, as you
grow more serviceable, so you shall be more acceptable to God; as you abound in
duty, so your grace, and your comfort, and your hopes, and your joy shall
abound? If you could tell them, This is the way to be rich, to rise and grow
great in this world; you shall gain favor and friendship with men; the
Dignities and Preferments, the Gold and the Silver shall be shared amongst the
most active and industrious Christians. What multitudes would this fetch in to
be Disciples, and what contending would there be, who should be the most
forward of all Christ's followers? But whilst this is all we can say, you
shall find grace in the eyes of the Lord, you shall have treasure in Heaven, we
see by experience enough, how little this will move them. Get these hearts to
be more Spiritualized, and then you will find both the work of God and his
rewards, to be most acceptable work, and the highest encouragements.

Friends, what is the reason that we so lose all our arguments, which the Lord
puts into our mouths, to persuade you to more serviceable and fruitful life? we
open the good treasure of Heaven to you, we set the unsearchable riches of
Christ before your eyes, and do what we can to enamour you of them, thereby to
allure on your lazy hearts, to kindle desire, to quicken to labor, but nothing
will do; you are as slow and as heartless in your pursuit of these invisible
treasures, as if nothing had been told you, of their worth and excellency; how
comes this to pass? why are you (...) yet carnal? I, that is it, that spiritual
good things are no more taking with you; your fleshly ways, your fleshly
pleasures, your fleshly converses and correspondencies, have so kept alive, and
fed, and fomented the carnality of your hearts, that they cannot discern or
taste the things of the Spirit.

When we are become more spiritual, we shall savor and relish spiritual
things, and then shall we feel what attractives they will be; our desires will
be above, our delights will be above, our hearts will be lost to these carnal
things, we shall leave this earth to earthly minds; when this mantle of flesh
is fallen off, and we are gotten up into the Chariots of fire, then shall we
ride upon the high places of the Heavens, and our wings shall carry us on
swiftly, toward the mountains of Spices.

As far forth as we are become spiritual, our motions upward will become
natural; and by how much the more natural, by so much the more strong and
pleasant: the rougher things of Religion, will be then more smooth, and the
hard things easy; it is this flesh that creates us difficulties, when the flesh
is swallowed up of Spirit, difficulties shall be swallowed up of delight, and
then shall we go on our way rejoicing, then shall we labor and abound in the
work of the Lord, when we shall thus taste, and see that our labor is not in
vain in the Lord.

Lastly, Follow after pleasure, the Pleasure of Religion: This will spring up
to you out of the former branches, as I have already hinted. Get you such a
Spirit of power and holy activity, grow up to that exactness, simplicity,
ingenuity, and spirituality, that you may drink of their pleasures. Here I
shall show, 1. That Religion has its pleasure. 2. That the pleasures of
Religion are the portion of the grown Christian. 3. What the particular
pleasures of Religion are, that we should be reaching after.


1. Religion has its pleasures. You may remember, I have been lashing and
leading you on hitherto, at least within a step or two, by fear. And though
your fears will now, in great part be left behind you, I would not yet leave
you. That which follows, will be of this use to you, to encourage you to bear
the rougher conduct of fear, all along your younger time, by that sweeter
course you shall have of it, when fear shall give up to love; as the pleasures
that comes in, from the hopes of freedom, does allay and sweeten the the
severities of an apprenticeship.

Religion has its pleasure. It has its tartness, and its trouble, as you have
seen already; so much unpleasantness it has in its fore view, that foolish
Sinners shun it, and run away from it, for fear. They will not touch the Roses,
for fear of the prickles. As it is with Saints, so it is with Holiness, it is a
Lilly among thorns; these thorns not only hurt the Lillies, but keep back the
hand of the gatherers; how many more than there are, would be reaching after
this precious flower, but for fear of being scratched.

Well, but whatever there be in Religion to affright, it has much more to
invite us to it; Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are
peace, Prove. 36.17. They shall be abundantly satisfied, with the fatness of
thine house, and thou shall make them drink of the River of thy pleasures,
Psalm. 36.8. what, and how great the pleasures of Religion are, will be made
appear in the third particular.

2. The pleasures of Religion are the portion of the grown. They lie deep, they
are some of those deep things of God, which the Spirit of God will reveal, 2.
Cor. 2.10. it is not every one, that has a little Religion, that is gotten down
so deep, as its pleasure lies. It is with the pleasure of Religion, as with the
Plagues of Sinners, they both lie at the bottom. The best of sin is at top,
Sinners first draughts are the sweetest, when they have drank down to the
bottom of their cup, then they taste the dregs. Beware Sinner, of what comes
after thy pleasant days; thou have yet tasted but the best of Sin, thou art
not come to the bottom of thy cup, there the gall and the wormwood lies.

And so on the other side, the top, and the outside of Godliness, has more
harshness in it, it is the inside and the bottom of it, that is most pleasant,
there its sweetness lies.

Young beginners and smatterers in Religion, seem to have made a bad exchange:
they have lost the sweetness of sin, and pleasures of the flesh, and are not
come at the sweetness of Religion; their pleasant days are gone, and what have
they in exchange? Behold, for peace they have great bitterness, for ease
weariness, for mirth heaviness. If Christians that are come but to the entry of
Christ, should hope for no more than they taste or see, they would be ready to
wish themselves back in the tents of wickedness.

It is really a blessed exchange that they make, who with Moses, Heb. 11.25.
choose the afflictions of Religion, rather than the pleasures of sin. The very
sufferings of the Saints, are a better portion, than the rejoycings of Sinners,
the Winter of Godliness has more Sunshine, than the Summer of Sin; honest
poverty is better than the Mammon of unrighteousness, and honest labor and
travail, than wicked ease and idleness. He whose carnal laughter is turned into
Godly sorrow, his sorrow will end in Godly joy.

This joy, though the entrance of Godliness be the way to it, yet the Infants
in Religion, do seldom taste of it. God uses to do, as Christ at that feast,
Joh. 2.10. he keeps the best wine till last. The pleasures of Religion are the
portion of those that have gotten up to the power of Religion: Whilst the
weaker Christians feed themselves on their fears and sorrows, and the most of
their Religion lies in their humblings and mournings for sin, those that are
grown up to be strong in the Lord, do feel the joy of the Lord to be their
strength; and when we have experience of this pleasure of Religion, it is both
a sign of our growth, and will be our sail to carry us on, with more vigor and
swiftness.

3. What the pleasures of Religion are. I shall mention but these four, 1. The
pleasure of Sincerity. 2. The pleasure of Success. 3. The pleasure of Ease. 4.
The pleasure of Love.


1. The pleasure of Sincerity. Sincerity has such sweetness in it, as no man
knows but he that has it; a stranger shall not intermeddle with this joy. This
pleasure is not known by every Christian, that is sincere. Where is sincerity
in every real Christian, but he has little of the pleasure of it, that has
not the knowledge of it. Weak Christians are in doubt, whether they be sincere
or not: those that are but one degree above hypocrites, are still in fear that
they are but hypocrites; they that know themselves upright, can rejoice with
that joy of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 1.12. This is our rejoicing, the testimony of
our Conscience, that in all simplicity and Godly sincerity, we have had our
conversation in the world.

O the galls and stings of a guileful heart! whatever specious shows there may
be, of Religion without, whatever approbation, or applause the hypocrite may
obtain from men; whatever tickling delight, in a great repute, for an eminent
Christian, he may feel for a while; whatever pleasure his gifts and commendable
performances, may feed him with; yet the Conscience of hypocrisy, and guile
within, after the flush of that carnal pleasure is over, will sting him into
bitterness and anguish. Much good may do hypocrites, with all their applauses
and self-exaltations, a plain, honest, upright heart, has more serenity and
sweetness, than comes in by all the admirings and Euge's in the world.

Friends, would you live a voluptuous life? get you an upright heart: would you
have all within you to be sweetness? beware of the leaven of hypocrisy: would
you prove your selves no hypocrites? then be improving daily; let sincerity be
growing up toward perfection, and then it will be known what it is, Nichodemas
will in a while, appear to be Nathaniel, an Israelite indeed in whom there is
no guile. Let it be thus with thee, and then thou may take up the Psalmists
words, Psalm. 4.7. Thou have put gladness in mine heart, more than in the time,
when their corn and wine increased.

2. The pleasure of success. It Is a comfort to see something coming in; when
the desire comes, it is a tree of life; disappointment is distress. To ask and
not to have, to sow and not to reap, to work and not to have to eat, to buy,
and sell, and travail, and trade, and never to prosper in any thing, but to be
as poor, and low, as those that are idle; I need not tell you, how sad and
uncomfortable it is. To take upon us to be the Servants of Christ, to take up
the professing trade, the praying trade, and the hearing trade, and to find all
we do, to come to just nothing; I have been praying, and hearing, and hoping,
and yet still I am where I was; Lust holds up the head, Grace hangs the wing;
doubts and fears, dullness and darkness still abide upon me as heretofore, I am
as carnal, and earthly, and barren, as very a child in Religion, as I was many
years since; O what a weary and uncomfortable life is this! to have so many
things a doing, and nothing done; O how heartless a thing is it.

When we have good success, when we see our Souls prospering, this will wash
our steps with butter, and strew our ways with rose-buds, and make pleasant
all our paths.

One of the great joys of the world, is the joy of the Harvest; and the joy of
the Saints is expressed by that, Isa. 9.3. They joy before thee, according to
the joy in harvest. The Harvest is the success of men's labors, and that is
their joy, to see they have not labored in vain.

Christians, though they are never like in this life, to see the Harvest in the
sheaf, yet it is a joy to them to see an Harvest in the blade; to perceive that
the seed is not dead and rotten under the clods, but springing up to the
Harvest; this is a pleasant sight. It is not such a pleasure to the Husbandman,
to walk through his fields, where he has been ploughing and sowing, and to
behold the thriving beginnings of an hopeful crop, to see all green, and fresh,
and hearty, and strong, this is not such a pleasure to the Husbandman, as it is
to a Christian, to see a spring of Grace in his Soul.

Now I see, it is not in vain to sow to the spirit, to serve and wait on God.
Where is all thy praying, where is all thy laboring? God knows where it is
says the barren Soul, I doubt it is all lost, I can see no sign of it
remaining; that is a sad Soul. But ask thus of the thriving Christian, where is
all thy praying, and thy laboring? and he can answer, O I thank God, it is here
to be seen; This field of mine, a few years since, lay all fallow, rough, and
hard, and nothing that was good, was to be found upon it; but now, (O how it
joys mine heart to find it so) the good seed that has been buried here, is
not dead, it is gotten up above ground, the Lord has let me see something of
his grace breaking forth, and it increases and grows up daily in me. The hard
and stubborn, is now become a melting and broken heart, the proud and froward,
is now become an humble and quiet spirit; It has cost me something, many a sad
thought, many a sigh, many a tear; but though I came hardly by it, here it is by
the grace of God, the barren has brought forth, this dry tree has blossomed,
this sluggish heart, to which the very thoughts of a laborious fruitful life,
were once so irksome, that I doubted that I should never have come to any
thing, but should have lived and died a drone; O what a comfort it is to me to
see it thus hopefully come on. A diligent Christian will have such successes,
his labor shall not be in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58. and when he sees
what good success he has, then let him speak, what a pleasure it is to him.

Christian, Thou have been at thy work, but what fruit have thou found? have
thou prospered? have thou sped well? do thou see of the travail of thy Soul?
Is thy sin weakened? is the world conquered, is grace quickened in thee? Is it
so, and is it not a pleasure to thee to find it so? Does it not please thee,
that thou art not so vain, nor so earthly, nor so proud as thou have been? Does
it not glad thee at the heart, to find that the Lord has been with thee, and
blessed thee, and helped thee, in what thou have set thine heart unto? And how
look thou now, on thy remaining works? will thou any more drive so
heartlessely, and so heavily on, as thou wast wont to do? will thou any more
cry out, Hard service? a weary life? Sure thou can not; what thou find
coming in, will make thy very labor and thy sweat, to be sweetness to thee.

3. The pleasure of Ease. Ease has a pleasure in it; not only ease or rest
from our work, but ease in our work, when we can carry it on with ease; by how
much the harder our work is in it self, by so much the greater pleasures will
it be, when we can go easily through it. Christ tells us, Matthew. 11.30. that
his yoke is easy, and his burden light. Christ's yoke is an hard and an heavy
yoke to Sinners, and such which they are in no wise able to bear, but he makes
it easy to his Saints. A yoke may be made easy three ways, 1. By making the
burden of it lighter, 2. By making the neck stronger, 3. By accustoming the
neck to the yoke.


1. By making the burden of it lighter; by paring it, or taking off something
of it; a great yoke may be pared, and pared, till at length it come to be a
little on. Thus Christ's yoke, will not be made easier; he will pare nothing
off, he will not abate any thing of his work; there is the same Law for Saints
and for Sinners, there is the same duty imposed on the weak as the strong,
Matthew. 5.17, 18. Think not that I am come to destroy the Law or the Prophets,
till Heaven and Earth pass, one jott or title shall in no wise pass from the
Law, till all be fulfilled: The same Law which was from the beginning, shall be
Law to the end. Christ will never make that to be no sin, which once was sin,
nor that to be no duty which once was a duty, nor will he ever dispense with
duty or sin; he says not to any, less shall serve for thee, than for others, he
requires all of every one. But here, by way of caution, take notice of two
things,

1. Christ's yoke, is in this sense, easier than Moses' s yoke, there is an
abatement of the burden of Ceremonies, and legal Rites; that Law of the carnal
Commandment, as it is called, Heb. 7.16. is vanished, and taken out of the way;
no more of that chargeable service, of Sacrifices, no more Bulls, or Goats, or
Lambs out of our flocks or herds; the service of Christians, is in this
respect, cheaper Service, than that of the Jews of old, it is only our Moralls,
whereof nothing will be abated.

2. Though Christ requires the same duty of all, and imposes the same things,
and as much upon the weak as upon the strong, yet he will accept that of the
weak, which he will not from the strong. Nothing less than perfection, is due
from the weakest, but sincerity will be accepted, whatever imperfection there
be. God will take those weak and maimed Services from the weak, which he will
not from the strong. He that has a Male in his flock, and Sacrifices a
corrupt thing, Cursed be that deceiver, Mal. 1.14.

2. By making the neck stronger. That Is an easy yoke to a man, which a Child
is not able to wagge. A laboring man that is weak and sickly, will find his
ordinary work, to be too hard for him; when he recovers his strength, he can go
through it with ease. Weak Christians, will ever find Christianity to be hard
Service; as they grow up to be stronger, they will find it grow more easy, day
by day.

3. By accustoming the neck to the yoke. The yoke at first putting on wrings
and galls, and wearies; those that are unaccustomed to the yoke, are impatient
of the yoke, it is use that makes it easy. An Apprentice to a Trade, though at
his first entrance, he do not half so much work as afterward; yet it is with
twice so much pains. The first hour is ordinarily with him the burden and heat
of the day, his morning is hotter than his noon.

The tediousness of Religion meets us at the threshold, our hardest task is to
begin well; nature will make the strongest opposition against grace, at the the
very birth of the new creature; our first charge against lust, is usually the
hottest charge; the travail of the birth has more pain in it, than all the
after care of bringing up the child.

A Christian at his first setting out after Christ, feels all his motions
heavenward to be as swimming against the stream, but by how much the more,
grace has over-powred nature, by so much the more, he has now gotten the
stream with him; his following God is now become as swimming down the stream of
that new nature, which has now gotten so much the better in him.

One of the hardest works of a Christian, is Self-denial; to lay down our own
wills, to curb our appetites, to go cross to our own dispositions, interests,
and humors; this goes near at first, and will hardly be born; but after we
have used our selves a while to it, and by degrees inured our wills to
submission to the will of Christ, and holding the bridle strait upon lust, and
appetite, have made our hearts to feel themselves to be under authority; a
cheerful and contented subjection will in time become habitual to us; the more
self-denial we have exercised, the less will there be afterward needed. He
that has been given to intemperance, to gluttony, or drunkenness, at his first
laying a restraint upon himself, what a bondage is sobriety and temperance to
him? but after he has used himself to a temperate life, he finds it more sweet
and easy to him, and is better pleased with it than ever he was with his
former excess, and scarcely knows now, what it is to lust after his old
licentiousness.

Now Brethren, that which I would persuade you to is, Make your Religion
pleasant, by making it easy to you; make your Religion easy, not by halfing
your work, or remitting your care, but by increasing your strength and your
diligence; get your hearts strengthened, and get them habituated to Religion;
this will make it easy, and ease will make it pleasant.

What Is the reason that we see some Sinners go on with so much pleasure, in
their wicked ways? the service of sin is laborious enough, and in some
respects much more toilsome and expensive, than the Service of Christ; They
have many Masters to serve, and every one of them will be calling them to work;
they have the Devil to serve, and the World to serve, and diverse lusts to
serve; they are like a servant of men, who is at the command of more Masters
than one; one calls him this way, another that way, one has this to be done,
another that to be done; so that for one and another, the poor Servant can
never be at rest; such is the case of Sinners, their pride calls them one way,
their covetousness another, their sensuality another; their Souls are made mere
Hackneys of, though they change their rider, yet one or other is still upon
their backs. And yet we see how roundly, and merrily they go on their way,
without ever complaining of their Masters, or their work. When do you ever hear
any such complaints among them, O this Devil is an hard Master, O this flesh of
mine, what a Tyrant is it? O this feasting and sporting, this drinking and
rioting, what an irksome Trade is it? O this getting of Money, this laying
house to house, and field to field, I am quite weary of it. When do you hear
any such groanings, or complainings amongst them? No, no, they are strong
Sinners, they are accustomed to do wickedly, and thereupon, as very a drudgery
as the service of Sin is, they can go through it with ease, and pleasure.
Friends, get you to be strong in the Lord, and you will run your race of duty
with much more pleasure, than sinners run their course of iniquity, hold you
close to your work a while, and you will get to Heaven with as much ease, as
Sinners go to Hell.

O what fools are loytering, trifling Christians! who think to make their life
easy, by idleness? what is the reason that thou haltest thus after the Lord,
and art so slothful in thy way? why do thou not set thine heart, and thy
shoulders to the work of the Lord, and give thy self in good earnest, and
wholly to it? O I cannot endure all labor, all difficulty, I must have a little
ease; it is too tedious and painful to me, to hold to such close and constant
service. But do thou think to make thy work easy, by trifling at it? Foolish
Soul, thou take the ready way, to create thee the more difficulty; once the
work must be done, or thou art undone, and there is no such way to do it easily,
as by doing it diligently; the life of a trifler, is the hardest life of all
that profess themselves Christians; doubtless Christ's yoke, will sit easiest
upon those necks, upon which it sits the closest.

4. The pleasure of Love. He that has not felt pleasures in love, has not
felt what it is to love. This is one of the great pleasures of Heaven, to love
and to be beloved; to receive the over-flowings of the divine love, and to feel
our hearts emptying themselves and flowing forth in returns of love to God.
Look how much you have of love, so much of Heaven, of the joy that is above, 1
Pet. 1.8. Whom having not seen, ye love; what follows? Ye rejoice with joy
unspeakable and full of glory, 1 John 4.16. God is love, and he that dwells
in love, dwells in God; and he that dwells in God, dwells in joy, Psalm.
37.4. Delight thy self in the Lord, to love God and to delight in God, are much
the same, love is the bud, and delight is the blossom, that grows out of it.

Love has a pleasure in it, and the love of God, will put a pleasure into all
Religion. How amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts, Psalm. 84.1. It is
good for me to draw near to God, Psalm. 73.28, I delight to do thy will, O my
God, Psalm. 40.8. Sing praises to his name, for it is pleasant, Psalm. 135.3. It
is a pleasant thing for him that loves, to please and praise the Lord; It is
good before the Saints, Psalm. 52.9.

Fear often brings us upon Service, but it is love that sweetens it, fear brings
us on, especially in the days of our minority, and it should do so, as I have
already showed, if love will not, fear must. We often pray, and read, and hear,
and search our hearts, and look to our ways, because we dare do no other; we
strive, and wrestle, and watch, against sin, and its lusts, against the world
and its temptations, because we are afraid what would become of us, if we
should not. It Is well that any thing will do, either love or hope, or fear;
whatever it be, that will bring us upon our duty, that will keep us from
iniquity, it is well that something will do it: It Is better to pray, because we
are afraid to neglect it, than not to pray at all; it is better to keep a good
Conscience, because we are afraid of an evil Conscience, than to be licentious;
whatever it be that brings us upon a conscientious life, better so, than to be
let alone to carnality and looseness.

But yet still, it is love that sweetens, and thereby strikes the great and most
kindly stroke in all Religion. Fear brings us to Religion, as to our Physic;
the sick man has no love to Physic, but yet he will take it, rather than dye;
Love brings us to it as to our food, it is our meat and drink to do the will of
God; eating and drinking, to the hungry and thirsty, are some of the great
pleasures of life. Duties are the meat of Holy Souls, and they come unto them,
with as great desire, and are conversant in them, with as great delight as
hungry bodies come to, and sit at their meals, Cant. 2.3. I sat down under his
shadow, and his fruit was sweet to my taste.

Weak believers are like sickly men, neither Physic, nor food will relish with
them; they must eat for necessity, they cannot live without something of
Religion; but were it not for necessity, they could almost as well let it all
alone. It Is well that necessity will prevail, but whilst they are thus forced
on, how heavily do they drive, and how little must suffice them? too often,
they come on to their duties like bears to the stake, and go off from them, as
the Ox from under the yoke.

But when thou love, thy soul will enlarge, and reach forth with desire, even
after the highest pitch of Godliness; and thou will go freely and cheerfully
on, in all the exercises of it. Thou will not then say, may not less serve?
thou will not say, may not less duty serve, because thou can not say, may not
less pleasure serve? Every one would have as much pleasure as he can, and
therefore would thou have, as much holiness as thou can; the more holy,
the more pleasure.

If thou love, thou will not be for short Duties, short Prayers, short
Sermons, little snatches at Religion, thou will not be so soon weary at thy
work; when are men weary of pleasure? when do they use to say, I have pleasant
hours enough, sunshine days enough, O that my good days were over once! O
that my days of darkness would come, and the years draw nigh, wherein I might
say, I have no pleasure in them! Every one is willing to live in delights, as
much and as long as he can; when once we can say, the Lord is my delight, the
next word will be, Let me dwell in the presence of God for ever.

Christians, let our Souls take the wing, and mount up toward this blessed
state; O how short do the most of us fall, we have much ground to go, e're we
shall get up to it. How is it with us in our secret converses with God? are we
glad when our retiring hours draw near? when we enter into our Closets, to meet
with our beloved, do we there use to solace our selves with love? Is praying
and praising our pleasure? is communing with God, and with our own hearts, a
delight? do our hearts use to say, It Is good for me to be here?

And how is it with us in our ordinary course? what is the joy of our life? Is
this it, that our life is a walking with God? have we no good days, but our
holy days? are we never well, but when we can see and serve the Lord, and
never amiss, while we are so doing? do we not only judge, but feel that
intimacy and familiarity in Heaven, is our only Heaven on earth? Lord how
seldom, Lord how little is it thus with us?

But may we not obtain? Is not such a blessed state, worth our putting in for
it? Are you willing, friends, to keep you always at this distance from your
delight? Is it enough, that you have some hopes for hereafter, are you content
that your souls should never taste of your joys here? shall they still dwell
in exile, while they dwell on earth? shall they never put off the garments of
their widowhood, till they put off their clothing of flesh? Are you content to
take up yet longer, with this dark and disconsolate state? Is the drudgery of
Religion, this sighing, and mourning, and striving against the stream, and
going on so poor, and hungry, and hard bestead; Is this Religion enough for
you? would you be glad to be more cheary, and lively in your way? would you
taste the milk and the honey, the marrow and the fatness? would you ride on,
with free spirits, and full sails, triumphing over difficulties, and rejoicing
in hope of the glory of God? would you that these rough ways were become a
plain, and these dark shades were all sunshine? would you feed in the green
pastures, and be led by the still waters, and be made to drink of that River,
that makes glad the City of God? Then put you on, be no longer smatterers and
pidlers, dwell no longer on the shore or surface of Religion, but hoyse up all
your sails, and launch forth into the deep; get you into the heart and inside
of Christianity, where the Lord will show you his loves. Be not satisfied with
some few glances, or little touches; but get you possessed and swallowed up of
the love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord; and this will be to you, both the
wine, that will make glad your hearts; and the oil, that will make all your
wheels to run: then shall you run the way of Gods Commandments, when the
pleasure of Love shall enlarge your hearts.

FINIS.

