Imprimatur,

Tho. Tomkyns Reverendissimo in Christo Patri ac Domino Domino Gilberto, Divina
Providentia Archi-Episcopo Cantuariensi a Sacris domesticis.

Deo and Ecclesiae Sacrum.

SACRILEGE Arraigned and Condemned BY SAINT PAVL, ROM II. 22.

PROSECUTED By ISAAC BASIRE, D.D. and Archdeacon of Northumberland, Chaplain
in Ordinary to HIS MAJESTY.

Published first in the Year 1646. by Special Command of His late Majesty of
Glorious Memory,

The Second Edition Corrected, and Enlarged.

I COR. IX. 13, 14. Do ye not know that they which Minister about Holy things,
Live of the things of the Temple? and they which wait at the Altar, are
Partakers with the Altar?

EVEN SO HAS THE LORD ORDAINED, that they which Preach the Gospel, should Live
of the Gospel.

Plato Lib. 10. de Legib. in principio, (...). Lucan. L. 3. Quis enim Laesos
impune putaret esse Deos? LONDON, Printed by W. G. for W. Wells, and R. Scot,
at the Sign of the Prince's-Arms in Little-Britain. 1668.

TO HIS Most Excellent Majesty King CHARLES II.
Most Gracious SOVEREIGN,
IT is now Two and twenty Years since first this PIECE was Rough-cast, Inter
Tubam and Tympanum (during the SIEGE at Oxford) being then Commanded upon that
Service by that late Incomparable Prince Your Royal Father, and my Most
Gracious Master, KING CHARLES the I. of Glorious Memory (a most zealous Enemy
to all kind of Sacrilege) Since that time, whilst I lived abroad Fifteen
Years (a full Fourth Part of my whole Life) in a voluntary Exile, only for my
Constancy in the True Religion, and for my faithful Allegiance to Your Crown:
This young Benoni was soon Over-laid, and so did, in a manner, lie long Buried
in the Graves of Schism and Rebellion: Till now, being called upon, I have
stretched my self over it, Endeavoring, through God's Blessing, to
Resuscitate it. As Soon as the Child begins now to Breath again, it softly
Creeps toward Your MAJESTY, and humbly Craves to be called Yours by Right of
Inheritance. In this Necessary Work, as I do most justly Condemn Sacrilege,
(that fatal Blazing Star to whole Nations) so, if I did not in all Humility,
lay down the WORK (such as it is) with the Author, at Your Sacred Feet, I
should then Commit Sacrilege indeed, and so both contradict the Work and
condemn my self. The whole Design of this Plea is nothing else, but a Just
Defense of some old honest Truths, which are never the worse for being now
adays so much spoken against by the Many. Though the IX Chapter of this Book
does chiefly Concern Your Majesty in Point of Conscience, yet (all being well
Considered) the whole Cause may Concern You no less in Point of Justice, as
well as in Point of Honor; And so this WORK becomes Yours again by another
Title, by Right of Purchase; since, as by Your late Gracious Restoring both of
the Church and Church Lands, Dedicated to the Service of God (in thankfulness
to that Great God for Your own mavelous Royal Restoration) You have strongly
Confuted the late Sacrilegious Usurpations; so, by Your Constant Care to
Preserve the Church Committed to Your Charge, in the Laws, Customs, Franchises,
Canonical Privileges, and Episcopal Government (according to the Tenor of
Your Royal Oath) You will not only Invincibly secure all these from future
Sacrilege, but also put Your own Great Seal to Your Father's Royal Deed, I
pray God neither I nor mine may be Accessory to the Ruins of the Church, etc.
The King's Portraicture, Sect. 19. upon the Covenant.
and turn that King's Prayer into a Prophecy, who (to speak out this His
Prerogative-Paramount, in His own Heroical words) Esteemed it His Greatest
Title to be called, and His Chiefest Glory to be the Defender of the Church
both in its true Faith, and its just Fruitions, equally abhorring Sacrilege
and Apostasy: Thus the KING being dead yet speaks, of whom it may be almost
said, Never King spoke like this King, except the King of Kings!

The Church of God is by another King (Solomon) described Terrible as an Army
with Banners (Acies Ordinata, Cantic. vi. 10.
for Power, Authority, and Order) in Allusion to the Camp of Israel, in whose
Tacticks (the Martial Style) we may, to our Admiration, if not Imitation,
Observe the Mysterious Manner how they Pitched about the Tabernacle, (that
Curious Emblem of the Church;) First then they Pitched with their Faces toward
the Tabernacle, to intimate the singular Regard all the Tribes had to the Tribe
of Levi, because that Tribe had the Charge of God's Tabernacle, (therefore the
other Tribes did not turn their Backs upon it, much less stretch forth their
Hands, or lift up their Heels against Levi. Number ii. 2.
) Secondly, they pitched round about the Tabernacle, (three Tribes on each side
of the four quarters of it) as a Guard to defend it, as a Magazine to Maintain
it: To which goodly Order of the Camp of Israel, King David seems to allude in
his Royal Religious Proclamation, Psalm. lxxvi. 11.
All ye that are round about him, bring Presents unto him that ought to be
feared; that is, unto God, (because always Resident and President in the
Church) and thus Israel pitched their Camp.

But when they marched, Juda, Number. x. 17.
Issachar, and Zabulon led the Van on the East, and then the Gersonites and
Merarites, (Levites) went next bearing the Tabernacle, whereby the Priests were
not, like so many Enfants perdus, put upon the Forelorn hope; but Juda the
Royal Tribe always stood betwixt Levi and the Enemy (and they prospered
accordingly) as very well knowing that the Ark of God was indeed the Glory of
Israel, which, 1 Samuel iv. 21.
Nunquam prospere cedunt Res humanae ubi negliguntur Divinae.
when once departed, the Crown would not stay long after it.

Lastly, The LORD as their General, dwelt in the midst of their Camp, to go in
and out before them, who, (as some have Observed it) is therefore in holy
Scripture styled The Lord of Hosts above 200 times. Thus Israel having God for
their Invincible General, having the Ark of God for their Sacred Arsenal; no
wonder if (as the Author to the Hebrews Blazons their Martial Achievements)
They through faith subdued Kingdoms, Heb. xi. 3^, 34.
waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the Armies of the Aliens: Nothing but
Trophies, nothing but Triumphs, so long as God's People keeps God's Order.

SIR, You are as well by Theory, as by Practice, (both ways) so eminently
Experienced in Martial Discipline, that to make Application of this Platform
were a Presumption, much more impertinent than that of Phormio before Hannibal:
I know to whom I speak, to a Prince, as great in Understanding, as in Power:
Indeed, Your Times, in so short a Period, have been as full of strange
Revolutions, of rare Accidents, as any Prince, which wonderful Passages of the
Divine Providence over You, may appear so many strong Arguments, that hitherto
the King of Heaven, has had a special Regard to Your Royal Person here on
Earth, and may also hereafter be so many sure Pledges, that the same Great God,
who has, so Marvellously (I might truly say Miraculously) Rescued, and
Restored You, will, no doubt, both preserve and prosper you still, whilst you
(in a Gracious Return) constantly bear a Reciprocal Regard unto God the King of
Kings, Observing his Laws, unto the House of God, the Church, preserving her
Rights, unto God's Service, and Servants, whose daily Office therefore is to
Offer up unto God the Spiritual Sacrifices of Prayers for you, especially that
the Sons of Zerviah be not too hard for you: (for the Sons of Zerviah are Men
of blood, 1 Samuel xxvi. 8. 11 Sam. ii. 19. 11 Sam. iij. 27.
upon God's own Record:) And although Zerviah be dead, albeit by your Royal
Power and Prudence, that Great Beldam Rebellion (pardon the word, for we cannot
odiously enough term the late violent Usurpation) be now utterly quelled, and
abolished (God be thanked) yet it is to be feared, the Sons of Zerviah are
alive still; nay, which is worse, they dare appear very lively and stirring,
very Comprehensive to contrive Mischief, very Active also to bring forth again
Confusion both in Church and State, (which God avert.)

That, under God, my Lord the King, 11 Sam. xiv. 20.
according to the wisdom of an Angel of God, may Discern the Good, and the Bad,
as it is, in Duty, my daily Devotion for Your Majesty, so is it the best
New-Years-Gift I am able to afford: In which honest Vow persevering unto my
Lives end, I do, in all lowliness, crave your Majesty's Gracious Pardon, and
Patronage, and in hope of your Royal Favor, and Acceptance of both the Work
and the Workman, Humbly Remain,

Most Dread Sovereign, Your MAJESTY'S Loyal, very Constant, and most Humble
Subject, and Hereditary Servant, Isaac Basire.
Westminster, on New-years-Day, 1668.
TO The High and Mighty MONARCH King CHARLES I.
DREAD SOVEREIGN,
BUT that, in Obedience to Your Royal Command, (reiterated) I must now Practice
as well as Preach Allegiance; This present ARGUMENT, (now laid down at Your
MAjESTY's Sacred Feet) had never presumed further than Your Royal Ear. What
was then Spoken, and by You Accepted, and is now Published, and also by some
good Men's Occasional Desire, and by other bad Men's malicious Opposition
Enlarged, is (all of it) the Verdict of an Impartial Conscience, convinced of
both the Antiquity and the Verity resident, (If any where upon Earth) within
the Bosom of this Persecuted Church, the Envy therefore, and the Butt of all
Opposites at Home and abroad: And yet for all that, to this day, the Admiration
in Chief, Florentissima Anglia Ocellus ille Ecclesiarum, Peculium Christi
singular, Perfugium Afflictorum, Imbellium Armamentarium, Inopum promptuarium,
Spei melioris Vexillum, -- Splendidae domini Caulae -- Horrore toti concutimur
ad Versam hanc Pulcherrimam Ecclesiae inter vos Faciem: Corrupit Spes nostras
Turbo ille Coitionum apud vos Popularium, quae Regis Serenissimi Discessioni a
suo Parliamento causam praebuere. -- Deus reponat IN ALTO ILLO Sanctae gloriae
ECCLESIAS VESTRAS, quae hactenus in Terris, and Ecclesiae Theatro emicuere. D.
Deodat. Genev. Responso ad Conventum Ecclesiasticum Londini. This is the
voluntary Attestation of GENEVA, sent then to the Assembly-men, concerning the
Flourishing Estate of the Church of England, before that RAGING TEMPEST OF
POPULAR CONSPIRACIES AND TUMULTS, which have FORCED AWAY THE KING FROM HIS
PARLIAMENT: (These are the GENEVA-Men's own Expressions.) So far are mere
Strangers from Approving of that Rebellious War, or Judging this Church
Corrupt, or Antichristian in Doctrine or Discipline, as it is blasphemed by her
own Rebellious Children, against whom these free Witnesses may one day rise up
in Judgment.
of the best men in other Reformed Churches, though now made the very
Offscouring of all by her own Ungracious Domestics. God, Alto Judicio, may
(for a while) suffer The Dan. 8.12.
Truth to be cast down to the ground, yet Oppressed Truth, is Truth still, and
in God's good time, may up again, for all this Eclipse. Blessed be the God of
Truth whose gracious Providence has made good this Prophecy, full fifteen
years after, for an Encouragement and Reward of Loyal Perseverance.]
As by your Royal Obligation, so by your Just and very It Is a gross Error to
think that the Kings of England's Title of Defender of the Church is no older
than King Henry VIII. For 300 years ago in the old Writs of K. Rich. II. to the
Sheriffs, the old style runs, Ecclesia, cujus nos Defensor sumus, and esse
volumus.
Ancient Title, and constant Profession too, God be thanked, your Majesty (in
Fact, as well in Right, DEFENDER OF THE FAITH) has more than a general
Interest, in this, and in all right Catholic Truth: And therefore, (whatever
others do in an Injurious Age) I cannot but Render to Matthew. 22.21.
Caesar the things that are Caesar's. And herein, So God be Served, the Church
Defended, Your MAjESTY Obeyed, Your People Warned, and Conscience Discharged,
he has his Ends, who, though compassed about with many Imperfections, yet, in
this Service, lies not much under the Command of any worldly Hope, or Fear. May
the King of Kings at last, Remember You, and Yours, and all your Troubles, and
by the Merit and Virtue of his own Glorious ASCENSION, (the Mystery of this
good Day for a good Omen) work out at last also Your ROyAL ASCENSION every way:
And meanwhile in this, and in all Truth else, the God of Truth, with his own
Right Hand, support and stablish You more and more, K. David's Prayer, (...)
properly, Uphold me with the Spirit of a Prince; so the Original Emphatically
bears it.
with his free Spirit; so daily Prays

Your MAJESTY'S Very Loyal, and most Humble Subject, and Servant, Isaac Basire.
Oxford, May VII. Ascension-Day, 1646.
The EPISTLE TO THE READER, IN THE FIRST EDITION.
Good Reader:
TAke heed of stumbling in Limine, it is held Tertull, Panciroll.
Ominous: Because this Argument lies now for a while, under the Axe of
Contradiction, and worse (as once Luke 22.53.
Christ himself, during their Hour, and the power of Darkness,) therefore to
think no more, nor no better of the whole Matter then Calumny gives it out: for
by that time thou have taken the pains to read this out, (and the last may be
the best) as I hope thou will be, at least, convinced, that non sic fuit ab
initio, as most men would have it now; so thou shall clearly see, that this our
Impeachment of the Sin of Sacrilege, is neither singular, nor affected, nor
new, nor unjust, nor unnecessary.

And, once for all, to give an Ingenuous Account to the World of our
Undertaking it: Indeed, but for mere Duty to GOD, Obedience to the King,
Faithfulness to the Church, and due Respect to this Nation also; (any of all
which are to Public Spirits, when fairly Called to it, evermore far dearer
than their own private Ease or Safety:) we are not so weary of our selves, but
(especially in these Censorious, yea, Cruel times, wherein, whatever be the
Arguments, the longest Weapon carries the Conclusion;) we could have reserved
to our selves so much Discretion, as either to have sat still, or else to have
chosen a Theme somewhat more indifferent, or more plausible, than the World we
live in, gives us cause to think this will prove unto the Major part, that
through the Witchcraft of gain, or guilt, are commonly obdurate enough against
such kind of Arguments. But yet this one Comfort for our share, we are already
sensible of, that as now, to God, to our own Conscience, and to the present
Age, this acquits us from the base humor of Temporizing; (Surely he were of a
very weak apprehension, that as times are now, especially with us here, This
Treatise was published by Royal Command in the Siege of Oxford, Anno 1646.
should suspect us of it:) So likewise hereafter this will clear us unto
Posterity, from a stupid, nay, sinful Negligere quid de se, suaque causa
quamvis falso and calumniose dicatur, praesertim cum id ejusmodi sit, ut in eo
DEI MAJESTAS and RELIGIONIS NEGOTIUM violetur, hominum est dissolutorum, and ad
Injurias divini Nominis secure atque Imp^e conniventium. Juell. Apolog.
Disregard of that Cause, wherein already so much of Gods Honor, and of the
Good Speed of Religion (and consequently, the Security of the whole State and
Nation, chiefly upheld by Religion) is so visibly engaged.

If for all this, any What do these feeble Jews? will they fortify
themselves? will they Sacrifice? will they make an end in a day? will they
Revive the stones out of the Heaps of the Rubbish which are burnt? Nehem. iv.
2.
base Sanballat the Horonite, or Tobiah the Ammonite, or Geshem the Arabian,
shall mock at our Pains, or think it too late, or to small purpose now, to
plead Gods Cause, he is ignorant of our End, which is hut to do our Duty, in
order to Gods Acceptance, and in hope of his Blessing: To use the Means unto
the very last gasp, that is our part, The Success is Gods part: To him
therefore we still humbly Offer up the one, and wholly leave the other. And who
knows but for all that, through Gods Grace, this Poor Piece may yet do the
Church some Service; at least with some, to Restrain, if not to Reclaim; if not
here, elsewhere; if not just now, some other time hereafter, when God may send
again Molliora fandi tempora? Nay, who knows, (as once Luther stoutly,) but God
may still help us even now, for all their Scoffs? for Potens est Deus Mortuos
Resuscitare, Potens est etiam Causam suam, Labentem sustentare, lapsam erigere,
stantem promovere, si nos non digni erimus, fiat per alios; At prosternetur
bona causa per Iram Dei, prosternamur simul and nos, SED NON PER NOS: Luther
Ep. ad ad Melancht.
God is able to raise the Dead, God is likewise able to uphold his own Cause,
when it is falling, yea, to lift it up, when it is quite down; yea, to advance
it more than ever, when it is once up again; if we be not worthy of it, let him
do it by others.

But if any should be so desperate, as, forsaking his own mercy, to say still,
what neither you, nor any man can, nor indeed ought to say, that for all that,
Certainly Gods own Cause must down, then I say, (as Luther still,) Let us also
down with it our selves, but NOT BY OUR SELVES, AND THROUGH OUR SELVES: Let not
us any longer, by a cowardly Silence, or wilful Negligence, be accessory to the
utter undoing of our selves, and of Gods Cause, with our selves; but resigning
both to God, let us all every one, within his own Sphere, orderly move to the
utmost of his Power, Policy, and Persuasion: For our parts, to the very last,
we shall do what we must do, what we can, as long as we can: and let the
Unbelieving World think, or say what it will: whether we Ruin, or Recover, as
long as we are but doing our Duty, Luke xii. 43.
Blessed is that Servant, whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing.
However for our Sins, or Gods own secret Ends, God be pleased to dispose of us,
or of his own Cause; whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear; for
they are a Rebellious House, Ezekiel. ii. 5.
says the Lord, yet they shall know, that there has been a Prophet among
them. And when they have done all they can against the Truth, yet again, in the
end, the Event may force them to confess, that 1 Esdr. iv. 21.
MAGNA EST VERITAS, and praevalebit. Meanwhile, maugre Men and Devils, Luke
vii. 35.
Wisdom will be justified of all her Children.

As for other Petty Exceptions to Matter, or Form, as we hope every favorable
Judge may easily digest them, so for Instance, If they say the Pleader does
here extend his Attainder of Sacrilege too far upon all Church Lands
whatsoever, and therefore this Work will be unwelcome to all Quorum Interest in
general, and may be durus Sermo too to some weak Consciences in particular: His
Answer is, that as here he walks not alone who is supported of either side with
Scripture and Reason for what he says, and backed beside with such a Cloud of
Witnesses of all sorts, both Primitive and Modern: So for weak Consciences, he
cannot be so uncharitable to them, as to suspect they will be wilfully weak
still, after competent Information, and Satisfaction given them from clear
Scripture, and sound Reason, and from the Universal Current of Purest
Antiquity, yea, for the main of it, of all Christendom to boot, Take in Geneva,
Edinborough, and all.

But some may think this Tract too long, (and we may partly thank the malicious
Adversaries for it) or too Confuse, or too Marginal, etc. If we may be but thus
much longer, we can answer all these: for the Truth is, It was not written for
them that say so, (not for them only or chiefly:) but for all Capacities, that
may be concerned in this Matter: mainly for those, who through Ignorance or
Wilfulness, or a mixture of both, (in an Argument especially so much against
the Hair, and because of Men's Temporal Interest in it, as subject to Obscurity
and Elusion, as Craft and Covetousness together can make it,) have need of Isa.
28.10.
Precept upon Precept, Line upon Line, over and over, as says the Prophet.

But again, it may be we could not mend it neither, who were so far from having
time enough to Contract, that ( the Printer can witness,) really we had not so
much time as to Copy it, so as we hope our unwilling Precipitancy shall be
nothing prejudicial to the Cause: For it is true, we had not the leisure to cut
it into such shorter Stages, as might happily have rendered the Passages in the
way more clear and easy, and the whole Journey more pleasant: But could we
have had the space to put it into a fitter Form than this way, wherein the
Matter of it was at first delivered, yet we would scarce have been shorter, in
the behalf of the most, with whom, as the old Horat. de art poetica.
saying is, whilst -- Brevis esse laboro,
Obscurus fio --


Touching the Load of Marginals; say some, give us Reasons, what need
Authorities? but as both does well, so it should be rather an Evidence of our
fair Dealing, that in this Controversy, we will not altogether speak our own
sense: but, especially in a matter of Fact, which calls in question the
Practice of the whole Church, the Margent may be as necessary, as the Text, and
(if you will try it,) it will sometimes prove as material too, especially ad
hominem: for with some kind of men, as some of those we are to Cope with, If
they be ingenuous men, one round Testimony of Calvin, or of Knox, may prevail
more than many Reasons, or bare Scriptures either without them. This for the
length.

Now some quite contrary, will think us (in another sense) sometimes too brief
with some of them: But against this Censure, we have learned out one good
Lesson, Namely, now so to speak unto men, Aug.
Non quae volunt audire, sed quae volent audisse, upon a Deathbed, or at
Doomsday, when the Tunc tacebunt linguae, silebunt Argumenta, solae loquentur
Conscientiae. Gerson.
voice of Conscience, and of Truth shall sound lowdest: especially, quando
agitur de salute Reip. Nay, de salute ECCLESIAE, In such a Case as we cannot be
too plain with men: So likewise we have our Warrant to show, as sometimes in a
good sense, Prove. 26.5.
For answering a Fool according to his Folly, least he be wise in his own
conceit: So in the other good Sense too, we are resolved already, we will not
answer a Fool according to his Folly neither: to wit, not with that
Unreasonableness, Absurdity, and Uncharitableness usual with some kind of men,
who in their way of Arguing, aim not so much ad Rem, as ad Personam; as if
directly they intended not to persuade, but to provoke their Adversary, which
is all the Sophisters good Logic, whose Verbal, or Personal Cavils, shall
therefore never trouble us, nor we them, any further than they shall pedem pedi
figere, about the Main Matter: And now they cannot say, but they know our mind
aforehand.

As for thee, good Reader, we bespeak no other Conditions of thee, save that
one good one which honest Hierocles (...). Hierocl. in Carm. Pythag. 8.
requires of a wise man, and a true friend, only the Favor of so much
Patience, as to wink at small Faults.

But as for greater Matters, assure thy self thou have met with one as willing
to retract an Error, as thou, or any man to refute it. For if any where we
have slipped any thing contrary to the true sense of any of the HOLY SCRIPTURES,
or to any of the general Tenants of the PRIMITIVE CATHOLIC CHURCH, or to any
of the Sound Articles, or good Orders of our Holy Mother THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND,
(none of all which we trust will here easily be found:) Behold, antecedenter, a
man most ready to recant it. And now, Good Reader, God speed.

THE PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION OF THIS BOOK.
1. SACRILEGE being such a Public Sin, and, in its Complication, a Sin of as
heinous a Nature, and of as dangerous a Consequence (both to Church and State)
as any, it gives us sufficient ground as to Undertake again, so to Justify our
constant Prosecution of it: Certainly, in such a Grand Case as this will appear
to be here, Neutrality were no better than open Hostility. For, if
Highway-Robbers by Land, and Pirates by Sea, are indeed, and so ought to be
accounted The common Enemies of Mankind, and therefore no ways to be protected,
but always to be prosecuted by the Law of Nations, we dare be bold to say, and
prove it also, and that a majori, all wilful Church-Robbers are no better then
so, Hosts humani generis, open Enemies to the best Society of Mankind, (the
Church) who dare attempt to rob God of his own Demesnes.

2. Must we not therefore, in our own Defense, be not only mindful, but also
fearful of our share in that Curse thundered out against Meroz, Because they
came not to the help of the Lord, Judge. v. 13.
to the help of the Lord against the mighty? What, have we so soon forgotten
the old Proverb, Amyclas silentium perdidit? must we therefore be Dumb still,
because others will need remain both Blind and Deaf? God forbid: Isa. lxii. 1.
Nay rather, For Zion's sake I will not hold my peace. For (to speak it out in
time) do not all honest knowing men, (that are yet true to God, the King, and
the Church) plainly perceive the old Cabales a foot again? Do not they hear
again the confused Noise of Gebal, and Ammon, Psalm. lxxxiij. 7.12.
and Amaleck, of the Presbyterian, the Independent, and the Phanatick within
the Land (left still, as the Canaanites in Israel, to be Thorns on our sides,
Judge. xi. 22.
to tempt, and to try us;) And of the Philistines also over Seas, all of them
(though each of them, for their own several ends) as it were, mutually
encouraging one another in the old style, Psalm. lxxiij. 12.
Let us take to our selves again the houses of God in possession?

Vt Jugulent Homines surgunt de nocte Latrones. Horat. lib. Epist. 1.

Vt teipsum serves, non expergisceris? --
3. Though, in this New Project of Sacrilege, the old Devil may seem to be
grown a dull Devil, for using still the same Method which he did practice in
the old Plot; as Venomous Tongues, set on fire of Hell, Jam. iij. 6.
base seditious Libels penned with the Devil's own Quill, Impudent Lies,
Calumniare audacter, aliquid haerehit: The Devil's old Maxim.
like Firebrands, scattered up and down among the giddy Multitude, to set them
on again all in a flame: and all these boldly staring in the very face of
Authority, and Truth: And all these flying furiously not upon the rascal-Deer,
but upon the Fairest, nay upon the Shepherds, the Chief Pastors of God's Flock,
that they being first smitten, the Sheep may the sooner be scattered abroad.
Thus the Nimrod of Hell appears coming out again, to hunt out the Church-game
with the same old Pack of Hounds, that at the first did but Bark to give the
onset, but being suffered to go on Unmuzzled, and Untied, did both back-bite
and bite sore, and in the end, did worry also both the Royal Shepherd, and the
scattered Sheep: Heu Probatum est! Therefore, may those, to whom it belongs,
have the Grace to look to it in time; and let all those that will still want
that Grace, at the least, learn more Wit from past Experience, the Mistress of
Fools.

4. That we may not add to their Number, we that durst in that time of Open
Rebellion, Anno 1646.
Charge on with Courage in the Tyrant's very Face, (because then under the
Command of a Gracious King, now Reigning glorious in Heaven) we should justly
deserve, after the old Roman Discipline, to be let blood for Cowards, if we
should flee off, or faint now, Teucro Duce, we Marching on, as yet, under the
Royal Standard of so Great, and so Gracious a Prince, willing and able, by
God's Assistance, to Defend the Truth against all the Herds of Heretics and
Schismatics, be their Malice as endless, as it is causeless against the Truth:
The worst I wish them all is, that they were able to taste and see, at least in
this their day, those Royal Favors which the King, both Father and Son, has
so graciously served up unto them in his multiplied Pardons, and not wilfully
go on still (in a Diabolical Antiperistasis) to turn into wantonness the Grace
of both the King of Heaven, Jude iv.
and the King on Earth, to their own Destruction.

5. For my part, I have now faithfully served Two KINGS these Eight and twenty
years, always resolute, and resolved with old S. Hierom, Epist.
That melius est mendicare panem, quam perdere fidem; (Though, through God's
favor, it is well known, I was never brought so low yet) and after all the
strange Revolutions of both Kings, I thank God, I do, with inward comfort,
find my self to be where I was full Forty years ago, when first (not out of
constraint, but out of choice, because out of Judgment) I gave my Name to the
Church of England: and where (whether by doing, or by suffering, either way,
God's will be done) I do fully purpose to be still, that is, In the Bosom of
Quod si me conjectura non fallit, totius Reformationis pars integerrima est in
Anglia. Ubi cum studio Veritatis viget studium Antiquitatis: quam certi homines
dum spernunt, in laqueos se induunt, unde nisi mendacio postea exuere se
nequeunt. Ita hostibus veritatis non solum risus praebetur, sed etiam parts
illorum mirifice confirmantur. Nemo serio versatus in Antiquitate, hoc verum
esse negaverit: Sed multos amor partium cogit mentiri. Isaacus Casaubonus
Epistola XL. ad Claudium Salmas. A full testimony of the Eminency of the Church
of England above all other Reformed Churches! But this was written Anno 1612.
(above Fifty years ago.)
the best Church in Christendom, both for Verity, and for Antiquity, both for
Christian Doctrine, as also for Catholic Discipline; (If a most Learned
Forreiner, great Isaac Causabon may be Judge, (a man of Geneva for Birth,
Education, and once a Professor there.)

6. But alas, our Vices are so great, for want of sincere practice of the holy
Doctrine, our Divisions so many, for want of sufficient Power for the due
Execution of godly Discipline, That this Eminent Church is now in a far worse
State then when I first had the Happiness and Honor to know it: Hei mihi,
qualis erat! Like Haggai's second Temple, Hag. ii. 3. and Ezra iij. 12.
in glory nothing like the first. God in mercy restore it, and preserve it,
chiefly from the furious Invasion of those barbarous Zamzummins, those Legions
of Atheists that now bid open Defiance to Heaven: Atheists of all sorts, of all
sizes.

First, Dogmatical Atheists, worse then the Devils in Hell (for the Devils
themselves believe and tremble) But these Incarnate Devils (Monsters of Men) do
openly deny God, Jam. ii. 19.
and so, as much as in them lies, rob God of his Essence, of his Providence
(which is Real Sacrilege indeed) For to deny there be any such Dogmatical
Atheists, when they publish it themselves, were either a very stupid Charity,
or a very gross Connivence, and indeed a sin of participation with them.)

Secondly, Practical Atheists, that rob God of his Attributes, of his Holiness,
and of his Justice, Tit. i. 16.
when they profess that they know God, but in works they deny him, being
abominable and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate: (which is
rotten, and reigning Hypocrisy.) This present evil World is full of such
practical Atheists.

Thirldy, Atheists Pragmatical, (worst of all) Doctors of Atheism, that set
themselves in the Chair of Pestilence, Psalm. i. 1. according to the Septuagint,
Aethiopick, and Vulgar Latin Translations.
(as it were with Authority, Ease, and Delight,) set up Schools of Atheism,
where in their damnable Rage against God that made them, against the Lord that
bought them, II. Pet. ii.
they Train up Novices in the Black Art of Atheism, (the highest kind of
Sacrilege:) Unworthy therefore to live (both Masters and Scholars) worthy to
die, for by the Judicial Law of God, the Blasphemer was to be stoned to death
by the whole Congregation. Levit. xxiv. 16.


Next to whom march on those Brutish Sadduces, that basely degrading themselves
to the low form of brute Beasts, do deny or dispute the Immortality of the Soul
of Man, which is another kind of damnable Sacrilege against all Mankind:
Beastly Epicures bring up the Rear of the Hellish Regiment, polluting their own
Bodies that should be God's Temples, (which is heinous Sacrilege again) with
the Vomit of Drunkenness, and all manner of Excess, wallowing in the Mire of
Uncleanness (open Adulteries) whose God is their belly, Phil. iij. 19.
and whose glory is in their shame, and whose end will be destruction,
(whatever they be, for God has no respect of persons) except they Repent and
amend their lives. Meanwhile, God help his Church (that Lilly among Thorns) so
compassed about of all sides with thus many Capital Enemies, Cantic. ii. 2.
that except Deus in monte vouchsafe to come down with Power, to interpose his
Infinite Wisdom and Mercy (only for his Names sake, for we are far gone) to
Correct our Disorders, to Compose our Divisions and Distractions, all sober and
godly men do justly fear that a just God may so dash us one against another,
Zach. xi. 7.
till both the Staves of Beauty and Bands (Doctrine and Discipline) being quite
broken asunder, the Common Enemy break in upon us all, to fill up the Period of
our Judgments; because Impudent and Incorrigible, and Impenitent as we are, and
that also with as much Ingratitude as Impunity, (the four fatal Prognostics of
the final destruction of any Church or Nation) we will go on still desperately
to fill up the measure of our sins. For has not God tried all the ways of
unparalled Mercies and Judgments upon this Nation, above all other Nations on
the face of the Earth, to save us yet, if it be possible? Has not God visited
us in fury, speaking to us in flaming Fire, both by Sea and Land, devouring us
both by Plagues, without example, (for their Rage and Ruin) and also by the
bloody Sword both at home and abroad: Has not God almost spent all his Arrows
to warn and to reclaim us from our wickednesses? when his Vocal word did not
prevail, because we still neglecting, or abusing it: Has not God added his
Real Word; for God's Judgments have a Voice, If we had the grace to hear it;
Hear ye the Rod (says the Prophet, Micha vi. 9.) and who has appointed it:
And are we grown better for all God's Mercies and Judgments? What remains then
but a fearful expectation of the final Judgment of God, to utter destruction?
of which sad Catastrophe, (by very wise men's more than bare Conjecture)
Sacrilege may be thought though not the only Sin, yet the most demeriting
sin, if not also the efficient sin of most of our other sins, and sorrows, of
our National Miseries: So that when ever that terrible Destiny comes upon us
(which God, in mercy, prevent still) mark it who will, Sacrilege will prove
the Leader, which therefore to stop in its furious March, and to encounter
valiantly, we have now again mustered up our Forces, but with a considerable
Recruit in this our New Muster-Roll.

7. For though we purposely have retained much of the old Levy, which may
therefore represent here some passages as unseasonable, albeit not at all
impertinent, and which we could not well leave out without some Sacrilege
against the Truth it self; yet we have done so, partly to show to the World, we
were then the same men we are now both for Judgment, and also Resolution, so
that though Tempora mutantur, nos non mutamur in illis: Partly, that by a wise
comparison of the times past, and present, if they prove better now, or
hereafter, then heretofore, we may entertain them with all thankfulness to God
and the King: But if they should prove as bad, or worse (if worse may be) as
our Sins and Errors make us fear, worse and worse: Then Experience of the time
past, 1 Pet. iv. 4.
as well as S. Peter's Caveat, for the time to come, having sufficiently warned
us, in these last and worst days especially, not to think any think strange
concerning the fiery Trial; we may then, like true Christians, arm our selves
aforehand with Faith and Patience, backed with an assured hope of a better
World, the only Armor of Proof.

8. Yet, to the Considerate Reader, this Book will appear most-what a New Book,
both for Matter and Form. For first, as to the Matter of it, it is in a great
measure augmented, as by our Experience abroad, so by our Inquiry, and
discovery at home of such Books as since the first Edition have been published
for, or against this Subject; Two whereof especially (as to the main) we have
taken in here, namely, that of Doctor Cornelius Burges No Sacrilege, nor Sin
to alien or purchase the Lands of Bishops, etc. By Cornelius Burges, An. 1659.
[If such a Book for Sacrilege had the licentiousness of a Second Edition, for
filthy lucres sake, can any justly blame us for fairly taking the license of a
Second Edition against Sacrilege for God's sake?]
and another of Mr. William Prynne, A seasonable Vindication of the
Jurisdiction of Christian Kings, etc. as well over the Possessions, as Persons
of Delinquent Prelates, etc. By William Prynne Esquire, Anno 1660.
which latter came not to our hands till this Book was already a good way in
the Press. By which several oppositions this Work is increased with many
Additions, so that from a transient That SERMON was Preached in LENT, at
CHRIST's- CHURCH in OXFORD, Anno 1646. Before KING CHARLES the I. Of Glorious
Memory.
Sermon at first, afterward, by Royal Command, Printed into a short Treatise
(for S. Austin gives this Reason of writing Books for reading, Ut sic bonae
Notiones quasi virgulis limatis figantur, ne ut aves evolent: That so good
Notions may be held, as it were, with Lime-twigs, and not like skipping Birds
fly away, as they often do, when a man only hears them, especially if he hear
them with prejudice.
permanency) it is now become a full Book: Thus to phrase it with the Poet, --
Amphora coepit
Institui, currente Rota cur Vrceus exit?
Horat. So that I have found, by little and little, though with no little
labor, that (as the Wiseman says, Eccles. xxiv. 31.) My Book is become a
River, and my River become a Sea. This to the Matter, and also for the Length
of it.

9. As to the Form of it, whereas it was before Composed in a continued
Discourse, and therefore more tedious, and probably less profitable to the
common Reader; It is now disposed into Chapters and Sections, as it were so
many short Stages, a better Method, to give both Light and Ease to the Reader,
learned and unlearned.

10. As for the Delay of this Second Edition hitherto (for which yet we must
thank Providence, which has thereby occasioned those necessary Additions) It Is
true, we were diverse times summoned to appear again, against this Common Enemy
of the Church, by the multiplied desires not only of many of the Clergy, and
some of them, the Right Reverend Fathers of the Church, but even also by some
of the Noble and generous Sons of the Church, men of the Laity: For that sour
Leaven of Sacrilege, though now very far spread, yet has it not (through
God's Providence) so utterly leavened the whole lump, God be thanked for it:
But as before the Kings Restoration, to have followed this Truth, too near at
the heels, it might (and that without success) have ding'd out our Teeth, if
not our Head (after so many more of our betters:) So, since the Restoration, I
could not, though I did both intend, and also endeavor it, over-take the
opportunity; Being in the year 1661. honorably engaged (and that still with
the Royal leave) in the Service of that valiant Achilles of Christendom,
George Ragotzi the II. Prince of Transylvania, my late gracious Master, who,
for the space of seven years had honored me with the Divinity-Chair in his
University of Alba-Julia, the Metropolis of that Noble Country, and endowed me
(a mere stranger to him) with a very ample Honorary; till in that very Year,
that Prince dying of his Wounds, received in his last Memorable Battle with the
Turks at Gyalu, the care of his Solemn Obsequies was committed to my Charge by
his Relict, Princess Sophia, whereby I was kept a year longer out of England,
(my most desired Haven, that other being but my Bay, pro tempore;) That
Function I did perform, at least in part, to discharge my duty of Gratitude
toward the Dead, for the Benefits received from him when living; whose Memory
shall ever live precious in my Breast, and to whose Sacred Manes (abhorring
Ingratitude) I could not but Dedicate this grateful Digression, if it be one.
Being recalled thence by a gracious Letter from his Majesty to that Prince then
living, I did, Anno 1661. in due Obedience, return safe, though Per varios
casus, per tot discrimina rerum: In all which, Acts xxvi. 22.
having obtained help of God, I continue unto this day.

11. Ever since my Return into England, to this very year, I have had my hands
full, as of my many public Functions in my scattered Stations, so of sundry
very tedious, and most expensive Suits at Law, (being engaged to fight, as well
as to write against Sacrilege) in the practical Defense of the Church from
sacrilegious Invasion, and Usurpations, to vindicate and establish (though with
my own personal loss) the Rights of Succession: In none of all which, that I
never yet did miscarry, as I humbly bless that God who helps them to Right
that suffer wrong, so, under God, Psalm. cxlvi. 7.
I must thankfully acknowledge the Impartial Justice of the Reverend Judges. O
that I might now but close up in Peace, this last Period of my troublesome Life!

12. And I would to God that this Work now come out at last, were utterly
unnecessary, or unseasonable, even at this time: I wish from my heart, that we
of this Nation were so free from the old, and so secured from new Sacrilege,
that there should be no need at all of this Plea against Sacrilege: 1 Samuel xv.
14.
But what means then the bleating of the Sheep (the People) and the lowing of
the Oxen (the Partisans) in our Ears? which even tingle with, not flying
Reports, but loud and lewd Outcries and Attempts of the havoc intended again
against this one poor Church, and that also by such unworthy Instruments (to
describe them in the late King's own words) Whose fortunes can hardly be worse,
but who would therefore make them better by Sacrilege: were it not for a just
King, and for an honest Parliament, that do still ponere obicem (whom God bless
with Constancy, and with Success accordingly) to whom in this great Crisis of
Affairs, to be humbly subservient (only in our own way) I have thought my self
obliged many ways; 1. As a dutiful Son of this Church. 2ly, As a faithful
Priest of the same: And 3ly, I might further add (modestly) ex officio also, by
virtue of that Dignity, which by our Law, Provideant Archidiaconi de
Possessionibus, ut ita singulis annis proficiant, ne Ecclesia suo Jure
defraudetur. Lindw. l. 1. Tet. 9. de Offic. Archidiac. page 42. Edit. 1664. and
gloss. ibid. Roberti Sharrock LL. D. Vide insuper ad idem, Constit. Othonis,
Tit. 19. De Archidiaconis.
in special, binds every Archdeacon expressly, To defend the Possessions of the
Church, that the Church be not defrauded of its Right ( a threefold Cord, one
would think, should not easily be broken, Eccles. iv. 12.) This we mention,
that none may trouble us with an impertinent Quis requisivit: or give it out,
that we take up Arms without Commission in this Public Service for God, (whom
we chiefly eye in this Cause) for the Church of God, in the Defense of the Just
Power, Primitive Prelacy, and due Patrimony thereof: Though this Work is not
intended, nor prosecuted neither for the Church only; For who ever shall take
the pains to read all, shall find that (according to our Oath) 1. The Sacred
State, and inviolable MAJESTY of the King's Person: The King's Preeminence, and
his just Prerogative, His Supreme Negative Voice, in the Legislative Power (a
chief Jewel of his Crown.) 2ly, The Parliament's Legal Authority, Prudence, and
Piety. 3ly, The Vniversitie's Colleges, and Revenues, (the Pillars of Church
and State, as that great King James, that Miracle of Learning wisely Studia
bonarum Artium Ornamenta Regnorum ducimus, and Firmamenta. Rectissime Seneca,
and ad nos; Etsi nostra magis refert fortiores fieri quam doctiores, tamen
alterum sine altero non fit: non enim aliundo venit animo rohur quam a bonis
artibus, and a Contemplatione Naturae. Ignoscimus Philosopho, quod non
adjecerit Studia Pietatis, quae nos tamen ante omnia semper poscinus and
meritissime. Regum doctissimus Jacobus Epist. ad Isaacum Casaubonum.
determines it, like himself.) 4ly, The true Liberties, and Property of the
Subject; all these, and much more, as occasion is given, are both inserted, and
also asserted in this Book: All these being, as in a political Concameration,
mutually, though not equally, supporting and supported one by another, and so
linked together in the Golden Chain of a mutual Interest, that they
consequently, and that also commonly, stand or fall together.

13. As for us, Quamvis nesciamus an in Extremis aliquid tentare Medicina sit,
certe nihil tentare Flagitium. Salvian.
we must do our part, what ever becomes of this Work (for we may not divine) we
have learned from the wise Arabes (among whom I do not repent, that I did live)
some time) to trust in the truth of that Proverb (...) That is, Vnicuique
operae praemium: There is a Reward belongs to every work; Nay every good Work
will be a kind of Reward to it self: And if that fail us, yet still we will fix
our trust upon a far surer Oracle, Isa. xlix. 4, 5.
that, Though Israel be not gathered, yet our Judgment is with the Lord, and
our Works with our God.

14. But indeed we should think it a sufficient Reward if this poor Work might
prove but a Warning-piece to all whom it may concern, to Persuade them, that
they may not wilfully venture still upon the Plague of Sacrilege: O trust not
in Wrong and Robbery! Psalm. lxii. 10.
which usually ends in fatal Beggary: For, even in this World, God visits it in
fury, that we say nothing of the World to come, where all Church-Robbers may be
sure God will meet with them, and there they shall not escape. Meanwhile, God,
alto Judicio, either takes away Posterity from their Estates, or withdraws
Prosperity from their Posterity: It Is very usual; As St. Luke in another sense,
Luke xvii. 32.
Remember Lot's wife, so may one say, Remember Cornelius Burges, This terrible
Example of the Judgment of God for Sacrilege upon the Person of Cornelius
Burges, such a notorious Doctor, and also Practitioner of Sacrilege, we may
observe, without Temerity: It is the more memorable because so domestical, so
visible, and yet so fresh in our Memories, therefore we could not well omit it,
without some kind of Sacrilege, both against God's Justice, and Man's
Posterity. Take it thus as upon my inquiry, it has been attested both by that
true Convert, the valiant, and zealous Sir Richard Brown himself, Alderman, and
Major General of the City of London, (I had it from his own mouth, the Letter
it self having been consumed in that fatal Deluge of Fire) as also from his
faithful Referendary, the Reverend Mr. John Durel, that judicious and laborious
Advocate for the Church of England, both in word, and deed, by his learned
Books, and by his labor of love to this Church, under the King, being the
Founder, and, by procured Benevolences, the Maintainer of the French Church at
the Savoy, a goodly Pattern, and Precedent, for Imitation, of the best
Reformation, Secundum Usum Ecclesiae Anglicanae: we cannot deliver it in better
terms then it is expressed in his Letter to me (bearing date the 7th of January
1662.) Give me leave, says this worthy Author, to furnish you with such an
Argumentum ad Hominem, as will not only confute that Party, but is able to make
all, who have any fear of God, to keep their hands from meddling with any of
those Lands, which the Piety of Christians has Consecrated for the Maintenance
of Christ's Ministers. About four years since, being with the worthy Major
General of the City of London, Sir Richard Brown, and remembering that Doctor
Britain of Detford had told me he had seen in the hands of the said Major
General a Letter of D. Cornelius Burges, wherein he acquainted him, that he was
brought to great want and poverty, and that he was eaten up with a Cancer in
his Neck, and Cheek: I desired Sir Richard to do me the Favor to show me D.
Burges his Letter, which was presently granted me; And there I read these very
words to the best of my remembrance, I am reduced to want a piece of bread, and
am eaten up with a Cancer in my Neck, and Cheek, as this Bearer my Son may
better Inform you. Yet the man was not so humbled by that heavy, and exemplary
Judgment of God, but that he added, Sir, mistake me not, I do not beg, I only
acquaint you with my condition, and do you what is fit. It Is known this man had
a great yearly Income; He was besides a Purchaser of a considerable Estate of
the I. Bishop of Bath and Wells's Lands, which he enjoyed long enough to
reimburse himself, and much more then so: and how he could be reduced to that
extreme poverty, is not easily to be guessed at, unless his Sacrilegious
Purchase proved as a Cancer to his other Estate to devour it up. And who knows
but God, in his Mercy, to make him sensible of his sin, sent that other
[Cancer] on his body, and set him up for an Example to this Impious Age, as it
were with this Inscription: Discite Justitiam Moniti, and non temnere Divos. I
must not omit that I am told, Dr. Burges died a very penitent man, frequenting
with great Zeal and Devotion the Divine Service of the Church of England till
his death, which happened about two years ago. Thus far Mr. Durel's words: I
must add my hearty wish, that D. Burges had himself, before his death, by some
authentic Instrument (as public as his Book for Sacrilege) Retracted, since
he could not Restore, and declared to the World, this his Repentance, to put
all good men's Charity out of doubt. Meanwhile, let all that hear, or read this
Singular Example, give God his Due (as did the Emperor Mauritius) Justus es,
Domine, and Rectum Judicium tuum (Psalm. cxix. 137.) And Observe God's wonderful
wisdom, that commonly Punishment is the Anagram of Sin, wherein, as in
Capitals, every one may read, That Beggary in that man's Estate was the Reward
of Robbery; the Sore there answerable to the Sin of Sacrilege, and also the
Cancer in his Body answerable to the Cancer of his Schism; For their word does
eat as does a Canker, or Gangrene) says the Apostle, 11 Tim. ii. 17. As if God
had written upon his Forehead Sennacherib's Epitaph, (...). Let every one that
looks upon me learn to be godly.
and a thousand more, that in the Balance of their final account have found
this sad propoposition too true a Prophecy, That the Interest of Sacrilege
has devoured the Principal: As if all their Gains that way had been put into
the Prophet's Bag with holes: Hagg. i. 6.
yet for all this men will not become wise.

14. But we are loath to let our Sun set in a Cloud, rather therefore to end
all in Prayer, I beseech God that this honest Work may prove a Graft of that
good Tree, Psalm i. 3.
which brings forth his fruit in due season: That all, from the King to the
Subject, may find Relish in it, and reap Benefit by it; That all the King's
true Servants, and loyal Subjects may never fail to give him (as they are most
bounden) honest and faithful Counsels, hearty and ready Obedience, constant and
courageous Defense, to the Glory of God, and the Peace, Power, Plenty, and
Prosperity of this great Nation: and (in order to all these Blessings) That God
forgiving our Sins, amending our Lives, uniting all our hearts and Hands, will
yet, in Mercy, hear the daily Prayer of his Church, Da pacem, Domine, in diebus
nostris! Amen.

ERRATA.
I. In the Text.
PAge 19. Line 4. for closs, read close: p. 20. l. 16. for the, r. their: p.
27. l. 8. for remaing, r. remaining: p. 28. l. 14. for live, r. have lived: p.
31. l. 28. for observers, r. observes: p. 34. l. 18. for (...), r. (...): p.
55. l. 21. from the word Cathedraticum to and seq. p. 56. l. 5. all this should
have been in the Margent, which being put into the Text obscures the sense. p.
57. l. 11. for Ministers, r. Ministry: p. 116. l. 14. (b) for ordes, r. order:
p. 133. l. 20. for (...), r. (...): p. 135. l. 29. These words, and really
punished also, are to be within a Parenthesis thus (): p. 155. l. 14. after
all, add is.

II. In the Margent.
PAge 49. Line 12. for Alepo, read Alepo: p. 132. -- after page, add 120. 123.
p. 133. after pige, add 69. ibid. l. 12. r. wesembec: p. 165. l. 1. add Genes.
xlvii. 22.26. p. 171. l. 32. before Majesty's, add late: p. 192. l. 4. for
(...), r. (...): p. 199. l. ult. after 1626. add above: p. 209. l. 14. for
Ecclica, r. Ecclesiae: ibid. l. 16. for Lundonicae, r. Lundoniae: ibid. l. 27.
after example of, add William the Conqueror: p. 228. l. 32. add Ezekiel. 1.16. A
Wheel in the middle of a wheel.

Note, That through a mistake, from Page 113, to 120. the Pages have the same
Number twice, which to distinguish, we have added the letter (a) to the first
Number, and the letter (b) to the second.

A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS.
The INTRODUCTION, Page 1. CHAP. I. OF the Sacrilegious Malefactor, Page 5
CHAP. II. The Description of Sacrilege, Page 12 CHAP. III. The Distribution of
Sacrilege, Page 27 CHAP. IV. Of the Parties against whom the sin of Sacrilege
is committed, and here first of the Priest, as God's Usufructuary only. Page
44 CHAP. V. That the Sin of Sacrilege is an offense against God himself, who
is the great Proprietary of the Revenues of the Clergy, Page 58 CHAP. VI. Of
God's heavy Curses against Sacrilegious, both Persons, and Nations.
Page 68 CHAP. VII. The Confutation of the fair Colors of Religion, brought in
to Varnish over the foul sin of Sacrilege, Page 113 CHAP. VIII. A full
Confutation of Three Reasons of State, or Pretenses of Policy, for the Practice
of Sacrilege, namely, 1. Justice upon Delinquents. 2. Public Peace. 3.
State-Necessity.
Page 130 CHAP. IX. Of the King's solemn Oath at his Coronation, whereby the
King is Obliged, as in Point of Honor, as he is a Man, so in Point of Justice,
as he is a Magistrate, and likewise in Point of Conscience, as he is a
Christian, constantly to Grant, Preserve, and Defend the Rights of the Church,
Page 168 CHAP. X. The Confutation of the fourth Politic Pretense of a
Legislative Power, Page 174 CHAP. XI. That the sin of Sacrilege is a great
SNARE, and also Condemned as by the Divine, so by the Canon, Civil, Saxon, and
by the Common, and Statute-Laws of the Realm, Page 188 CHAP. XII. A Cloud of
Domestical, and also a Triumvirat of foreign Witnesses, Luther for Germany,
Calvin for France, and Knox for Scotland, all deposing against Sacrilege, Page
198 The Recapitulation of all, Page 212
Sacrilege ARRAIGNED By SAINT PAVL.
ROMANS 2.22. Thou, that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege?


INTRODUCTION.
Sect. 1. IN the Primitive Church, there was a Godly Discipline, That in Lent,
notorious Offenders were put to Open Penance; that, by this Temporal
Punishment, they might be reclaimed, and so escape God's Eternal Doom. This
wholesome Course, our holy Mother the Church does wish At the beginning of the
Commination.
might be reformed again; till when, (in some degree at least) to comply with
our Mother's Godly Intentions, it might prove very good Service to the Church,
and to men's Souls too, if at such a time and occasion as this, we also would
keep our Spiritual Lenten Assizes, (as I may say) If every one of us that is
called up to this great Place and Duty, would, for his Task, lay hold of some
such one notorious Offender, and Arraign him by Preaching down the sin, (which
to a guilty Conscience may prove a kind of Penance also.) But if then every
man's Conscience would join with the Preacher, to prosecute the Indictment, and
pass sentence upon it, and accordingly submit it to due Execution: Ah, how soon
might such a National Penitent course, rid this miserable Land of all those
National Sins that have pulled down these National Judgments, which now are
Incumbent upon us, till we all, King, Priest, and People, sink under the heavy
weight of them!

2. However, to contribute my service toward so good a Work, as the Removal of
God's Judgments from this Nation, I have singled out one notorious Offender,
that deserves the open Penance as much as any; It Is Sacrilege, a reigning Sin,
that seems to want nothing now but the Ceremony of Coronation, I mean, the
Consent of the Crown: The want whereof (under God's admirable prevention) is,
as yet, the only Bar in Law, that hinders this Tyrant-Sin from becoming an
absolute Conqueror over this whole Church and Nation, and then from triumphing
over, and leading away Captive this Eldest Daughter of the Catholic Church.
For, to omit at this time our other National sins, of all other sins, this sin
of Sacrilege, has proved the fatal Passing Bell to whole Nations, whole
Empires. Very Paynims, by the dim light of Nature, could see this truth: would
you think that a Virgil, or an Horace, Horat. Carm. l. Ode 6. Ad Romanos,
[Britannos] De moribus sui seculi corruptis.
would impute their National Changes, Revolutions, and public Calamities, as
to sin in general, so to this very sin of Sacrilege in particular? yet is this
their own Observation. Take it in a Natural Sorites; The sin of Sacrilege is
in the Consequences of it, Delicta majorum immeritus lues
Roman: donec templa refeceris
Aedesque labentes Deorum, and
Foeda nigro Simulachra fumo,
Diis te minorem quod geris, imperas.
Hinc omne principium huc refer exitum.
Di multa neglecti dederunt
Hesperiae mala luctuosae.
Virgil. 2. Aeneid. Excessere omnes adytis, arisque relictis,
Di quibus imperium steterat. --

first a Decay, and then at last by degrees, an utter overthrow of the Service
of God: The overthrow of God's Service, provokes God to a Departure: (There
needs no other Evocation from without: V. de la Cerda ibid. Plin. Histor. l.
28. c. 2. Macrob. Saturnal. l. 3. c. 9. The footsteps of all which Evocations,
and Departures you have Ezekiel. 10.4.18, 19. Then the glory of the Lord departed
from over the threshold of the House, etc.
) God's departure from a Nation, is always the forerunner of final
destruction: So did Joshua and Caleb conclude the period of the Canaanites, See
Ainsw. on Number. 14.9. and Number. 22.6. Neptunus in Troade, apud Euripid. (...).
Their shadow (that is God) is departed from them, and the Lord is with us,
therefore they are bread for us, etc. It were easy to accumulate National
Instances: witness the whole Jewish Church and Nation, translated by the 2 Chronicles. 36.4.17.21.
Chaldees into utter Captivity, for this very sin of Sacrilege expressly; and
particularly for the Sacrilegious profanation of God's House, and of the
Seventh or Sabbatical year; and for the other Natural Branch thereof, the
contempt of the Priest, the greater Sacrilege of the two, says the Gravius
contra personam quam contra locum, Aquin. 22 ae q. 99.
School: witness once more, the Great Babylonian Monarchy, for this very
particular sin of Sacrilege, says God himself, Dan. 5.23.
translated within less than the space of an hundred years, The Sacred Vessels
were carried by Nebuchadnezzar, Anno Mundi 3360. and the Assyrian Monarchy
expired, Anno 3430. according to some men's computation.
from those very Chaldees to the Medes and Persians.

I pray God that in these sad Stories, I do not read out unto you your own
Destiny: To avert it for our part, behold a direct Bill of Indictment preferred
against that fatal sin of Sacrilege, by one of God's chief Apostles, (...);
Thou that say a man should not commit Adultery, do thou commit Adultery?
Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege?

3. In this Indictment you have these two plain natural Parts, the Malefactor,
and the Crime.

1. The Malefactor is described by his Religion, he is a Professor, yea, a
Zelot, one that abhors Idols.

2. The Crime laid to his Charge is Sacrilege: Touching which we shall
deliver, 1. Matter of Declaration. 2. Matter of Aggravation. 3. Matter of
Probation.
And by that time the Case is thus argued out; we shall desire no more favor
than shall be due to the fairness of our Evidence from clear Scripture, and
sound Reason, the two Master-Pillars of a Just Cause, the only ground of our
good hope that the Sentence will go of our Clients side: for it is Causa Dei,
that is to be pleaded before you this day, and it is God is the Client; pardon
the word, for so it is God, although, de Jure, the great Patron-Paramount of
you, and of us all, that yet, as the matter is used now adays, is, de facto,
turned Client, and makes you now his Judges, who one day must judge you all,
high and low: Then, as at that day you look for Mercy at his hands, do him this
Justice, I beseech you, give Audience without prejudice or partiality, with
Reverence and Conscience, hearken to God's Charge, Thou that abhorrest Idols,
do then commit Sacrilege?

CHAP. I.
Of the Sacrilegious Malefactor.

TO begin with the first, The Malefactor, he is described here, first in
general, by his Titles of Religion, secondly, in particular, by his Titles of
Office; for to all these in the Context, the Text has a plain Reference.

Sect. 1. First, in general he is described, by his Titles of Religion, for
it is a Religious Malefactor; he is a Professor, nay, a forward one, a Zelot,
described first positively, Behold thou art called a Jew, (verse 17.) and
restest in the Law, ((...), is the word, a full word) thou so wholly reliest
upon thy bare profession of the Law, as thou art utterly careless Aret. in loc.
Secure legi indormiens, de reliquo nil solicitus.
meanwhile of the practice of, or obedience to the Law, (as appears by the
Text and Context, v. 23.) Thou that gloriest in, or make thy boast of God,
(you may please to save me the labor of application, change but the Names and
you may have here a full Character of too too many men in our Generation) Thou
pretendest to know the will of God (v. 18.) thou approvest the things that are
more excellent, or (as the Margin reads it, (...).
and the Original bears it.) Thou that presumest to take upon thee the Office
of a Tryer, that can try the things that differ, that can try Religions,
and in pretense choose out the best: Here is a forward one indeed, and that not
only thus, positively a Zelot of the Law in his own Religion, (as he is
termed, Acts 20.21.) But negatively too, a Zelot against the contrary
Religion, one, that not only abstains from, but (which may seem the very
Quintessence of Repentance of, and conversion from a sin) one that abhors
Idolatry, that stops his Nose at the smell of an Idol, (so the Greek) (...) of
(...), which signifies an utmost stink, or the extremity of an ill savor.
Vorst. q. d. propter foetotorem aversaris: (...), execror, Budaeus: unde (...),
Apoc. 21.27. Omnis generis atrocia peccata.
that can startle or shake with horror at but the very sight of an Idol, so
the German renders it, Der du einen grewell have, an den gotzen raubest heilige
dinge?
a Zelot indeed, and yet behold this is the man Indicted here by the Apostle,
as a Malefactor, Thou that abhorrest, etc. as if Saint Paul arguing ab absurdo,
had said thus, How can thou pretend to be indeed an Enemy to Idolatry, as
long as thou art a friend to Sacrilege, a sin in the appurtenances of it, as
directly destructive of the first whole Table, nay more, of both Tables, (in
the nature of Theft also) and therefore full out as bad as Idolatry?

2. But this is one of Satan's Deepest Rev. 2.24.
Depths: when the Devil can hold men no longer in an old sin, he is then wont
thus to ring Changes, or to shift his Weapon, when he perceives men through
Constitution, Education, or Profession, converted and averse from an old Error,
he persuades them to some other new sinful course, full out as bad as the old;
causing them to mistake, such an The Devil's converts.
Hypocritical Commutation of a new sin for and old, instead of a sound
Conversion: as when men grow weary of Prodigality, he converts them to
Covetousness; instead of an old carnal Lust, he persuades them to entertain a
new one, as spiritual Pride, or Singularity, or Envy, and in time, to exchange
this too, for Schism, or Sedition, or Rebellion; To avoid Superstition, he
persuades them to utter Profaneness, the quite other extreme, as (...), Basil.
instead of Idolatry to give over themselves to Sacrilege: And as thus in the
case of particular men's Conversions, so through God's just permission, yea,
Judgment against National Hypocrisy, in the case of National changes too, or
Reformation of Religion, Satan does sometimes enlarge this his Depth, and as
easily as single men, misleads into it whole Nations, whole Churches; when they
are grown weary of a stale Error, he presents them with a fresh, full out as
rank as the former, only sweetened over with some plausible pretense of Zeal, or
of the Purity of Religion.

3. This was here the very Case of some of the preciser sort, in the Nation of
the Jews, for the Parties here Indicted are not Heathen, or Barbarians, or
Scythians, but Jews, (which is a name Verse. 28, 29. He is not a Jew which is
one outwardly, etc.
of profession) Professors of the then supposed old true Religion: or if you
will (as So the French, and the Italian of Diodati.
some) enlarge it to the Roman Converts also, the Professors of the then
Reformed Christian Religion: The observation will be still the same either way,
That Zealous Professors may be deeply guilty of foul sins in general, of this
foul sin of Sacrilege in particular.

4. But ex abundanti, to reconcile both these Expositions into one, why may not
the Jews and Romans here be both one? such as were those strangers of Rome, (or
stranger- Romans) Acts 2.5.
expressly called Jews and Proselytes, some of the old Jewish Dispersions
(mentioned by St. Jam. 1.1. (...). V. Orationem Agrippae in Josepho.
James) then converted by St. Peter's Preaching, and now confirmed by St.
Paul's Epistle: for that those Roman Jews mentioned in the Acts, were but
Sojourners at Jerusalem, and not Dwellers there, is plain from that Text well
examined: so that those Roman Jews might by this time be returned Converts from
Jerusalem to Rome, and be the men in part, to whom Saint Paul here directs this
his Epistle: This is very probable, but whether they were or were not Jews
unconverted, against whom St. Paul directs his Charge, it matters not. Dato,
nedum concesso, that they were mere Jews, here lies the issue, Sacrilege is
here made a plain parallel sin, and of the same nature with Adultery and
Idolatry, Ergo, Sacrilege is a sin still under the Gospel, as much as Adultery
or Idolatry, or else St. Paul says as good as nothing to his main drift and
purpose in this whole Chapter, which is, to convince both Jew and Gentile of
damnable hypocrisy, in doing as bad as others, whom yet rhey did condemn.
Ergo, from the scope of the Text, it must needs follow in ordinary Logic, that
as Adultery and Idolatry are breaches of the Moral Law, which Law concerns us
Christians as much as it did the Jews; even so is Sacrilege too a breach of
the same Moral Law, and in some respects, as you shall hear it proved anon, a
greater sin under the Gospel, than under the Law.

5. Then what ever the Malefactor be, the Crime is the same: so that for all
their outward profession of being God's own People, neither the Law, nor
Circumcision, neither God's Word, nor his Sacraments, nor all the External
advantages of Religion (otherwise excellent and glorious, if well used) shall
avail them any further, than to Verse 25.27.
aggravate their just condemnation: Their pretense of Detestation of Idolatry
will not serve the turn, as long as they continue in Sacrilege: what ever they
be, Jews, or Christians, Laity, or Clergy; (God's own express distinction, as
old as Moses) Exodus 19.13. etc. Where the people are set down their bounds:
It Is S. Greg. Nazianz. observation, etc.
God has no respect of persons, for if you mark it, the Malefactor is here
Indicted, not only by his Titles of Religion; But, which is our second point of
Examination, by his Titles of Office too, as he is a Doctor, or a Preacher; so
runs the style in the Context.

6. Behold, says the Apostle, Verse 19.20, 21.
thou art confident that thou thy self art a guide of the blind, a light of
them which are in darkness (an illuminate Generation) an Instructor of the
Foolish, a teacher of Babes, which have the form of Knowledge, and of the truth
in the Law. Thou therefore which teach another Been docere and male vivere,
quid aliud est quam se sua voce damnare? Prosper.
teach thou not thy self? Thou that preachest a man should not steal, do
thou steal? Thou that say a man should not commit Adultery, do thou
commit Adultery? Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege?

7. It seems they that should have been the Guardians, were the Robbers, yea,
Ringleaders in the spoil of God's House, turned Bethel into Bethaven, the
House of God into a Den of Thieves: Thieves indeed, who to buy the
High Priesthood it self Joseph: and Beza ex eo.
not out of any love to the Office, (for Sectaries and Heretics, Pharisees and
Sadduces as they were, almost all of them, witness Annas the then High Priest,
a Sadducee himself, what cared they for the Office, so they had the Benecice)
they did not spare to sell the Offerings, corrade the Sacrifices, rob God's
Exchequer, to pay the Roman-Chapman, by whom all sacred things were then
exposed to sale.

I suppose you so apprehensive as not to expect an application of this, to our
late Lay-Bishops, or Lay-Deans, in this one respect, still worse than the old
Church-Thieves, that those did not abolish the Office, as keen as they were of
the Benefice, but still had some care to preserve their Church in the old form,
though very corrupt for the matter thereof.

8. The fair warning deducible from this History, may concern you all, that you
may not be seduced by the smooth pretenses, or false Principles of men, be
their Titles never so specious, be they Doctors or Pastors, discontented
Teachers, or popular Preachers; say they be of the Tribe of Levi, or of the
Family of Chorah: yea should any of our selves for our own particular
advantage, go about to mince the matter, to persuade you that Sacrilege is no
Sacrilege, believe us not: for, as one has too truly observed it; I know not
how, nor by what Destiny, (but by the Devils cooperation) in the spoil of
God's Demesnes, usually all of all sorts, join heads and hands: these three
Avaritia Magnatum, Ambitio Sacerdotum and Superbia Populorum, both of old and
of late, go hand in hand about it, commonly the Avarice of the Grandees, is
still the Beldam; the ambition Number. 16.
of some greedy male-contented, and perhaps undeserving Priests, is the
Midwife; and the Pride of the overweening vulgar (for Quum excellimur, and
instamur adversus Clerum, tum sumus omnes sacerdotes, quia Sacerdotes nos Deo
and Patri fecit: quum ad per aequationem Disciplinae Sacerdotalis provocamur
deponibus Insulas, and Impares sumus. Tertul. de Monogamia, c. 12.
every man, the simplest man would be his own Priest, his own Bishop:) has
proved the unhappy Nurse to breed and bring forth all Church-Mischief. These
three are never awanting, but always ready to help one another, and the Devil
above all to rob God Almighty, which is the Crime charged here by the Apostle
upon this Malefactor, and the second main part of our Discourse, to wit, the
examination of the sin of Sacrilege, and that, as you may remember, the
division three manner of ways, to wit, 1. By way of Declaration. 2. By way of
Aggravation; and 3. By way of Probation.


CHAP. II.
The Description of Sacrilege.

1. TOuching the matter of Declaration, we shall deliver it first by way of
Description, secondly by way of Distribution, of the sin of Sacrilege
according to its several kinds and degrees.

In the Description we may consider the sin of Sacrilege, as it is set down in
the Text. 1. Absolutely, in its own nature. 2. Comparatively with those other
parallel-sins expressed in the Text, and Context, to wit, Adultery, a most
heinous sin against the second Table. Idolatry a most grievous Crime against
the first Table.


We begin with the first, the Consideration of the sin of Sacrilege
absolutely, and in its own nature. Not to trouble you with any Heins. ad loc.
uncouth Exposition, but following the Father's Deligendus est sensus e materia
dicti: Regula Tertulliani, and Hilarii. Where the matter and the Context will
bear it, we are to choose the most proper and literal sense. Aug. de Doctr.
Christiana.
sound Rule, in finding out the right sense of a Text: By Sacrilege here, is
meant properly, the Abuse of Aquin. in loc.
things sacred, or belonging to the service of God, whether the Abuse be
committed by way of Violatione, vel surreptione.
violation, through profaneness, or usurpation, through fraud, or covetousness
(of which latter kind of real Sacrilege, you shall hear more anon, when we
come to the matter of Aggravation:) but whether by Profanation, or Usurpation,
either way, it is Sacrilege; so says Calvin upon the place, and so Contzen the
Jesuit, (witnesses enough we may have of all sorts, of all sides:) That this
is the full extent or value of the word (...), to commit Sacrilege, is plain
from the constant Etymology thereof, in the general Phavorini, Lexicon, (...).
So Hesych. Suidas. Budaeus. Roberti Steph. Thesaurus. The great Greek
Concordance given by Sir Henry Savile, to the public Library at Oxford. See
there (...), 2 Mac. 13.6. and (...), 2 Mac. 4.42. So Acts 19.37. Sacrilegium
est proprie rerum sacrarum furtum, Papias. Nay, so the Hebrew (...) in the Old
Testament, ( Genesis 49 27.) from whence directly the word (...) in the Greek of
the New Testament is derived, being applied to things Sacred, is properly to
spoil, to pillage, or (for the capacity of those who are better versed in the
new way of Robbing) to Plunder holy things? so the German of Rackaw renders
this Text, Raubest heilige dinge: Rauben and Plundern, in that Language being
full Synonymes.
Current of Authors, Ecclesiastical, or Classical, Greek or Latin (for the
word Sacrilegium:) And now, God be-thanked, it is clear by the letter of this
Text, that there is still such a thing as Sacrilege, and that Sacrilege is a
sin under the Gospel, as much as under the Law, a sin of as heinous a nature,
and of as heavy a Consequence, as either Adultery or Idolatry; either of which,
I hope, no Christian will deny to be sins under the Gospel, as well as under
the Law. Here is a plain literal Text for both; a fair Foundation to build the
rest of our discourse upon. This for the Grammatical Exposition of the Text.

2. As for the particular occasion thereof: 1. Some are of opinion, that the
Apostle might, by the Holy Ghost, foresee this Error, that some Zelots (whether
Jews or Romans, it matters not) under pretense of hating Idols, might presume
to rob the Idol's Temples: and from this take their Hint most Expositers
ancient and modern, Chrysostom. Theoph. Calv. Estius ad loc.
Greek and Latin, to paraphrase the Text thus; Thou that abhorrest Idols,
do thou (through sacrilegious Avarice) steal away the things sacrificed to
Idols? From which general Exposition we may thus argue the Case: If the
Apostle, and the holy Fathers did think the Robbing of an Idol, a false God, As
no Casuist doubts of it that a Turk may be guilty of Perjury, and for it be
punished by the True God, If he forswear himself, though he swear but by
Mahomet a false Prophet.
to be Sacrilege, (and in Dionysius, and others, though but mere Heathen, the
true God has revenged it for such) then a majori, it must needs be high
Sacrilege to steal away that which belongs to the true God indeed, unless they
will make him a tamer Deity in his own Right, than in the Right of an Idol.

3. But secondly, the Syriack Expositor is yet more literal, and renders these
words thus, Do thou commit Sacrilege directly by those? do thou spoil
the house of the Sanctuary? ((...)) that is the word: And that God Almighty
has still under the Gospel his Domum Sanctuarii, as well as under the Law,
needs no other Text, than that plain Evangelical one, ( Marc. 11.17. out of
Isa. 56.7.) My house shall be called of (or to) all Nations the house of
Prayer. Where 1. Even under the Gospel God does still claim a house to himself?
My house, by a plain right of appropriation. 2. That it must be so called, and
so used too, (...), to, or of all Nations, which till the calling in of the
Gentiles by the Gospel, could not be under the Law.
either Exposition will serve the turn, That in the Apostle's judgment, it is
Sacrilege to take away that which belongs to God, and to turn it into a
profane or common use.

4. You may easily take an Estimate of the hainousness of the sin of Sacrilege
in its own nature, by the worth of its opposite, the highest Virtue, the virtue
of Religion, which Sacrilege Aquin.
directly overthrows: and therefore vi contrariorum, Sacrilege must needs be
the basest Vice. A Thief, any ordinary Thief is a Person infamous by the Law, I
C. and Stat. concern. Ridesdale-men, etc.
who yet robs but a man like himself; how base a Thief is he then that robs
God, that robs his own God? for so God Indicts him expressly, Malach. 3.8.
and so both the Greek and the (...), Suid. Bud. Gotts-Dieb. In Classical
Authors it is an Epithet of highest aggravation, when a thing is called
Sacrilegious, as Vipera and Sacrilega sunt convicia comica and apta in Ancillas
and mulieres improbas, etc Chabot in 5. Epod. Horat. Bellum Sacrilegum Cic. 7.
in Verr. Sacrilegi furores Martial.
German, and the Saxon, your old Language term him, Gods Thief, that is his
Brand. Nay, one degree worse yet, for Sacrilege is a Vice opposite to the
virtue of Religion, not simply, or in any inferior degree, but in its heroical
degree of Excellency; It particularly opposes Devotion, which is Religion in
its Zenith, in its height; It being an holy promptitude to honor God with our
substance, as well as with our service, one of the highest Expressions of our
duty to our Maker, and of the homage we can perform to God Almighty, whilst we
are upon Earth: which does as near as may be at this distance fasten us (to use
the phrase of that Divine Heathen) (...). Hierocl. Knit us together with God.
unto God heart and hand, and all: Then sure the quite contrary disservice can
be no Gnat, which very Pagans themselves out of mere common Notions, have ever
strained at; to say nothing of all Christendom besides. And as Sacrilege is
thus heinous in its own nature, so it will appear more horrible still, being
compared with the Parallel-sins it is matched withal in the Context: Noscitur
ex socio, is an old Say; And this is our second Point in order, to make up the
full description of this sin, to wit, by way of Comparison.

5. The sins near of kin to Sacrilege, are here set down to be, 1. Adultery,
and 2. Idolatry; damnable sins both of them in whomsoever, in the Christian, as
well as in the Jew: so that with as much Reason may any man affirm the sins of
Adultery or of Idolatry, to concern only the Jews, and not us Christians,
because St. Paul seems here to speak to the Jews, as to say so of Sacrilege,
or with as much reason may any man deny Adultery or Idolatry, to be sins now
under the Gospel, as deny Sacrilege to be a sin still, for the ground in this
Text is the same for both; and therefore by a plain Argument, a pari at least,
Sacrilege must needs be a sin of the same nature, that is as damnable in a
Christian, as in a Jew, under the Gospel, as under the Law. As for the first
Adultery, that can be no Peccadillo, no sin in jest, that in earnest was dyed
in the blood of 25000 Number. 25.9.
all at once: and for which millions lie now frying in Hell. But yet, as
heinous as Adultery is, it is the observation of some learned Interpreters
Mendoca. in 1 Reg. 2.17.
upon the Text; that 1. Whereas God stayed patiently a twelvemonth, before he
did reprove King David for his Adultery: but for the sin of Sacrilege, God did
arraign and condemn too King Uzziah, (...). 2 Chronicles. 26.20, 21.
In the very act, as we say, which, Caeteris paribus, is more severe. 2. God
did not deprive King David of his Royal Office for his Adultery, but for his
Sacrilege, God degraded from the Throne King Uzziah. 3. God did set no
personal, visible mark of his Justice upon King David himself for his Adultery;
but for his Sacrilege, God did fix the mark of his wrath upon King Uzziah's
Forehead, as the most visible place, for a fair warning: and so God does still
generally punish sacrilegious persons, even here upon Earth temporally, yea,
visibly: One memorable Instance for the Aggravation of the sin of Sacrilege
above Adultery, our Lord and Master has left us upon Record: for when the
great Bishop and Shepherd of our Souls came to visit his Metropolis Jerusalem,
and found sacrilegious Chapmen trading there: Though our Lord had waved to give
any Sentence or Judgment, Luc. 12.14. John 8.11.
as in the case of Inheritance, so in the case of Adultery, yet he passes
sentence and judgment, and himself executes present penalty, in the very Act,
against the Sacrilegious Abusers of his House. His Whip of small Cords, as St.
Hierom amplifies it, Matthew. 21.
wrought a greater Miracle than any in the whole Gospel: Quod unus homo, and
illo tempore contemptibilis, etc. potuerit ad unius flagolli verbera tantam
ejicere multitudinem. Such was our supreme Visitor's divine zeal and fiery
indignation against Sacrilege, that he himself is both Accuser, Witness,
Judge, and Executioner, which is very singular, and only in the case of
Sacrilege: And which is yet more, this penal Miracle is also redoubled (as
Pharaoh's Dream for certainty) and acted twice over by our Lord, for the full
confirmation and ratifying of the Penalty to all ensuing Ages and Generations:
As both learned Grotius on John 11.14. and judicious Mr. Mede very well
observe: Christ made the Correction of Sacrilege both the Alpha and the Omega
of his Episcopal Care. And yet let no profane Esau Heb. 2.16.
wrest this Parallel to an Extenuation of that sin of Adultery, which, of all
others, God has threatened to reserve unto his own Judicatory; because the
close Adulterer presuming to do that work of darkness in the presence of the
Immortal God, which he durst not do in the presence of a mortal man, highly
defies the Omni-science and Omni-presence of God: Therefore in the matter of
Vriah's Wife, God, who has no respect of persons, threatens David, though a
King, That because he did it secretly, God would punish him openly before all
Israel, and before the Sun, (2 Samuel 12.2.) and the Apostle confirms the
Commination, saying, That Whoremongers and Aulterers God will judge: Heb. 13.4.
And if so, where shall then the Church-Robber, or sacrilegious person appear?


6. Secondly, as for the other Parallel-sin, the sin of Idolatry, to which
Sacrilege is here compared. It Is true, Idolatry is a heinous sin, whether in
Pagan Impiety, or Popish Superstition, or simplicity; for a Isa. 44.19.
rational Creature, to fall down to the stock of a Tree, is able to provoke the
jealousy of a patient God, (and jealousy is anger in the height of fury)
which therefore in the proportion of God's Justice, must needs presuppose a
very high Offense: And so the Jews conceived of it, acknowledging to this day
(at their solemn Feast of Expiation) their Idolatry about the Calfe, Moses
Gerundensis.
and that an Ounce of it, is still an Ingredient to all their National
punishments: and in this, the ancient Christian Church was even with the Jew
for detestation of Idolatry; witness against the Religious use of Images in
Churches, that rigid Fact of Epiphanius, and the rigor of the Council of
Eliberis, as also the prudent wariness of the old Catholics in their slow
admission of them: for it is very well known to the Learned, that Images were
not received into the Church but the other day in comparison, and that not
without very great opposition neither; all this ado about Images, was, as to
avoid all appearance of evil, in those Pagan times and places especially, so to
express their devout fear of slipping into that occasional Error, into which
some Western Churches first, and, after the seducing example, some of the
Eastern-Churches also are foully fallen at last by little and little: yet as
bad as, by all this, Idolatty may appear, Sacrilege must needs be at least,
full out as damnable a sin as Idolatry, If (y) Calvin may be Judge, Site
Apostolus opponit Idololatriae Sacrilegium, tanquam rem ejusdem generis. Calv.
ad loc.
who therefore expressly observes on the Text, the fitness of the Apostle's
Comparison, in parallelling Idolatry with Sacrilege, as being sins ejusdem
generis, of the same kind; and if of the same kind, then sure Sacrilege is
still a sin as damnable now under the Gospel, as Idolatry it self.

7. And I would to God we had no cause to fear, that under the very same
pretense of avoiding Idolatry and Superstition, some men have Reformed the
Worship of God, the quite contrary way, and run so far toward the other two
extremes of Sacrilege and Profaneness, as that they may seem full out as
liable to the Apostle's Indictment here, as any: Thou that abhorrest Idols,
do thou commit Sacrilege?

A sin which in some respects, may prove somewhat worse than Idolatry, to wit,
if considered in its Complication, with those other grievous Crimes, that of
all other sins, do usually attend upon the sin of Sacrilege, as forerunners or
followers: (for Sacrilege is one of those sins, which they call As Calvin very
well notes of the Sacrilege of Ananias, on Act. 5.1. In hac ficta oblatione
plura mala suberant. 1. Contemptus Dei quem suae pravitatis conscium non
reveretur. 2. Sacrilega fraudatio, quia partem ex eo subducit quod sacrum esse
Deo profitebatur. 3. Perversa vanitas and ambitio, quia, posthabito Dei judicio
hominibus se venditat. 4. Infidelitas quia hanc viam, illicitam non aggressus
esset, nisi Deo diffisus. 5. Pii, sanctique instituti corruption. 6. Ipsa quoque
hypocrisis magnum per se erat malum. 7. Accessit huc quoque obstinata mentiendi
audacia. Behold, out of one single Root of Sacrilege, seven deadly sins, as so
many cursed branches spreading out themselves over a Church of the Apostle's
own Plantation. Diodati adds one sin more expressed in the 9th Verse, to wit,
Tempting of God: Di tentare, c. di fare un prophano Saggio, se egli
conoscerebbe, etc. That is to make a profane Trial, or assay, whether God
could know their fraud, or knowing it, would or could punish it.
Peccata aggregata.) For instance, Idolaters, as bad as they are, yet they will
suffer Bishops, (and so far the Papists are right) but the late Patrons of
Sacrilege in flat opposition to Christ and his Apostles, ever begin their work
with the bloody Persecution of God's chief Servants, the Bisheps and Pastors of
Christ's Flock, because they are, and ever were the men, down from the
Apostle's days, entrusted by the Catholic Church, as Feoffees and Guardians of
the sacred Patrimony: It Is the Devil's stale Stratagem this, still to begin at
the Matthew. 26.31.
Shepherds, that the Sheep may the easier be scattered: The Devil in this,
dealing with the Church, as Aelian reports, Anytus, one of the thirty Tyrants,
to have done with Athens. The Persecutor intending usurpation upon the State of
Athens, and finding good honest Socrates to stand in his way, as being able to
confute his Conclusions, never left, till first by underhand traducing, and
then by open false Accusation, he, through the hands of the Hair-brained
multitude, forced the good man to drink off the Cup of Hemlock: Thus Socrates
once voted out of the way, Anytus soon after became the Head-Master of the
Athenian Crew, State and all.

8. Add to all this, that some Idolaters may be Loyal, but as for Sacrilege,
you may observe, that the most usual Medium to compass it, is Rebellion and
Treason still: As Anytus dealt with Socrates, so they will deal still with the
Prince, if he prove a Constantine to God, and his own Soul, and therefore
refuse his consent, because it is not in his own power, for the King's Prove.
21.1.
heart is, and should he still in the hand of the Lord, as I may say, under
God's own Lock and Key, but then, rather than miss of their sacrilegious ends,
they will burst, or force open the Wards, the more need has He then again of
all good Subjects Prayers, Lord Psalm. 51.12. it is (...) SPIRITU PRINCIPIS
fulcito, velut manibus.
stablish him with thy free spirit.

For I know not how, but still these two, Sacrilege and Rebellion, do usually
meet in eodem subjecto: witness Judas, as a sacrilegious Thief, so a base
Traitor, set down therefore in the old Forms of the Quisquis autem hujus meae
munificentiae Testamentum quovis deinceps tempore, aliqua occasion, cujus
libet etiam dignitatis, vel professionis, vel gradus pervertere vel in irritum
deducere tentaverit, sciat se cum proditore Juda aeterna confusione, edacibus
ineffabilium tormentorum flammis periturum. K. Ina, Anno Dom. 725. Sir Henry
Spelman. Council. tom. 1. passim.
Curses against Sacrilege, as the fittest precedent to curse by: and I would
be very loath to have my part with Judas, where he is now, for all the
Church Lands in Christendom.

And so Charles Martell of France, another arrand Traitor against his Liege
Lord, upon pretense of mere necessity to pay his Army for the Holy War against
the Turk, did, under the Title of borrowing, seize upon the Church Revenues,
with promise (as some So they say, that above a hundred years ago, a King of
this Land did pretend and promise too, to restore, etc. but once gone, aye
gone, for that good work is to do yet, and who knows, but this is it we all
smart for now? The Parallels are strange for Time, Place, and Person; but that
we keep within the Rule, Parcere, Personis, etc.
others) of Restitution; for lack of which Charles Martell is (in good History)
branded with the Imputation of being the first Founder of Sacrilege in
Christendom, and for it reported also by the Du Tillet, Fauchet, and other
French Historians.
Historians of those times, to be damned Body and Soul, more than in a bare
Vision: Fides penes Authors esto.

But what need we cross over-Seas for examples of this kind? since to our woe,
he that runs may in Capitals, read this sad Truth in the Rubric of this
Island, where those that were deepest in the Sacrilege, were deepest in the
Rebellion.

9. Let none therefore think that this Discourse does nothing at all concern
the men of our Generation: for no doubt it does, full as much as it did those
in St. Paul's days: for is not this the very Plea of our Zelots now adays, that
to avoid Idolatry, they must needs do as they do, commit Sacrilege? They abhor
Popery forsooth, and the Church Lands, and Revenues, smell rank of that Weed,
(and yet this only in the Clergie's hands) therefore they must be converted
into their own Lay-hands, there to be sweetened, yea, sanctified, though their
hands be full of blood: But as the Apostle, so may we justly bespeak these
Religious men, Thou that abhorrest Popery, will thou commit Sacrilege? a sin,
for the Original of it, no less Popish than the other: for search and examine,
who first began the sacrilegious Invention of Appropriations; did not the Pope
to gratify the Monky? so that one of your own Camden.
Historians bears Record, that in this one Country alone of 9284 Parishes, the
Pope has Impropriated no less than 3845, that is almost the one half, and you
may well suppose (for it is true) that the fattest Benefices might be the first
that went to the Pot: yet these sound Protestants, thus directly treading in
the Pope's sacrilegious steps, would make you, and all the blind World believe,
they do it all this while, to avoid the Pope's Company: But indeed, to say
truth, the Pope was in comparison, but a Novice in the gainful Trade of
Sacrilege, Antichrist as he is, in their own opinion, he never, as these, had
either the wit to think of, or the boldness then to strike at Root and Branch,
from the higest Prelate, to the meanest Chorister.

But in this case, the Servant may not be greater than his Master, the Priest
may not fare better than the King: for do not the self same men too, Rebel
against the King, (for mark it again, still Sacrilege and Rebellion are Twins)
still to prevent Popery? Yea, and blame the King very much, if, when they
themselves force him to it, he do presume to use a Sword of his own, if it
chance to be found in a Popish hand, whilst themselves, good men are
blameless, though, for Rebellion against their own Protestant-King, point blank
to the Doctrine of Christ, Lex nova non se vindi ultore gladio Tertul.
and the constant practice of the old Catholic Church, (for the compass of
almost a thousand years) they, out of a zeal against Popery, for Rebellion
Bucha nan. Junius. Brutus, compared with Bellarm. Suarez, etc.
use all the chief Popish spiritual Swords (I am able to make good the charge)
the Popish Arguments, I mean, Swords so much the more dangerous, than can be a
Papist's material Sword (whilst under Command) because this can only wound the
body, but that the other Sword, a poisoned Weapon, may kill the Soul it self.

Those that know me, know I am no friend to Popery, I was bred and born in a
Religion opposite unto it, I thank God for it, and in this Religion, as it is
established, and professed in the Church of England, for which (25 years at
home, and 15 years abroad) I have both done, and suffered my share: I hope, and
my trust in God is, that I shall live and die: I do hate real Popery, as much
as any, I mean what Doctrine is by that Church Canonized as de fide, contrary
to the old Catholic Faith, for the first five hundred years after Christ. But
I must needs confess I cannot, without just indignation, think of the deep
hypocrisy of the men of our Generation, that under the odious false imputation
of Popery, spit at the face of all sound and venerable Antiquity, yea, and that
under pretense of Zeal against Popery, maintain and do the same things that the
hottest Papists do, and that in such points as of all others (for
destructiveness) are the very Gunpowder, to blow up Church and State.

10. But you see, it is just so as we told you, rather than two such old
Acquaintances as Sacrilege and Rebellion should part, opposites in show will
shake hands indeed, and as the Zodiac (that in some places seems further
distant) they will cross the line, and meet at both ends, when (standing the
Terms, as now they do) Papists and we, that to some pore-blind Brains, may seem
nearer, yet, like Parallel-lines, can never meet, but must still keep out
Aequal-distance. And this discourse may suffice to make up the full Description
of the sin of Sacrilege, according to the Apostle's own method, considering it
first absolutely in its own Nature: next comparatively by way of parallel, with
the sins of Adultery and Idolatry; we might have added, and of Theft too, in
the foregoing Verse; all which sins of Theft, Adultery, and Idolatry,
remaining sins under the Gospel, as much as under the Law, it must needs
follow, Vi Inductionis, that this Text and Indictment in it, concerns us
Christians, as much as it did the Jews; Sacrilege and those other sins being
res ejusdem generis, as Calvin has plainly told you before; sins of the same
kind. Pass we now from the Description to the Distribution of the Sin of
Sacrilege in its full extent, according to the several parts and degrees
thereof.

CHAP. III.
The Distribution of Sacrilege.

1. ANd they are just as many as there be subjects capable of holiness
inherent, or relative, all which at the most, the School reduces to these
five; 1. Times. 2. Places. 3. Persons. 4. Actions. And 5. Things, which may be
said to be holy, as being set apart, and belonging unto God in a more peculiar
and appropriate manner, and therefore to be used cum discrimine, that is, with
a choice and singular respect from other common things of the same kind: If
otherwise used, then they are really profaned: And that they may be so abused,
(...) facto, our own woeful Experience in all these particulars, saves me a
labor, o^^ Eyes and Ears are passionate Witnesses o^ a sudden, stupendous,
National Confusion of all that is called Divine; and but tha^ this sad Truth
will from us descend to o^^ Posterity, sealed up with the constancy o^ our
sufferings for it, after Ages might mistrust our Report.

As the good old Father, so may we, ^o^ truly cry out, Bone Deus in quae nos
tempora reservasti! We live to see generally Yet in the most cruel Wars of the
most barbarous Nations, Goths, etc. The Temples, and the Priests were by the
Law of Nations, always held Sacred, and therefore secured from the general
violence; St. Augustine, l. 1. de civit Dei. See at large diverse memorable
examples of Religious Civility in this kind, in Grotius de Jure Belli, l. 3.
cap. 6. Sect. 6. and 7.
first, God's own Feasts unhallowed God's Houses demolished, God's Servants
degraded, God's Service disgraced, God's Portion invaded: And to plain the
Highway to this horrid Chaos, Sacred Majesty it self violated, (for by all the
Laws of Nations, Divine and Humane; the Persons of Kings, as well as their
Offices were ever held sacred.) No doubt, all this through God's just anger
against this Nation in general, because of their former unthankefulness for,
and wilful Abuse of all those eminent Blessings, so in particular, because too
too many of our side, have been and are still too grossly guilty of a manifold
profanation, and visible abuse of all those sacred Favors even among our
selves, unto this day.

2. To point at, and if it may be, to cut of some of the heads of this Hydra,
this ^any-headed Monster of sins. Sacrilege is a sin of a large extent: for,
to instance in personal Sacrilege, as I may term it. First of all, every
Christian, by solemn Dedication at his Baptism, is or should be morally holy,
suo gradu, not in Korah's Number. 6.3.
rebellious sense, holy all alike, in Grace, and Office, and all, hand over
head: but in the Apostle's sober sense, secundum mensuram, Romans 12.3.
holy in all manner of 2 Pet. 3.11.
conversation, else Quaelibet species luxuriae secundum quod violat aliquid
pertinens ad cultum Dei, est Sacrilegium. Aquin. 22 ae. q. 154. 10. o.
Luxury is, and any wilful sin committed by a Christian, may be, in a large
sense, termed Sacrilege: because every Christian, he or she, that in this or
any other sin abuses his body, directly prophanes a Temple of the Holy Ghost,
and, if any man 1 Cor. 3.17. Ambr. ad virginem lapsam.
defile the Temple of God, (material, or moral; nay, this of the two may, in
some respects, appear the greater sin) him will God destroy: look to it,
Wantons, and Epicures, fear, and amend, for it is no less than spiritual
Sacrilege this, and a perfidious violation of your great Vow in Baptism;
whereby you have really dedicated your selves Body and Soul unto God in the
face of Holy Church, that may one day bear witness pro, or con, for, or against
you, as you stand to, or fall away from your Vow, and by it condemn you at
Doomsday.

3. Thus every Christian is a sacred person, and ought thus far to reverence
himself, as not, by committing acts contrary to, or unworthy of his Consecrated
condition, to unhallow himself: Mere Pagans out of a natural self-respect to a
reasonable Nature, and no more, could give this excellent Reason why men ought
neither in company, nor alone, to commit any Turpitude, because of all others
(next to God) every man ought to reverence himself, so the (...). Carm. 11. and
12. Pythag. (...) pro (...) possim (...). Iscr. ad Demonic. (...), Xenoph.
Paed. 1.
Greek word bears it:) And if so, then what strong obligation lies upon us
Christians, 1 These. 4.4.
To possess our Vessels in holiness and honor, that have the addition of such
a solemn positive Dedication? Doubtless to abuse a Nature so many ways sacred,
and so highly exalted, as is our Humane Nature by its intimate conjunction with
the Divine Nature of Christ our Head, by its sacred unction with the Holy Ghost
at our Baptism, must needs be fearful Apostasy, and in a manner with Julian,
to wash off again our Christendom: The only consideration whereof how should
it sublimate our minds, our manners, and raise up our Spirits to an holy
Dedignation of all base Actions? Should such a man as I flee? said Noble Neh.
6.11.
Nehemiah? So should every gallant Christian stand upon his spiritual Point of
Honor and holily scorn to do acts undercoming so sacred a Person; If not, he
shall one day find it to amount to more than a Metaphorical Sacrilege: This
by the way, may concern every Christian in general.

4. But secondly in particular, every King what ever he be is holy too by
virtue of his Unction, yea, though he were a mere Heathen, yea, though he want
the Ceremony; yet, Cyrus mine Anointed, Isa. 45.1.
is God's own style: Jus Regnandi, that is, God's Power from above is, for the
Reality, Unction sufficient to make the King's Person sacred, and therefore the
Cod. de Crim. Sacril.
Civilians both Greek and Roman, do extend the Attaindor of Sacrilege even to
them also that do but violate the Imperial Constitutions of the Prince.

-- Ubi nunc lex Julia dormis? Every Rebel then that dares lift up but a
Eccles. 10.20.
thought against God's Anointed, violates a Person sacred, and adds to his
Rebellion, Sacrilege, when either of these sins by it self is enough to damn a
Soul, for, when all Rebels and Traitors (with all their specious pretenses)
shall be dead and rotten, still for all their Machavellian distinctions, the
Thirteenth of the Verse 2.
Romans will be Scripture, Whosoever resists the Power, resists the
Ordinance of God, and they that resist shall RECEIVE TO THEMSELVES DAMNATION:
Acquirent sibi, as the Vulgar reads it, shall purchase to themselves, That will
prove the only purchase in the upshot of all their Projects: nay, (...), as
Bezae major. Not. in loc. renders it, not sibi ipsis damnationem acquirent, as
are the ordinary versions, but ipsi sibi damnationem acquirent.
Beza well observes it, they shall not only be damned simply so, in a passive
sense, but they shall damn themselves in the active signification, become
spiritual Felo's de se, in a spiritual sense, wilfully accessory to their own
Damnation: whether by their wilful perjury, express or implicit in the breach
of their Allegiance natural or positive, (the dismal Prologue of all
Rebellions) or whether by their wilful Impenitency, the fatal Epilogue or
Conclusion of all Rebels at their end, Rebellion of all other sins, being a sin
of 1 Samuel 15.23. This Text is absolutely the only best reason of the usual
Devilish obstinacy of Rebels: who are in this also Machiavel's true Disciples,
who bids him that has once presumed to draw out his Sword against his
Superior, fling away the Scabberd, and never think of putting up again.
Witchcraft, either way will serve one day to convince Rebels, that they, of
all others, would needs damn themselves, and therefore they, of all others,
must needs be damned, a sad Criticisme this, the ground whereof in God's own
heavy sentence, I pray God the Rebels may yet have the grace to lay to their
hearts, that they may escape so great a Damnation, the express Doom of this
second kind of Sacrilege against the sacred Person of the Prince.

5. Thirdly, every Priest in his degree, is by his Vocation a Person sacred
too, and therefore in some sense, inviolable by the Law of Nations, as well as
by the Law of God, or of Holy Church, whose ancient Canons were therefore so
strict to preserve the respect due to the Priest, that if a man did but in
disdain (...), (that is the word in one of them) look big or scornfully upon
the Priest, he was for the affront severely punishable, as an Offender
sacrilegious in this sense.

And for the same reason, because the Priest is a Person sacred; therefore on
the other side, as strict, and as great was the Primitive severity of the known
Ecclesiastical Canons to regulate, and to Quid prodest si Canonice eligantur,
and non Canonice vivant? Bern.
confine the Priest in his manner of Life and Conversation, as one that, all
over, ought to carry and deport himself more holily than other ordinary
Christians, for that which, in things sacred, is their use, in Persons sacred
is their Conversation.

'Twas figurative that under the Law, in the curious frame of God's Tabernacle;
The nearer things were unto God, in relation of service, the more precious they
were to be both for Exodus 26. and 28.
stuff and workmanship, Gold and imbroydered work: so much more under the
Gospel, ought those Persons that belong to God be precious, for holy life and
sacred conversation? Every Priest therefore that instead of teaching the People
knowledge, opens his lips wide to folly, or vanity, is lingua Sacrilegus,
pollutes his Priesthood, and if a Pair of holy Nugae in ore Sacerdotis sunt
Blasphemiae. Hieron. In aliis vitia, in Sacerdotibus sunt Sacrilegia. Chrysol.
de Ebrietate. Consecrasti os tuum Evangelio, nugis igitur aperire illicitum,
assuescere sacrilegium. Bern.
Fathers may be his Judges, is guilty both at once, of Blasphemy and
Sacrilege, a fearful sin this, more or less: (for you all know, what became of
the Sons of Eli, for their personal Sacrilege, in polluting their Priesthood)
since that Omne peccatum personae sacrae est Sacrilegium, materialiter at
least, according to the Determination of the Aquin. 22 ae. q. 99. 3. 3 m.
School: because the Person is sacred.

6. And as thus many ways Sacrilege may be committed against Persons sacred,
so against sacred Things, or Actions too, which are the Circumstances of God's
service, wherein to abuse or not devoutly to use Psalm. 119.8. old Translation.
God's Ceremonies, has by the Ancients been termed Sacrilege, whose full
Definition ^quin quo supra.
Aquinas extends to any Irreverence in Sacris: about which, under the Law, even
those that did sin through Ignorance in the holy things of the Lord, were yet
to Levit. 5.15.
offer for their Trespass; and under the Gospel, the Christian Church was no
less precise in all points of Reverence, witness their frequent (...), and
(...), so strictly enjoined, and reiterated in their sacred Chrysostom. Liturg.
etc.
Liturgies, full of those holy And all this too without Popish superstition,
for this was the Catholic practice long before the birth of Popery.
low Congies, devout Kisses, and religious Venerations, every time they did put
on, or off, (...), the holy Vestments, every time they did handle, or but
touch, (...), the holy Utensils, the holy Table, Vessels, Books, etc. The
Reading and observation of which primitive Devotions, I know not whether it
would more ravish the godly Reader's mind with admiration, or strike it with
astonishment, at the comparison of those good old devout Primitive Christians,
with our loose and profane Generation: Ah, holy Fathers, should you now come
down again, and be but once present with the most of our ordinary
Congregations, I doubt much, whether you would own us for your Successors, or
our people for Christians! I pray God this Item may in us all, Priest and
People, amend this kind of Sacrilege, and teach us all better manners in, and
about the Service of our God. For indeed by such a respective usage, and
sanctification of things Sacred, (still terminative, in a reflection to the
Owner) the Name of God himself, to whom they belong, is sanctified, it is the
thing we all daily pretend to in our Prayer, but seldom remember to make good
in our practice, which made me acquaint you with but thus much of the contrary
Example of Devout Antiquity, only in a glance.

There is also another kind of Sacrilege which may be committed about the
sacred Revenues of the Church, namely, If those be abused, or Dilapidated by
excess, luxury, Multi Canonici vivunt ut Domini, moriuntur ut servi. Baldus
apud Tympium in speculo magno: signo 18.
or a lavish vanity, under pretense of Hospitality; a Christian, yea, Episcopal
virtue indeed, if it be rightly applied, if wisely regulated after the Pattern
of Primitive Antiquity: not as though a Clergyman must give over his Studies,
and either become a common Host to all Comers, what ever they be, or else
forfeit the Reputation of Hospitality: But that Ecclesiastical Persons must
have a primary regard to the true poor; such as those are not, that wilfully
make themselves poor, by being Unthrifts, riotous Spenders, idle Strumpets,
vagabond Loiterers, Drolls, and Buffoons; for such, Correction and Labor is
the best Alms, Houses of Correction are fitter to entertain such Guests, than
Clergy-mens Houses: To Relieve such, remaining such, is so far from true
Charity, that it is rather a kind of Impiety, a sin of Participation, because
by a preposterous Relief, it incourageth such disorderly Persons in their lewd
or loose courses. But, on the contrary, it is high Charity to entertain, or
relieve such, as by the Law are termed Miserabiles personae, those that are
true poor indeed: whether See in Speed's Chronicle, at the Reign of K. Edw. 6,
about the end, a List of the Poor.
1. By Impotency, as the stranger, the fatherless, and the Widow, the poor
Clergy-men's Widows in special, desolate Creatures, where no public care is
taken for them: The Memory of Dr. Warner late Lord Bishop of Rochester, is
precious for his Piety, in settling by his last Will and Testament, for
perpetuity, 400 li. per annum, for the maintenance of 20 poor Minister's Widows
(if they be Widows indeed, of S. Paul's Character, 1 Timothy v. 5. Trusting in
God, and continuing in supplications and prayers) with an house for each of
them, and 50 li. per annum for a Chaplain.
the aged, the blind, the lame, and the diseased, especially the incurable. Or
2ly, By casualty, through the hand of God, as overcharged, or decayed
Householders, (whereof no small number now since the fatal Fire of the
Metropolis of London) Persons sick, or visited, Captives (in whose Redemption
the Clergy of this Land have not been wanting) poor Scholars especially, are a
very proper object of the Charity of Prelates and Churchmen. The Munificence
of that famous William Wickham Bishop of Winchester, in K. Edw. 3. time (who
both founded Winchester College for Grammar-Scholars, and also New College in
Oxford, for Students there) is fragrant to this day for his magnificent
Provision for no less then an hundred Scholars maintained by it, (now 300 years
after) to the eminent obligation of both Church and State, furnished still out
of these noble Nurseries: T. de Walsingham Hypodigm. Neustriae. Had Churchmen
been Stipendiaries, or the People's Beadsmen (as some would have them) could
they, out of their stinted Pittance, have raised such Monuments of Charity?
To Relieve any such is true Charity, to Entertain such (especially where no
public Provision is made for them) is right Christian Hospitality, so much
practiced of old by the Primitive Bishops, (who then out of their far larger
Revenues could far better do it, then the present Bishops) and even at this
day, in mine own experience, this Hospitality is practiced also by the Eastern
Bishops, according to their poor proportion, living for the most part under
Persecution.

And God be thanked, this kind of Hospitality to the poor, is not so neglected
by the godly Prelates of our Church, as to deserve the slander of some men in
our Generation, who being troubled with that foul disease, Matthew. 20.15.
called by our Lord (...), the evil eye, do odiously insinuate, that our
Prelates do spend their Estates in pompous worldly splendour; or treasure up
their Revenues in their own Purses, to enrich themselves, their Wives,
Children, Kindred, and Servants: etc. A Seasonable Vindication, etc. by William
Prynne, Esquire 1660. 1 Timothy 5.8.
As if contrary to the Apostle's Rule to Bishop Timothy, our Bishops must be
the only men (that must cast off all just care of providing honestly for their
own Households, and (at least so far) to Deny the faith, and become worse than
Infidels, unless they will incur the guilt of Real sacrilege: (a heavy
Censure, but the Charge is no less then so:) As though (bating Inheritance) the
Bishop's and Clergy-men's Estates were not by the Law of the Land, their
Freeholds, as much their own, as any Lay-Lords or Gentlemen; and consequently,
as if Clergymen in their Prudence and Piety, might not do with their own what
seems them good: But because they will not let their left hand know what
their right hand does: They desire not, as some, with a Noverint universi,
every time they do a good work, to blow a Trumpet to proclaim their works of
Piety and Charity to all the World: Therefore the World must needs believe
Clergymen have no Charity, Clergymen keep no Hospitality. And yet again on
the contrary, if Prelates and Churchmen do in imitation of their noble
Predecesors, the ancient Bishops of William Wickham Bishop of Winton, in Edw.
3d's time, was so famous for Episcopal Hospitality, that upon his Monument in
his Cathedral Church there, it is part of his Epitaph; Largus erat Dapifer,
Probat hoc cum divite Pauper.
England, keep decent Hospitality, as they are obliged according to their
Degree, to satisfy the Bounty of Princes, and the Magnificence of their
Donors, or the last Will and Testament of their godly Predecessors (many of S.
William, so called, was Nephew to Henry Bishop of Winchester, who was King
Stephen's Brother: Hugh Pudsey Bishop of Duresme, King Stephen's Nephew;
William Courtney (Son to Hugh Earl of Devonsh^re) Archbishop of Canterbury, and
many more such, Natalium splendore illustres, in Bishop Godwin's excellent
Book, de Praesulibus Angliae (which it would be an honor to the Church and
Nation to continue, since for above threescore years, he wants a worthy
Successor.)
them of Noble blood) the lawful It Is a vulgar Error confuted by History, That
every bit of the Clergy's Revenues, and every parcel of their Church Lands is
held in Frank-almoigne. (To say nothing now of Tithes, which the Clergy must
hold of God in Capite) had no Clergymen, trow we (many of them as appears
above, of so Noble, and some of them of Royal blood) ever any temporal Estate
of his own Patrimony, or Purchase? though much of it may be consumed aforehand
in their Education, and long Studies in the Schools, to make themselves able
and sufficient for that high and sacred Office: For instance, first, Walter
Gray Archbishop of York (in H. 3d's time) did purchase the Manor of
Bishopthorp near York, and gave the same to his Church, specie-tenus (for a
very good reason) but, re ipsa, to his Archiepiscopal See, (which to this day
injoys it successively, as the Archbishop's Mansion House.) See Bishop Godwin,
quo supra. 2ly, Lawrence Boothe Archbishop of York also (in Edw. 4th's time)
did purchase the Manor of Battersey near London, built the House there, and
gave it to his See. Ibid. 3ly, Hugh Pudsey who built the House and Church of
Darlington, and founded the Priory of Fenkelo near Durham. [And now I mention
Durham, I may not omit to commend to Posterity, the Magnificence of John Cousin,
the present Lord Bishop of that See (our venerable Dioecesan) who, since the
happy Restoration of the King and Prelates) has repaired, and notably adorned
the Episcopal Castles both of Duresme, and of Bishops-Aukland, where he has
erected a goodly Chapel, (Two other Chapels formerly belonging to that
Castle, being by the late Sacrilegious Rebellion, blown up and destroyed.) The
same Bishop has also founded two Hospitals, or Almshouses, one at Duresme,
and another at Auckland.]
Purchasers of some of the Lands, and Founders of the Houses of Bishops, Deans,
and Chapters: then straightway our Prelates must incur the Imputation of Riot,
and Excess, and be blasted with the Pride of pompous worldly splendour. Thus are
our Bishops traduced on both sides: An hard Dilemma! but easily dissolved, as
long as our Christian Bishops have a godly Care, in the sight of God, as to
satisfy their own Consciences, so to answer the Expectation of honest and
sober men; as long as their civil Hospitality to their good Neighbors (as the
Prelates are men, and great men) does not hinder, much less exclude their
Sacred Hospitality toward the Poor, to which also, and that chiefly, Bishops
are obliged, as by the Apostle's Rule (Tit. 1.8.) to be (...), that is, Lovers
of Hospitality in general; and, as the Original bears it, Lovers of strangers
in special: So by the Canons of the Church, and their solemn Vow at their
Consecration? according to which our Prelates and Churchmen doing their duty,
they need not much care for the talk of the Vulgus, or fear the pretended
charge of this kind of Real Sacrilege, namely, The abuse of the Revenues of
the Church.

7. One kind of Sacrilege more the holy Fathers have observed out unto us, too
too seasonable, nay necessary for you in these days to take notice of; it is
Sacrilege committed against this Sacred Book of God, to wit, when the holy
Senses, Words, and Phrases thereof, appropriated to the Expressions of Divine
and Sacred Mysteries, are abused either in a profane and scurrilous
application of them (the humor now a-la-mode with the Court, or Camp-Atheist,)
or in a sacrilegious Detortion of Holy Writ to the Patronage of Heresy, or
Schism, Rebellion, or Sedition, or Sacrilege, Errors in Life or Doctrine, or
both.

8. This kind of Scripture Sacrilege is as old as Adam's fall, and the Devils
own early Invention, or ever the word was written, he did snatch it (with
reverence be it spoken) out of God's own mouth, Genesis 3.1.
yea, has God said ye shall not eat of every tree of the Garden? etc. This was
his first Temptation, before he used a second, thereby to persuade the Woman
that either God never said so, or else that God never meant so: Thus the first
founder of all Sacrilege began berimes to tempt our first Parents, by a verbal
Sacrilege, to a real Sacrilege, (for the first sin of mankind, for the
particular species of the Fact, was Direct Sacrilege, in profaning and
usurping that which God had made holy:) This you may call Original Sacrilege,
as well as Original sin: The hereditary sin of Sacrilege we all smart for ever
since, from Generation to Generation. To this first grand Sacrilege, the Devil
did persuade Mankind by this other kind of Sacrilege, by stealing out the
Sacred Letter of God's Word, and abusing it against God's own sense, to his own
Devilish ends; therefore you may do well to take special notice of it, as of a
main cause of Apostasy in the end.

9. With the guilt of this kind of Sacrilege, were charged of old the
Heretics, termed therefore by the holy Fathers (...), as Cyril of Alexandria
terms them; or Literae Sacrilegi, as Arnobius translates them, Thieves of the
Sacred Letter, The very Patriarchs of our new Scripturists; that unstable and
unlearned too 2 Pet. 3.16.
as they are, yet to this day go on still treading in their Fathers black
steps, by wresting the holy Scriptures unto their own destruction. In this the
Devil's good Scholars, for you know the Devil Matthew. 4.
had his Scriptum est, even against the Son of God himself, and so have his
Disciples still their Scriptum est too, for Rebellion, Sacrilege, any thing:
stealing away the meaning of the Text, in a new way of Sacrilegious
Appropriation thereof to their own Errors: And this they do by quoting it
amiss, (which is worth your notice for a warning) one of these three by-ways:
1. Either foysting in their own false glosses, and blending these with God's
own true word, to the attraction of the undiscerning hearer. 2. Or else by a
plain omission of some of the most material words, which soon alter the true
sense. 3. Or lastly, By a cunning concealment of some such main circumstances
in the Context (which is Clavis Textus, the Key that opens the passage into a
Text;) which citcumstances well examined, would plainly contradict their Cause:
Always they do it by perverting the Scope (which is the Soul of the Text.)

10. I could abound with Instances in this kind both old and new, but that
there is nothing more obvious in the old Records of the Fathers and Councels,
and the late Pamphlets of our new Heretics and Schismatics, against all which
to forewarn you, once for all, now if ever, take this Apostolical counsel, John
4.1.
Beloved, believe not every spirit, nor every Scripture neither, If once in the
Devil's mouth, for thence it comes out with the Devil's breath, I mean, the
Devil's false sense, which to know from the true sense of God's word, you need
no more, but by way of Antidote, to remember to make good use of the three
premised good Cautions: 1. Ware their false glosses. 2. Turn over the Key, I
mean, the Coherence of the Text. 3. Mark the scope, the soul of the Text,
according to the Analogy of Faith, the Creed, or the Rule of a good life, the
Decalogue: The which, if you cannot well find out Judicio discretionis, of your
own selves, for that is all is allowed unto your lay-form, then for Judicium
directionis, take God's own Counsel, Go, and Hag. 2.11, 12.
ask the Priests concerning the Law, they can best tell what is holy, what is
unholy. Will you have God's promise and precept for it, implied both in one
Text? Malac. 2.7.
The Priests lips (if any) should keep knowledge, and the People should seek
the Law at his Mouth, for he is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts. However
this Rule may fail in this or that particular Priest, yet for the general, it
holds in the public Ordinance, animated by the public spirit of the Church:
especially if the doubt be about matters fundamental and necessary to
salvation, about which God will never suffer an honest, and humble Joh.
Parisiens.
mind, seeking for the truth it self, unto God by Prayer, unto God's Church by
obedience, to err finally: Enough to discover this dangerous delusion unto
you, and to free you from the Epidemical contagion in this kind of
Scripture-Sacriledge: The last head of this Monster, that concludes our
Distribution of the sin of Sacrilege, and our first main part of this
Indictment, containing matter of Declaration.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Parties against whom the Sin of Sacrilege is committed: and first of
the Priest as God's Usufructuary only.

FOllows now the second part in order, which contains Matter of Aggravation.

1. And it is deduced from the consideration of the Parties against whom the
offense of Sacrilege is committed, and those ordine Analytico, shall be first
the Clergy, (who is God's Vsufructuary) invested in God's Name, as an holy
Corporation, in such a Right: And therefore secondly, God Almighty himself (who
is the direct Proprietary of all holy Portions.)

2. First, as for the Clergy, properly God's Lexicon. Juridic. Calvin.
Ususfructus est jus alienis rebus utendi fruendi salvi rerum substantia, l. 1.
ff. de usufr. Hot. v. eodem Calv. ad vocem, proprietas.
Usufructuary and no more, to it belongs only the personal right, use, or
profits for life, no longer, the real right or property being wholly (as I may
say) resident in God the chief Lord, to whom they are dedicated, or due; so
that whatever Conclusions may be pretended to the contrary, from the several
examples of absolute Alienation public or private, through the iniquity of the
Times or Persons, are all of them (well examined) but so many mere
Inconsequences a facto ad Jus, concluding no more against God's usurped
Property, then for instance, so many examples of popular (and it may be for a
while, (as of late through God's permission, prosperous) Rebellion, can justly
prescribe for lawfulness of Title against oppressed Monarchy.

3. But yet, say the Clergy were indeed the very Proprietaries, so that the
wrong done by Sacrilege did reach no further then the Clergy it self, yet were
the offense heinous enough, seeing that of all other Estates of men the Persons
and Possessions too of the Priests have always been Privileged by all Nations,
by your own Nation especially, (till of late) witness (not to name particular
As the Charter of the Church of Carlisle, wherein King Henry the sixth, frees
all the Members of that Church from all Taxes, Subsidies, and Services in, and
toward the Wars against the Scots, their next Neighbors, though even then
ready upon the Borders, to Invade this Kingdom: and all this, that the Clergy
there might the better attend God's Service, and pray for the King, etc. Yet
the Laiety of those Times might easily have objected, That since the Church of
Carlisle enjoyed a considerable portion of the Lands, bordering upon the Enemy,
they ought to bear a full proportion of the Burdens with the Laity: But the
truth is, in those days your more godly Ancestors did put more trust, under
God, in the Prayers of the Church, than in the Purses of the Church, and they
prospered accordingly.
Charters) your own great Charter, Imprimis Concessimus Deo, and hac praesenti
Charta nostra confirmavimus pro nobis and haeredibus nostris in perpetuum, quod
Ecclesia Anglicana libera sit, and habeat omnia Jura sua Integra, and
libertates suas Illaesas, etc. These be the words of King Henry the third, Anno
9o. Chapter 1. grounded upon an ancient Law found Inter leges, seu Institutiones
Regis, H. 1. c. 1. whose Tenor is here inserted, and made a part of Magna
Charta, in these words, Sanctam Dei Imprimis Ecclesiam liberam facio, ita quod
nec vendam, nec ad firmam ponam, etc.
Magna Charta, a fundamental Law, and one of the main Bulwarks of all your
several Properties and Liberties, and for that Reason Confirmed no less then
Two and thirty times by your several Parliaments; and therefore beware, lest if
you go on still to Undermine this National Foundation, only to oppress one main
State of the Nation, the Clergy, you do not unawares, by such Sacrilegious
Precedents, open a Gap into your own temporal Estates, or Lay-Inheritances in
aftertimes, for God is just: Observe therefore how your Magna Charta begins,
with an Imprimis: A Grant unto God that the Church of England shall be free,
and have all its Rights entire, (words of largest extent) and all its Liberties
inviolable: By virtue of which general words, the Church has as good ground,
even in Law, to demand and to defend her Ecclesiastical Rights and Liberties,
as any of you for your Temporal Rights, or Intails whatsoever.

4. Sir Edward The second part of the Institutes, page 2.
Coke's gloss upon it is well worth the notice: [Concessimus Deo;] we have
granted to God: when any thing, (says he) is granted for God, it is deemed in
Law to be granted to God, and WHATSOEVER IS GRANTED TO HIS CHURCH FOR HIS
HONOR, AND THE MAINTENANCE OF HIS RELIGION AND SERVICE, IS GRANTED TO AND FOR
GOD: QUOD DATUM EST ECCLESIAE, DATUM EST DEO: Ergo, God himself is a Party in
the Grant, and the Proprietary: Here is God's Title in Law, your own Law for
it: except therefore men can produce the Counter-Title, that is, God's express
consent for Alienation, it cannot be in the power of any man, or men, Lay, or
Clergy, single or assembled, of no Civitas, or Societas, to take that from God,
which is once given to God.

5. This and the like were the Forms of ancient Acts and Grants, says your
Glossator, and those ancient Acts and Grants must be construed and taken as the
Law was holden at that time, when they were made; not as the Law may be now.
[Quod Ecclesia Anglicana libera sit:] That is, That all Ecclesiastical Persons
within the Realm, their Possessions and Goods shall be freed from all unjust
Exactions and Oppressions, etc. And purposely and materially the Charter says
Ecclesia, because Ecclesia non moritur, but moriuntur Ecclesiastici. [So that
this Law is not restrained to the Persons, or Possessions, of those Times only,
but that fundamental Disposition must extend to succeeding Ages, as long as
there remains an Ecclesia Anglicana, which (except our Sins, and Sacrilege by
name, Remove the Candlestick) we may still hope, Revel. 11.5.
and will pray shall still remain a Church unto the end of the World. That
eminent Lawyer goes on, Et habeat omnia sua Jura Integra:] That is, that all
Ecclesiastical Persons shall enjoy all their lawful Jurisdictions, and other
their Rights wholly, without any Diminution, or Subtraction whatsoever, and
great were their Rights, when they had the third part of the Possessions of the
Realm, as it is affirmed in a Parliament Roll (Rot. Parliam. 4. Rich. 2. Number.
13.) And true it is, says he, that Ecclesiastical Persons have more and
greater liberties than other of the Kings Subjects; all which to set down,
would take up a whole Volume of it self: He instances in some, as freedom from
sundry temporal Burdens, from personal Services in the War, from Distresses,
from sundry Writs, as from Levari facias, and from Capias, etc. from some
Appearances, etc. and expressly then from Pontagium, Pontagium: Pontage est un
Parol mention en diverse Statutes come en Westminster. 2. c. 25. 1 H. 8. c. 9. 39
Eliz. c. 24. and signify ascun foits le contribution collect pur le Reparation
dun pont, ascun foits le toll que est pay per Passengers a cea purpose, Terms
of Art, Pontagium,] Tributum quod exolvitur ob transitum Pontis, vel ob Pontium
restaurationem, Stat. West. cap. 26. Transmarinis Pontaticum dicitur: Indiculus
Regalis inter formul. vett. Bignon. 45. Gallis pontage: and sic in legibus
Penearnensium ut notat Bignon. H. Spelm. glossar.
or Bridge-money, as they now term it, Contribution for Reparation of Bridges:
(a majori, from those other Servile-Taxes, such as Rogue-mony, and the like,
now pressed upon some of the oppressed Clergy:) Thus that great Lawyer, who was
otherwise no great friend to the Church.

5. To say that those were times of Blindness and Popery, and that therefore
whatever your Ancestors did, could be no better than Popish all over, has as
little of true Logic, as of Religion to God, or Charity to man, yea, to all
Christendom besides, yea, to all Mankind, that by the Common Instinct of
Nature, did ever Honor and Reverence, and Privilege their Priests: By the
same Argument we shall forfeit our Creed, nay, our whole Religion: Nay, by the
same Argument, the Opposers must forfeit the Law too, which to some men in our
Generation is of more value than the Gospel, that either Creed or Religion; I
mean, so much of their temporal Privileges and Liberties, as was visibly
extorted by mere force in times of Licentiousness and Rebellion, the far
greater Popery of the two: (yet they can take advantage of such times, as bad
as they may be, they never examine nor dispute the times, in such a case.)

6. It may be it was in imitation of that your ancient Charter, that just so
many honest As the Parliament held 3. of H. 5. c. 1.
Parliaments since (as it were, for an Omen of good speed in the rest of their
proceedings toward the preservation of their own temporal Liberties) usually
begin them still with the Confirmation of the Rights and Liberties of the
Church first of all.

7. This tender Respect of the People toward the Clergy, was not confined
within this Island, or Christendom either, but was (as it were by the Law of
Nations) observed all the World over, even amongst the worst men, Heathen men,
(a Turk even at this day shows respect to a Christian I know this by
Experience, having lived three years of my voluntary Banishment amongst the
(...): as at Aelepo in Syria, and in Mesopotamia, and at Constantinople, etc.
And (that I may not seem to arrogate this thing to my self) This Respect of the
Turks toward me, was not personal, but general to any Christian Priest; for
when in the year 1652. I was at Jerusalem, and (without Superstition) had an
honest desire to enter into the Temple of Christ's Sepulcher; whereas the Turks
(who receive the Tribute for that liberty) take from every Layman 24 Dollers,
or Pieces of Eight, (about six pounds English) They did demand from me but 12
Dollers, (the one half only) because they understood that I was a Christian
Priest: neither did the Pope's Vicar there (to whom I had ingenuously declared
my Communion with the Church of England) oppose that Privilege, or interpose
himself to hinder it.
Priest:) even in the worst times of Famine and War, very Egyptians in time of
Famine, did exempt their Genesis 47.22.26.
Priests Lands from Sale, or so much as a Morgage, when they would not spare
their own Lands: and very 1 Samuel 10.5.10. Cretenses, narrat. Plutarchus quaest.
gr. cum bellis intestinis colliderentur, omnem noxam abstinuisse a
Sacerdotibus. Grot. de Jure belli.
Philistines in time of War, even where they kept an hostile Garrison, would
allow the Enemie's Prophets free pass and repass, without molestation: of which
their Civility therefore the Holy Ghost is pleased to take express notice upon
Record, and I wish our uncivil Generation may do so too, lest civil Paynims
rise up in judgment against barbarous Christians, and condemn them for their
misusage of their own Clergy, though the Party, of all the three Estates, so
strongly fenced about by the double Hedge of the Law of God and Man: of the Law
of Nature, of Nations, of the old Laws, If any man shall offer any injury to a
Priest, let all take it as an injury done unto all, and help him to redress,
etc. Canone 5o. Sub Edgaro Rege in (...), etc. v. Capitulare Caroli Magni lib.
6 cap. 285. w^ere the People do in their Petition to the Prince for the Clergy,
express a most tender affection toward their Priests in times of War, or
public dangers, etc.
Roman, Saxon, English, Gallican, all jointly supporting the Clergy with all
mannnr of favorable Exemptions, honorable Privileges, ample Possessions of
all kinds, predial as well as personal; far beyond the necessity of a Modern
Pension, (the gallant Plot, in the end, of our new Founders) for they had
Estates even ad Pompam Ministerii, as the ancient Title of the old Church bears
it; even to an honorable Magnificency, or as De honoribus Sacerdotii, circa
fin.
Philo terms it expressly, even to a Royal Exchequer.

8. This truth of Fact is so clear in the Primitive Volumes of Church and
State, the old Councels and Records, that it seems as it were (to Phrase it
with Lactantius) written with Sun beams upon a Wall of Cristal. So that it were
needless to prove it, but for the gross Ignorance, or wilful Impudence of some,
who to make way for their Sacrilege; do wrest, and urge the Examples of the
Acts 20.34. 1 Cor. 4.12.
Apostolical, Temporary, Occasional, and sometimes Arbitrary Poverty, to
enforce a beggarly, or at the most a stipendiary Ministry, against all sense,
or reason, as well as Religion, and point blank to the Context: Acts 4.22.
would these Apostolical men be content to sell their Lands, and freely to lay
down the prices of them at the Apostle's Feet? (for that story concerns the
Laity to follow, more than the Clergy:) If they say the Church was then
unsettled, and Ambulatory, and so could not, during Persecution, carry their
Lands up and down with them, but now in a settled Church and State the case is
altered: In so saying they plead for us, and answer themselves.

9. For indeed this is an universal truth beyond all contradiction; That since
the beginning of the World, God never had a settled Church upon Earth, but
therein more or less, proportionably to the Opulency of the Temporal State
thereof, he would always have his Service and Servants honorably maintained.

10. Let no prejudicate person therefore think the Analogy of the Levitical
Priesthood utterly Impertinent to the Evangelical Ministry; for Scripture, the
holy Fathers, Natural Equity it self would prove the contrary. Since Ubi par
Ratio, par Lex, and we may not imagine our good God worse, or more niggardly to
his Servants now under the Gospel, than under the Law, or more bountiful to the
Ministry of the Letter (in comparison) than to the Ministry of the Spirit. 11
Cor. 3.6.


11. One plain Text for all, 1 Cor. 9.13, 14.
may serve to convince any Impartial Spirit, Do ye not know (says St. Paul)
that they which Minister about holy things, Live of the things of the Temple?
And they which wait at the Altar, are partakers with the Altar. EVEN SO has
the Lord ordained, that they which Preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel.
EVEN SO, infers more than a bare comparison, Even a good consequence of the
Equity, (says Calvin on the place) and that a majori says Bucer on Bucer, on
Gal. 6.6. In veteri Testamento alebantur Ministri verbi ex Docimis and
sacrificiis, and sic ex optimis bonis, QUANTO MAGIS Ministri Evangelii ex
optimis aleudi sunt?
another place. Now the nature of Equity requires, ut aequalia aequalibus,
Inaequalia inaequalibus reddantur: To give less to those that deserve more,
were far from Equity, but that the Ministry under the Gospel, in sundry
respects, is both far more painful, and also far more excellent than the
Levitical Priesthood, is clear from 2 Timothy 4.2. 2 Cor. 3.6. to 12.
Scripture, Reason, and Experience; and therefore must needs deserve a
Maintenance every way as ample, and as honorable at least, as the Legal
Priesthood, which yet as may appear by God's own Book of Rates, was exceeding
Opulent, yea, Magnificent both for the Maintenance and the Conveyance of it.

12. As for the Maintenance, besides the Natural standing Portion of Tithes of
all, with how large an Addition does God enrich the Priesthood? Indowing it
with all the firstborn of all Cattle, the firstborn of Men, after the Rate of
five Sheckles (that is five Half-Crowns) a piece which may amount to much in
that numerous Nation; 11 Sam. 24.9.
That could at one Muster, reckon up thirteen hundred thousand Men at Arms. 3.
The First Fruits of all. 4. Add to all this, their share in the Meat Offerings,
Sin Offerings, Wave-Offerings, Thank-Offerings, besides their Vows or
Free Will Offerings. 5. Their Shewbread. 6. Their three terms of solemn
Appearance, for all the Males, with a strict charge that none do appear
Empty-handed. 7. They had, over and above all this, a large Glebe, consisting
of Eight and forty whole Cities, with large Suburbs of two thousand Cubits in
measure every way round about, (and each Cubit was a full Yard) a great
proportion of Land, for little Jury to afford unto one single Tribe, especially
if we consider, (for this also is very observable) that the Tribe of Levi,
though the thirteenth Tribe, yet was, for number of persons, in God's own
Muster-Roll far from being the Number. 1.46. All the Males of the twelve Tribes
were six hundred thousand, three thousand five hundred and fifty: All the Males
of the Tribe of Levi, were but two and twenty thousand, Number. 3.39. Yet in the
numbering of the twelve Tribes, the little Ones are not reckoned, but only the
Males from twenty years old and upward: whereas in the Muster of Levi, the
little Ones are reckoned from a Month old and upward, which makes the odds
still greater and greater.
thirteenth part, (as some Ignorant that we say not, Impudent, Arithmeticians,
do grossly mistake it) scarce the sixtieth part.

13. And if survey were taken of the Clergy in the Church of England, and of
their Families, I suppose, it would not come much short of that proportion of
Persons, albeit much shorter in the proportion of Revenues, and yet the
Levitical Priesthood was hereditary also, not so the Evangelical, which must
still increase the odds very much: our Children and Widows find it so, too too
often, by sad experience.

14. Now it is plain, by Joshuah's Joshuah 16, and 17.21. Judah was seventy six
thousand and five hundred in number, thrice as many as Levi; except this Tribe,
for any thing we read, Levi had half in half more than any Tribe else, and four
times as much as some Tribes, and that by God's own wise appointment: [and
surely the Sages of our Generation (that not only think, but cry cut still, the
Clergy has too much) dare not presume themselves wiser than God himself.] As
for example, Number. 1.31. Zebulun was seven and fifty thousand and four hundred
(almost thrice as many in number as Levi) and yet had but twelve Cities, when
Levi had eight and forty, four times as much, and, for ought we know, as good
as theirs.
Terrier, that all the several Tribes, but Judah, the Royal Tribe, were in
proportion of Lands far inferior to the Tribe of Levi: Thus in the Jewish
Church, by God's own appointment the Priests Portion, was in respect of the
Quantity, very liberal.

15. And in this, as in all other good Evidences of true Devotion, the
Christian Church was nothing behind the Jewish Synagogue. The Apostolical
Charter, for the maintenance of the Evangelical Ministry, is very large, Gal.
6.6.
Let him that is taught in the word communicate unto him that teaches in all
good things: This is a very general term, it may include Unmoveables, as well
as Movables, above, or under ground, Mines as well as Manors: It may extend
to Houses, Lands, any good thing; for I hope, those that are so greedy of the
Church Lands, will not exclude them from the Number of good things: and here is
as good as a Command about it, in the Ministers behalf.

16. In this sense the Primitive Church took it, as soon as it was settled;
witness, all Christendom over, the multiplied Canons and Laws, for the early
and ample Dotations of Churches at their very first Dedication, honored by
Constantine, and his fellow Emperors, with large Bounties; that I say nothing
of those so many Magnificent Monuments of that old (but now superannated)
Christian Devotion, allowing their Bishops those Rich Cathedratica,
Cathedraticum est Tributum, quod Episcopus per Dioecesim ambulans, in honorem
Ecclesiae suae, ab ecelesiis colligebat. Concilio autem, Bracarensi 2. circiter
Annum Dom. 672. ( vel ut alii perhibent 610.) Ca. 2. and Council. Toletano 7.
Ca. 4. circa An. 684. Statutum est ut 2. Solid, non excederet. (A considerable
Revenue in those old days.) Hispanis hodie EL Cathedratico nuncupatur. H.
spelm. glossar.

This Cathedraticum was paid to the Bishop by the Inferior Clergy, in
argumentum subjectionis and ob honorem Cathedrae: Hostiens. ^n Sum. de
Censibus, Sect. ex quibus, ver. Ca^hedraticum autem. Item Duaren. de Sacris
Ecclesiae Ministeriis, and Beneficiis l. 7. c. 5.

See much more of this Cathedraticum in a learned Treatise, Entitled, An
Historical Discourse of Procurations, etc. by J.S. An. 1661. ( P. 78. and seq.)
These Cathedratica so often mentioned in the old Councels were to support the
Episcopal State; some of their more eminent Sees, as that of Toledo in Spain,
Aldenburgh in Sclavonia, Hemoldus Chronic. Sclavor.
without reproach or envy, surpassing in Sacred Revenues the Exchequer of some
Kingdoms. The old Christians, by these Donations, testifying to all the World,
the high esteem they had of their God, and of his Service, and of his Servants,
and of their own Souls, all which are involved in the contempt of the Priest.

17. By this discourse it is plain enough that the Priests Portion was for the
Matter very abundant. As for the Manner of conveyance it was Noble, not at all
Stipendiary, temporary, or dependent: (we all know by too sad experience, what
some of that New kind of Clergy, as King James has Surnamed them, King James's
Instruct. to Preachers.
that New Body severed from the Ancient Clergy of England, as being neither
Parson, Vicar, nor Curate, has through popular supparasitation occasioned in
this Church and State:) But the old way of Church-Maintenance was never so, but
every way Honorary, as for Magnificence, so for continuance too: It was for
Perpetuity, with Independency from the People, issuing into the Priest's hands
immediately from Gods hands to whom, as Philo excellently well observe it, The
People directly brought all their Dues, (the Priest needed not interrupt his
sacred Office, to seek, or fetch them, much less to sue for them:) They were to
his hand solemnly brought to the Temple, as being God's own first, and from
thence did the Priest as solemnly receive them (such Ceremonies sometimes
become Substances;) as it were from the Invisible hands of God himself
immediately: for whom they hold, in chief, as their Ministers, so their
Maintenance.

18. The excellent reason of this Honorable Ceremony, Philo renders to be
this, (...) etc.
That none of the people might have the least pretense to upbraid the Priest,
as if he were any way beholding unto the People for his subsistence, Ex
Charitate, no, sed ex Justitia (as the School speaks) nay, ex Religione, not
out of Courtesy, but Conscience, toward God: which makes the Alienation, or
but Detention of those Sacred Tributes, to reach at God himself terminative,
because (and that is a singular truth worth the proving, and the marking too,
in the defense of this Cause) The Clergy, to speak properly, is indeed but the
Vsufructuary of all it injoyes, God, and none but God, is really the
Proprietary, which is now our second Consideration that mainly aggravates the
sin of Sacrilege, The Offense is immediately against God himself, Sacrilegium
est quod proprie in Deum committitur. Hieron. in Text. Romans 2.22.
as will plainly appear, first, by the Light of Nature: secondly, by the Light
of Scripture; these two ways of Revelation being sufficient Mediums to assure
us both of God's Acceptance for our encouragement in the Case of Vows, and of
God's Vengeance too, for our warning, in case of Violations.

CHAP. V.
That the Sin of Sacrilege is an Offense against God himself, who is the Great
Proprietary of the Revenues of the Clergy.

Sect. 1. TO begin with the first, the Light of Nature: those Jura nata, as the
Heathen Jurae negans sibi nata, Horat.
term them, those Natural Rights, or (...), inbred Principles: The Natural
Dictates of right Reason suggest unto all Mankind; 1. That there is a God. 2.
That to this God is due all Sovereign honor and service, in thought, word,
and deed. 3. That therefore he cannot but be well pleased with our purpose and
real intention thus to honor him, much more with our serious promise, or vow
so to do, most of all with our faithful and effectual performance in so doing:
All this is not Scripta, but nata Lex; The sum whereof is, That God must be
served in chief: For which Maxim of Nature, there is all the Reason in the
World, for God is the Sovereign Being in himself, and the Fountain of all
Being to others.

2. Now this Service must be both personal, with the Powers and Faculties of
our Souls, and the Members of our Bodies; and real too, with our Goods, or
Substance: Honor the Lord with thy substance, Prove. 3.9.
Religion to be complete, requires the Contribution of all these. As for the
latter of these especially, though we might in reason, take that for granted,
which the Practice of the Church of God in all Ages, yea, the general Consent
of all Mankind from the beginning of the World, bears witness unto, to wit,
that God Almighty ever has had such a special Homage, and such proper Sacred
Tributes duly paid him, and that Lirin.
Vbique, and that semper, and that ab omnibus; (The genuine Marks of what is
truly Catholic) yet since it is our hard hap to live in an Age that puts us to
the Necessity of proving Principles: we will be at the cost to prove all, God
willing. 1. That to our Substance, God himself is Entitled two manner of ways,
not only by his General Title of Creation, as he is Lord Paramount of the
whole World, but by a more peculiar Title, and proper Right to some Parcels of
the whole, and for the whole.

3. These two Titles, as they are distinct, (for the first universal Right is
in and from God himself. The second particular Right is our own Act of
Donation, in acknowledgment of God's universal Right:) So may these two Titles
very well stand together, so far are they, as some cavil about it, from being
incompatible, or excluding one the other, that the one is naturally founded
upon the other, to wit, the special Title upon the universal; for, because,
Jure Creationis, God is Lord of all, therefore very fit it is, (since that
Title is perpetual under the Gospel, as well as before, and under the Law)
that, Jure Religionis too, we and all Mankind, should still acknowledge him to
be such, and testify this our acknowledgment, by a thankful Return of some
part for the whole, as it were our Pepper-corn-Rent, In signum universalis
Dominii (as the Schools phrase it) in token of our Homage to the great
Landlord of Heaven and Earth, and for the support, with Honor and Credit, of
his own public Service.

4. And that Retribution God expects at our hands still proportionable to his
bounty, and our ability; be it more, be it less, in Movables or Vnmoveables,
in Rents or In some parts of Europe the Priest's Maintenance lies wholly in
Lands. Seldom.
in Lands: For instance, when God allowed his People but Tents for themselves,
himself also was content to dwell in a Tent or a Tabernacle, but when he was
pleased to allow them Houses of Cedars, then common sense made up the Argument
1 Chronicles. 17.1.
in David's Heart, and Mouth, and Hand, and all: It was no longer fit the Ark
of the Lord should remain under Curtains: and thereupon (unbidden) devout David
1 Chronicles. 29.11. O Lord, all that is in the Heaven and in the Earth is thine.
(14.) All things come of thee, and of thine own have we given thee: (16.) O
Lord our God, all this store that we have prepared to build thee an House for
thy holy Name, comes of thine hands, and is all thine own: (17.) I know also
my God, that thou triest the Heart, and have pleasure in uprightness (
Uprightness is assurance enough of God's Acceptance:) In the Uprightness of my
Heart, I have willingly offered all these things, and now have I seen with Joy,
thy People which are present here, to offer willingly unto thee.
expressly upon the premised grounds of, 1. Homage. 2. In thankefulness. 3. For
the service of his Maker, prepares that solemn Royal-Offering recorded in the
Chronicles for our Imitation; (for David's fact in this particular, was no part
of the Levitical Service:) And so far was God from rejecting David's Offering,
as a piece of Will Worship, because not expressly commanded, that contrariwise
(for our encouragement) God directly commends Go and tell David my servant,
thus says the Lord, Thou shall not build me an house, 1 Chronicles. 17.4.
Nevertheless whereas it was in thine heart, to build an house unto my Name,
THOU DID WELL THAT IT WAS IN THINE HEART: 1 Kings 8.18. And therefore I
will build thee an house, 1 Chronicles. 17.10. The purpose could not be unlawful so
long as it was not expressly forbidden, for where no Law is there is no
Transgression, Romans 4.15. As there was no command for it, so there was no
command against it, and that is enough to clear the Offerer from Will Worship.
David's devout purpose, even then, when, for some personal causes, he forbids
the performance.

5. And except they will say, that we under the Gospel are less obliged to God
than they were under the Law, then sure this example, as far as it is Moral,
and not Typical, concerns us as much, nay more than it did them, or any, the
Privileges of our Christendom, as far surpassing the bare natural, or legal
Advantages, as our Redemption excels our Creation.

6. Behold in the Root of this discourse, the very first Original of Tithes and
Offerings, the two main branches to which the whole Portion of Religion, God's
special Demesnes, and man's Devotions in this kind are reducible.

7. By the first of these, Tithes, God Almighty himself seems to have pointed
out unto us, and to all Mankind, that for the general, he well approves of, and
accepts too this very way of divine Homage, or Appropriation: witness, 1. His
own Original Reservation of a Part, and for the Quota it self, of a tenth part,
accordingly paid unto God in his Priest Melchizedech under the Law of Nature,
(an example if Typical, yet all over full of reference to the State under the
Gospel, as some Heb. 7. See Sacrilege sacredly handled by Sir James Sempill.
have at large made it good:) for this was long before the Levitical Law, by
above Genesis 14. Abraham paid Tithes to Melchizedeck, An. M. 2030. and the Law
positive about Tithes and Offerings, ( Number. 18.) was not enacted till the year
2454.
400 years: and about 150 years after Jacob, Genesis 28.22.
in his Vow pitcheth again upon the very same Quota, no doubt induced by the
same Precedent, and upon the same grounds: which (and it is very strange, unless
it were founded upon something more universal, yea, and perpetual too than the
Jew's Ceremonial Law) was the Practice not only then of an Abraham, or a Jacob
men within the Pale of the Church, but long after this above 1300 years after,
of a Roman Plutarchus in Camillo: Tuo ductu, Pythice Apollo, pergo ad delendam
Urbem Veios tibique hinc Decimam partem praedae voveo: B. Brissonius, de
formulis l. 1. p. 95. 96.
Camillus, etc. mere Heathen themselves happen upon the self same Quota,
witness those old Inscriptions in Brissonius, where just as Abraham to
Melchizedeck, so the Pagan Votary devotes the Tenth of his spoils of the
Hetrurian City, unto his Apollo: just as the Israelite, so the Heathen agrees
upon the matter of the Vow; as well as upon the form to do it thus voluntarily,
by way of Vow: which supervenient Tie, is so far from being superfluous, that
it rather adds very much to our natural obligation, we being naturally so dull
and backward to perform what the Law requires, and so fickle too, and frail to
persevere in our duty: we had need of all these Moral bonds, to deter us from
the violation, and to Duplex vinculum fortius ligat.
strengthen, and to stir us up unto Devotion.

8. Such holy Vows, Promises, or Pacts, are as the addition of a Seal to the
hand in a Bond, and in practice usual with the Saints, who, (to say nothing of
the Christian's Vow in Baptism) are therefore, for our example, recorded to
have, ex abundanti, bound themselves with Vows and Oaths Genesis 28.20. Job 31.1.
Psalm. 119.106.
to the observance of that which otherwise they were morally obliged unto
before their Vow by the Law of Nature, and by the express Law of God: Besides
by the Law of Nature we are bound only to maintain God's service in genere, but
by Vow we may bind our selves to it in specie, namely to maintain it in this,
or that particular way.

Thus (for the general part of it) you see how God himself is entitled to our
substance by the light of Nature, which of it self is Romans 1.19, 20, 21.28.
enough without any further Revelation, to discover many things, and this truth
amongst the rest.

9. As for the Divine light, the light of Revelation, the light of Scripture.
No sooner do you read of a positive Law of God, but behold God's express
Resumption of his own Right, both for the Number. 18.21.
Quota of Tithes, as also for those ample additions of Offerings Inventaried
See above page 29.
above, calling them all expressly Deuteronomy. 18.1. Dei possessio, Seldom ad Eadmer.
p. 155.
the Lord's Inheritance, and himself the Proprietary, yet sure God Almighty was
then as much Lord of the whole World, as now, and no less now, then he was then.

How far in point of Analogy, and natural Equity this Title does concern the
Ministers under the Gospel, you have heard before, See above p. 28. 29.
out of St. Paul's own mouth.

10. This second sort of Devotions, Offerings, I mean, become God's due (under
the Gospel, as well as under the Law, by a twofold Act: 1. By a voluntary
Dedication on the Offerers part, by whom as they are separated from all
profane and common use, so are they appropriated to a Divine and Sacred use,
which act, ipso facto, alters the Property, and actually transfers the full
Right from the Owner, the Donor, unto God the Creator, that daigns to become
the Donee, or Receiver from his Creature, and this Divine Condescension (...).
Nazian. (...). Hierocl. in carm. Pythag.
holy men, yea, very Heathen have accounted no small favor, in that it renders
us, in a manner, worthy to receive from him again. As for the Acceptance of all
this, (of which more hereafter) it is testified by a second Act on the Officer's
part, the Priest, I mean, who by an Invocative sanctification or Benediction,
usually called Consecration, as God's Vicegerent, allows of the Oblations, and
receives them in God's Name and stead, for God's use and service.

This latter Act of Consecration, though it may seem but an Ecclesiastical
Ceremony, yet is it as the public Solemnity of Marriage, de been esse, to
legitimate the substance.

11. And thus, Times, Places, Persons, and Things of common become holy,
relatively; and so proper unto God that ever after God expressly calls all such
holy things his, and by his Name, in the perpetual language of the Exodus 13. 1
King. 8.43. Jerem. 7.10. Matthew. 21.13.
Scripture, to intimate that he claims as full, and as real a Propriety in
those things, as he does in Die Dominica, the Rev. 1.10. On which day therefore
Theodoric in his Edict make it Sacrilege to sue or convent a man before a
Judge.
Lord's Day, or in Domo Dominica, the Lord's House: for so of old in the
Primitive Records of Christian Councils, were all sacred things termed (...),
no less, the Lord's things: Nay, so your own Law, and H. de Bract. de legibus
and consuetudin. Angliae. Sir Edw. Coke above p. 46.
Lawyers too, call them, Divinum Tenementum, God's own Tenure, (and they say,
your Law keeps as precisely close to the Letter as any.) Till therefore it be
proved either that they were things so relinquished, as none owned them before,
or had never been in any one's rightful possession, and so fell to those who
first could seize on them, by the Rule, Quae nullius sunt, fiunt occupantis: or
that God himself, the Proprietary, has derelinquish'd his own Right, or
demised it to another, it can neither revert to the Donor, nor be converted to
any other profane or common use, without high Sacrilege. Excellently well to
our purpose does Ecclesiae Anglicanae Suspiria, B. 4. chapter 26.
Dr. Gauden, late Lord bishop of Worcester, Reason this Case thus; God's mind
must be known, that he is willing to be deprived either of that Service and
Honor, he and his Son Jesus Christ had, or of those means for the Maintenance
of it, which were Devoted to him: Nor can any Power (that I know) but only
God's Omnipotence, absolve the living, and Survivors from that Right which the
Donors had, when yet living, and that Bond which from them, though dead, yet
still lies on the Consciences of those Survivors, who for ever stand bound to
discharge their trust, by observing, as sacred, the Will of the Dead, which, if
once lawful, is not to be made void wilfully and presumptuously. If at any
time, public Necessities do drive men to some temporary dispensations and
seisures, yet these must be so recompensed afterward in quiet times, as may
keep them from being made, beyond inconveniences, intentional and eternal
Injuries to God, and his Church, that it may be but a Borrowing, and not a
Robbing of God and his Church, but must remain for ever the Lord's proper
Demesne, and as I may say, his Sacred Enclosure, fenced about therefore with
the double Hedge of a solemn Consecration, and of a severe Commination too.

12. Both which are the Offsprings of one and the same original Mr. Mede's
Diatrib. on Matthew. 6.9.
Root, to wit, INCOMMUNICABLENESS, which derives a Shadow and Resemblance upon
all those Things, Places, Times Persons, or Actions, which have God's Name
stamped upon them, and renders them Incommunicable, exalting them into a State
of Appropriateness and singularity, because Divine: so that still all this
Respect and Reverence exhibited to all sacred things, terminates finally in God
himself; so far is outward Devotion (if rightly pitched for the Object) from
becoming a Bridge unto Idolatry or Superstition, that to a Considerative Soul,
it rather prompts the clean contrary, if we would but take the pains to
understand, or to heed the right Reason of our Reverence toward sacred things,
namely, their Relation unto God, which Derives unto all such, whether persons
or things, though not an inherent, yet a relative Holiness.

CHAP. VI.
Of God's Heavy Curses against Sacrilegious, both Persons, and Nations.

Divine respect is the more observable, because it is the fandamental ground of
all those heavy Curses temporal and Eternal, (without Repentance, unavoidable)
usually annexed, all the Christian World over, as a deadly Seal unto all
Religious Donations: The black forms whereof you have yet extant in your own
See above, page 23. See the form of those Imprecations set down in a
Manuscript, compiled by the command of the great King Edgar, apud Joh. Seldom.
in Not. ad Eadmerum, p. 155, 156. Where they are doomed to the same damned end
with the lapsed Angels, or Devils, with Cain, with Judas, etc. I once saw in
the hands of a most Reverend Prelate, an old Manuscript of Alcuinus (Tutor to
Charles the Great) containing an Extract of all the most rigorous Curses
scattered all over the Imprecatory Psalms, (such as the 69. 83. 139. etc.) and
other direful Passages in holy Scripture, (as Levit. 26. Deuteron. 28 etc.) and
all, as I may say, compounded into one terrible Clap of Thunder, darted out
against this very sin of Sacrilege, the Report whereof would make the hardest
Ear to Tingle, (Read but seriously so much as we have quoted of it:) The Sum
of them all was, A sad Denun^iation of an U^ter, Total, Final, Eternal
Separation from God, and his Blessing, Body, Soul, and Estate, Posterity and
all.
Saxon Records, of your old Kings, Ina, and Edgar, etc,

2. These Curses though uttered by particular men, (who yet if Parents or
Superiors have a power from, and under God, to See a learned Tract of this in
Ludovici Cappelli Spicilegio, Diatrib. de voto Jepthae.
Curse as well as to Bless) yet were they ratified by the whole Church, as well
as by this whole Nation, and therefore every way lawful, as well as powerful.

3. For although it might be once in the power of the King and Parliament, or
Nation, by the Law of the Land, to disallow of those Curses, or of the
Donations themselves, before they were uttered and confirmed; as, by the Law of
God, it was in the power of the Superior, Father or Husband, to disallow the
Vow of the Daughter or Wife, Numb. 30.
antecedenter, before his Assent, yet, consequenter, (as anon more at large,
yet after they have once given way to them, or allowed of them, See in the Book
of Statutes the Sentence of Curse, An. 51. Hen. tertii.
then de Jure, and that by the express Law of God too, as well as by their own
Act, it is past their Power, or the Power of their Successors after them, to
reverse or to repeal either the Curses, or the Donations, because God himself
is then become a Party in the case, and his holy Name engaged and interessed in
both, which Specialty gives the Clergie's spiritual Estates one ground of
Privilege in Law, beyond and above all other Lay-fees, and affords the Reason
why Church Lands may not be equally disposeable, or alienable as by the Law of
the Land other temporal Estates may be.

4. This is a Ruled Case in God's Court of Justice: One memorable Instance for
all you have Recorded in the Ninth Chapter of the Book of Joshuah, and this it
was, The Deuter. 7.1. Joshua 9.3.
Gibeonites (a part of the seven Devoted Pagan Nations) by fraud obtain the
Privilege of Exemption, confirmed by a rash Oath of the Princes of the
Congregation. About four hundred years after, King 1 Samuel 21.
Saul, in his zeal too, (says the Text) to please the humor of the People,
sought to slay the Gibeonites: Hereupon God Almighty sends three whole years
Famine, and God expressly renders the cause to be a breach of the Promise made
unto the Gibeonites so many years before, and no way of Expiation, but by
hanging up unto the Lord in Gibeah of Saul, seven of Readiness Sons, to satisfy
for their Fathers violation. In this History, besides the remarkable
Circumstanstances of the Divine Talio, both in the Place and Persons, and the
hereditariness of the Curse: It Is worth the observing, the several differences
betwixt that Case and ours, as so many degrees of advantage in our behalf: As
that, 1. Before the Oath, and but for the Oath, God's express Deuteronomy. 7.1.2. Ob
spreta septem Praecepta Noachi. Petr. Cunaeus de Repub. Hebr. lib. 2. c. 19.
Command was to destroy these Gibeonites, as being within the compass of God's
Interdictum. 2ly, The Oath was rash, for ( v. 14.) the Princes would not so
much as stay to ask counsel of the Lord. 3ly, It was extorted by fraud, and
that upon a false ground too, that they came from a very far Country, whereas
they dwelt hard by. 4ly, There seemed a kind of public necessity to repeal
such a rash Oath, for ( v. 19.) because of it all the Congregation murmured
against the Princes: yet for all that, the Princes dare not, to please, or
appease the People, venture to displease God: But ( v. 19.) All the Princes
said unto all the Congregation, we have sworn unto them by the Lord God of
Israel, now therefore we may not touch them. Sure they will not say, that this
example also is but Levitical, or Oaths but Ceremonial, (unless they will shake
hands with the Anabaptists, and other Fanatics.)

5. It needs no further Application, for if in the case of a Promise made to
mere Heathen, to cursed Heathen, God was so strict a Revenger of the Violation,
then a majori, betwixt Christian and Christian, yea, between God and Man,
(venture who dare:) Eurip.
(...), though man cannot, God can, Lev. 25.21.
Command as the Blessing, so the Curse to take effect: for it will appear soon
or late that it was God's own Curse, and therefore impossible it should be
either causeless, or powerless.

6. Causeless it is not, but most just in the Nature, in the Motives, in the
end thereof.

First, in the Nature of it, for what can be more just, then to separate those
Persons from God, (the nature of the Curse) who made no Conscience of
separating those holy things from God, which belong unto God by the Donor's
godly will?

Secondly, in the Ends and Motives, the Curses were just also, for why might
not those good men have in them, an Eye to the glory of Sanctus, i. e.
honoratus sit Deus eo ipso, quod punit Sacrilegos, scilicet de divino honor
tantum sacrilegi de trahunt, ut necesse sit per eorum punitionem resarciri
honorem pristinum. Caiet. in Levit. 10.3.
God, (their Protestations are so, and Charity bids believe the best) and to
the good of his Church, namely, that God's Justice might appear in the
punishment of Sacrilegious Usurpers or Violators: and so the Church might be
edified, and all men warned by their Exemplary punishment?

7. And as those Curses were not causeless, so neither were they powerless, how
ever the Irreligious Scoffers of these latter days may blaspheme God, and
slight them, and all God's ways of Justice, or Mercy either: Yet, by the
general woeful experience of so many Men, Families, yea Nations, as have
ventured upon them, it will appear they were more than bare Bug-bear-words,
even Fatal Predictions of God's real and visible Judgments, which without
Repentance and Restitution, the Offenders could never claw off: for indeed the
more immediate the offense is against God himself, the sorer and the closer the
Curse sticks to the Offender: 1 Samuel 2.25.
if one man sin against another, the Judge shall judge him, but if a man sin
against the Lord, who shall entreat for him? for finiti ad infinitum nulla
proportio.

8. Enough to make it appear that the Curse rightly applied is more than a mere
humane Curse, that it is, for Authority, Divine, and therefore indeed rather an
Approbation, or but applicative Declaration in particular, of God's own Curse
already denounced in the general against all sacrilegious Offenders, than a new
Curse of their own, being Copied, as I may say, into their several Books of
particular Donations out of the Original in God's own Book, wherein you may
read those Curses written on both sides, I mean in the New, as well as in the
Old Testament.

9. Take one or two proofs of each: The first Curse we read of in this kind, is
as old as Moses, Deuteronomy. 33.11.
whom we may observe in the very Act of blessing the Tribe of Levy, suddenly to
shift his foot from Mount Gerizzim, to Mount Ebal, where he falls a cursing all
those that shall attempt to hinder Levi in his substance; or to impeach him in
the Work of his hands, saying, Bless, O Lord, the Substance of Levi, and accept
the Work of his hands; but smite through the LOINS of them that rise against
Levi, and of them that hate him, that they rise not again: A full and fatal
Curse this, wherein you may clearly observe:

10. First of all that in the Enumeration of all the other Tribes, there is no
mention of Enemies to any but to these two, Verse 7. Be thou an help to Judah
from his Enemies.
to the Royal Tribe of Judah, and to the sacred Tribe of Levi: It seems Moses
and Aaron, the King and the Priest must still be Lam. 3.6.
Fellow Patients, (pardon the word) for so God himself joins them in the
Lamentation, and so the Devil and his Agents too match them in the Persecution
also; It was against Moses and against Aaron, that seditious Number. 16.3.
Corah and his Company gathered themselves together, not against Moses alone,
nor against Aaron alone, but against both at once: He very well knew what
belonged to his King-craft, that said it, King James in the Confer. at H. C.
NO BISHOP, NO KING: for the self same in effect was the Oracle of another wise
Emperor, above a thousand years before King James spoke it, Maxima quidem in
omnibus sunt Dona Dei superna collata Clementia, SACERDOTIUM ET IMPERIUM, and
illud quidem Divinis Ministrans, hoc autem humanis praesidens. Inter haec duo
Consonantia omne quicquid est utile humano confert generi, etc. Authent. Coll.
1. Tit. 6. Novel. 6. in praef. ad Epiphan. Archiep. and Patriarch.
Constantinop. It seems those ancient Sages did conceive, That the Influence of
good Success upon a Nation, Prince, and People, mainly depends upon the good
Correspondence and bappy conjunction of all the Estates with the Priesthood: A
Maxim very memorable, as full of Policy as of Religion, and in experience, as
full of Truth, as of both those: That Harmony being indeed the only ordinary
way to maintain Correspondence with God himself, namely, to correspond with
God's Priest, because God's immediate Agent in spiritualibus, in all matters
'twixt God and man. Did this Nation ever thrive, since it began to strive with
the Priest? Hosee iv. 4.
Justinian I mean: These two the King and the Priest, as they were of old Twins
of Oil, as the Rabbis style them, so are they still Twins of Destiny too, they
stand or fall together: Therefore, and it were but in Policy, in point of
Mutual Interest, they had need support and assist each other against the common
Enemy.

11. But although Judah and Levi, the King and the Priest have both their
Enemies, yet does not Moses curse the Enemies of Judah, neither so directly,
nor so vehemently as he does the Enemies of Levi, as if they were more, or more
full of Animosity against the Tribe of Levi, than against any other Tribe
whatsoever. That we may all prepare, my Brethren, for Nil novum sub sole,
whether it be for Aaron's Rod, the Priest's Power, or for the flourishing of
that Rod, the Priest's Portion, it seems it is an old Grudge, the mad World has
still to the Laici semper sunt Infesti Clericis, Covarruvias.
Clergy; It Is strange, that of 1. Thrice for water, Exodus 15.24. and 17.2. Number.
20.2. 2. Twice for the way, Number. 11.1. (Sol Jarchi:) and 21.4. 3. Once for
bread, Exodus 16.2. 4. Once for flesh, Number. 11.4. 5. Once at the News, Number.
14.2. 6. Twice at the Priest especially, Number. 16.11.41.
ten several popular Mutinies in that stiff-necked Jewish Nation, (upon six
several occasions) of the Persecution, the Priest had more than his share twice
over, far above his Tenth of that, to be sure, that none will grudge him.

12. Secondly, Sacrilege (whether personal or real, it is no matter, either way
it is the sin cursed here) must needs be an heinous Offense that moves meek Number.
12.3. The man Moses was very meek, above all the men which were upon the face
of the earth.
Moses, that Mirror of Lenity upon God's own Record; 1. To fall a Cursing:
2ly, To extend his Curse through the very Loins of the Enemies of Levi, that
is, as it were, to Intail the Curse upon their Posterity. 3ly, To aggravate
this Curse with the Doom of a final Destruction, praying unto God, that such of
all others may never rise again.

13. And, as if the Curse upon Sacrilege were always so fatal and final, so
runs King Darius his Curse also annexed to his Charter of Donation to the
Temple, Esdr. 6.12 and 1 Esdr. 6.33
The God that has caused his Name to dwell there, destroy, (utterly destroy)
all Kings and People that shall put to their hands to alter, and to destroy the
house of God: Here is utter destruction again, and that to (...) To all Kings,
says our Translation, To all Kingdoms, says the Vulgar: No respect of
persons, for Magnitude, or Multitude, all is one with God: To whom in point of
Revenge, The Nations are but as a drop of a Bucket, Isa. 40.15.17.
and are counted as the small dust of the Balance: behold, he takes up the
Isles as a very little thing, (Hear this Isle of Great Britain) All Nations
before him are as nothing, and they are counted to him less than nothing, and
vanity.

14. Go to profane World, and mock on, think as slightly of the Priest's
Curse as you usually do of his Blessing; (To which most profanely the Vulgar
use to turn their Backs; though they should know that Judas fot departing
before all was done, met the Devil at the Door, John 13.27.) Yet know you must
at last, that God is not mocked: Though the Priest overawed by the general
Vogue, should not dare to complain against the Encroachments upon his Person,
Office, Provision, or Privileges, but is forced as the Prudent man (Amos v.
13.) to keep silence in such a time, because it is an evil time: Yet our God
shall come, and shall not keep silence; And then there shall go before him a
consuming fire, and a mighty tempest shall be stirred up round about him,
(Psalm 50.3.) Will you hear God himself speak this out unto you in Thunder and
Lightning? Then behold in Malachy iii. 7. ad fin.
Malachy, God himself draws up the full Indictment, and himself also pronounces
the heavy Sentence upon it, against all sacrilegious Pretenders, or Purchasers.

1. God begins with an Emphatical Interrogation, Will a man rob God?
(intimating the Unnaturalness of this sin:) will a man, any man, Jew or
Christian, or Heathen: (were not this a sin against the Law of Nature, God
would not have used such a general term as this, that includes all Mankind; for
were this a sin only against the Law Levitical, it would have concerned none
but the Jew.)

2ly, Will a man rob, or kick against his own God? so the (...).
Septuagint do render it, Will a man Supplant, or cast his own God under feet,
as it were? To intimate what an Oracle of your LE DECAY DES REVENUES DE HOMES
DE SAINT ESGLISE EN LE FINE SERRA SUBVERSION DEL SERVICE DE DIEU, ET DE SON
RELIGION: Sir Edw. Coke, L'evesque de Winchester's Case: where he gives an
irrefragable Reason by way of instance, in the two most grievous Persecutions,
the one under Diocletian, who yet did only by his cruelty, occidere
Presbyteros, so that notwithstanding Religion did flourish: The other under
Julian the Apostate, who by his Sacrilege and subtilty did Occidere
Presbyterium: and this was the far more grievous Persecution of the two,
because in a little time, there did ensue such neglect of God's Service, and
such gross Ignorance of God's true Religion, as greatly decayed the Christian
Profession. The Reason is plain, For God cannot be served without Men, nor Men
be maintained without Means.
Law, sadly presageth, that Sacrilege if not prevented or remedied, will be
the downfall in the end of God's Church, and of God's whole Worship and Service:
A Sacrilegious, or but slovenly Religion ends commonly so in downright
Atheism.

Dr. Gauden above.
Consequently all the Parts of the State it self Noble and Ignoble, will in the
end, be enfeebled, abased, and mortified, when the Ministers of the Church of
Christ are obstructed, or exhausted: They being as the Arteries of the Body
Politic in any Nation, State, or Kingdom, which is Christian, as they who, Ex
officio, are to derive and carry from the Head, which is Jesus Christ, the
vital, and best (that is the Religious) Spirits to all the Parts of the Body.

3ly, Will a man rob God? his own God? this still aggravates the Offense, and
the imputation thereof appears so odious to the guilty Jews, that they
straight-ways seem to deny it, even then when God directly charges them with
it, yet ye have robbed me? They would plead not guilty, saying, (...) wherein
have we robbed thee?

4ly, All along you may please to apply all this, and to observe the Impudeney
of this sin, and how of all other sins it is hard to convince of, much more to
convert a Church-Robber from his Sacrilege, he is so entrenched in it, with so
many Shifts and Evasions, Distinctions, and Extenuations, why, and wherein, to
outface if possible, even the Charge of God himself: Yes, says God, ye have
robbed me, and if you will know wherein, In Tithes and Offerings: well, and
fully the learned Italian Nelle Decime: c. Ritenendo a voi quello che a di
questi miei diritti, e del fornimento del mio servigio, e del sostentamento de
miei Ministri, etc.
Diodati on this place, Ye have robbed me, in Detaining those my Rights, which
should support my Service, and maintain my Servants: In as much as you have
done it to one of those that belongs to me, you have done it to me, (so Saint
Si enim per alios visitatur in Carcere, and aegrotus suscipitur, and esuriens
sitiensque cibum accipit atque potatur, cur non in Ministris suis ipse Decimas
accipiat, and si non dentur, part sua ipse privetur? -- Subtrahendo Decimas
and Primitias non dico Sacerdotibus meis and Levitis, sed mihi -- fraudastis me
part mea, etc. Hieron. in 3. Malach.
Hierom on this very place, alluding to God's irrevocable Sentence at Mat. 25.
Doomsday:) This will be as true in malam, as in bonam partem: For even as God
interprets our ordinary Acts of Charity, as done to himself, because done to
his Servants at large: so on the contrary, and that a majori too, will God take
those Acts of Irreligious Injustice, or Sacrilege against his immediate
Servants, as committed against himself: whether he be Jew or Christian that
commits it, whether the Fact be committed under the Law, or under the Gospel,
the Sentence you see, is one and the same for both.

In which Sentence by the way, may be worth the observing the full value of the
word GIVING, I was an hungered, and you GAVE me Meat, I was thirsty, and you
GAVE me Drink, etc. where giving in its native sense and full signification, is
a word of Relation, that naturally implies Receiving, as its Correlatum: And
this must needs exclude Rejection; so that here Men's Devotion, and God's
Acceptance kiss each other. For else, unless God did accept those Pious works,
he could not properly have said, you gave me, but you Isa. 66.3. He that
offers an oblation, is as if he offered Swins blood.
offered me, as in some other places wherein he rejects the Offering: This in a
glance by occasion of Saint Hierom's parallel of that place of Saint Matthew,
with this of Malachy.

5. I, but happily those Jews might plead hereditary Prescription, for what they
did now detain from the Priests, they came honestly to it, by Descent from
their Ancestors; yet all that is nothing, for God Non-suits that Plea also, (
v. 7.) Even from the days of your Fathers, you are gone away from mine
Ordinances; to wit, by continuing in your Father's Sacrilegious steps; (so
Saint In quo reverti Jubentur, in eo recesserant, etc. Hieron. quo supra.
Hierom expounds it still) so far is Age then, or Continuance in sin or injury,
from acquiring a just Title, either by the Law of Man, Quod initio vitiosum
est, non potest fractu temporis convalescere: Paulus lib. 8. ad Sabinum. ff. de
diverse. R. J. L. quod Initio, 29. (alias 30. Sic enim Digesto Novo tit. 17. l.
50.) Ratio Regulae est, quia sicut Tempus non est modus Inducendae, vel
tollendae obligationis, (L. obligationum Sect. Placet. De Action. and
obligation.) Ita solum Tempus actum ab initio invalidum confirmare non potest.
Hujus Regulae (says a good Civilian, and my old Acquaintance) Exemplum in
contractibus extat in Sect. 1. Instit. de Inutil^b. stipulat. Si rem SACRAM,
vel publicam stipuler, non valet stipulatio, licet postea efficiatur profana,
aut privata, and in hominum Commercium perveniat. Everard. Bronchorst. in hanc
legem, p. 80. If this be Law, if Jus, and aequum, then let all men judge,
whether they Decree righteous Decrees, who f^rst rob God of his Demesnes, and
then vote it a Lay-fee, as if such a Vote were Operative to command a second
Transubstantiation of Natures. The truth is, but for Club-law: The Church has
all the just Law and Equity in the World of her side.
or by the Law of God, that it rather aggravates the Offense by turning it
through Custom into a state of final Impenitency: Else Belshazzar might have
had as good a Plea for his Sacrilege, as some in our days, that he for his
part came lawfully by the Sacred Vessels, for he had them by Inheritance from
his Grandfather: Where notwithstanding ('it is very observable) it did not reach
De male quaesitis non gaudet tertius haeres.
the third Generation, but in a moment translated away with it, an Empire that
had lasted above a thousand years.

This we note the rather, once for all, to warn all men never to think the
better of an Error, or of a sin, as of the sin of Sacrilege or Rebellion,
because hereditary: for God Alto Judicio, may suffer a sin in a kind of Lineal
succession, to descend from the Father to the Child, yea, to seem as it were
intailed upon a Family, upon a whole Nation for a while, till at last when he
sees his time, Tarditatem supplicii gravitate compensat: and by his National,
final Curse, cuts off for ever the Intail, and the Intailers too, Root and
Branch indeed: For thus the Son is still under the Curse, and justly
punishable, though not for the first Sacrilegious Act committed by his Father,
yet for the impenitent continuance of that Sacrilegious Act of his Fathers;
which brings us to the consideration of the next particular, namely, God's
Curse.

For sixthly, the Indictment being both repeated, and proved, God proceeds to
Sentence, saying, Ye are cursed with a Curse, Verse 9.
because ye have robbed me, even this whole Nation: Where observe, that as the
Sin, so the Curse is for the extent National, for the kind very equal, for they
did by Sacrilege famish the Priests of God, and the God of the Priests did
famish them by Scarcity, for ordinarily Punishment is the Anagram of Sin: So
God's Justice commonly runs in a Talio, observes as it were, an exact
Geometrical proportion, rendering par pari, (as S. Hierom again) If men will
walk contrary unto him, Levit. xxvi. 27, 28.
he will also walk contrary unto them, and enlarge his Plagues seven times more
for their sins: The whole Nation was deep in the Sacrilege, the meaner sort
following herein, the bad examples of the great ones, which with the baser
ignoble multitude, usually goes for Law, and so the whole Nation undergoes the
Judgment too, a miserable National Famine, so extreme, that (some record) they
were fain to sell their own Children to buy bread abroad: Their own Heaven at
home being become Iron, Levit. xxvi. 19.
and their own Earth brass, (for Offenso Creatore, omnis offenditur Creatura)
our own Destiny in the end of another National War, except we repent; for,
whether this fundamental sin of Sacrilege, be not become as National here
among us, as possibly it might be amongst the Jews, judge ye: If a sin should
be once decreed lawful by the Representative Body of a Nation, that is, with
Authority, if it be practiced generally by the Diffusive Body of a Nation with
Impunity, either of these two ways is enough to denominate a sin National, a
Majori then, where both these do concur. This I press, that by the present
National punishment, we may apprehend the vastness of our sin to have been no
less than so, National also; and that the Plaster may be as broad as the Sore,
so must be the Repentance and Reformation too by way of Restitution, National
also, that is the next.

For behold and admire Clementiam Domini, Hieron. ibid.
(says the Father) that thus patiently bears with whole Generations of sin in
Father and Child, and yet still invites them to repentance, Return unto me, V.
7.
and I will return unto you, says the Lord of Hosts: Nay, as if he would meet
them more than halfway, he points out unto them the only way, they may not
think of Peace, or of Plenty again, or of a Pardon, If they come still empty or
close-handed, no, that is not the way God marks out here, but the quite
contrary way, V. 10.
Bring in all the Tithes into the Storehouse, and prove me now herewith, if I
will not open you the Windows of Heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that
there shall not be room enough to receive it.

15. From whence you may first of all observe for your own direction, that the
only National Remedy left us is National Restitution: so far, if you intend to
prosper, must you be from venturing to add new Sacrilege to the old (as some
would have you) that all your care must be rather, to contrive how to make
Restitution for what is past. It Is a duty will still lie heavy upon you, and
the whole Nation else, 'till you resolve to discharge it; take it in the words
of one of your own wise men, Sir Francis Bacon in his Consider. etc.
and a Lawyer also, who observing very well how Church Lands pass in valuation
between man and man at a lower rate than other Temporalties, thinks therefore
(with all reverence be it repeated) that all PARLIAMENTS since the 27, and 31
of H. the VIII.) STAND OBNOXIOUS (they are his own words) AND OBLIGED TO GOD IN
CONSCIENCE, to do somewhat for the Church, to reduce the Patrimony thereof; And
adds, That since they have debarred Christ's Wife of a great part of her DOWRY,
it were reason they made her a competent JOYNTVRE.

16. Touching the matter, out of which to make the Restitution, as it concerns
mainly the Consciences and Estates of the Usurpers, (for Caveat emptor, and the
old Rule will be for ever true, Aug.
Non remittetur peccatum, donec restituatur ablatum, at least 2 Cor. 8.11.
according to what a man has:) If this seem durus Sermo, then think, that for
lack of Restitution, Ite Maledicti, will sound far harsher: So it were a
gallant opportunity to the charity of public Spirits, whom God has blessed
with abundance both of Grace and Wealth, to redeem the Lord's Inheritance: Less
than half an Age of Peace and Plenty might do it; and who knows but such a
Project as this in the Heart of this Nation, might through God's acceptance,
purchase again that well-grounded Peace, which all the other fair and foul
means we have already used, have missed of as yet? As for the Medium how to
effect that Resumption or Redemption, that in all modesty, we must wholly leave
to the Justice and Authority of the Higher Powers, whose Immortal Glory it
would be once for all, to have freed this Church and State from the Plague of
Sacrilege for ever.

Secondly, In that this Prophet here, and others Nehem. 10.35.37.
elsewhere, make mention of the Priest's Storehouses, their Magazines, or as
S. Hierom calls them, Inferte in horrea, i. e. in Thesauros Templi. Hieron.
their Treasuries: It is from hence evident, it was never God's meaning, that
his Priests should live basely, or poorly from hand to mouth, (as they say.)

Thirdly, In that God to this duty of Restitution, promises so many Blessings
of all kinds, Blessings privative, Deliverance from Incumbent Judgments, from
the Devourer, etc. (verse 11.) Blessings positive, plenty and credit again, at
home and abroad, ( verse 10.12.) Since, I say, all these Blessings are assured
upon the observation of this one Precept of all others: (as if in it God had
summed up his whole Law:) We may thence infer two things.

1. That he that makes no Conscience of the sin of Sacrilege, will make
Conscience of no sin at all. The Jews have a Proverb, That Drus.
Idolatra totam Legem abnegat, Sacrilege therefore being in St. Paul's
judgment, of the same size and latitude with Idolatry, it must needs renounce
the whole Law, Romans 2.22.
not only in St. James's general sense, Jam. 2.10.
but more particularly, because all the Second Table depends upon the first,
and all the Commandments upon the foremost.

Secondly, When ever we miss of God' Blessings, as now, let us then remember
the Cause, why all this evil is come upon us, and amend it: See the Exhortation
appointed for the Fast against the Plague of Pestilence, An. 1665.

Deutr. 28.21.


The public voice of the Church tells us plainly, That because the Portion of
God is invaded, his Altars robbed of Tithes and Offerings, and holy things of
all sorts profanely and sacrilegiously devoured; Therefore God in his just
Judgment, will cause the Pestilence to cleave unto us, until he has consumed
us from the Land: Have we felt it already, and yet will not we believe it? nor
use the Remedy, Repentance and Restitution?

Men may toil and moil, as they say, plot and project, and purchase too, and
yet all this while put all their gains into the Prophet's bag with holes, Hag.
1.6.
If God do but blow upon it: When all is done, it is the Prove. 0.22.
blessing of the Lord that makes rich: Decima and ditesces, says the Rabbin
from this Text, and contra. Let the Modern Projectors then build their Babels
never so high, if they be reared upon the Ruins of Sion, they will find at
last that Foundation, Fabric and all, will down all at once, and sink both the
Founder and his Posterity into worse than their first nothing.

Finally, for a close of this large Sermon of the Prophet Malachy against
Sacrilege, let us observe the Success, (for it may be, I am preaching mine own
Destiny) so far were some from relenting, much less restoring, that they were
rather hardened at it, and scoffed at both the Prophet, and his God too, so God
complains directly, Verse 13, 14, 15.
Your words have been stout against me, says the Lord.

And yet on the other side, to the comfort of the Preacher, and the Honor of
his God, some became of a better mind, took the Matter into their serious
Consideration, They feared God, says the Text, ( verse 16.) and God himself
takes special notice of it, Registers up their mutual good motions in his great
Book of Remembrance, against the great day of Reckoning and Reward, (verse 17.)
on which day, at furthest, shall clearly appear says God, ( verse 18.) The
wide difference betwixt the righteous and the wicked, between him that serves
God, and him that serves him not: And thus ends the Prophet's Sermon against
Sacrilege, and (for the most of it) the Fathers Descant upon it, who there
expressly inlarges the Application of all this, (both in respect of the
Minister's Maintenance, and the Usurpers Offense too) unto all Nations under
the New Testament. And this also the Father urges fully, in a direct and
express Opposition to Marcion, Valentinus, and the rest, Qui vetus non
recipient Testamentum, says the Father there, that, as the men of our
Generation, (especially if the case be concerning Rebellion, or Sacrilege, or
any such Cross-Theam) they will at one dash, recuse the whole Old Testament, (as
if one and the same good God were not the Author of both Testaments, New and
Old, but some evil Spirit had been the Author of the Old) point blank to the
sound The old Testament is not contrary to the New, Article 7.
Doctrine of this Church, their own Mother: from which, in this, as in so many
good things else, whilst they Apostatise, you see they become ex Ass, the
Heirs and Successors of the old Heretics.

17. But to leave them and all others without Excuse, and that you, and all men
may clearly see we want not in the New Testament also, as full, and as
memorable a Text against Sacrilege, as any we have yet produced besides our
own Text; what will they say to the Famous History of Ananias and Sapphira?

18. For, that they were guilty of Sacrilege it is plain, not only by the
verdict of the Holy Fathers, both Greek and Latin, as In locum.
St. Chrysostom, Sermon. 9.
St. Ambrose, De verbis Apostoli.
St. Austin; and to name no other Writers, by a full Jury of Protestants upon
the place, amongst the rest, Calvin, Erat Sacrilega fraudatio, quia partem ex
eo subducit, quod Sacrum esse Deo profitebatur. Calv. ad locum, and more
largely above page 21. See the rest in Marlorati Ecclesiastica Expos. ad locum
Beza, whose Testimony See at large Beza on Acts 5.2.
amounts to these five Concessions; 1. That there may still be a Consecration
of things under the Gospel. 2. That this Consecration may be of Lands. 3. That
this Consecration because it was offered Ecclesiae, to the Church, therefore it
was construed to be offered Domino too, to the Lord, as Irenaeus by and by, in
Vsus Dominicos, so that the Lord is still a Party in this Cause. 4. That this
Consecration is done Spiritus sancti impulsu, and so Per mentire allo spirito
Santo: c. In quanto quella CONSECRATIONE potera essere Stata un movimento
desso, a cui egli non havea sinceramente ubbidito. Diodati in v. 3. c. 5.
Diodati too upon the place, by the good motion of the Holy Ghost, (so far are
this kind of Devotions from being unlawful, or unacceptable) which good Motion
because they had not sincerely obeyed, therefore, says that Italian Doctor,
they did abuse the Holy Ghost. 5. and lastly, They all agree, that to alienate
this from a Consecrated use, is Sacrilege. Sure these Reverend men of Geneva,
when they writ thus, must needs believe that there was still such a thing as
Consecration, or Sacrilege under the Gospel. And just so Peter Martyr,
Brentius, Aretius, and they all directly conclude, 'twas Sacrilege.

19. And should we want all these, the Context would prove it self; for clearly
there, the Materiale, or circa quod, of Ananias's sin, was a thing Devoted to
God, the Author of Holiness, to be a help or means to propagate holiness, and
therefore the thing was holy: and as for the Formale, the sacrilegious
Detention, that is clearer still by S. Peter's Charge, and by the express Text,
Thou have kept back part of the price (v. 4.) and in so doing, Thou have
cheated God himself, (so your Margent, verse 3.) But all this will appear most
evident in the more particular Examination of the whole History, out of which
we will draw so many Deductions or Conclusions, which well weighed, will amount
to so many Declarations, and Confirmations too from the New Testament, of all
that which we have formerly delivered out of the Old Testament.

20. First then, Super tota materia, we may from the Premises fairly deduce
still under the Gospel, the Continuance or Lawfulness of such Consecrations, or
voluntary Devotions, witness God's Acceptance of them at the hands of those
good men mentioned in the foregoing Acts 4.34. to the end.
Chapter, and God's visible Vengeance, on the Violators in this Chapter: To run
over these in order.

21. Touching the Continuance of Consecrations in the New Testament, it is plain
the old Primitive Christians understood the Apostle's practice, Praxis
Sanctorum, Interpres Praeceptorum.
and this History no otherwise, which made them even therefore, as careful ever
after, to honor God with their Prove. 3.9.
Substance, as ever were the Jews before them: They did not, under pretense of
confining their Religion within the Spirit, renounce with Judaisme, all manner
of real, or corporal Offerings; They were wise men Matt. 2.11.
who not content with bare falling down and worshipping, (and yet many a
zealous Professor's Modern Religion extends not so far now adays) would also
Offer their Gold, Frankincense, and Myrrh, such as they had: and this their
Religion they, and the whole Catholic Church for above fifteen hundred years,
has transmitted uncontrolled, unquestioned down to our own Sacrilegious Age,
the great Climacterical of all Ancient Devotion.

22. And now, for an upstart Generation, to strive against such an Universal
Stream, as the godly Judgment and Practice too of the whole Church, what can it
be, but (in the Aug. Extremae Insaniae, etc.
Fathers Judgment) Extreme Madness indeed.

23. Apostolical Non genus Oblationum reprobatum est, Oblationes enim and
illic, (scil. in V. T. Oblationes autem and bic, etc. (scil. in N. T.) --
Species tantum immutata est, quippe cum jam non a servis, sed a liberis
offeratur. l. 4. c. 34. Edit. Colon. and vet. Cod.
S. Irenaeus (who was St. John's Scholar, but once removed, and therefore far
more likely to give us the right ground, and meaning of the Apostle's Godly
Practice, than these men of yesterday) assures us at large in a whole Chapter,
that, As there were Oblations under the old Testament, so there were still
Oblations under the New. 2ly. That those Oblations the Lord did teach, Dominus
docuit. 3ly, That this was not a thing of private or particular observance, but
Catholic or Universal, a Service which the whole World was to perform: Dominus
docuit offerri in universo mundo. 4ly, That it was grateful and acceptable to
God, Purum reputatum est apud Deum and acceptum: what can be more plain? I,
but was not this meant only of the spiritual Oblations of Prayers and Praises?
Expressly no. For, 5ly, For the matter first, they must be Primitiae
Creaturarum, the first Fruits, or the best of God's Creatures. And 2ly, For the
ends, they must be in Usus Dominicos, (a large word) for the Lord's uses, as
toward the Sacrament, or for the Maintenance of God's Ministers; and therefore
Irenaeus expressly instanceth there in Tithes, arguing directly a Majori, that
we may not give Minora, but must be more liberal under the Gospel, because
Majorem spem habentes, because we have greater hopes of greater rewards.

6ly, They must be offered to God as the Maker of all, not for any need, or
Indigency he has, but for the need our selves have to offer unto God, says
the Father, namely, that we may not be unfaithful, but thankeful, and
acceptable, and capable too of his Rewards, according to that of S. Matthew. 25.
I was hungry, and you fed me: Thus that Apostolical Father excellently all over.

24. And that in point of obligatory Imitation, that Apostolical Practice
concerns us now adays as much as it did them; Take Calvin's Plusquam serrea
nobis viscera esse oportet, quod non aliter hujus historiae lectione afficimur*
Illi simpliciter and bona fide suum proferebant, nos mill excogitamus obliquas
Arts, quibus omnia hinc inde fraudulenter ad nos trahamus. ILLI AD PEDES
APOSTOLORUM OFFEREBANT, NOS SACRILEGA AUDACIA QUOD DEO OBLATUM ERAT PRAEDARI
NON VEREMUR: Vendebant olim suas possessiones, nunc Insatiabilis regnat emendi
Cupiditas, etc. Quare haec in pudorem, and dedecus nostrum Scripta sunt. --
Testatum hac historia voluit Deus quantopere illi probitas Sancta, puraque
Ecclesiae suae Politia probetur. Calvin. in Act. 4.35. and cap. 5.1.
own words (passionate enough) as near as I can translate them; Sure our Bowels
are made of Steel (says he) that we are no more affected with the Reading of
this History, Those good old Christians honestly, and bona fide, did offer what
was their own; we contrariwise study out a thousand crooked ways, by fraud to
snatch of all sides what is none of our own: THEY THEN WILLINGLY OFFERED AT THE
APOSTLE'S FEET, AND WE NOW IN A SACRILEGIOUS AUDACIOUSNESS ARE NOT AFRAID OF
PLUNDERING THAT WHICH WAS OFFERED UNTO GOD. Of old, they sold their own
Possessions; but now quite contrary, there reigns an Unsatiable desire of
buying and heaping up, etc. wherefore these things are written to our shame and
disgrace. This from Calvin's Mouth is somewhat plain and home: So as we were
fain to name Calvin for it in our own Defense, else we might, by some of our
Modern hard Judges have been impeached of Popery or Malignancy at least, even
for this one very strain of plainness. But his Conclusion is no better, God
says he, in this History would, as it were, leave upon Record, how much he is
pleased with the sincere Honesty and Godly Polity of his Church. Thus far
Calvin: full enough, to prove the lawful Continuance of such Consecrations in
the New Testament.

25. In the second place, we may observe the Alteration of the property after
Consecration, first in that the Object of the Deceit and Injury is here set
down to be God the Holy Ghost: (For his must needs be the Right directly, whose
the Injury is:) now the Apostle says not here thou have cheated me, or the
Church, or the poor Saints, though all these were concerned in it too, as God's
Assigns, but God was the Principal, and therefore the Apostle says directly,
Thou have deceived the Holy Ghost: so the Greek may bear it; and some
Phavorinus (...), etc. Scapul.
Lexicographers do allow it, and Beza seconds it, saying, That they had to do
with God himself, whose Title it was Consecrationis Obligamento, as Tertullian
terms it, and the 4th verse puts it out of all doubt, saying, Whilst it
remained was it not thine own, and after it was sold was it not in thine own
power? As if the Apostle had said, as sure as before Consecration you might
have called it your own; so sure after Consecration, it is no more your own,
the Property is altered: whose is it then, or whose should it be, but his whom
thou have Cheated, so Diodati again, Ma dopo la Consecratione, non era tua, tu
non V'havevi pi^u ragione alcuna: era di Dio, e percio tu hai commesso
Sacrilegio: Diodati, in c. 5. 4.
After Consecration thou have no right in the world to it, it is now God's own,
and even therefore thou have committed Sacrilege: So he; where you may see in
plain terms again, Consecration, and God's Title, and Sacrilege; all these
avouched. And so much the late Annotat. London 1645. on Acts 5.3.
Assembly-men gloss upon the Text (on these words, To lie to the Holy Ghost, or
to deceive:) This is their Comment. When they had DEDICATED the possession TO
GOD, for the relief of his Servants, the fraud and falsehood concerned his
INTEREST, etc. Here you have first, Their Vote for Dedicating Possessions to
God under the Gospel. 2ly, That such an Act gives God an Interest in things
Dedicated: Do not you therefore dream that the Presbyterian Party will allow
your Lay-Sacriledge, for you shall hear the quite contrary from themselves by
and by, when their Testimony comes in. 3ly, Here you may plainly observe God's
own Ratification, as I may say, of the Church's Act in all such matters, both
for the Acceptance of the Devotion, and the Censure and Curse also for the
Detention, or violation. And that the Apostles, the Church Representative, were
God's Vicegerents for both, as Calvin expressly observes upon the place, that
Deus illis vices suas mandaverat; and he gives the ground of their Commission
to be this, because though they were homines, they were but men, yet they were
not privati homines, private men, but public persons, and so God's Assigns
for the whole matter.

26. For the first Act, the Acceptance of the Devotions, it may admit of a
twofold Consideration, in a twofold Respect; 1. Of the persons that may Vow.
2ly, Of the matter of the Vow.

Concerning the first, It Is a ruled Case, Number. 30.5.8.
That none have power to Vow irrevocably, but such as are sui Juris, if any
under age, or Covert Baron, or Command, do make Vows, the Superior in the
Church, or in the State, or in the Family, within his several Sphere, private
or public, as God's Vicegerent, has power under God, to Exodus 36.6.
restrain, or to reverse, to disallow the Vows when he hears them: bur if the
Superior hold his peace at the hearing of them, and disallows not the Vows of
his Inferior, then says God, Number. 30.11.14.
he confirms them, ipso facto, and cannot afterward make them void, having
passed away his right: If he do, after he has heard them, any ways make them
void, he shall bear the Iniquity of them all; If bare silence imply such a
Consent, and so bind the Superior to make good the Vows of the Inferior, how
much more then, (as in the clear case betwixt the Parliament and the People in
their Devotions to the Church) will it bind, when the Superior has given his
express consent, yea passed it away by his own Act: This as a second Instance,
added unto that mentioned above concerning the Gibeonites fortifies still more
and more the Clergie's Title, and renders it past Revocation.

27. Secondly, Touching the Matter of the Vow, because Romans 14.23.
whatsoever is not of faith is sin; Therefore it is very fit in case of
Doubting, to ask the Hag. 2.11.
Priests concerning the Law: But where the Case is clear, and out of all doubt,
and the Vow both for Person and Matter lawful, and only of private
concernment; In such a case we may not lay a snare upon men's Consciences,
there seems no necessity of any Vicegerent or Substitute at all, but God the
Principal, being Omnipresent to every man's heart, the matter may safely be
concluded betwixt God and a man's self; Actu interno, or Unto cordis: To vow
with the heart is sufficient, and we may quiet our mind in this Assurance, that
God is willing to accept all such our Just and prudent Vows, without any more
ado. This is clear in so many Vows recorded in Holy Writ, for our Imitation
and Confirmation too, such as was Genesis 28.20. Judge. 11.30. 1 Samuel 1.11.13.
Jacob's Vow, and Jephtha's Vow, and devout Hannah's Vow, which was not so much
as expressed, Actu ullo externo oris, and yet have they all the express Seal of
God's Acceptance, in his gracious grant of the Condition of their several
Vows: Though we read not in any of them of any Deputy, or Vicegerent at all.

28. But Thirdly, if the Matter of the Vow be of more public concernment, and
other circumstances so require, then behold God's Vicegerents at hand, God's
Apostles I mean, to whom God himself has given both the Mat. 16.19.
Keys, that of Knowledge, and this of Authority, therewith to open and to shut,
to bind and to loose men's Consciences, as in the case of Absolution, so in the
case of Resolution too, that if any, may judge both of the Power and of the
Matter of the Vow, and determine the Conscience of the Votary either way,
according to God's Word, whether the Vow will be acceptable, that is lawful,
yea or no; and if it be lawful, they may Accept it in God's Name and stead.

29. And this Office being none of the extraordinary Apostolical Prerogatives,
(such as some reckon these to have been their (...), or Infallibility, their
power of Miracles, and their Ecumenical Jurisdiction:) is not therefore
Incommunicable, or Intransitive, but as successive, and permanent, and
pertinent to their Successors in ordinary the Bishops and Pastors of God's
Flock, (who, as well as the Priests under the Law, or the Apostles under the
Gospel, are God's visible Vicegerents unto the end of the World, Heb. 5.1.
in all things pertaining unto God) as to accept the Peoples Offerings in God's
Name and stead, so to present The Clause in the Prayer for the Church Militant
[to accept our Alms and Oblations.
them unto God, as well as to pray to God for the People, or to bless the
People in God's Name.

30. And as to Bless, so to Curse in God's Name also (for Ejusdem est ligare
cujus est solvere:) and this is in that History, the Apostle's second Act, to
assure us and all the World of the Continuance of God's own heavy Curse, and
Exemplary Vengeance too, even under the New Testament, in case of Fraud or
Sacrilege: And this Ecclesiastical Censure, does here consist of two express
parts, a Spiritual and Eternal Excommunication, as I may say, See Ghostwyke's
Anatomy of Ananias and Sapphira's Sacrilege, chap. 6.
from all the means, yea from the Life of Grace it self, the sorest, severest,
extremest Vengeance that can be inflicted on a man in this World, forsaking
and forsaken of God. Secondly, a Corporal, and that too a sudden and utter
Deprivation of the Life of Nature also, both of them making up that fearful,
total Extermination, which the Jews term Drus. qu. l. 1. qu. 9.
Sammatha, or Sammathizatio, of (...) that signifies desolare, and ad stuporem
vastare, and (...) tu: as much to say, as let such a Curse fall upon thee, as
is Ultima Execratio, or God's utmost Malediction: Saint Paul from another Root
(Maran atha) seems to allude to this very Curse, 1 Cor. 16.22.) Cursing them ad
magnum diem, as the old Councels phrase it, till Doomsday, and a day after. A
Curse so terrible, that in the Book of Eum Ananiae and Sapphirae una stix
porrigi ne ejulantem crucians complectatur. Seldom ad Eadmerum quo supra, p.
156.
Curses formerly quoted against Sacrilege, Ananias and Sapphira, a^e become
the Proverbial, as I may say, the Standard to Curse by.

31. Surely such a Curse, so terrible (take in all the circumstances) we read
not of in all the Old Testament, as if God hereby would intimate as the
hainousness of the sin of Sacrilege above all sins in general, so the
aggravation of it in particular, as it being a greater sin now under the
Gospel, than under the Law, both respectu Personae, and also respectu Status:
because as our Oblations to all Acts of Devotion, are more, so is our
knowledge, and our hope likewise, (this is Allus. ad Decimas. Hilariter and
libenter danda ea, non quae sunt minora, utpote majorem Spem habentes, Iren. l.
iv. c. 34.
Irenaeus his Argument;) far greater now than it was then.

32. And because this Fact of Ananias was the first Notorious Act of
Sacrilege, that ever was committed under the Gospel; therefore least any after
them should presume upon their Impunity, as they gave ill example to their
Generation, and to Posterity to boot, ('it is P. Martyr's note) themselves became
a sad example to both; They were confounded Body and Soul.

33. And that too with a sudden Destruction, in an Instant, the usual Destiny
of Sacrilege: witness Dan. v. 30. 2 King. xi. 16.
Belshazzar, Athaliah, and so many more slain, (...), as we say, In the very
Act of Sacrilege.

34. This is an History brim-full of horror, in all the grievous circumstances
of it: To see a Man and his Wife, Children of the Church, Auditors of the
Apostles, Professors of Christ's true Religion outwardly, conformable to the
Apostolical Discipline, Benefactors to the Church, no apparent professed
Enemies or Atheists, no Persecutors or Apostates, or notorious evil livers,
(for any thing we read of them.) Ah! I tremble to think it, that such persons,
so qualified, should yet be liable to so Execrable an end, as (say Gostwick's
Anatomy of Ananias Sacril. chapter 6.
some) in a moment to be damned Body and Soul, (dying without repentance)
should, as they were man and wife in the sin upon Earth, be still man and wife
in the Torment of Hell, and all this damnable rigor, for grudging a few Pence,
or Pounds at the most, to God and Holy Church. But Deuteronomy. xxix. 29.
Secret things belong unto the Lord our God: and God's judgments are past
finding out: Romans xi. 33.
Our best course therefore is, to adore them with admiration! To lay them to
heart with fear and trembling, and to acknowledge with all humility, that God
sees not as man sees, however Sacrilege may be extenuated in the World's
deceitful Scales, yet in the Just Balance of the Sanctuary, you see the heavy
doom of it, weighs down to the bottom of Hell.

35. And now although this latter part of the Censure, the Corporal part, was
miraculous, and so extraordinary, yet let none harden himself in Sacrilege,
upon the presumption that St. Peter and his fellows, that could kill with a
breath, are now dead and gone: As long as the Lord lives, and Ecclesia nunquam
moritur, in your own sense, and in our sense, I am sure, the Church lives too,
and the Spiritual Ordinance of God, and of his Church the heavy Censure of
Excommunication, is permanent in the Church unto the World's end, and is, and
ever will be, (clave non errante) still as quick, and powerful to plague, and
to destroy no less now, than in those days, if not always with visible external
Judgments (from which we are not yet free) yet with far worse, with invisible
inward Judgments, as Blindness of Mind, not to see our Disease nor Danger, our
Duty nor Remedy; and Hardness of heart, not to repent, and return, and restore:
for this Impenitent State may still provoke God to punish one sin with another
(in his just Permission) a Judgment which is of all others the most grievous,
the very next step to Hell it self, and therefore not inferior for the matter,
(though not so visible for the manner) to that dreadful Curse which befell
Ananias and Sapphira, in whose fatal Example God did purposely express such a
Terrible Severity to countenance the just Censures of the Church, and to bring
into credit Church Authority, a maine Nerve or Sinew, in Christ's Body
Mystical; the Mortification whereof in this latter Age, has occasioned the
Gangrene of the whole Body of this Christian Church and State: for we may not
flatter now, but now or never, must strike at the Root of all our Mischiefs,
and tell you a sad truth, that of all our swarms of Heresies and Schisms, of
all our Divisions and Distractions, of all our Seditions and Rebellions too, of
all our Sacriledges and Prophanenesses: of all these cursed branches the Mother
Root has been the Contempt of the Church, for these four Buttresses, or
Master-pillars of the Church, The Churches Apostolical Truth, Holy Peace, Just
Power, and Due Patrimony,
stand or fall together, and like Plutarch.
Scylurus his Arrows, whilst kept tied in the bundle, do render that Church
and State impregnable, invincible, but one of them once sundered from the
other, break but any one, and you may easily knap all the rest in sunder: This
is the sad story of all our former National miseries, and till the Restitution
of this Church Right also; and that cum effectu, Excommunication, (so dreaded
in other Churches, the Greek especially) being now become with the many in
England, but a mere (...), or Bugbear, unless that Brachium Seculare do
corroborate it, by some coercive way, as shall seem to their wisdom most
suitable unto the symptoms and dispositions of this Nation, yet very much out
of joint: Till then, we may in vain hope for a Respit, but never obtain the
effectual Remedy, much less the real Recovery of this Church and Nation.

36. And to bring in all this, here is a fair Hint given us by the Holy Ghost,
from this very Text and History of Ananias, wherein you may for an Epilogue
from Calvin, observe yet this one Item more, That one main Aggravation, and
always a deadly Ingredient of this sin of Sacrilege, was and is the Contempt
of a general Godly Practice of the whole Christian Church, whose bare Custom in
those honest and simple Apostolical days, St. Paul thought an Argument strong
enough to confute any Irregular Schismatic, saying, upon occasion of a
Church-Difference, 1 Cor. 11.16.
If any man seem to be contentious, we have no such Custom, neither the
Churches of God. Of such force in those days of Discipline was the general
Practice of the Church: How much more forcible then would have been the Precept
of the Church, not only, or chiefly of the Church Diffusive, the whole Body at
large, (for that in the matter of Exercise or Execution, was never, could never
be Subjectum capax, of that Power or Jurisdiction) but, principally of the
Church Representative, the Apostles and Ministers, who as you have heard, and
Calvin very well observes still upon the place; Though they were but men, yet
they were no mere private men, because God's Vicegerents, in which sense, the
Contempt of the Church is, by a plain consequence, a Contempt of Christ
himself, who according to his gracious Matthew. 28.20.
Promise, for a Farewell to his Apostles, has engaged himself by his Spirit of
Power and Counsel, to be present with, and in his Church unto the end of the
world. In reference to which Divine Promise, That Primitive Catholic Ceremony,
of placing the Sacred Book of the Gospel on a Throne, in the midst of the
Councels sitting, was till of late, Solemn, and full of Divine Mystery,
namely, among the rest, to intimate that in regard of Christ's Spiritual, and
Invisible, but undoubted Presence, in the midst of his Reputare debuerat, ubi
duo aut tres congregati sunt in Christi nomine, illic eum adesse Praesidem, nec
secus in eo coetu se gerere, quam si Deum oculis cerneret. Calv. in Act. v. 4.
Church, all men ought to behave themselves in, and toward the Church with as
much Obedience, as if there they saw with their Eyes, Christ himself visibly
present.

37. To draw up all our several Observations upon this Apostolical History,
into a narrow compass; By this time you see, That the Contempt of the Godly
Precept, or but General Practice of the Church, (such as ever was this of
Consecrations, or Dedications) is, first of all, Injurious to Jesus Christ
himself, the invisible Guide, and perpetual President of the Church. 2ly,
Derogatory to Venerable Antiquity, and to all those that have gone before us in
this devout way of well-doing. 3ly, Scandalous, yea, (in its contagious Nature,
and bad Example) pernicious too, to the present Age, and unto Posterity to
boot. 4ly, Dangerous, yea, without timely Repentance, Damnable unto the
Contemners, what ever they be.

38. And now after all this said and proved too, yea, ex abundanti, sealed also
both ways with God's own actual Curse or Benediction, as it were his visible
Image and Superscription, yet still to ask the question, whether we shall
Render this Sacred Tribute Matthew. 22.20, 21.
unto our Maker, or no? still for all this, to pretend a fear of God's Refusal
of our Devotions, or to say we want still a particular Revelation of Gods
Acceptance, or to quarrel about the Authority of the Vicegerent, to assure us
of all these (The Sacrilegious Cavils of some in our days.) What were all this,
but plainly to declare we have no more mind to this Religious Errand, than he
in the Prove. xxvi. 13.
Proverbs, when instead of running, he tells you of a Lion in the way, a Lion
in the streets.

39. For, as touching the main of all these, Assurance of Acceptance, since
that is now adays called in question, I beseech you, have we not as much
Revelation for God's Acceptance of this, as for any other good work, as for our
Prayers, or for our Alms, or for any? To affirm the contrary, were it not
besides the sin of Infidelity, a Tang of Deep Hypocrisy, yea the very
Cutthroat of all good works of Mercy or Piety whatsoever, private as well as
public? would not this Doctrine also bid very fair for Enthusiasme?

40. Say we had no more but some one of 1 Cor. 15. ult.
God's general Promises, would not that serve? Nay, may not the Nature of the
work it self be instead of all Revelations, if it have all the four Essential
usually requisite Conditions of a good work: I mean if it be done, 1. Upon
God's Warrant, or according to his Word, As under the old Testament. Prove. iij.
19. So under the New, Gal. vi. 5. See above p. 65.
2ly, If the general intent in it, be to please and serve God. Romans 14.6. He
that eats not, eats not to the Lord, etc.
3ly, If the work be done in love to God, for no self-respects, or by-ends of
our own, but chiefly, (as the Church praises him) propter magnam gloriam suam,
for his own Glory, because we know that God is To do good, and to distribute
forget not, for with such Sacrifices God is well pleased, Heb. xiii. 16.
honored by this our Acknowledgment. 4ly, and lastly, If that our Devotion be
offered in Luke vii. 47.
Faith, out of a persuasion of God's love to us in Christ, and of his general
Ephesians. 1.6.
Acceptance both of our Persons and Performances through Christ: Upon such
grounds as these, S. Paul doubts not, but bids the Devout Phil. iv. 18.
Philippians, be confident that their Offerings sent unto him, their Apostle,
were an Odor of a sweet smell, a Sacrifice ACCEPTABLE, and well-sing unto God.

41. This general Discourse you may extend to all the particulars in this kind,
except they will say, (for they will, and may say any thing) that God will
indeed Accept the good works done to any Disciples at large, to the meanest,
but to the Seventy, or to the Twelve, his own Servants in Ordinary, his
Disciples in chief: In whose behalf yet (that they may see we have God's
Revelation, yea, Assurance of Acceptance, yea, special Promise of Reward also:
all these as particularly set down in the Clergie's behalf as may be) in the
very first rank of that noted ancient Grot. in Matthew. 10.40, 41, 42. Tres
discipulorum gradus, supremus prophetarum, secundus Justorum, infimus
parvulorum: ex Textu, and ex Clem. Alexandr. and Origin.
Gradation of Disciples, God places his Prophets foremost of all, saying, He
that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet: That is, as we use to say,
in the quality of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophet's reward: and if you will
know what kind of Prophets he there means, they were his Apostles, the then
MINISTERS, pro tempore, of whom, in the Verse immediately before, he had
expressly said, He that receives you, receives me: and of whom also, in the
very next Verse, he says, and in a manner swears it too, that if the Offering
should amount to no more but a Cup of cold water, yet it should not go
rewardless. As once the Tertullian.
Father upon another occasion, so may I say, Happy we, my Brethren, for whose
sakes Christ swears, but then, Unhappy they all that will not believe Christ,
no not when he swears on our behalf.

42. And now, will any sober man, Heathen, or Christian, expect a surer, or
more express Revelation of God's Acceptance, than his own Promise of actual
Reward, sealed too with such a Solemn Asseveration, (verily, verily, I say unto
you, etc.) to put us out of all doubt, as if Christ had here in this place
directly foreseen these latter days of Indevotion and Infidelity?

43. And again, are we here assured, that God both does Accept, and will Reward
the meanest transitory Oblation, a Meals-meat, as we say, bestowed on his
Ministers, and shall we raise a doubt whether he will accept these Devotions,
which are more Permanent, which are intended and dedicated for Perpetuity? Sure
God Almighty, now under the Gospel, as well as under the Law, will have
Persons, and Places too, as well as Times, consecrated to his Honor and
Service, and those not Planetary neither, nor mutable every third year, but
fixed and settled too for perpetuity, as we have already in part demonstrated,
and these Rational men cannot deny with Reason: with what reason then can they
deny the Lawfulness, yea Necessity of such sacred permanent Portions, to
maintain those Sacred Persons and Places, for Perpetuity?

44. And can they, with all their Serpentine subtlety find out a better
Expedient for such a kind of standing Provision, than standing Revenues, or
Lands? Here in the Apostle's Deed we read of Lands sold, and the Prices, the
Lands-worth given; Sure had the unsettled condition of those tumultuary Times
borne it, we might, (as soon as in after times) have read of Lands directly
given (for Lands, or Lands-worth, is it not all one?) that would have saved the
labor of a Sale: however, there was in it an express Consecration of Lands,
for so Beza very well notes upon the place, that Praedium Domino consecraverant.

45. And the Lawfulness of it must needs stand with all the reason in the
World: for, shall it be lawful to give Lands to maintain a Bridge, or a
Highway for perpetuity, (To which against the ancient Law, See above, page 48.
the Clergy are now angariated) and shall it be unlawful to give the like to
maintain a Churchman, or a Church? Shall Lay Donations made to secular men ex
mero motu, or ex Intuitu Charitatis, be valid, and those be decreed invalid
that are made to a Clergyman ex intuitu Religionis? we may justly be afraid of
offending, in doing such Monsters of men, the honor to confute them with so
much reason, that deserve no other Confutation then that of the Isa. 5.20.
Prophet, Woe be to them that call evil good, and good evil: that call good
works sins, and sins good works: For unless such men were strangely possessed
with a Spirit of Atheism, would they reason the matter thus? Or use such
Arguments as in the Consequence, must needs blaspheme God? for what (with God's
Reverence and their reproach be it spoken) would they make God worse than an
Infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8.
in purposely providing worst of all other sorts of men, for those of his own
Household? Belike, all other men, Lawyers, Physicians, and all may have a
command, or at least a permission lawfully to possess Lands, only the Divine
may not? But Ubi scriptum est? quomodo legis? where is the Clergy excluded? had
such kind of Law, or Reason, been in force of old, then how could the Bishops
have conquered by fair purchase much of their own, and of the Churches Lands?
Turn over the Records, and see, and you may yet read their munificent
Erections, and ample Endowments too, not only of most of the Colleges, but
also of so many See the L. Bishop Godwin's Catalogue of the Bishops, and in it,
for instance, the magnificent Foundations of Hugo de Puteaco, or Hugh Pudsey
Bishop of Duresme, K. Stephen's Nephew, etc. An. 1153. Sir H. Spelm. Council.
Cathedrals in England, besides all their other large Religious Donations: This
we must needs note, that the simple people may not proudly as well as
ignorantly, think that the Clergie's Lands are all of the Laitie's bestowings,
but could the Clergy have done all those great matters without Lands, trow we?

46. And if the Clergy may as lawfully, nay in some of the premised respects,
may more deservedly, and more irrevocably too, than any of the other Estates,
possess their Lands, then sure, by the Rule of Proportion, the Deprivation, or
taking away of the Church Lands, must needs be an Injury far more heinous in
the sight of God and Man, than to take away the Lands of Barons, of Knights, or
Lawyers, or Physicians, or any: So far were such an Act from being either no
Sacrilege, or no sin at all, that it is a wonder any man, that pretends to
reason, should affirm any such thing Impune, especially in a Christian
Commonwealth, (for even in Plato's Commonwealth, Plato 10. de Legib.
we know such a man has his doom.)

47. But more strange it is (if in these African days any thing may seem
strange;) that any should dare to offer unto Masters of Reason no better
Arguments, for such a high attempt against God and Man, and all the just Laws
of both, than such as very Boys are hissed for in the School, or worse, a
Pedantical Etymology, or so; Forsooth, the word Theft was more properly of
things moveable belike, because things moveable are more portative than Lands
or Houses, and so that kind of Theft was more easy, and so more likely, and so
usually more in the notice, and care, and censure of the Law to provide
against, therefore to take away a Penny from a rich man, is a sin indeed, and a
sin of Theft too, but underhand by false witness, or close forgery, or a packt
Jury, or with an high hand, by oppression and open violence, to rob an Orphan,
or a Widow, or a School, or an Hospital, or all these, of all their Lands, that
is no sin at all, much less all at once to take away for ever from a whole
National Church, all their Lands and whole Livelihoods, (as lately.)

48. Good God, how ill art thou requited for endowing such men with Reason,
that abuse it thus! Sure such a Spirit of Delusion in the Patrons of
Sacrilege, must needs be a just judgment of God, because they will not receive
the Truth, therefore God gives them over to such a Reprobate mind in the Active
sense, that is to a (...), i. e. In mentem Judicii expertem, sensu activo. Beza
in Romans 1.28.
mind unable to prove or taste Truth from Falsehood, Reason from Caption,
Consequence from Inconsequence: God gives them over to such a senseless
stupefied judgment, thus to reason themselves, and others, not only out of all
Religion, and common Honesty, but even out of all common sense and reason too:
so dangerous it is once to go astray in Judgment or Practice from the Common
Road of the Catholic Church.

49. For, not to Grammaticate it about the exact value of the word Furtum, or
Sacrilegium, (wherein yet out of Lexicons, or Vocabularies, they may possibly
be convinced of falsehood:) For Isidor. Orig. l. 5. c. 26. Sacrilegium est Sacri
violatio, vel ejusdem usurpatio, committitur quandoque ratione rei, quum res
sacrata usurpatur: quandoque ratione loci, ut quum Ecclesia violatur, etc. v.
Lexicon Martinii more at large. Manifestum Furtum est, ut ait Massurius, quod
deprehenditur dum fit. Quod autem sit Oblatum, quod Conceptum, and pleraque
alia ad eam rem, ex egregiis veterum moribus accepta, qui legere volet,
inveniet Sabini Librum, cui titulus est, de Furtis, in quo id quoque Scriptum
est, non tantum rerum Moventium, quae efferri occulte and surripi possunt, sed
Fundi quoque and Aedium fieri Furtum: Condemnatum quoque Furti Colonum, qui
Fundo quem conduxerat, vendito, possessione ejus Dominum intervertisset, etc.
A. Gellii Noct. Attic. lib. XI. Cap. 18.
Sabinus the Lawyer, in A. Gellius, expressly extends the word Furtum, or Theft,
to things moveable, to Houses or Lands, and instanceth in a Farmer condemned of
Theft, for selling away his Farm ground, to the prejudice of his Earthly
Landlord: (The more it concerns us of the Clergy, as much as lies in us, not to
be Accessory by our Silence, much less Consent to the Alienation of those
Lands, whose right of property in Solidum, belongs unto our Heavenly Landlord.)
Which weighty Consideration of our Conscience and Duty to God and his Church,
may not only justify but magnify to God and the World, the Care and the
Courage, the Cost and the Pains of those valiant Priests (as the Scripture
Epithets them in another case, 11 Chron. xxvi. 17.) that do by due course of
Justice, vindicate and recover the Church's Patrimony from those late
Sacrilegious Invasions, that by a monstrous kind of Transubstantiation had
turned Lease-holds for years, into Freeholds of Inheritance, and Tenants into
Landlords (Thanks be to a good God, a good King, and a good Parliament that by
an happy Restoration has broken the Damme, which formerly obstructed the
course of Justice, that now (according to God's Command, Amos v. 24.) Judgment
may run down as waters, and Righteousness as a mighty stream.)

50. But to return to our Grammar-Boys: Posito, that the word Furtum were
properly no more but so, Contrectatio rei alienae Mobilis, (l. furtum de
obligat, quae ex delicto:) That Is only for the word, but what is all this to
the matter? Will it therefore follow, that Robbing Nabo^h of his 1 King. xxi.
Vineyard, was well done of Ahab, and no sin at all against the eighth
Commandment, Thou shall not steal? Because Naboth's Vineyard was no res
Mobilis? By as good Reason may they affirm Incest or Sodomy, or Bestiality; or
any villainy, to be no sin, or at least no sin of Lust against the seventh
Commandment, because not properly Adulterium, according to the Grammaticality
of the word.

51. It is a Sin, and Theft, and Sacrilege, and all these, to steal but a
Chalice. (Thanks yet for granting so much) or to take away a Church-Book, (for
these and no better are their own Instances) and shall it be no sin at all to
take away those Lands, that should maintain the Service or Servants that must
serve God with all these? what is this, if it be not to strain at a Gnat, and
swallow a Camel? Ridiculous Pharisaisme, as well as Devilish hypocrisy!

52. To commit Sacrilege is a Crime which alone is damnable per se, but to
teach men so to do, that is the Superlative of all wickedness; Sure, such men
do scarce believe there is an Hell; or a Kingdom of Heaven; or if they believe
it, and yet break the greatest, yea all Gods Commandments in one, do not they
fear God? when he swears, that whosoever shall break one of but the least of
these his Commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be called the least
in the Kingdom of Heaven: which (as Grot. in Matthew. v. 18, 19.
Grotius well observes) is not meant of the Place of Heaven, for such men,
except they repent, shall never come there, but of the Time when the Kingdom of
Heaven shall be fulfilled at the end of the World, in the great Ecumenical
Parliament of Heaven and Earth, after the general Resurrection, they shall be
nothing esteemed of there in that World, however they may be cried up here, for
wise men among the Fools of this World.

53. Whom yet to teach more wit at least, since they have no more grace:
Behold, ad hominem, one Argument more for those kind of men, whom neither
Scripture nor Reason can do good upon, it is Experience, the Mistress of Fools,
and yet full out as good, and as great a Dame, as Mistress Necessity, is this
Mistress Experience, especially if the Experience be Universal, such as the
Experience of all Ages, in all Places, of all Persons, single and multiplied
too; I mean, not only of so many several men, but of whole Families, yea of
whole Nations.

54. For did you ever read, or hear of any that did Rob God, and indeed thrive
of the Bargain in the end? Then what mean all those fatal Examples of God's
heavy Curse upon so many as have ventured (...), as Plato phrases it, to shave
this Lion? whose dismal ends recorded in all History, as well sacred as
profane represent them, as it were, hanged up in Chains, for a terrible
warning unto all Posterity, like so many black Monuments of God's deadly Curse
Personal, Domestical, National, all these.

1. That the Curse will be Personal, besides the Achans, the Shishak's, the
Belshazzars, etc. of the Old Testament, and the Ananiasses of the New: most
memorable is that fatal Curse that found out all those Persons that meddled with
the Temple, after it was repaired by Darius (whose Consecration and Curse too,
were both of them valid, though he but a Heathen:) It was a Curse in the Form
of it, of the largest extent, upon whomsoever they should but Plaut.
Manum admoliri Sacro, as the phrase is, or but (...), (so 1 Esdr. 6.33.
Esdras) not only upon those that shall actually destroy or alter God's
Possessions: but also upon all that shall but go about to stretch forth their
hand, (Jeroboam 1 King. 13.5.
did no more but so, stretch forth his hand against one single Prophet, and
yet, for it, did his hand wither in the very Act:) that is, that shall Intend,
or Plot, or endeavor the Alienation, (so a good Interpreter Joh. Wolph. l. 2.
Comment. in Esram.
on the place) or if he do not do it himself, if he do but help others by
Counsel, or Consent, or Countenance; as that Curse of Darius, so this very Text
of S. Paul will reach him home what ever he be, for it comprehends all manner
of Accessaries, Preparatories, Contrivances, and therefore the Spanish
Translation renders it by as large a word as any is in the Spanish Tongue, El
que abominas los Ydolos, hazez Sacrilegio? Thou that abhorrest Idols, do
thou commit Sacrilege?

The word Hazer, which is used for committing, being in that Language (...),
multisignificant, as to deal about any way, to cause any way, or to follow
others evil example, also to bear, or bring forth, a full word that fits the
men of our Generation, for now adays every Addle Brain is turned Church
Projector, and is with child, yea Teeming with his own Sacrilegious
Bastard-Brat, or false Conception, how to rob God most colourably: but God sees
Hearts as we see Faces, and ha^h store of Curses of all sizes, able to
adaequate this sin in all its Dimensions; Zachary Zach. v. 2.3.
tells you of one single flying Roll of such Curses, twenty Cubits long, ten
Cubits broad, expressly sent after the Thief to apprehend him where ever it find
him at home or abroad. It were enough to verify all this, if we had no more
but that one memorable Instance of Darius his Curse, that, at the long run,
overtook all those Antiochusses, and Nicanors, and H^liodorusses, Maccab.
and Crassusses, etc. that durst venture upon it.

55. And indeed (for this Sea of Examples has no bottom) the time would fail
me to tell you out of Ecclesiastical and Secular History, of the fatal ends of
a Sacrilegious Julian, Blond.
both Uncle and Nephew, of a Leo of Constantinople, of an Isaacius Angelus, and
of so many more in the Empire of the East, of a Theodebert and his Partners
(out of Aimoinus) in the West: That I say nothing of your own old Rufus, and
his fatal Posterity, nor of your late Allens, and your Wolseys, and your
Cromwells, and of your -- I had almost spoken it out, but that, as your own
several Chronicles Stow. ad An. 1536. and Godwin Lord Bishop of Hereford, ad
An. 1540.
save me that labor, so I remember, that Lex in sermon tenenda, especially
when it concerns Princes that are dead and gone: (what ever Saul was, yet
because once the Lord's Anointed, therefore David's Epitaph of 11 Sam. 1. etc.
Saul is a gallant piece.) But assuredly as the Apostle speaks 1 Cor. x. 11.
All these things happened unto them for ensamples, and they are written for
our Admonition, that all men, high and low, one with another, may dread to
meddle (of all other sins) with the sin of Sacrilege, at least because of the
Curse, which is not only so, Personal and no more, but commonly Domestical
also; dilating it self from the Sacrilegious person to his whole Sacrilegious
Family, root and branch, because all of them are usually Accessaries more or
less: nay, it becomes Epidemical, as in the Sin, so in the Judgment, it spreads
it self from Persons to Families, and from Families to whole Nations, if they
legitimate the sin: 1. Cor. v. 6.7.
Know ye not that a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump? Purge out therefore
the old leaven, that ye may be a new lump. It Is Apostolical Counsel, worth the
taking in time by all, whether Persons, Families, or Nations, be they otherwise
never so wise; For (...), God fulfils all his Works, as I may say, by a kind of
exact Geometry, Wisd. xi. 20.
In Pondere, Numero, and Mensura, Commensurating his Judgments to the sins:
Amos vi. 11.
He can smite the Great House with Breaches, and the little House with Clefts,
and proportion National Sins with National Judgments. Dr. Gauden above.
Some are so Superstitious (says a Reverend Author upon this Argument) as to
imagine that Bishop's, and all Church Lands, or Revenues, properly such, (as
pertaining to the support of that Order, Government, Authority, Ministry,
Charity and Hospitality, which ought to be in Clergymen, are like Irishwood
to Spiders and venomous Beasts, prone to burst them, so that vix gaudet tertius
hares; nay, though they possess them, yet they do not enjoy them, for nothing
temporal can be enjoyed without a serene mind, an unspotted Fame, and an
unscrupulous Conscience; which cannot be the Lot of Sacrilegious persons.

56. We need not remember you that not Ananias alone, but Ananias and Sapphira
together were Man and Wife in the Curse: For Zachary is plain for it, the
flying Roll of God's Curse will with all its Dimensions find passage into the
house of the Thief; nay more, it shall remain there in the midst of his house,
says the Lord, and Zach. v. 4
at last Consume it, with the Timber thereof, and the Stones thenceof: This for
God's Curse upon his Material house. As for the Moral house, his Sacrilegious
Posterity: Can any of you point out but any one notorious Church-Pirate, whose
Family is absolutely free from its share in that sad Hereditary Curse, which
(though upon another occasion) was pronounced against the house of Joab, so as
11 Sam. iij. 29.
there never fails from the house of GOD'S THIEF, one that has either an
Issue, it may be of Blood, (it may be by Duel, or by Murder) or else an Issue
of Uncleanness, as God is wont to punish the sin of Sacrilege, with giving
such men over to some other Hereditary sin, (the sorest Scourge next Hell) or
one that is a Leper, that has some Hereditary Disease; or one that leans on
a Staff, that is, a Cripple, or a misshapen, deformed thing, marked like Cain,
as it were, with Gods own immediate hand: or that falls on the Sword, that
comes to an untimely End, or dies an unnatural Death; or lastly, one that
lacks Bread, that lives or dies a Beggar: This for the Curse of God upon the
Sacrilegious Person's Moral house, as much as upon his Material house.

57. You of this Island, need not Sail over for Instances in all these
several kinds of Virum magnum, and summa familiarum Anglicarum, historiaeque
antiquae notitia praeditum citare testem possumus, quem coram aliquot viris
Intelligentibus and Nobilibus, Religione Protestantibus, ipsum etiam
professione Protestantem narrantem audivimus, quo tempore Rex Henricus viij.
opima illa Coenobiorum latifundia, ducentis Sexaginta and amplius nobilibus
viris, vel gratis, vel permutatione facta distribuisset, etiam Thomam
Norfolciae Ducem, viginti Clientibus suis, qui ei diu fideliter, liberaliterque
serviissent, reditum perpetuum quadringentarum librarum Sterlingarum ex aequo
repartivisse: ex horum viginti nobilium stirpe superesse adhuc haeredes
singulorum, in ipsis haereditatibus quas a Duce, patribusque suis acceperunt
florentes: Ex toto autem eorum numero, qui Coenobiorum opibus fuerunt ditati,
non superesse Sexaginta familias, quae in bonis perseverant avitis, omnes
reliquas familias penitus eis rebus, quas sic a R. Henrico possederant hodie
excidisse: Idque sibi ita notum dixit vir ille Nobilissimus, ut si opus foret,
singulos illos posset enumerare -- Adeo verissimum est quod vir Ingeniosissimus
Bosenus in politicis dixit, Reditus Ecclesiae and Monasteriorum esse velut
Aquilarum Plumas, quae, sialiarum avium plumis misceantur easdem velut Igne
contractas destruunt, usuique prorsus Ineptas reddunt. -- Ita si Deo dicata
misceantur Laicalibus feudis. and ad temporales applicentur causas, adeo non
apportant ipsis quicq^am Incrementi, ut etiam temporales Reditus, quibus
augendis addebantur non minuant tantum, verum and ad nihilum perducant. V.
Apostolatum Benedictinorum in Anglia per Clem. Reyner, etc. Tract. 1. Sect. 6.
p. 227. Infausta laicis bonorum Coenobialium possessio.
God's Curse upon both the Houses; He that runs may read them in the Capitals
of so many Ruinated Families among your selves, who (if I misapprehend not my
Author) can within the compass of one single County, point out the bare Names,
(for that is almost all is left of them, with much ado) of above 200. quondam
Noble Families, amongst whom King Henry the Eighth did distribute the
Abbey-lands by way of Sale, or Exchange, all of them, as we may say,
disinherited at this day; whereas within the same County, of twenty other
Families, whose Ancestors were of the Retinue of Thomas Duke of Norfolk, and
therefore rewarded by him with the Annuity of 400 li. a year equally divided
amongst them, there is not one of those, but to this day, he injoys his
Father's well-gotten Goods by way of Inheritance, with improvement, whilst
those other Sacrilegious Estates, as if full of Quicksilver, could never yet
settle, since the first Usurpation, but in less than three Generations, have
changed and ruined too their several Owners over and over: as if that fearful
Curse of God denounced by the Prophet Ezekiel 21, 27.
Ezekiel, against the great City Jerusalem, for their breach of the Oath of
Allegiance, and further Rebellion (to the King of Babylon, though a Pagan King,
though an Usurper) were for ever entailed also of all other Estates, upon the
Sacrilegious Family, (...) I WILL OVERTVRN, OVERTVRN, OVERTVRN IT, AND IT SHALL
BE NO MORE, UNTIL HE COME WHOSE RIGHT IT IS, AND I WILL GIVE IT HIM: A sad Item
this, for a treble Curse upon all Sacrilegious Rebels.

58. By this you see experimentally, how God's Curse upon Sacrilege is not
only Personal, but diffusive too, over the whole Family, yea Nation tha'ts
tainted therewith.

59. Not to accumulate any more Instances out of that confounded heap of
National Examples, (Pagan and Christian) who knows (we have reason to ask the
question) whether the Continuance here of the old National Sacrilege, and the
palpable Contrivance of some to add New Sacrilege to the Old, be not the
Principal sad Ingredient in this National Cup of God's wrath, which (do what we
can) must, you see, go round all over, as that deadly Cup of God*s fury, put
into the hand of the Prophet Jer, xxv. 27
Jeremy, by way of Emblem, with a command to cause every one, even the holy
City, and all, to drink it off; and a sad Commination too, you shall drink,
says the Lord of Hosts, and be drunken, (and so we were God knows Drunken
indeed, A DEMENTATED NATION, Dead drunk with God's Poculum stuporis, Psalm. lx.
3.
God's Deadly Cup, till we did stagger, and too too many fell down with it, yea
tumble one upon another,) and ye shall spew, and fall, and rise no more, (Lord
have mercy upon us,) and wherefore all this? because of the Sword which I will
send among you; That is, the deadly Cup, the Sword, wherewith we are cursed,
even this whole NATION (remember ye May. iij. 8. etc. See above.
Malachy) because we have ROBBED GOD. We have, if you mark all, too too just
cause to suspect, that this is not one of the least of all our National
Trangressions, the Divine Majesty does almost Vocally admonish us of, in this
his so long, so bloody a Visitation. We were lately robbed of our Estates, of
our Peace, of our Truth, of our Religion, of all, because we have robbed God:
For this is that Retaliation mentioned by Ex. xxi. 24.
Moses, An Eye for an Eye, and a Tooth for a Tooth: So Gods Punishments are
still the Anagrams of our sins: In the Analo^y of his Judgments, we may visily
read our sins in kind; it was so of old, See and compare the Histories in Dan.
viij. 12. with the ii, iij, and iv Chap. of the Book of Maccab. and also 11
Maccab xiij. 6.8.
and whether the National overthrow of God's true Religion, and Primitive
service in this whole Land, were not a sad Memento to us all, of our gross
abuse of the very same by National Sacrilege and profaneness; I leave it to
judge, unto those Consciences that are not yet utterly past feeling.

60. And if so, then to march on still, yea to give fire in the very face of
God himself, as it were, to charge on still in despite of God's destroying
Angel in our way, were worse than Scythian Barbarousness, even desperate
Brutishness below Number. 22.27.
Balam's Ass, that could stop, nay, stoop down at but the sight of that Sword,
that has been so deeply sheathed into our very Bowels, yea, drunk with our own
best blood; spent and spilt in that Sacrilegious War.

61. For we can never find out a fitter Title for that late Unnatural War, than
that of the Cic. in Virrem.
Orator, Bellum Sacrilegum, (the Superlative of aggravation) a Sacrilegious
War, in all the Dimensions of Sacrilege, a Sin you see, as of a heinous
nature, so of as heavy a consequence: The Demonstration whereof was the second
main part of our Pleading, The matter of Aggravation. May we now, Christian
Reader, in God's behalf, crave but the Favor of thy Religious patience,
whilst we pass through the third and last part, which contains the Matter of
Probation, and then we have done.

CHAP. VII.
The Confutation of the fair Colors of Religion, brought in to varnish over
the foul Sin of Sacrilege.

1. IT consists of these two principal School-heads, to wit, (...); The first
contains matter of Confutation, or Non-sute of the Adversaries Plea: The second
concludes with matter of Confirmation of our own cause.

2. Touching the first, the matter of Confutation, the Adversaries Plea for
Sacrilege is a Compound of Pretenses, drawn chiefly from the two main Heads,
or Common Places of Religion, and Policy. For the first of these, The pretense
of Religion, it is not unusual with the Devil, to transform himself into an
Angel of Light, in both Religions: for in the case of Alienation, the Papist
pretends Plenitudinem potestatis, Canonical Dispensation, etc. and the like.

3. But seriously and in reason (to go upon their own Principles) will a man
think that in this particular, the High Priest of the West, can de Jure,
pretend to a higher Power under the Gospel, than was allowed under the Law, to
the High Priest of the East? But however in some kind of vows, (as the vow Lev.
27.11.13.27, 28, etc. Ludovic. Capel. Diatribe de voto Jephta.
called (...) votum simplex) the votary might be allowed the liberty of
Redemption, in case the thing were not fit for Oblation, (for else if it were
fit, it might not at all be changed:) and the High Priest might have the power
of dispensation, as it were, in the estimation of it, yea, and commutation too,
but still with the Addition of a fifth: yet, in that other kind of
Compound-vows, called (...) conceived by way of Anathema with Malediction, such
as are generally all our Dedications, Compounded of two distinct Acts, the one
of Consecration in their use and end, the other of Execration in their Nature
and Effect. In this kind of Devotions therefore, neither were the Votary, nor
the High Priest himself allowed any the least Liberty, either of Estimation, or
Redemption, or Commutation, or Dispensation any ways: but the thing so
devoted, was concluded under the Law of an Irrevocable Devotion.

4. What was thus given to the Church, was of old said to be consigned in Manus
Mortuas, the Law, by this Style, may have supposed that the Clergy had no more
power to alienate them de Jure, than a dead man can de facto: otherwise, they
should be no longer manus mortuae, but manus mortiferae, no longer dead hands,
but deadly, and as subject to Gods deadly Curse too, as any Lay-mans, nay more,
the quality of the person augments the gradation, and doubles the Sacrilege.
This on the Popes, or the Ordinaries part.

5. On the Votaries part, the sin and danger is parallel; for as the Pope
cannot lawfully grant me such a Dispensation, so neither may I lawfully take
it: for, say the Pope could dispense with my promise made to the Church,
(that is the most he could do) how can he dispense with my promise made to God
himself? being but Gods Assignee, or witness, he can no more free me, really,
from my Obligation to God, than a Witness to a Bond can free a Debtor from the
payment of the Debt. It Is the Creditor alone that can dispense with the Debt,
not all the Witnesses in the World without him: that I am bound by my Vow, I
know it from clear Scripture: That I am loosed from my Vow, let any make it
appear unto me from as clear evidence, or else I may not trust to Man's
dispensation against Gods right. Thus much to the Papist, a far off; and God
grant we may never have any more to do with him but so, afar off indeed, God in
Mercy, prevent the Prophecy, which by their ingratitude to God, and this
Church, some men deserve, and provoke, Ne veniant Romani, Amen.

6. But now to lay the Axe to the root of the Tree; the Puritan (in point of
Religion) pretends Zeal. 1. Against Idolatry, and is for utter Abolition. 2.
Against an Idle Ministry, and is, (at least pretends to be) only for
Commutation.

7. Touching the first, the Zealot against Idolatry: admit, what we deny, and
they can never prove, that the Church Revenues, as they now stand by Law
established, are still abused indeed to Idolatry or Superstition, must we
therefore utterly down with them all Root and Branch? Can the Church Lands be
worse abused, than the Censers of Corah? or will you make your Ancestors, the
pious Founders, worse than Dathan and Abiram, and their Rebellious Company?

And yet behold (after the severe personal Execution of the Abusers) God
expressly gives order, what? That those Censers because abused, should therefore
be presently beaten into Kettles, or Brass pots for the use of the Kitchen? No,
but quite contrary, Ta^^ the Censers of those sinners against their own souls,
says the Lord, Numb. 16.37, 38.
and let, them ma^e them broad plates for a covering of the Altar? whatever
Man's Ordinance may be to the Contrary, Gods infallible Ordinance is directly,
they must be kept still, In genere Sa^^o, for the use of the Sanctuary: And
this command God fortifies with a Reason of perpet^al Consequence, as forcible
now as then, For, says he, they offered them unto the Lord, therefore they are
hallowed: Behold Gods express Acceptance of the Act, even then when he rejects
both the Actors, and their Intentions.

8. Can we expect a clearer Precedent, than is this full Determination of God
Almighty upon the Case? for what, in the substance of that whole History, can
they say was Typical or Levitical?

Sure the Equity, yea Religion of that Divine sentence, the old Lawmakers, the
wise Founders both of the Civil and Satute-Law, were sensible of. For Jure
Institutorum, says Instit. l. 2. Tit. 1. 8.
Schneidwin for one) Things once given to Religious uses, which cannot now upon
some emergent occasions be still so employed, (as to maintain Masses for the
Dead, or so, etc.) yet they may not revert to the Donor, or to his Heir, nor be
employed to profane or common uses, his Reason is, because Quod semel Deo
dicatum est amplius ad prophanos usus transferri non debet, sed talia oblata
and relicta ad alium pium usum converti debent. I well know, ad hominem, of how
little authority this Law is like to be, or indeed, all the good Laws of God
and man, if cross to the humor of the men I am now dealing withal. The ground
therefore why I quote this Law, and other such like Laws is for the Reason of
those Laws, because, Semel Deo dicatum, etc. What was once given to God, must
be Gods for ever. And this Reason is expressly grounded upon Number 16.38. See
above, page 126.
Scripture too.

9. And therefore the Wisdom and Religion both of your better Ancestors, had a
special respect unto it, as may appear by two notable Acts of Parliament: the
first Among the Statutes at large in the public Library at Oxon. Sta^utum de
Terris Templariorum. Coke l. 11. fol. 25.
passed almost 400 years ago, in the 17th, of Edward the Second, at the
Dissolution of the Templars, which was become Ordo impietatis, and therefore
voted down, not by a Private Close-Committee of one single City, or Nation
either, but by a general Act of all Christendom. But then what became of all
their Lands? you shall find in that EXCELLENT Statute, that for their part
your godly Ancestors, made a Conscience of turning those Lands into Lay-fees,
and therefore did then, and there, upon sundry Reasons of Religion and Honesty
both, in that Statute excellently well delivered, to the praise of the Piety
and Christian Wisdom of that Age, restore all those Lands to the Church by Act
of Parliament. Some of those reasons may be worth your notice, because they may
concern you now at least as much as them: The first is, because however those
Lands were now abused, yet originally they were given to the Augmentation of
the Honor of God. 2. For the good of Universal Holy Church. Therefore 3. Those
honest Common-wealths-men thought themselves bound in Conscience for the Health
of their own Souls to preserve them still to godly uses: That so 4. The godly
and worthy will of the Givers might be observed in genere, though it could not
then in specie.

10. And this fourth Reason is in that one Statute repeated twice for failing:
May their good Example be a warning to you all, that it may not rise upon in
judgment against you, as against all the rest of this Generation. For the good
will of the Dead, the Pious Founders of Holy Places and Portions, is another
Sacred thing, and therefore ungodly to alter and to frustrate it, was always
amongst all good men held a heinous Crime, as being 1. Impious to the Dead. 2.
Injurious to your godly Ancestors: and 3. To your own Posterity It will prove
no better than fatal Sacrilege.

Therefore the Determination of that wise Assembly was this, That neither our
Lord the King, nor any other chief Lords of the Eees, nor any Persons
whatsoever should by Escheat, or by any other means have or enjoy any of those
Lands, but they should be still converted, and charitably disposed of to godly
uses; and therefore they were given to the Prior of the Hospital of Saint John
of Jerusalem, as it were, in eodem genere, though changed in specie. And yet
those Templars, to whose Lands your Ancestors showed so much Religious respect,
were no Churchmen neither, but Soldiers: How much greater then ought your
Care and Conscience to be, for the preserving of those Lands which belong to
the Church directly?

11. The second Act of Parliament you may have amongst your private Statutes,
2. of H. 5. upon the Dissolution of Priors Aliens: The Reason expressed in the
Preamble, was ad Intentionem, quod divina Servitia in locis praedictis possent
plus debite fieri per gentes Anglicanas, etc. so that still divina Servitia,
was their main care: Therefore it is observable, that upon the same premised
grounds, immediately at the dissolution of those Priors Aliens, the King kept
them not in his own hands, but gave them to other religious uses: as for
instance, To the Monastery of Shene, (which he Founded) to the Dean and Canons
of St. Stephen, etc.

12. Say again, that those were Times of Ignorance and Blindness, and that
therefore in those times the Impulsive Cause might be merely Superstitious in
the particulars, yet for all that, the final Cause was right still in the
general, namely, to honor God, to maintain his Service, etc. as may be seen in
all their Evidences and Donations, which ever bear this Clause, Deo and
Ecclesiae; To God and the Church, before there be any mention of any Saint, or
other supposed Superstitious use. Now in all Reason, although the Impulsive
Cause may cease, yet the Final Cause cease not, nor the good effect flowing
from it.

So that far safer it were to mind that, in a reverend respect unto, and
imitation of those wise men your godly Ancestors, who took hold of the general
Intent of the Pious Founders, however after abused by the particular Successors.

13. And that you may once for all, know directly what that general intent was,
Take it in the very words of the old Form of Dedication, yet extant in the
Capitular of Scimus res Ecclesiae Deo esse Sacratas, qua propter si quis eas ab
Ecclesiis aufert proculdubio Sacrilegium comittit. Caecus. enim est qui ista
non videt. Quisquis ergo nostrum suas res Ecclesiae tradit, Domino Deo illas
offert, atque dedicat, suisque Sanctis and non alteri dicendo talia and agendo
Ita, Facit enim Scripturam de ipsis rebus quas Deo dare desiderat, and ipsam
Scripturam coram Altari, aut supra tenet in manu, dicens ejusdem loci
Sacerdotibus atque Custodibus, Offero Deo atque dedico omnes res, quae in hac
Chartula tenentur insertae [pro remissione peccatorum meorum, ac parentum and
filiorum] aut pro quocunque illas Deo deliberare voluerit ad Serviendum ex his
Deo in Sacrificiis, Missarumque Solemniis, Orationibus, Luminariis, Pauperum,
ac Clericorum Alimoniis, and caeteris divinis cultibus, atque illius Ecclesiae
Utilitatibus, Si quis autem eas inde, quod fieri nullatenus credo, abstulerit,
sub poena Sacrilegii ex hoc Domino Deo, cui eas offero atque dedico,
districtissimas reddat rations. Ponit etiam in ea alias Conjurationes, quas
Enumerare longum est. -- Absit ut rerum Ecclesiarum cupiditate, vel oblatione
Sacrilegi, aut Anathema Efficiamur, aut talibus Laqueis unquam devinciamur:
quoniam scimus Anathematos homines, vel Sacrilegos, non solum infames, and a
Consortio fidelium alienos esse, sed etiam a Regno Dei extorres fieri, non
dubitamus. Ut ergo omnis suspicio a nobis auferatur, profitemur omnes stipulas
dextris manibus tenentes easque propriis e manibus ejicientes, coram Deo and
Angelis suis, ac vobis cunctisque Sacerdotibus, nec talia facere, nec facere
volentibus consentire, sed magis Deo auxiliante resistere: -- nec cum iis cibum
Sumere, nec ad Ecclesiam, vel ad Palatium, aut in itinere pergere, nec nostros
Caballos, vel reliqua pecora nostra cum eorum peccoribus, aut ad pastum ire,
aut simul habitare, vel manner -- ne pro eorum Iniquitatibus una cum eis, nos
and nostri, quod absit, pereamus; Scimus enim quia perit Justus pro impio, etc.
Ut ergo haec omnia a vobis, and a nobis, sive a successoribus vestris, and
nostris futuris temporibus absque ulla dissimulatione conserventur, Inter
vestra Capitula inserere Jubete, Capitul, Caroli Magni Wormatiae, lib. 6. cap.
285.
Charles the Great, (a man equally as far from Idolatry as he was from
Sacrilege; witness against it that severe passage of his in his book of Lib.
3. cap. 17. de Imag.
Images.) In the Preamble of that Form, the whole generality of the people,
does first of all acknowledge, that whatsoever is given to the Church, is
consecrated to God. 2. That whosoever takes away such things from the Church,
does undoubtedly commit Sacrilege: and that he must needs be stark blind that
does not see all this to be so indeed: This is therefore a far greater
blindness in any now adays, to doubt either of Consecrations, or of Sacrilege,
or of the Effect of the Curses, etc. than was that blindness they impute unto
their devout Ancestors.

14. Then follows the Form; and here first of all, The Founder or Donor lays
upon the Altar the Schedule, which contains an Inventory of all his Gifts, or
holds it over it in his hand, saying to the Priests and Guardians of that
place, I do offer unto God, and dedicate all those things that are contained in
this Paper: And these their Donations they do seal up with many a heavy Curse,
and second it with the significant Ceremonies of those times, as by scattering
of Straw to and fro, the old Rite of Excommunication in allusion to the Destiny
of the ungodly, Psalm 1.4. who are compared to the Chafe, which the wind
drives to and fro and the like: and those Curses they do lay upon themselves,
and upon all those that shall go about to alter or alienate, or but consent to
the Alienation, vowing that they will be so far from that, that they will, by
Gods help, resist all such to the utmost of their power, and renounce their
company man and beast: Their reason is, lest being partakers of their sin, they
should for company perish with them for ever.

15. But that which is most observable in the Form, is that after the
Repetition of their own particular Intentions, (some of them it may be
Superstitious, and some others right enough, the Corn may easily be winnowed
from the Chafe) then they sum up all in these general terms, thus, That they
Offer it all, for whatsoever shall be pleasing unto God, toward the
maintenance of his Divine Service, for the sustentation of the Clergy, and all
other things that may be honorable to God, and profitable to Holy Church:
Which express general words, with charitable Judges, may well bear the sense of
an Implicit Renounciation of all contrary Idolatry or Superstition, or abuse
in the particulars, which in them, living then under no better light, may be
presumed to be repented of, among their sins of Ignorance. And this with the
Premises may serve in Confutation of the first pretense of Zeal against
Idolatry for utter Abolition.

16. Follows now the second Religious pretense of Zeal against an Idle
Ministry, which pleads for, (at least pretends to no more but) Commutation
only. For so, this Church-Patrimony which now maintains but an idle Company of
Apostolical Bishops and Pastors, shall be far better employed to maintain a
powerful preaching Ministry, forsooth, that shall restore the Purity of the
Gospel. This is the Plea.

To which, by the way, (to say no worse) 1. Is not this against all Reason and
Equity, that the Adversary should take upon him to be both Party and Judge, both
of the Charge and of the Change too.

17. But to the Change it self, either they intend to Change for the better, or
for the worse; if they say for the better, then first the Amelioration must be
made appear to be clearly such, that in it at the least, finis legis, shall be
kept, and Gods Service will be better supported. 2. To do it by way of Addition
to it, was once Levit. 27.10.33.
Gods own express Direction upon the Case, not by way of Alteration, or
downright Commutation; God in his Wisdom so ordained it, as suspecting men
might change for the worse, even then when they pretend to change for the
better, lest therefore a gap might thereby be opened to men's Frailty, or
Fraudulency, God would not suffer a man to change at all, no not a good for a
bad, but rather to double his offering, if he would needs be changing. 3. They
may not only pretend, but intend too to change for the better, and yet through
Gods just Judgment upon Changelings, it may prove the worse for the
Constitution of this Commonwealth, or other emergent causes; and if they be
not sure to change for the better, as it is very much to be feared they cannot,
then we had as good keep us as we are.

10. But say, Pretenses were become very Truths, and that they wiser men then
all the whole Catholic Church besides, down from Christ's days, and upwards
too, might happily change for the betrer indeed: yet in a very wise Le leggi
nuove, anchorche in qualche part fussero migliori, mancano di quel Rispetto, e
di quella Forza, che L'antichita, e la consuetudine sogliono apportare a tutte
le cose e cosi a poco a poco, debilitando si ipiu very fondamenti del governo,
conviene facilmente cadere, urtato dall' Ambitione de pochi potenti, O dalla
Licenza del popolo, il quale, perduta una volta la Riverenza verso le leggi,
suole spesso insurgere contra di loro, con nuove e perverse Usanze; come auv
enne in Roma, etc. Mario Favorito dal Popolo contro le leggi, etc. Paruta della
vita Politica libro. Terzo.
Italian Statesman, I find an old Rule of State, (consonant to the Rules of
Religion too) which before we change, would be vary seriously pondered.

And this is it: Upon CHANGES, especially of Government, follow NEW LAWS which
though in part, possibly better than the Old, yet will want much of that
respect and force or Authority, which custom and Antiquity are wont to procure
unto all things and thus by little and little, the very FOUNDATION of
Government will undermine it self: so as in time all the whole FRAME OF STATE
(we may say the same of the Church) will insensibly down to the ground, being
justled out by the ambition of a few great ones, or by the licentiousness of
the many, the People, who having once forgotten the reverence they owed unto
the old Laws, will soon make Insurrection against all manner of Laws
whatsoever: The truth of all this is clear, in the Case betwixt the State of
Rome, and Marius the Peoples Favorite against the old Laws, etc. Thus far the
Italian Statesman.

19. And this Foreign Wisdom upon this very Case too, was as I may say,
naturalized here by a Royal See the Proclamation for the Uniformity of Common
prayer before the Book of Common Prayer.
Act, for the Authorizing an Uniformity of the Book of Common Prayer, etc.
Established by Act of Parliament, wherein to prevent the Temptation to, and
Imputation of FICKLENESS, that GREAT SCANDAL OF STATE, the Royal Admonition
runs thus, We do admonish all men, that hereafter they shall not expect, nor
attempt any further ALTERATION in the Common and Public Form of Gods Service,
from this, which is now established, for that neither will we give way to any
to presume, that our own Judgment having determined in a matter of this weight,
shall be swayed to alteration by the frivolous suggestions of any light Spirit:
neither are we ignorant of the Inconveniences that do arise in GOVERNMENT, by
admitting INNOVATION in things once settled by mature deliberation: And how
necessary it is to use Constancy in the upholding of public Determinations of
State, for that such is the unquietness and unstedfastness of some
dispositions, affecting every year new forms of things, as if they should be
followed in their unconstancy, would make all Actions of States ridiculous and
contemptible: whereas the steadfast maintaining of things by good advice
established, is the weal of all Commonwealths. Behold a Fort-Royal, strong
enough against all such Changes, if but well manned, and maintained,

20. And indeed the Platform of it was borrowed from the wisest mortal King
that ever was, Solomon it is, who gives us all fair warning, saying, Prove.
24.21, 22, 23.
My Son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are
given to change: The Precept is backed with an ominous Prophecy, For their
Calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both, (both
Changers and Medlers: These things also belong unto the wise: as wise as some
men may think themselves, were they as wise as Achitophel, they may need; and
they should take this wise counsel betimes, lest they prove Achitophels at
their latter end.

21. But if Solomon had not given us this fair warning, we may know those men's
good meaning in the Change, by their Intentions and Endeavors too, ad ultimum
Potentiae, expressed in the Bill for Abolition offered at Uxbridge: A full
Relation of the passages concerning the Treaty at Uxbrige, etc. p. 160.
Exchange is no Robbery, was once your Proverb, but our late sad Experience of
those Reformers good Intentions in the change, may have taught us more wit,
then still to believe words: As once the Orator, so may we now justly cry out,
Quid verba audio cum facta videam? let their Actions speak, and they will speak
loud, and tell you what goodly Change they mean to make. Behold, Testimonia
rerum, and loquentia signa: In two late flourishing Kingdoms at once, as in a
two leaved broad Glass, you may clearly see, that, under pretense of
Commutation, they have at last, compassed their great Project of utter
Confusion, in the utter abolition of the chief Offices, and Sacrilegious
Conversion of the Church Lands, and Revenues, to their own proper Lay Uses:
Except it may be Offam Cerbero, here and there a bone cast, to stop the mouths
of such as otherwise would bark out against their crying sin of Sacrilege. For
as an Non alio censendi Elogio sunt, quos Templorum and Sacerdotiorum Opulentia
ad fidei dogmata novanda illexit, qui suos Pseudopastorculos aliqua divitiarum
particula asperserunt totum ut ipsi devorarent Impetue. Contzen ad Romans cap.
2.22:
Author upon our Text says too truly; They deserve no other Epithet, whom
Covetousness has allured to Innovate all in Church and Religion, and all out
of a hope thereby to enrich themselves with the rich spoils of the old Church
and Religion, under pretense of sprinkling their false petty Shepherds with a
few drops, that so themselves without control, may swallow up all. Of some of
our Reformers, Pudet haec, and dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli.

22. But in such a case, should they, or we all hold our peace, very Heathens
would open their mouth, and plead Gods Cause for us against them: would you
think a (...). Plato de legib. lib. 10 principio, (...), De Sacrilegio.
Plato, by the mere light of nature could charge such a kind of Sacrilege
with flat Atheism? Whosoever (says he, speaking there expressly of Sacrilege)
wrongs the Gods any of those ways, he must of necessity be guilty of one of
these three crimes, either he absolutely thinks there is no God at all: or
secondly, that if there be a God, that he is a God careless of what is done
here below: or thirdly, That this God is nothing so just or so terrible to
offenders at the world is made believe, but either corrupt, one that will be
bribed in his own Cause, or a very tame facile God (with all profound
reverence, be this but repeated to the Conversion or Confusion of the Authors
of such Atheistical Opinions and practices:) a flexible God, whom you may
offend at pleasure, and re-appease as you please with a few good words, for
many bad deeds. God deliver us from such a Childish ridiculous Religion, nay,
from such damnable Atheism, in thought, word, or deed: for as the Vel Deos non
esse, etc. -- vel illos praeter aequum and bonum Muneribus and precibus
conciliari: Illa enim absurda Deo attribuere, est negare Deum: Joh. Serran. in
Platon.
Glossator of this Text in Plato well comments by such carriage toward God, in
attributing such absurdities unto God, what is any one, the least, of all these
three ways, but utterly to raze down the Foundation of all Religion, and even
then, when in words we profess a GOD, in WORKS to deny HIM, as the Tit. 1. ult.
Apostle argues the Case?

23. And as for to other part of the pretense, the powerfulness of their
Ministry and the Purity of their Gospel, etc. will you take our Lords Advice?
Then judge of the Tree by his Fruit, for Mat. 7.16.
by their Fruits ye shall know them, says the great Shepherd and Bishop of
our Souls; and there he speaks directly of Teachers too, and bids us judge of
the Doctrine by the Fruits it brings forth, be they good or bad; and who sees
not that since those powerful Preachers came up, (we speak of the generality of
them) we had more Christian Blood shed, we had more Spirits of Error, conjured
up within the Circle of this one Island, (to the credit of the Cause be it
spoken) and within the compass of one Triennium, the span of one three years of
Schism and Rebellion, than was raised in the whole Christian world besides (all
circumstances considered) in thrice three hundred years.

And now having confuted their holy pretenses drawn from colors of Religion,
we pass on to examine their State-Wisdom, consisting of four points of Policy,
as it were the four Elements that make up the whole compound of their Plea for
Sacrilege.

CHAP. VIII.
A full CONFUTATION of three Reasons of State, or Pretenses of Policy, for the
Practice of Sacrilege: namely, 1. Justice upon Delinquents. 2. Public Peace.
3. State-Necessity.

1. THe first is a pretense of Justice upon a Delinquent Party. The second a
pretense of Peace to the whole Kingdom. The third, a pretense of
State-necessity. The fourth, a pretense of power Legislative to dispose of the
Church Revenues, as they see cause. These be the Ragioni di stato of our
English Machiavels.

To all which first in general, Super tota Materia, we may well preface with
the honest Observation (you may call it an Oracle) of that Noble Venetian
Knight, Paulo Paruta, In questo corrotto seculo con certo vauo nome di RAGION
DI STATO, si vanno spesso perturbando, e confondendo tutte le cose humane e
divine: That is, In this Corrupt Age, N. B.
under pretense of a certain vain thing, called REASON OF STATE, men too too
often go on so far, till have troubled, yea confounded all humane and divine
matters: Thus he. But e're we encounter them, we had need to pray, from such
Statesmen, and from such reasons of State, as will make true Religion but a
stalking Horse to false Policy: Good Lord deliver us. Once you may be sure of
this, that one day you shall not be Judged by your vain Reason of State, but by
your True Religion to God, and Real Reverence to Holy Church under God.

2. To the particulars: One does well define Sacrilege a colored Theft, under
pretense of Law: To begin therefore with the first Pretense, It Is the Pretense
of Justice upon a Delinquent Party, accused of two Crimes. 1. Of old Collusion
and fraud at the first original Purchase of those Church Revenues. 2. Of
another great new Crime, since, called Malignancy, which is in plain English, a
compound of Religion to God, Duty to the Church, Loyalty to the King, This is
that terrible Chimaera, Malignancy; the fear whereof, far more than the fear of
God, or of the King, has already Conquered, and now possesses the Hearts of
the People, the Heads of some Peers, and the Tail of the Priests.

3. To prove the first the Collusion, they will tell you that of old the Priests
took advantage of the simplicity of the times and of the men, when both were at
the worst: and men ^awned upon, or frighted, upon their deathbed were
fraudulently persuaded to do they knew not well what: and clearly to prove all
this, they produce strong evidences, such as, for instance, the merry Case of
Naples, etc. and the like. This is the Plea, colored with the odious
imputation of Covin, Covetousness, and Ambition in the Priest, Blindeness, and
Superstition in the People.

4. I am confident men are too rational, to expect we should confute this
seriously: But yet how do they evidence the Collusion? for first, a wise man
would think it hard for a third Person, to tell what passes betwixt a Penitent
and his Confessor; especially the Penitent dying upon it. But 2. Admit there
had been fraud indeed in some one odd case or other, (for to affirm this
universally of all Church-Donations, were both very untrue, very Immodest, that
we say not impudent and very uncharitable) although the particular intent might
be bad in the deceiver, yet at least for the general of it, the Intent might be
good, and Religion in the party deceived, viz. To further the Service of God,
and the salvation of his Soul, as we have See above page
proved before. 3. Why may not we in such a case, for Gods Interest, and the
Right of the Church, say as you say in your own Law, for the Right of your
Client, or the Interest of the Commonwealth, BETTER A MISCHIEF, THEN AN
INCONVENIENCE: Better suffer some such one private injury, than open a public
gap to Sacrilege: as it was better for the Princes of Joshua 9. See above page
Israel, though circumvented by fraud on the Gibeonites part, yet to keep
promise with the Deceiver, than to open a gap unto Perjury, and the penalty
attending upon perjury. But Ex abundanti in one respect more, the ground of
both those cases may be one and the same, namely, because, Semel Sacrata vero
numini, per veram Ecclesiam, prophanari rursus, aut in fiscum redigi non
possunt. Wesebec. paratit. c l. 1. T. xi. 4.
Semel Deo dicatum, what is once given to God, must be Gods for ever: For was
not this the very case of the Gibeonites, where, besides the Interposition of
an Oath, a part ante, there was also the addition of a Dedication, a part
post; they were given to God, and even therefore afterward Ezra 2.43.
those Gibeonites were called Nethinims, from (...) which signifies to give,
because they were given for the service of the Temple, To be hewers of wood,
Josh. 9.27.
and drawers of water for the Congregation, and for the Altar of the Lord. It Is
true, their Office was for the matter, but vile and base, as may appear by that
proverbial speech among the Jews, Deuteronomy. 29.11.
From the hewer of thy wood, unto the drawer of thy water: yet bebold so many
hundred years after, how severe an avenger God was of the injury done, though
by a King unto his Nethinims: and if God be so tender over his water-bearers,
will he not much more avenge the blood of his Highpriests? This by the way,
upon occasion of the parallel of the Gibeonites fraud with the supposed deceit
of the old Priests in the obtention of those Testamentary Donations.

5. But fifthly and lastly, admit the charge of Collusion be false, and the
case not so indeed, (as for the general, the contrary is most apparent;) then
under pretense of Justice, what an extreme Injustice is this, Invito donatore,
Who being dead, yet lives, in his last Will and Testament: for if an Apostle
may be Judge upon the Case, a Testament is of force after men are dead, (Heb.
ix. 17.) Invito donatore, I say, and Invito possessore too, and both bona
fidei, in despite of God and man, feloniously, to take away the Churches
Right, yea, Gods own Inheritance? Deuteronomy. xviii. 1, 2.
Inter pares, so to do, were high Injustice, though but a violation of a civil
contract, or stipulation; how much more heinous then must the usurpation be
against our Superior, yea, against the Supreme Lord, the God of Heaven and
Earth, whose Right, by all Laws is absolute, Irrespective, Independent. This is
the very Argument of King Withred, in his Scimus and veraciter extat, ut si
quid s^mel acceperit homo de manu alterius in propriam potestatem, nullatenus
sine Ira and ultione illud dimiserit impunitus. Ideo horrendum est hominibus
expoliare Deum vivum, and scindere Tunicam ejus, and haereditatem ejus,
quotquot ex aliquo concessum ei fuerat de terrenis substantiis. S. H. Spelman
in Concilio Magno Becanqueldensi, sub Withredo Rege Cantii, A. C. 694.
Council of Becanceld, almost a thousand years ago. And thus much in answer to
the Imputation of Collusion, and the first pretense of Justice against it.

6. As for the second point of Delinquency, the charge of Malignancy: God
forbid but offenders indeed, such as have really violated the known Laws of God
or man, should have condign punishment, and Imprimis Churchmen. So the Trial
be Legal, and the Triers (according to your own Law) Magna Charta, 9 H. 3. S.
29. Juries ought to be persons considerable and knowing, they anciently used to
be twelve Knights. So says Sir Edward Coke in his Comment upon Littleton's
Tenures, citing Mr. Lambert -- The meaning of Legalis Homo, to qualify him of
a Jury, is not, nor formerly was, meant to be only a man of 40 s. per annum,
but to be at least in some good measure, In Legibus peritus, as some are of
opinion, and so as it were a kind of assistant to the Judge. This is the
observation of a wise man, Nomine and re. Sir Robert Wiseman in his learned
Book of the Law of Laws. Edit. 1664. Notes touching the alteration of some
Law^, p. 116, 117.
homines legales and pares, and therefore not parties, or enemies, against such
Jurors the Law will allow of a principal challenge: Lastly, so they be tried
not ad placitum, but by the old standing Rule, The known Law of England; which,
to define out of that known Author, ( Doctor and Student, Chap. 4.) must be
grounded, 1. On the Law of Reason. 2. On the Law of God. 3. On the general
Customs of the Realm. 4. On the Principles, or Maxims of the Law. 5. On
particular Customs. 6. On the Statutes, or Acts of Parliament. All which above,
have put in their Plea for the Church.

But secondly, if bare Accusation may serve the turn, who can be Innocent?
especially, if by the Faction or Malice of a prevailing party, stilo Novo, he
be called an Offender, who is most Faithful to God, most Dutiful to the Church,
and most Loyal to the King. The pretended crime has been published, and really
punished also, any time these seven and twenty years, and it is to prove yet.

Thirdly, If some of the Clergy were guilty, yet sure not all; all are not
such, and by what Law of God or Man, must the Righteous suffer merely for the
wicked. The Ipsa Communitas non potest Excommunicari. Aquin. Suppl. 22, 5^0.
School determines it unlawful to Excommunicate an whole University, or
Corporation, because of the possible mixture of some good with the bad, how
much less to Excommunicate a whole Community to all Generations, and can it
then be lawful hand over head, to deprive a whole Tribe, Gods own Tribe, with
their Wives and Children, and all for ever and aye, without hope of redress, or
recovery.

Fourthly. Say all this whole present Generation of Clergymen were really
guilty of all the Crimes laid to their charge, and guilty every man of them,
what is this to future Succession, out of all doubt innocent as yet? Personal
Delinquency may forfeit the Personal Right of the present Incumbent, the
Offender; but it cannot forfeit another Right: By the Laws of other Nations,
(and as I am assured by your The Law is clear, if a Clergyman commit Treason
or any other capital offense, he forfeits not the Right of his Church, but only
the present profit during his own life, or Incumbency. See Stamford's Pleas of
the Crown, 187.
own Law too) the forfeiture can extend no farther than the Title: Now
whatsoever a Clergyman possesses, is all in Jure Ecclesiae, and Jure Dei: is
all in the Right of the Church, and in the Right of God.

7. As for the first, Jus Ecclesiae, the Personal Delinquency of a Clergyman
can no more forfeit, or impeach that, than the Guardians personal offense can
prejudice his Ward under age: for in this sense you say, the Church is always
under age, always a Minor in the World: God's, the Kings, and the States Ward:
God, the Supreme Guardian of the Church can and will defend his Ward, let the
under-Guardians look to it, as they will answer the Supreme. It Is both the
comparison and conclusion too of your own Ecclesia semper est infra aetatem,
and fungitur semper vice minoris, nec est juri consonum quod infra aetatem
existentes per negligentiam custodum suorum, exharedationem patiantur seu ab
action repellantur. Sir Edw. Coke, super Magna Charta, page 3.
Lawyers upon the case, grounded upon diverse Records* best known to your own
selves.

8. And as thus in respect of the Church, no Clergyman can forfeit the Lands
and Revenues which he enjoys only in Jure Ecclesiae: So fifthly and lastly,
much less in respect of God: for a Tenant for Life or Years, can but forfeit
his own Lease, for his own time; he cannot forfeit the right or property of his
Tenement, that belongs to his Landlord: How then can any man's fault forfeit
Gods Right? for we have proved it before by Gods Law, and (as we are given to
understand it from some of your own sages) by your own Law too, that of all
Church Revenues God is really the Proprietary, the Clergy but the Vsufractuary.
This is enough to tear off from the painted face of Sacrilege this first
Vizard, the Pretense of Justice upon Delinquents.

9. From the premises may clearly appear, how impertinent, and unjust some men
are, who maliciously mis-apply against our Prelates and Church men. Some
vehement declamations, and disputes of John Wickliffe in the 17th. of his 45.
Articles, and John Huss 43. Arguments against the Temporalties of the Church:
without any due or just Consideration, either 1. of the Time when, or 2. Place
where, or 3. the Parties against whom, or 4. the Matter about which, or 5. the
manner how far, either John Wickliffe, or John Huss delivered those Positions:
Any one of which single Circumstances soberly, and ingenuously pondered, does
quite alter the Case.

For 1. As for the Time, it was when the Clergy so superabounded in their
Revenues, that a Law seemed necessary to interpose, and restrain the Oblations,
by Mortmain, Stat. of Mortmain, 7. of Edw. 1.
When the people brought much more then enough, as in Moses Case, Exodus xxxvi.
5. when the people were so liberal of their Oblations, and Donations unto the
Clergy, That, to phrase it with S. Luke, chap. vi. 38. in an higher sense, they
seemed as it were, pressed down, shaken together, and running over into their
bosoms. But now the case is altered, there is no great fear, in this our Age,
that the people will over-do in this kind. The notable Subtractions from the
Bishoprics, and Deans, and Chapters in the last Age, the multiplied
Prescriptions through Covin, or Cowardice, the Conversion of Lease-holds into
Free-holds, by encroachments, the Decays of Church-Rents, the easy Pines of
the Churchmen (in comparison of Lay-Land-lords) the Aggravations by servile
Taxes, never heard of before, now of late laid upon the Clergy, such as
Bridge-money, Roague-money, and the like. These (and much more could be said)
may sufficiently secure the State from the Clergies Exceedings: therefore,
Distingue Tempora, is a wise rule to silence the Objectors.

2. As for the place, John Huss, (Arg. 32.) fixed his Assertions in the Kingdom
of Bohemia; whereof he affirms the Clergy had a fourth, or third part; from
which proportion the Clergy of England (though very thankful to God and the
King for what they have) are very far, perhaps upon honest computation, not the
thirtieth part, all Reprises duly deducted.

3. The Parties, against whom John Wickliffe, and John Huss positions were
directed, were the Popish Prelates, Abbots, etc. Shavelings, as John Huss, Arg.
42. out of Hildegardis Prophecy terms them, (i. e.) Monks. The whole scope of
both John Wickliffe, and John Huss Positions is against such Clergymen, who did
both usurp, and also plead Exemption of the Clergy from the Kings Authority, N.
B.
as over their Persons, so over their Possessions: Whereas the Clergy of
England have better learned Christ since, ( Romans xiii. 1.) They know, and
acknowledge, that Omnis Anima, Every soul must be subject to the higher Powers.
(...), according to St. Chrysostoms Loyal Gloss upon the place, Though he were
an Apostle, though he be a Bishop, yet must he be subject to the Higher Powers:
and therefore our Prelates and Churchmen, do not only profess, but also swear
due Subjection and Allegiance to the King, as Supreme in both Respects as over
their Persons, so in all Causes, and therefore over their Possessions: Bp.
Andrews, Tortura Torti. Bp. Morton's Causa Regia, etc.
Our Prelates do not only practice due subjection in both these, but also to
their Power, Protect the Kings Supremacy, with their Pens and Learned Writings
against all Opposers on the right hand and on the left, against all, whether
Anabaptists or Papists; so that to confound our Prelates and Churchmen, with
those Prelates and Churchmen in John Wickliffe's and John Huss times, is a
malicious Plot. Certainly, here, if any where, Comparisons are odious: To argue
thus, from the left to the Right, what is it but Crassa ignoratio Elenchi: a
fallacy exploded in the very Schools.

4. The matter about which both John Wickliffe and John Huss frame their
Arguments, is the Clergy offending habitualiter, that is, as ( Wickliffe
explains it) which continue in the custom of sin, and will not amend; and John
Huss (Argument 2.) instances in Rebellion against the King, and ( Arg. 24.)
Treason, as in the case of Bishop Judas Iscariot (as he terms him) Heresy, as
Pope Leo; Rapos and other such grievous Crimes (enumerated also by the Author,
in the title of his Appendix to John Wickliffe's Articles, etc. with which
heinous Matters, Impudence it self cannot charge our Prelates and other
Canonical Churchmen, who, when tried in the fiery furnace of the late
Rebellious, and Sacrilegious Persecution, (absit verbo invidia) proved
generally the most loyal, and most constant Subjects of all, so as neither
Sequestration, nor Deprivation, nor Banishment, nor Torment, nor Death it self
could prevail upon them, to make them renounce their due Allegiance to the
King: Therefore to tell the King, that to take away their Temporalties is
neither Sacrilege nor Injustice, is such a bad office, such an high offense
against the Kings Justice, as would deserve some Exemplary Correction, to deter
others from the like presumption against my Lord the King, whose Royal
Generosity (so Hereditary to him, from his unparalled Father No Prince in the
whole world did ever both in word and deed more abhor the Sin of Sacrilege
than the late godly King Charles the First: Witness those Divine Lines in his
Portraicture, especially Sect. 14. Upon the Covenant. No man (says that King)
can be more forward than my self to carry on all due Reformations with mature
Judgment, and a good Conscience, in what things I shall (after impartial
advice) be by Gods word, and right Reason, convinced to be amiss, I have
offered more than ever the fullest, freest, and wisest Parliaments did desire.

But the sequel of some men's actions makes it evident, that the main
Reformation intended is the abasing of Episcopacy into Presbytery, and the
Robbing the Church of its Lands, and Revenues: for no men have been more
injuriously used, as to their Loyal Rights, than the Bishops, and Churchmen.
These as the fattest Deer must be destroyed; the other Rascal-herd of Schisms,
Heresies, etc. being lean, may enjoy the benefit of a Toleration. Thus Naboth's
Vineyard made him the only blasphemer of his City, and fit to dye. Still I see
while the breath of Religion fills the Sails, Profit is the Compass, by which
factious men steer their course in all seditious Commotions. -- Whereupon the
King protests his detestation of such sacrilegious Reformation, in these words:
"I have always had such a perfect abhorrence of it in my soul, that I never
found the least Inclination to such sacrilegious Reformings: yet no man has a
greater desire to have Bishops and all Churchmen so reformed, that they may
best deserve, and use not only what the pious munificence of my Predecessors
has given to God, and the Church, but all other additions of Christian Bounty.
Thus that incomparable Prince.


of Glorious Memory) does scorn such unworthy Counsel, and Counselors as would
persuade the King, against his gracious Genius, to do an Act whereby that
Estate, I mean, the Clergy, which suffered most for the King, should now also
suffer again by the King.

5. As for the manner, how far both John Wickliffe and John Huss extend, or
limit their Assertions: It Is to be observed, first, that as they both still
pre-suppose, as a ground of just deprivation. 1. The notorious abuse of those
Revenues, or Temporalties of the Clergy. 2. The Clergies Contumacy, or
continuance therein, and all this not pretended, but proved: so secondly, do
they expressly limit those, who have Authority to deprive such offenders, when,
and how, and how far they may proceed, and enter their Protestation against all
Arbitrary Deprivation: for so runs the Preamble before John Huss Arguments: N.
B.
I do profess, says he, That it is not my intent, like as it is not the
meaning of the University (he means Prague) to persuade, That Princes, or
secular Lords should take away the goods from the Clergy, when they would, or
how they would, and convert them to what use they list. Certainly John Huss,
(thus protesting) would never have been of Council to turn the Church Lands
into Lay-fees; and therefore to make his or John Wickliffe's case a parallel
with this, and to detort their Arguments, as An Ancient plea in justification
of the late taking away, and sales of Cathedral Lands, etc. (which Act was not
passed by the King, God be thanked, but by a Parliament sitting against the
King) is a prevarication as bold, as it is strange: tending mainly to vilify
the just owners, and to gratify some unwary Purchasers, (to say no worse of
them, in reverence to the Law) who, before their hasty bargain, might have
minded the Rule of the Law, Caveat Emptor.

10. And now that by way of Ratiocination, we have sufficiently confuted those
pretended Arguments, wrested from the sayings of John Wickliffe, and John Huss,
for the matter of Right, it will be very pertinent for the matter of Fact, to
make some Reflections upon the History of those times, by way of inquiry, what
might be the motive, which set on John Wickliffe to broach that controversy
against the Temporalties of the Prelates and Churchmen of his time. Somewhat
therefore must be observed. 1. Concerning John Wickliffe's Person, and
profession. 2. Somewhat concerning his Positions, as they relate to this matter
of the Temporalties of Prelates and Churchmen, the point in question. And 3.
Somewhat also of his chief Patron who set him on to maintain those Positions,
and, as it were, did license and authorize both the Author, and his Opinions.

First then, concerning John Wickliffes Person and profession, the History
tells us, he was a Secular Priest, Graduate, and Professor in Oxford about the
year 1375. and that, for want of a just Title, he was by Simon Sudbury,
Archbishop of Canterbury, deprived Daniels Hist. of England in Edw. the 3.
Fullers Eccles. Hist. B. 4. Cent. 14.
of the Headship of Canterbury-Colledge (now incorporated into Christ's Church.)
This Deprivation bred Discontent (says your Daniel) The humor that commonly
breeds opposition, and many times hurries discontented men into Schism (as that
Historian wisely observes, and experience both of old, and of late, abundantly
confirms.) This Censure therefore did sharpen Wickliffe's Pen, Contra
Religiosos possessionates (as Walsingham phrases it) against Churchmen, who
had Temporal Possessions. Hereupon Wickliffe vexed with opposition, Fuller.
which makes men reel into violence (as his own zealous Advocate would excuse
him in this) transported with a Polemical heat, when chafed with Disputation,
became active in his Sermons, and acts in the Schools, where that 17. Article
(so much pressed on by the Churches Adversary) was first coined. Here Wickliffe
did mainly inveigh against Churchmen endowed with Temporalties, especially the
Monks (then not free from scandal, and no doubt, worthy to be taxed, when found
Delinquents.) Moreover Wickliffe stayed not there, but, becoming popular, did
(...), drew Disciples after him of the populace, to be taken notice of, and
discerned by a new livery, long Russet Coats, and going barefooted, and
professing Poverty, with that kind of Novelty, the more to catch the people,
who rather believe then judge: Thus much concerning John Wickliffe's Person and
Profession.

Secondly, Concerning Wickliffe's Positions, whereof the occasion, you see, was
Deprivation. Fuller adds also his Ambition, because he did miss of the
Bishopric of Worcester, which he aimed at. (The old quarrel in Church History
of some male-contented Priests against their Bishops) we purposely wave to
charge Wickliffe with those Centuries of Articles exhibited against him by
Thomas Waldensis, Harpsfield, and others, who might be excepted against for
partiality: we will therefore confine our discourse chiefly to two of your own
Historians, Daniel, and Fuller, afore-cited. Wickliffe's Positions (placed by
Walsingham at the year 1377.) Daniel delivers thus. Wickliffe maintained, That
neither the King, nor Temporal Lords could give any thing to Churchmen in
perpetuity: which certainly was an error as full of Injustice, as of untruth:
as being opposite to the whole current of Holy Scriptures, both in the Old, and
New Testament, contrary to so many Councels, Fathers, Laws of all sorts, Canon,
Civil, and to the Laws of the Land, and to the practice of the whole Catholic
Church in all Ages, as well as to right Reason, the ground of both Precept and
Practice for it (as is at large demonstrated throughout this whole Treatise
especially, Chap. 11.) Secondly, he maintained, says the same Historian, That
Temporal Lords, in their necessity, might lawfully take away the Goods of
Religious Persons. This, if true, (as he is charged by Historians) is as
contrary to Justice, as to right Reason, to deprive men, whether they be
Delinquents or no: But this Doctrine, as it was popular, so it proved very
pleasing to great men, Walsingham and Daniel.
especially, who commonly embrace Sects, either for Ambition to get, or for
Jealousy not to lose, or for Hatred to revenge (as your own Historian
judiciously observes it) which fell out to be John of Gaunts Case, and brings
us to the third consideration of John Wickliffes namesake, and chief Patron,
John of Gaunt, the Duke of Lancaster, fallen out with that eminent Prelate.
Godwin, de praesul bus Angliae, Gulielmus Wickham.
William Wickham, Bishop of Winchester, Ob causam mihi non ignotam (says
another good Author) for a cause not unknown to me, which happily will not be so
expedient to record. Episcopum implacabili odio prosequebatur, did thereupon
prosecute the Bishop with implacable hatred, and did instigate King Edward the
Third (then decayed through Age) both to take away all this Bishops
Temporalties, and also to except him out of the general Pardon. This quarrel
was aggravated by another accident, when John Wickliffe, being cited, came to
appear before the Archbishop of Canterbury, (aforenamed) at a Synod in St.
Paul's Church: there John of Gaunt blew up the Coals (says Fuller) and both by
Word and Deed, animated Wickliffe, bidding him not to fear the Bishops saying,
They were all unlearned in respect of him. Whereupon there happened a fierce
contest between Courtney, Bishop of London, and John of Gaunt, threatening the
Bishop, that he would bring down the pride, not of that Bishop alone, but of
all the Prelates in England: Like another Haman, Esther iii. 6.
who scorned to be revenged only on the person of Mordecai; and therefore did
plot the destruction of the whole Nation: Though for this, John of Gaunt was
like to have proved another Haman also in the Destiny, had not the courage, as
well as the Prudence of that noble Bishop restrained the zealous Londoners,
Walsingham and Daniel, quo supra.
who did then so love their Bishop, that, but for him, they had burned John of
Gaunts house, the Savoy, and made an end of him also, had he not fled: This is
the very truth of Wickliffe's story, concerning which, as we will not affirm,
that all the errors imputed to him by the aforesaid Waldensis and Harpsfield,
were Wickliffe's Opinions: Christian Charity forbids us to believe that of him:
Jer. xv. 19.
Because taking forth the precious from the vile, his positions against the
Popes Supremacy, Purgatory, superstitious Pilgrimages, and the like, were good
Corn, and so far God might make good use of John Wickliffe. But on the
contrary, Christian Prudence forbids us to allow of Wickliffe's Chafe, for the
good Corn mixed with it, or to say, hand over head, that all his Doctrines were
Gospel, (as his overforward Advocate seems to Christen them. Fuller.
) We have learned a better Rule of Judgment from a better Doctor, the Apostle
of the Gentiles, Let no man glory in men, (1 Cor. iii. 21) And again, from
another Apostle, (Jude 16,) not to have men's persons in admiration, because of
advantage. To shut up this Period concerning Wickliffe's Positions in the words
of his own Advocate, Fuller.
John Wickliffe was but a man, and so subject to error, as much as other men;
especially all the premises considered, to wit, 1. Wickliffe's Deprivation as
the cause antecedent. 2. John of Gau^ts Instigation, as the cause evident of
Wickliffe's distemper, against the Prelates and Churchmen of his time: Foelix
qui potuit Rerum Cognoscere Causas. And thus much may suffice, both in point of
Reason, for the matter of Right, and also in point of History, for the Matter
of Fact to nonsuit every way that unseasonable A seasonable Vindication of the
Supreme Authority and Jurisdiction of Christian Kings, Lords, and Parliaments,
as well over the Poss ssions, as persons of Delinquent Prelates, and Church
men, etc. b^ V^illiam Pry^ne, Esquire. 1660.
Book (that we say no worse of it) entitled, An ancient Plea in Justification
of the late taking away, and sales of Cathedral Lands, etc. and let this close
up our full confutation of that first Politic Pretense for Sacrilege; namely,
Justice upon Delinquents.

11. Follows now the second Politic Pretense, which is as specious as the
first. It Is the Pretense of Peace to the whole Kingdom: A precious blessing
indeed, well worth the praying, yea the paying for, is the Blessing of Peace:
If it be consistent with true Honor, with Moral Honesty, with Christian Piety,
if compatible with the Peace of God, and with the Peace of a good Conscience;
else without these, it were no Peace, (call it what you will) but a mere
Conspiracy against God, which Christians, of all men, ought not to venture
upon, no not to save a World: Except Peace come hand in hand with Honesty,
Justice, and Truth, if it be purchased with the counterfeit Coin of Baseness,
Falsehood, and Wrong, with Robbery, yea, Sacrilege, it can prove no other but
an Imaginary Peace, a very Mock-Peace, such a Peace, as more then once we have
already been gulled withal, (and still, Si populus vult decipi, decipiatur) a
Peace in Jest, but the very Preparative of a bloody War in earnest: or rather
indeed and in truth, a very sorry, base, sneaking temporary shift, that in the
end, through Gods just Judgment, may prove but the Exchange of one Civil War
for another, and in the Conclusion of all, the Malum Omen of a Foreign, for a
Civil War to boot (the late case you know.)

12. A strange way of Cure this! For can any endowed with any spark of Right
Reason (for this time, bate Religion) imagine to Purge a Land already sick to
Death, with the Surfeit of the old Sacrilege, by Repletion, by a new kind of
Sacrilege, and worse? as if the Iniquity of Josh xxii. 27.
Peor were too little for us, from which we are not cleansed until this day? If
Sacrilege began the War on their part, (who, as falsely, as odiously, termed it
the Church-War) can they hope to end it by Sacrilege, otherwise then in the
Peoples slavery for the oppression of the Priest? (the event you know, proved
no better then so) can we ever hope to recover our Peace, or if recovered, to
retain that long, which is so ill gotten? they say that those sick folks that
are recovered by the help of such as they call White Witches, fall again into
the same, or worse disease: It needs no application: Martial.
Hic rogo non furor est ne moriare mori?

Is this a likely way to save the Church by destroying it? Is it not time now
or never, to deal plainly and faithfully with you? for say, do we thrive of the
Sacrilege committed in Scotland, attempted in England? In such a case to hold
our Peace, what were it but cruel Incharitableness toward your own Souls;
damnable Unfaithfulness toward our God, our Church, our King, and the whole
Nation.

13. Think not therefore within your selves, that whenever we thus speak, we
are but Pleading our own private Cause all this while: for (once for all) to
satisfy you all about it, the Cause is as Important, and as Public as any
Cause in the World; and therefore, says Calvin, The Preacher may, nay, ought
to be the freer with you all. And the unworthy Advocate that now pleads this
Nemo mirari debet si toties Apostolus verbi Auditores ad Officium praestandum
Exhortari voluit. In quo fuit liberior, quia non ageb^t causam suam Privatam,
sed communi Ecclesiae Utilitati consulebat. Aretius and Calvin, in Gal. 6.6. in
baec verba, Communicet qui Catechizatur Sermon, ei qui se Catechizat in
omnibus bonis.
Public Cause, before you all, dares in the name of all his Brethren, clear
their Priestly Magnanimity, and avouch their Christian Confidence in Gods
all-sufficient Providence, assured, (as the Holy Father St. Chrysostom being
once threatened, as we are, Psalm. xxiv. 1.
with a Sacrilegious Deprivation) that still, Domini Terra and plenitudo ejus:
For our parts, doing our duty, we have all manner of Cause to be secure, that
God will never want an Ark for his Noah's, for his Preachers of Righteousness,
nor a Zoar for his Lots, nor a Goshen for his true Israelites. We know the
worst of it: If God disperse us, he has engaged his Power, and his Truth both,
that Ezekiel. xi. 16.
He will be a little sanctuary unto us in all places, where we shall be
scattered: This truth the unworthy Author has to the praise of God, found by
fifteen years experience, having so long subsisted abroad, without any supply
out of England, and yet with honor, credit, and competency, yea, sometimes
plenty, even to the relief of his dear Relations in England, so long defrauded
and oppressed by the predominant Rebellious party. But Psalm: cxv. 1. Non nobis
Domine, etc. Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give the
praise.
or if that were not, if no room on Earth, yet John xiiii. 2.
in my Fathers house there are many Mansions; room enough there for all Gods
persecuted Servants, but no room at all there for the 1 Cor vi. 9, 10.
Persecutor, for the Thief, the Sacrilegious Thief especially, so far is such
an one from the hope of an Eternal Mansion above in Heaven, that he shall not
so much as to the third Generation enjoy a settled room here on earth: for as
you have heard, of all other sins, Sacrilege can turn whole Families, yea,
except prevented, will turn this whole Kingdom and Nation into a perpetual
Floating Island, till at last it be quite swallowed up in a Red Sea of her own
blood, or worse, (Deus avertat omen.)

You have seen it already overflow all the Banks, and shall we with Pharaoh,
wilfully march on still into it, and pursue till we utterly perish in it? Know
ye not, that in such a case the Righteous Judge of all the Earth has his
(...). Pindar.
Magazines and varieties of Plagues, besides the Plague of Civil War, or
Pestilence, or Famine? Yes God has a thousand invisible ways unknown unto us,
and all the World, as to recover, so to ruin an Empire: and when wicked men
shall cry, Peace, peace, even then to fulfill upon them his infallible Prophecy.
1 Thessalonians. v. 3.
Even then to send upon them all swift destruction, as the Throes upon a woman
in Travel, so that they shall not escape it. It Is Gods own comparison, to note
the sudden, the painful, the unavoidable destruction of such FALSE PEACEMAKERS.

14. Say then, were it wisdom for an overhasty desire of the shadow of Peace to
lose the substance: for a little base Carnal Ease, Christened over with the
name of Peace, for that is it most of your vulgar sort of men, or minds, calls
Peace; for such men are most men, that desire Peace, any Peace, not Peace in
the right way, to wit, in order to the Glory of God, the Honor of the Church,
of the King, and Nation, and the public good, but only to satisfy again their
own private Lusts: and no doubt, this very Corruption visible in Gods sight,
maybe a great Remora to our Peace, which, even in mercy, God may still keep
away from us, till he see us fitter for it, and make us more thankful for it,
when recovered.

Will you for a moment, to retire per fas nefas, from the edge of Man's material
Sword, rush your selves for ever and ever directly upon the sharp point of Gods
spiritual Sword, the heavy Curse of God Almighty upon you and yours? If you
dare go on, for all this plain, this fair warning, even therefore God may
retard, yea utterly reverse that Peace, you so eagerly press for, so as you
shall run your selves quite out of breath, in your own ways, pursuing after
Peace, and never overtake it; yet however alto consilio, God may dispose of us,
if we should lose all, we may preserve, and carry away within our own Bosom,
this comfort worth all, That by this plain dealing, Liberavimus animas nostras.

15. But we have cause to hope better things of you (of the chief of you at
least) and therefore we rather pray for you, that God will be pleased to bless
you, and (if the Decree be not yet gone forth) all the men of this Generation,
from leaving upon Record, as a National stain of poor spiritedness, that base
Character of Cowardice, whose nature it is through impatiency, to shift off a
present evil, though with the unavoidable danger of a far greater, yea of a
final Misery to come in the end: For, as the wise man defines it, this (base,
carnal) fear is nothing else, but the betraying of the succors which reason
offers (Wisd. xvii. 12.)

16. Once, be pleased to take this as a sound Maxim of State, as well as of
Religion, which a great Master of Reason, a wise man of Dieu se courrouce quand
nous ne luy voulons pas permettre de disposer de son Eglise comme il voult,
ains le voulons prevenir par nostre sagesse: -- par injustes moyons and par un
Zele Impatient. -- Il pourtoit donc bien advenir, que si nous changeons de
train Dieu en changera aussy Et comme les moyens par lesquels nous avons pense
avancer nostre Religion l'ont reculee: Ainsy Dieu par les mesmes moyens per
lesquels nous craignons estre en Empeschement a nostre Religion l'auancera. Car
les grandes oeuvres de Dieu sont to^siours co^tre l'attente des honmes -- C'est
a Dieu de le fair and non pat a nous. Dieu ne benit iam^is les Action^ de ceux
qui le veulent prevenir par Impatiente. Examen Pacifique de la Doctrine des
Huguenots. Epistre au lecteur.
France) has delivered touching the Determination of the Civil Wars in France;
(Wars for Religion too:) God is very angry, says he, when men will not permit
him to dispose of his own Church his own way, but devise to prevent him by
their own worldly wisdoms, (by unjust means, and by an impatient zeal) once for
all, God never blesses those men's courses, which think to anticipate his
Counsels, but rather gives over such Infidels to unjustifiable practices for
their impatiency: Thus he.

15. Then, a Gods name, stay Gods good leisure a little while longer, Repent,
Reform, Restore every one, all at once, and then put your Life in your hands,
God can work great matters by small means, contrary to means, without means: If
not, yet with the Dan. iii. 18.
three children in the fiery furnace, let us put on the Resolution of men,
never to be so base as to serve the Vulgar's Gods, or fall down and worship the
mad Peoples golden Im^ge, or trudge after the Calves of Rebellious Jeroboam:
Rather then such a Peace, rather than so, far better suffer Christianly, and
dye gallantly, then do, of l^ve basely. O do not buy a short, base Peace in
show, at the rate of a sin indeed, of such a sin as Sacrilege: Make no more
haste than good speed, and you shall soon or late find by comfortable
Experience, that God is faithful, who therefore, (as long as you continue in
well-doing) 1 Cor. 10.13.
will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able, but will with the
temptation also make a way to escape, that you may be able to bear it.

Say we should be at the last cast, yet who dares say that God cannot help us?
or who is of Gods Privy-Councel to know he will not help us? Is it not usual
with God, when the Enemies are at the highest, and confident all their own,
then to step in, and to interpose, and in an instant to quell their rage, with
a Hucusque, Job 38.11.
Hither shall thy proud waves come, and no further:

18. Behold, (what our selves with all our own Inventions, could never yet hit
on:) God can yet Command a SVRE, AND AN HONEST PEACE, thus many ways. 1.
Either by Constraint of the Enemies unto Peace, contrary to their nature, Amen:
So he turned Genesis 33.10.
Esaus heart toward Jacob. Or 2. By Diversion, finding the Enemies work enough
elsewhere, so by the 1 Samuel 23.27, 28.
Philistines, he diverted Saul from pursuing after David. Or 3. By Division,
among themselves at last, so he sent an evil Spirit between Judge. 9.23. Judge.
7.22.
Abimelech and the men of Shechem, and made them to destroy one another. Or 4.
By the self destruction of the Ringleaders of them, as 2 Samuel 17.
Achitophel hanged himself. Or 5. By arming the Creatures, (wind and weather,
and waters) Exodus 15.9.
against them, or pleading the Kings Cause with raging Pestilence, or cruel
Famine. Or 6. By infatuating their Councels, and making the Isa. 19.11.
Princes of Zoan fools to their own Ruin. Or 7. By panick fears, by a Rumor,
a mere Imagination, as the 2 Kings 3.23.
Moabites were overthrown by occasion of a color of Blood, caused on the
waters by the reflection of the Sun. Or 8. and Lastly, Should all these ways
fail, God can yet command Peace a thousand other ways, by Jer. 31.22.
Creating a new thing in the Earth, as the Prophet phrases it: for of all other
Blessings God expressly does challenge the Blessing of Peace to be his own
proper work, saying, Isa. 57.19.
It Is I the Lord that CREATE the fruit of the Lips, PEACE, PEACE, to him that
is far off, and to him that is near: If you do really intend to have a sure
Peace indeed, then to God you should turn, not from God: By good, honest, and
just ways, you should apply your selves to God every one of you; for it is God,
and none but God can create Peace, as he did this world, out of nothing in
sight, or out of a Chaos, (such as this our present Confusion) worse then
nothing. Though Miracles in ordinary, be now ceased, yet still in extraordinary
cases, God can work Marvails, so we for our part, and in the Clergies own
behalf too, say still in our Almighty and Everlasting God, which alone workest
GREAT MARVAILS, etc. The Collect for the Clergy.
daily Prayers.

19. There being therefore yet so many ways to Peace, why should any short
spirited soul, out of despair, or doubting, rush headlong into the way of
Sinners? That (if we keep our selves from the accursed thing) one of these
ways God will send us an honest Peace at last, we have great Cause to hope,
considering not only the justness of our Cause, which God is concerned in to
uphold: but also on the contrary, as the base Treachery, so the Unparalleled
Immodesty, yea, Inhumane Pride of our Enemies, in their hard hearted Rejection
of all those so frequent Royal Offers of Grace and Peace; accumulated as by the
Royal Father now of Glorious Memory, so in imitation, by the King, his Son, and
Lawful Successor, as in his Kingdoms, so in this Virtue of Clemency (The Crown
of the Kings Crown) provided it be not abused, Jude 4.
as the Grace of God, which ungodly men turn into wantonness. The obstinate
refusal of all which Royal Acts of Grace, as it is a sad Symptom, of the Sons
of Belial, so to all wise and Religious men, it is a shrewd Crisis, that seems
to portend no less then their fatal end at hand: and if so, then what an
unspeakable comfort, and glorious will this be to all honest men, that they
have had, and held out the Grace of Perseverance, thus long to hold out
patiently, and all this while to keep their hearts and hands pure, as well from
Sacrilege as from Rebellion; either of which hereafter may be such a 1 Samuel
25.30, 31.
grief of mind and offense of Heart, unto the Sacrilegious Apostates as will
sour, yea quite take away all the sweetness of Peace when it comes, and send
them full of shame, and sorrow, mourning and pining to their Graves: I pray God
all may so believe these Truths, that it may be unto you, even as you will.

20. If so you do, I have a Commission from God, to assure you, however the
world goes; yet Say ye to the righteous, that it shall be well with him: for
they shall eat the fruit of their doing^, but woe unto the wicked, it shall be
il^ with him, for the Reward of his hands shall be given him, Isa. 3.10, 11.
that it shall be well with you, and that, if God see it good for you, one of
those many ways, this Course of Patience, (with perseverance) will in Gods
good time, and that with the inward Peace of Conscience too, without Sin, or
Sacrilege, really procure that outward Peace indeed, which it may be you miss
all this while, even because Peace is made but the Pretense to persuade unto a
necessity of Sacrilege, the third Politic Pretense now to be examined.

21. It Is the Pretense of State Necessity, in answer to which, first of all,
use would be made of a sound Rule, by way of Distinction, delivered by one of
the Holy Fathers, Bern. Ep. 7. ad Adam. monach.
That some things there are pure bona, such as Faith, Hope, and Charity; so
purely good, as that they are always obligatory, so as upon no case of
N^cessity whatsoever to be forbidden or forborne. But on the contrary, some
other things there are, pure mala, the Father instanceth expressly in Adultery
and Sacrilege, as being sins of the same Nature, and things so purely evil, as
that upon no Case of Necessity whatsoever to be commanded, or committed. The
Reason is clear, because in such a case, betwixt the two extremes, of the
Necessity, and the Sin, God still leaves us a fair Medium, namely, to MAKE OF
NECESSITY VIRTUE, by suffering gallantly, patiently, and Christianly, that
Necessity, what ever it be: This is then upon the Case, Gods revealed will,
which we ought quietly to submit unto, and to attend, till God himself point us
out a lawful way of Deliverance, or of Escape; else violently, through
impatiency, to Rescue our selves out of our Makers hands, were, as I may say,
to break the Goal, which a very Senec.
Heathen would condemn as a most Capital offense, base in the Commission,
dangerous in the Consequence, for we can never escape this Goalers hands.

22. In such a case of Necessity therefore, 'till God himself help us out of
it, we must suffer, but we may not sin to help our selves, for we Romans 3.8.
may not do evil, though but the least evil, that good may come thereof, though
even the greatest good, to save a World: should we presume upon it, then were
our own damnation as just indeed, as theirs whom we preach against.

23. For sin is an action of such a Nature, as that Non cadit sub Electionem,
it can never become the object of our Election; be the the Straits of Necessity
never so great: this is the plain Determination of the School, as well of
Aristotle, as of Christ.

24. For else, once open the gap of Necessity unto sin or vice, and Uno dato
absurdo, upon the same ground that now may necessitate us to commit Sacrilege,
we may be necessitated to Rebel against our King, and then what will become of
our Allegiance? or such a case may come again (we play too fair for it by our
wilful divisions) as that we may be necessitated to receive the Popes Mass
again, and then what will become of our Religion? or to receive the Turks
Alcoran, and then what will become of our Christendom? To avoid all which
dangerous Absurdities, we must constantly stand to this sound Principle, that
there never was, there never can be any Necessity to sin. So that pretend what
necessity you will, in this sense, Nemo laeditur nisi a seipso.

25. Therefore in the greatest Straits or Exigences of Church or State, this
must be the Rule of all whom it may concern, to put on and to keep the
Christian Resolution to suffer, not to Act. Resolve to pass no Act, what ever
come of it; for the Act once past, the sin is Naturalized, and by your own Law,
it may then Inherit, nay it must then Inherit, the Curse of God, I mean, upon
the Principals, and upon all the Accessaries too, But till then, till you pass
Acts of your own, all is yet safe: you may suffer indeed, so did Christ suffer,
innocently; but then you shall not sin, but in both be conformable to Christ
himself; for thus when a man cannot mend the matter, it is not then his Crime,
though it may be his Cross, which shall one day be his Crown, if he be faithful
unto Death. Thus much, in thesi, touching the Case of Necessity in general.

26. Now in hypothesi, to examine our own case of Necessity in particular:
first of all, notice would be taken, what Devil has brought the Public Faith,
and us all to this Pinnacle of State, to this Precipice of Necessity; and rather
then rashly to yield to the Tempter, or to his Temptation, and cast our selves
down headlong, we should (as our Savior in the like case) answer the Devil
with a peremptory Scriptum est, Justificabis, Deuteronomy. xxv. 1.
Justum and condemnabis Impium, It is written, thou shall justify the
Righteous, and condemn the wicked: If therefore Schism and Sedition, Rebellion
and Sacrilege be the great Malignants indeed, that have brought us all into
these National Distresses, and Public Debts; what Justice or Equity, or Reason
that Religion and Loyalty, or that the Church should pay for it? will you have
a Royal Determination upon this very case of State-Necessity? Then hark how our
late gracious King, being dead, yet speaks. The Kings Portraicture, Sect. 14.
Upon the Covenant.
No NECESSITY says that glorious Martyr) shall ever, I hope, drive me, or
mine, to invade or sell the Priests Lands, which both Pharaohs Divinity, and
Joseph's true Piety abhorred to do: So unjust, I think it both in the eye of
Reason and Religion, to deprive the most Sacred employment of all due
encouragements, and like that other hard-hearted Pharaoh, to withdraw the
straw, and increase the Task: So pursuing the oppressed Church, as some have
done, to the Red Sea of a Civil War, where nothing but a Miracle can save
either it or him, who esteems it his greatest Title to be called, and his
chiefest glory to be the Defender of the Church, both in its true Faith, and
its just Fruitions; equally abhorring Sacrilege, and Apostasy.

I had rather live, as my Predecessor Henry 3. sometime did, on the Churches
Alms, than violently to take the bread out of Bishops, and Ministers mouths.
Thus far that great Princes determination upon the case of a State-Necessity:
In which case, (were it really such) to steer a course so contrary to the
Judgment of such a Pilot, what could it portend but a just shipwreck both of
Church and State. For if those who should be the Guardians of the Church should
betray the Church to the Rape of Sacrilegious Usurpers, would not such a base
yieldance encourage Sheba, to blow up his Trumpet of Rebellion once every
Triennial? Do we not see experimentally, that such another Bargain did once
again, provoke some to a second Invasion, because they sped so well at the
first? Where Poverty may extenuate the Crime of theft, certainly there Plenty
cannot but aggravate it, (as in Nathans parable of the Ewe-Lamb, King David
himself does pass his Sentence, 2 Samuel xii. 5.) It Is again If the Poverty of
Scotland might, yet the Plenty of England cannot excuse the envy, and Rapine of
the Churches Rights and Revenues. -- There are ways enough to repair the
Breaches of the State, without the Ruins of the Church: as I would be a
Restorer of the one, so I would not be an oppressor of the other Under the
pretense of Public Debts. The occasions contracting them were bad enough, but
such a discharging of them would be much worse: I pray God neither I nor mine
may be accessory to either. K. Charles the I. in the same place above.
our Royal Martyrs Argument against this Sacrilege, under pretense of a
State-necessity, to discharge public Debts.

27. But secondly, say that all the three Estates of the Kingdom, Clergy and
all have contributed their equal share, to that Mass of public sin and guilt,
that has drawn down upon us, all these public necessities and miseries, yet
again, I ask, what Necessity or Conscience, or but Reason imaginable that Gods
special Demesne alone must pay for all, must be alienated, sold, or morgaged,
or as good as utterly annihilated to clear general or common engagements? Why
should Bishops Lands, or the Revenues of Deans and Chapters make the National
Expiation of a National Offense, more than the Lands of Barons, or of Knights,
or of Lawyers, or of Physicians, or of Tradesmen, or of any. (An solus in Adamo
peccavit Clerus?) There is far less Reason for the one, and (as anon you shall
see) more Scripture for the other.

28. For say, are not the possessions of the Clergy, as Public as any? or is
it not a Rule (or somewhat like it) in your Sir Edward Coke, Super Mag. Charta.
own Law, that Jura Ecclesiae Publicis aequiparantur? or will you have England
alone, to walk quite Antipode unto the Religious steps of all Christendom
besides, that (as has See above, page 50. and below, p. 165.
been above clearly evidenced unto you) in all common Calamities, would rather,
of all others, always exempt their Clergy. No doubt (as one of your great LE
LEY ADGRAND POLICY EN CEO, Car, etc. Sir Edw. Coke, en L'evesque de Winchester.
Clerks well observes it of your own good old Law) out of a wise Conjunction of
the Temporal with the Spiritual Policy, as to preserve Religion, so by their
good usage of their Clergy, to procure their Prayers, (Gods own Ordinance to
preserve both Princes, and Provinces) That which the PRIESTS have need of, let
it be given them day by day, without fail, THAT THEY MAY OFFER SACRIFICES OF
SWEET SAVOURS UNTO GOD, AND PRAY FOR THE LIFE OF THE KING, AND OF HIS SONS,
Ezra. 6.9, 10.
and by them to derive the influence of the Divine Blessing upon all the other
secular Estates.

29. Nay, in a case of such base Notorious partiality, the Jews, even in their
worst Estate, may rise up in judgment against this Generation: For, it is
recorded, as highly commendable of the Jews in their greatest Hard-heartedness,
Madness, and Sedition, during that horrible siege, straitness, and famine of
Jerusalem, under Titus Vespasian, That yet, Vsserii Annal. Chronol.
as long as they had any Priests, they were not awanting to furnish still the
Temple, The PRIESTS, and the Altar of God with that (Juge Sacrificium) That
daily Sacrifice of the Lamb, morning and evening, which God had once required (
Exodus xxx. 38, 39.) till the great Sacrifice of the Messiah had finished all by
his own Oblation of himself once offered (Heb. x. 11, 12.) which their
blindness, and unbelief would not understand: But yet, even in those times of
utmost extremity very Jews durst not pretend necessity against duty. Nay,
beyond all this yet, Pagan Egypt it self, would out of the bottom of the Red
Sea, rise up in judgment against Baptized England, if so Sacrilegious. ('It Is
the Applicative note of David Pareus, and of the late Assembly-men to boot,
upon Rex demensum praebebat Sacerdotibus, ne agros suos vendere Inopia
^digerentur. Laudabilis Pietas Regis, etsi enim isti erant falsorum Deorum
Cultores ostendit tamen JUS NATURAE ET GENTIVM, postulare haec duo: 1. Ut
publicis Dei Ministris ex publico salaria honesta tribuantur, quod ex Jure
Divino Veteri and Novo, etc. 1 Cor. ix. 13, 14. -- 2. Ut iidem, Immunitatibus
ab oneribus and gravaminibus Publicis beneficio piorum Regum donentur, atque
fruantur, ut Officio vacent, etc. -- Sed proh dolor, quantum hic peccatur,
pauci sunt body Rege^ and Josephi tam in Ecclesiam Benefici -- Sacerdotes:]
ita. LXX. and Onkeli, Josephi, Philonis, omniumque Interpretum testatur
consensus. David Pareus in Genesis x.vii. 22, 26.

This example condemns the Irreligion of many Christians who show little
Reverence or respect, if not much uncharitableness or contempt toward the
Ministers of the Gospel, against whom the men of Egypt in the day of Judgment
shall rise up and condemn them, as Matthew. xii. 41, 42. Annotations, etc.
London, 1645. in Genesis, etc.

By these Notes of theirs you may see, once for all, that in these men's
judgment, those examples out of the Old Testament are, in point of Equity,
pertinent enough to the Ministry under the New Testament.


the Place.) For in a time of as public, as general, as tedious, and as
extreme a necessity as ever did lie upon a Nation (seven years unparalleled
Famine) and that also from the immediate hand of God expressly, so as to put
bread in their Mouths, all other men else were fain to sell their Cattle, their
Lands and all, and themselves too in the end: yet all this while, says the
express Text, and that twice for failing to enforce the Observation: Only the
Land of the Priests Joseph bought not, for the Priests had a portion assigned
them of Pharaoh, and did eat their portion which Pharaoh gave them; therefore
they sold not their Lands.

30. In which Record, you may first of all observe, that the Egyptian Priests
had Lands, for their standing maintenance; and yet were these but Idolatrous
Priests, the Priests of a false God: and can you be Christians and think the
Priests of the true God worthy of less, or of a worse kind of Maintenance then
were the Priests of Egypt? Secondly, special care was taken, for all the
straits of public and general necessity, that whatever became of the Laymens
Lands, yet the Priests Lands should be preserved from Sale, or Alienation,
belike because the Priests standing maintenance once gone, the Priests
themselves could not subsist long after it, and then the God of both Priest and
People, would be unserved; therefore as the Current of Interpreters notes upon
the place, N. B.
there all the other Lands were morgaged, only or chiefly the Priests Lands
were free: Thus amongst Egyptians; and must it go quite contrary amongst you
Christians, must all your Estates pass scotfree, and only your Clergy become
the sole Sacrifice?

31. Must those men, that for ought we know, have by their Loyal constancy in
well doing and suffering, been the Instruments under God, to preserve us a
Remnant, and unto this day, to keep this handful of people in their Religion
and Allegiance: Must these men, I say, for this their good service unto God and
the King, become the whole Nations only Victime? Would not such a National
Injustice, nay impiety, provoke God Almighty, the God of the Priests, to burst
open all the Sluices of Christendom, and, without Hyperbole, to let in upon you
all that whole Deluge of Turks or Scythians, your other sins call for, to
revenge Gods quarrel upon the whole Land, by overflowing such an unworthy
Nation for ever, rather than such a National Injustice should go away
unpunished even in this world? Ah, remember the fate of the seven Famous
Churches of Asia, and fear, and amend.

32. Thirdly, and lastly. In that Egyptian History, it is most observable, that
it was principally by Pharaoh's Royal Care, that the Priests Lands were kept
unsold, for the Priests had a Portion assigned them of Pharaoh, says the Text,
and would they allow a Christian King less Power or Authority to provide for
Christ's Ministers, than was allowed to the Egyptian King? or would they make My
Lord the King, worse than the Egyptian Tyrant, worse than the other Pharaoh, the
worst Pharaoh, to sell and betray his own Priests, to whose special defense and
protection, the King in his Religious respect to the Laws of God and Man,
knows, and, in Royal Duty, thinks himself bound by so many multiplied Ties, as
it were so many Divine Chains, in all his Capacities, Moral, Political, and
Spiritual: as the King is a Man, as the King is a Magistrate, as the King is a
Christian.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Kings Solemn Oath at his Coronation, which obliges the King as well in
Point of Honor, as he is a man; as in Point of Justice, as he is a Magistrate:
and likewise in Point of Conscience, as he is a Christian, constantly to grant,
preserve, and defend the Rights of the Church.

1. FOR first; If you consider the King but as a Man, in his mere Moral
Capacity, were it not an unnatural act to betray his best Friends? those that,
to phrase it in 1 Kings ii. 26.
King Solomon's words, have really been afflicted in all wherein the King has
been afflicted? (And yet this Solomon spoke of such a Priest, Abiathar; who,
though Loyal in Absalom's Rebellion, (2 Samuel xv. 24.) yet (as here, too many of
our Tribe) proved an errand Traitor, in Adonijah's second Rebellion (1 Kings i.
7.) But our constancy, God be thanked, makes our case the better: For, should
the King deal worse with his Innocent, with his Loyal Priests? Nay, could the
King save the whole Kingdom from ruin, by giving but his Consent to take away
the Life, or but Livelihood of but one Innocent man, (that we say not a Bishop,
or a Priest) we may safely say, by the rules of bare Moral Honesty, the King
might not do it, in Point of Honor, as the King is a man.

2. But secondly, consider the King in his Political Capacity,, as a
Magistrate, and of all other Estates or Corporations whatsoever, by your own
rules, the King is bound in Conscience and Law both, to defend and provide for
the Church, as his perpetual Ward in Law: since as you say your selves, and
your own Sir Edward Coke upon Magna Charta, page 3. See the several Records (to
this purpose) quoted by him there.
Records say no less, Ecclesia semper est infra aetatem, and in Custodia Domini
Regis, qui tenetur Jura and haereditates suas manu tenere and defendere, in
point of Justice, as he is a Magistrate, that we say nothing of the INTEREST OF
STATE, for no State in the whole Realm is more beneficial unto the Princes
Exchequer, then the Clergy, (if it be kept flourishing) not only because they
are deepest in Subsidies, but because from the Clergy, and so from no other
Estate in the Land, the King has a considerable continual standing Revenue of
Tenths, besides First Fruits, etc. so that the King will be a loser by the
bargain when all is done, and Ezra vi. 22.
Why should damage grow to the hurt of the King? and we hold our Peace?

3. But to wave that Temporal respect, Thirdly, and lastly, how much more is
the King engaged to the Defense of the Church, (besides his Royal Title of
DEFENDER OF THE FAITH, which is preserved in, and by the Church) in point of
Conscience, or Spiritual Interest, if you consider the King in his Spiritual
Capacity, as a Christian man, for that relation trebbles the Kings Obligation
to all the premised Acts of Justice and Honesty.

4. Especially if, in the fourth place you add to all these Bonds the Solemn
Supervention of his Royal Oath, Personally taken by the King at his Coronation,
and to declare his Majesty's sincere and plain dealing, and his Real Intention
to keep his said Oath; His Majesty has therefore graciously been pleased
himself thus to publish it.

5. In that Oath the King Swears in a manner, thrice for the Clergy
particularly, and so for no other Estate of the Realm besides, to intimate that
as your Law 8 Esiz c. 1. In the Preamble.
styles The Clergy a High State, and one of the greatest States of this Realm;
so it deserves a special care, and high regard proportionable. Therefore as in
the first Paragraph At the Kings Coronation, the Sermon being done, the
Archbishop administreth these Questions to the King, and the King Answers them
severally.

. 1. Episcopus. Sir, will you grant, and keep, and by Your Oath confirm to the
People of England, the Laws and Customs to them granted by the Kings of
England, Your Lawful and Religious Predecessors, and namely THE LAWS, CUSTOMS,
AND FRANCHISES GRANTED TO THE CLERGY by the glorious King Saint Edward Your
Predecessor, according to the Laws of God, the true profession of the Gospel
established in this Kingdom, and agreeable to the Prerogative of the Kings
thereof, and the ancient Customs of this Realm.

Rex. I grant and promise to keep them.

. 2. Episcopus. Sir, will You keep Peace, and Godly agreement entirely,
(according to Your Power) both to God, the Holy Church, the Clergy, and the
People?

Rex. I will keep it.

. 3. Episcopus. Sir, will You (to your Power) cause Law, Justice, and
Discretion, in Mercy and Truth, to be executed in all Your Judgments?

Rex. I will.

. 4. Episcopus. Sir, will you grant to hold and keep the Laws and rightful
Customs, which the Commonalty of this Your Kingdom have; and will You defend
and uphold them to the Honor of God, so much as in you lies?

Rex. I grant and promise so to do.

Then one of the Bishops reads this Admonition to the King, before the people
with a loud voice.

. 5. Our Lord the King, we beseech You to pardon, and to grant, and to preserve
unto us, and to the Churches committed to our charge, ALL CANONICAL
PRIVILEGES, and due Law and Justice, and that you will protect and defend us
as every good King ought TO BE PROTECTOR AND DEFENDER OF THE BISHOPS, and the
Churches under their Government.

The King Answers.

With a willing and devout heart I promise and grant my Pardon, and that I will
preserve and maintain to you, and the Churches committed to your Charge, all
Canonical Privileges, and due Law and Justice, and that I will be your
Protector and Defender to my Power, by the assistance of God, as every good
King in his Kingdom, in right ought to Protect and defend the Bishops and the
Churches under their Government.

Then the King arises, and it led to the Communion Table, where he makes a
Solemn Oath in sight of all the people, to observe the Premises; and laying
his hand upon the Book, says:

The Oath.

The things that I have here Promised, I shall perform and keep, so help me
God, and the Contents of this Book.

This Oath is to be found in the Records of the Exchequer, and is published in
his Majesty's Answer to a Remonstrance, etc. of the 26. of May, 1642.

The same Oath, for matter, you may read in an old Manuscript Book, containing
the Form of Coronation, etc. in the Public Library at Oxon.


of that Oath the King Swears in general, to do Justice and Right, with Mercy
and Truth unto all the whole body of the People, and the Clergy jointly; so
afterward more particularly (in the second and fifth Paragraphs) the King
Swears in special for the Clergy and that He will be the Protector, and
Defender of the Bishops in their Privileges, that is, not only or their
Persons, but of their Possessions also, that is of their Persons in such a
Condition, so qualified, in sensu composito, with such Rights and Liberties:
and those Rights must needs pre-suppose their Essence and Office too: and that
as it was then in being, according to the Law, when the King took that Oath.
This may be one Golden Nail more to fasten the Clergies Title, and to Rivet it
more and more into your own Law.

6. For by this Juratory Obligation of the Kings special Promissory Oath unto
God for the Clergy in particular, some of your own good Lawyers teach us to
say, That the Clergies (supposed) tacit Consent in a general Act is not
remissory at all of the Kings Conscience from this particular Clause of his
Oath, without the Clergies particular Consent first obtained, and clearly
expressed by a particular Body Representative of their own, (of the Clergy,
quatenus Clergy (and not involved with the general Body of the People: Their
Act to free the Kings Conscience, must in Reason and Equity be proportionable,
and adaequate to the Kings Act, or Bond, that is, full out as particular.

7. For else this bundle of Absurdities would follow that the Clergy obtains no
more by the Kings Special Oath in their particular behalf, then if the King had
Sworn only in general; which is as much to say, that in this little short
draught, Oaths (that should be spared) are multiplied without Necessity, or so
much as Signification, or that they must pass for mere Tautologies.

8. If therefore the case be so, that the King after such a solemn particular
Oath, may not consent to the Bishop's Deprivation, etc. without Injustice, nay
Impiety, then sure I am, that no man ought to counsel the King so to do: for
that Subject, whoever he be, that will go about to persuade the King to so
impious an Act, persuades the King to do that which were most palpable Injury
to his fellow Subjects, and most damnable wickedness against the Soul of the
King himself: for whom contrariwise every Loyal Subject is bound in Conscience
to pray, that rather then His Royal Soul should be so loose, it may for ever be
1 Samuel xxv. 29.
bound in the bundle of Life, with the Lord his God, but that the souls of His,
and the Churches Enemies, may for ever and ever be slung out, as out of the
middle of a sling. This must be their Destiny at last, for Malum consilium
consultori pessimum: you never knew it prove otherwise in the end. We say no
more, but conceive this enough to confute one necessity with a greater, the
pretended Necessity of State, with the real Necessity of Conscience so many
ways engaged in this public Cause of God, and the Church: which Church (as it
rationally, and clearly appears from the premises) the King is obliged to
defend, in point of Conscience, as the King is a Christian.

CHAP. X.
The Confutation of the fourth Politic Pretense of a Legislative Power.

FOllows now the Fourth and last Politic Pretense of a Legislative Power, to
dispose of the Clergies Revenues (and consequently, of all men's Estates) as
they see Cause.

1. This pretended Plea of a Legislative Power is mainly pressed by the chief
Advocates both for Sacrilege and Rebellion, (for those Diabolical twins are
still bred, and born, and grow up together) and the same is also made the very
Basis, and Foundation of all the late Sacrilegious Usurpations by that
notorious No Sacrilege, nor Sin to alien, or purchase the Lands of Bishops,
etc. by Cornelius Burges, D. D. This Sacrilegious Book, in those Rebellious
times had the licentiousness of a second Edition, Anno 1659.
Doctor of Sacrilege CORNELIUS BURGES, who, not content to Matthew. v. 19.
break one of the greatest Commandments of God, by practicing Sacrilege in
his own person, (Usurping, for many years, both the Manor, and Demesnes of the
Bishopric of Wells, from the just owner, that Learned, and Venerable, and most
ancient Bishop, Dr. William Pierce) but had also the impudence to teach men so,
by Preaching and Printing the lawfulness of Sacrilege, which, at first, was
but only intended, or pretended by his Rebellious Accomplices, but (as it was, ex
signis, and causis, in a manner, foretold by us three years before the event,
in the first Edition of this very Book) it was afterward acted in earnest This
Torrent brake out first against the Prelates, the Lords Spiritual, whom having
once burried out of the way, it soon overtook also the Lords Temporal, and
never stopped till at last it swallowed up* the King himself: Therefore,
principiis obsta, is good counsel, and very seasonable.
and also legitimated by that Sacrilegious Act of their pretended Parliament,
and, which is worst of all, aggravated by immediate Sacrilege against God
himself, blasphemously making God the principal Author of their Sin; and with a
complication of Blasphemies, making the late Gracious King (now a Glorious
Martyr) the Instrumental Cause of it: for he (worse than cursed Cham) having
begun his Libel with downright railing at the Bishops and Pastors of Gods
Flock (to whom this ungrateful wight owed his Ordination) over whose unjust
persecution, and illegal Abolition, (drawing out his arrow from the Popish or
Mohammedan Bow. that is, arguing from their Cross against their Cause) he there
does most barbarously insult, telling the world of the sad Providence on the
Cathedral Prelacy of England, C. B. chapter 1.
(though since, another happy providence has most visibly confuted him by a
gracious and almost miraculous Restoration both of King, and Bishop:) then he
dares affirm expressly, that it was God who did put it into the hearts of the
late Long Parliament, by an Ordinance of both Houses, dated October. 9. 1646.
(after the King, (says that Shimei) had deserted his Parliament, Corn. Burges,
chap. 1.
raised his Standard against them, whereby he put both them and the whole
Kingdom out of his Protection, and none but those two Houses of Parliament
remained to take care of the Public Interest in a Legal Way) wholly to abolish
the Name, Title, Style, Dignity, and Offices of all Archbishops, and Bishops,
within the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and to vest and settle their
Lands and Possessions in Trustees, to the use of the Commonwealth, etc. and
soon after he proceeds farther, avowing, that on the 13. of April, 1649. the
Commons of England (being then the only persons remaining) [having then, after
the Bishops, thrusted also the Temporal Lords out of doors] in Parliament
Assembled were necessitated (forsooth) to sell the Lands of Deans and Chapters,
whom he rails at, with a full mouth, as at the former) and so to enact an utter
abolition of these also (reserved for the last to satisfy the Bulimia of those
cruel and unsatiable Polyplemus's, and so to make good their so long designed
extirpation of both Root and Branch.) It were a Crime of Participation to be
patient or silent in this cause, which is Causa Dei, Religionis, Ecclesiae,
Regis, all these at once, and Sacrilege in special being expressly excepted in
the Act of Oblivion: We must therefore be mindeful to proceed against it. This
pretended Legislative Power of that illegal Assembly, and their Sacrilegious
Act, Matthew. vii. 26.
is the sandy Foundation, upon which this foolish Builder (like a downright
Sophister wilfully declining the Question of Right) does build his house of
Sacrilege.

(Subrue fulturam, patitur structura Ruinam.) To batter which, we could say
more both ad Hominem, and also ad Rem: but that, as for the Man, we purposely
blunt our Pen, because, we hear, he is dead and gone, and so past his Accounts
here; and, for a terror to all surviving Usurpers (except he did Repent, and
Restore also) he has already received his sentence according to his works: God
knows where he is now, and there we leave him. But, as to the matter it self,
That pretended Legislative Power, of his counterfeit Parliament, is
sufficiently abolished (mark the Divine Talio of Abolition for Abolition) by
the Legal Power of that Loyal Parliament 13 Car. 2. cap. 1. for Repeal of the
Parliament, begun 3. Nov. 1640. See Sir Robert Wiseman's notes touching the
Long Parliament.
that had declared all such Orders and Ordinances made by that disloyal
Parliament, to be null and void; and further determined, That there is no
Legislative Power in either, or both Houses of Parliament without the King?
This being the main Fundamental Law of this Realm, might suffice for a full
Confutation of what ever has been said in his whole Book, by that infamous
Patron of Sacrilege. But admitting an impossibility, that such an unlawful
Assembly had been a lawful Parliament, yet can that prove it therefore to be
infallible, but that it may do wrong? may not one be Tyrannus Exercitio, though
not Titulo, if his Decrees or Ordinances fall upon indebitam materiam: what
else can such a manner of proceeding be, to enact a total deprivation of a
whole community of men (many of them innocent, as has been showed above in the
case of pretended Delinquency) and afterward to argue a facto ad jus It is the
complaint of a wise man of the Law, that the meaning of that Axiom, Ex facto
jus oritur, has been extremely racked: Sir Robert Wiseman 's Note touching the
alteration of some Laws.
our Sophisters chief Medium all over: This way of arguing must needs prove of
a monstrous, of a dangerous consequence: for say a man should thus Syllogize.

Whatsoever the two Houses, or but one of the Houses of Parliament do enact or
ordain is lawful ( that must be his Major.)

But the two Houses; or at least one of them, has abolished, and also deprived
all Bishops, Deans, and Chapters: ( this Minor proved too true.)

Ergo, That Abolition and Deprivation was lawful, and consequently, No
Sacrilege, nor Sin (the presumptuous Title of the Book of this Church-Pyrate.)
Now, should the sharp point of this two-edged Argument (which we have felt
sufficiently through, and through) be retorted, and turned upon the breast of
either of those two Estates of the Kingdom, what would then become of the Lords
Temporal, or of the Commons themselves, trow we? for if they grant the Major,
they cannot avoid the Conclusion, and so they may be turned out of all, by the
Votes of a Predominant Party, and then farewell the Property of the Subject:
Beware of such Precedents, you that are wise; for it is an old say, Cras tibi,
hodie mihi. Enough for the Demolition of such an absurd Power that is attended
by such palpable injustice: But yet, ex abundanti, upon this occasion of C.
B.'s Book, for a fuller Conviction, and if possible, Conversion (of which
though we have but small hope, yet is it both our wish, and our main design in
this troublesome work) it will be worth the pains, soberly to examine the full
extent of all humane Legislative Power, granting the Hypothesis that the Power
is lawful.

In prosecution whereof, first of all let this our Protestation be entered,
That we intend not to question the Justice of the Law, or to examine the Power
or the Wisdom of the Lawmakers, or to meddle at all with the Constitution of
the State, or to discuss this point further then in a direct, and necessary
Reference to the Universal Law, the Law of Nature, the Law of Nations, and the
Law of God; to which all particular Laws, (if they be Laws indeed, and not
Lawless Libertinism, or barbarous Tyranny) must needs vail, and yield their due
Subordination. If not, then, by all men's leave, the Divine may, nay must,
without any busie-bodiness at all in States-matters, taking the Law interminis,
according to the common sense it bears, or should bear, carry it, TO THE LAW,
AND TO THE TESTIMONY; If they speak not according to this word, it is because
there is no light in them, Isa. viii. 20.
Ad Legem, and ad Testimonium, and there wisely, warily, and impartially weigh
the matter of the Law, in the Balance of the Sanctuary, or in the Scales of
clear Scripture, and sound Reason, at whose Bar both all the Laws, and all the
Lawmakers too, must one day be tried at last, in Ultimo districtu: And if upon
Aequilibration, as we may say, the Humane Law shall prove light, then that men
may not stumble at it, and fall, and perish, by obeying any unjust Law of man,
contrary to the just Law of God, it is then the proper work and direct
Profession of the Divine, (as he will answer Soul for Soul) to take forth the
Jer. xv. 19.
Precious from the vile, and as becomes him, who is to the people as Gods
mouth, to Ezekiel. iii. 17, 18.
warn other men's Consciences from it, and so free his own. For thus, though the
Law of the Land be matter of Policy, yet the Peace of Conscience about the
lawfulness, or unlawfulness of that Law, immediately belongs to Divinity, the
Senior-Law of all, from which as we may say, all men's Junior-Laws, if just,
must be derived; Divinity being indeed no other than the Original Law of God:
which may suffice once for all, to pre-occupate an ignorant, or malicious, and
yet a very ordinary Objection of some, that whilst themselves take upon them at
every turn to Confront Divinity with Colors of Law, yet blame the Divine very
much, if, se defendendo, he dare offer to prefer Gods Law to man's Law, in case
those two Laws should justle, as if the Divine in doing but his own proper
duty, were ipso facto, a medlar in another man's Calling.

2. Thus much premised, the justness of such a pretended Legislative Power will
be soon tried, if but compared. 1. With some Undeniable Principles it
destroys. 2. With some Right Conditions of a just power, which it should have,
and does want. 3. With some gross Absurdities it involves.

3. First then, such a Legislative Power at pleasure, as they call it, to vote
men, Innocent men, out of their whole Estates, and Livelihoods, (their Lives
may be next) is too absolute to be communicable to any Creature, and does
trench upon Gods own Prerogative, whose will is therefore a Law, and Idea
Justitiae (as they say in the Schools) so that whatever is just with God, is
just a priori, because it is Gods will, but contrariwise with man, this or that
must be Man's will, only a posteriori, because it is just. And the Reason of all
this, is founded upon a common Principle undeniable, because God, and God alone
is Essentially Just, so as Gods Justice is his very Essence: It Is not, it
cannot be so with any man, or men, single, or collective, whose justice at the
most is but an Accident separable, that may abesse, as soon as adesse, go and
come, as men may be well or ill affected: so that it is as vain a Point of
Popery as any, for mere Creatures to challenge an Absoluteness or Infallibility
in the Distribution of Justice, as to pretend it in the Determination of Truth.
This is a Divine Privilege, reserved to the Creator, and beyond the Sphere of
any Creature. By these two plain Principles, such a Legislative Power, ad
placitum, is quite gone; so far from being lawful, that it is made the very
Prove. i. 11:
Character of Sinners in grain to challenge a power, to deprive the Innocent
without cause: and therefore an Act, whose Authors are accursed upon Gods own
Record, and Deuteronomy. xxvii. 25.
to which Curse all Gods people are commanded to say, Amen.

4. Secondly, as such a Legislative Power is utterly incompatible with those
prima Principia, so with those other Right Conditions required to the good
Constitution of a just Law: whose very Ratio est anima legis.
Soul is or should be Right Reason: without which any humane Law is dead, nay
deadly as well to those that enact it, as to those whose unhappiness it is to
live, or to suffer under such an Unreasonable Law, or Lawmakers: so Essential
is Reason to Law, that therefore the Law is generally defined by it, (...):
Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 1. who there calls it (...) a good opinion, etc.
Lex est recta Ratio: But how point blank to all right Reason such an Act of
Deprivation would be, we have at large demonstrated before: This for the Form
of the Law, as we may say.

5. As for the Matter, the Law should be an (...), Clem. ibid. Suarez. de
legib. l. 1. c. 1. 1. ex Aquin. 1. 2. q. 90. Art. 1:
Vnbended Rule equally fit and able to render to every one their Right, and to
redress their wrongs; so that an Injurious Law, though (if not directly
contrary to Gods Law) de facto, it must and does bind the Inferior unto
Obedience, quoad effectum civilem: yet de Jure, it is no Law at all, because
not just. So that in such Cases, it is no Presumption at all to say, the Law
cannot do this, or the Law cannot do that; If the thing be unlawful, because as
the Law is, DD. in L. Impossibilium 185. ff. de R. J. Calv. Lexi c. Jurid.
impossible. S^hneid. in Instit lib. 3. de verbor. obligat. tit. 17. Sect. sub*
c^nd. number. 4.
Impossible est quod de Jure non licet: as it is impossible by Nature, for a
man upon earth to touch the Sky with his Finger: (Thus the Doctors compare the
two Impossibilities, natural and moral) so whatsoever is contra bonos mores, is
as impossible, de Jure, quia id demum possumus quod honest possumus: Lex est
Honestum legitimae potestatis Decretum, ad tuendam Reip. Pac. Wesemb. paratit.
Digest. l. 11. Tit. 3. de legibus.
Since therefore such a Law of Deprivation, were unto so considerable a Party
in the Commonwealth, as the Clergy is in Law, such an extreme injury we may
safely say, and that without any just offense to God or Man, that the Law
cannot do such an act. Nay, so far is such a Restraint from being any real
disparagement to Princes, or Parliaments, to the Lawmakers themselves, that if
rightly apprehended, it rather does greatly redound to their Honor, because it
does in a degree assimilate them unto God himself, of whom the Apostle says to
his praise, that Tit. i. ult. 2 Timothy ii. 13.
God cannot lie, that God cannot deny himself, and the like.

6. But thirdly, all this will be yet plainer, and I hope past all just
Exception, yea, or but Contradiction, when we have impartially considered the
poisoned Cluster of gross Absurdities growing upon it.

7. As first, The utter destruction of the property of the Subject, the great
Diana so much cried up, at the beginning, by those very men, that did Vote it
down in the end. Sure, one would think that the people, if they were but once
again in their right mind, would not thank such Doctors, nor such Doctrines
neither, as directly take away the property of the Subject (for it will follow
by the Rule, a quatenus ad omne:) Yet some Servile Lay men stick not to
acknowledge their own Lay-Estates, as liable as ours, to this v^st Law. It may
be they do it only out of an intent, or color, to open a gap into Sacrilege,
and then out of a hope to make up that gap again, if they can.

8. But secondly, as such an Act of absolute deprivation, were the very Al
renunciation of all manner of Justice Universal, Commutative, Distributive, all
at once: So in the fatal consequences of it, it would prove the Utter
subversion too of all the other known Laws, and Fundamental Constitutions of
this Kingdom, yea of the very Law of Nations. For what Nation once well
settled, did ever yet claim a power de Jure, (for in this case to quote Matters
of Fact (their usual, I may yet say, their chief argument) were but Petitio
Principii) to deprive a man Innocent, or Untried, and Uncondemned (Lay, or
Clergy) of those Rights, which by the standing Magna Charta, See above, page 45.
Laws of that Land, he is, at least, as legally Vested in, for matter of Title,
as any Baron, or Knight, or any other Subject whatsoever? what were this, but
data porta, to introduce a mere Arbitrary Government? and indeed, by such a
notorious Precedent, (if once past in rem Judicatam) had you but eyes to see
it, to open a wide gap into your own Lay Estates, till they had reduced you all
also, to a tame politic Parity. So true you will then find to your own woe,
that old Maxim of Reason, Uno absurdo dato mill Sequuntur: Beware of your
Levellers.

9. For deceive not your selves any longer, John xv. 20.
the Servant is not greater then his Master; if they dare fall upon God
Almighty himself, whom we have proved before to be the great Proprietary of
those Church Revenues, whom think you, will these doughty men spare in the end?
Did ever, or can ever (we speak still de Jure) any Earthly or Humane Power,
take away that from God and his Church, which is theirs, which God did justly
receive from those that had just power to give? yet these stout men say, they
can do it, and also they are ready to justify it, if not by the Word (for here
you see they are gone) yet by the Sword (Mahomets Argument, far from Christ his
Rule.) If you will try it once more, Da illis posse, and velle videbis.

10. Time was, when your more just Ancestors were so far from challenging such
a Legislative Power above God Almighty, that in open At a Parliament held 25.
of Edw. 1.
Parliament, they utterly disclaim it, and they ground their Disclaim too upon
Scripture, saying That Lay men, (and there they speak of themselves as a
Parliament) have no Authority to dispose of the goods of the Church, but (as
the Holy Scriptures do testify) they are committed only to the Priests to be
disposed of. Thus they: but the case is altered now, our great Masters (though
mere Laymen) may dispose not only of Church Goods, but of Church Lands too, nay
of Church men, nay of the whole Church it self, as if per omnes Casus, the
Church were no more indeed, but as all other Lay Incorporations, a mere Civil
Corporation all over, that had in them nothing Spirituale, immediately held of
God himself: however in all other Secular, yea and Ecclesiastical matters too,
for Order as, well for Conscience sake, the Church, as all other Lay
Corporations in the Commonwealth, must and does notwithstanding all this,
acknowledge it self still subject to the Sovereign Jurisdiction, and
ARCHITECKTONICK Power-Paramount of the Prince under God.

11. By this time, all may perceive that this fourth and last Pretense, by such
a vast Legislative Power, ad Placitum, to claim a kind of Omnipotency (which
is high Sacrilege indeed) to dispose of men's Estates, and to deprive men, nay
whole Successions of men, how innocent soever, of their whole Livelihoods, is
so far of it self from deserving an Answer, that upon due Examination, it
rather becomes an Aggravation of the Injustice, when men will thus Psalm, xciv.
20.
frame mischief by a Law, without, nay, against all manner of just Precedent
for it in all Christendom, yea in all the whole world besides. The worst we
wish them is, that they would speedily lay their hand upon their Consciences,
and before their term be quite expired, seriously Comment on that sad Text of
the Prophet, Isa. x. 1, 2, 3.
Woe unto them that Decree Unrighteous Decrees, and that write grievousness
which they have prescribed: To turn aside the needy from Judgment, and to take
away the Right from the poor of my People, that Widows may be their Prey, and
that they may rob the Fatherless: (for if they should go on, at that rate, as
they did once begin, some Clergymen (a good many) may leave behind them their
Wives Widows, and their Children Fatherless, and both of them poor enough, God
knows!)

But then, (mark the end of such men) what will you do in the day of
Visitation, says the Lord, and in the Desolation which shall come from far? to
whom will ye then flee for help, and where will ye leave your glory? and there
we leave them also.

May all those who find or feel themselves concerned in this Arraignment of
Sacrilege lay to heart this sad Item, for an upshot of a full Answer to all
their pretenses: And thus much for Matter of Confutation sufficient again to
Non-sute the Adversaries whole Plea: This is the (...), or first main part in
the Matter of Probation.

CHAP. XI.
That the Sin of Sacrilege is a great SNARE, and also condemned, as by the
Divine, so the Canon, Civil, Saxon, Common, and Statute-Laws.

FOllows now the second and last part of all, the (...), or Matter of
Confirmation of our own Cause.

1. Upon which we shall be the briefer, because as occasion was offered, and
Necessity required, we have already by a kind of Prolepsis, prevented the
greatest part of it in the preceding passages, all along, as we were delivering
Matters of Declaration, and of Aggravation.

2. But yet the better to distribute the Remainder of our Evidence, be pleased
to take notice that of our Clients side (which you must remember is God
himself) we have yet so much Clear Scripture, so much strong Reason, so much
Law of all sorts founded on both the former, and so much Testimony of all
Parties beyond Exception, such a Cloud of Witnesses of all ranks, from all
quarters, as may leave them past all Excuse, and jointly rise up in Judgment
against them, that after all these fair Evidences brought forth against this
Camel (the sin of Sacrilege) will yet resolve to Implead, or to Impeach God,
and the Church in their Rights and Liberties.

3. As for the first kind of proof by Scripture, one notable Text more against
Sacrilege, we may not omit to acquaint you with, and thus it runs, Prove. xx.
25.
It is a snare for a man to devour that which is Holy, and after Vows to make
Enquiry: In which words you have both the Nature of the sin, and the Danger of
it.

4. The Nature of it consists of two Acts, 1. To devour that which is Holy:
That Is the matter of Fact as it were: and then 2. After Vows to make Enquiry,
that is the Plea, or the pretended Matter of Right.

5. Touching the first, the Matter of Fact: The Act is to devour, the Object,
is that which is Holy. As for the Act, it is expressed in the From (...) a (...)
The same word which is used, Psalm. cxxiv. 3. They had swallowed us up quick,
etc.
Original by such a Metaphorical word, as is borrowed from Ravenous Beasts that
will not admit of so much Deliberation in Eating, as to choose, or to chew
their meat, but for very greediness do swallow it up all raw, yea, quick, and
whole too, as they light on it: (A fit Emblem, by the way, of our late ROOT
AND BRANCH-MEN.)

6. 2ly. As for the Object, Translations vary, (only about the word, for they
all agree upon the matter:) 1. Some as ours read it, to devour that which is
Holy: That is, says Cajetan on the place, to appropriate Holy Things, such as
the Holy Tithes and Offerings, and other Sacred Tributes due to Gods Priests,
(and Cajetan is counted one of the best of them, ad Literam;) 2. Some, as the
Original, (by an usual Hebraisme, putting the Abstract for the Concrete) reads
it to devour Holiness it self, to note again, as 1. The decay of holiness it
self upon the Decay of holy means: so 2. That those who make no Conscience of
violating holy things, they may pretend what they will, but really they make no
Conscience indeed of holiness it self, but miscere Sacra profanis, is all one
with them. 3. Some as the Vulgar reads it altogether in Concreto, it is a snare
to devour Sanctos, that is, says an Interpreter on the place, Salazar.
To deprive of their Livelihoods good and godly men (the Act in hand) and sure,
of all such men, the holy men of God: for so of old in all Reverence, the
Primitive Nos Sanctos vocant, and Dei servos^ etc. Aug.
Christian People did esteem, and as usually call the Priests of God, by this
Religious Title, of the Saints of God, not, as now, hand over head, the
profane, or at least ignorant People, call Gods Priests, their Ministers: when
no where in all the whole Bible, are they so called by their great Master, God
himself, the servants of men, in that general sense: And if 2 Cor. iv. 5.
but once in all the Bible, they do, (in a special, and voluntary case of
Condescension, as St. Paul for Preaching gratis to the Corinthians) call
themselves your Servants: yet, mark well what follows, it is for Jesus sake they
do it: But else all over, Gods Ministers are styled Men's Guides, Men's Rulers,
and other such like terms of Superiority, and then Gods Ambassadors, Gods
Ministers, or Gods Saints, (...), because they are, or should be so, and so
accounted of by you. This in a glance only: and thus much for the Fact, and the
two main Species of Sacrilege both Personal, and Real.

7. Secondly, The Plea, or the pretended Matter of Right, is after Vows to make
Enquiry: That is as the same Retractare, revocare, refellere, etc. Salazar.
interpreter glosses it aright, first to commit Sacrilege, and then to study
and find out Reasons and Colors to defend it, The Black Art of too many in
our Generation: and who knows, but they may have learned this good Lesson also
of the Popes themselves, who first would Impropriate, that is, devour that
which is holy: and then what themselves had thus wrongfully done de facto, they
made their Friars (the receivers of the Sacrilege) use all their wits to
maintain it de jure? As to name no more, your Countryman Alexander Hales did,
who was the first that ever directly maintained that Tithes were de Jure
Ecclesiastico, not Divino, which Popish conceit has yet since by diverse of
your own D. Ridley, D. Carleton, D. Downh^m. Sir James Sempel, etc. and so many
more as yet unanswered, etc.
Champions been learnedly confuted.

8. But secondly, some of the Hebrews read it thus, It is a snare for a man to
Consecrate, and after vows to change for the worse: If so, then let our
Changelings look to it, any of these ways they will light on a Snare.

Thirdly, and lastly, the (...). LXX. (...) Laqueus est homini qui devovit
Sanctuario, and postea tangit eum anima ipsius. Targum.
Septuagint out of the Chaldee, are yet more strict, and read the Text thus, It
is a snare for a man to consecrate a thing rashly, and afterward to repent it.
From whence observe. 1. That if Vota temere nuncupata, Rash Vows be obligatory,
and must stand, then a majori, out of all doubt, Deliberate Consecrations. 2.
If it be a Snare for a man after Consecration to grudge, or but to Repent it,
then a majori again, what a Snare must it needs be utterly to reverse it, and
to resume it? and if but to resume, a majori, still to rob? And thus for the
Nature of the sin, it is heinous enough.

9. Secondly, as for the Danger, it is expressed here by the Metaphor of a
Snare, or of a Trap, that is, Destruction, as several Translations read it: and
that Snare, a double Snare too, as Cajetan well observes it, for first by his
vow he is caught to one side in the Snare of Gods Law, for that bids him Psalm.
lxxvi. 11. Deuteronomy. xxii. 21, 24.
Vow, and pay, because though vovere voluntatis, yet reddere necessitatis, else
the Law will be a perpetual Snare to attach the Votary, till he pay it. Take
one notable Instance of this in the old Patriarch Genesis xxviii. 20, 22.
Jacob, who, in his extremity, fleeing from his Brother Esau, vowed to build an
Altar unto God at Bethel: but it seems afterward he did for the space of
thirty years, either altogether forget, or at least foreslow the payment of his
Vow: All this while he is no sooner quit of one mischief, as it were one Snare,
but he lights on another: such as Esau's Ambushment, (Genesis xxxiii.) The
Deflourement of his Daughter Dinah. (Genesis xxxiiii.) The furious Massacre
committed by his Sons upon the Sichemites, to the provocation of all the
Nations round about him: till God at last, in mercy, plainly puts him in mind
of his Vow, saying, Genesis xxxv. 1.
Arise go up to Bethel, and make there an Altar unto God that appeared unto
thee, etc. And then did he pay his Vow, and so slipped his foot out of the snare:
And as thus he that vows, is caught in the Snare of the Law, till he pay it, So
2. If he do not pay it, he is trapped on the other side with the Snare of his
own Sin of Sacrilege; so that till he repent, and reform, and restore also,
turn which way he will, he will light on a snare, or fall headlong into
Jeremy's Labyrinth, Jer. xlviii. 43, 44.
Fear, and the Pit, and the Snare will be upon him, so as when he flees from
the fear, he shall fall into the Pit, and when he gets up out of the Pit, he
shall be taken in the Snare.

10. Now, if you will further know what that Snare is, it is no other but that
which before the Prophet Malachy did directly call Gods Curse: of which enough
See above, page
before, and therefore no more of it at this Time. It Is such a Noli tangere, in
the Nature of it, witness Jeremies Metaphor, Jer. ii. 3.
Israel is as an hallowed thing unto the Lord, and as the first fruits of his
Increase, all that devour him shall offend, evil shall come upon them: They
shall be sure to light on a Snare: And get the Bird once in the Snare, and you
need no Fortune Tellers to tell you her destiny: so is the Case, so is the Fate
of every Sacrilegious Person, Family, Nation, it needs no other Clog. And you
of this Nation may well suspect such a Clog hangs about you, for your Exodus xiv.
25.
Chariot Wheels, have, for some years last past, driven very heavily, To any
Nation then this one sin will be ILLAQUEATION sufficient, because of all others
it has in it as much of the Devils Power and Policy, as any.

12. And that, in short, is the strong Reason of the hainousness of this sin,
because it is a sin so Fundamental and Radical of almost all other sins, that
where it is entertained, it presently fills the Heart with the Devil and all
his works: So does God charge Sacrilegious Acts v. 3.
Ananias at his Arraignment, why has Satan filled thy heart? Pride, and Envy,
Fraud, and Oppression, Avarice, and Ambition, are all but the handmaids, that
wait, in ordinary, on this great Beldam-sin of Sacrilege: This for the
Original Cause of Sacrilege.

13. As for the Fruits of such a Cursed Stock, no wise man can expect they
should be blessed: It being (as you have heard at large) a sin Destructive of
all Religion and Policy, of Church and State, Introductive of all Irreligion,
Atheism, and Anarchy: The very new Gun-Powder-Plot, or White-Powder-Mine, under
holy pretenses, and therefore without noise, to blow up Priest, Priesthood, and
all that is called Holy: Balaams, or Julian's Plot was but a Puny to this:
Would I turn Traitor in grain against God and man, I would only counsel
Sacrilege: That will do it, that will speed any Church or Nation to sudden,
and total, and final Destruction. Reason enough therefore, to add no more, why
all good Christians should abhor this sin for ever.

14. And therefore in the third place, you may take notice, that in all
Nations, all wise Law givers in conformity to Gods Law, have been careful, yea
severe, as by wholesome Laws to prevent, so by rigorous, and generally Capital,
Execution to punish the crime of Sacrilege as heavily as any: this is clear in
the Records of all the Laws, Canon, Civil, Saxon, French.

15. For by the Canon Law, whosoever takes away, or alienates to other persons
or uses, goods or things ( Chattels your Lawyers call them) nay, Facultates at
large is the word Sacrilegi judicantur qui ECCLESIAE FACULTATES alienant. Tit.
Omnes ECCLESIAE RAPTORES, Alque FACULTATUM suarum ALIENATORES Sacrilegos esse
Judicamus: and non solum eos, sed omnes consentientes eis, ^uia non solum qui
faciunt, rei Judicantur, sed etiam qui consentiunt facientibus: PAR ENIM Poe^a
and AGENTES ET CONSENTIENTES COMPREHENDIT. Decret. part. 2. c. 17. l. 4. c. 5.
both in the Title and in the Body of the Law, all manner of Church-wealth or
Estate, (that must needs comprehend all Movables and Immoveables) or whosoever
shall consent to any such Alienation, shall be all alike guilty of Sacrilege:
and as the Canonists phrase it, shall incur ipso facto crimen laesae Majestatis
divinae, which by comparison with the other crime of High Treason against the
King on Earth, (whatever Sacrilegious Thieves, or Rebellious Subjects may think
of it) must needs be by proportion, a Crime of the highest degree: and so it is
punished with the highest spiritual extremity that Law can inflict, the heavy
sentence of Excommunication, and to note farther the hainousness of the
offense, as Ivo, Burchardus, Gratian and the rest agree, the Canonists allot
unto it seven years Penance, where so many days might suffice for other
ordinary sins: but because Aquin. 22. q. 99. 4.
says Aquinas, as heavy as the just sentence of Excommunication may seem to a
right Christian, yet it is by the Sacrilegious offender, commonly no more
regarded then a bugbear word; therefore pro qualitate delicti, it is by the
Secular Power punished sometimes with pecuniary Censure, (heavier to the
offender that commonly fears more the loss of his Money, then the loss of his
soul) sometimes with outright Decapitation.

16. Or, as by the Civil Law, Sacrilegii poena de Jure communi regulariter est
Capitalis, ita ut pr^ qualitate personae and condition rei Sacrilegi aliquando
damnentur ad Bestias, aliquando ad Ignem, aliquando ad Furcam. l. Sac^ilegii 6.
ff. ad L. Jul. peculatus; and in. Item. l. Julia peculatus 9. Wesembec paratit.
ff. l. xlix. Tit. 13. ad l. Jul. peculatus, and de Sacrilegis. Infra de publ.
Iud. Jure Saxonieo rota concutiendos esse Sacrilegos statuitur Art. 13. l. 2.
Schneid. ad lib. 4. Instit. Tit. 2. de vi bonorum raptorum.
proportionably to the quality of the Offender, and condition of the Offense,
they were condemned sometimes to the Wild Beasts, or to the Fire, to the
Gallows, or as now, Jure Saxonico, to the wheel: and of old by your own Leges
Aluredi Regis cap. 1. l. 6. in (...), etc.
Saxon Law to Mutilation at least, or cutting off the Sacrilegious hand. In
France I remember I have seen Sacrilege punished with Hanging and Burning
(both at once) according to the Civil Law.

17. As for your own Common Law, I have heard some of your great Clerks say,
that it is somewhat defective about the Case of Sacrilege, as taking no
Cognizance of it, nor affording any Action for it under that Notion, but yet
that in such cases it allows no Clergy to the Thief, See above, Chap. IV. Sect
3. and seq. Magna Charta. Item, Chapter VII. Sect. 9. and seq. and Statutes. Anno
28. H. 8. c. 1. and 32. H. 8. Persons guilty of Robbing Churches, Chapels, or
other Holy Places, shall not be admitted to the Benefit of their Clergy, (such
as be admitted to Holy Orders, i. e. of the Order of Subdeacon, or above, only
excepted: and this Statute to be in force for ever. [It seems by this Statute,
that in the eye of the Law, Clergy-mens persons are privilegiate, even in
Delinquency; not that their sin is less, but rather, as we said above, greater
then the sin of the Laity: But that the favor of the Law is greater to
Clergymen, in regard of their Office.]

One degree more of aggravation we may observe from the Act of Indemnity, (An.
12. Car. II. cap XI.) where, out of the General Pardon, Sacrilege is excepted
expressly, no less then Rapes, and other monstrous Sins against Nature: as if
the Law-^iver would hereby intimate, that Sacrilege is a sin parallel to those
crimes, for hainousness.


grounding the sentence on that common principle, received almost in all Laws,
to wit, That frustra Legis auxilium invocat, qui in Legem committit: And this
singularity adds one grain of aggravation to the hainousness of this sin, even
in the balance of your own Law.

CHAP. XII.
A Cloud of Domestical, and also a Triumvirate of Foreign Witnesses. 1. Luther
for Germany. 2. Calvin for France. And 3. Knox for Scotland, all of them
expressly deposing against the Sin of Sacrilege.

1. AND now as your free Merchants use to give somewhat into the Bargain, for
an (...), for good Measure, or down-weight, so for a close of this our
Pleading, take ex alundanti, so many Testimonies of all sorts of men, in their
generations, that you may not think this our Action against Sacrilege geazon,
or uncouth, or merely litig^ous on our part.

2. Amongst those so many Testes veritatis, we forbear to accumulate the Holy
Fathers, of whose Declamations against this sin, we have given you sundry
hansels already, and could afford you many more full Pieces, but that, ad
hominem, (the more shame) some more Modern Witnesses will be far more
Authentical.

3. And yet amongst these too, we will not so much as repeat the so many
several complaints of your own Gild^sses of old, nor of late, of your Gilpins,
Ridleys, Latimers, Tindals, Jewels, Hookers, Andrewsses, and of so many more,
nor their several sad Considerations, Prophecies, and humble Petitions, put as
it were up in their Sermons and Epistles yet extant, and directed to their
several Kings and Queens, even then when this Serpent was but a Scorpion in the
Egg: what then would all those Bern. Gilpin. in a Sermon. at Greenwich, An.
1552. before Edw. 6. B. Ridley in his Le ter to Mr. Cheek, July 23. 1551. from
Fulham, among the Letters of the Martyrs, by Miles Coverdail, p. 683. Land.
1564. Latimers Sermon. of Covetousness* Grindals Manuscript Letter to Q.
Elizabeth, 1580. Jewel's Sermons on Hag. 1. v. 2, 3, 4. and on Psalm. 69.9.
Hooker B. 5. of Eccles. Polit. B. Andrews did much find fault, and reprove
three sins too common, and reigning in this latter age. 1. One was Usury, etc.
2. Another was Simony, etc. The third and greatest was Sacrilege, which he did
abhor as one principal Cause among many, of the Foreign and Civil Wars in
Christendom and Invasion of the Turks: wherein even the Reformed, and otherwise
the true Professors and Servants of Christ, because they took GODS PORTION, and
turned away it to public profane uses, or to private advancements, d^d suffer
just Chastisement and Correction at Gods hand: And at home it had been
observed, and he wished some man would take the pains to collect how many
Families that were raised by the Spoils of the Church, were now vanished, and
the place thereof knows them no more: See the Sermon Preached at the Funeral of
the Lord Bishop Andrews, by the then Lord Bishop of R chester, Anno 1626.
(forty years ago.)
good men have said think you, had they been so unhappy as to live to our
Sacrilegious days, to see this sin grown to the stature of a full Dragon
indeed?

4. But lest these, being but Domestici testes, should seem partial in their
own cause; therefore we intend to cite none but the Masters of the Reformation
abroad; whom you shall hear crying aloud against the Sacrilege of the
Reformers, in their several times and places, charging them with deep
Hypocrisy, damnable Avarice, and what not? and that under pretense of
Reformation, they did but intend, nay practice Robbery in the Usurpation of
those Church Revenues that were Dedicated to God, for the maintenance of his
Ministers: of such free, and full strains their Writings are top full.

5. And yet to prove all this, we will only single out one eminent Triumvirat
of such witnesses as we are confident even with these men we are pleading
against, will be most free from all exception: They be Luther, Calvin, and
Knox, as it were so many Delegates for Germany, France, and Scotland, the Three
great Foreign Stages of the Reformation:

6. According to their Seniority, the first main Witness we produce in the
behalf of our Cause, is Luther, who (preaching on that ample Text of S. Paul to
the Galathians, Quoties lego Pauli Adhortationes, etc. [This Testimony being
prolixe, we will only extract the most Emphatical points in it, and refer the
Reader to the Author at large.] -- Summa, homines videntur degenerare in
Bestias. -- Satan horrendissimum malum hoc vehementer urget per Impios
Magistratus in Civitatib and Nobiles in Rure qui BONA ECCLESIARUM ex quibus
Ministri debebant vivere, rapiunt, etc. -- Tangit autem acu mores Nostratium,
qui securissime nostrum Ministerium contemnunt -- Praecipue Nobiles qui
pastores suos sibi tanquam viles Servos obnoxios faciunt: and nisi haberemus
tam pium and am^ntem veritat^s Principem; Jam dudum ex his terris exturbassent
nos. Exclamant, (quando pastores postulant -- aut queruntur --) Sacerdotes
avarisunt, Insatiabiles -- Tyranni and subsannatores Dei, videri tamen volunt
Evangelici. -- Puniet Deus acerrimum odium vestrum in Ministro^. -- Ferox
Nobilitas, Cives and Rustici, cum periculum mo^^is Instabit, sentient
Comminationem quam rident: Deus enim non irride^ur. -- Sint illa PAPAE BONA per
meram Imposturam coacervata. tamen Deus Spolians Aegyptios, hoc est, Papistas
suis Bonis, tranfert ea in locis nostris in pium usum. Non quando Nobiles
rapiunt, and transferunt in abusum, sed quando ij qui gloriam Dei annunciant
inde aluntur. Sciamus igitur nos bona Conscientia posse fru^ BONIS
ECCLESIASTICIS. See at large Luther himself, on Galat. 6.6.
Let him that is taught in the word, communicate unto him that teaches in all
good things: (you may call this the Ministers Magna Charta indeed, irrevocable
by any humane Authority, or Municipal Laws whatsoever:) for I hope none of our
Religion will presume herein to shake hands with the Pope to pretend a Power to
dispense Contra Apostolum. Luthers Gloss upon St. Paul does so fit our Meridian
in almost all the particulars, as if it had been penned but yesterday here in
England, not a hundred years ago, nor so far as Germany, St. Basil somewhere
argues, that the Holy Ghost was no doubt very God, because he was present at
the same time with Habakkuk in the Field, Jeremy in the Dungeon, Daniel in the
Den: witness the Concordance of their Prophecies, (I stand not now upon the
truth of the Chronology;) but only I do observe, that sure there is somewhat
more then ordinary of Gods public Spirit in this public Cause of the Church,
seeing that all these men of several Nations, at that distance of times and
places, yet still consort in a Harmony: however their Descant do vary, their
Ground is one and the same; and all of them jointly, constant unisones against
this particular kind of Sacrilege, namely, the Converting of the Lands and
Possessions, etc. formerly given to Superstitious, or Popish Uses unto
Lay-Uses; and that also (which is worth the observing) after those
Superstitious Officers, and Offices, (Mass-Priests, and Popish Monks, etc.)
had, by lawful Authority, (not so here the Bishops and Deans) been abolished.
But now It is to me a wonder, how those Declaimers against such alienations of
Cathedral Lands, can with any forehead produce such eminent Protestant Authors,
as bearing witness for them against this practice, after the Offices be all at
an end: Cornelius Burges in the Preface to his Sacrilegious Book, where like
another Goliath, (1 Samuel xvii. 10) he bids defiance to all Fathers, Canonists,
Schoolmen, Protestants, though never so eminent, if they dare cross his way to
his Mammon of Iniquity
by Cornelius Burges his leave, let the Witnesses be heard) to cite them, with
their reasons, will be enough to confute him. To begin with Luther, if you
please but tacitly, all along, to apply him to Cornelius Burges his Case, A
Case concerning the Buying of Bishps Lands, with the Lawfulness thereof
[presented to his Parliament, Anno 1650. as a Prodromus to his Book for
Sacriledge]
you will save your selves, and me some labor.

7. First then, Luther begins his Sermon with Astonishment, and blushes to
think that so great an Apostle as Saint Paul should be forced to use so many
words, nay, so many full Sermons to persuade the People to maintain Gods
Ministers: so as to spend about it, two whole Chapters to the Corinthians, in
an earnest kind of Beggary: I would be very loath (says Luther to his
Audience,) to diffame my Wittemberg, as St. Paul does his Corinth: But this is
the ill fortune of the Gospel, that so far are most men from giving any thing
for it, or to it, that all men will rather use all the base tricks they can to
circumvent, to snatch, to steal away the means that should maintain the
Ministers of it. The short and the long is this, men are degenerated into
Beasts. (This is Luther right.)

8. So that hence from, we may learn (I speak in Luthers very words all this
while:) how n^cessary this Doctrine of Saint Paul, touching the Maintenance of
Gods Ministers is to be Preached unto the People: for the It seems the German
and British Devils are near of Kin.
Devil has but two highways to destroy Religion; The one is by the Errors of
Heretics, and the Terrors of Tyrants, or Persecutors: But the other way is by
starving, or depriving Gods Ministers, thereby forcing them to desert their
Ministry, upon the Failer whereof, in time, the miserable People, for want of
Gods Words, are turned into so many brute Beasts.

9. This horrible Mischief, the better to bring about, the Devil stirs up the
Impious Magistrate in the City, and some ungodly ones of the Nobility and
Gentry in the Country, violently to take away, and to convert to their own
impious use, those Church Revenues, which are the maintenance of Gods
Ministers: whereby it will soon come to pass, that none (that is worldly wise)
will put his Children to the Divinity-School, of all others, but rather apply
them all to the other more gainful Trades and Sciences. (That you may the
better heed this, Luther goes over it again, discovering the Devils deep drift
in this mystery of Iniquity, saying) This is the Devils own Master-Plot to
banish Christ's Religion out of our Land, without either the visible violence of
the Tyrants, or the under hand work of the Heretics.

10. Ah! then, how much more likely is the Apostasy, and miserable must needs
be that poor peoples Case, in whose Land all these three may seem to have
conspired in a joint Concurrence to the Destruction of that Church and Nation?
Heresy, Tyranny, and Robbery, all these at once; Lord have mercy upon us!) But
Luther goes on sadly still, and you must hear him out, for you must give
Witnesses leave to speak out, and to tell out their own Tale, their own way too.

11. Will you know the Calamities attending upon such horrible Ingratitude?
Then behold, because an ungracious Nation thinks much to part with their Carnal
things, for our Spiritual things; therefore says he, by a just Judgment of God
they shall forfeit, and utterly lose both their own Carnal things, and our
Spiritual things too.

12. And indeed I am verily persuaded, that these Churches of Galatia, and of
Corinth, etc. were for no other cause thus infested, and troubled with so many
false Apostles, but because they did so notoriously neglect their own true
Doctors: For most just it is with God, that those that deny him their Pence,
when He affords them all their own good things, and offers them eternal life to
boot, should be given over to such frenzy, as freely to bestow whole pounds on
the Devil and his Apostles: (and then you may say, penny wise, and pound
foolish indeed!) Then commenting further on the next words following, Be not
deceived, God is not mocked: The Apostle, says he, is so earnest in urging
this Text for the liberal Maintenance of Gods Ministers, that he is fain to
back his Exhortation with Increpation, downright chiding, yea to fortify both
these with a severe Commination, saying, Be not deceived, God is not mocked;
for whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap.

13. And even here, as we say, he hits the nail on the head, and meets full in
the face, with the good manners of the men of our Generation, that most
securely contemn our Ministry -- Chiefly the great ones, that keep their
Chaplains at such distance, as if they were not their Pastors, but their basest
Slaves: So that were it not for Gods mercy that has blessed us with a Prince
so pious, and such a fast Friend to Religion, some of them had long ago made us
weary of this Land. (Do not imagine, it is I speak this, for these are still
Luther's own words all of them.)

14. Such are they that when the Preacher offers to defend, or to demand but
his own, or but fairly to complain of his wrongs, they cry out straight, These
Parsons are ever Covetous, and insatiable men; they never have enough, and the
like; yet for all that, says Luther, we must not give over pleading Gods
Cause, when the Scripture it self pleads it thus for us: But these hard Lessons
men must be taught, and told often, though they Scoff at us for our labor.

15. Yet these latterdayes-scoffers of God himself (in his Servants) would seem
as good Gospellers as any of the best: But for all that know ye, says he, that
however God, for awhile, delays his Vengeance, yet in his due time, he will
find you out, and plague your Dogged hatred against Gods Ministers.

16. Methinks, some are tired already with reading thus much against the hair:
will Luther never have done? but the main is behind yet: for now Luther may
seem to thunder and lighten indeed, saying: That for all this Patience of God,
yet the time will come, when the proudest of the Gentry, the Covetousest of the
City, and the rudest Clowns in the Country, shall all at the very approach of
Death, [finde the Curses of God to be no Bugbear words] they shall then at
furthest, find, [yea feel too] the Truth of this Curse of God upon them, that
in the end God will not be mocked indeed, but that as they have sown, so now
they must go reap for ever.

17. And lest any should misconceive that Luther speaks only this at large of
the Ministers Maintenance in genere: and so not to our particular purpose:
therefore for a Conclusion, take notice, that Luther speaks there expressly of
BONA PAPAE, as there he calls them, of such Popish Church Revenues, as some
miscal the Lands of your Bishops, Deans, and Chapters: ( Luther himself would
have said no less of the Abby-Lands: for were not these also inter Bona Papae?)
which Luther is so far from condemning to Lay-uses, because of the abuses, that
he rather earnestly warns all Ministers to take special notice, That those
Church Revenues are their own Maintenance, and therefore they should not
suffer themselves to be deprived of them by the Laity upon scruples of
Conscience, because they were Popish, or so; for say, they were gotten, and
heaped up together by MERE IMPOSTURES, yet, says he, since God has been
pleased, (all these are his own words still) to spoil the Egyptians, (I mean
the Papists) and to give them unto us, why should not we enjoy our own? Can
they be converted to a more pious use, than to maintain the Ministers of God?
or will any affirm that use to be better, which they are put unto, by the
Nobility and Gentry, that Rob us of them? Then he concludes all, saying, Let us
therefore once for all know, that with a very good Conscience we both may take,
and keep too those Church Revenues to our selves. And thus far our first ample
Witness, Luther for Germany.

18. In the second place, the next Witness we produce in the behalf of our
Cause, will be far more brief, and yet very pithy too: and it is Calvin for
France, who even there were Ecclesiae facultates in alienos usus convertere
sacrilegium esse dicunt, Assentior. Si nihil hic apud nos peccari dixero,
Mentiar -- non Excuso, Principes nostros accusant quod Patrimonium Christi, and
Ecclesiae Deo consecratum rapuerint, and in profanos usus dilapident: -- Quod
in eos tantum usus non impendantur Ecclesia reditus quibus sunt dedicati, mihi
displicere profiteor. Mecum etiam id gemunt omnes boni: -- ECCLESIAE BONA ex
Sacerdotum and Monach rum Erepta manibus ad se receperunt Principes nostri. --
Fateor grave Judicium pronuntiari adversus eos, qui Ecclesiam spoliaverunt, ut
sibi raperent quod illius erat, quia veros Ministros fraudant suo victu. -- Jam
ante Triennium testati sunt nostri principes, moram se nullam in Restitutione
facturos, modo in eundem se ordinem cogi patiantur, etc. Habet igitur tua
Majestas, Invictissime Caesar, principes sua promissione obstrictos, etc. Extat
etiam in manibus hominum Libellus, ut ad Doctrinae consensionem ea res non
debeat esse impedimento. Calvin, Tractatu de Necessitate Reformandae Ecclesiae,
in vol. Opuscul.
Ex professo, he does his utmost in writing unto the Emperor, Charles the
Fifth, and to the rest of the Princes then assembled at Spira, to excuse at
large the Sacrilege objected to the Reformers, yet even then, I say, is he
forced to let fall thus many Truths at once.

19. First, he truly States the Objection thus, They say that to convert the
Church Revenues unto other uses is Sacrilege, I grant it. 2. That at the
Reformation those Church Revenues were not so well disposed of, I should lie if
I should deny it: And again, it cannot be free from blame: and again, I cannot
excuse it: Though the pretense was then as now, and so is his Plea, that part
of it was employed in Stipends to the Maintenance of the Ministers: yet for all
that, he ingenuously confesses, and complains too, that those Church Revenues,
(which he there calls expressly the Patrimony of Christ, and the Patrimony of
the Church, consecrated to God) were not employed only to those uses to which
they were dedicated, (I speak all this while in Calvin's own words:) and that
they are not so employed is my grief, and all good men lament this case with
me. If you now make a question what Church Revenues he means, he tells you
plainly, he means no other but those Church means that by the Princes of the
Reformation, were taken away from THE POPISH PRIESTS AND FRIARS, so that he
must needs make THE FRIARS Means part of the Churches Patrimony. Nay Calvin
goes farther, to denounce Gods grievous Judgment against all those that had
thus robbed the Church to enrich themselves: and last of all, for a conclusion
of all, he seems to point out no other Remedy for it, but For this kind of
pious Restitution of the Church Lands, and other Sacred Revenues, formerly
usurped, we need not go beyond Seas to seek Precedents: This Island (so famous
for ancient Christianity) affords us memorable Examples: To cite but one for
all: Willelmus Rex Anglorum Reddidit Ecclesiae omnes fere terras antiquis and
modernis temporibus a jure ipsius Ecclesiae ablatas, quarum terrarum Nomina
haec sunt. In Cantia Raculf. Sandwic. Rateburch. Widecun. Monasterium de
Limminge cum terris and Consuetudinibus ad ipsum Monasterium pertinentibus.
Saltwude cum Burgo heche ad saltwude pertinente, Langport Niwendene. Rokinge,
Detlinge. Prestentune non long a fluvio Medeweie sitam. Sunderherste.
Iarbeche: Orpentun. Amesford. Denintun. Stock. Quatuor Praebendas de Mwentune
and praeter haec omnia multas alias modicas terras tam in insulis quam extra
insulas in Cantia sitas. Stock vero and Denentum Lanfrancus Archiep's Reddidit
Ecclesiae Sancti Andreae, quia de jure ipsius Ecclicae Antiquitus fuerunt. In
sutrege Murtelac Lundoniae Monasterium Sanctae Mariae cum terris and Domibus
quas Livingus Presbiter, and uxor illius Lundonice habuerunt. In Middlesexum.
Hergam. in Buckingham-scire Risbergam healtun. In Oxenaford-scire Niwentun. In
Suchfolke Frakenham: hanc Villam Lanfrancus Archep's Reddidit Ecclesiae Sancti
Andreae, quia antiquitus ad ipsam Ecclesiam pertinebat. In East Sexum scistede.
Stanbgrigge. haec omnia Reddidit pro Deo and pro salute animae suae, gratis and
sine ullo Precio.

This Record is to be seen in the Rare Library of that late Famous Antiquary,
Sir Robert Cotton, in a Manuscript Entitled, Canones Burcardi and Lanfranci
Constitutiones, Fol. 165. B. In which Notable evidence are very observable 1.
The Royal Example of Restitution to the Church. 2. The godly Concurrence of
Lanfrancus the Archbishop. 3. That this Restitution tends to God, Pro Deo, and
pro salute, Animae suae. 4. That this was done gratis and sine ullo precio: It
was neither by way of Commutation on the Restorers part, nor by way of
Redemption on the Church's part. 5. (But this only obiter) we may also hereby
take notice of the Marriage of Priests in those ancient days, 600 years ago:
for Archbishop Lanfranc was promoted to the Sea of Canterbury, Anno 1070.

That such Restitutions were procured by Archbishop Lanfranc may further
appear: Nam maneria 25. per Od^nem Epum Baiocensem, fratrem Regis uterinum
erepta, Ecclica Restituenda Curavit. Mannerium de R^dburne per injuriam ereptum
illius Opera redditum est. Godwin de Praesulibus in Lanfranc.


Restitution, which he therefore mentions twice for failing, Telling the
Emperor, that some three years before, the Princes had made a Promise to
restore them all without delay, (but upon Condition, namely, Provided the
Friars, and the Priests, and the Bishops too, who did also abuse Church-means,
to maintain Vice and Luxury, would part with them also: Conditions unlikely
enough, and therefore to this day that Restitution is yet to make:) In
conclusion, Calvin seems as it were, to put up for it, his Petition to the
Emperor himself, saying, Caesar, you have the Princes bound by their own
promise, to restore, as if he would say, you may sue out their Bond. Calvin
adds moreover, that there was a Book written on purpose touching the
Restitution, to give satisfaction about it; so that this particular should be
no hinderance to Consent in Doctrine. Thus far Calvin for France.

20. And so in the third and last place, Knox for Scotland, In the first Book
of Discipline, Anno 1560. he and all his fellow Ministers are very vehement in
pressing the Lords of the Privy Council to Restitution of all the Church
Revenues; their words are to this effect, We dare not flatter your Lordships,
but for fear of the loss of your souls and ours, we desire to have all the
Church Lands of the Friars, and all other Mortifications restored back again
unto the Church.

21. And in particular, Knox himself, about the year 1572. in which year he
died, Knox his History.
in a general Epistle of his, from Edinborough, where he was Minister, unto the
General Assembly then sitting at Striveling, he there exhorts them all to join
in Preaching against the sin of Sacrilege, in words to this purpose, Brethren,
we have had a fight against the Heretics, and God has blessed us, we have now
a strong fight against the Sacrilegious; and therefore be you courageous, and
God will give us an happy end. This Doctrine from Knox, you may the rather take
notice of, and believe too, because it seems it was his DEATHBED DOCTRINE.

22. We omit to dilate farther, in quoting their whole express Sermons, such as
was that of Mr. John Cragge, Preached at Lyth, Anno 1571. directly against the
Sin of Sacrilege: by all which, you may clearly see, that all those Reformers
were as earnest as any of us can be, in inveighing against but the beginning of
that Sacrilege, against whose progress, nay, almost conquest, some Left
hearted men, now adays, think it strange that we dare open our Mouths.

23. But what need I trouble you with any more single Testimonies, If whole
Assemblies as it were Agmine facto, marching in a full Body against it, have
charged this sin through and through: For behold, as Leah said at the Birth of
Gad, a Troop comes. Genes. xxx. 11.
To name no more, The whole Assembly at St. Andrews, (we are in Scotland still)
which did (Anno 1582.) expressly enjoin a General Fast throughout the Realm, for
appeasing Gods wrath upon the Land directly again for the crying sin of
Sacrilege. And surely we of this Kingdom have much more cause to arraign our
selves for this sin now, then they had then: So that (even before I knew this
example) such a thing has been often times in my thoughts and wishes, with
humble submission to Authority.

Behold instances enough of all sorts, as to Justify our Charge to the full,
so to finish our matter of Probation, and indeed our whole Pleading against the
Sin of Sacrilege arraigned here by Saint Paul in these words.

THOU THAT ABHORREST IDOLS, DO THOU COMMIT SACRILEGE?

THE RECAPITULATION OF ALL.
1. AND now to contract this whole Mass of Matter, and to bind up all our
evidence into one plain Syllogism, (the most convincing way of Argumentation:)

WHATEVER is of the same nature with Idolatry and Adultery, that must needs be
a Sin now under the Gospel, as much as under the Law.

BUT Sacrilege is of the same Nature with Idolatry and Adultery.

ERGO, SACRILEGE IS A SIN NOW UNDER THE GOSPEL, AS MUCH AS UNDER THE LAW.

Quod erat Demonstrandum.

The MAJOR is extra controversiam being founded upon a Maxim of Reason, for
Eorundem eadem est ratio.

The MINOR is expressed in the words of the Text, and grounded besides upon the
clear Scope of the Apostle in the whole Context, which is all along by
Induction, at least a pari, if not a Majori, to convince both Jew and Gentile
of gross Hypocrisy, for Therefore thou art Inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou
art, that Judge: for wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self,
for thou that judge, do the same things. -- And think thou, O man, that
judge them which do such things, and do the same, that thou shall escape
the Judgment of God? Romans 2.1.3. and so, ver. 21.22.
committing those very sins of Idolatry, or Adultery, (or as bad as those)
which they did condemn in others. And if both the Major and the Minor also be
true, none but made men will deny the CONCLUSION. This evidence in the behalf
of Gods Cause, is both so strong, and so clear, That the professed Adversaries
of it are forced to confess it: For the chief of them, that Doctor of
Sacrilege (cited, and confuted above in the X Chapt.) in that very Book, which
he wrote, ex professo, in defense of Sacrilege, spends an whole Chapter, C.B.
Chap. 3,
to prove it: the Title whereof is, That there is, or may be Sacrilege
committed now under the Gospel.

Albeit the same Author, playing still the Prevaricator, (his best part) in the
very next Chapter before, goes about to undermine this very Text, Thou that
abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege: as if meant only of the
Idolothytes, the meats sacrificed to Idols, (which Cavil, a male divisis, etc.
has been already confuted above, Chap. II. p. 14, 15,) whereas, by the Current
of Interpreters, As 1. The Syriack renders it, Do thou spoil the Holy House?
2. The Aethiopick, Do thou rob the House of God? 3. The Arabic, Do thou
steal the Vessels of the Temple? 4. Bucerus upon the place, Fieri potest, etc.
It may be St. Paul here, by Sacrilege, did not mean the stealing of the money
dedicated to Idols, but the Rapine, which the Jews did commit about their
Sacred Things, partly by Selling, and Buying the Priesthood; partly by
intercepting the Sacred Offerings, and the Money dedicated by the people to
Religious Uses. -- For which cause our Lord did cast out of the Temple those,
that bought and sold therein. These things the Jews most impuden ly had long
before begun to practice; as also Jesephus himself does witness. Thus Bucerus.
5. Ad verbum, Templum* Despolias? Do thou plunder, or rob the Temple? (...)
and (...): Contemptus divinae Majestati^, per synecdochen speciei. Pisc. in
loc. To the same pu pose P. Martyr, and others.
the sense is much more enlarged, and this Text expounded directly of Robbing
the true God, by intercepting, and interverting Religious Oblations, and
setting the same to sale. (The good work which C. B. in that Book undertakes to
maintain, thereby to justify his own Sacrilegious Purchase.) But if it be
Sacrilege (as himself there does confess) to sell, or purchase such transient
oblations. Then certainly, by his leave, with very good Logic, any man endued
with right Reason, must needs conclude, That by the Rule of Proportion, it is
much more, and much greater Sacrilege to sell, or to purchase the Permanent
Oblations, the Houses and Lands dedicated for the maintenance of the Service,
and Servants of the true Gods: whose Acceptance of such Oblations, and
consequently Gods Propriety in them, we have clearly made out above ( Chap. vi.
p. 64. and elsewhere.) But this is, and ever will be, the true Character of our
Modern Pharisees, like the true offspring of the Old Pharisees, (Matthew. xxiii.
24.) To strain at a gnat, and swallow a Camel. To leave them therefore, and by
Application to turn unto you.

By this time we may hope that you and all good men, not blinded with
Schismatical Prejudice, or bewitched with Sacrilegious Avarice, will be really
convinced of the CONCLUSION. As for us, That which was our Task to make good,
we have done, God be thanked, this Text is clearly our own: a Divine, and
Direct Bar against the Sin of Sacrilege.

2. And now after all this, let the Fanatical Libertines of our Times, in their
Atheism, or Ignorance, say still, that Sacrilege is but a Fancy: with as good
reason, they may (and rather then miss of the prey, (the Church Lands) happily
they would, if they durst) say as much of Adultery, that it is but a Fancy
neither, or of Idolatry, or of Theft, or of any sin, that it is no more but so,
a Fancy also: for some are grown now such proficients in the Schools of
Atheism, that they dare affirm Virtues, and Vices to be but Opinions: But we
hope you have better learned Christ, You see clearly, that in the natural, and
full propriety of the word, Sacrilege is here by Saint Paul expressly matched
with all those Crimes: As for the gainsayers, either they must admit all the
premised absurdities, or else (which is far better) let them in aserious
Reflection upon their own folly, and vain imaginations, and a day of reckoning
for them all, speedily Repent, and Recant these their own wild Fancies; lest
if they go on in their earthly, sensual, devilish Wisdom, (these are an
Apostles Jam. 3.15.
own Epithets of such Wits (for so they would be called) through Gods just
judgment, Romans 1.21.
they become utterly vain in their own Imaginations, and their foolish heart be
for ever darkened: And let them take heed, lest by their wilful impenitency,
and hardness of heart, they provoke a just God to pass upon them that terrible
and final Sentence, 2 Thessalonians. ii. 10, 11, 12.
That because they would not receive the love of the Truth, that they might be
saved, therefore God will send them strong delusion, that they shall believe a
lie, that they all may be DAMNED.

3. As for you, whom God has blessed with more of that true impartial wisdom
which is from above, let no man, or men, deceive you with vain words: Since you
have heard this truth so abundantly vouched, from such undeniable Principles of
all kinds from the Law of Nature, from the Law of Moses, which is the Law of
God, (his Moral Law) confirmed by the Law of Christ; for no Text in all the
whole Bible more plain against Sacrilege, then this we have now treated of.

4. Since this Solemn Devotion of Religiou^ Consecrations, whereby good
Christians do bind themselves heart and hand, and all back again unto God,
(which is the very Nature of Religion) Religio a Religando: Lact.
has been unquestionably transmitted to us, down from Christ his days, by the
Practice Apostolical and Primitive, by whole Juries of several Nations, and
indeed by the general Verdict of the Church Catholic throughout all Ages, all
over Christendom: and sure in such an Universal sense, Vox populi, vox Dei, one
would think.

5. Since by all Municipal Laws, Civil and Statute Law, your own Common Law, it
so clearly appears, that the Churches Claim is no Imaginary Title, but as Real
as all these Laws can make it. Since by them the Church is lawfully possessed
of all her Demesnes Praedial, as well as Personal, unmoveables as well as
movables, Houses and Lands, as well as Tithes, or Rents; of Cathedral Lands,
as well as Glebe Lands: which although now, and here usually, stylo novo,
restrained more strictly to Lands belonging to Parochial Churches, and thence,
by too nice a distinction, maliciously Cornel. Burges chap. 1. and 4. of his
Book for Sacrilege, to make way for his Usurpation of the Cathedral Lands,
does enter a Caution, That he does not extend his Plea to Parochial Glebes, or
appropriations of them; which Glebes, says he, cannot be taken, (though by his
pretended Parliament, these were also taken most unjustly) from able and
fai^hful Ministers, by any humane Authority, without bordering at least, upon
Sacrilege: Thus he determines it, without offering any the least solid proof
for the Jus Divinum, or for the exemption of Parochial Glebes, from sale, which
may not be retorted in the behalf of Cathedral Lands: as where he affirms
(Chap. 4.) That the Glebes were given by men of Quality, and Piety, for the
good of the Souls of the living, so far as the Founders of those Churches were
able to judge: Why may not the same be said of Cathedral Lands? (He that reads
the forms of Donations, formerly cited, will easily confute him:) And whereas,
he there restrains our Ministry only to the Office (as he describes i^) of
truly and faithfully preaching Christ to the people of those places where such
Lands were given. This assertion is both a gross petitio principii, a begging
of the Question, and also a Schismatical plot, with tke pretense of preaching,
to justle out the public Prayers of the Church: as if the Solemn Office of the
daily public Prayers, duly and daily celebrated in our Cathedrals (including
also Parish-Churches) were not worth the naming: which Office is by all sorts
of Christians, East, and West, (all but the Puritans) constantly practiced, and
which indeed (where, through decay of the Primitive Devotion, the daily use of
the Eucharist is neglected) is the only Juge Sacrificium left to the
Christians, instead of the Jews m rning and evening Lamb: ( Ex. xxix. 39.) The
daily Sacrifice of Prayers and Praises intimated by the Author of the Epistle
to the Hebrews, chap. xiii. 15. (and so understood by the Ancients) which daily
public Office of Prayers, and Praises, as it is profitable not to one single
Parish only (as the Office of Preaching) but, in a diffusive Charity, to the
whole Catholic Church; and therefore for the good of the Souls of the Living:
so is it not at all (as he maliciously would insinuate) exclusive of the other
Holy Office of Preaching, that is, Soberly, and soundly Expounding the Holy
Word of God, and that also according to the Ancients (whose streams may run
clearer, as they were nearer the fountain) and Applying the Divine Word to the
right Information of the Christian Faith, and the wholesome Instruction of a
Godly Life: which to do aright, is to Preach indeed, an Office frequently
practiced also in our Cathedral Churches.
wrested to the exclusion of Cathedral Lands, thereby the more plausibly to
expose them to sale, or purchase, without fear of Sacrilege: yet the Gleba:)
pro solo, and dote Ecclesiae. Passim in Jure Canonico. Provinciale Angliae, lib
3. Tu de Eccles. aedificand.. 1. Ibi Lindewod. Gleba, id est, Terra in qua
consistit Dos Ecclesiae. Theod. Cod. pro quovis saepe agro. Sic constit. Neap.
l iii Tit. 3. servi Gleba. H. Spelman. Glossar.
Learned know, that in the true notion thereof, Glebes were anciently, and
generally taken for any Church Lands whatsoever: and that also all those
premised Revenues of the Church, were not then stinted to the base, narrow
bounds of a bare Necessity, as to the hire of a Labourer only, or as some
ignorantly term it, to the Pittance of a fitting, and that also arbitrary,
maintenance at the most, (those that by this word, mean only just as much as
needs, and no more, would in their own case, scarce be content with a Just
Retortion:) But it is plain to the contrary, that the Church has by all those
good Laws, been endowed even to an Ample, redundant, honorable maintenance,
suitable to the eminent Condition of the Immediate Servants of the most High
God; which to diminish, or to defraud, has always been accounted, and
accordingly abhorred as most heinous Sacrilege by the whole Catholic Church,
for above a thousand years, (one only odd man excepted Aerias in Epiphanius,
held even therefore by all for an errand Heretic.) Since all these Truths are
attested by whole Troops of Witnesses out of all places, France, Scotland,
Germany, etc. at all times, of all sorts, of all sides.

5. Since that of all this Ecclesiastical Estate, the Clergy is really but the
Usufructuary, God himself, to whom by the express Letter of all those Laws, and
of your own Law likewise, the Donations are entitled, being therefore the
direct Proprietary: and God cannot be mocked.

6. Since this whole Church Patrimony in general, is fenced round about with so
many (not Bruta fulmina, or bare bug-bearwords, as the Atheistical Scoffers of
these latter-dayes nickname them) but with so many Divine Comminations, and
most Just Curses, thundered out at first by the mouth of Gods own Moses's,
Ezras's, Solomon's, Malachie's, under the old, and executed by his Peter's, his
Apostle's, under the New Testament, only in due Conformity repeated after them,
See this at large in the Codix Donationum Piarum, A. Auberto miraeo; (besides
so many clear Precedents of your own, cited above, chapter vi.)
in all the Solemn Religious Donations, not out of any private Interest, but
out of a public respect, and devout zeal to Gods Glory, etc.

7. Since this your own National Churches Patrimony in particular is, Ex
abundanti, fortified with the double Rampart of so many Oaths, no private
Oaths, but Royal Oaths: First in general, then in particular, for the special
Defense and protection of the Clergy. (If it were possible for these violent
men to persuade a Christian King to such wilful Perjury, could either King or
People expect to prosper after so many Perjuries and Injuries of all sides?)

8. Since (only in general let it be observed without any further particular
Application of Gods Judgments) the Usurpation of this Sacred Patrimony, has
always proved thus Fatal to the greatest of men, to whole Families, to whole
Nations and Empires, as indeed being wholly destructive of all Justice and
Hon^sty, Law and Reason, and of Religion also, though masked under the
Pretenses of all these: Tending really to the Eradication ('it is their own
truculent Metaphor, Root and Branch) of the whole Order of the Priesthood, in
destroying the Fountains of it, (the Devils great Master-Plot) and consequently
ending at last in the utter Change and subversion of all Government in Church
and State: the very Downfall of the whole Frame of both States Ecclesiastical
and Civil: For flatter not your selves, but mark it who will, even in this
sense St. Paul's Maxim may pass for an Oracle of State, as well as of Religion,
Heb. 7.12.
WHERE THE PRIESTHOOD IS ONCE CHANGED, THERE MUST ALSO OF NECESSITY FOLLOW A
CHANGE OF THE LAW: The very It Is that famous Macenas, (in Dion Cassius Histor.
Romans Lib. Lii.) who, bating only his Heathen style, gives unto Augustus the
Emperor this excellent counsel concerning his Office: (...). That is, If thou
desire indeed to become Immortal, [then] do thou thy self, at all times and
in all places, Worship God, according to the Religion of thy Country, and also
compel others to the same Worship: as for Innovators about it, those thou must
both hate, and punish also, not only out of respect to the Gods, whom whosoever
contemns, will certainly little regard any thing else, but because they that,
in opposition, will introduce new Gods, will also entice, or seduce many to
alter the Laws: From whence will arise Conspiracies, Meetings, and
Conventicles, which are things inconsistent with Monarchy. Thou must not
therefore TOLERATE any, either Atheist, or Conjurer. [Those two indeed are here
well-matched together.] Thus it is plain from the Mouth, even of an Heathen,
That it is necessary for Kings and Princes to be Religious, even for this solid
Reason of State: Machiavel himself (at least in show) goes so far in his
Princeps: To prescribe Religion, even in Policy, which Hypoc^isie proves the
Excellency and Necessity of Religion to preserve Policy.
Heathen could see this great Truth afar off.

9. Since therefore such an Act were directly Introductive of a Discipline (to
say the least of it) utterly Unsuitable, yea Incompatible with the Altitude of
this Royal Meridian, that we say not utterly contradictory to the Platform of
the Holy Ghost, and to the express Truth of God in his Word, which shall be
found true when of all others, these wilful Innovators shall be found Liars,
who dare thus immodestly Control the general Wisdom, and constant Practice of
all the Churches of Christ, Oriental, and Occidental, all over, for above
fifteen hundred years.

10. Since this dangerous Mine of Sacrilege, if not countermined (which is our
labor at this time) if it be once sprung up, would prove destructive not only
to the Church, but a majori, to all Schools of good learning. (The fruitful
Seminaries of both Church and Commonwealth) and so consequently would be
Introductive of all Barbarism and Blindeness. For you cannot be ignorant, that
this fatal Plot of Sacrilege did both of old, and also of late, play at all:
was there not a time, ('it is but an Age since) when it came to catch, Henry VIII.
who catch can? then the Vniversity-Lands were even attempted, and in danger:
Had not some gallant Statesmen Sir John Mason then Chancellor of Oxford.
protected those Incour^gements of Learning and Virtue, the two Master-Pillars
of Church and State: For all would be Fish that came to the Net, on the turning
of the tide, and Alteration of Religion. How easy was it then for Covetousness
to quarrel the Colledge-Lands into Superstition? Sacrilege then stood ready to
knock at their Gates, but the good Porter kept the door close. And again of
late, did not the Sacrilegious Sects press sore upon the Universities, offering
violence, ready to break the door. Had not as I may say, the Universities
Provincial Angels Dan. xi. 13, 21. Genesis xix. 9.
protected them, and smitten those Sons of Belial (like the men of Sodom) who
came to commit a Rape upon them, with blindness that they could not find the
Door? for there wanted nothing but opportunity, and may they still want it: But
this we may be sure of, there wants not, even at this day, whole Herds of
brutish Schismatics, and furious Fanatics, that still cry down all manner of
learning, as superfluous, nay, as a base Badge of Antichrist. Do you believe
those wild Beasts, if they had full power to their mad will, would count it
Sacrilege to pull down the Colleges, or favor the Universities more then the
Churches, which when they reigned, and raged, they (by the Spirit) turned into
Stables? who knows but what has been, may be, except God, and the King prevent
it?

11. Since to compass this Audacious Project, you may observe that the
Arguments they produce, are as groundless as their Pretenses are false, drawn
from Religion, from Policy; their Religious Pretences^, 1. Of Zeal, for Purity
of Religion. 2. For a Powerful Ministry. Their Politic Pretenses, 1. Of
Justice upon Delinquents. 2. The Public Peace. 3. State-Necessity. 4.
Legislative Power; which duly examined, have proved, as you have seen, either
black Calumnies, or else false Colors, which once brought to the light of
Truth, and Reason, do signify just nothing: for it, we dare appeal to mere
rational men, that we say not Christians: Nay, I am verily persuaded, that some
of them in their own Consciences cannot but sometimes Doubt at least, that
their Distinctions and Extenuations may then want Christ's Approbation, when
Christ himself shall charge them with Sacrilege and Rebellion at the day of
Judgment: and then what will become of the miserable Authors? Since one day all
of you, single, or Assembled, high and low, rich and poor, one with another
must be Judged. not by your RAGION DI STATO, but by your RIGHT RELIGION TO GOD,
TRUE ALLEGIANCE TO THE KING, AND DUTIFUL OBEDIENCE TO HOLY CHURCH TOO, UNDER
GOD.

12. Since when these Projectors perceive the Impotency of their Arguments, yet
still to bring about their Injurious Ends, their Practices are so violent,
their Machinations so Mahumetan, so bloody, (for the Devil was a Murderer from
the beginning, John viii. 44. and therefore will still be doing his own work,
his own way) nothing else but a Train of Multiplied Conspiracies and Rebellions
against both Church and King, so lately overflowing all over three whole
Christian Kingdoms, with such a Deluge of Sin, Schism, and Christian Blood, as
a Turk would blush at to see or suffer to be thus wilfully spilt among his own
Mahumetans: you may justly, and that also Matthew. vii. 20.
infallibly know them by their fruits, by the baseness of their Course, judge
of the goodness of their Cause, fortified with nothing else but a new Usurped
Power, under-propt by a multiplication of Seditious and Schismatical Covenants,
for Form, and Matter, Authority, and Ends, all of them in a^l these,
point blank to all the several National Covenants mentioned in Holy Scriptures.
(Believe us not, but search and try it your There are but SIX NATIONAL
COVENANTS mentioned in all the whole Bible, and all of them, 1. Both given and
taken by the Kings Authority, never a Covenant of them all imposed without,
much less against Sovereign Authority. 2. They were merely Religious Covenants,
not Politic, no STATE-COVENANTS. 3. If as in Esra's Case, King Artaxerxes,
expressly moved by Evil Counselors, such as Bishlam, Tabeel and his fellow^,
did forbid the going on with it, or with the public Reformation, then they
accordingly left of all, till God sent them another better King, till a Darius
gives them leave to go on with it again; yet were those Kings, to whom the
People of God showed so much Respect and Duty, but mere Heathen, nay, humanitus
loquendo, Usurpers also. But had it been, as is pretended, the Nations Duty to
Reform Religion without, nay against the Kings leave, then they ought to have
suffered the utmost, rather then to have sinned by the S^rcease of such a
Necessary duty This is all clear Scripture, read it, and believe it
accordingly: the several places are extant in Josh. 24.25. 2 Kings 11.4. 2 Chronicles. 15.12. and 29.10. and 34.30. and Ezra 10, 3. and 4.23, 24.
selves:) Sealed with so many Execrable Counter Oaths, Positive, Ngative,
enforced upon all men within their Line of Communication, as I may call it,
(This is LIBERTY OF CONSCIENCE indeed, when no man may buy or sell, except he
have THE MARK OF THE BEAST, Rev. 13.1^.
one or other, in his right hand, or in his forehead.) Sure as it argues, that
Building must needs be very weak, or else very rotten, that needs so many more
then ordinary Props to keep it from falling: So likewise it declares plainly,
that Scelus Pavidum est, it is a Malignant sign this, that they sore suspect
the Honesty or Strength, in the end, of their own Cause; which makes them for
very fear, use so many sinister means, to harden their miserable Accomplices in a
brazen obstinacy, against God, against the King, against the Church, and
against all those other good things that belong unto their Peace, that so, as
much as in them lies, they may save the Devil himself the labor, and Cauterize
the Consciences of their poor deluded Proselytes: for what is all this, if it
be not to Seal men under utter Impenitency against all possible Touches of
Remorse, lest any of those whom they have so inveigled, or engaged, or indeed
directly compelled into their Inhumane Conjuration, perceiving (by the Event)
God Almighties sore displeasure at these hellish Confusions, and being at the
last, it may be touched in Conscience with the horrors of so many National
Mischiefs in Church and State, so much Christian Blood streaming of all sides
of them, in all Quarters, and crying aloud for Gods Vengeance upon themselves,
and the whole Land, might, (as in Conscience they are bound, under pain of
Damnation, notwithstanding all their Unjust Oaths, which being ill taken, are
In malis promissis rescinde fidem, in turpi voto, m^ta Decretum. Isidor.
hispal^ Illicitum praestare tenetur nemo* Herod's keeping of his Oath, and
cutting off John Baptists head, was far worse than the taking it, Mark 6.26.
far worse kept) give over at last their Damnable Rebellion, and so by their
Repentance, never to be repented of, hazard the further Prosecution, and
utterly prevent the Perfection of the Devils great Master-Plot, in some
respects far beyond the horror of the Gun-Powder-Plot it self, or any Plot, new
or old.

13. And yet since for all these Furious Attempts of men and Devils against
this one poor Church: as if the Church of Britain were indeed, as of old it was
called BRITANNIA PRIMOGENITA ECCLESIAE. Sabellicus Ennead. 7. Lib. 5.
The Eldest Daughter of the whole Catholic Church, you may see the gates of
Hell cannot prevail against it, but as yet, it subsists, like Moses burning
Bush, thus long preserved from utter Consumption in the very midst of all that
great fire of Persecution: you may visibly perceive Gods Admirable Prevention,
Gods especial hand of Restraint over the late King of Glorious Memory; who,
although tempted by all the Devils Methods, by all the Arts of Fraud, or Force,
yet could never be so much as inclined to yield his Royal Consent, or but
Countenance, or Connivance any ways, toward the Demolition of this Church:
Because, as he told the Parricides, first and last, he could neither in
Conscience, nor Honor, do such an Act: Therefore that Great Prince did rather
choose, Christianly to dye a Glorious Martyr, then ignominiously to live, a
Perjured Prince, by wilfully betraying the Churches Rights, and the Peoples
Laws, and Liberties: for that nothing but Cornel Burges, No Sacrilege, etc.
chapter 2.
black malice can cast the Odium of that Rebellious War, or of the Kings Death,
upon the Churches Cause only, is evident both by the Kings own Protestations in
his Declarations, and, Numb. ii. upon the 19. Propositions, etc.
especially by that incomparable (we might say inspired) Book of his Royal
Portraicture, and by the Rebel's own Proceedings; all which abundantly
testify, that the King dyed for the Liberties of the People, as well as for
the Rights of the Church: To defend both which Church and People, (according to
his Royal Oath at his Coronation) the King did use his Sword, as long as he
could; and when he could do it no longer, that way ( the Sword of God being by
a Prodigious Rebellion, wrested out of his Sacred hand) he did seal it with his
Blood: An act of Heroical Magnanimity, that has no Parallel but that of the
King of Kings, who came not to destroy, Luke xix. 10.
but to save; and therefore gave his Life for his Sheep: a Precedent worthy the
Admiration of all Christian Princes, John x. 15.
if not of their Imitation!

14. But to return to Gods Providence over this Church, what can such a
miraculous Restraint of the Father, and no less Miraculous Restoration of the
Son, Stupente orb, to the Admiration, yea astonishment, of all the world
(Pagan and Christian) what can all these Marvails, all these mysterious Wheels
of the Divine Providence over this Church signify, but that as yet God has,
and (if our Sins and National Ingratitude do not reverse it) God will have
still, I trust, a special hand of Providence, for the preservation of this
Church. Considering how the destruction thereof, was so long since Plotted, so
notoriously Proclaimed, so violently, yea so sanguinarily Prosecuted, and yet,
that still for all that, the Divine Counsel has from time to time put off as
yet the Period of it: under God, (in whose only hand is, and ought to be, the
Kings Heart, as the rivers of water, Prove. xxi. 1.
to turn it whithersoever he will: We are all bound to thank the King, both the
Father, and the Son, for that Royal Faithfulness and Christian Constancy, that
yet, in chief, upholds this persecuted Church: And, under God and the King,
thank a Loyal Parliament also. We had need to pray to God, earnestly to confirm
the King, that he may conserve the Church; for it is no less then the Kings own
Conscience, the Assault of Sacrilege aims at to storm, and then to Conquer,
that so the Rebels may once again, Reign without him: God in mercy to this
Church, and Nation, avert still that final Judgment to the Rebels Conversion,
or Confusion. Amen.

15. In this good hope (all the Premises duly and sadly considered) let us all
arm our selves with Christian Patience, and Gallant Resolution, praying for
Perseverance: and if Sinners puffed up with their late seeming advantages, and
Penal prosperity, because God, in his unsearchable ways, to our Trial, but to
their greater Dementation and Obduration, did of late curse them with good
successes: If by the Representation of these Favors in show, should, (as it is
too much to be feared, and therefore may wisely be presumed, they are plotting
still to strike at the King himself, Camb. Q. Eliz.
through the Churches sides.) If they should entice you to join with them,
Prove. 1.10, 19.
to swallow up Gods own precious substance, to fill your houses with the Church
spoils, to cast in your lot among them: bearing you in hand that you shall be
all made by it, you shall all have one purse with them: Psalm. 62.10.
O trust not in wrong and robbery. Take the wise man's good Counsel, for all
their goodly pretenses of Religion or Policy, Consent you not, but rather
refrain your foot from their Path, for their feet run to evil, and make haste
to shed blood: Nay, in the upshot, you shall see, yea, themselves and all their
partners shall find, it and feel it, that they do but all this while lay wait
for their own blood, lurking privily for their own lives, posting away
insensibly to their own destruction in the end; like Shimei, 1 Kings xi 44.
digging their own Graves, (as so many of them have done lately) by their
Relapses, even after a general Pardon.

16. If all this cannot move you, as it comes from us? Then to draw all toward
an end, for a sad Farewel-Truth, Imagine, (what is but too true in the Moral)
that you now see THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND it self, YOUR own Dear MOTHER grovelling
here at your feet, all discheveled, and discomposed (as she lately was) all
over rent and torn with so many Fractions and Factions, with so many Thorns,
and Briars of dangerous Sects, and scandalous Schisms, all over yet stained and
gore with the mutual Blood of her own Unnatural Children, that like a brood of
cursed Vipers did dilacerate their own Mothers Womb) (a most ruful Spectacle to
a right Christian Spirit!) In this sad habit and posture, the late ruful Dress
of your Mother Church: Think you hear still your miserable Parent, thus
feelingly bespeaking you all for a last warning: Ah my Sons, Ah the Sons of my
Vows, let me now, if ever, once for all, beseech you all, by this Womb that
bare you all, and brought you forth unto Christ: by those breasts that gave you
suck, even by Gods holy Word, and Sacraments: by those Arms that have so long
enclosed you all, That Holy Doctrine, and Godly Discipline, that has, as yet,
kept you safe from the Fangs of so many Heresies and Schisms, that have
overspread almost all the Churches of Christ, over all Christendom; by all
these, and by more then all these, by your hope and share in all the mercies of
God, in all the merits and sufferings of Christ my Dear Husband, the Savior of
your souls: Ephesians. iv. 3, 4, 5, 6.
By all the Seven Unities of the Holy Ghost, one Body, one Spirit, one Hope of
your Calling, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all, who
is above all, and through all, and in you all: By the Holy, Blessed, and
Glorious Trinity, three Persons and one God: Ah, my Sons, I adjure you by all
these most Holy Ties, and Interests, Reverence my gray hairs: Do not by one
(for ever fatal) Bargain, sell away for nothing, Isa. ix. 5.
but Garments rolled in Blood, all that Sacred Truth, all that Solemn Devotion,
Ancient Dignity, and Religious Decency, all that Beauty of Holiness, all that
Christian Glory, which I, through so great Opposition of whole Legions of
Heretics, and Schismatics, through so much Persecution by the old and new
Tyrants, through so many Martyrdomes, have been laying up for your these full
sixteen That it is so long since Christian Religion (as it here now stands by
Law Established, both for Matter of Doctrine, and for Form of Government also)
was first planted here in Britain there need^ no witness more authentical then
old Gildas de Excidio Britanniae, who there expressly affirms that he knows it
so to be true: placing the age of it Summo Tibe^ii Caesaris tempore, about the
xxxv. year of Christ (as Baronius reckons it.) For Tiberius dyed in the 37.
year of our Lord: So Eusebius Pamphili in Chronico,
hundred years: Betray not now at last your Old Mother to the scorn, and spoil
of Sacrilegious, and seditious men, (your own Consciences know they were at
their best estate, no better then FORTUNATE REBELS,) that will lay yours, and
the whole Nations, and all your Mothers Honor in the dust. Is this all your
thanks to me for my Religious care, and holy cost in your gracious Education?
Is this all the Respect you show to the Memory of your pious ANCESTORS? Is this
all the Regard you have of the eternal welfare of your tender POSTERITY? will
you now in a manner, Unchristen your selves and them all? will you wilfully
venture your selves, and your Successors upon the sharp Swords-point of so many
Ancient Execrations, Authentic Curses, not causless, nor powerless, (as
Sacrilegious Purchasers blinded with their great god, Mammon, may profanely
fancy, but) Curses deserved, curses effectual also, just Imprecations,
zealously denounced against all unjust Violators of the Wills and Testaments of
the Religious Donors? Ah rather turn again, my Sons, and save the blazing
Candlestick, that is even now upon going out, from Utter Removal; Except you
will leave all your Successors after you for ever in utter darkness; Vindicate
the Ancient glory of your slaunder-beaten Tollite hoc Ingens Scandalum toti
Orbi Christiano objectum: Eluite illam maculam aspersam Professioni purloris
Evangelii, adversari illam arcano quodam odio Regnis and Potestalibus: V. D.
Deodati Genevens. Responsum ad Conventum Ecclesiasticum Londini.
Religion, never till now guilty of such Doctrines of Devils: Redeem the Credit
of your Justly Defamed-Nation, for the dire Parracides of a Rebellious party
yet reaking with the Sacred Blood of your own King, the Holy Blood of your own
Patriarch: Oh show your selves once more Christians indeed, and Right
Englishmen, like true Patriots, rescue your turmoyled Country from Ingruent
Captivity, for else in the ordinary course of Gods Judgments, that must be the
next: To foretell which fatal, and final destiny, needs no new Spirit of
Prophecy, the great Prophet, so long before pointed at by Moses Deuteronomy. xviii. 18.
has told it you long ago, Mat. xii. 25.
Regnum divisum desolabitur, a Kingdom divided against it self (as yours is
now, so many ways, both in Church and State) must needs come to Desolation:
open your eyes therefore, and behold, if yet you can, the usual, and infallible
prognostic of it DEMENTATION. Quos vult perdere Jupiter hos DEMENTAT.


17. If you wish to see once more, within this once so fortunate Island,
Christ's Religion in its purity, the Church your Mother at Unity, the King your
Father in his Beauty, the People your Brethren in their Duty; O do not you, any
of you whom it may concerns. (through Impatiency, or Unbelief) do that one Act
that at once may undo all these, and your selves eternally.

18. If you be wise, Acts 5.38, 39
Refrain from these men, for they are the men of God, lest you be found, in the
end really, to fight even against God: Refrain from those means, they are the
Demesnes of God: It Is a clear case, 'twill be no sin to let them alone; but it
may be a sin, nay it must be a sin, sure enough, to meddle with them: for they
are the Means hallowed to maintain his Service, and his Servants, and indeed to
preserve your own souls in Christ's true Religion. But if in despite of Father
and Mother, King, and Church, and God, and all, you should go on desperately,
and touch either the men, or the means, know that it will prove an Achan, an
accursed thing unto you, and to the whole Nation, and make you fall worse and
worse before your Enemies, till you fall quite down never to rise up again
according to the Curse of Moses, (Deuteronomy. xxxiii. 11.) how will you answer one
day (for you must one day answer for all these) the Dead, and the Living, the
Church and the State, the present and future age, God and your own Consciences?
For to all your other National Sins (and those not a few, new and old, and
those no Moats, or Gnats) can you add a greater sin than this, to fill up the
full measure of your sins? What, will ye in earnest put God Almighty to it?
will you try Masteries with your God, who shall carry it? Did ever any (Person,
or Nation) contend with God, and prosper (says Holy Job?) will you thus
requite God, to take away his own, Job ix. 34.
who has hitherto so freely given you all that you can call your own? yea, who
has made you all, yea who has with his own precious Blood bought you all,
yea, as you regard, or dis-regard his Cause, even this Cause, the Cause of his
Service and Servants, who (except such of you as are concerned, speedily
prevent it, by Repentance, and Restitution also, to some Satisfaction) has
absolute Power, indeed, Eternally to destroy you all Body and Soul.

19. From such Total, Final, and Eternal Destruction that God Almighty may
deliver this (so lately desolate) Church, King, and Kingdom, may we all now at
last, turn our fierce Disputes, of all sides, into fervent Devotions each for
other: for Nunc nil nisi vota supersunt; Praesidiis omnibus terrestribus
cessantibus, divina sunt aggredienda* quae nunquam incassum cessere. Haec ratio
efficere posset, quod a bello Civili, utcunqueres cadat, neutiquam sperari
possit, ut voluntaria animorum flexione plene sarciatur vulnus, and
redintegretur amor. D. Deodat quo supra.
when all Humane Helps fail, this is a Divine Ordinance never misses: but may
soon effect, what from Civil, or rather Rebellious War, could never be hoped
for, that by a voluntary Inclination of Hearts, the National wounds may be
closed up again, and that National Love and Peace, and Prosperity, which was
once, as the Envy, and Terror, so the chief Glory, and Honor of this Noble
Nation, may be fully recovered at last. To that happy end, let us all humbly
beseech God, the God of Peace, that of his infinite mercy, he will open the
eyes of the People of England, Luke 19.42.
that now, in this their day, they may yet see those things that belong to
their Peace, that he will turn the Hearts of our Enemies, and keep all Ours
from every evil work, especially from this evil work, this Damnable Sin of
Sacrilege, from Robbing God, our own God, of his own Inheritance, that so in
the end none of us all, and (if it be possible) none of all our, even
deadliest, Enemies, may forfeit his part with us, in the Inheritance of Gods
Heavenly Kingdom, who, for us all, both Priest and People, has purchased it hy
his own Precious Blood, through Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior, To whom
therefore with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be ascribed all Praise, Power,
Majesty, and Dominion, from this time forth and for evermore. Amen.

Matthew. xxii.. 21. Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto
God, the things that are Gods.

FINIS.
A Table of some Principal Texts of Holy Scripture, explained, and cleared in
this BOOK.
BOOK. CHAP. VERSE. PAGE. GEnesis iii. 1. 40. xxviii. 22. 62. 192. -- xlvii.
22.26. 50, 165. 166 Exodus xix. 13. 10. xxvi. xxviii. 33. Leviticus x. 3. 71.
xxvii. 11. 114. 124. Numbers i. 46. 53. xiv. 9. 3. xvi. 3. 29. 73. 37.38. 116.
117. -- xxii. 6. 3. xxx. 5.8. 69. 95. Deuteronomy vii. 1. 69. 70. xxxiii. 11.
73. Joshua ix. 3. 69. I Samuel xv. 23. 32. II Samuel iii. 29. 117. (a) I
Chronicles xxix. 11. 60. 61. II Chron. xxvi. 20.21. 17. Ezra vi. 12. 75. Psalms
i. 4. 122. Li. 12. 22. Proverbs xx. 25. ^89. -- Isaiah xlv. 1. 31. Zachariah v.
2.3. 115. (a) Malachy iii. 7. -- 76. -- Matthew v. 18.19. ^13. (a) vi. 9. 67.
vii. 16. 1^9. x. 40.41.42. 100. xvi. 19. ^7. xxi. 12. 18. Mark vi. 26. 227.
Acts ii. 5. ^. v. 1. 21. 88. 3. 194. xx. 34. 5^. Romans ii. 22. 6. 213. xiii.
2. 31. I Corinth. ix. 13.14. 52. II Corinth. iv. 3. 190. Galatians vi. 6. 52,
54. 200. I These. v. 3. 152. Hebrews xii. 16. 18.

An Alphabetical Table of the Principal Matters contained in this BOOK.
A.
UTter Abolition of the chief Offices and Revenues of the Church declared at
Uxbridge. page 127 Acceptance of Offerings under the Gospel, proved. page 79,
91, 94, 95, 104, 105 Adultery a very heinous sin, page 7, 19 Amelioration by
way of Addition, not utter Alienation. page 78, 124 Bishop Andrew's Censure of
Sacrilege. page 199 Anania's and Saphira's Sacrilege. page 88 Appropriations
and Impropriations, Popish Inventions. page 24, 191 Apostolical prerogatives.
page 97
B.
To depart before the Ministerial Blessing great profaneness. page 76 Times of
Blindeness do not frustrate Donations. page 48, 120 Cornel. Burges foul and
false plea for Sacrilege, confuted. page 174
C.
Calvin against Sacrilege, page 207 Capitular of Charles the Great. page 121
(b) Cathedral Lands possessed by as good right and title, as Parochial Glebes.
page 218 Cathedraticum, what page 55 We must plead the public Cause what ever
men say or do. page 150, ^05 Ceremonies sacred page 34 Change of Government
very dangerous. page 125, 221 The Character of Cowardice. page 153 K. Charles
the I. his abhorrency of Sacrilege* page 141 -- A Martyr for the people as
well as for the Church page 228 Charles Martel's doom for Sacrilege. page 23
The Charter of the Church of Carlisle. page 45 Christians are persons Sacred.
page 29 The Church is always a Minor. page 136 Four Pillars of the Church.
page 101, 102 The Church of Britain Christian above 16^. years. page 232 -- Her
late deplorable case. page 231 Church Authority a main Pillar and preser^ative
of Truth, and Peace, and Order* page ^8 Gods Providence over the Church of
England. page 227, 228 -- Herper s^^ted speech to all her Children. page 230
Church-Rites are to be vindicated. page 112 The Custom of the Church to be
observed. page 102, 103 The Clergy is one of the highest States of the Realm by
Act of Parliament. page 170 -- Privileged by all Laws. page 45, 49, 50 --
Freed from Taxes for Bridges. page 48 -- Their Maintenance magnificent. page
50-57 -- Phil^'s excellent passage about it. page 57 -- Their decay the ruin
of Religion. page 77 -- Their deprivation a damnable injury. page 109, 136, 184
Exemption of the Clergy from the Civil Magistrate confuted. page ^39
Clergy-mens Hospitality page ^35 The Loyalty of the Clergy of England. page
140, 141 Comfort to the Clergy, when persecuted. page 15^ Collusions in
Donations confuted. page 1^1 Commutation of one sin for another no Conversion*
page ^7 The obtruded Covenant contrary to the (...) National Covenants in holy
Scripture. page 225 Curses inserted in Donations. page 68, 75. 114 (b) 122, 220
Waranted under the Gospel. page 99 -- Neither Causless. page 71 -- Nor
Powerless. page 7^, 98 -- Personal. page 114 (a) 116 (a) Domestical. page 115,
117, 1^8 (a) -- National. page 4, 8^, 119 (a)
D.
Dedications what page 64, 94 -- Their continuance under the Gospel. ibid. St.
Iren^eus clear for it. page 91 Trial of Delinquents, what legal. page 135
Devotion what. page 16 New Discipline inconsistent with this Monarchy. page ^22
Humane Dispensations ^ull about Sacrilege. page 115 (b) Deprecation of final
Destruction. page 235 The f^rm 1 of Donations. page 120, 12^ Do^ations of
Churches. page 55
E.
Egyptians regard of their Priests. page 50, 165 Enemies to Juda and Levi,
deeply cursed. page 73, 234 Equity for the Clergy under the Gospel greater then
under the Law. page 52 Excommunication still of force, visibly, or invisibly.
page 100, 101
F.
A general Fas^ for National Sacrilege enjoined by the whole Assembly at St.
Andrews in Scotland. page 211 Furtum what. page 111
G.
John of Gaunt's malice against Bishops. page 146, 147 The Fraud of the
Gi^eonites. page 69, 133 The general and ancient notion of Glebes. page 217
Gods special Demesnes Tithes, and Offerings, page 61 God is the great
Proprietary of all Church Revenues. page ^8, 137
H.
Relative Holiness. page 65, 67 Real Homage due to God as well as personal.
page 58 John Huss wrested against the Temporalti^^ of Prelates examined, and
^^swered. page 139
I.
Idolatry a most heinous sin, page ^6, ^7, ^^ The Jews daily offerring the Lamb
morning and evening, not neglected in the straitness of their Siege page 164
Gods Judgments parallel to men's sins. page ^^6
K.
Kings Persons are sa^^ed. page ^^, 31 The Kings manifold Obligations to
preserve and protect the Clergy: 1. As the King is a moral Man. page 1^8 2. As
he is the Supre^m Magistrate. page ^69 3. As he is a Christian. page 169 4. By
his particular Oath, thrice for the Clergy. page 170
Knox against Sacriledg. page ^10
L.
Church Lands belong to the Clergy, by as good right as any. page 46, 107 --
Lands have been both lawfully purchased, and piously given by Churchmen for
perpetuity to the Church. page 107, 109 Right Reason is the soul of the Law.
page 182 Penance in Leut. page 1 The analogy of the Levitical Priesthood, with
the Evangelical Ministry, for the Substance, in respect of the sacred Offices.
page 52, 64 Luthers full Testimony against Sacrilege. page 202 Legislative
power discussed and determined. page 177, etc.
M.
Magna Charta a fundamental Law for the Rights of the Church. page 46 The
sacrilegious Malefactor. page 6 Malignancy a new found Crime. page 135 Manus
Mortua, why so called. page 114 (b) Isreal's ten Mutinies. page 75 Ministers of
God not the Peoples Servants. page 190
N.
Necessity of State no plea at all for Sacrilege. page 160 -- The
Determination of K* Charles the First, upon the Case. page 161 Gods Nethinims
inviolable. page 133
O.
Unlawful Oaths ill taken, worse kept. 227 Obduration in Rebellion a shrewd
omen of fatal destruction. page 157 Offerings asserted by the law of Nature.
page 63 King David's offerings, voluntary, yet no will worship. page 61
Voluntary oblations accepted under the Gospel. page 91
P.
The Parliament 25. Edw. 1. disclaims the Power of disposing the Estates of the
Clergy. page 185 The Long Parliament of 1640. annulled by the Lo^al Parliament
of page 166^. ^77 Plato's Testimony against Sacrilege. page 128 Popery what
properly. page 26 Prescription no plea against God or the Church. page 80, 81
Two Religious pretenses for Sacrilege, namely, Zeal, 1. Against Idolatry. page
116 2. Against an idle Ministry: page 123 For a powerful Ministry. page 129
Four politic Pretenses. page 1^0 1. Of Justice upon Delinquents. page 131, 135
2. Of public peace. page 148 -- Eight ways besides, opened to an honest
Peace, without Sacrilege page 155 3. A third pretense of a State-Necessity to
rob the Church. page 158 The determination of King Charles the I. upon this
Case. 161 4. The fourth pretense of a Legislative Power. page 177, to 187 Poor
true, and poor false. page 35, Prelates vindicated from Sacrilege* page 35 The
Priests person is sacred page 32 The dissolution of Priors aliens. page 119 (b)
Public daily Prayers, now the Christians Juge Sacrificium or continual
Sacrifice. page 218 Preaching, what. ibid.
R.
Reason of State no Rule of Faith, or Life. page 131, 224 Rebellion of all sins
guilty of self-damnation. page 31 Rebellion and Sacrilege inseparable twins.
page 22, 25, 26, 174 The Rebels penal prosperity. 229 The Recapitulation of the
whole Book. page 112 Religion, what. page 217 National Restitution the only
National Remedy. page 83 -- The Nations obligation to it. page 84 Gods
Benediction upon Restitution. page 85 Gods malediction for want of Restitution.
page 86 Memorable examples of Restitution to the Church. page 209 Sacrilege
about the Revenues of the Church, what, and what not. page 35 Outward Reverence
no superstition. page 34, 67 -- The ground of it excellent. ibid. The Right of
the Church is the Right of God. page 137
S.
Sacrilege is a sin under the Gospel, as much, nay more, then under the Law.
page 213 -- Proved so by way of Syllogism. page 212 -- The description of it.
page 12, 131 A complication of sins. page 21, 85 -- Condemned by all Laws. page
195 -- The Etymology of Sacrilege. page 13 -- The heinous Nature thereof. page
18, 19 -- The kinds of it. page 27, 111 -- The plague of Nations. page 3, 4 --
Three roots of it. page 11 Sacrilege excepted out of the Act of Indemnity.
page 176 Sacrilege is a great Snare, and how. page 188 Jacobs multiplied
Snares till he performed his Vow. page 193 -- Plagued with sudden Death. page
99 Scripture-Sacriledge, what. page 40, 41 -- 3. Ways thereof, and 3.
Antidotes against it. page 42 Sin, when National. page 82 Stipendiaries usually
popular. page 56
T.
Dissolution of the Templars, and the excellent Statute about it. page 118, 119
Temporalties of Prelates asserted, and vindicated. page 13^ -- Wickliffe's
positions about the same examined, and answered. page 144 Heretics Recusers of
the Old Testament. page 87 Testaments not to be disanulled. page 66 Testimonies
against Sacrilege. page 198 Theft may be of things unmovable. page 111, 112
Tithes a moral Debt. page 62 Turk's Respect to Christian Priests. page 49
V.
Who are now, under the Gospel, Gods Vicegerents to accept our Offerings. page
97, 103 The nature, and lawfulness of Vows under the Gospel. page 63, 94 Vows
of two sorts. page 114 -- All to be paid. page 192 Uniformity of Divine Servic^
most necessary. page 126 The Universities in danger by Sacrilege. page 222
Usufructuary, what. page 44
W.
Wickliffe's Articles wrested against our Prelates, examined, and answered.
page 137 -- His History. page 143 The will of the Dead inviolable. page 66, 134
FINIS.

