Lib. 1. cap. 9

Sect. 13.39

Page. 475.

F. H. van. Hove. sculp:
section of Zwelfer's globe, furnace and bellows method for obtaining vapors
of antimony

Pharmacopoeia Bateana: OR, Bate's Dispensatory. Translated from the Second
Edition of the Latin Copy, Published by Mr. James Shipton.

CONTAINING His Choice and Select Recipe's, their Names, Compositions,
Preparations, Virtues, Uses and Doses, as they are Applicable to the whole
Practice of Physic and Chyrurgery: THE ARCANA GODDARDIANA, AND Their Recipe's
intersperst in their proper Places, which are almost all wanting in the Latin
Copy.

COMPLETED With above Five Hundred Chemical Processes; and their Explications
at large, various Observations thereon, and a Rationale upon each Process.

To which are Added in this English Edition, GODDARD's Drops, RUSSEL's Powder,
AND THE EMPLASTRUM FEBRIFUGUM: Those so much Famed in the World; As also
several other Preparations from the Collectanea Chymica, and other Good Authors.

By WILLIAM SALMON, Professor of PHYSIC.

LONDON: Printed for S. Smith and B. Walford, at the Prince's Arms, in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1694.

TO THE Most Serene and Mighty MONARCH, WILLIAM III. King of England, Scotland,
France, and Ireland.
Great SIR,
I Bring to Your Majesty a small Work, a Series of Prescriptions in the Medical
Art, yet possibly the Greatest in its Kind, for Excellency and Usefulness, that
ever any Age produced: A Collected Summary of the Choicest Secrets in Physic
yet known; and what all the Professors thereof acknowledge as a Spontaneous
Product from the Universal Stock of Experience.

I have Accomodated it for the Advantage of all Your Majesty's Subjects, and
made its Use as Universal and Easy, as the Medicaments themselves are General
and Good: Had not the Necessity of such a Work, prevailed with me, I had never
put my Hand to this Plough, nor troubled Your Majesty on such an Occasion.

Be pleased therefore, Sir, to cast Your Favorable Eye, on the State of the
Profession of Physic, and in particular on this Book, which through your
Benignity cannot go without its hoped for Effects; for that through Your Royal
Favor, it will not only live now in Estimation and Respect, but stand as a
Signal to future Times of Your Majesty's extraordinary Goodness, frustrating
the Designs of evil Men.

You have, Sir, rescued us not only from the Jaws of Lions and Paws of Bears,
the brutest of Beasts, but from the Insuperable Chains of Popery and Slavery,
and from the Dreaded Tyranny of Eternal Slaves, the Barbarous French: And
restored our dearest Liberties, ravished from us by Usurpation and Violence,
through the Malice and Deceit of Treacherous and Ambitious Men; who not only
ruined the Public by their Follies, but precipitated themselves from the
highest Acme of Glory, to the fathomless Abyss of Dishonor and Contempt.

Thus, Sir, becoming the Glory of the Diadem, and the Majesty of Crowned Heads,
You will outdo Royalty it self; and by Your Magnanimity, build such Monuments
of Honor, which the Result of utmost Ages shall never deface, nor eternal
Times ever wear out or alter.

Were my Abilities to write your Character but equal to the Greatness of Your
Spirit; and could I but scetch out a faint Idea of Your Glorious Actions, I Would
write in Everlasting Lines Your Immortal Life, and depict upon the Curtains of
Eternity, not the Shadows of Royalty but the perpetual Substance thereof,
powerfully Armed with unlimited Goodness: A Prerogative that no Prince upon
Earth, but Your Majesty, can justly Claim.

May Heaven therefore continue the Success of your Arms; and Victory attend You
wheresoever You go: May you subdue Tyrants by Your Sword, and vanquish the
Terrible of the Earth, trampling under Your Feet the Destroyers of the World:
and being filled with the Spoils of Your Enemies, May You lift up the Standarts
of Justice and Truth, and by Your Irresistable Power introduce Peace to your
People And that a Prosperous Conduct may attend You with Honor and Glory,
through a long and happy Reign, is the perpetual Prayer of

Your Majesty's most Loyal And humble Subject, WILLIAM SALMON.

THE PREFACE.
I THE Original Author of this Book was the Eminent and Learned Dr. Bate, a Man
who in his Station had been Physician to Two Kings of England, and a Protector;
and of such Approved Skill in his Profession, that to make any Descants
thereon, would be to draw a Vail over his Luster, and blemish that Excellency,
which in this following Work, gives a convincing Proof, that he was one of the
greatest Masters of his Art in the Universe.

II. His Arcana and Prescripts were Collected, as they appear in the Latin
Copy, by that ingenious and indefatigable Gentlemen, Mr. James Shipton, who had
the Happiness of preparing and making the greater part (if not all) of them up:
And by whose Care and Industry the World became blessed with such a valuable
Production; which exceeds in its Benefit and Usefulness to Mankind, (we speak
it without Flattery) all the Dispensatories this day extant, in what Language
soever.

III. Thus came out the first Edition, with general Applause, which meriting so
well in the World, Mr. Shipton was pleased to make us happy with a Second,
wherein he added above One hundred more of Dr. Bate's Recipes, and the Arcana
Goddardiana, from the Authors Autograph, who being a Learned Man, and they no
mean things, advanced very much the Value of the Book: So that in a very few
Years, there were sold of the Latin Copies to the number of (at least) Six
thousand.

IV. The Work obtaining thus exceedingly upon the Public, as having the
general Liking and Approbation of all the Learned World, more especially of the
Gentlemen of the Profession: And among the number of the rest, falling into my
Hands, upon view thereof, finding it so vastly to exceed in Usefulness and
Learning whatever had been yet extant of that kind before; and that it was
entertained among Professors of Our Art (of what Quality or Education soever)
with no common Friendship or Reception: It made me consider it a little
farther; and to draw an Argument from its general Usefulness and Entertainment;
That if whilst it wandered through the World in an unknown Tongue (as to the
Vulgar) and was a Stranger, it became so desirable and acceptable; how much
more, if we indulged it, by making it a Free Denizon, or Native of our own.

V. Upon these Considerations, I immediately fell upon the Translation, which I
hope you will find done with all Faithfulness and Sincerity: And whereas the
Arcana Godd. were for the most part Nominal, without exhibiting their
Preparations: We have in this English Edition, added them at large, and
intersperst them for the Benefit of all the Lovers of this kind of Learning.

VI. And whilst we were doing this, that we might yet lay a farther Obligation
upon the Generous Lovers of Art; we have added to this Impression, the much
esteemed Goddard s Drops, and Russel's Powder (neither of them in any printed
Work before) the former of which was one of the accounted inestimable Jewels of
K. Charles II. The other that Famed Universal, which for these twenty five
Years last past has obtained a general Reputation, from the East to the
West Indies, and in a manner through the whole World. You have also the
Emplastrum Febrifugum, which, though as to its Composition, it is a very simple
thing, and whilst not published, hugged as a great Secret, yet truly valuable
as to its Virtues, for that it has scarcely been ever known to be applied
without the desired Success; nor did I ever use it in vain. And to these we
have added near half an hundred more, of considerable Recipes, out of the
Collectanea Chymica, and other valuable Authors.

VII. We have not here given you a bare Translation only, but besides that, a
large Comment upon each particular (as the Nature of the Subject would admit,
or did require) more especially upon all the Chemical Processes, which are
many, and the most excellent, selected out of a large Farraginous heap; and
made choice of from mighty Strength of Reason, and a long Series of
Experiences, which has exceedingly added to their Credit and Reputation.

VIII. These We have almost every where searched out, from their Original
Fountains, and where need required, given a clear Explication of the Process it
self, and added as a Supplement (to make the Work the more absolute and
complete) a Rationale upon the same.

And farther, We have examined the Prescripts and Opinions of the most Learned
Authors who have wrote thereof: Showing, either their Processes at large, if
new; Or, the particular Circumstances wherein they chiefly differ, if material;
and so representing as it were in a Glass, a Summary of all that has been
hitherto written of this kind.

IX. As to the Authors made use of in this Book; though we cannot have the Vanity
to obtrude a vast Catalogue or Heap, as is usual with several Writers of Books
(possibly many whom they never looked into, to consult, but for Ostentation they
enumerate) yet we think it necessary to give an Account of the Chief of those
We were Beholden to, that we may put Our Artist into a Capacity to make a more
exact and satisfactory Judgment of the following Discourses.

X. The Chief of those We consulted in this Undertaking were either of the more
Ancient; as, Paracelsus, Crollius, Hartman, Libavius, Beguinus, Sala, Faber,
Mynsicht, Grulingius, Vntzer, Quercetan, Mylius, Sennertus, etc. Or of the
Modern and more Late; as, Riverius, Schroder, Hofman, Horstius, Rolfincius,
Marggrave, Maets, Le Mort, Ludovicus, Ettmuller, Junken, Tachenius, Glauber, Le
Febure, Thibaut, Charras, and Lemery, with some others of lesser Note, whose
Performances in this kind (for so much as they wrote of) have been admirable
above all the rest of their Fellows.

XI. This being thus completed, you may in a little time expect the Second
Part of the same, which is now in in the Press, viz. Our Officina Chymica, or
Chemical Shop; being a complete Body of Chemistry in all in its Parts: Wherein
you will find Explicated, 1. The Principles of Natural Bodies, in their
received and genuine Sense. 2. The Fornaces and Instruments of the Art
particularly described with their Figures in Copper Plates. 3. The Operations
of Chemistry per se, abstracted from the Preparation of any set Medicine. 4.
The Preparation of Metals and Minerals deduced from all the Operations of
Chemistry. 5. Lastly, The Preparation of certain Vegetable and Animal
Substances, according to all the more late Discoveries or Designations.

XII. But from hence one Objection arises to be obviated, viz. That I have
treated of many things in this Dispensatory, that I had handled formerly at
large in my Pharmacopoeia Londinensis and Doron, and therefore might very well
have been omitted here. To which I answer, 1. That this is another Man's Book,
and my self but the Translator thereof; so that I could by no means with
Justice and Honor have gelt the Text, or obliterated any part thereof, without
a manifest Wrong and Injury to the Author. 2. That I have done no otherwise
with respect to the aforenamed Books, than Schroder did with his Quercetanus
Redivivus when he wrote his own Dispensatory. 3. That notwithstanding this
seeming Repetition, or reiterating of the very same thing sometimes, you may
possibly in this meet with that which is new concerning it, not contained in
the other Books, which may recompense the Labor and Pains of a second Review.

XIII. If any of the Gentlemen of the Profession, think, that in this Work or
any other, we have done them Wrong or Prejudice, in discovering to the Vulgar,
many of the Arcana of Our Art: We hope (as a Recompense for the same) to make
them amends again, in divulging several other Secrets, which the most of them
were wholly ignorant of before. However as a general Answer to this Objection,
We think, that all particular Interests should sacrifice to the general, and
that the Public good ought ever to be preferred before the Private how dear
and valuable soever.

XIV. It is my Opinion, that the Art of Physic is not any particular Man's or
Societies proper Right, more than another; but that every Man has an equal
share in the same. But it is like Gold and Silver, he that wins it, or takes
pains for it, shall have it. And as in one, every Man has a Right by his Wit
and Industry, to get Gold, if he can, and having got it, to make use of it; so
in the other, every Man has a Right to study Physic if he pleases; and having
once made himself Master of the Knowledge of it, has as great a Right to use it
as we. Nor can I see ought, which may entitle any one particular Person to an
Original Interest in it, more than it can another, whatever some self-ended Men
may pretend to the contrary.

XV. It is generous to do good to Mankind; and the more voluntary is is, the
more acceptable. For my part, I owe so great a Friendship to all the World,
that I wish every Man understood the Art as well as I do. And I should be
content upon the Condition, that it would please the most Good and Infinite
Being, to bless the Sons of Men with a perpetual State of Health, to seek out
some other way of living. And as Health is the most valuable of all Earthly
Happinesses; so I am of Opinion, all other Interests should vail to it. He can
be no good Man, who desires to build up his Fortunes from the Miseries and
Calamities of others; or to raise an Estate upon the Necessities of the Mean,
and the Ruins of such as want Bread.

XVI. For this Reason sake, I have for these Thirty Years together exercised my
Art (as well as to live by it) as a necessary piece of Charity. I know no poor
Creature that ever came to me, in my whole time, that once went from me,
without my desired help Gratis. I have not only given them my Judgment or
Opinion concerning their Diseases and Distempers; but if curable and Poor) have
supplied them with all the Medical Necessaries for the whole Cure, till they
became perfectly well, without demanding or requiring one Penny for it
afterward. And I have accounted the Restoration of such poor and wretched
Creatures a greater Blessing to me, than if I had gotten the Wealth of both the
Indies. I cannot so well express my self concerning this Matter, as I can
conceive it; but I am sure I should have been more pleased, and had a greater
Satisfaction, in seeing such a helpless Creature, restored to its desired
Health, than if I had found a very valuable Treasure.

XVII. There are several Hundreds in this Great City, can bear me witness to
this Truth. And for all the past Good I have done in those Cases; as I can
never repent it; so I resolve to continue it; for I certainly know, that I have
had the signal Blessing of God attended my Endeavors for it: For which, (with
all humility) I here publicly acknowledge his Goodness; and blessing his most
merciful Hand, with bended Knees give Thanks for the same. Nor shall I ever
desist the doing of what I have for thus many Years done in this kind, but am
resolved through the Assistance of the most good God, to exercise the same
Charity, and as largely extend it, to all the Poor and Miserable, who shall
please to make use of it, whilst I have my Sense and Reason, and draw Breath
upon Earth.

XVIII. I have begun to render the Arts of Physic and Chyrurgery with their
Appendices, the Materia Medica, Anatomy and Chemistry into English; and in
doing of which, by this present Work, and Thirteen or Fourteen other Books, I
have made a considerable Progress already; and intend not to desist, till I
have fully made them in all their parts, complete and entire. It Is every
English Man's Birthright, and an unspeakable Wrong to endeavor the keeping it
from him.

XIX. Nor do I know why any should be offended with me for thus doing, since it
is but what Hippocrates and Galen, Celsus and Paracelsus, with hundreds more,
all did, writing the System of Physic in their own Languages. Yea, and it is
what the French (out of an Ambition of Glory) do at this day. I am sure we are
their great Admirers in most things, and Ape them in whatsoever is vicious and
ridiculous: And why we should not imitate them in a thing of such an essential
Good I know not; unless you would oblige us to follow them only in their Vices,
and eschew them in their Virtues.

XX. I know that I have many Enemies in the World, and that the publishing this
Work will create me many more, and those powerful ones, and malicious too: But
I have overlookt all this, and have directed my Eye to the Recompense of
Reward. If herein I have served my Country and Generation, I have what I aimed
at, and I am sure I shall have along with it the Defense of him, whose Mercies
are over all his Works, and the Blessings of the Poor and Needy.

W. SALMON.
From my House at the Blew Ball by the Ditch-side, near Holbourn-bridge, London
7. December. 1693.
BOOKS Printed for S. Smith and B. Walford.
MEDICINAL EXPERIMENTS: Or a Collection of choice and safe Remedies for the
most part simple and easily prepared; useful in Families, and very serviceable
to Country People. By the Honorable R Boyl^, E^q Fellow of ^he Royaf Society.
To which is annexed a Catalogue of his Theo^ogical and Philosophical Books and
Tracts. Land. 1693. Price 1 s.

-- A Second Volume; containing about Three hundred ^ew Receipts, published
from the Author's Original Manuscripts, and by him recommended to the Care of
his Executors, and per^sed by some of his Learned Friends; together with a
large Pre^ace written by the Author's own Hand. Land. 1693. Price 1 s. 6 d.

-- Medicina Hydrostatica: Or, Hydrostaticks applied to ^he Materia Medica;
showing how by the Weight that diverse Bodies used in Physic have in Water; one
may discover whether they be genuine or adulterate; and also a Previous way of
^stimating Ores. Price 2 s.

-- Of the Reconcileableness of Spec^fick Medicines to the Corpuscular
Philosophy: To which is annexed, the Advantages ^f the Use of simple Medicines,
in Octavo. Price 2 s.

-- Short Memoirs for the Natural, Experimental History of Mineral Waters;
wherein are discovered several ways of ex^mining all sorts of Mineral Waters,
very useful for Water-^rinkers. Price 1 s. With most of the other Tracts
written by Mr. Boil, and printed in Quarto and Octavo, Latin and English.

Osteologia Nova: Or some new Observations of the Bones. ^. Of the Membrane,
Nature's constituent Parts, and internal Structure of the Bones. 2. Of Acretion
and Nutrition, as also of the Affections of the Bones in the Rickets, and of
Venerial Nodes. 3. Of the Medulla, or Marrow. 4. Of the Mucilagi^ous Glands,
with the Etiology or Explication of the Causes of (...) Rheumatism and the
Gout, and the manner how they are produced: To which is added a Fifth Discourse
of the Cartilages. By Clop. Havers, M. D. in Octavo.

Myotomia Reformata: Or, A new Description of all the Muscles of Humane Bodies;
Containing many new Discoveries and cu^ious Observations: Illustrated with
several Copper Cuts after ^he Life. By W. Cooper, Chyrurgeon, in Octavo, 1694.

A Collection of curious Travels and Voyages, in two Tomes. The first
containing Dr. Leonart Rauwolff's Itinerary into the Eastern Countries. The
second taking in many parts of Greece, Asia Minor, Egypt, Arabia Felix, and
Petraea, Ethiopia, etc. From the Observations of Mr. Belon, Mr. Vernon, Dr.
Spon, Dr. Smith, Dr. Huntingdon, Mr. Greaves, Alpinus, Veslingius, Thevenot's
Collections, and others; To which are added three Catalogues of such Trees,
Shrubs, and Herbs as grow in the Levant. By John Ray, Fellow of the Royal
Society. Land. 1693. Octavo.

THE General CONTENTS.
LIB. I. Of Compound Internals.
Chap. I. OF Waters. Page 1 Chap. II. Of Spirits. 37 Chap. III. Of Oils
distilled. 132 Chap. IV. Of Balsams distilled. 153 Chap. V. Of Essences or
Powers. 174 Chap. VI. Of Elixirs. 184 Chap. VII. Of Tinctures. 199 Chap. VIII.
Of Extracts. 329 Chap. IX. Of Magisteries. 353 Chap. X. Of Salts. 606 Chap. XI.
Of Liquors. 710 Chap. XII. Of Wines. 723 Chap. XIII. Of Vinegars. 729. Chap.
XIV. Of Infusions. 734 Chap. XV. Of Decoctions. 745 Chap. XVI. Of Syrups. 759
Chap. XVII. Of Quiddonies. 789 Chap. XVIII. Of Lohochs. 796 Chap. XIX. Of
Preserves. 799 Chap. XX. Of Sugars. 832 Chap. XXI. Of Pouders. 807 Chap. XXII.
Of Electuaries. 831 Chap. XXIII. Of Pills. 840 Chap. XXIV. Of Troches, and
Tablets. 856
LIB. II. Of Compound Externals.
Chap. I. OF Lotions. 869 Chap. II. Of Oils. 874 Chap. III. Of Balsam. 880
Chap. IV. Of Ointments. 887 Chap. V. Of Cere-cloths. 898 Chap. VI. Of
Emplasters. 901 Chap. VII. Of Cataplasms. 912 Chap. VIII. Of Clysters. 915
Chap. IX. Of Medicaments Anomalous. 921 APPENDIX. Chap. X. Tabula Posologica.
93^ Chap. XI. Orthotonia Verborum. 945
The Usual Chemical CHARACTERS.
. Saturn, or Lead.. Jupiter, or Tin.. Mars, or Iron.. Sol, or Gold.. Venus, or
Copper.. Mercury, or Quicksilver.. Luna, or Silver.. Bezoar minerale. arsenic.
Arsenick. {day}. {night}. Day. Night. {sal ammoniac}. Sal Armoniack.. Urine.
fire. Fire. arsenic. Arsenick.. Virdegrise. {cinnabar}. Cinnabar. vitriol.
Chalcantum. vitriol. Vitriol. {salt}. Salt common. {nitre}. Nitre or
Saltpeter.. Antimony.. Oil, of any kind.. Caput Mortuum. alum. Alum.. Sal
Gem.. Cancer, or Crab. subli. Sublimate. precipi. Precipitate. {water}. Water.
tartar, Tartar. {sulphur}. Sulphur. {retort}. Retort. vinegar. Vinegar.
{vinegar distilled}. Spirit of Vinegar. quicklime. Quicklime. {orpiment}.
Auripigment.
The Usual Medicinal CHARACTERS
lb. A Pound, or xij.. An Ounce, or viij.. A Dram, or iij.. A Scruple, or gr.
xx. gr. A Grain. gt. A Drop. gut. Idem. M. A Handful. P. A Pugil. p. j. ij.
One, two parts. ss. ss. Half any quantity. No. In number. A. Of each a like
quantity. Ana. Idem. alembic;. Alembick. AB. Bole Armon. fine Bole. aaa.
Amalgama. aqua fortis. Aqua Fortis. A F. Idem. A R. Aqua Regia. aqua regis.
Idem. A V. Aqua Vitae B M. Balneo Mariae. B V. Balneo Vaporis D. Distill, or
Distilling. ashes. Ashes. MB. Balneo Mariae. q. s. quantum satis. q. v. quantum
vis.. Recipe, Take. S. Spirit. S. V. Spirit of Wine. S A. Secundum Artem. S S
S. Stratum super Stratum: Or, Lay upon Lay. V. Vinum, Wine.
PHARMACOPOEIA BATEANA:
LIB. I.
CHAP. I. Of WATERS.
I. Aqua Aluminosa, Alumed Water.
Bate.] ALVM and White Vitriol ana: Mix them together, and boil them in an
earthen Vessel, with a gentle Fire, till they become like a Stone: powder it;
and to every spoonful thereof, add boiling Water a quart: dissolve and filter.
It is profitable against Wounds, Ulcers, Fistula's, etc. washing them therewith.

Salmon.] If to every pint of this Liquor you add ij. of Spirit of Wine or
Brandy, it will be almost of double virtue to that of the prescript; for
Spirits of Wine has a wonderful power, being mingled with fit Medicaments to
cleanse, purify, heal, and glue together Wounds and Ulcers, especially those
of the nervous parts, which it does safely, as we have taught in our Synopsis
Medicine, lib. 3. cap. 26. Sect. 9.4. and 7. I know by almost a thousand
Experiences, that this Alumed Water is a most admirable thing against a Herpes
miliaris, and all manner of Tettars and Ring-worms, or Serpigines, and such
like breakings out in any part of the Body, tho of never so many years
standing. The way of using it is thus: Put some of it into an earthen Basin
over a Chafing Dish of Coals, and with a Cloth let the diseased bathe well the
place affected, as hot as they can endure it, for a quarter of an hour or more
at a time; and do it two or three times a day, or oftener, as need requires: It
will in a short time cure the Tettar, let it be never so inveterate and
rebellious. I cured two Gentlewomen of inveterate Tettars herewith, the one of
which had been troubled with the Distemper above twenty years. It is also a
most admirable Injection in a Virulent Gonorrhaea, or the Whites in Women,
universals being premised, injecting therewith warm three or four times a day.
It is also a good Collyrium, curing weeping Eyes, and strengthening them, taking
away Clouds, Films, Pearls, etc.

II. Aqua Animalis, The Animal Water of Horsedung.
Bate.] Take Horse-turds newly made, No xij.: White Wind a Gallon: Sweet
Fennelseeds, Parsly-seeds, ana ij.: Grocers Treacle, or lb j.: Polypody of the
Oak, Butchers Broom, Liver-wort, ana Mij.: Ginger iij.: mix and distill
according to Art, with a gentle Fire. It prevails against Pleurisies, Pains,
Rheumatisms, etc. Dose add iv.: sweating upon it.

Salmon.] It is not only good against Pleurisies, which is the chief design of
the Medicine, but also against the Gravel and Stone, whether in the Reins or
Bladder, as also Pains and Stoppages in the Urinary parts, it dissolving the
mucous Matter to a Miracle. It may be given to old or young from ij. ad vj, and
may be repeated four times in twenty four hours: but it will be much more
effectual if you add to every Dose, as it is taken twenty or twenty five drops
of Spirit of Sal Armoniack, in the Case of a Pleurisy: or fifteen Grains of
Sal Prunellae in Nephritick Diseases. vi. of it immediately given upon a
Surfeit is an admirable thing, and might save the Life of many a poor Creature,
which otherwise for want of it would be lost.

III. Aqua Antiphthisica, A Water against Phthisicks.
Bate.] The Blood of a Calf new killed, freed from its Fibers, by beating
together lb iij: Venice Turpentine, ten Ounces; Liquorice not dried lb j:
Raisons stoned xij: Fat Figgs No 100: Garden Snails No 70: fresh Orice-Roots
vi: Spanish Tobacco cut ij: Crumbs of White-bread lb j: mix and distill
according to Art. Dose ij, with its proper quantity of Oil swimming thereupon,
being all mixed together with a Pectoral Syrup, and taken for fifteen days.

Salmon.] If this Medicine should receive a gentle Fermentation before
Distillation, it would be so much the better, for by that means the Sulphur of
the Fruit and Turpen. being more intimately mixed with the Aqueous parts of the
Blood and Snails, a more volatile Liquor would come over the helm. This in some
Constitutions will gently Vomit, and in others cause a most admirable
Expectoration, cleansing and healing Ulcers in the Lungs to a wonder, and
thereby cure Consumptions, take away Coughs and Colds, shortness of Breath, and
Obstructions of the Lungs, and cause a free breathing.

IV. Aqua Antiscorbutica, The Water against the Scurvy.
Bate.] Take Leaves of Fumetary, Watercresses, Scurvygrass both sorts,
Brook-lime, ana Mxij: Hearts tongue, Cichory, Pine-tops, Germander, Hore-hound,
Agrimony, Centory the less, ana M.x. mix: Roman Wormwood, Liverwort, ana, Miv.:
Bryonie Roots viij.: Roots of Female Fern, Dook Bitter-sweet, inward Bark of
the Ash, ana vi: Ash-keys iss.: Seeds of Angelica ss.: all being fresh and
bruised, add Rhenish-wine lb vi, in which a red-hot Iron has been twenty times
quenched: Express all strongly out with a Press, and distill the Liquor in B. M.
( adding Troches of Capers poudered vi.: Lime of Mars iss.:) to the thickness
of Honey, the Magma evaporate to the consistency of an Extract, which keep for
the Antiscorbutick Extract.

Salmon. It is an excellent Antiscorbutick, and a Water that may be profitably
given in all cold and weak Stomachs, and such as cannot digest their Food: It
opens Obstructions of the Viscera, sweetens and strengthens the Blood in its
Crasis, and is profitably given not only to young Girls against the
Green Sickness, and in Scorbutic Rheumatisms, but also to aged People, to
comfort and strengthen them; which it effectually does if given ad ij. Morning
and Evening, (a little dulcified with White Sugar) for fifteen or twenty days
together. Dose of the Extract a j and ij.

V. Aqua Antiscorbutica altera, The other Antiscorbutick Water. Micklethw.
Bate.] Leaves of Aron, Garden-Scurvy-grass, Watercresses, common Wormwood,
ana Mvi.: fresh Orange peels, iv.: Nutmegs ij.: infuse for a Night in a Gallon
of Brunswick Beer or Mum, and distill according to Art.

Salmon.] The four Ounces of Orange-peels must only be the yellow Rind pared
off from the white, which in this case is of no great worth. It is a good
Antiscorbutick, given with other things to the same intention. Dose by it self
(sweetened) is from j. to ij. in the Morning fasting.

VI. Aqua Bechica, A Water against a Cough.
Bate.] Take Leaves of Ground Ivy, Coltsfoot, Oak of Jerusalem, ana lb iij.:
Hyssop, Rosemary, Pennyroyal, Horehound, ana lb iss.: Roots of Elecampane and
Liquorice ana lb iss Orrice Florentine xij.: Figgs cut lb iij.: of the best
Saffron, Anniseed sweet Fennelseed, ana, ss. Spirit of Wine lb x.: Fountain
Water lb48.: digest a while, and distill by a Vesica lb xxiv. or xxx. for to
make the Syrupus Tolutanus Magistralis.

Salmon.] The Title shows the chief design, as being good against Coughs,
Colds, Stoppages of the Breast and Lungs, Wheesings, and such like: Dose a ij.
ad iv. sweetened with white Sugar Candy at night going to Bed, it may also be
taken in the day time in like manner, when the Cough proves troublesome; and
may serve for a Vehicle to take Balsams of Sulphur in, or any other Pectoral or
Antiasthmatick Medicine. However the Prescript tells you, it is to make the
Magistral Syrup of Bals. de Tolu.

VII. Aqua Benedicta, The Blessed Water.
Bate.] Take unslackt Lime lb i.: to which affuse boiling Water lb viij: after
the Ebulition is over, and it is sufficiently settled, filter it and keep it for
use. Dose iij. or iv. thrice a day; or to be used as common Drink for a Month;
being drunk it does much good in many cases, as in Redness of the Face,
Pustules, etc. in the King's Evil, Asthma, Phthisick or Consumption of the
Lungs, Empyema, malign Dysenteries, watery and scrophulous Tumors, flux of the
Whites, running Gout, Morphew, Freckles, Herpes, Tettars, Gangreens, Oedema,
Swellings of the Knees and Shins, common Ulcers, with a Flux of Humors, etc.
and in the cure of the Diabetes it is a most excellent Remedy.

Salmon.] If a few Cloves, Jamaica Pepper, or some other Spice be infused in
it, to give it a relish, it will be so much the better. It is certainly an
excellent thing to sweeten the Blood and Humors, and to absorb the acid Juices
lodging in them, by which means it prevails against Heart-burnings, Soreness of
the Stomach, Griping of the Intestines, and such like.

VIII. Aqua Benedicta Composita, The Blessed Water Compound.
Bate] Fresh Liquorice j.: Bark of Sassafras ss.: Raisons of the Sun stoned
vj.: Nutmegs vj.: Aqua Benedicta aforegoing lb vj.: infuse without heat for two
days, then strain and keep it for use. It is better than the former, and more
efficacious in several Cases.

Salmon.] It is not only good against the aforenamed Diseases, but is also an
excellent Pectoral opening Obstructions of the Breast and Lungs, sweetning the
acid Humors, and cleansing the Body of them: and may be of good use, to be
taken some few days before the Exhibibition of a Purge or Vomit, for that it
not only opens, but also loosens the toughest Humor. Dose iij.: two or three
times a day.

IX. Aqua Camphorata, Camphorated Water.
Bate.] Roman Vitriol, Fine Bole, ana iv.: Camphir i,: mix and make a Powder;
of which put j. to boiling Water lb iv.: remove it from the Fire, and let the
Faerces settle. With this Water, being warmed, wash any Ulcer: It stops all
Defluxions, cleanses, dries, strengthens, fastens the Teeth, hinders
putrefaction, cures Ignem sacrum, Scaby Hands and prevails wonderfully against
Ophthalmies, Epiphora, and other Diseases of the Eyes.

Salmon.] To reduce the Camphir into subtle Po^der, you must first drop upon it
a small quantity of rectified Spirit of Wine, so with a Knife, or in a little
Mortar you may immediately rub it till it is impalpable, without which you will
be troubled to bring it to a fine Powder. This Water is a good Collyrium, and
prevails against all Diseases of the Eyes, taking away Mists* Clouds, Films,
Pearls, Blood-shot, or any other Distemper which obfuscates the sight: it also
cures Ulcers in the Eyes, by washing them therewith two or three times a day;
and is a most admirable thing against Herpes, Tettars, Ring-worms, or other
breakings out in any part of the Body.

X. Aqua Cariophyllorum, Water of Clove-gillyflowers.
Bate.] Clove-gilliflowers new gathered lb ij.: Dates lb i.: Anniseeds,
Liquorice, ana j.: Lees of Wine lb xxiv.: digest and distill in an Alembick lb
iv.: to which add Sugarcandy iv.: and hang it in a Nodule, Cloves No iv.; Musk
and Ambergriese, ana gr. v.

Salmon.] It is an excellent Cordial-water, good against Faintings, Swoonings,
Sickness at Heart, Oppression of the Spirits, Wind, Gripings, and such like;
and is very profitable to be given against the Plague, and all manner of
pestilential Fevers proceeding from putrefaction. It chears the Heart, revives
the Spirit, comforts Nature, drives away Melancholy, making merry and pleasant:
but by reason of the Musk, you must be cautious not to give it to Women
troubled with Vapors or Hysteric Fits. It strengthens the Brain and Memory,
fortifies the Animal Spirits, and is good against cold Distempers of the Head.
Dose j. in Wine or other convenient Vehicle upon any Paroxysm or Fit.

XI. * Aqua Cephalica, A Water for the Head.
Bate.] Male Peony-roots iv.: Roots of Angelica, Valerian, ana iss.: of Avens
i.: Leaves of Sage, of Rosemary, Betony, Marjoram, Bawm; Flowers of Lavender,
Betony, Peony, Marigolds, Sage, Rosemary Lilly Convally, of the Tile Tree, ana
M.j.: Staechas iss.: Red Roses, Cow-slips, A. M.ij.: Lignum Rhodium, yellow
Sanders A. vj. Nutmegs iss. Galangal, ss.: Cardamoms, Cubebs, A iij.: infuse in
the best White Wind lb xiv.: for ten days, then add of the best Cinnamon lb j.:
digest for two days, and distill according to Art. It is profitable against the
intemperature of the Head, Headache, etc. Dose two spoonfuls: Let it be drawn
up the Nostrils, bathed well upon the Temples, and places about the Ears, dropped
into the Ears, and held in the Mouth: and Lint dipped in it may be applied to the
Nape of the Neck: It gives comfort to many, tho to others it is used in vain.

Salmon.] You must not draw it off to dryness, least the Matter tastes of
Burning, unless you distill in Balneo, then you may be more secure: but if you
have not the convenience of a Bath, but must make use of a Copper Vesica with
its Worm, you must when you distill add a Gallon of Water; then may you draw
off, nearly your whole quantity; or so much according to the strength which you
design it. You may give it from ij. to iv. in any cold Distemper of the head:
but in hot Distempers it will make the pain worse.

XII. * Aqua Cerasorum Composita, Water of Black Cherries compound.
Bate.] Black Cherries with their Stones well bruised lb x.: Red Cows Milk new
milked, two Gallons: Leaves of Violets, Bramble, Self-heal, Wood-bine, A. Miv.:
distill according to Art. Dose half a pint twice a day. It is a most powerful
Remedy in the cure of a Tympanites.

Salmon.] This ought to be distilled in Balneo, if you would make the Medicine
well; and then you may draw off the matter to dryness. The Water is Stomatick
and Astringent; and is of good use for those who have old Sores, running
Ulcers, Fistula's, etc. which are hard to cure.

XIII. * Aqua Chalybeata, Steeled Water.
Bate.] Mars cleansed iv.: White Wind lb iv.: digest in the Sun, shaking the
Glass every day, so long till the Wine grows black, and the Mars becomes
altered in its color; then add Juice of fresh Strawberries gently pressed
forth lb iv.: Sperma Ceti, Rhubarb, Mummy, A. ss.: distill to dryness. Dose
three or four Ounces twice a day in Fistula's or Ulcers of the Urinary parts,
Apostems, Hemorrhoids, pissing of Matter, Bruises, coagulated Blood, etc.

Salmon.] It is a good Medicine before Distillation, in my opinion, much better
than after, being only filtrated: It cures the Green Sickness in Virgins to a
miracle, and makes them have a good color in their Faces, even in three or
four times taking, presently taking away all their faintness, weakness, and
indisposition to stir up and down. Dose ab j. ad ij, in a Glass of Ale or Wine:
It also is good against Consumptions and dries Ulcers and Fistula's,
wonderfully disposing them to a present healing. Being di^^illed, it has some
of the same Virtues, but scarcely of half the strength* and therefore is to be
given in double the Dose: But this advantage you have by distillation, that
though it may not be of half the Virtue, yet it is five times more pleasant than
that undistilled. But in my Opinion the former is preferrable; and truly my
Experience has confirmed it.

XIV. * Aqua Chamaemeli Composita, Camomil Water Compound.
Bate.] Camomil Flowers M. 30.: Cut, bruise, and infuse in Water stilled from
Camomil itself, lb x.: Spanish Wine lb xvj.: digest for twenty four hours then
express; and infuse a second time fresh Flowers M.xx.: Express again the third
time, and infuse fresh Flowers M. xij.: then add the yellow of Orange-peels
fresh ij.: Pontick or Roman Wormwood, Centory, Penny royal, Origanum, A.
Miiss.: Seeds of Dill ij.: of Anise, Fennel, Caraways, Cumin, Carduus ben.
Ladies Thistle, A. iss.: Bay and Juniper Berries, A. ss.: Nutmegs iij.: digest
a sufficient time, then distill according to Art. It is prevalent against Wind,
Colic, Stone, obstructions of the Courses.

Salmon.] It warms the Stomach, expels Wind, opens Obstructions of the Urine,
brings away Sand, Gravel, Slime, or other Matter stopping the passages; and is
a specific against Pleurisies, Stitches, and Pains of the side coming from
Cold or Wind, or both. Dose ab j.: ad iij. in the Morning fasting. It is also
found by experience to be good against intermitting Fevers or Agues.

XV. * Aqua Cinamomi Cardiaca, Cordial Cinnamon Water.
Bate.] Juice of Borrage freed from its residence lb xxiv. Clove-gilliflowers,
or Pinks. M.ix: Saffron ij.: of the best Cinnamon lb iss: Flowers of Borrage
Miv.: distill in B M. according to Art. It is profitable against Faintings,
Swoonings, dejection of Mind, etc.

Salmon.] It is an excellent thing against Consumptions, of what kind soever;
and may be given in a Hectic, if the Sick drinks plentifully new Cows Milk,
and sometimes a sweet palatable Limewater, which extinguishes the
preter-natural heat. Dose i. to ij, alone or in a proper Vehicle.

XVI. Aqua Cinamomi Hordeata, Cinnamon Water with Barley.
Bate.] Barly-water clarified lb viij.: Best Cinnamon xij.: digest and distill
according to Art. Taken by Spoonfuls with Oxymel of Squils, it is of admirable
use in Asthma's.

Salmon.] It is Cordial, good against Faintings and Swoonings, and has the
Virtues of the former, but is thought to be not altogether so hot. It
strengthens the Stomach, and very much revives the Spirits. Dose from three
spoonfuls to six, either alone, or in any sit Vehiculum.

XVII. Aqua Cordium Composita, Water of Hearts Compound.
Bate.] Calves Hearts new killed, and cut into pieces, No vi.: Crumbs of Bread
steeped in Cows Milk, lb i.: Damask Rose Water, Orange Flower Water, A. lb i.:
Citrons sliced. No iij.: Cinnamon iv.: Mace i.: Gelly of Hartshorn made with
White Wind lb iv.: Lambs and Calves Blood freed from the Fibers A lb ij.:
Spanish Wine lb iij.: mix and distill according to Art. It is of admirable use
against Weaknesses, and a dejection of the Strength.

Salmon.] It is given with good success in Consumptions, Pinings, and Decays of
Nature, and may be taken Morning, Noon and Night, from two Ounces to four,
either alone, or in some fit mixture.

XVIII. Aqua Cosmetica, The Beautifying Water.
Bate.] Calves Feet broken, No vi.: Mill Dust iv.: Powder of Myrrh ivss: Wine,
Milk, A lb iij.: mix and distill according to Art. With this the Face is to be
washed; some smooth pieces of Alum being first shaked up and down in it.

Salmon.] Some parts of the Alum being dissolved in the Menstruum causes it to
dry and whiten; it also heals Ulcers, dries up Tettars, or other breakings out
in the skin, taking away Scruf, Morphew, Sun-burnings, and other like
deformities: but it ought to be used twice a day; and after the skin has first
been bathed for a pretty while with almost scalding hot Water, whereby the
Pores will be opened, and so made the more fit to receive into it the virtues
and efficacy of the Medicine.

XIX. * Aqua Crinalis, A Water for the Hair.
Bate.] Live Flies, [or rather Bees] iv.: Honey lb i.: Milk lb ij.: mix and
distill Sec. Artem. Besides, that it wonderfully helps in an Alopecia, or
falling of the Hair; it is very good against Deafness, being dropped into the
Ears.

Salmon.] If you infuse Powder of Pomegranate-peels in it after distillation,
it will be more powerful to hinder a falling of the Hair: Also if you infuse
therein Black Pepper j. to a lbj. of Water: it will be of more than
treblestrength in causing hair to grow upon bald places: and if you infuse Ant
Eggs in it, being first bruised, it will be more prevalent against deafness,
and thickness of hearing: all which things you may use according to your
discretion.

XX. * Aqua Cucumerum Composita, Water of Cucumers compound.

Bate.] Juice of Garden Cowcumbers lb iv: White Wind lb vj.: Bean Cods lb iss.:
Leaves and Roots of Rest-harrow, lb j.: Juniper Berries vi.: Nutmegs, No 21.:
Parsly-seed iv. Seeds of White Saxafrage iss.: Flowers of Broom M. viij.: of
Elder, of white dead Nettles, A. M. vi.: distilled according to Art to dryness.
Dose ij. every Morning to expel the Stone and Gravel, or Sand, Pills made of
Cypress Turpentine being premised.

Salmon.] You may give before hand, either the Pilulae Diureticae Clossaei,
described in our Doron Medicum, lib. 2. cap. 23. 3. or these following: Cypress
Turpentine ij. Aniseeds, Caraways, in fine Powder, ana, enough to make it up
into Pills: of which the Sick may take from j. ad ij. every Night going to Bed;
for some time, drinking after it, the Water in the Prescript. These things thus
jointly used, prevail also against the Scurvy and Dropsy, and all other ill
habits of body.

XXI. Aqua Cynosbati Composita, Water of Hipps compound.
Bate.] Hipps, or Fruit of the Wild Bryar, bruised Seeds and all vi.: Seeds of
Radishes ss.: of Parsley j.: of Saxifrage ij.: Roots of White Saxifrage i.
Liquorice iij.: of Altheaa vj.: Whey lb x.: mix, and distill according to Art.
Dose iv. twice a day, wtih Syrup of Marshmallows and Purslane, the Conserve of
the Pulp of the Hips being premised.

Salmon.] It ought to be distilled in B.M. to dryness: otherwise, if in a
Copper Vesica with its Alembick, you must add Water lbiv. or vj.: and then draw
but half off to avoid burning. It is a good thing against Sand, Gravel, or
mucous Matter obstructing the passages of the Reins and Bladder.

XXII. Aqua Digitalis, Water of Fox-Glove.
Bate.] Fresh Fox-Glove xij.: Liquorce iv.: Aniseeds ij.: Strong Beer lb xij.:
ferment it nineteen days, and distill according to Art. It is an admirable
Anti-asthmatick, and is powerful to cause Expectoration: Dose some spoonfuls
often.

Salmon.] It takes away Wheesings and Shortness of Breath, and is prevalent
against most Distempers of the Lungs, which obstructs or hinder breathing. Dose
j. ad ij, in which ten or twelve drops of Spirit of Sal Armoniack may be mixed:
thus taken it is good against Quinsies, Pleurisies, and the like.

XXIII. Aqua Embryonum, A Water to preserve the Child in the Womb.
Bate.] Fresh Eringoroots lb j.: Dates lb ss.: Sweet Almonds iv. all being
bruised and brought into a pulp, add Nutmegs iij.: Mace ss.: Barley
Cinamon-water lb iss.: Spanish Wine, Baum-water, A lb ij.: mix and distill
according to Art. Dose ij. thrice a day with Sugar Pearled; an Electuary made
of Conserve of Red Roses, Clovegilliflowers, preserved Nutmegs, Powder of Ivory
and Pearl, etc. being premised.

Salmon.] This Medicine daily taken, nourishes the Child in the Womb, and
prevents Miscarriage where it is feared, as also in such as are accustomed to
it. It is cordial also, and restores in Consumptions. If you distill in B. M.
you may draw off to dryness; otherwise you must add Water to prevent burning.

XXIV. * Aqua Epidemica, The Plague-Water.
Bate.] Celandine, Rosemary, Rue, Sage, Mugwort, Wormwood, Pimpernel, Dragons,
Scabiouse, Agrimony, Bawm, Scordium, lesser Centory, Carduus Ben. Betony, Ros.
Solis, A. Mij.: Roots of Angelica, Tormentil, Gentian, Zedoary, Liquorice, A,
j.: macerate in White Wind lb viij, for two days, then distill according to Art.

Salmon.] You may distill in B M. to dryness; otherwise if in a Copper Vesica,
you must add Water to prevent the Empyreuma. This Water is profitable against
the Plague or Pestilence, and all manner of malign and pestilential Fevers,
etc. It may either be given alone from ij. ad iv.; or used as a Vehicle to
convey other Medicines for the same intention in letting the sick be in bed,
and sweating well upon it. In my opinion, if three or four good large Lemons
were thin sliced and put (after Distillation) into the Water, it would be so
much the better, for that the particles of that acid Juice certainly destroys
all the Vermiculi, or Miasmata, which are the Progenerators of the Plague, or
Pestilence; and also more powerfully overcome it when the Infection is begun.
For this reason it is, Vinegar is put into almost all our Plague-Waters, by
Sylvius, Barbet, and others of the more learned Physicians.

XXV. * Aqua Febrifuga, The Febrifuge-Water.
Bate.] Tops of Centory the less, M. viij.: Wormwood, Featherfew, Cink-foil,
Marigolds, Tormentil, Green Tobacco, Sorrel, Carduus Ben. Dragons, Camomil,
Germander, A. Mvi.: Dandelon Mxij. bruise them all, and add to them Whitewine
lb iv. and distill according to Art. To the distilled Water affuse new Herbs,
digest and distill to dryness. In the distilled Water infuse Roots of white
Dittany, of Tormentil, A. iss.: Seeds of Citrons, of Carduus Ben. of Carduus
Mariae, of Sorrel, A. ij. Leaves of Scordium, Goats Rue, A. M. iv.: then distill
according to Art.

Salmon.] This Water is profitable against all manner of Fevers, whether
continent, continual, or intermitting, commonly called Agues. You may either
distill in a Copper Vesica, adding a convenient quantity of Water to keep it
from burning, or distill in a Glass Body in B.M. then may you distill to dryness.
This Water is also good for a cold and weak Stomach. fainting Fits, Palpitation
of the Heart, and such like. Dose two, four, or six spoonfuls according to the
Age, Sex, and as necessity requires.

XXVI. Aqua Formicarum, Water of Pismites.
Bate.] Of the larger Pismires (gathered in May or June) lb j.: Honey lb ij:
Spring Water lb j.: mix and distill according to Art. Dose one spoonful. It
provokes Vomiting, and cures Tertian Agues.

Salmon.] Let it be distilled in a Glass Body in Balneo; otherwise, if in a
Copper Vesica tinned within, you must not draw off much above a quart, least
the Water tastes of burning, and so the Medicine be spoiled: If it be fermented
before Distillation, it will make an Aqua Magnanimitatis, which will be good
against Melancholy, Sadness, and dejectedness of Mind.

XXVII. Aqua Fortis Duplex, Double Aqua Fortis, or Dissolvent of Silver.
Bate.] It is made of Nitre and Vitriol, Ana: distilled by a Retort according
to Art. It dissolves Silver and Copper.

Salmon.] Filings of Venus, or Luna in Leaves may be dissolved by this Water:
which being dissolved the Water may be separated by B. M. and the Calx of Luna,
etc. will remain at bottom: If you dissolve this Calx again in double the
quantity of fresh A F. abstracting, and putting on fresh continually, you will
at length find the Metal reduced to an Oil at bottom; for the fresh AF. does
every time divide the Metaline Particles into infinitely finer and finer Atoms,
till at length they become as it were a perfect Oil, according to the Opinion
of Paracelsus.

XXVIII. Aqua Fortis Aluminata, Aqua Fortis made with Alum.
Bate.] Alum, Nitra, A. lb j.: Vitriol lb ss.: mix and distill according to Art.

Salmon.] It is to be distilled by a Retort as the former, and serves for the
same uses: but this is much better for some work than the former, for that it
blacks not so much as that does; as in the dissolving of Pearls or Coralls; or
the dissolving of Silver in order to the making its Crystals for the Pilulae
Lunares, which see in its proper place.

XXIX. Aqua Herpetica, A Water against Tettars, Ring-worms, Itches, Scabs,
Herpes, etc.
Bate.] Roch Alum j.: White Vitriol ij.: best White Wind Vinegar lb j.: fresh
Roots of Elecampane ij.: Leaves of Green Tobacco, M. j.: boil to the
consumption of a third part, strain, and add burnt Vitriol ss.: mix, and keep
it for use. Cloths being wet in a sufficient quantity of this Water, are to be
laid upon the Herpes, and permitted to dry on, four times, viz. till (the Scabs
yet sticking on) a new skin be generated underneath.

Salmon.] It not only cures Herpes, but also Scabs, Itch, Tettars, Ring-worms,
and other breakings out of the skin; and I heard a certain Lady say, (who
constantly used it) that it will take away Lentils, Freckles, Pimples,
Sun-burning, Tannings, and such like Deformities: you may either use it with a
Cloth as aforesaid, or only by bathing the parts affected several times a day,
but then you must be sure, to let it be always very hot when you use it, so
will it do five times more good than if you should use it cold; because hot, it
the better opens the pores, and penetrates the skin.

XXX. * Aqua Hirundinum, Water of Swallows.
Bate.] Live Swallows Number 40: Castoreum j.: White Wind lb iij.: distill. It
prevails admirably in cure of the Epilepsy.

Salmon.] If you distill in BM. to dryness, and cohobate four or five several
times, your Water will be so much the stronger and better; for at length by
many Cohobations the Volatile Salt will in some measure ascend and mix with the
Water, which at the first distillation it will not. It is an excellent thing
indeed in the cure of the Epilepsy: Dose ab j. ad iij, every Morning for forty
days together; and if in every Dose iv. or vi. Grains of Sal Volatile Cranii
Humani be added, the Medicine will be so much the better. You may give it
either alone, or in Black-cherry-water.

XXXI. * Aqua Hormini Composita, Water of Clary compound.
Bate.] Leaves of fresh Clary bruised, M. xij.: Spirit of Wine lb ij.: distill
to dryness: to the distilled Water, put fresh Clary M. x. Flowers of
Archangel, or Dead-nettles, M. vi.: and distill a second time: repeat the
affusion and distillation with fresh Herbs and Flowers, adding also Nutmegs j.:
the Liquor distilling is to be received in a Glass upon double refined Sugar
vj.: Ambergriese gr. iij. tied up in a Rag, and hung within the Vial. It is of
great use (among young and tender Women) for preventing Abortion; it also stops
the Whites.

Salmon.] You must distill it every time in a Glass Body in B. M. it being
digested or macerated twenty four hours before distillation; and then you must
draw off the Spirit with a gentle Fire. It is good for the intention: but if
you put into every quart of the Water Catechu in fine Powder ij.: and so make a
Tincture, it will be ten times stronger to all the purposes aforementioned, and
will also stop the most violent flux of the Terms. Dose one or two spoonfuls at
night.

XXXII. * Aqua Hungarica, The Queen of Hungary's Water.
Bate.] Fresh Rosemary Flowers lb ij.: Alchool of Wine, i. e. the highest and
best rectified Spirit lb iij.: digest and distill S. A. It prevails against the
Running Gout and Sciatica. Dose to one spoonful twice a week. The Face and
parts affected, may be daily washed therewith; it may also be drawn up the
Nostrils, as in the use of the Aqua Cephalica.

Salmon.] It is of singular good use against Palsies, Cramps, Convulsions, the
Falling Sickness, Vertigo, Lethargy, Megrim, Headache, and indeed most
Diseases of the Head, Brain, and Nerves, proceeding from a cold cause; it may
be outwardly bathed upon the part twice a day, (it is a neat and cleanly
Medicine) as also drawn up the Nostrils against the Vertigo, Headache, Megrim,
etc. Inwardly it may be taken against all the same Diseases, as also against
dimness of sight, cloudiness of Eyes, and even blindness itself, where it
proceeds from an inward cause, nor do I believe there is any better specific
in the World, against weakness of the Sight, hurts of the Optic Nerves, and
Palsies, than this very Water is; but it ought to be taken every day about a
spoonful at a time in a Glass of pure Ale or Wine, or some other convenient
Vehicle, as Blackcherry Water, Aqua Lactis, etc. for a quarter of a year
together, or more; yea, half a year if need requires. In external pains of the
Gout, Sciatica, etc. as also in vehement Colicks (for which it is an admirable
thing) it will be much more powerful, if you add to it (to every quart of the
Water) ij. of the best Camphir; and then to bathe the place affected therewith,
as also to take a spoonful of it at a time, in a Glass of Sack, in the most
excruciating Colic. This Water is a thing I have used many years in my
Practice, and have found it of singular use to a great number of Diseases, more
than I have here time to enumerate. I always keep great quantities of it by me,
and have sent it through the Nation, to the most considerable Persons of the
Kingdom, Ladies of Quality, Physicians, Chirurgions, etc. Those who desire it,
may be supplied with what quantities they please, as good as can be made by
Art, at very reasonable Rates. It is good also to preserve against the Measles,
Smallpox, Plague, or Pestilence, and other infectious Diseases.

XXXIII. Aqua Lactis Alexiteria, Milk-water resisting Poison.
Bate.] Mead sweet, Carduus Ben. Goats Rue, A. M. vj.: Mint, common Wormwood,
A. M. v. Rue Miij.: Angelica M. ij. being bruised, add new Milk three Gallons:
mix and distill in a common Still.

Salmon.] It is better if it be distilled in a Copper Vesica tinned within,
with a very gentle Fire; but much better if it be distilled in a Glass Body in
BM. for then you may distill to dryness, and never hazard an Empyreuma, or taste
of burning. The intention of this Medicine is to be used as a general Vehicle
to take many other Medicines in, it being much better and pleasanter than Beer,
Ale, Wine, Water, Broaths, or Posset-drinks. However it is good against Poison,
the biting of Venomous Creatures; and is many times used to quench thirst in
Violent, Continual, and Burning, or Malignant Fevers, where other Liquors
being given would be prejudicial. Dose ij. ad vj.

XXXIV. * Aqua Lactis Cardiaca, A Cordial Milk-water.
Bate.] Sweet-scented Apples, (as Pippins and Pearmains) with their peels and
kernels lb xij.: Bawm, Scordium, A. M. x.: Zodoary, Tormentil, A. viij.: new
Milk lb x.: mix and distill, S. A.

Salmon.] It ought to be distilled as we have before directed; and then you
have a pleasant Cordial Water to be used as a Vehicle to give any Cordial
Medicines in, against fainting Fits, Palpitation of the Heart, Swooning, and
other Distempers of the Praecordia. Thus, Of this Water a ij. ad iv. plus
minus, Cinnamon Water iij.: Tincture of Coral j.: Confectio Alkermes ij.: Syrup
of Clovegilliflowers, q. s. mix for a Cordial Draught.

XXXV. * Aqua Lactis Nephritica, Nephritick Milk-water.
Bate.] Leaves of Althaea, Pellitory of the Wall, Cleavers, A Miv.: Roots of
Althaea xij.: Liquorice iij.: of White Saxifrage iv.: new Milk lb xij.: mix and
distill S. A. Or thus: Whites of Eggs, with the shells, (the yelks being taken
away) No xxiv.: beat them well together, then add Milk warm from the Cow lb
viij.: mix and distill according to Art, with a gentle fire. Dose half a pint
every Morning for fifteen or twenty days; and afterward once or twice a Month,
or for two or three days together about the New and Full Moons.

Salmon] This is chiefly to be used as a Vehicle to convey other Nephritick
Medicines in, after this manner: Of this Water a iv. adviij. Oleum Tartari per
deliquium, iij.: Powder of Winter Cherries j.: mix for a Dose. This Water ought
to be distilled in a Glass Body in B.M. and then you may distill to dryness,
otherwise it is impossible to avoid an Empyreuma.

XXXVI. * Aqua Lactis Pectorali^. A Pectoral Milk-water.
Bate.] Garden Snails bruised lb j.: Hogs Blood lb ii.: Maidenhair,
Ground Ivy, A. M. iij.: Hart's-tongue M. ij.: Liquorice, Aniseeds, A. iij.:
Jujubs, Raisons, A. iv.: Milk warm from the Cow lb xij.: mix and distill, S. A.
It is a good Pulmonick, profitable against the Phthisick, Consumption, Pining,
etc.

Salmon.] In my opinion, if Sal Armoniack vi.: be added and dissolved in the
Milk and Hogs Blood, and then distilled, it will be much more powerful to the
purpose intended: It is good against Coughs, Colds, Obstructions of the Lungs,
Shortness of Breath, and other Diseases of those parts. You may give it from an
Ounce to iij.: especially mix with some Pectoral Syrup; and is used as a
Vehiculum to convey any Pectoral Medicine down the Throat in.

XXXVII. * Aqua Lactis Scorbutica, Milk-water against the Scurvy.
Bate.] Sea Scurvy Grass, greater Hous^eek, A. M. xij.: Watercresses,
Brook-lime, Grass, A M. vi.: Chervil, M. iv.: Milk warm from the Cow lb xij.:
mix and distill S. A.

Salmon] Distill in a Glass Body in B. M. The Title shows the use: Dose iv. or
more at a time, every Morning fasting: but its chief design is to be a Vehicle
to convey other Antiscorbutick Medicines in.

XXXVIII. Aqua Lamii Composita, Water of Dead Nettles Compound.
Bate.] Flowers of the White Archangel M.x.: Comfrey M. viij.: Clary, M. iv.:
Dates No 24.: Nutmegs iij.: Cassia Ligna i.: Wine and Milk, Ana lb vj.: mix and
distill to dryness. It is used in the overflowing or flux of the Whites in
Women; Dose iv. at a time.

Salmon.] If you distill to dryness you must do it in a double Vessel to avoid
burning: and if to every quart of Water you add ij. of the best Catechu in fine
Powder, it will be much more powerful to the end designed: the Water will
extract a good Tincture from the Earth, and make it an excellent Medicine
against the overflowing of the Terms also, or any inward Flux of Blood,
spitting of Blood, pissing of Blood, etc. whereby it will be prevalent against
Consumptions, Phthisicks, Violent Coughs, Catarrhs, or any Flux of Humors: The
Tincture may be given ab j. ad iij. at Night going ^o Bed in a Draught of Ale.

XXXIX. * Aqua Melluminata, Honeyed Water Alumed.
Bate.] Leaves of Oak, Rib-wort, Bramble, Strawberries, Cinquefoil, Bugloss,
Yarrow, Woodbine, Sage, Rosemary, red Roses, A. M. ij.: Chips of Guajacum iv.:
Rhodium ij.: Roots of Bistort i. Sulpher Vive iss.: Vitriol. i. Alum iv. Honey
lb ss. Water lb viij. boil to the consumption of one half, strain, and the
faeces being settled, you may keep it for a year, It is used with Oil of
Sulphur, for to cure Ulcers of the Mouth and Gums: with Flowers of Nitre it is
the best Remedy against Pustules.

Salmon.] Besides what the Author has prescribed it for, it is a most excellent
thing against all manner of Tettars, Ring-worms, Herpes, or other like
breakings out, proceeding from a virulent, salt, and sharp humor. But this you
must observe in the use of it, that the Patient must bathe with it for a
quarter of an hour or more at a time, as hot as they can endure it, else it
will not so effectually answer the intention.

XL. Aqua Mercurialis, Water of Mercury sublimate.
Bate.] Roots of White Lillies ij. Spring Water, q. s. boil and strain, to lb
i. of which add, bitter Almonds blanched ij.: make an Emulsion. In this
dissolve (by grinding in a Glass Mortar) Mercury sublimate ij, and make a most
white Water, S. A. It takes away redness and pustles in the Face* for which it
is a most certain Cure: touch the places often with the Water drop by drop at a
time, and drying it always with a rag.

Salmon.] This Water seems to whiten at first, and without doubt it is of good
use, if wisely used, to take away the defedations of the skin: but it ought to
be used with caution and discretion, and not for a constancy, least the
infinitely small particles of the Mercury should by degrees, in length of time,
insinuate themselves into the flesh, and in process of time corrupt the Bone.
For an ordinary use, and with much less danger, the Water of the Gryphs
Mercurii is much better to be used, which is thus made: Sublimate j. in fine
powder: Water boiling hot lb iv. put the Water upon the Mercury in a white ware
Basin; and dissolve; or dissolve by boiling in an earthen Pipkin: then
precipitate with Oleum Tartari per deliquium: the Mercury being fallen, decant
the Water for use. It is admirable to wash any old Sore or running Ulcer
withal, and to bring it to a speedy healing; and to cleanse and beautify the
skin, and take away the deformities thereof.

XLI. Aqua Odorifera, Sweet or Perfumed Water.
Bate.] Oranges and Lemons, A. No vi. Roots of Florentine Orrice, white
Sanders, Cinnamon, A. ij. Mace, Cloves, A. vi. Flowers of Lavender M iv. of
Roman Camomil and Rosemary, A. M. ij. Leaves of Marjoram, M. ij. Basil M. iij.
Styrax Calamit. iij. Benjamin v. Damask Roses M. xv. round Cyperus ss. Fountain
Water lb xxx. distill all in an Alembick according to Art, drawing off only the
first lb xv. to every pint of which add (tied up in a Nodule) the best Musk gr.
ij.

Salmon.] The Musk ought to be mixed with a third part of a Volatile Sulphur,
such as is in that of Civit, to open its body, adding a few drops of Juice of
Limons, to make it exert its odor more powerfully, thus: Musk gr.ix. Civit.
gr. iij. grind them together on a Stone or in a small Glass Mortar, to which
add Juice of Limons gut iij. or iv. This being put in a Nodule, will sweeten or
perfume twice the quantity of Water that the Musk will do alone: and will make
almost an incredible Odor. The Water it self is used as a Perfume, or it may
be used in place of Rose Water; and is a most excellent Vehicle to make any
Cordial Juleb up withal; for it admirably comforts and recreates the Animal
Spirits.

XLII. * Aqua Omnium Florum, All Flower-water.
Bate.] It is made of Cowsdung gathered in May, adding to it a third of
White Wind. and then distilled. Or thus: Fresh Cows-dung, Snails with their
shells bruised, A. mix and distill in a common Still. This Water is said to be
good against the Gout, running Gout, Rheumatism, Stone, Stoppage of Urine, etc.
being very effectual: Dose iv. at a time.

Salmon.] This is a Water of general tendency, being a Spirit extracted from
the Sulphur of Plants in general: It is not only good against the aforementioned
Diseases, but a most excellent thing against the Scurvy in particular, as also
against the Palsy, and other Distempers of the Nerves, Blood, and Humors.
There was a certain Woman who from the most obscure Fortune set up for a
Doctress, and undertook the Cure of all Diseases with this only Remedy, or
rather the same worse made; and from the state of a Beggar became Mistress of
more than Twenty thousand pounds: This she gave in all Distempers, and against
all Diseases; and so happy and successful she was, that she cured almost all
such who were given over by others, for uncurable, and it was rare that any
thing came under her hands that miscarried; this was her Catholicon, this her
excellent Secret, by which she did such Wonders in the Art of Physic: Fresh
Cow Dung gathered in the morning lb xij. Spring or Riverwater lb xxx.: mix and
digest twenty four hours; let it settle, and then decant the clear brown
Tincture. It is without doubt a good thing, and so much the better, because of
its general tendency, and being constantly used with such an approved success:
by reason it is extracted from Cows-dung, it has a pretty kind of sweet scent,
as if it was perfumed with Musk, or some other odoriferous thing: her usual
proportions and way of giving it was thus: She ordered the Patient to take
about 5 or 6 Ouncesin the Morning fasting, and last at Night going to Bed; and
if the Disease was rebellious or stubborn, as much half an hour, or an hour
before Dinner; and if there was any external affect, to bathe the part two or
three times a day therewith very hot, for a quarter of an hour at a time: By
this only and alone thing and method, she did even almost incredible things.
It Is true, the Medicine is but a mean thing, but not to be despised.

XLIII. Aqua Ophthalmica, Eye-Water.
Bate.] It is made of the Water from Gum Guajacum distilled by Retort in Ashes
mixed with Brick dust, with a moderate Fire; the Oil being separated, and the
Water being rectified, and mixed with white Rose Water, S A. It is a most
excellent Remedy in Diseases of the Eyes.

Salmon.] This is the acid Water of the Gum, which being rectified is to be
mixed with its equal weight or quantity of the Rose Water, or double or tripple
quantity, according as the Patient is less able to endure the pain and
smarting; with which the Eyes are to be washed two, three, or four times a day,
and at Night going to Bed, after washing, a little Virgin-honey is to be put
into them.

XLIV. * Aqua Ophthalmica Sapphirina, The Sapphirine Eye-Water.
Bate.] It is made of Water of Calx Vive lb i. Sal Armoniniack iij. put and
kept in a Copper Basin, till it acquires a Sapphirine color; and then to be
futred for use. It is invented for various Diseases of the Eyes, three or four
drops at a time being put into them: all sorts of Ulcers, Defluxions of Humors,
Rheums, Pustules, Suffusions or Cataracts, etc. are cured herewith.

Salmon.] All the difficulty in this Recipe, is to find out the just proportion
of the Lime to the Water, to make the Water of a just strength, which because
some may be ignorant of, we shall here set down. Quicklime lb iij. put it into
a large Vessel, upon which affuse three Gallons of hot Water gradatim. stirring
the Lime till it is dissolved in the Water: stir it often with a wooden
Spotula, that the Volatile Salt may dissolve and mix with the Water: let it
settle for some hours, then decant the clear, which filter, and keep for the
use aforesaid, close stopped. This is a most incomparable Water for most Diseases
of the Eyes, it cures Ophthalmies, or Blood-shot, Clouds, Films, Pearls, or
what other matter soever, which obstructs or hinders the sight: It cures sores,
ulcerated, rheumy or running Eyes, and has in a short time made those see,
which have for some years been in a manner quite blind: I cannot enough praise
it, but it ought to be esteemed as a Jewel. See the preparation in other
proportions in our Druggist's Shop, lib. 4. chap. 14. sect. 15.

XLV. * Aqua Pectoralis, The Pectoral Water.
Bate.] Roots of Elecampane, of round Birth-wort, A. iij. of our Orrice, or
Flowerde-luce iss. of Florentine Orrice, Parsley, Fennel, Liquorice, A. i.
Green Tobacco, M. iv. Scabiouse, Veronica, Coltsfoot, Hyssop, Horehound,
Maidenhair, Carduus ben. A. M. j. Jujubes, Sebestens, A. No xxx. Figgs, Dates,
A. No xvi. Seeds of Tobacco iij. of Nigella i. of Nettles, of Cresses,
Mustard Seed, Linseed, A. ij. Bay Berries vj. Powder of Guajacum viij. Venice
Turpentine (dissolved in the yolks of Eggs) iiss. White Wind lb xvi. digest
three days, and distill S. A. In the time of the distilling, let Hog-lice
bruised No 60. be tied up in a rag, and hung by a thread in the Receiver. It is
a very powerful thing against Asthma's, Dyspnaea's, Coughs, and tartarous
Diseases of the Lungs and Reins, etc. Dose ij, twice or thrice a day, out of
the Fit.

Salmon.] All the Ingredients are to be gotten green that can be, and then the
whole Matter or Compositum is to be digested a day or two before distillation,
in order to a previous fermentation; which done, you may distill either in BM,
or a Copper Vesica tin'd within, drawing off only lbviij. so will you have a
fine and spiritous Liquor, good for all the Intentions proposed: but if you
draw off to dryness, you will have a double Liquor; 1. An Etherial Oil. 2. A
weak Water; which may be separated and kept apart: but the first way will be
the best, in which the Liquor will be united into one: for otherwise, you must
draw off the Water again, or rectify it, separating the fine Spirit from the
inconsiderable Water: then you must join the Spirit with the Oil, and unite
them by a third distillation; all which is a great deal of trouble. It is an
excellent thing against Stone and Gravel, whether in Reins or Bladder, given as
directed for a Month together. If it be well made and spiritous, you will find
from ss. to i. to be Dose large enough.

XLVI. * Aqua Persicariae composita, Arsmart Water compound.
Bate.] Fresh spotted Arsmart lb iij. Pellitory of the Wall, Purslain,
Bean-cods, A. lb i. bruise them, and add Milk new or hot from the Cow lb viij.
mix and distill S. A. It is a great Arcanum against the Stone in the Reins and
Bladder. Dose iv. twice a day with Honey, for twenty six days together.

Salmon.] You may keep and use this Water as a general Vehicle, to convey all
Nephriticks and Lithontripticks in, it being an excellent thing indeed against
the Stone and Gravel, or any obstruction of mucous slime, or any other Matter
afflicting the Reins and Bladder,: alone it may be given ad vi.

XLVII. * Aqua Picarum composita, Water of Magpies compound.
Bate.] Young Magpies No vi. White Dung of a Peacock lb ss. Misceltoe of the
Oak, Male Peony-roots, A. iv. Fresh Cowslip Flowers lb j. White and Spanish
Wine, A. lb v. infuse and distill, S. A. Dose iv. Morning and Evening, in the
last days before the Full and New Moons. It is an eminent Remedy against the
Epilepsie.

Salmon.] If you distill to dryness it must be in a double Vessel in BM, and
cohobate three or four times: otherwise, if in a Copper Vesica, you must add
White Wind, Water, A. lbiij. more, and then draw off the first five or six
pints. It is good against the Falling Sickness, and almost all Diseases of the
Brain and Nerves, Palsies, etc. and may be used as a general Vehicle to convey
other Antepileptick, Neurotick, and Cephalic Medicines in.

XLVIII. * Aqua Pneumonica, A Water expelling Wind.
Bate.] Leaves of the best Tobacco, outward rind or peel of Oranges, A. vi.
Winters Cinnamon, vi. Aniseeds iss. Spanish Wine lb iss. Spirit of Wine lb i.
digest and distill in a Glass Still. In the Colic, excruciating pains of the
Stomach, want of Appetite, etc. it is an approved Cure. Dose i. spoonful before
eating.

Salmon.] It ought to be distilled in B. M. with great care: it is an excellent
Carminative, and Anti-colick, giving ease in those most intolerable pains,
almost upon the spot. Of this Water a spoonful, Blood red Tincture of Opium,
made with juice of Sevil Oranges, gut. xx. ad xxx. mix for a Dose. Give this in
extremity it will not fail of the desired end.

XLIX. Aqua Prolifica, The Water making fruitful.
Bate.] Seeds of Angelica hull'd, lb iss. Sweet Fennel-seed, Liquorice, A. iv.
Raisons stoned lb j. Leaves of Mugwort, Baum, A. M. iv. Carduus ben.
Pennyroyal, A. M. ij. Seed of Amomum iv. Wine of Milk, A. lb vi. mix and
distill according to Art. Dose iv. (praemissis, praemittendis) with Tincture of
Juniper i, and Syrup of the Juice of Sage two spoonfuls, morning and night (ij.
of the Powder of the Seeds of Hartwort, or Bastard Lovage, mixed with Sugar of
Roses, being given before).

Salmon.] You must distill in B.M. and draw off to dryness. It is given to cure
Barrenness in Women, and make fruitful. It sweetens the Blood, and destroys the
Scorbutic Acidities, which hinder the breeding of good Seed, and being given
at a convenient time, (after the exhibition of the ij. of the Hartwort-seeds)
it is said to provoke the Terms and effecteally cleanse the Womb of its
Impurities, which hinder Generation. Sometimes it is also profitably given
against Hysteric Fits: and may be used as a Vehicle for other things of like
nature.

L. Aqua Regia, The Dissolvent of Gold.
Bate.] It is made of Nitre and Sal Ammoniacum, ana, in a Glass Retort
sufficiently large, placed in Sand, distilling for two days S. A. with degrees
of Fire. It dissolves Gold.

Salmon. This is Basil Valentine's Aqua Regia: but that you might the better
and more conveniently draw off the Spirit, you ought to add Powder or Calx of
Flints, viz. to the Nitre and Sal Armoniack A. lb ij. Powder of Flints lb iij.
and to distill by a red hot tubulated Retort; but the ordinary way is by an Iron
pot, on which is placed an earthen Cover like an Alembick with a Beak, set in a
naked Fire with a large Receiver. This Water dissolves Gold, and after many
Cohobations will reduce it to an Oil, and carry it with it, over the Helm into
the Receiver. Through the manifold Cohobations, the Sol becomes volatilized,
and is made to yield a blood red Tincture in rectified Spirit of Wine, if you
proceed Philosophically; which is the highest of Cordials, and may be given
some drops at a time, in a Glass of Sack, or other Wine against Faintings,
Fits, Swoonings, Palpitation of the Heart, Trembling, Plague, Pestilential
Fevers, Measles, Smallpox, etc.

LI. Aqua Salivalis, The Salivating, or Spitting Water.
Bate.] Mercury sublimate, Venice Treacle, Zedoary, Cinnamon, A. ij. Saffron ss.
Fountain Water lb iss. mix, and infuse some days.

Salmon.] The intention of this Water is to salivate with, in order to the cure
of the Lues Venerea, or other Relics of that filthy Disease: you may give
one, two, or three spoonfuls at a time, (according as the strength and
condition of your Patient may be) and so to diminish or increase the Dose (as
you find it inclines your Patient to Vomit or not Vomit) a spoonful at a time,
continuing the same with an increase of the Dose, till you find the Gums to
begin to swell, and the Mouth to be sore: when you see the Flux to arise, you
may desist the Exhibition, till you see with what force and vigor it comes on;
if freely and briskly, give no more; but if dull and slow, you must yet
continue it a Dose or two, or more, till you see it is likely to effect what
you desire; which when done, and the Salivation becomes laudable, you must let
it continue so long as your reason, and necessity of your Patient may require,
following the methodical Rules of a Salivation. The exact Dose, in order to a
Salivation cannot be prescribed, that you must find out by your Practice and
continual Experience; for that the Constitutions of Bodies do so vastly differ;
the continual giving of one or two spoonfuls at a time, will make some Persons
flux; while others shall take three, four, or five, and it shall do almost
nothing at all, scarcely make their Gums sore or swell; therefore in this thing
you ought to be guided according to the Nature, Strength, and Constitution of
the Sick. You may exhibit it in a Decoction of Sarsaparilla, or thin
Water Gruel, or other convenient Vehicle, which is free from any thing of
sharpness, nor is apt to grow sharp in the Stomach after it is taken: for
Liquors which are acid, or apt to turn acid in the Stomach, may provoke the
Mercury to a strange kind of Violence; which by the softness, and sweetness of
the Vehicle, would have otherwise been kind and mild enough. Some give this
Medicine Dietetically, and every day for a Month or two together, and with good
success: but that must be after you have observed what Dose may be given
without inclining the Gums to swell, which a prudent Man will soon be informed
of. The following Water is a good Vehicle for the Exhibition of it in.

LII. Aqua Sarsae Composita, Compound Water of Sarsaparilla.
Bate.] Sarsaparilla, choice China, A. xij. Lignum Guajacum, lb ij. Bark of the
same, Sassafras, A. lb iv. White Sanders, Coriander-seed, A. iss. Liquorice vj.
White Wind lb xxiv. Barley-water lb xvj. digest for some time, then draw off
per Vesicam lb xxiv. what remains strain out, and evaporate in Balneo Mar. to
the Consistence of an Extract, S. A.

Salmon.] This Water is an Antidote against the French Disease, and all its
Concomitants and Symptoms, and may be given dieterically every day, in order to
the cure of that Disease, from iv. ad vi. It is good also against Surfeits, the
Scurvy, Dropsy and Gout, for that it strengthens the Tone of the Stomach, and
the whole Nervous System, sweetens the Blood, taking away all its sharpness and
acidities. It is also a good Vehicle to convey the former Medicine in, whether
you intend it as a Flux, or to use it only as a Diet. The Extract may be given
a j. ad ij. or more, in some of the same Water, for the same purposes and
intentions, chiefly at Night going to Bed, and so to sweat upon it.

LIII. * Aqua Senelorum Composita, Water of Haws Compound.
Bate.] Ripe Haws, freed from their stalks, two Gallons: bruise them well, and
add to them, Roots of Althaea, Liquorice, A. viij. of Rest-harrow iij. Leaves
of Parietary, Winter Cherries, A. xij. Mint, M. ij. Seeds of common Daucus iv.
of Coriander ij. Milk warm from the Cow lb xij. mix and distill, S. A. Dose iv.
sweetened with Sir. de Althaea, etc. It is an excellent thing against the Stone.

Salmon.] It ought to be distilled in M.B. to dryness, and if it was several
times cohobated, it would be yet better. Of this Water from iv. ad vj. Spirit
of sweet Fennel-seeds vj. Powder of Winter Cherries j. mix for a Dose against
the Stone, Gravel, Heats, Pain, and all Obstructions of Urine. Or thus: Of this
Water ad vj. Tincture of Salt of Tartar ij. ad iij. Salt of Broom j. Powder of
Winter Cherries gr. xvj. mix for a Dose for the same purpose. Of this Water iv.
Powers of Juniper Berries ij. Powder of Sows j. mix for a Dose.

LIVE. Aqua Siphylica, The Pocky Water, or Water against the French Pox.
Bate.] Chips of Guajacum lb iss. digest them in new well wrought Beer or Ale
lb ij. digest in Ashes for three days, and distill to dryness. Dose i. in a fit
Vehicle against the French Pox.

Salmon.] You must distill it in a Glass Retort in Sand or Ashes to dryness, so
will you have an acid Spirit of Guajacum joined with the Spirit of the Beer or
Ale, which will be profitable against the Lues, and its retaining Symptoms
given to i. or more, in iv. of the Aqua Sarsaecomposita, aforegoing.

LV. Aqua Stimmios Sulphurata, The Sulphurated Water: or Gass of Antimony and
Nitre.
Bate.] It is made of Antimony, Nitre, and Sulphur, ana. distilled into a
Liquor, filtrated, and rectified according to Art. Dose so much as may give the
Liquor a convenient acidity. It opens Obstructions, and is a noble Diuretic
and Diaphoretick.

Salmon.] It ought to be distilled in a tubulated Retort, into a very large
Glass Receiver, having Water in it, so will the Volatile Spirits of the
Ingredients impregnate the Water with such a Gass or Volatility, that it will
be as uneasy to be smelt to, as Spirit, or Volatile Sal Ammoniack, and with a
very pleasing acidity. If you distill in a tubulated Retort, into Water, etc.
you must put in the Ingredients being in Powder by spoonfuls into the Retort,
being red hot, and then immediately to stop the Pipe, so will the matter be
presently calcined, and the Receiver filled with cloudy Vapors, which mixing
with the Water, the Receiver will presently be clear again, then put in more of
your Powder, repeating this work so long as it lasts. Before you begin your
Distillation, be sure that the neck of the Retort be well luted into the
Receiver lest the fumes should come forth and do you a mischief. You ought not
to filter it, because of its volatility, for that will much impair the
Medicine. In this preparation the Niter opens the Body of the Antimony, and the
Sulphur fixes its Emetick quality. Without the help of the Nitre the Spirit
would difficultly come forth, for closing the Tube of the Retort, the Sulphur
would be stifled; but the Nitre being fixed by it, ceases not to burn till all
is consumed. It is an Ens primum of the three matters conjoined, is a famous
Antiscorbutick, and Antiarthritick: it is also a Preservative against the
Plague or Pestilence, Measles, Smallpox, or any other malign Fever,
extinguishing the praeternatural heat upon the spot, purifying the Blood, and
all the other Juyces: It opens all Obstructions whatsoever in the Stomach,
Liver, Spleen, Gall, Mesentery, Womb, Hypochonders, Bowels, and other organick
parts, provokes the Terms, and cures the Greensickness and Cholick: but all
these things it does more powerfully, if it be impregnated with the Crystals or
Salt of Mars, or a Tincture be made therewith, of the Filings of Iron; you have
then a Medicine great indeed, with which you may be certain to do wonders.

LVI. Aqua Styptica, The Styptick Water.
Bate.] Collothar, burnt Alum, White Sugar Candy, A. j. boys Urine, Red
Rose Water A. i. Plantane Water iv. digest, filter, and keep it for use.

Salmon.] It is a most excellent Styptick, and stops bleeding in any part,
being applied with stuphs, or the like, for some time. This following possibly
may not be inferior to any: Hungarian Vitriol, Roch Alum, A. lb ss. Phlegm of
Vitriol, lb iv. boil to the dissolution: being cold, filtrate it, and separate
it from the Crystals; and to every pound of the Water, add Oil of Vitriol j.
mix and keep it for use. It has the same Virtues with the former, but much more
powerful.

LVII. Stypticum Regis, The Royal Styptick of King Charles II.
Bate.] To Vitriol dissolved, filtrated, precipitated with Spirit of Vinegar,
edulcated and dried, affuse Oil of Vitriol, and distill by a Retort to dryness.
The Caput Mortuum digest with Spirit of Wine, filter warm, and abstract:
dissolve the Salt remaining in the bottom, with four times its weight of Water,
by digestion, and the Styptick is done. Its use is both internal and external;
Dose gut. 10.20, etc. in all sorts of Haemorrhagies, or Bleedings.

Salmon.] The first part of the Prescript, is only an artificial Method,
teaching you how to make Spirit of Vitriol, which is possibly better than the
ordinary method: the whole in short is this: You must first extract a Salt out
of the Caput Mortuum of Vitriol, with Spirit of Wine: this Salt you must
dissolve in four times its weight of fair Water, and your Styptick is made.
This is the great Styptick which made such a noise in the World, and for the
knowledge of which K. Charles II. gave a vast Sum of Money. It is not only a
great Styptick, as to the stopping of violent Hemorrhagies, but a most
excellent Vulnerary, possibly one of the best yet known in the World. In
spittings of Blood, Bloody Fluxes, (Universals being premised) violent Fluxes
of the Terms, pissing Blood, it is a noble Arcanum, and upon an exigency worth
a whole Apothecaries Shop.

LVIII. * Aqua Tussilaginis Composita, Water of Coltsfoot compound.
Bate.] Herb Gerrard, Hyssop, A. viij. Flowers of Coltsfoot xxiv. Liquorice
iv. Aniseeds iij. Raisons lb j. strong Beer lb xij. mix and distill S. A. It
prevails against a Pleurisy, Empyema, or Inflammation of the Lungs, etc.

Salmon.] You may distill in a Copper Vesica, with a gentle Fire, and draw of
eight pounds, or in a Glass Body in BM. and distill to dryness: but the first
will be the stronger, as having less of Phlegm in it. It is indeed an excellent
thing against most Distempers of the Breast and Lungs, where there is any
stoppage, shortness of breath, difficulty of breathing, pain, stitch, swelling
of the Pleura, or the like. Dose ab ss. ad i. in any fit Vehicle: Or you may
give it thus: Of this Water j. Spirit of Sal Armoniack, or of Hartshorn gut.
xxx. Black-Cherry-Water iij. White Sugar Candy in fine Powder ij. mix for a
Dose.

LIX. * Aqua Venustatis, The Beautifying Water.
Bate.] Mint Water lb j. fine common Salt iss. boil and scum it. It is to wash
the Face with after the Smallpox; it also takes away Scurf and Itch.

Salmon.] It is an excellent sort of Salt Brine, which may be useful in the
case prescribed; but it is of known efficacy being used almost scalding hot,
against Kibes in the Feet and Toes, not broken, which the Vulgar call
Bloody-falls.

LX. Aqua Vermifuga, A Water killing Worms.
Bate.] Crude Mercury well cleansed i. Water of Grass and Purslane, A. iv.
digest two hours, often and strongly stirring of it; afterward decanting the
Water, straining it, and leaving the Mercury in the Vessel. It is given three
spoonfuls at a time, thrice a day.

Salmon.] The better way is to put Mercury viij. with any proper Water lbiij.
or more; into a large Glass, and being close stopped, to shake it for three or
four hours together; then to digest it in a gentle heat for a week, more or
less, or otherwise to boil it for two or three hours, by which means the Water
will be better impregnated. It is a known remedy for killing Worms of all
sorts; and may be given with all the safety imaginable.

LXI. Aqua Vulneraria; The Wound-water: Sir Ken. Digby.
Bate.] Of the best Vitriol ss. pure Nitre ij. put upon it Fountain Water six
Gallons, digest and let it stand still for forty eight hours: then with a
Siphon, (without troubling the subsiding matter) draw off the Water. Dose half
a pint or a pint, twice or thrice a day. It immediately and effectually cures
Wounds or Ulcers.

Salmon.] The Nitre is chiefly put in, to cause an exquisite subsidence of the
dissolved matter, that the Water might be perfectly clear. It is doubtless an
excellent thing for the curing of any Wound or Ulcer, whether inward or
outward, in what part of the Body soever. And since Vitriol (in the
Sympathetick Powder) has such a mighty power and force, that it is able to cure
Wounds at a distance; yea, at a very great distance; it is much more
reasonable, being taken into the Body, and received into the mass of Blood, and
thereby into all the parts of the whole Body, that it should perform the same
thing more powerfully, and with more singular advantages. This Water drunk for
some Months together, is said perfectly to cure the Leprosy, Scurf, Morphew,
and such like defedations of the skin.

LXII. Aqua Absinthii Composita, Wormwood Water Compound.
] The outward fresh rinds of Lemons lb iss. Orange-peels lb j. Tops of dried
Wormwood, Winters Cinnamon, A. lb ss. Flowers of Camomil iv. Lesser Cardamoms
not husked, Cloves, Cubebs, Camels Hay, A. i. Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Caraways, A.
ij. Spirit of Wine lb xij. Spring Water (or Wormwood Water draw off a second
time from the faeces) gal. ivss. digest for three days, then distill in B. M. to
dryness.

Salmon.] It is an excellent Stomach-water, and a good Cordial, prevalent
against Faintings and Swooning Fits, Cholick, Wind in the Bowels, and such
like. It is also a specific against the Scurvy, very much sweetning the Blood;
and an admirable Surfeit-water, being given to j. or more, either alone, or in
any proper Vehicle.

LXIII. Aqua Alexiteria, The Water resisting Poison.
] Juniper Berries lb iij, Zedoary, Myrrh, Seeds of Angelica, A. ix. Dittany of
Creet. Virginia Snake-root, A. vj. Saffron iss. Spirit of Wine gall. iiss. Aqua
Proalexiteria gall. ivss. infuse warm for three days, then distill in B.M. to
dryness. A second Alexiterick Water is made by affusing simple Water upon the
faeces, and distilling it; and afterward mixing it with an equal part of the
Aqua Alexiteria.

Salmon.] It is profitable against the Plague, Measles, Smallpox, and all
manner of malign and pestilential Fevers, the Bitings of Serpents, ^ad Dogs,
and other vene^ous Creatures; and may ^e given either alone to j, or ij, or
mixed with any conve^ient Vehicle. It prevails also against Faintings,
Swoon^ngs, or any other Distemper or Sickness of the Stomach and Heart. If six
good Lemons sliced be added to the Composition, the Water will be of almost
double worth; for the reasons we formerly expressed, at Sect. 24. aforegoing.

LXIV. Aqua Chamaemeli composita, Camomil Water compound.
Tops of Wormwood viij. Flowers of Camomil, Nutmegs, A. lb j. Spirit of Wine a
Gallon: simple distilled Camomil Water, (or fair Water) Gal. 6. infuse for
three days, then distill in B. M. to dryness.

Salmon.] Being distilled according to this Prescript, the Water will be very
low and small, and the Oil of both the Camomil Flowers and Nutmegs will swim a
top, which ought to be separated for other uses; and the Water kept for a
Cephalic, Stomatick, Cardiack, and Nephritick Vehicle: But if you would distill
so, as to have the oily parts to be joined with the spirituous; you must put
only Spirit of Wine in a fourfold quantity, which you may in B. M. draw off to
dryness, cohobating three or four times. Or you may distill in a Copper Vesica,
adding Water Gall. i. and drawing off to dryness with a very gentle heat, which
you may cohobate as before, three, four, or five several times, drawing off in
the last distillation only the complete quantity of the Spirit of Wine: In
every distillation or cohobation, you will have more or less of the Oil to
arise, which you must after every cohobation separate and keep by itself:
lastly having separated the pure high rectified fine Spirit from its phlegmy
parts, you are to join the Volatile Oil, (gathered upon each distillation and
cohobation) with the said Spirits, mix, and distill them together, so will they
be united, and become one subtle, volatile, spirituous and congenerous
Medicine, having a thousand times more virtue and power than that produced by
the Prescript. It is a great Cephalic and Cordial. Dose ij.

LXV. Aqua Cochleariae composita, Scurvy Grass Water compound.
Garden Scury-grass lb xxx. Horse-Radish-roots cut into thin slices lb vj. fair
Water Gall. iij. infuse warm for twenty four hours: then draw off three Gallons
of Water.

Salmon.] This ought to have a different distillation from that of Aromaticks,
for as Scurvy Grass, etc. abounds with more volatile Spirits, and more volatile
Salts, so it admits of less fermentation; and therefore ought to have a proper
Menstruum, (stronger than common Water) which may attract, dissolve, and join
with the essential parts of the Ingredients and carry them along with it in
distillation, without changing their natures and virtues; for this purpose you
may use strong March Beer, clear and well made Rhenish Wine, Cider, Perry,
Mead, as also Spirit of Wine, etc. as proper Menstruums. Of the Ingredients as
much as you please, which shred small, put them into a Copper Vesica tin'd
within, and affuse thereon of some of the former Liquors so much as may
overtop the Ingredients four of five Inches, then distill twenty four hours,
and distill through a Serpentine or Worm, with a very gentle Fire, that the
spirituous and volatile parts may ascend, continuing the distillation till the
falling drops are almost insipid: to this Water put the same quantities of the
Ingredients again in like manner, and its equal weight of Wine, digest and
distill again as aforesaid: the distillation being over, put in again fresh
Herbs, pouring in upon them the last distilled Liquor, which digest and distill
as aforesaid, repeating this distillation so long, till the Spirit is strong
enough: this done, rectify the Spirit in B. M. keeping that which is repleat
with Sulphur and Volatile Salt, and ascends first, apart by its self: and the
remaining spirituous Water by itself, continuing the distillation till the
drops are almost insipid. All these Liquors are essentially good against the
Scurvy, Dropsy, and Gout, as also against the Cholick, Rheumatisms, Surfeits,
and other like general Distempers, which will hardly admit of any singular name
or denomination: Dose of the Water in the Prescript i. or more, in a Glass of
Ale, or other proper Vehide. But of the sulphurous Spirit abounding with
Volatile Salt a gut.xx. ad 40. in Ale or Wine as aforesaid: and of ^he
spirituous Water following it j. ad ij. continuing their use for some weeks.

LXVI. Aqua Cordialis, The Cordial Water.

The outward rind of Lemons fresh, iv. of Oranges iij. Cinnamon ij. Nutmegs,
Mace, Calamus Aromaticus, Coriander, A. i. Cubebs vj. Cloves, Seeds of Carduus
ben. Cardamoms unhuskt, A. ss. Saffron ij. Spirit of Wine lb vj. Fountain Water
lb xij. infuse and distill according to Art.

Salmon.] You ought to distill in B. M. to dryness, and to cohobate two or three
times, drawing off the last time only lbxij. of the Water: Or you may distill in
a Copper Vesica, drawing about lbx. which you must dulcifie (if you would make
it pleasant to the taste) with a small quantity of Syrup of Damask Rose Water,
made with double refined Sugar in the heat of a Bath. Dose from j. to ^ij.
either alone, or in any proper Vehicle, against Faintings, Swoonings,
Palpitations, sickness of the Heart of and Stomach, Plague, Pestilence, and all
manner of malign Fevers, in which last cases it ought to be given in some
cooling Vehicle, with three or four drops of Spirit of Sulphur in it.

LXVII. Aqua Lenitiva, The Lenitive, or Loosening Water.

Figs, Althaea Roots, A. lb ij. Liquorice, Florentine Orrice, A. lb j. Flowers
of Elder dried iij. infuse in Spring or Fountain Water, Gal. v. and add Styrax
Calamita iij. Nutmegs ij. Aniseeds, Sweet Fennel-seeds, A. ss. infused in
Spirit of Wine lb vj. Oil of bitter Almonds vj. mix, digest and distill in an
Alembick according to Art.

Salmon.] It opens Obstructions of the Bowels, and other Viscera, strengthens
the Tone of the Stomach and other parts, and may be given ab iij. ad vj. being
designed, as I suppose, only for a Vehicle to convey any Lenitive Purge in,
down into the Body. Of itself it purges not, nor can it any ways loosen the
Belly: Nor do I see for what reason the Oil of Almonds is added, for it is
scarcely possible to be brought over the Helm in an Alembick; which yet, if it
could be done, will be but the same thing it was before, and not in the least
mix with the Water, but only swim upon it.

LXVIII. Aqua Pectoralis, The Pectoral Water.

] Figs lb vj. Roots of Elecampane, Liquorice, A lb iij. Florentine Orrice lb
iss. Anniseeds, sweet Fennel-seeds, A i. Spirit of Wine gal. iiss. Aquae
Propectoralis, (or Fountain Water mixed in equal parts, with the said Aq.
Propectoralis) gal. iv. ss. infuse warm for three days, then distill to dryness.

Salmon.] Let it be distilled in B. M. to avoid an Empyreuma: Dose j. at a
time, more or less, in any Cough, Cold, Soreness of the Breast and Stomach,
shortness of Breath, difficulty of Breathing, or any obstruction of the Lungs:
your best way of exhibiting of it, will be thus: Of this Water i. Syrup of
Poppies ss. Spirit of Sal Armoniack, gut. xvj. mix for a Dose. Which may be
repeated twice or thrice a day.

LXIX. Aqua Propectoralis, The Water for making the Pectoral Water with.

] Oak of Jerusalem, Coltsfoot, Ground Ivy, A. lb vj. Hore-hound, Pennyroyal,
Hyssop, Rosemary, A. lb iij. Fountain Water twelve gallons, infuse warm for
iij. days, and then distill in an Alembick, S. A.

Salmon.] Being a little fermented in that three days with Sugar or Melossos,
added in a fit quantity, viz. lbj. to a Gallon of Water, you will have a small
Spirit, or rather Water, fit for that purpose it is designed for; and may serve
for Vehicle for other Medicines: it is best distilled in B. M. to dryness.

LXX. Aqua Proalexiteria, The Water for making the Alexiterick Waters with.

] Green Walnuts lb xxxv. or in number 400. fresh Roots of the Butterburr lb
xij. of Masterwort lb iv. of Valerian, Elecampane, Flowers fresh gathered of
Marigolds, Leaves of Scordium, Bawm, Centory the less, A. lb vj. Wormwood, Rue,
A. lb ss. fair Water, gal. xviij. infuse warm for three days, then distal in an
Alembick with its Worm, till you have drawn forth all the virtue, but having a
care to avoid burning: you may draw off from gall. xij. to xv.

Salmon.] It will be best in this as in the former, to add to every gallon of
Water lbss. of course Sugar or Melossos, to cause a fermentation, and then in
B. M. with a Worm to distill to dryness; otherwise in an Alembick, you must not
draw off above gal. xiv. of the Water. Besides the purpose for which it is
designed, which is the making of the Aqua Alexiteria aforegoing, it may
indifferently serve for a Vehicle to convey any Cordial Medicine, or
Antifebritick in.

CHAP. II. Of SPIRITS.
I. Spiritus Alkermes, Spirit of Alkermes.
Bate.] SPirits of Cinnamon, of Citrons, of black Cherries, of Rosemary Flowers,
A. iv. Juice of Kermes ij. mix them very well, filtrate through brown paper,
and add of the best white Sugar Candy ij. Leaves of Gold No 10. mix them S. A.
For the Rich some add the Spirit of Ambergriese ij. It discusses sharp Vapors,
recreates the Spirits Natural, Vital, and Animal; gives relief and comfort to
Women in Labor.

Salmon.] This is properly a mixture or compound made of several choice things,
where ^y it becomes a great Cepha^ick, Neurotick, and Cardiack; and may be
given in all cases where there is any Deliquium Animi, as Faintings and
Swoonings, Sickness at Heart and Stomach; and indeed in almost every kind of
weakness; as also in Palsies, Tremblings, Numbness, feebleness of the Joints,
weakness of the Sight, and in most of the Illnesses and Distempers of Old Age,
for that it comforts, warms, and cherishes their chilled and unactive Juyces,
etc. Dose ss. either alone, or in any proper Cordial Water. I know but one
fault in this Composition, which is its dearness, it being only fit for the
more wealthy sort of People, who are able to pay a good price for a Cordial
Draught.

II. Spiritus Aluminis, Spirit of Alum.
Bate.] It is distilled from burnt Alum by a Retort, in all respects, as you
distill Oil of Vitriol. Dose gut. 4, 5, 6, etc.

Salmon.] 1. It is Roch Alum which you are to use, of which you may take lbvj.
put it into a very large Glass or Earthen Body, fit to it a Head with its
Recipient, and distill in Sand till no more moisture will arise; this is the
Phlegm of the Alum. 2. This done, break the Body, take out the white Mass and
powder it, which put into an earthen Retort half empty, place it in a
Reverberatory Furnace, luting to it a large Receiver; make a gentle Fire for
the first three hours, to warm the Retort as it were, then increase it every
hour to the utmost violence, so will the Spirits come forth, and fill the
Receiver with white Clouds: continue the Fire at this height for three days and
nights together, then let the Vessels cool: so will you have an Acid Spirit,
which by rectifying in a Glass Alembick in Sand, you may make pure and clear.
3. At the bottom of the Retort is a white and very light Calx, very much
rarefied, which is called burnt or calcined Alum. 4. The Phlegm of Alum is used
against Diseases of the Eyes, for Quinsies, to cleanse Wounds and Ulcers, and
to heal them: more especially if in six Ounces thereof, you dissolve i. of the
crude Roch Alum. 5. The Acid Spirit. It is scarcely so pleasant as that of
Vitriol and Sulphur, but it is ordinarily used in Juleps for Continual and
Continent Fevers, as also in Tertian Agues, and has indeed nearly all the
Virtues of the Oils, or Spirits of Vitriol or Sulphur: Dose is from four to
eight drops. It is likewise used in the cure of the Aphthae or Thrush, i. e.
little Cankers in the Mouths, for the most part of Children. This Spirit thus
distilled with a strong Fire for three days together, does not give place
neither in strength nor quantity to that of Vitriol, notwithstanding that most
Authors affirm the contrary, saying, that it yields but little Acid. 6. The
white light Calx, after the last distillation, which we call burnt Alum, is
used to eat fleshy excrescences, or proud flesh, etc. but that which remained
before, after the first distillation, or when the Phlegm of the Alum was only
drawn off, is much more Escarcotick than the latter, which has lost its acid
Spirits. 7. In the first distillation you must fill the Retort not above half
full, because it is apt to swell much, and requires a great deal of room; and
the Phlegm is all come off, when there distills no more, for the acid Spirits
being very weighty, require a much greater heat than that of Sand to raise
them. 8. Lastly, There is no such thing as an Acrimonious Salt of Alum, to be
distinguished from its Acid Salt; for that there is nothing Acrimonious, or
purely Corrosive in this Mineral, which will not turn into an Acid Spirit,
being strongly forced by the Fire, which he that shall take the pains actually
to distill it, shall find the Mechanical demonstration of.

III. Spiritus Aluminis dulcis, Sweet Spirit of Alum.
Bate.] It is made by oftentimes rectifying the aforegogoing Spirit of Alum,
with rectified Spirit of Wine so long, till the Spirit comes over sweet. It is
Diuretic, expels the Stone, opens Obstructions, and abates the heat in Fevers.
Dose gut. 4.5. etc. at a time.

Salmon.] You must mix equal parts of Spirit of Alum, and Spirit of Wine
together, and so draw them off, till they grow sweet: this mixture also will
grow sweet, merely by digestion in a gentle heat, in length of time, whereby it
appears, that this Spirit, (like as unripe and sour Fruit, grows ripe and sweet
by length of time, and heat of the Sun, through the power of its internal heat
conjoined); in like manner ripens and looses its Acidity, by virtue of the
internal heat of the Spirit of Wine, conjoined with it, and stirred up by the
external heat of a Bath, or Sand. It opens also Obstructions in the Reins and
Bladder, and dissolves whatever is lodged there, causing Obstructions. It opens
also Obstructions of Liver and Spleen, prevails against the Scurvy, or a
Scorbutic habit of Body; cures Continent and Continual Fevers; cures
Inflammations; and heals sore Throats and Mouths. Dose a gut. v. ad xx.
plus-minus.

IV. * Spiritus Ambrae, Spirit of Ambergrise.
Bate.] Ambergrise ss. Muck gr. xv: Sugar Candy j. mix and make a Powder; upon
which affuse of the best rectified Spirit of Wine iv. digest (in a Vessel
hermetically sealed) in Horse-dung, for twenty or thirty Days; then filter for
use. Dose gut vj. in any Swooning or Fainting of the Spirits.

Salmon.] For want of the convenience of Horse-dung, you may use either a Bath,
or a genle heat in Sand, of equal strength with the Horsedung. The Musk and
Ambergrise will be almost. all dissolved in the Spirit of Wine, and make a
Tincture of a high red color: for Ambergrise being a kind of Bitumen, and Musk
being of an oily nature, they will easily dissolve in the Spirit of Wine, and
communicate to it their Tincture. If a few grains of Civet be added to the
Composition, the Tincture will be yet richer; for that the Bodies of the Musk
and Amber will be thereby more admirably opened, it being a more excellent and
volatile Sulphur. Ambergrise ss. Musk gr. 15. Civit gr. ix. burnt Bones in fine
Powder j. grind altogether in a Glass Mortar, then add Juice of Lemons, gut.
10. Spirit or Oil of Damask Roses j. mix well, and put it into a Glass Mattress,
upon which affuse of the Alcohol of Spirit of Wine iv. seal up hermetically,
and digest till the Tincture is deep. Where note, That the Civet and Spirit of
Roses are added, the better to open the Bodies of the other Perfumes; and the
Powder of Burnt Bones serve only to separate the Particles of the Ingredients
the better one from another, and that they may be the easier poudered; whereby,
when the Spirit of Wine is put upon them, it will the more admirably penetrate
their Substance, and extract their Tincture. Dose a gut. vj. ad xij. in any
convenient Cordial Vehicle.

V. * Spiritus Benzoini, Spirit of Benjamin.
Bate.] Of the white parts of the best Benjamin ij. best rectified Spirit of
Wine xvj. let them remain together in a cold place, often shaking or stirring
the Vessel, till the Rosin is dissolved, then filter, and keep it for use. If
you precipitate with Aqua Lactis, and then dry it, you will have Magistery of
Benjamin. Dose of the Spirit a j. ad iij. of the Magistery a gr. 10. ad 20. It
has the Virtues of the Benjamin.

Salmon.] Benjamin, or Assa Dulcis, is a Resin of a Tree whose Name is yet
unknown to us, which is very common in Samaria, and other Countries adjacent
thereto. That which has white Spots in it is called Amygdaloides. 2. This
Medicine which the Author calls a Spirit, is rather a Tincture, for that it is
a dissolution of the Sulphurous parts of the Gum in the Spirit of Wine. 3.
Inwardly taken it strengthens the Stomach, and is good against Asthma's and
other Obstructions of the Lungs; it also mightily sweetens the Blood, and is
prevalent against Scorbutic, Arthritick, and Pocky Symptoms; and an excellent
thing against the Colic. The Magistery has the same Virtues, but is not full
out so powerful. 4. Outwardly it is used to take spots out of the Face, and
remove the defilements of the skin; a dram of it being put into four ounces of
Water, whitens it like Milk, which serves for a Wash, and is called by some
Virgins Milk. 5. This white color in the Water, results from the weakening of
the Tincture with the Water, whereby the Spirit quits what it held, to the
Water, the particles of which make the Water white. 6. If this Water be
suffered to stand still, those particles will settle to the bottom, which are
the Magistry, and the Water will become again clear. 7. That if a sixth part of
Styrax Calamita be added, the Odor will yet transcend.

VI. * Spiritus Camphorae, Spirit of Camphir.
Bate.] It is made by dissolving Camphir j. in the best rectified Spirit of
Wine viij. S. A. Dose ss. before the Fit of a Tertian Ague. It is an admirable
Diaphoretick in malign Fevers; it is also a Noble Anodyn, gives ease in the
pains of the Teeth, etc.

Salmon.] It is profitable against all Arthritick pains whatsoever, and a
singular thing against the Colic, let the pain be never so extreme, giving
ease in less than an hours time. Give it in a Glass of Canary; having another
Glass ready to drink immediately after it; for the present heat of the Medicine
(which yet is without danger) is such, that the Patient will think he has
swallowed down so much Fire; nor will incredulous People be satisfied till the
heat is over. This precious Medicine is above an ordinary Commendation.

VII. Spiritus Cardiacus magnus; seu Flos Cordialium, nec-non Cardiacum Magnum,
The Great Cardiack Spirit, or Flower of Cordials, etc.
Bate.] Dried Flowers of Rosemary, Marigolds, Clovegilliflowers, Carnations,
Borrage, Bugloss, Red and Damask Roses, Rosa Solis, Violets, Elder, Betony,
Oranges, Jesamine, A. j. Saffron iv. dried Leaves of Carduus ben. Scordium,
Angelica, Bawm, Mint, sweet Marjoram, Valerian, A. vj. Roots of Tormentil,
Zedoary, round Birthwort, Avens, A. ss. Gentian ij. Seeds of Basil,
Citron-peels, yellow Sanders, Juniper Berries, Kermes, Cardamoms, A. ss. Cubebs
iij. Sassafras bark, Wood of Aloes, A. j. brusing these things which are to be
bruised, add Spirit of Wine tb xxx. and after a convenient digestion, draw off
by B. M. tb xx. of Water, which keep for use under the Title of Flos
Cordialium: The remainder strain out by pressing, and by another distillation
reduce the Magma at bottom to the consistency of Honey: to every Ounce of which
mix perfectly, white Sugarcandy in fine Powder ij. Juice of Kermes j. Tincture
of Coral vj. Pearls prepared ss. Terra Sigillata ij. Bezoar Animale, Bezoar
Oriental, A. j. Ambergriese ij. Musk ss. Leaves of Gold, No xx. mix S. A. and
make Cardiacum Magnum, or The Great Cordial.

Salmon.] This rightly made, is a great Cordial, both the Spirit and the
Extract, and may be given in all malignant Fevers, Plague, Pestilence,
Smallpox, Measses, Faintings, Swoonings, Palpitation of the Heart, Melancholy,
and the like: the Spirit being dulcified, may be given in any Cordial Water a
ij. ad ss. or more: the Extract a ss. ad ij. or more, drinking a small Cordial
Draught after it, and this either at Night going to Bed, or in the Morning
fasting, or when any Paroxysm is feared, or approaches. It is a long tedious
Recipe, which requires a great deal of trouble in making of it; and will hardly
countervail the labor and charge, considering that multitudes of full as good
Medicines of less perplexed Preparations, and far less Price, are always to be
had, and almost everywhere at hand.

VIII. * Spiritus Cerasorum nigrorum, Spirit of Black Cherries.
Bate.] It is made of Black Cherries with their stones bruised and broken, and
fermented, then distilled in an Alembick, and rectified in B.M. It is
Cephalic, Diuretic, Hysteric, and Antepileptick; it expels Wind, and is good
against Convulsions. Dose ij. ad j, etc.

Salmon.] You may ferment them with Leven, or Yest; but Melossos or Sugar is
better, for that they add to, and exalt the Spirit. It may be given to elder
Persons ab j. ad ij. either alone, being dulcified, or compounded thus: Of this
Spirit i. Volatile Spirit of Hungarian Vitriol, gut. 20. Peony Water simple ij.
mix for a Dose, against the Falling Sickness, then which there is not many
things more powerful in the World.

IX. * Spiritus Cochleariae, Spirit of Scurvy Grass.
Bate.] It is made of Garden Scurvy Grass in the Flower, fermented, or not
fermented, then distilling in an Alembick with its Worm: that which first comes
forth save for Spirit, by itself. It is also prepared after this manner: Of the
best Spirit of Wine tbxxiv. fresh Garden Scurvygrass while in flowering, so
much as may fill the Spirit: digest twelve hours, and then distill the one half.
With this Spirit, and the Resin of Scammony, or Jallap (extracting the
Tincture, and filtrating) you may prepare Spiritum Cochleariae Purgantem, The
Purging Spirit of Scurvy Grass. It is Splenetick and Diaphoretick, makes fixed
and crude Humors volatile, and resists putrefaction. It is profitable in
Hypochondriack and Tartarous Diseases, chiefly against the Scurvy. Dose 20, or
30 drops or more, in any proper Liquor.

Salmon.] I have already in a manner showed you how to make Spirit of
Scurvy Grass, in Chap. I. Sect. 65. aforegoing, which you may compare with the
Prescript here laid down, taking which you like best. 2. But some make it thus:
Fresh and large Garden Scurvy Grass when in the Flower, q. v. bruise well in a
Mortar, then put it into a wooden Vessel, affuse thereon so much Water as may
cover it: add to it two or three handfuls of Salt, and a little Yest, and let
it ferment a day or two, then distill in a Copper Alembick tin'd within, saving
the first running by itself for the true Spirit, which you may distill again
from fresh Scurvy Grass, saving the first running as before: so will you have a
very strong, and true essential Spirit of Scurvy Grass. 3. But Rolfincius
dislikes this way by fermentation, and makes it thus: Fresh Scurvy Grass, q. v.
bruise it in gross, gently and speedily, add to it generous White Wind, (not
fermenting of it beforehand, by which means much of the volatile Spirit will be
lost) and draw off the Spirit in an Alembick, according to Art; separating the
Oil, if any be found supernating. He exhibits the Spirit with any proper
Vehicle: the Oil he mixes with Sugar, and makes thereof an Elaeosaccharum
Cochleariae. But in London several other sorts are made, which are called Plain
and Golden, which they make after this manner: 4. The Plain Spirit: Proof
Spirit, q. s. put into it as much Scurvy Grass as it can contain, digest two or
three hours, then distill in an Alembick with its Worm, saving the first half.
This is little differing from the latter Prescript. 5. The Golden or Purging
Spirit: Of the former Spirit tb ij. Powder of Jallap, or Scammony iij. digest
in Sand, or a gentle B. M. till you see the Tincture grow very red, which
decant and keep for use. Where Note, That we here use the Drugs themselves
instead of their Extracts, or Resins, which is much cheaper and full as well,
if not better, considering the Spirit is fully strong enough to extract the
Tincture. 6. The best way of making this Spirit is thus: Scurvy Grass in its
prime, bruise it, and put it into an earthen Jarr, pressing it in, upon which
affuse Wine made of the Juice of Scurvygrass, so much as may supernate four or
five inches; stop it up close with a Cork and lute it firmly for three or four
days: then put all into an Alembick with its Head and Worm, drawing off the
Spirit or Water according to Art; which rectify in a Glass Cucurbit, so will
the pure, subtle, and volatile Spirit ascend first, which keep by itself, in a
Glass close stopped. The remaining Water you may draw off to dryness to make
fresh Spirits with. 7. Dose of any of these, whether Simple or Purging, is from
gut. 20. ad 60. or more, in a Glass of Ale or Wine in the Morning fasting. 8.
It cures the Scurvy and all Scorbutic Diseases, (as well the Simple as the
Purging) destroys Acidities, and prevails against the Gout, Obstructions of
Liver and Spleen, Rheumatisms, etc. but ought to be cautiously given to such as
are of a hot and dry Constitution, or of a Choleric Habit. In gross Bodies,
and where Humors much abound, you must give the Purging Spirit; in other cases
the Plain or Simple Spirit. 9. Thus after the same manner, you may make the
Spirit of Mustard and Mustard Seed, of Charlock, Radishes, Horseradish,
Radish-seed, Rochet, Brook-lime, Watercresses, Garden-cresses,
Sciatica-cresses, Bank-cresses, Onions, Scallions, Garlic, Leeks, etc.

X. Spiritus Corallorum, Spirit of Coral.
Bate.] It is made of the best purified Salt of Coral, by distilling it in
Sand, and rectifying it. It is an Antiscorbutick, and Lithontriptick. Dose a
gut. 5. ad 20.

Salmon.] How this Salt is made, we shall hereafter show in its place. The
distillation is best to be done in a close Reverberatory, and the Phlegm being
come off, to take the Spirits by themselves in a large Receiver, the white
Spirits first come over, then the rest, blood-red like Oil, the which may be
separated by a Retort. 2. This white Spirit, or Menstruum, (which is partly
extracted from the Spirit of Vinegar, and partly from the Coral) will extract
from fresh Coral put into it, a most red Tincture; and if you make it volatile,
by freeing it again from this Spirit by distillation, and digesting it with
Spirit of Wine, or proper Cordial Spirit, and by cohobating it, you will have
an excellent Tincture of Coral, of a sweet taste, and fragrant scent. 3. That
this Salt before the distillation of the Spirit, is to be impregnated with
Spirit of Vinegar, which is gently to be distilled off, that the insipid Phlegm
may only come forth, and fresh Vinegar to be added, distilling in like manner
again; and this course to be followed so long, till the Vinegar comes forth as
sharp as it was when it first went in. 4. If you distill the simple Salt not
impregnated with Spirit of Vinegar, as before directed, in a Retort in Sand,
you will get a Liquor only Styptick, without any considerable acidity, which
shows that the Acids are almost wholly destroyed, and do not come forth from
the Alcali as they went in. You may give it in a fit Vehicle against the
Scurvy, Dropsy, Stone and Gout.

XI. * Spiritus Cornu Cervi Succinatus, Spirit of Hartshorn, with Amber
Bate.] It is distilled from Harts-born, with half the weight of Amber. Dose a
gut. v. ad xv. etc. It is a good Sudorifick, Diuretic, Hysteric, and
Antepileptick, etc.

Salmon.] It is indeed of good use in Fainting and Swooning Fits, Palpitation
of the Heart, etc. and much more powerful against Fits of the Mother; than
either the Spirit of Hartshorn, or Oil of Amber alone. It as well recreates
the Spirits, as contends with the Disease: you may give it from ten drops to
thirty, in any convenient Vehicle, first, in the Morning fasting, and last at
Night going to Bed, as also in the time of the Paroxysm, or before, if it be
feared.

XII. * Spiritus Diatrion, vel Mixtura Simplex, The Spirit of Three Things, Or,
The Simple Mixture.
Bate.] Spiritus Theriacalis camphorated x. Spiritus Vitrioli ij. Spirit of
Tartar rectified vj. digest in a Phial Hermetically sealed for three weeks,
that they may be perfectly united according to Art. It prevents Sweat, resists
Putrefaction, and is of excellent use in Malign Fevers. Dose j. Plus-minus.

Salmon.] 1. The first Author of this Medicament was Paracelsus, in his Book Of
Natural Things, lib. 8. where he calls it, Arcanum Caduci, or, The Secret
against the Falling Sickness; the foundation of which Cure is taken from
Vitriol. 2. The Spirit of Vitriol here intended, is not the common Oil or
Spirit of Vitriol, everywhere almost sold; but the true Volatile Spirit, which
ascends next after the Phlegm in the distillation of Vitriol, and before our
vulgar or common Oil or Spirit: and according to Maets is thus made: Vitriol
calcined to whiteness, q. v. put it into an earthen Retort, and distill S. A.
First comes the Phlegm, then the Volatile Spirit; lastly, the Oil, or Vulgar
Spirit. If you distill altogether, you must separate the Phlegm, Spirit and Oil
one from another, by putting the whole into a high Glass Cucurbit, and with a
very gentle Fire, the volatile sulphurous Spirit will ascend and come forth,
which you must keep in a Glass very close stopped, for this use: afterward the
Phlegm will ascend, leaving the fixed Oil or Spirit at bottom, which also being
put into a Glass Retort, may be rectified so as to be clear like Water. 3. But
if you would avoid this trouble of Rectification, in getting this Volatile
Spirit of Vitriol, put your Vitriol dried to whiteness into a large earthen
Retort, or a Glass one luted, and according to Art: 1. Draw forth the Phlegm
which might remain yet in the Vitriol, with a very small fire, till no more
will distill: Pour forth this Phlegm, and refit the Receiver again to the neck of
the Retort, luting the Juncture exactly. 2. Increase the Fire by degrees, to
raise the Volatile Spirit, which will ascend and come forth into the Receiver
in Clouds; continue the distillation, till the Receiver grows cold, then is all
the volatile Spirit come over; take off the Receiver, and pour out the Spirit,
which keep for the use here intended, by Paracelsus. 3. Luting the Receiver to
the Retort again, augment the Fire to the highest violence, and in three days
draw off the fixed Spirit or Oil, as is usual in distilling Oil of Vitriol,
etc. 4. This mixture has the power of inciding, and attenuating; and by the
subtilty of its substance, penetrates through the whole body, without any
trouble. It is one of the most powerful things in curing the Falling Sickness,
as Paracelsus declares; gives immediate help in the Pleurisy, and wonderfully
opens all Obstructions of the Viscera. It prevails against Hypochondriack
Distempers, and Melancholy; overcomes burning and malignant Fevers, and expels
them from the Center per (...), to the superficies of the Body, from whence it
is called by its Author, Diaphoreticum in Peracutis. 5. Modus Vtendi. Of Aqua
Lactis Alexiteria j. Aquae Cinnamomi ij. of this Spirit j. ad j. mix for a
Dose. You may also give it in Carduus Water, Bawm Water, or any other fit
Vehicle in like manner.

XIII. Spiritus Dracunculi, Spirit of Herb-Dragon.
Bate.] Spirit of Wine Gal. j. Leaves of Herb-Dragon new gathered, as much as
the Spirit will hold; bruise and digest for three days, and distill S. A. To the
distilled Water add a sufficient quantity of the best Sugar, to dulcifie it.
Dose iv. at a time. It provokes Sweat, and wonderfully prevails against even
unknown Diseases.

Salmon.] It is good against the Scurvy, Dropsy, and Gout, prevails against
Rheumatisms, and a Scorbutic Habit of Body, by sweetning the Blood;
strengthens and comforts a cold Stomach, and resists malign and infectious
Diseases. If you distill it by the Prescript, you must do it in a Glass Body in
B. M. and then draw off to dryness, otherwise iv. will be too large a Dose to
be given at a time. But in my opinion it will be better to distill it, as we
have before taught you to distill Spirit of Scurvy Grass; by that means you will
have a very strong and virtuous Spirit, of which j. will be enough to be given
at a time in a fit or proper Vehicle.

XIV. * Spiritus Embryonum, A Spirit to preserve a Child in the Womb.
Bate.] Capons No iij. freed from their fat, beat and cut them: Dates lb j.
Raisons lb iss. Bawm, M. iv. Angelica, sweet Marjoram, Chervil, A. Miij. Seeds
of Bazil ss. of Fennel, of Angelica, Lemon-peels, A. iij. Citron-peels, Roots
of Peony, Borrage, A. iv. of Angelica iss. Saffron v. Conserve of the Flowers
of Borrage, Clove-gilliflowers, Marjoram, A. iv. Spanish Wine, ( I suppose
Sherry ought to be understood) lb xxxij. mix and distill to dryness. With this
Water and Spirit of Clary lb j. Waters of Black Cherries, and Bawm, A. lb iij.
Borrage-water lb iv. and blanched Almonds lb iss. make an Emulsion, to which
add Conserve of Peony Flowers, vj. of Borrage and Clove-gilliflowers, A. iv. of
the Flowers of Violets, of Cowslips, Carnations, Red Roses, of Rosemary, and
Marigolds, A. M. iv. Wood of Aloes iij. yellow Sanders iiss. Cinnamon viij.
Aromaticum Rosatum j. mix and distill again, S. A. It is happily given to Women,
who are apt to suffer Abortion; also to Women with Child, when they have been
frighted, or put under any sudden terror, or languish from any external cause:
It cures Faintings and Swooning Fits, and Inflammations in the Bowels. It
comforts the feeble Foetus in the Womb, strengthens the Uterine Ligaments;
cures the Epilepsy, and contributes to the making of Blood, etc. Dose two or
three spoonfuls, or more, pro re nata.

Salmon.] It is a long, tedidious, and troublesome thing to make, and something
chargable, performed by a double distillation, which (a previous fermentation
being supposed) might have been better done by a single, in a moderate Balneo.
The Title shows the intention, besides which it is a good Cordial, and
restorative for such as are in Consumptions, being assiduously taken for some
time.

XV. Spiritus Hormini Compositus, Spirit of Clary Compound.
Bate.] It is made as the Aqua Hormini Composita, in Chap. 1. Sect. 31.
aforegoing.

Salmon.] If you design it only as a Water, you are to distill to dryness; but
if you design a subtle and volatile Spirit, you must rectify it by another
distillation, drawing off only about two thirds of the Water or Spirit: what
remains, will serve to make fresh Water, or Spirit withal: you may give it for
the same intentions you use the Water for, to one spoonful, in any proper
Vehicle.

XVI. * Spiritus Hyssopi Verus, The true Spirit of Hyssop.
Bate.] Fresh Hyssop when in Flower, q. v. bruise it well, and put it into an
Oaken Vessel, adding Fountain Water warm, q. s. and a little Ale-yeast; let it
alone for a while to ferment, viz. for ten or twelve days: then add more Water,
and distill by an Alembick; afterward rectify it often in B. M. according to
Art. After the same manner you may prepare the Spirits of other Herbs and
Plants. It is an admirable Pectoral.

Salmon.] You must not distill to dryness in a Copper Vesica, for then the
Matter distilled will certainly taste of burning; but only draw off about two
thirds of the humidity, which afterward you may rectify in Balneo Mariae, as
is directed. It is designed against Coughs, Colds, Obstructions of the Breast
and Lungs, Wheesings, Hoarsness Shortness of Breath, and Difficulty of
Breathing; you may prescribe it thus: Of this Spirit j. Aquae Lactis Pectoralis
ij. Liquid Laudanum gut. 20. ad 30. mix for a Dose, to be given at Night going
to Bed: or half of it in a Fit of Coughing in the day time, and to be repeated.
Or thus: Of this Spirit j. Aq. Lactis Pectoralis ij. Spir. Salis Armoniaci gut.
20. Syrup of Red Poppies enough to sweeten it, mix for a Dose.

XVII. * Spiritus Juniperi verus, The true Spirit of Juniper.
Bate.] It is distilled from the Berries, fermented as before. It is a singular
Carminative, Diuretic, and Stomatick; expels Wind, as also Sand and Gravel in
the Reins, provokes the Terms, and is egregiously powerful in curing or
removing Barrenness.

Salmon.] 1. Juniper Berries, as they are produced from a Plant able to endure
the greatest injuries of the hardest Winter, and which takes a longer space of
time than ordinary, in bringing its Berries to maturation, viz. about two
years, before they are fit to be gathered, or can be taken in the height of
their maturity and perfection; so it seems, that in this elaborated Fruit there
is perfected a most admirable and salutiferous Balsam and Spirit: The longer
Nature is in perfecting or completing any thing, the more elaborate and
excellent will its Productions be at last. 2. Let therefore the Berries used in
the Preparation, be such as have attained a perfect ripeness, gathered in the
second year of their Production, in the Month of September, at what time they
have a certain kind of pleasantness, and balsamic Honey, which contains its
volatile Salt, subtle and penetrating Oil, and thin Aetherial Spirit, the
Berries being black, plump, and smooth. 3. Full ripe Juniper Berries lb vj.
bruise them well, Seeds and all, add to them warm Water lb xviij. Sugar lb
iiss. mix, dissolve, and let it ferment eight or ten days, till it has got a
Vinous scent; then distill in an Alembick with its Worm, drawing off lb xiv. the
Water rectify, separating the Spirit in in B. M. by drawing off lb vij. which
keep by itself for Spirit: then distill to dryness, keeping this that comes last
for Juniper-Water: with which by addition of fresh Berries you may make more
Spirit. 4. Or thus, according to Le Febure: Juniper Berries lb vj. beat them in
a wooden Mortar, put them into a Vesicatory; affuse thereon Rain or River
Water, so much, till it comes within six inches of the brim; cover, and lute
it, and distill S. A. so will you have a spirituous Water with a subtle Oil
swimming a top, which you must separate; rectifying the Water to the subtilty
of a Spirit: But this is not the best. 5. Now if you have a design to raise an
ardent or burning Spirit from the Berries, and not an Oil, you must cause them
to undergo a fermentation as aforesaid, adding Leaven, Yeast, Honey, Sugar, or
Manna, to excite it, to make a separation of the subtle and volatile from the
grosser parts, by which the greatest part of the Oil will be dissolved in the
said Spirit; this is an excellent way, and the Spirit thus made, good. 6. But
that is esteemed yet more excellent, which is distilled with Spirit of Wine,
instead of Water, as being extracted with more ease, and rather of greater
virtues and subtilty, after this-manner: Full ripe Juniper Berries, well
bruised lb vj. put them into a Glass Cucurbit, filling it about half full:
affuse thereon Spirit of Wine well rectified, till but one third of the
Cucurbit remains empty; cover it with its blind head, perfectly luting the
Junctures: digest in a little Sand heat for three days, (which will be enough
for penetration of the Berries, and dissolution of their volatile parts): this
done, take off the blind Head, and put thereon an Alembick fitted, with its
Receiver, and distill in B. M. or in a Sand heat with a gentle Fire, so will you
have a subtle, volatile, and inflamable Spirit, repleat with the best and most
volatile parts of the Juniper Berries. 7. You may also obtain this Spirit in
its perfection, by bruising a good quantity of those Berries, and then to fill
about two thirds of one, or more Earthen Jarrs well leaded within, affusing
warm Water upon them, and then (without the addition of any ferment) stopping
them close up, and so let them stand about eight or ten days, in a gentle Sand
heat, to distill in a Copper Vesica tinned within, and covered, over with its
Alembick and Serpentine, or Worm, and Receiver well luted, continuing the
distillation, till what distills is almost insipid. So have you a Juniper-Water
repleat, with the volatile Salt, subtle Oil, and aetherial Spirit of the
Berries: what Oil swims a top, separate according to Art. The Water rectify in
a Glass Vesica in B.M. drawing off one half for Spirit; and the other half for
Juniper-Water, which may be kept to make new Spirit of as before, from fresh
Berries. 8. The Feces at the bottom of the Copper Vesica, strain out hard by
pressing, put it into a glazed earthen Vessel, and evaporate to the
Consistence, of Honey, (this is called, Honey of Juniper) or of an Extract,
which will be something Aromatical, to which if you add the fixed Salt of the
Feces, made by Calcination, and Elixiviation, you will have an excellent
Confection, and obtain all that is excellent in the Subject you wrought upon.
9. All these several Medicines produced from this mixed, have for the most part
one and the same Virtues, save that one is more powerful than another: The
Water is weaker than the Spirit, and the Spirit weaker than the Oil: the
Extract, tho it has some of the same Virtues, yet it has another intention in
its operation, which is a little purging. 10. The Virtues therefore of these
things are to provoke Urine and Sweat, to open Obstructions of the Liver,
Spleen, Reins, Bladder, and Womb, and to comfort and fortify the Brain and
Nerves. The Extract is excellent against Coughs, Colds, Asthma's, Wheesings,
Shortness of Breath, Ulcers in the Lungs or Bowels, and Weakness of the
Stomach, it evacuates cold, windy, slimy, and griping Matter or Humors out of
the Bowels. Dose a ij. ad ss. It is good against Plague and Poison, and is used
in all cases where Treacle or Mithridate are used. The Water may be given ab j.
ad ij. or more, as need requires. 11. The Aetherial Oil, is a most admirable
thing to provoke Urine, to open Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and to
cure a Scirrhus of those parts, being assiduously used for some time; and it is
an excellent Topical Remedy in all Palsies, Cramps, Convulsions, and all cold
affections of the Nerves. Dose from gut. iij. ad xij. xv. or xx. dropped upon
white Sugar, and so given in White Wind, or Aqua Alexiteria. 12. But the Powers
are an Agent far surpassing all what we have said, for they penetrate in a
moment the whole Body, and intimately mix with the Blood, which is evident, for
that the sick taking never so little shall have the next Urine which comes from
him smell purely sweet, and like a Violet: 13. Dose a j. ad ij. in Wine, or
Aqua Lactis Nephritica. Aquae Lactis Nephriticae iij. Spirit of Juniper iss.
Salt of Hog-lice, gr. iij. mix for a Dose in Nephritick Diseases.

XVIII. Spiritus Mannae, Spirit of Manna.
Bate.] If you distill Manna by a Cucurbit, with a gentle or slow Fire, you will
have an insipid Sudorifick Spirit. It is an admirable Sudorifick in Fevers,
whether pestilential or common; producing even a sticking kind of Sweat. Dose
to one spoonful.

Salmon.] 1. That what comes off, will be insipid like Phlegm is certain; but as
to its Medicinal Virtues, I can say nothing by Experience; you are obliged to
take them upon the Credit of our Learned Author. 2. It is said to expel the
Excrements of the last digestion; and that it has a peculiar Virtue to dissolve
Sulphur, and to extract its yellow Tincture, which is not one of the least
Remedies for easing the Breast, and the Praecordia, when oppressed; this
Tincture being as a restoring Balsam, to remedy the Distempers and Affects of
the Lungs, and to strengthen and preserve their Action, and may be given from
gut. iij. ad xij. in prepared or depurated Juice of Elecampane, or Hyssop. 3.
There is another insipid Spirit of Manna, thus prepared: Choice Manna lb ij.
pure Nitre lb j. put them both into a Hog's Bladder, tie it exactly up: hang
the same by a string, in boiling Water, till the two Substances be well
dissolved: this Liquor or Dissolution distill in a Glass Cucurbit covered with
its Head, and fitted with a Receiver: so will you have an insipid laxative
Water, provoking Sweat copiously; Dose a ij. ad vj. or j. in Aqua Lactis
Pectoralis, or Cardiaca, or other proper Vehicle: it is good to bring forth
those superfluous Serosities, which many times breed Rh^umatisms, and
Defluxions. 4. Spiritus Mannae Acidus. Manna q. v. put it into a Cornute or
Retort in a Sand heat, and with a soft Fire at the beginning, draw forth the
insipid Water aforementioned: then change the Receiver, and augment the Fire by
degrees, distilling to dryness, (which if you please you may cohobate several
times) so have you the Acid Spirit, which rectify to take away the Empyreuma.
This is a Spirituous Water, containing all the best of the Manna, and is more
effectual than the first insipid Water, to provoke Sweat, and also makes a
better Tincture of Sulphur. This Acid Spirit is said to be a wonderful
Specific against all sorts of intermitting Fevers or Agues, giving it at the
beginning of the Fit from j. ad iv. 5. But here is to be noted, that whether
you distill in a Cucurbit or Retort, you ought not to fill them with the Matter
above a quarter, or one third part full; because the Manna is apt to swell in
Distillation. 6. Spiritus Mannae Compositus. Pure Manna viij. pure Sal
Armoniack iv. mix and put it into a Glass or Earthen Body, so as it may fill
only a third or fourth part, place it in a Sand Furnace, and fit to it a Head
and Receiver, luting the Junctures with a wet Bladder: make a small Fire for an
hour only to heat the Vessel; then increase it to the second degree, so will
the Liquor distill drop by drop, and toward the end there will arise white
Vapors into the Head: increase the Fire still more, till all is come forth
that will: Let the Vessels cool, and you will find in the Receiver viij. of an
ill scented Spirit, and a little Oil; decant all into another Glass Body, with
its Head and Receiver well luted, and distill again in a Sand heat, till you
have about vj. which will be a very pure clear, acid Spirit, without any
Empyreuma, and agreeable to the Taste. 7. This Spirit is stronger than the
former, and is a good Operative against the Gravel and Dropsy; it is good to
stop Diarrhaea's and Dysenteries, and may be dropped into Tincture of Roses
instead of other acid Spirits. Dose gut. 8. or 10. or to an agreeable acidity
in any proper Vehicle. The faetid Oil remaining may be of use to cleanse old,
running Sores. 8. Spiritus Mannae ardens. Choice Manna lb j. warm Water a
Gallon: add Ale or Beer-yeast j. or ij. and mix them well together; stop the
Vessel carelessly, and leave it for twenty four hours, so will it ferment very
strongly: then decant the Liquor into a Glass Cucurbit, with its Head and
Recipient well luted in the Joints, and distill in B. M. with a gentle heat; so
will you have an inflamable Spirit followed by the Phlegm, or watery parts,
which separate by rectification: the Spirit keep by it self: the Phlegm affuse
upon the Feces, cover and stop it slightly up, set it in a Cellar for two
Months, and make a new distillation in the first Cucurbit, with its Head and
Recipient, so will you have more inflamable Spirit, or a Water, from which by
distillation it must be separated. This Spirit added to the former reserved
Spirit, will make the just weight of the whole Manna, by which it appears, that
its whole Substance is a Spirit, and is here converted into a pure, aetherial,
volatile, and inflamable Sulphur. 9. The Virtues are the same with those of
Spirit of Wine; but as it is produced from an aetherial, airy, or heavenly
Substance, so it is a more admirable and noble production than Spirit of Wine,
they differing one from another, as much as their Principles differ; the one
being the product of the Earth, the other of the Heaven or Air, etc. Hence it
appears also, it is a much better Menstruum to extract Tinctures with, and the
Virtues of Things, especially if impregnated with the Acid of the Air also,
which is a pure Nitrious Spirit. A Word is enough to the Wise.

XIX. Spiritus Millepedum, Spirit of Sows, or Hoglice.
Bate.] It is distilled in all respects as Spirit of Hartshorn, saving the
Salt. It provokes Urine powerfully, opens all Obstructions, is profitable
against Diseases of the Eyes, and the Rickets: and is a Specific in Deafness,
and difficulty of hearing, being dropped into the Ears.

Salmon.] 1. Take an Earthen Retort, or a Glass one luted, fill it almost full
of Millepedes, lute to it a Receiver, and distill in Sand, or rather in an open
Fire, observing the degree of heat: with the first degree of heat will come the
Phlegm; with the second, the Oil; and with the third, the volatile Salt;
continue the distillation till no more will come forth: the Oil, volatile Salt,
and Spirit mix together, by shaking well the Recipient; put all into a Glass
Cucurbit, and with a very gentle heat, sublime the volatile Salt, then augment
the Fire, and the Spirit and Oil will ascend, take each by themselves. 2. The
Spirit is volatile and subtle, like that of Sal Armoniack, but the volatile
Salt is the most penetrative and powerful, and the highest Diaphoretick and
Sudorifick, and may be given a gr. iij. ad xij. or xvj. in any proper Vehicle,
against the Stone, Gravel, all manner of Stoppages of Urine, the Yellow
Jaundice, Apoplexy, Palsy, Pleurisy, Running Gout, Smallpox, Measles,
Plague, and all sorts of Pestilential Fevers: the Spirit may be given to j. 3.
But because the Salt is so Volatile, that it is difficult to be kept, it is
best to be conserved in the Spirit thus: Of the Spirit j. of the volatile Salt
ss. mix and digest; and in length of time, part of the Salt will crystallize.
This Spirit has all the former Virtues, and may be given a gut. x. ad ss. or j.
in any proper Vehicle. and 4. The Oil is of an ungrateful Odor, and scarcely
(for that reason) fit to be given inwardly, unless in the case of Hysteric
Fits: you may make the Potestates thereof thus: Of this Oil j. of the volatile
Salt j. Spirit of Wine highly rectified iv. mix, digest a Month, shaking it
once a day, then draw them off together in a Glass Body. Dose a j. ad ij. in
any fit Vehicle, in the cases aforementioned. 5. The Potestates may also be
made thus: Sows, or Hog-lice, q. v. pure Spirit of Nitre, enough to dissolve
them; being dissolved, add thereto the equal quantity of the Alcohol of Spirit
of Wine; which digest for a Month, and keep for use. 6. These are the
Potestates Millepedum Nitratae, powerful against the Scurvy, Dropsy, Gout,
Stone, Plague, and all sorts of Malign Diseases, and may be given in any fit
Vehiculum a gut. xij, ad xx. or more, as the Physician shall see occasion.

XX. * Spiritus Nitri, Spirit of Nitre.
Bate.] Sand p. ij. Nitre, p. j. mix and distill by a Retort, till the Fumes
cease to appear. You can scarcely find a more admirable Diuretic; it
powerfully provokes Sweat, from whence it is of signal use in the Colic,
Pleurisy, and all Fevers, chiefly such as are Malign. Dose a j. ad ij.

Salmon.] 1. Here is but p. ij. of Sand to p. j. of Nitre, which I judge too
little, the College in their Dispensatory allows 5. to 1. as you may see in
our Pharm. Land. lib. 3. cap. 10. Sect. 47. But three to one is by experience
found to be the best proportion. 2. Pure Nitre tb ij. common Bole, or Potters
Earth tb vj. mix and put them into a large Earthen, or Glass Retort luted, set
it in a close Reverberatory Furnace, fitting to it a large Receiver: give a
gentle Fire for four or five hours, till all the Phlegm is come forth, which
will be drop by drop; when it will drop no more, cast away the Phlegm in the
Receiver, and refit it, luting the Juncture, increase the Fire gradatim to the
second degree, so will the Spirit come forth, filling the Receiver with white
Clouds, continue the Fire in that equality for two hours, and then increase it
to the greatest Violence, and the Vapors will be red, which continue till all
is come over, which will be in about fourteen or fifteen hours. The Vessels
being cold, take the Spirit and put it in a strong Glass Bottle, with a Glass
Stopple, or else stop it with Wax. 3. This Spirit is the best Aqua Fortis that
can be made; and therefore besides the Virtues ascribed to it by our Author, it
has the power of dissolving of Metals. 4. The Earth or Sand here put in, is of
use only to separate the parts of the Salt, to the end that the Fire may the
more easily operate upon the Body thereof: and we cast away the Phlegm, because
if it was retained, it could be of no use, but only to weaken the Spirit, 5.
The white Vapors are the first and weakest Spirit: the red ones are the
latter, and strongest, coming forth from the most fixed part of the Salt; where
Note, That no kind of Salt yields red Vapors but Nitre only. 6. The greatest
part of the Nitre comes over in Phlegm and Spirit; for out of 32 Ounces of
Nitre, 30 Ounces of Phlegm and Spirit is commonly drawn. 7. You must not fill
the Retort above two thirds full, and the Recipient must be very large, for
that the Spirits being strong, and the Vapors plentiful, and withal coming
hastily forth, they would break all to pieces, if they had not room enough to
expatiate in. 8. This Spirit, from its coming forth in red Vapors, is by some
Authors called, The Salamanders Blood; and being thus at first freed from its
Phlegm, will act with so much the more force. 9. This Spirit will dissolve, or
rather corrode all Metals, except Gold, into which it cannot enter alone, by
reason of the smallness of the Pores of that Metal; but if you add to it a
fourth part of its weight of Sal Armoniack, or of Sea Salt, or of Sal Gem, it
will give a new form to its particles, shaping them into more subtle points,
capable of entering into the pores of the Gold, and to penetrate and disslve
its substance. 10. It is highly good against Malign Fevers of all sorts, and
to suppress Vapors that arise from crude and tartarous humors, ceases the
ebilition of the humors, by reason of its volatile and sulphurous Salt joined
with its acid; and is an excellent Remedy against the Colic. It opens
Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and of all the Bowels, dissolves
coagulated Blood, and therefore is singularly profitable against the Pleurisy,
whether true or bastard, expelling the Disease either by sweat, or insensible
transpiration. It cures Rheumatisms, and all sorts of wandering pains, and the
Dropsy Tympanites. Besides all which it changes the Emetick and Cathartick
Virtues of several things into Diaphoretick, particularly Antimony.

XXI. Spiritus Nitri Bezoarticus, Bezoartick Spirit of Nitre.
Bate.] It is distilled from Spirit of Nitre rectified, and Butter of Antimony,
ana; by a Retort, S. A. The Caput Mortuum serves to make Bezoar Mineral of.

Salmon.] It ought to be distilled in a Retort in Sand; whereof, if the Fire be
speedily urged, the Spirit will be red, and as Authors affirm, be able not only
to dissolve Gold, but also to volatilize it. 2. It ought to be made of
rectified Spirit of Nitre; which is thus done: Of the former Spirit of Nitre,
at Sect. 20. q. v. put it into a Glass Body, and in an open Fire make it to
evaporate, till the Vapors or Fumes begin to ascend yellow; then remove it
from the Fire, and keep it for use; this is rectified Spirit of Nitre. 3. This
Spirit of Nitre thus rectified, ought to be put upon the Butter of Antimony, so
long till the Effervescence ceases: then the mixture to be distilled to
dryness; this Liquor thus distilled is the Bezoartick Spirit, which indeed is
nothing else but Aqua Regia, made by a conjunction of the Spirit of common
Salt, which Spirit of Nitre, for which reason it dissolves Gold, and does other
things which the vulgar A. R. does.

XXII. * Spiritus Nitri dulcis, Dulcified Spirit of Nitre.
Bate.] Spirit of Nitre, p. j. Alcohole of Spirit of Wine, p. ij. Digest till
they are joined, and distill in Sand, cohobating twice, S. A. Dose ad j. in any
convenient Liquor; it moves sweat, takes away Obstructions of the Colic,
Reins, Breast, etc.

Salmon.] 1. This proportion of 1 to 2. is that which is observed by Le Mort,
Maets and Marg-grave; but Rolfincius, Charras, and Lemery, make the mixture in
equal parts of each. 2. In the mixing them you must be very cautious, and do it
leisurely and by degrees: you must not put the Spirit of Wine to the Spirit of
Nitre, for then you will set it all in a flame; but you must put in the Spirit
of Nitre Gradatim into the Spirit of Wine, so will you prevent the flaming, but
the mixture will grow so hot, that you will scarcely be able to hold your hand
on the outside the Vessel. 3. Being mixed together, digest for seven days, then
put the mixture into a Glass Retort, and distill in Sand, first with a gentle
heat, and afterward with a stronger, to dryness: the Receiver let be very
large, and the neck of the Retort fit for it, and so enter a good way in, and
the Juncture to be well luted, for otherwise you will lose much of your Spirit.
4. It is necessary that the Spirit should be cohobated twice at least, some
Authors advise thrice; for the oftener it is cohobated, the sweeter it is. Le
Mort also says, that the distillation may be performed upon the spot of the
commixtion; and that if the digestion exceeds seven days before the
distillation, the Union will be so firm that there will be no need of a
distillation. 5. The two Spirits mix and unite with an inseparable Union,
sweet, or at least not of so great an acritude as before, and of a very
grateful odor. 6. It ought to be an open Vessel that the mixture is made in,
for should it be in a Glass Bottle, and stopped before the ebulition be over, it
would hazard the breaking of the same. 7. Lemery advises to make the mixture in
a Bolt-head set in straw in the Chimny, without heat, letting it be open till
the Ebulition is over, taking heed also to avoid the fumes, and then to put it
into a Glass, and keep it without distillation for use. 8. This Operation
differs not much from that of mixing Oil of Turpentine, and Oil of Vitriol
together: for these Liquors also heat and boil together much alike. 9. In this
mixture the Spirit of Nitre joins itself to the Sulphur of the Wine, and both
being admirably volatile, they strive to mount upwards, whereby the mixture is
put into that mighty motion and effervescency; and from whence results a
complicate Spirit, being most fragrant, and having the greatest volatility. 10.
Charras advises it to be distilled in a Sand heat in a Glass Cucurbit, covered
with its head carefully luted, and to be repeated three times; from whence,
says he, arises a composed Spirit, more agreeable in smell, more grateful to
the taste, more gentle in all in operations, more fit for our bodies, and more
admirably diaphoretick than the simple Spirit of Nitre can possibly be. 11.
Rolfincius in Chimia, Lib. 3. Sect. 1. Art. 4. Cap. 11. advises after four days
digestion to distill it in an Alembick; so, says he, will the Spirits in this
Operation be united, and contract a Violet kind of odor, or smell, and a
subdulce and grateful taste. 12. It is a most admirable Diuretic and
Diaphoretick, quenches thirsts, resists putrefaction of the blood and humors,
and and powerfully attenuates and incides: It is a singular Febrifuge, cures
all malign Fevers, even the Smallpox, and Plague itself. It abates
Inflammations, even of the Lungs, and penetrates the whole Body, for it is
indeed the highest volatile acid that is yet known in Rerum Natura. It is a
most signal Anticolick, curing the Disease above all other Medicines, and many
times when all other Remedies fail. It is a Specific against the Pleurisy, in
which Disease Rolfincius gives it with Syrup of Corn Poppies in a proper
Volatile. It takes away all preternatural heat in any part of the Body to a
Miracle: It is good against the Stone, Gravel, and all Obstructions of Urine
whatsoever, and indeed has not only all the Virtues of simple Spirit of Nitre,
at Sect. 20. 10. aforegoing, but also much exceeds that in every respect. 13.
It is a circulated Menstruum, and by some is taken for the Circulatum majus
Paracelsi; by it the Virtues of many things are momentarily to be extracted,
much better than by several others, and some Chemists use it in the preparation
of Tincture of Coral. Dose is from gut. 10. ad 40. plusminus, in any proper
Vehicle. Infinite Diseases almost, says Marggrave, are cured by this Medicine.

XXIII. * Spiritus Rhoeados crapularius, the Surfeit Spirit of the Red, Wild,
or Corn Poppy.
Bate.] Corn Poppy Flowers new gathered lb j. Carawayseeds ij. Nutmegs j.
Ambergrise gr. iv. Spirit of Wine lb iv. digest S. A. strain out, and keep it
for use. Dose iv. at the hours of sleep, or in the Morning after a Surfeiting.
It is a Specific also in the Pleurisy.

Salmon.] 1. 1. The body of the Ambergrise ought to be opened as we have
formerly directed at Sect. 4. aforegoing, whereby it will perform four times as
much as it would otherwise. 2. That the Spirit of Wine here intended, is only
common Spirit of Wine or Brandy for otherwise it could not be, given in so
large a Dose as our Author here prescribes it in. 3. That it is not only an
excellent thing against Surfeiting and Drunkenness, as also the Pleurisy, but
also against all manner of Pains, and Stitches in the Sides, Breast, and
Stomach, the Colic, and Griping of the Guts, Pains in the Back, Reins, and
Bladder, but indeed against all manner of Pains in any part of the Body: it
gently provokes Sweat, dissolves coagulated Blood, and gives relief against the
strongest Agonies. 4. The Dose is from j. to iv. according to the Age, and
Condition of the Sick; it may be given either alone, sweetened with white Sugar;
or in Ale, Wine, or Aqua Lactis Alexiteria, etc. chiefly at Night going to Bed.

XXIV. Spiritus Salis Armoniaci, Spirit of Sal Armoniack.
Bate.] Sal Armoniack p. j. Calx Vive, p. ij. Water p. iij. mix and distill in
Sand, S. A. It is Diuretic, Diaphoretick, and Inciding; it resists
putrefaction, and is most powerful against Fevers; Dose a gut. vj. ad xij. etc.

Salmon.] 1. Various are the Ways and Proportions which Authors have prescribed
in the making of this Spirit, which because we would not leave the Artist in
the dark, and are willing to ease him of the labor of searching of many Books,
we shall here take the pains to deliver the Summary of all together. 2. Le Mort
makes it thus: Sal Ammoniacum lb j. Salt of Tartar lb j. ss. (or in place
thereof Potashes) common Water lb j. mix them. Or thus, from the same Author:
Sal Ammon lb j, Oil of Tartar, per deliquium lb ij. mix and distill in a Glass,
or glazed Retort in Sand, with a very gentle Fire, till the volatile Salt
begins to swell, so will the volatile Salt ascend, which in the following Phlegm
will be dissolved. Or thus: Sal Am. lb j, in fine Powder: Sal Tartari, or other
Alcalious Salt lb ij. Water lb iij. mix and distill with a gentle Fire by a
glased Retort, till about xij. is come forth, then cease. 3. Where Note, That
if Calx Vice be used instead of the Salt of Tartar, the Spirit will come forth
much more volatile and fugitive: also if it be distilled from Minerals, as
Iron, Lapis Hematitis, Calaminaris, etc. it comes forth most penetrative. 4.
This is also to be noted, That if the Sal Amm. be mixed with Calx Vive, the
Spirit goes forth in a most volatile Liquor, but never in a volatile Salt,
whereas if it be mixed with other Calxes or Salts, the volatile Salt come first
in a dry form, then the liquid Spirit together with the Phlegm, in which the
volatile Salt is dissolved. 5. Sal Ammon. does seem to be nothing else, but a
mixture of Sea Salt, and the volatile Salt of Urine, which here is reduced into
a saline volatile Spirit, by the help of a fixed Salt, or other earthy Bodies
being mixed. 6. Rolfincius advises to take Sal Am. lb j. Ashes lb iv. so to mix
and to distill by an Alembick in Sand, and then to rectify the Spirit. 7. The
Rectification of the Spirit is thus done: Of the said Spirit lb ss. Salt of
Tartar, or of Potashes ij. mix them in a glass Retort, and distill again. 8.
Marggrave makes it thus: Sal Am. Salt of Tartar, or a^y other Alcalious Salt,
ana: each being in Powder mix them, and put them into a glased Retort, with
Water q. s. and a very large Receiver well luted, and distill in Sand; and in
three or four hours with a Fire of the third degree, you will have first, the
coagulated Spirit, or volatile Salt in a dry form, sticking to the sides of the
Receiver like Snow: continue the distillation, that the Spirit may come over,
till the said dry volatile Salt is brought or dissolved into the said Spirit.
Then immediately take the Recipient away, keeping the said Spirit in a Glass
close stopped for use; what comes after over is only pure Phlegm, of little or no
use. 9. From this Caput Mort. with Water you may extract a pure white Salt,
which Sylvius calls, Sal Febrifugum: which being rightly prepared and sublimed
from an earthen Retort, in an open Fire, will go forth for the most part, in
most white Flowers, very penetrating, but not urinous, and of a pleasant
refrigerating taste; which some will have to be a volatile Salt of Tartar. 10.
Maets makes it thus: Sal Am. Salt of Tartar, Potashes, ana; mix, (being in
Powder) put them into a Glass Cucurbit, affuse thereon Water, q. s. and distill
with a gentle Fire: so will you have a potent Spirit of Sal Am. together with
its volatile Salt in a dry form, sticking to the sides of the Vessel. 11. Le
Febure makes it thus: Sal Am. in Powder, Salt of Tartar, ana, mix, put them
into a glass Retort with a wide neck, fitting to it a large Receiver; give a
gradual Fire, and in short time you will have a volatile Spirit coming over the
helm in Liquor, the Salt subliming into a clear substance as white as Camphir;
which operation will be done in about four or five hours. The volatile Salt you
may dissolve in its own Spirit, and so keep both together as Spirit of Sal Am.
12. Now Sal Am. consists of a double Nature, as we have above observed, viz. of
a kind of common Salt as it were fixed; and of a volatile Salt of Urine; the
mixture and union of which Salts is so strict, that it is very difficult,
almost impossible, to bring them over the helm into Liquor, ^he one without the
other, the urinous and volatile carrying along with it the common and fixed
Salt; without the addition of some other Body as Salt of Tartar, Potashes,
Calx Vive, etc. which have the faculty to keep back the acid Salt, to let the
urinous and volatile ascend. 13. But if you would extract the acid Spirit of
the Sal Am. as well as its volatile; the said Le Febure does it thus: Sal Am.
Quicklime A. mix and make them into a pap with Urine: then distill in a glowing
red hot Iron Retort, having a Tube with a wide Mouth, and an Iron stopple; put
in the matter Cochleatim at the Tube, and immediately stop it, so will the
Vapors presently go into the Receiver luted to the same, which Method continue
till all the Ingredients are done: now take all this Liquor in the Recipient,
put it into a glass Cucurbit a Cubit high, and narrow in the neck, cover it
with an Alembick-head, and its Recipient, both well luted, and in B. M. give a
gradual Fire, that all the volatile Spirit, and urinous Salt may ascend; when
no more will arise, put the remaining Liquor into a Retort, and rectify it in
Sand, so will you have an acid Spirit, much pleasanter than the Spirit of
common Salt, and of the same Virtues; save, that being compared therewith, it
as much exceeds that of common Salt, as a full-grown and perfect Man exceeds a
Youth or Child. 14. Lemery makes the urinous Spirit thus: Sal Am. lb j. Calx
Vive lb ij. Powder them apart, and when you have mixed them in a Mortar, put
upon them iv. of Water, which put presently into a Retort, whose half must
remain empty: fit to it a large Receiver, lute the Junctures, and distill in
Sand, beginning the distillation without Fire, for about a quarter of an hour,
then make a gentle Fire, and increase it gradatim to the second degree, and
continue it till nothing more comes forth; take off your Recipient, pour out
the Spirit immediately into a Vial, turning away your Head as much as may be,
to avoid the subtle Vapors that continually rise: stop the Glass with a Glass
stopple well ground, or with Wax. 15. In this last Prescript here is to be
observed, That before distillation the Alcali of the Sea Salt had in a manner
bound up the volatile Salt in the Sal Am. to loosen which, the unslakt Lime is
added whose Alcali destroys the Acid of the Sea Salt; whence it is, that as
soon as they are mixed together, the volatile uririnous Spirit begins to arise
and distill; which Vapors come forth so plentifully, that you could never be
able to put the mixture into the Retort, should you not turn away your Head,
while your Hands are at work. 16. That the Water is added to moisten it, (which
Le Febure certainly forgot in his Prescript) and to liquifie the volatile
Salts; for if there were nothing to moisten them, they would suddenly sublime
to the neck of the Retort, and stopping it altogether, would break it to
pieces: but the quantity of the Water seems to be too little by half: viij. of
Water is the least that ought to be used. 17. By reason of the swelling of the
Lime after wetting, and the great deal of room the Spirits take to rarifie
themselves in, the Retort must not be above half full, and the Receiver must be
very large, that they may circulate with ease. 18. This Spirit is nothing but a
solution of the volatile Salt in Water: if you would sublime and separate this
Salt there from, put the Spirit into a Mattress with its head, and a Receiver,
lute the Joints with a wet Bladder, and in Sand, with a gentle Fire, you may
make the volatile Salt ascend white as Snow; for it will sublime and stick to
the top, and uppermost parts; which separate and keep in a Glass close stopped
with a Glass stopple. This Salt being dry, more easily flies away, than when
you kept it dissolved in the Water, for which cause sake it is best to keep it
in a liquid form. 19. This Spirit made with Quicklime is stronger than that
made with Salt of Tartar, etc. because the fiery particles of the Quicklime,
quicken the motion of the volatile Salts, much more than the Salt of Tartar can
do. 20. It is also to be noted, That the Spirit of Sal Am. thus drawn with
Quicklime, being mixed with Spirit of Wine, will not coagulate; whereas that
which is drawn with Salt of Tartar, etc. will. 21. When you take away the
Receiver from the Alembick, have in readiness a wet cloth to stop its mouth,
that its volatile Vapors may not strike your Nostrils and Brain, and so hinder
respiration, and cause swooning. 22. This volatile Spirit is also an excellent
Menstruum to make precipitations with, it destroys acids, as do all other
volatile Alcalies, and precipitates Gold after it is dissolved. 23. Charras
makes it thus: Good Sal Am. lb j. Salt of Tartar lb j. or in its place Oak
Ashes lb iv. beat them in a Mortar, and put them in a Cucurbit, in Sand:
Sprinkle the mixture with Water viij. then immediately, put on the Head with
its Receiver, luting the Junctures well, kindle a gentle Fire, and continue it
five or six hours, or till all the volatile Spirit is come over, and the
Flowers are sublimed partly into the Head, and partly to the upper part of the
Cucurbit, which take and keep for use. 24. Near as soon as the Water is put in,
the Salt of Tartar joins with the Acid of the Sea Salt, so that the Sea Salt
disingages itself from the Volatile Salt, thereby giving it the liberty of
immediate arising, partly in the form of a dry Salt, and partly in the form of
Spirit, so that you are forced as speedily as may be, to cover the Cucurbit
with its Head, etc. 25. From all these Considerations it evidently appears,
that should Sal Am. be distilled alone in its own condition, when exposed to
the violence of the Fire, the volatile part of the Sal Am. would do violence to
the acid, and sublime it, or carry it up with it, so that you would have only a
mixed Flower of Sal Am. or rather Sal Am. purified, not the pure volatile
alcalious Salt alone, but mixed with all its acid, etc, 26. It is also to be
observed, that tho the mixture of Quicklime, or a fit Salt, stops the Acid or
Marine Salt from rising, letting the urinous, volatile part go alone, either in
dry Salt or Spirit, yet the action would be very slow and feeble, did you not
mix Water with them, the more firmly to dissolve the marine Salt, and the fixed
Salt, and to mix them together, making their conjunction the more facile. So
that it appears, the Spirit and volatile Salt are possible to be separated
without Water; but then it is more slowly, and in this case, besides strong
luting of the Junctures, you must leave at least three quarters of the Cucurbit
empty, etc. 27. Besides all these ways of distilling this Spirit, you may see
several others in our Pharm. Land. lib. 3. cap. 11. sect. 30, 31, and 32. the
last of which is the Colledge's own Prescription; but those of our Author, and
Lemery's seem to carry away the Bell from all the rest. 28. This volatile
Spirit may be given a gut. vj. or x. ad 20. and some Authors allow it given to
30, yea to 60, in any proper Vehicle, as Bawm, or Carduus Water, Aqua Lactis
Alexiteria, etc. it is better given in some good or proper Cordial or
Sudorifick Water than in Broth, because Broth being taken hot, the heat would
dissipate a good part of the volatile Spirits, before the mixture could
possibly be drunk. 29. It is given with good success in the Cure of Malignant
Fevers, and all Diseases where Sweating is required. It is of a most
penetrating nature, revives Apoplecticks and Lethargicks, resolves and
attenuates the humors, takes away the stagnation of the Blood, and causes it
to circulate; resists putrefaction, takes away all manner of Fevers, arising
from Obstruction, and powerfully removes the Obstruction itself: it cures
Quotidians and Tertians, Plague or Pestilence, and other Diseases proceeding
from malignity. It is said also to cure the Epilepsie, Palsy, Hysteric Fits,
Hypochondriack Melancholy, inveterate Headachs, Heart-burnings, Gouts, etc. It
is attenuating, inciding, resolving, penetrating, dissipating, and opening,
prevalent against the Scurvy, and other Chronick Diseases arising from a
morbifick acid, making all the humors fluid, and putting them into motion,
whereby, what is preternatural, is the more fit for excretion. It is given also
in Venereal Diseases, and especially where Mercury has been given unseasonably,
unskilfully, or in too great a quantity, for that this Spirit drives and forces
the said Mercury, lodged in the several parts of the Body through the pores of
the skin. It is good against Vapors arising from the lower parts, and
ascending up into the Stomach and Head, as well by smelling to it, as by taking
it inwardly, whereby it removes Vertigo's, and other ill Accidents of the Head
and Brain, which interrupt the proper course of the Spirits, and the Functions
of all the parts; for which reason it is proper in swooning Fits, weakness and
palpitation of the Heart, and to dissipate Vapors rising from the Womb; it
kills Worms, and above all things opens the passages of the Urine, provided it
be mixed with some fixed Salt or Acid in a proper Vehicle. 30. The volatile Salt
has the same Virtues with the Spirit, but must be given in smaller Dose, viz. a
gr. v. ad xij, plus-minus. They sometimes cause sleep, because they dull the
sharpness of acid Salts, which entering into the little Conduits of the Brain,
do cause perpetual watchings. This is also to be added, viz. that as this
volatile Salt and Spirit do above most other things correct and hinder
putrefaction, so also they more powerfully overcome the poison and venom of the
Plague, and as well preserve from that dreadful Disease, as cure it, preserving
the Stomach also from putrefaction and corruption, which is caused by the vice
and defect of the digestive faculty. In all the mentioned Diseases, it is
certain that they will produce wonderful and surprising effects. 31. The acid
Spirit distilled as before directed, is said to open all Obstructions of the
lower Belly, to break and expel the Stone, and to ease the pain of the Bowels,
strengthening them as well as the Liver, Spleen, and Stomach: This Spirit will
be so much the better or more powerful, if (when you mix the Sal Am. in order
to drawing off its volatile urinous Spirit,) you take the equal quantities of
the Powder of Lapis Hematitis, or Filings of Steel, and then proceed in all
respects, as if you had used Lime, or Salt of Tartar, to the eliciting the
volatile Spirit and Salt: and then from the Caput mort. to draw the Acid Spirit
as before directed, which will be of a Golden color, and may be rectified over
a gentle Fire, to separate its flegmy parts. Dose a gut. vj. ad xij. or more in
any proper Liquor.

XXV. Spiritus Salis Armoniaci Tartarisatus, Spirits of Sal Armoniack
tartarized. Bate.] Salt of Tartar, Sal Arm. ana, mix and add a tripple quantity
of Water, and distill, S. A. It has the Virtues of the former.
Salmon.] It is the same with the former volatile urinous Spirit, and to be
distilled as we have directed in the Annotations of the former Section, and is
to be given against the same Diseases, in the same manner and dose. Note, That
if to the Caput Mort. you add new Salt of Tartar, and distill again, you will
have volatile Salt afresh.

XXVI. Spiritus Salis Armoniaci Succinatus, Spirit of Sal Ammoniack with Amber.
Bate.] It is made by rectifying the volatile Spirit of Sal Ammoniack [whether
made with Quicklime, Salt of Tartar, or Pot-ashes] upon the fine Powder of
Amber, S. A.
Salmon.]. 1. But if you would have only a Salt succinated, you must mix the
Volatile Sal Amm. with the Volatile Salt of Amber, in equal parts, and so
sublime according to Art. 2. This Salt and Spirit has all the Virtues of the
former simple Volatile Salt and Spirit, but with this advantage, that it is yet
more powerful against the Diseases for which it is designed, but especially in
all Epileptick and Hysteric Cases, and where Vapors are apt to afflict the
Patient. 3. It is also to be given in the same manner and dose.

XXVII. Spiritus Salis Armoniaci Chalybeatus, Spirit of Sal Armoniack steeled.
Bate.] It is made from the Caput Mortuum of the steeled Flowers of Sal
Armoniack (the Sal Armoniack being first mixed with Filings of Mars) being
distilled in a Retort, S. A. Dose a gut. 5. ad 15. It takes away all
Obstructions, provokes Urine and the Terms; and is said to be Sudorifick.

Salmon.] This is nothing but the Acid Spirit of Sal Armoniack; which, in our
Annotations upon the simple Spirit, at Sect. 24. above, we have taught more
fully the preparation of: It pierces, is thin, diuretic, and diaphoretick, and
has been found good against: the Colic, and against the Greensickness in
Virgins: give a gut. vj. ad xij. plus-minus, in Water distilled from Onions,
Parsley, Arsmart, Smallage, or Saxifrage.

XXVIII. Spiritus Salis Coagulatus, Spirit of Salt coagulated.
Bate.] Salt of Wormwood depurated j. rectified Spirit of Salt iss. mix and
coagulate S. A. It is a Diuretic Medicament, and a Specific Hydropick,
potently expelling by Urine, all watery Humors and Wind, and all the tartarous
and viscous matter, from whence the Stone is generated. In the Iliack Passion,
Colic, Fevers, Jaundice, Bloody Flux, Apoplexy, Gout, etc. it is a present
help. Dose gr. vj. ad xv. See Mynsicht.

Salmon.] 1. Mynsicht in his Thesaurus, Sect. 1. page 31. advises, That so much
of the Spirit may be coagulated and united with the Salt, till it prevails both
in taste and strength: being brought to in just consistence, it may be kept in
a Glass for use: and in this form, you may more easily carry it up and down in
traveling, than you can Spirit of Salt alone by itself. 2. It is a most
excellent Medicine, having a Balsamic property, renovating the whole Man. It
purifies the Blood, comforts the Head, Heart, and Stomach; opens Obstructions
of Liver and Spleen; it incides, discusses, mundifies, and resists
putrefaction. 3. Besides also, it is a more efficacious Diuretic, and so
specific an Hydropick, that it admirably expels by the urinary parts, all
preternatural Humidities and Wind, and the whole tartarous and viscous matter,
from whence the Stone, and Gravel, and the lapidiscent Concretions in the Gout
are produced. 4. Our Author commends it also against the Palsy, the Leprosy,
Worms, whether in old or young, Ruptures the English Sweating-sickness Plague,
and all manner of Poison, as a speedy help in time of need. 5. It may be given
in the Dose above mentioned, in any appropriate or specific Vehicle: In the
Dropsy (Universals being premised) in Aqua Absinthii, mixed with an equal
quantity of Spirit of Eiderflowers, continuing it daily, till the Dropsy and
Tympany (which will in a little time) vanishes.

XXIX. Spiritus Salis Martialis, Steeled Spirit of Salt Gem.
Bate.] Sal Gem. p. j. Mars, p. ij. mix and distill by a Retort, S. A. Dose a
gut. 5. ad 15. It is diuretic, and wonderfully aperitive or opening.

Salmon.] 1. It is made as Spirit of common Salt, and indeed is nothing but
Spirit of Salt impregnated with the virtue, power, and efficacy of the Steel or
Iron, and the most volatile parts thereof, which are dissolved by the Acid of
the Salt, and made to ascend with it. 2. It may be dulcified after this manner:
Of this steeled Spirit lb j. Alcohol of the Spirit of Wine lb iss. mix and
digest a week, shaking the glass once a day: being thus sweetened by digestion
with Spirit of Wine, it is more balsamic, and natural to the Body of Man. 3.
It strengthens and fortifies the Stomach, potently resists the Scurvy and
Green Sickness in Virgins; opens all manner of Obstructions in Liver, Spleen,
Womb, Reins, or Bladder, expels watery Humors and Wind, and is of singular use
against the Colic. It increases the Appetite, and causes a good digestion. Of
this Spirit a gut. 6. ad 20. White Wind, or Canary iv. ad vj. Tincture of
Wormwood gut. xxx. mix for a Dose; to be given either at Night going to Bed, or
early in the Morning fasting: where Note, That if it be dulcified with Spirit
of Wine, you may give it from 15 drops, to 50, or 60, as you see need requires.

XXX. Spiritus Sambuci, Spirit of Elder-berries.
Bate.] It is distilled from the fermented Berries, as you distill Spirit of
Hyssop, etc. It is Alexipharmick, Cardiack; Sudorifick, and U^erine. Dose a
spoonful or two, etc.

Salmon.] 1. You must take the Berries and bruise them well, then put them into
a wooden Vessel; to every gallon of which, you must add of course Sugar, or
Melussos lb j. to hasten the fermentation, which ought to be continued so long,
till the Liquor has acquired a vinous scent; then put it into a Copper Vesica
tinned within, with its Worm and Recipient, and draw off the Spirit with a
gentle Fire: draw off the quarter part, which save by itself as the best and
strongest Spirit; and is to go by the name of Spirit of Elder: then changing
the Receiver draw off about as much more, which keep by itself, under the title
of Elder-water. 2. This Water you may reserve for making of new Spirit, putting
it into fresh bruised Berries, (but after the fermentation, least you lose the
volatile parts thereof before you distill it) and draw off the Spirit as before;
and then the Elder-water, which you may save for a supplement to the next
Spirit. 3. Modus Vtendi. Of this Spirit j. Juniper, or Parsley-water ij. Syrup
of Lemons ss. mix for a Dose, against Obstructions of the Reins and Bladder. Of
this Spirit j. Tincture of Castor j. White Wind or Sherry iv, mix for a Dose,
against Distempers of the Womb. Of this Spirit j. Spirit of Sal Armoniack gut.
20. Spirit of Scurvy Grass gut. 10. Camomil-water iv. mix for a Dose, against
the Pleurisy.

XXXI. Spiritus Sanguinis, Spirit of Man's Blood.
Bate.] Distill it from the Blood of a sound young Man, putrefied, in Sand, and
then rectify it, S. A. It is chiefly commended against the Epilepsie, or
Falling Sickness, radically taking it away; as also against the Palsy,
Apoplexy, Ulcers of the Lungs, etc. Dose a gut. 10. ad 20. and more, for a
whole Month.

Salmon.] 1. Because it is really necessary to understand the way of distilling
Humane Blood, we shall here particularly explicate and exemplify the process.
Of the Blood of a sound young Man q. v. put it into a large Glass Body, upon
which put some two or three handfuls of Hemp, to prevent its rising or swelling
into the Head or Alembick* lute the Junctures well, giving a gentle and gradual
Fire in Ashes or Sand, distill to dryness, but beware of burning; so have you
Water and Spirit, which you must rectify in B. M. 2. With the Water you may
extract the Salt out of the Caput Mortuum; after due Calcination; the Spirit
you may preserve as it is, as an excellent Remedy against the Falling Sickness,
and Convulsion Fits in Children, and may be given a ss. to j. thus: Of this
Spirit j. Water of Earthworms, Lilly Convally, Lavender, or Peony ij. or iij.
Syrup of Peony ij. mix for a Dose. 3. Now here is to be noted, that this Spirit
would yet be stronger and better, if you cohobate it upon the faeces several
times in a Retort, viz. Eight or nine times, or till it has got a Ruby color,
and that the Oil comes at last with its volatile Salt, sticking to the neck of
the Glass, or sides of your Recipient; then to mix it with the Spirit, and join
them together by distillation in B. M. 4. This is that Spirit so much cried up
for the cure of the Palsy, being inwardly taken a gut. vj. ad xij. or xx. in
Broth, Decoction, or generous Wine: what remains at the bottom of this Glass
Body, after the Cohobations, being calcined, you may extract the Salt out of,
as before directed. 5. The Oil you may rectify upon Colcothar in Sand, in a
Retort, till you find it thin, subtle, and penetrative, with which mix the
fixed Salt, and digest till they are perfectly united: thus have you an
excellent Balsam to ease the Gout in Hands or Feet, and to remove the tumor
and redness thereof; it softens, dissipates, yea, and dissolves the chalky
Concretions, which are bred in the Joints in that Disease; as also pocky Nodes,
Tophs, Gums, and Swellings, the Body being beforehand prepared by taking some
few Doses of our Aurum Vitae. 6. In defect of Man's Blood, you may make use of
Sheeps, Goats, Swines, or Neats-blood, and distill it in the same manner as
Humane Blood; for in perfect Animals, the natural digestions are performed in
the same manner, and their Blood is endowed with nearly the same Virtues, save
that Humane Blood may be thought to be more homogenial to our Natures. 7.
Rolfincius Artis Chimicae, Lib. 5. Sect. 1. Art. 4. Cap. 2. makes it after this
manner: The Blood newly gathered, dry it gently in an Oven, so that being freed
from the Phlegm, there may be lb xij. put it into a Retort, and distill with an
open Fire, so have you first a Spirit, after a volatile Salt, then a thick Oil:
The Fire being out, and the Vessels cooled, gather the yellow Salt moistened
with the Oil; and after the white and crystalline, (which is indeed but little)
that adheres to the lightest part of the Recipient. The Spirit impregnated with
much Salt separate from the Oil, and the more sincere or pure Spirit, mixed
with the former volatile Salt, rectify by an Alembick, keeping the pure white
Salt by it self for use. The residue of the Liquor which remains, distill
through the Alembick, and keep by itself. Lastly, Because you cannot distill to
dryness without danger of breaking the Glass Body: affuse thereon Spirit of
Wine rectified, so will it ascend white, pellucid, and of a grateful flavor.
This Salt and Spirit have one and the same Virtues, and are admirable
Diaphoreticks to be used in all burning, malign, and pestilential Fevers. Dose
a gr. iij. ad viij. in Broth, or a Draught of Wine. 8. Maets makes it thus:
Blood of a sound Man, and dry it, adding as much rectified Spirit of Salt as
the Serum weighed; evaporate to dryness again: of this Blood thus dried, take
p. j. white Rhenish Tartar, p. v. mix exactly and distill: separate the stinking
Oil from the Spirit, the Oil rectify upon Glawber 's Sal Mirabilis Calcinatum,
or upon common Salt calcined, or decripetated; rectify it so long, till it
becomes clear and limpid, leaving a black Earth at bottom of the Retort: to
this Oil add Alcohol of Spirit of Wine, p. iv. and distill them together till
they are perfectly united. So have you a most subtle and fiery Spirit of Humane
Blood, of which you may give a gut. 20. ad 40. but of the former Spirit to a
much larger Dose. 9. He also makes it thus: Man's Blood dried, p. j. Calx of
Flints, p. ij. or decripitated Salt: mix and distill by a Retort, so have you
Spirit and Oil, which separate by filtring; the volatile Salt adhering to the
Receiver and Neck of the Retort, gather and rectify or depurate it, as you do
volatile Salt of Hartshorn: the Oil rectify as before, the volatile Salt
dissolve in the Spirit, and keep it for use. 10. It is made also after this
manner: Man's Blood, q. v. put it into a sublimatory Vial, and digest it in
Horse-dung for forty days; then draw off the Spirit with a very gentle Fire.
This volatile Spirit is a great Arcanum in the cure of the Falling Sickness.
11. Marggrave makes it thus: Man's Blood xxx. distill it in a low Cucurbit in
Sand, for six or eight hours, augmenting the Fire strongly in the end, till
nothing more will come forth: first there ascends xv. of a limpid Liquor: then
follows ix. of a turbid Liquor: conjoyn both, and affuse them the next day upon
the Caput Mort. and distill again as before to dryness; do this once or twice
more, till the Liquor ascends turbid, with some little drops of Oil swimming in
it: Separate the Oil by a Funnel, and rectify the Liquor, so as to abstract
only five or six Ounces, of which the Dose is gut. x. ad xx. against the
Epilepsie, and most other Diseases of the Brain, Nerves, and Womb, Hysteric
Fits, etc.

XXXII. Spiritus Saturni, Spirit of Saturn.
Bate.] It is distilled by a Retor^ from purified and rectified Saccharum
Saturni, S. A. It is sudorifick, good against the Plague or Pestilence,
Hypochondriack Melancholy, Burning Fevers, French Pox, and the like. Dose gut.
ij. or iij.

Salmon.] This Spirit of Saturn, drawn from its Salt, is an inslamable Liquor,
and is thus made: Salt of Saturn, so much as may fill your Glass or Earthen
Retort two thirds full; put it into a Furnace over a very gentle Fire, both to
heat the Retort, and drive out the Phlegm, (which comes first:) continue this
degree of Fire, till the drops begin to have some taste; then fit to it a large
Receiver, lute well the Junctures, and increase the Fire gradatim, so will the
Spirit come forth, filling the Receiver with Clouds: all being come off, let
the Vessels cool, then unlute, and take the Spirit and put it into a Glass
Cucurbit, to rectify it, in a very gentle Sand heat, drawing off about the one
half thereof: this is the inflamable Spirit of Saturn, burning like Spirit of
Wine, and of a sour taste, Quemque inter non entia reponit Rolfincius; but I
think him to be mistaken. 2. The other half of the Liquor which remains in the
Alembick, they call (though improperly) Oil of Saturn, and is used to cleanse and
clear the Eyes of Horses. 3. The blackish matter remaining in the Retort, being
put into a Crucible upon a good Fire, will reassume the form of Lead, being
deprived of the Acids which gave it the form of Salt. 4. The Salt of Saturn may
also be revived into Lead, by mixing it with an Alcaly, and melting it as
aforesaid in a good Fire, for that the Alcali absorbs the Acid, and as much
enervates it, as if it were drawn off; but then it will flame, before it
revives, because of the Spirit of Wine contained in the Vinegar, which
converted the Lead into Ceruse. 5. The Spirit of Saturn therefore is
inflamable, because it contains some Spirit of Wine, which remains still
involved in the Vinegar, and was carried with the Acids into the Pores of the
Lead, when the Saccharum Saturni was made. This Salt being distilled, the force
of the Fire breaks the Acid, and sets the Spirit of Wine at liberty; so that
the Spirit of Saturn has very little of an acid taste in it. 6. It is also to
be observed, that if you take lbj. or xvj. of the Saccharum, you will have by
distillation in the Retort, about 3 ounces of Liquor, or Spirit, and yet there
will be left in the Retort (which is the wonder) about eighteen ounces of a
blackish matter, so that here an augmentation is evident: Now ^the quantity of
Lead in the Saccharum: And if you reduce the eighteen ounces of black Matter
into Lead, in a Crucible, you will have of Lead 10; and ij. of a yellow Earth,
like Litharge of Gold, which seems to be an impurity of the Lead. 7. Hence it
is apparent, that the Saccharum, as by distillation it loses its acid
particles, it receives others, which are igneous, in; more in number, and
greater in quantity or weight, as appears by the operation: but when again it
is reduced in a Crucible into Lead, the particles of the Lead coming together
into a Body, expel the fiery particles, so that the Lead reviving as before,
recovers but its first weight. 8. The Retort ought scarcely to be full, and the
Receiver ought to be very large, because these volatile Spirits flying out with
violence, if they should not have room enough to play in, might possibly break
the Vessels. 9. Le Febure makes it after this manner: Pure Crystalline
Saccharum Saturni lb j. dissolve it seven times one after another in the best
Spirit of Vinegar, evaporating every time: then in the hottest Season of the
Year dissolve it in a cold Cellar, per deliquium, this Liquor put into a Retort
placed in a Reverberatory Furnace upon an earthen Pot, the bottom turned upside
down, having about an inch thickness of Sand or Ashes between the said bottom
and Retort: fit to the neck a very large Receiver, luting the Juncture with all
possible care; which being dry, make a gentle Fire at first, and very slowly
increase it, till the Receiver is totally filled with white Vapors, but by
degrees augment it to the height, and when you see heavy and red drops fall
down, and that the Receipient grows clear of itself, (which will be in about
twenty or twenty four hours) cease, or put out the Fire. 10. This Liquor
distilled over into the Receiver, is fourfold, viz. 1. A subtle and volatile
Spirit. 2. A yellow Oil. 3. A Phlegm. 4. A red Oil, which you must separate one
from another by rectification, thus: 11. Put them into a clean glass Retort in
B.M. or Sand, with its Recipient, changing the Receiver according to the change
of the Liquors coming over. The Volatile and Aetherial Spirits come first through
the neck of the Retort, without framing any Veins therein: next follows the
yellow Oil, which makes oblique and winding Veins; as soon as which sign does
appear, the Receiver must be changed: After the yellow Oil comes the Phlegm in
straight and direct Veins, which must also be taken away by itself: And lastly,
In the bottom of the Retort you will find the red Oil remaining. 12. This
Volatile Spirit of Saturn resists putrefaction of the Blood and Humors, and
cures Hypochondriack Melancholy (given for twenty or thirty days together); it
is a wonderful Sudorifick, and therefore is excellent against the Plague,
pestilential and burning Fevers, Palsy, Epilepsie, Apoplexy, French Pox,
Frenzy, Madness, and other like Diseases afflicting Body or Mind, or both. Dose
a gut. 8. ad 16. or 20. in any appropriated Vehicle. 13. The yellow Oil being
digested upon Calx of Gold, or Crocus Solis in a gentle heat of a Bal.
Vaporoso, in a Circulatory Vessel hermetically sealed, will become as red as
Blood; and then be a great Arcanum against all Griefs of the Heart and Brain,
being given a gut. j. ad iv. in Spirit of Lilly Convally, Canary, or other
proper Liquor. 14. The red. Oil being circulated with equal parts of Oil of
Camphir, and tartariz'd Spirit of Wine for fifteen or twenty days, or longer,
and then the S. V. abstracted with a very gentle heat in B. M. you will have
remaining a miraculous Balsamic Essence, which will cure green Wounds in a day
or two, at once dressing, being only slightly besmeared with a Feather dipped
therein; and is besides profitable for the cure of the most inveterate Ulcers,
dissolves and resolves all Swellings, hinders Accidents in Wounds, wonderfully
cures Fistula's, and growing Cancers, as also takes away Scurf, Morphew, and
Leprosy, and restores again pined and withered Members; for it is a kind of
Mummial Balsam impregnated with the Sulphur of Saturn.

XXXIII. Spiritus Spongiarum, Spirit of Sponges.
Bate.] It is distilled from Sponges by a Retort, and rectified, S. A. It is a
singular Lithontriptick.

Salmon.] 1. As much Sponge as you please, cut it very small, put it into a
glass Retort, which place in a close Reverberatory, with its Receiver; lute the
Juncture well, and give Fire Gradatim, like as in the distillation of Tartar:
and continue to increase it by little and little, till the white and oily
clouds begin to come, and that you see the volatile Salt does sublime and stick
to the sides of the Receiver: continue the Fire in the same degree till all is
come forth, and the Receiver grows clear of it self. 2. Then cease the Fire,
and all being cold, take away the Vessels, pour out the Spirit and volatile
Salt together, and separate the Oil by a Funnel, or some Cotton, which keep in
a Glass by itself. 3. Put the Spirit and Volatile Salt into a low Glass Body,
and rectify them in Sand, keeping them together: The Sponge also calcined at
the bottom of the Retort after distillation, you may save for to stop violent
fluxes of Blood. 4. This Spirit, volatile Salt, and Oil of Sponges, are not
only of excellent use against the Stone and Gravel, or any other Obstruction in
the Reins and Bladder, or other passages of Urine, but are also profitable
against strumous or scrophulons Swellings, and the Disease called, Broncoceles,
which is a Bunch or Swelling in the Throat: for they not only admirably open,
but also by their acuity of parts, attenuate and resolve much. 5. Against the
Stone and Diseases of the Reins and Bladder, you may use them thus: Of the
Spirit, in which the volatile Salt is dissolved j. Aquae Fabarum, or in place
thereof Petroselini, iij. Syrupus Nephriticus, or in place thereof Dialthaea
ij. Powder of Winter Cherries ss. mix for three Doses. 6. But for a
Broncoceles, or King's Evil thus: First, Purge the Patient with my Family-Pills,
or Pilulae Panchymagogae, or Pilulae Mirabiles, or some other Purge proper in
this case, as this: Fine Scammony gr. xvj. Resin of Jallap, gr. viij.
Colocynthis in Powder ij. mix, and with extract of Colocynthis, make Pills for
iij. Doses. Or you may purge with a simple Extract of Colocynthis alone, made
only with common Water, which is an admirable thing, and works well in gr. vj.
or viij. This Purging is to be continued all along the Cure, every fourth or
fifth day, till the Swelling is wholly gone. 7. Then you must anoint outwardly
with this: Oil of Sponges j. Oil of bitter Almonds j. mix them to anoint with
Morning and Evening, applying over all an Emplaster of Oxycroceum, or
Diachylon, or some such like. 8. Lastly, Give the Patient every Morning
fasting, and every Night going to Bed, the Spirit mixed with the volatile Salt,
after this manner: Of the Spirit a gut. xij. ad xx. or xxiv. Arsmart Water iij.
Syrupi Volatilis vj. mix for a Dose: Or, giving the said mixture at Night going
to Bed, give these following Lozenges, one every Morning fasting: Of the
strongest fine Sugar iv. Calx of the Sponge aforementioned ij. Crocus martis
astringens iij. Long Pepper j. mix, and make Lozenges, weighing each iiss.
which dry and keep for use. By following this course constantly, you will
evidently and daily see these Scrophulous, Strumatick, and Bronchocele Tumors
to decrease, and vanish to nothing. 9. In what Classis to place Sponge, Authors
have scarcely determined; some thinking it to be neither Vegetable, Mineral,
nor Animal; others thinking it to participate of them all: others place it
between Animals and Vegetables, affirming it to partake of both of them; for
that, say they, it has an active quality to dilate itself, and shrink up
together when it is in the Sea, whereby it enjoys a tenebrous life, coming near
to that of an Animal, and to that of a Plant, whence they will have it a
Zoophyton, or Plant Animal.

XXXIV. Spiritus Tabaccae, Spirit of Tobacco.
Bate.] It is distilled as that of Amber, from the dried Leaves. Dose a j. ad
iij. for Vomiting.

Salmon.] 1. In handling this Preparation, I hope we shall evidently
demonstrate, That Chimical Physicians are not contented simply with the
superficies, or outside of things, but aim at a farther scrutiny, viz. to open
them, and to penetrate into their insides, and very centers, thereby to find
out the whole of what they do contain, separating the pure and virtuous parts,
the Spirit, Oil, and volatile Salt, viz. the Potestates, or Powers, from their
impure, faeculent, and earthy parts, that so they may the more aptly be
appropriated and applied to the cure of the Diseases of Humane kind. 2. Of the
best Spanish Tobacco cut small lb j. or xvj. put upon it an equal weight of
Phlegm of Vitriol, put on the Cucurbit or Vesica its Head, digest in Sand for a
day or two; fit to it a Receiver, and distill about ten ounces of Liquor by a
gentle Fire, which keep in a Vial by itself. This is a powerful Vomit, and may
be given a ij. ad vj. in some fit Vehicle; outwardly it is good also to bathe
Tettars, Ring-worms, Itch, and such like with. 3. Put the Magma in the Cucurbit
into an Earthen, or Glass Retort luted, place it in a Furnace with a large
Receiver, well luting the Juncture, begin with a small Fire to raise the Phlegm,
which augment gradatim, and the Spirits will come forth confusedly with a black
Oil; continue the Fire till all is come over, then cool the Vessels, and unlute
them: what you have in the Recipient, put into a Funnel lined with brown Paper,
so will the watery and spirituous parts pass through, leaving the black foetid
Oil in the Paper or Filter. 4. This Spirit is not usual to be taken inwardly;
outwardly you may use it thus: Pure yellow Palm Oil ij. of this Spirit j. mix
them. It cures Itch, Tettars, Ring-worms, by anointing therewith. 5. The Oil is
too violent to be given inwardly, and therefore some use it outwardly thus:
Lapis infernalis q. v. Oil of Tobacco, so much as will make an Ointment, which
keep in a dry place. Anoint the pit of the Stomach with gr. v. or vj. and the
Patient will presently vomit; but if you would move the Body downwards, anoint
about the Navel therewith, and the sick will presently fall a purging; where
note, 1. That the sick ought to take some warm Broth, or Posset Drink in the
working. 2. That the Ointment is not to lie so long as to cauterize the part to
which it is applied. 6. But the greatest external use of this Oil, is, to
consolidate new Wounds, and to cure Cacoethick Ulcers, and to remove all the
Accidents of Contusions: because it potently resolves the extravasated Blood,
and hinders the heat and inflammation, which are always previous to a
putrefaction. It is good also against the Toothache, and to dissipate the
chalky knots proceeding from the Gout, and to dissolve pocky Gums, Nodes, and
Tophs, thus: Palm Oil ij. Oil of Tobacco ij. mix for an Ointment, for the
aforesaid purpose. 7. This Oil is best unrectified, for now it contains both
Oil and volatile Salt, which in conjunction produce those rare effects; whereas
being rectified it loses much of the said volatile Salt, and becomes less
effectual. Dr. French makes Lozenges of this unrectified Oil thus: Of the
strongest refined Sugar ^^ss. Oils of Resemary, and Rhodium ana gut. xxxij. Oil
^f Nutmegs by Expression j. Oil of Tobacco, gut. xxx. or ^^ss, mix and make
Lozenges, ^ach weighing a dram; which ^s a Dose, about half a grain of the Oil
being in each Lo^enge. One of these being taken (says he) every Morn^ng, or
every other Morning, ^eeps the Body soluble, and ^s good for such as are apt to
^e costive. 8. I must con^ess, I like not much the ta^ing of this unrectified
Oil ^nwardly; for by reason of ^he peircing sulphur, and vo^atile Salt which it
contains, it ^as soon as ever it gets into ^he stomach) falls a pricking ^he
fibers with violence, and ^n weak persons may endanger Convulsions: yea, this
Oil is so great a Vomit, that ^olding but ones nose a little over the Vial
containing it, it ^mmediately puts the stomach upon a convulsive mo^ion. 9. A
few drops being instilled into the Veins of (...) Dog's Leg, presently put ^he
Dog into Convulsions and Vomiting, and in a short time after killed him; from
which ^t appears, that if it be ever given inwardly, it would doubtless be best
to rectify it by distillation, thereby to take away in a great measure its
Empyreuma. 10. Then (say Authors) it may be given with happy success against
Suffocations, Fits of the Mother, Risings, Vapors, Inflations, and Irritations
of the Spleen, which cause shortness of breath, by reason of the compression of
the Diaphragma, or Midriff. It is good also against intermitting Fevers, given
a little before the Fit comes; and is a good Antepileptick Remedy, exhibited
upon the Full of the Moon, two or three days before and after in Spir.
Theriacalis camphorated, volatile Spirit of Hartshorn, or Mixtura Simplex. 11.
In giving this Oil, (if not made up into Lozenges) you must drop it upon pure
white Sugar, a gut. ij. ad iv. and then mix it with any appropriate Vehicle;
for example, against an Epilepsy: Mixtura Simplex j. of this Oil gut ij. ad iv.
dropped into white Sugar: Bawm Water iij. Syrup of Clove-gilliflowers vj. mix for
a Dose. Against intermitting Fevers you may give it thus: Spir, Theriacli j.
of this Oil, gut. iij. or iv. Centaury Water iv. Syrup of Citron-peels j. mix
for a Dose. 12. But as this Oil is not often given inwardly, except upon great
necessities, when no other Remedies are to be found; so being reserved for
external uses, it is best without rectifying, and so is much more powerful to
the intentions proposed, as then comprehending within it, its volatile Salt,
which being rectified, it will be in the greatest part deprived of. 13. From
the Faeces in the Retort by Calcination and Elixiviation, etc. you may have a
fixed Salt, or Alkali; but in making of it, it will be good to get a larger
quantity of Ashes, that you may have it the more plentifully. 14. This Salt is
said to possess all the Virtues of the Plant, besides which, it mundifies and
heals, and is very gentle being applied to foul and running Ulcers, and upon
their callous sides, which hinder Cicatrizing: taken inwardly in Broth, it
gently moves the Belly, kills Worms, and expels all other Corruptions in the
Stomach and Entrails: It is Sudorifick, Diuretic, and Deopilative, removing
all Obstructions in parts adjacent to the Ventricle, chiefly those of the
Mesentery and Pincreas, and takes away all the Impurities of the Womb. The Dose
is a gr. iv. ad xx in any appropriated Liquor. 15. Le Febure makes this Spirit
and Oil thus: Tobacco cut small lb iv. put it into a Glass Retort in a
Reverberatory Furnace, upon the Cover of an Earthen Pot turned upside down, and
kept up upon two Iron Bars, putting two or three handfuls of Sand or Ashes
thereon, to hinder the touching of the Earthen Pot and Retort, and prevent its
breaking: cover the Furnace, and lute on the Recipient, which being dry, kindle
the Fire, increasing it gradually by little and little, till the Recipient
begins to be filled with Clouds and Vapors; then keep the Fire in an equality
till the Glass it freed from fumes, which done, give the last and extreme
degree of Fire, that the Tobacco may calcine, and no volatile, saline, or
oleaginous substance may remain behind: when the Recipient grows clear, and no
more comes over, let the Fi^e go out, take the Receiver, and shaking all
together, pour it out into a Funnel lined with brown Paper, so will the Spirit
filtrate through the Paper, leaving the Oil behind, as before directed. 16. This
Spirit you ought to rectify in a Glass Cucurbit from its Phlegm; and being so
rectified, it is full of volatile Salt, whereby it is powerful to deterge,
attenuate, and dissolve whatever is against Nature, of what quality soever, and
in what part soever contained. It is profitable against Asthma's, and other
Oppressions of the Breast and Lungs, proceeding from a tartarous matter, which
it truly and specifically dissolves. It works by Spitting, Urine, and Sweat,
and also provokes Vomiting according to the matter it meets with: outwardly it
purifies, cleanses, and heals callous and cancerous Ulcers; and above all,
admirably cures Fistula's; it is also excellent above many other things for
fresh Wounds and Contusions, if mixed with Urine, and then part washed therewith,
and afterward applied warm upon the wounded part. It also cures the Crystaline
Bladder arising on the end of the Yard, in the French Disease, which is one of
the most pernicious Symptoms that can happen, it appeases the pain, resolves
powerfully the venomous matter which causes it, and prevents the mortal
consequences attending it. 17. It may be given inwardly in any Specific
Decoction or Water, or in Broth, Hydromel, or Wine, as you see convenient; and
the design is from gut. iij. ad xx. according to the age and strength of the
Patient. 18. The Oil aforementioned you may rectify in this manner: The Caput
Mort. before the Salt is extracted, powder it, and therewith mix the Oil, till
you have made it into a mass or lump; put it into a Retort, and in a Sand
Furnace, draw off the Oil; so will it be very pure and subtle; which keep for
the inward uses aforementioned. Tobacco is a wonderful Plant, and admirable
uses may be made of it in the curing of many Diseases, if a wise Man has it in
hand. 19. Clissus Peti, The Powers of Tobacco, are made (according to Le
Febure) out of the three Principles of the Plant, viz. the Mercury, or Spirit;
Sulphur or Oil, and Salt, mixed together in a fit proportion, and digested till
an inseparable union is made; which will be more absolute and perfect, if they
be drawn over the helm together, and several times cohobated. This is a much
more efficacious remedy than any of the three Principles separated; and
therefore the Dose must be less in proportion.

XXXV. Spiritus Theriacalis camphoratus, The Treacle Spirit camphorated.
Bate.] Venice Treacle v. best Myrrh x. English Saffron ss. Camphir ij. best
rectified Spirit of Wine x. digest and distill in B. M. cohobating thrice, S. A.
It is of egregious use in all malign Diseases; it provokes Sweat, and resist
Poison. Dose a j. ad j. etc.

Salmon.] 1. Rolfincius Artis Chimiae, Lib. 3. Sect. 1. Art. 2. Cap. 23. has
this prescript in a differing proportion, viz. Venice Treacle v. choice Myrrh,
xx. Saffron ss Camphir ij. Spirit of Wine xx. by which you may perceive that in
this the Myrrh and S. V. are completely doubled, and he makes the distillation
in a Sand heat, but this in B. M. is much the best, for so the Spirit will have
no Empyreuma or smatch of burning. 2. It has the power of inciding,
attenuating, and resisting malignity; by the tenuity and subtily of its
substance it immediately penetrates the universal Body without any trouble.
(...) est, malignitatem per sudorem dispellens. It has a place amongst the
greatest of Cordials, is good against fainting and swooning Fits, Palpitation
of the Heart, the Colic, Wind in the Bowels, and all sorts of burning and
malign Fevers, but chiefly against the Contagion of the Plague or Pestilence.
3. The Dose of it in way of Cure may be ad ij. but in way of Prevention ad ij.
in generous Wine, or some other appropriate Liquor; but some Authors allow it
to be given to an Ounce in a proper Vehicle. 4. Charras in his Royal
Pharmacopoeia makes a Treacle Spirit after this manner: Of the best Venice
Treacle v. Roots of Angelica, of Master-wort, of Spignel Athamantick, and
Valerian the greater, A. iij. vj. Seeds of Bishops-weed, and Seseli, A. x.
Spirit of Wine rectified lb ij. the Roots and Seeds bruised, digest eight days
in S. V. then distill in B. M. S. A. This, if you please, you may make
camphorated with three drams of Camphire. 5. It has the Virtues of the former,
and powerfully resists and sorts of Poisons, and may be given a j. ad iv. in
Canary, or any other Cordial Liquor: Some drops of it being dropped upon the
palms of the hands, may be gently rubbed together, and then immediately drawn
up the Nostrils against the pain of the Head, Megrim, or other Distempers of
the Brain, as also applied to the Temples and Sutures of the Skull, and Pit of
the Stomach.

XXXVI. Spiritus Veneris, Spirit of Venus, or Copper.
Bate.] It is distilled by a Retort from the Vitriol of Venus, S. A. It is the
greatest Arcanum for the Cure of the Epilepsy, it corroborates the Ventricle,
corrects Crudities, warms a cold Womb, cures the Suffocation thereof, or Fits
of the Mother, moves or provokes the Courses, and strengthens the Reins to
perform their duty. Dose a gut. v. ad. x.

Salmon.] 1. In Our Doron Medicum, Lib. 2. Cap. 2. Sect. 19. we have given you
a full and large description of the Spirit of Venus, showing you its complete
Preparation, as well as its Virtues, Uses, and Dose. But there are several
other ways of preparing thereof, which we now come to declare. 2. Spiritus and
Crocus Veneris Marg-gravii. Verdigrise in fine Powder lb ss. put it into a
Glass Retort, and distill in Sand with Fire of the third degree, for five or six
hours, or till no more will come forth; so will you have iv. of Liquor. Take
this distilled Liquor, and distill it by a Glass Retort to dryness, so have you
Spirit of Venus rectified and pure, which Zwelfer calls the Liquor Alcahest.
The Caput Mort. left in the first distillation, edulcorate, or wash oftentimes
with warm Water, and dry it; so have you Crocus Veneris. 3. This Spirit or
Alkahest or Zwelfer is an admirable dissolvent of Mars, Venus, Corals, and
other Stones; being taken into the Body, it attenuates gross humors, and opens
all manner of Obstructions, taking away the viscosity of the passages, it
strengthens the Stomach and created dries and astringes, stops Haemorrhagies,
and is used in drying and astringing Ointments and Emplasters.. 4. Maets makes
it after this manner: Verdigrise, or rather Crystals of Venus, q. v. to which
add a half part of Alum calcined, (i. e. of the Caput Mort. after its Spirit is
drawn off) mix and distill in an earthen Retort, or a Glass one well luted in an
open Fire, till all the Fumes cease, which Spirit rectify from its phlegm, as
before directed. 5. This Spirit is an egregious Menstruum for extracting the
Tinctures from the Glass of Antimony, as also from its Minera, and the Crocus's
and Calces of other Metals, exceeding indeed all other Spirits of Vinegars. 6.
Lemery makes it thus: Crystals of Venus q. v. put them into a Glass Retort,
filling it full, place it in Sand, fit to it a large Receiver, lute well the
Juncture, and give a small Fire at first, to drive out the insipid Phlegm, after
which will follow a volatile Spirit. Augment the Fire gradatim, and the
Recipient will fill with white Clouds; toward the latter end, kindle Coals
round about the Retort, increasing the Fire to the last degree, to force over
all the Spirits. When the Clouds disappear, and the Recipient grows cool, put
out the Fire, unlute and decant the distilled Spirit into a Glass Body, drawing
off the Spirit again to dryness: this is Spirit of Venus rectified. 7. It is a
Specific against the Epilepsy, Palsy, Apolexy, and other Diseases of the Head
and Brain: it may be given a gut. v. ad x. or xij. in any convenient Vehicle.
The black mass at bottom may be revived into Copper, if put into a Cucurbite in
a fire of fusion, with a little Saltpeter, or Tartar. 8. In making this Spirit
from the Crystals of Venus, you will have viij. from xvj. of the Vitriol, viij.
of Caput Mort. remaining behind. 9. And tho Zwelfer says, that this Spirit will
dissolve Coral and Pearl without loosing any thing of its force or strength, so
that when you would use the same numerical Spirit again, it shall do again the
same operation upon new matter, yet Experience has not confirmed this
assertion; for tho it may come off from the dissolved matter with a great deal
of sharpness, yet has it lost a great part of its acidity wherein the force of
the Menstruum lay: and by many reiterated Operations upon new matter Operations
upon new matter, it will come off at length very weak, and almost insipid. 10.
Charras makes it thus: Crystals of Venus made of Verdigrise, affuse on them (in
fine Powder) S. V. rectified, so much as may overtop it four inches, which in a
Sand heat abstract, and cohobate twice or thrice more, to qualify the Acrimony
of the Vitriol: then being dry, and in Powder put it into a Retort, and distill
as before directed in a close Furnace of Reverberation, with a large Recipient:
reiterate the distillation as also cohobation of the Spirit distilled upon the
sediment, and make a third distillation: so will you have a Spirit impregnated
with the most essential parts of the Crocus Veneris. 11. This Spirit is a
Specific against the Epilepsy-Appolexy, Convulsions, Lethargy, Coma, Carus,
and other Diseases of the Head, Brain, and Womb. It is highly esteemed against
the Jaundice, illness and weakness of the Stomach, want of Appetite, and to
break the Stone in the Reigns and Bladder. It is prevalent also against all
sorts of Agues, the Plague or Pestilence, and all other malign Fevers; and may
be successfully used instead of the Prophylactick Wate of Sylvius, even against
all the Diseases for which that is commended. 12. Paracelsus accounts this very
Medicine as the quarter part of the whole Materia medica, and by some it is
esteemed as a real Alcahest, able to dissolve totally all Pearls, Corals, and
such other like hard Substances, with more ease than any other dissolvent, and
then quitting them by distillation, is able to dissolve more: but without doubt
(as I before observed) it must grow weaker and weaker; for the saline parts of
the matter dissolved will be sure to retain, and unite itself with some part of
the acid; and the terrene parts will also detain and unite with other particles
of the said Menstruum, which cannot well be separated by distillation, nor by
any other way but by lotion; so that in all probability* this Spirit must by
using decay, and grow every time weaker and weaker. 13. And this is also to be
noted, That Iron, Copper, Pearls, Corals, etc. ought not to pass for pure
Alcalies, because that acid Spirits work upon them: for tho these, and such
other like substances, are not destitute of the proper Alcali, it follows not,
that this part is the whole, nor that it can transform the other parts into
itself, since that when acid Spirits dissolve those kind of Substances, they do
it not by uniting themselves to them, as they do with true Alcalies, but by
destroying them, by dividing them into little particles; quitting them, and
letting them precipitate downwards, when they meet with any fixed or volatile
Salt, with which they can unite; considering that* only salt Substances
dissolvable in Water, and capable to unite and incorporate themselves with the
Oils, can be accounted real Alcalies. And tho boiling Water may make some
dissolutions of Copper reduced into Crystals, or Crocus after it has been
calcined with Sulphur; yet it only dissolves that part which the acid of the
Sulphur has corroded, and as it were half dissolved in Calcination. 14. As it
is given inwardly in any proper Liquor a gut. vj. ad xij. so likewise it is
used outwardly in Ointments to make the Hair grow, and to cure the Itch, Scurf,
and Scald Heads.

XXXVII. Spiritus Vini Scucinatus, Spirit of Wine with Amber.
Bate.] Powder of Amber iv. Alcohol of Spirit of Wine xij. mix and distill in B.
M. S. A. It is Cephalic, or good against Diseases of the Head, etc.

Salmon.] 1. The method how you are to perform this, we have exactly showed in
Our Pharmacopoeia Londinensis, lib. 4. cap. 3. sect. 39. to which I refer you.
It is much pleasanter than Oil of Amber, and in my opinion more subtle and
piercing, and therefore of greater efficacy. 2. You may also do it after this
manner: Of the best rectified Spirit of Wine (three or four times drawn off
from the best volatile Sal Armoniack, or rather digested six Months thereon) lb
ij. Oil of Amber of the first d^^wing ij. mix, digest two or three days, and
then draw them off together in a Glass Body; so will you have the Potestates
Succini, of admirable subtilty. 3. This Medicine is good for all that the Oil
is good for, and may be given inwardly against Vapors, Hysteric Fits, and all
Distempers of the Head, Nerves, and Womb. Outwardly to bathe with, it cures
Palsies, Numbness, Cramps, Convulsions, Pains, Aches, Sciatica's and Gouts,
proceeding from a cold cause, in what part of the Body soever. Dose a gut. 30.
ad 60.

XXXVIII. Spiritus Vini Tartarisatus, Spirit of Wine tartarised.
Bate.] Take Salt of Tartar iv. Alcohol of Spirit of Wine lb ij. mix and distill
in B. M. It is Scorbutic, etc.

Salmon.] 1. The intention of this Prescription is perfectly to deflegmate the
Spirit of Wine, not that the Spirit of Wine receives any great matter from the
Salt of Tartar, forasmuch as they are two distinct Substances not easily
miscible. 2. The Spirit of Wine will also be deflegmated, if you put the Salt
of Tartar into it, and digest it therein for some time, as eight or ten days,
without any thing of distillation: for the Phlegm will dissolve the Salt, and
mix with it, lying at the bottom like a heavy Oil, the Spirit perfectly
dephlegmated swimming on the top, which you may decant off, or separate with a
Funnel. 3. You may also deflegmate it with the purest and best Potashes,
(which are almost all Salt) after the same manner, for the Salt of the
Potashes imbibing the phlegmatic part of the Spirit, the pure subtle,
volatile Spirit will swim a top as before, which may in like manner be decanted
off for use; ^^or is it in the least inferior to the former, 4. I made once an
Experiment, by long digesting rectified Spirit of Wine upon Salt of Tartar,
after this manner: Pure Salt of Tartar j. Boneashes in fine Powder iij.
rectified, S. V. lb ij. mix them, and digest together for a Year or more,
shaking it once a day. I then decanted off my Spirit, which smelt and tasted
extreme strong of the Salt of Tartar, which made me believe, it had taken some
of the substance of the Salt, and united it with its own Body. The Salt I
restored carefully by Elixiviation, and Coagulation, etc. and found it to want
ij. of what it weighed before: this is matter of fact: and from hence I
conclude, many great Medicines may be made by long digestion. 5. This Spirit is
seldom used simply of itself against any Disease, yet it mightily sweetens the
Blood, chears the Spirits, warms the chilled Blood and Humors, dissolves
Coagulations of the Juyces, is good against the Scurvy, and provokes Urine. 6.
But the chief intention of it is to be a Menstruum to extract the volatile,
saline, and oily particles of other Bodies, chiefly from dried Vegetables; not
moist or green, for then their flegmy parts by mixing with the Menstruum, would
so weaken it, that it would do no great feats, or what would be worth
regarding. 7. You may also make a Syrup of it to have always ready, to
dulcicifie any Cordial Medicine with, after this manner: Syrupus Violatilis
Tartarisatus. Spirit of Wine Tartarized lb ij. double refined Sugar, so much as
it will dissolve over a gentle heat: being mixed and dissolved, keep it close
stopped for use. You will find it much better in practice than the cold
phlegmatic Syrups of the Shops: and if you please you may Aromatize it with
Cinnamon, and other Spices as you see fit, by digesting them grossly bruised, or
whole, in the Tartarized Spirit, before it is made into a Syrup.

XXXIX. Spiritus Viperarum, Spirit of Vipers.
Bate.] It is distilled from dried Vipers in the same manner as you distill
Spirit of Hartshorn, reserving the volatile Salt. It penetrates in the highest
degree, resists putrefaction, and opens Obstructions through the whole Body; it
overcomes Fevers, chiefly Quartan Agues. Dose gut. iv. ad. x.

Salmon.] 1. Vipers Flesh dried and shred small, q. v. put it into an earthen
Retort, or a glass one coated, place it in a close Reverberatory with a large
Receiver, lute the Juncture well, and distill first with a very gentle Fire to
warm the Retort, driving out the Phlegm drop by drop; when no more drops fall,
increase the Fire by little and little, so will the Spirit come forth, filling
the Receiver with white Clouds, and afterward a black Oil, and the volatile
Salt sticking to the sides of the Receiver. Continue the Fire till no more
comes, then cool and unlute, shaking about the Receiver a little, to loosen the
volatile Salt from the sides: Put all into a Bolt-head, with its Alembick, and
a small Receiver, luting the Joints with a wet Bladder, then distill in Sand
with a gentle Fire, so will the volatile Salt sublime to the top of the
Bolt-head, which separate and keep in a Glass well stopped, for use. 2. What
remains in the Bolt-head filter through brown Paper, so will the Phlegm and
Spirit pass through, leaving the Oil behind. This Spirit and Phlegm put into an
Alembick, and draw off about half the Liquor (which is the subtle Spirit) in a
Vaporous Bath, which keep close stopped for use, casting away the Phlegm. 3.
Rolfincius advises to take the dried Flesh, with the dried Hearts, Livers,
Heads, and Tails, and to distill as aforesaid, with degrees of Fire; so will you
have Spirit, Oil, and volatile Salt, the Salt sticking to the neck and sides of
the Receiver. The Spirit you must separate from the Oil, by filtration, as
before, through double brown Paper. Then you may mix the Salt with the Spirit,
and in a Glass Body and Alembick rectify the Salt, making it to ascend with a
very gentle Fire to the head of the Alembick white and pure. This head is then
immediately to be taken off, and another put on, and the distillation to be
continued till the Spirit is drawn off, as before directed. See my
Pharmacopoeia Londinensis, lib. 2. cap. 5. sect. 24. 12. and Doron Medicum,
lib. 1. cap. 25.. 138. 4. The farther preparation of the volatile Salt, with
its several Virtues and Uses, we shall pretermit here, and refer you to its
proper place in the Chapter of Salts following. The black Oil here, is so fetid
and stinking, that it is not to be used either outwardly or inwardly, except
only in the case of Hysteric Fits, to be smelt to. 5. But if you prepare it
with Spirit of Nitre after this manner following, it will be a most excellent
Medicine, and not much inferior to the Salt. Of the black fetid Oil of Vipers
iv. Spirit of Nitre viij. mix and digest two days: then add thereto of the best
rectified Spirit of Wine xij. filter through brown Paper, and keep it for use.
6. Thus have you a most excellent Medicine, and one of the most abominable
scents upon Earth, made one of the greatest Fragrancies in the whole World: it
may be given from gut. xij. ad xxx. in Wine, or any other proper Liquor against
fainting of the Spirits, Weakness, Consumptions, Epilepsies, Apoplexies, and in
a word, against all Diseases the volatile Spirit or volatile Salt are prevalent
against. 7. Now in the distillation of Vipers this is to be noted, that the
Receiver must be large, that the Spirits may circulate with the greater ease,
and the Fire gentle and gradual, least the too hasty rushing forth of the
Spirit should break the Vessels. 8. And whereas in the first distillation the
Phlegm comes first, before the Spirit, Oil, and Salt; yet in the second
distillation or rectification the Volatile Salt rises first, and the Phlegm
remains last: in performing of which operations, the neck of the Vesica or
Bolt-head must be very high, that the volatile Salt may ascend pure; for if any
Phlegm should rise with it, it would liquifie it, and turn it into Spirit. 9. In
rectification of the Spirit of Vipers, to clear it from its Phlegm; if you
should let the Liquor continue distilling never so little longer than it should
do, the Phlegm will rise after the Spirit, and make the Spirit look whitish; but
being kept together for about a Month, or somewhat longer, they will mix
perfectly together, and become clear: the reason of this whiteness is from a
small quantity of Oil ascending with the Spirit, which coming to be mixed with
never so small a quantity of Phlegm, always gives a white color. 10. This
Spirit is one of the best Medicines in the whole Art of Physic; it is
prevalent against Plague or Pestilence, and all sorts of malignant Fevers and
Agues the French Pox, Consumptions of all sorts, Poison, Bitings of Vipers,
Serpents, mad Dogs, or any other venomous Creature: It is a stupendous Remedy
against the Epilepsie, Apoplexy, Palsy, Numbness, Tremblings, Lethargy, and
Hysteric Fits. It is good against all Stoppages of the Head and Brain, and
cures Asthma's, Pleurisies, Obstructions of the Lungs, as also all old and new
Coughs, and other Diseases of the Breast and Lungs. It strengthens the Stomach,
helps Digestion, opens all Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and Bowels,
dissolves the Congelation, or Stagnation of the Blood, and is one of the
greatest Sudorificks in the World. Dose a gut. xx. ad xl. in Carduus, or
Angelica-water, or Spirit of Saffron, or Cinamon-water 11. Lemery makes a
Sudorifick-water of Vipers thus: Live Vipers cut them into pieces, and put them
alive into a large Earthen, or Glass Body, with its Head and Receiver, lute
well the Joints, and distill in B. M. to dryness. This Water (containing some
part of the volatile Salt) is Sudorifick, and may be given a j. ad ss. in any
sit Liquor. The dried pieces of Vipers may be distilled as before, from whence
you will have Spirit, Oil, and volatile Salt in like manner. 12. Le Febure's
Spirituous Essence of Vipers: Dried Hearts and Livers of Vipers iij. Alcohol of
S. V. so much as to overtop them six inches; put them into a double Glass,
lute it and digest in B. V. with a very gentle heat for four days: then in B.
M. distill with a slow Fire to dryness; cohobating three times: to every x. of
this Spirit put i. of the volatile Salt of Vipers; Ambergrise essentificated j.
Oil of Cinnamon, Oil of Lemon Peel, A. ss. mix all, and circulate in a Pelican
for eight days, and keep it close stopped for use. 13. This essentificated Spirit
of Vipers has all the Virtues of the volatile Salt, and this advantage over and
above, that it may better be preserved, being one of the best and noblest
Antidotes in the World, worthy the Closets of the greatest of Princes. Dose a
j. ad ij. in a little Wine. 14. Spiritus Viperarum acovisticus* Vipers Flesh
dried, cut it into bits, and bruise it well, q. v. affuse thereon so much
rectified S. V. as may overtop it six inches. Digest in a very gentle heat,
till all, or most of the substance is turned into an oily or spirituous Liquor,
which keep close stopped for use. It wonderfully helps in deafness, curing those
that have been deaf a long time: this was the Secret of a Nobleman of Germany,
and his chiefest Medicine, by which (it is reported) he cured such as are born
deaf: It is used by dropping it warm into the Ears.

XL. Ros Vitrioli, Dew of Vitriol.
Bate.] It is drawn forth from crude white Vitriol, by the heat of a boiling B.
M. S. A. It is good against a violent pain of the head, and adustion of blood,
and strengthens the Viscera. Dose ij, etc. continuing it for some time.

Salmon.] 1. Sala was the first that took notice of this Medicine, and after
him other Authors. We placed it among the Spirits, although it is a Phlegm. 1.
Because it contains a part of the volatile Spirit of Vitriol, which is in it.
2. Because it is previous in making of the said volatile Spirit, which follows
next after. 2. Le Febure makes it thus: Pure Vitriol. q. s. put it into a broad
mouthed Cucurbit eight inches high, with its Limbeck-head and Receiver, and in
a boiling B. M. distill till no more will come over. It is given in Broth or
other fit Liquor against the Megrim, and other pains of the Head, etc. 3.
According to Marg-grave, thus: Pure green Vitriol, put it into a Glass
Cucurbit, and distill in B. M. so long as any thing will come forth, which will
be done in twenty four hours time. This, says Marg-grave, is the Spiritus
Vitrioli verus Paracelsi, which refrigerates, opens, resists putrefaction,
extinguishes Fevers, and cures the Falling Sickness. Dose ij.

XLI. Spiritus Vitrioli, Spirit of Vitriol.
Bate.] Distill Vitriol calcined from Sand, and separate the Spirit from the
Phlegm* S. A. In strengthening the Ventricle, repressing Fevers, quenching
Thirst, allaying Inflammations, etc. it is a Secret. Dose so much as may make
the Liquor pleasantly acid, and not set the Teeth on edge.

Salmon.] 1. In our Pharm. Land. lib. 3. cap. 11. sect. 78. you have the
Colledge's way of distilling this Spirit and Oil, with our Annotations thereon,
which in that respect are enough: but by reason several Men have several ways
or methods of doing the same, from whence new Observations may arise, and that
they are also equally necessary to be known to the ingenious Physician, we
shall take the pains here to relate them. 2. From Marg-gravius. Vitriol
calcined and poudred lb x. put it into a strong earthen Retort, or a glass one
well covered with lute; distill in an open Fire for twenty four hours, so will
you have Phlegm and Spirit come over together: which by rectification you must
separate: then change your Receiver, and distill with a Reverberating Fire for
twenty four hours more, so will you have a most potent and strong Oil, which is
the Oleum Vitrioli verum Paracelsi; which being mixed with Water will make an
Effervescence. 3. Now here is to be noted, that in the beginning of this
distillation, the Fire ought to be small for the first six or eight hours, this
brings off the Phlegm: then it ought to be increased by degrees to the second
and third degree of Reverberation for eight hours more, and then urged for the
next eight hours to the fourth degree, so have you Spirit and Phlegm in one mass
together, which (as I said before) by rectification are to be separated:
lastly, for the other twenty four hours, the Fire is continued in that same
fourth degree for eliciting the Oil of Paracelsus. 4. From this vehement strong
Oil, by means of Water, and other Liquors, a white Substance may be
precipitated, which by fusion or melting will turn into Copper. 5. According to
Maets thus: English or Hungarian Vitriol calcined to whiteness, put it in gross
powder or bits into an earthen Retort, distill in an open Fire first with a
gentle heat, so have you Phlegm with a volatile Spirit: then increase the Fire
till the Retort grows red hot, so have you the volatile acid Spirit. At length
urge the Fire to the fourth and last degree, so have you the red Oil of Vitriol
of Paracelsus, wonderfully corrosive; continue the Fire in this degree for
twenty four hours, till all the Oil is come forth. All being cooled, take what
is distilled, put it into a Cucurbit with a long neck, and with a most gentle
Fire abstract the volatile Spirit of Vitriol: what remains at bottom put into a
Retort, and with a moderate Fire draw forth the Phlegm; then the acid Spirit of
Vitriol, leaving the ponderous corrosive Oil at bottom. 6. Le Mort's Oleum
Vitrioli martis. Vitriol of Iron lb v. calcined and poudred put it into a
Retort so as it may not be above half full, (which thing you ought to observe
in the former) add a large Receiver, luting the Joint well, and then distill:
Phlegm comes first, then the Spirit and Oil, the sign of which is, that the
Recipient will be full of white Vapors: continue the Fire in the highest
degree; so in the space of eight hours you will have a pound of Oil or more,
according to the goodness of the Vitriol. 7. Now to rectify this, put all into
a glass Retort, and distill first with a gentle Fire, so will a little Phlegm
come forth, with a sulphurous volatile Spirit: next comes forth the acid
Spirit, leaving the most sharp Oil, like limpid Water in the bottom. 8. In this
operation you must note, that if your Vitriol be not well calcined, you will
have so much the more Phlegm, and it will need so much the more rectification:
besides, in the first distillation it will endanger the breaking of the
Vessels. 9. That the Vitriol of Mars yields more Oil, and less of the volatile
Spirit, whereas the Vitriol of Venus yields a much less plenty of Oil, and a
far greater quantity of a most grateful Spirit, like Spirit of Sulphur per
Campanum. 10. That the whole quantity of Oil of Vitriol may according to Le
Mort be converted into Spirit after this manner: Oil of Vitriol j. Common Water
iv. mix, and put them into a glass Retort, distill in Sand, and the Phlegm will
come forth; then a volatile Spirit, leaving a heavy Oil in the bottom, a third,
or at least a quarter part diminished: Repeat the distillation, by mixing more
Water with the Oil, and so often repeat this work till the whole Oil is
converted into Spirit. 11. Le Febure having drawn off his Ros Vitrioli from the
crude Vitriol, so long till no more will come, as we have already taught,
places the Cucurbit in a Sand heat, with an Alembick Head and Receiver, and
increases the Fire till the Head of the Alembick is filled with white Vapors,
and continues it till no more drops of Liquor will fall from it: this acid
Liquor he also saves, being a Phlegm of Vitriol mixed with some of the volatile
Spirit, which, says he, is not to be despised, for tho it has but little
acidity in it, yet it partic^pates of the volatile, aperitive, and anodyn
Virtue of the Vitriol, which makes it successfully used for cleansing the
Reins, and healing all inward Corrosions, quenches Thrist in Fevers, and
provokes Urine abundantly. If you add a little Saccharum Saturni to it, it will
take away Inflammations, Pains, and sharpness of the Eyes, heal malignant Ulcers
in them, they being washed with it warm. And a little Sal Tartari being mixed
with it, it takes away itching of the skin, and heals, scabs. 12. Then he
proceeds to making the acid Spirit and Corrosive Oil thus: The matter last left
in the Cucurbit, beat it into a gross Powder, put it into an earthen or glass
Retort well luted, place it in a close Reverberatory, with a capacious
Receiver, well luting the Juncture, give a gradual Fire, as in distilling
Spirit of Salt, but higher and longer, with the flame of dry Wood for the space
of three days and nights without ceasing, viz. till the Receiver (filled with
white Clouds and Vapors in the distilling) grows clear: the distilled
Liquorice put into a glass Retort, and distill in Sand with a gradual Fire, till
the drops begin to fall, which taste from time to time, to change the Recipient
as soon as you perceive them to have an acidity: having drawn off two parts of
the Liquor, remove the Fire, so have you three several Liquors. 1. An almost
insipid Liquor, containing the volatile Spirit with a sulphurous smell. 2. A
pleasant acid Liquor, called the acid Spirit of Vitriol. 3. The remaining Oil
in the Retort, which you may purify by filtrating it through Glass beaten into
fine Powder, (for it would corrode all other substances) commonly called Oil of
Vitriol. 13. Le Febure's sweet Spirit of Vitriol. Vitriol calcined between
yellow and red lb iij. put it into a Cucurbit in Powder, add Spirit of Vinegar
so much as to reduce it to a paste: stir without ceasing putting in still new
Spirit of Vinegar, till it is three inches high: put the Cucurbit into B.
Vaporoso, cover it with a blind head, and digest in a gentle heat for three
whole days: the fourth day decant the Vinegar, and add more fresh Spirit in the
room of it; digest again three days and decant; thus proceed seven times, every
time adding fresh Spirit of Vinegar: at length filtrate all the Spirit or
Tincture, put it into a Cucurbit in Ashes, and draw off the superfluous
Menstruum by distillation with a slow and gradual Fire, till the Magma is as
thick as Honey: this make into a mass with calcined Pebbles, which put into a
Retort, and with a gradual Fire, in twenty four or thirty hours space, draw off
an Oil and Spirit, which rectify in a Glass Retort in Sand, and keep it for
use. 14. This Spirit or Oil, is of a pleasant sweetish taste, having in it the
Virtues of the Vitriol, mixed with those of the Spirit of Vinegar. It may be
given in all Diseases proceeding from a Tartarous matter, as the Stone, Gravel,
Scurvy, Gout, Rheumatism, Catarrhs, French Pox, and generally in all Diseases
proceeding from gross and sharp Serosities, as Leprosy, Scabs, Herpes, Itch,
Tettars, Ring-worms, etc. for this wonderful Spirit rectifies the whole Mass of
Blood, by Urine, Sweat, and insensible transpiration. Dose a j. ad ij. in
Broth, Decoctions, or Wine, or some appropriated Syrup. 15. Charras after he
has drawn his Ros Vitrioli, and acid Water following it in a Sand heat, Takes
the Vitriol in the Cucurbit, beats it into Powder, and fills an earthen Retort
three quarters full with a large Receiver, and in a close Reverberatory with a
gradual Fire increased to the utmost violence, draws forth the Spirit. 16. This
Spirit he rectifies, by putting it into a glass Cucurbit covered with its Head
and Receiver, distilling in Sand first with a gentle heat, by which the
volatile, subtle, penetrating, sulphurous Spirit is drawn off, and kept in a
Glass close stopped by it self: then continuing the Fire the Phlegm arises: after
that, an acid Spirit, leaving at the bottom of the Cucurbit the heavy Spirit,
commonly called Oil of Vitriol. 17. According to Rolfincius: Roman Vitriol lb
xxv. calcine to whiteness, and the absumption of its humidity, the Vessels
being cold, take the mass, which will be about lb xiv. and put it into an
earthen Retort in a Reverberatory Furnace, with a large Receiver, observing
degrees of Fire for the space of three or four days, till all the Spirit and
Oil is come over, which rectify in a Cucurbit, separating the Spirit, Phlegm,
and Oil, as before directed. 18. Zwelfer says, That the Retort is to be filled
not above half full, and that the Receiver ought to be long, and have a large
neck, because of the violence and impetuosity with which the Spirits come
forth; that the Fire is to be very gentle while the Phlegm is a coming forth,
which ought to distill drop by drop, for the space of ten or twelve hours: then
the Fire by degrees being increased, white Clouds will break or come forth,
which will fill the Retort, and Receiver also; and that this distillation is to
be continued with the highest violence of the Fire for the space of two days,
till the whole radical humidity, viz. Spirit and Oil (improperly so called) are
come forth, and all the said white Clouds cease to appear. 19. Lemery makes it
thus: Vitriol calcined to whiteness lb viij. put it into an earthen Retort, so
as to fill it about three quarters full: place it in a close Reverberatory,
with a very large Receiver: give a very small Fire to make the Phlegm come forth
which remained yet in the Vitriol. When no more will come off, take off the
Recipient, decant the Phlegm, (which is used for Inflammations of the Eyes) and
refit the Recipient again to the Retort, luting the Juncture; increase the Fire
gradatim, and when you see white Clouds to fill the Receiver, continue it in
the same condition till the Receiver grows cold, then strengthen the Fire with
Wood to an extreme violence, till the flame rises through the Funnel of the
Reverberatory: the Receiver will then fill again with white Clouds; now
continue the Fire in this degree, for the space of three days and nights,
letting it then go out. 20. The Vessels being cold, decant the Spirit into a
glass Body, set it in Sand, and immediately fit to it a Head with its Receiver,
and distill with a very gentle Fire four or five Ounces; this is the Sulphurous
Spirit of Vitriol, which keep by itself in a Glass close stopped. Change the
Receiver, and augmenting the Fire distill about half the Liquor which remains;
this is the acid Spirit of Vitriol. That which yet remains in the glass Body is
the most acid part of the Vitriol, and is called Oil, tho improperly, and may
be used like the acid Spirit in continual Fevers, and other Distempers which
proceed from a violent heat. In the bottom of the Retort remains the Caput
Mortuum, which is called Colcothar, out of which is elicited the Sal Vitrioli,
The Styptick Water of Rabel, and Ens Veneris. 21. As to the choice of the
Vitriol, Lemery advises to take green English Vitriol, such as (says he) being
rubbed upon Iron, does not at all change color, which shows that it does not
partake of Copper, as the German does, that looks a little bluish, and is more
acrimonious. 22. There comes also a great deal of Phlegm into the Receiver,
which is known to be all come off, when there drops no more. When the volatile
sulphurous Spirits come, you must then be very careful of the Fire, for they
come with a great deal of violence, and will break the Retort, if driven too
furiously. They being come forth, you must then augment the Fire to the highest
and last degree of all, for the acid Spirit will not part with its Earth,
unless forced by an extraordinary heat. 23. From lbviij. of Vitriol calcined
(sixteen Ounces to the pound) you will have of Phlegm xvij. of the volatile
sulphurous Spirit, and acid Spirit together xxiiss. of which twenty two Ounces
and half, there will be of the volatile sulphurous Spirit about four or five
Ounces: and in the Retort you will have lbv.v. of Colcothar. 24. That if you
use German Vitriol instead of English, you may have a little more Spirit than
the proportion named, by reason of the Copper particles contained in the
Vitriol, it would smell something like A F. and the matter remaining in the
Retort would be of a brown or darker color. 25. That no other Body is added to
Vitriol in distillation, as in the distillation of Nitre, because its own Body
contains Earth enough. 26. That the Furnace ought to be very thick, that the
heat of the Fire being little or none of it lost through the pores, may the
better act upon the Retort. 27. That some in distilling Vitriol continue the
Fire for four or five days together: and that if it should be continued for
three or four days longer, there would come forth a congealed Oil of Vitriol,
and Caustic, which is nothing but the more fixed part of the Spirit of Vitriol,
or common Oil. 28. That all acid Spirits are only salts made fluid by force of
Fire, they thereby being disengaged for their terrestious parts; and that they
may again be revived by affusing them upon some proper Alcali. Thus Spirit of
Vitriol put upon Iron, and remaining there some time, does reincorporate into
Vitriol. And Spirit of Nitre, put upon Salt of Tartar, makes again Saltpeter.
29. That the Caustic nature of the Oil of Vitriol, and its fiery Corrosion,
proceeds from a repletion of the mineral Salt with fiery particles, without
which it could never burn nor heat any foreign matter put into it. 30. If into
a Tincture of Violets, or of the Sun-flower, you drop Sp. Vitrioli, it will
presently make it red; put into it Ol. Tartari, or of Potashes, and it will
recover its former color again. Contrariwise, put to the said Tincture Oil of
Tartar, or Spirit of Sal Armoniack, and the blew Tincture will presently turn
green; put then into it a little Sp. Vitrioli, and it will be an obscure red. A
Tincture of red Roses in warm fair Water, will be very weak and mean; if
thereinto you drop a little Spirit of Vitriol, it will immediately be of a high
red: drop into it afterward Ol. Tartari, it will become of a dirty black. 31.
So also, a decoction of Brazil, Logwood, or Brazilletto, being very red, if you
drop into it Spirit of Vitriol, it turns it yellow; and then if you add
Volatile Spirit of Sal Armoniack, it will become black: if also you drop Oil of
Tartar into Claret, it becomes greenish, but adding a little Spirit of Vitriol
it returns to its former color again, etc. Now all these changes of color
made by these differing Salts, do really arise only from the different position
of the particles of Bodies dissolved in the Liquor, and their disposition to
modifie and represent the light several and different ways. 32. Some Authors
put Vitriol into a Glass Cucurbit in an Ash heat, covered with its Head and
Receiver, and well luting the Junctures, with a moderate heat they draw off the
Phlegm and acid Spirit, or Ros Vitrioli, as much as they can force to ascend;
then they cohobate the distilled Liquor upon the Paeces, distilling and
cohobating seven or eight times and redoubling the heat in the last
distillation, they at length draw forth a Phlegm mixed with much acid Spirit,
which is of a very grateful odor, being circulated in a Sand heat with a Fire
of digestion, in a Glass well closed. 33. The Virtues of the volatile
sulphurous Spirit of Vitriol. It is good against Palsies, Asthma's, and
Diseases of the Lungs, it also dissipates pains of the Head, eases the Megrim,
and cures the Epilepsy, and Apoplexy, and indeed most Diseases of the Head,
Nerves, Breast, and Lungs, it opens, cuts, attenuates, absterges, resolves
viscous humors, resists putrefaction, and heals Ulcers of the Lungs, and
Spitting Blood. But, says Rolfincius, Non possidet omnes enumeratas virtutes
primario and ex se, sed multas secundario ex accidente. In Diseases of the Head
from a hot cause it is taken in a cold Vehicle, as Aqua Rosarum, etc. but in
Diseases from a cold cause, in a hot Vehicle, as the Spirituous Water of
Rosemary, Sage, Lavender, etc. It prevails against a Vertigo, and is given
against an Apoplexy in Apoplectick Waters, as that of the Tile-tree, Lillies of
the Valley, etc. against a Frenzy, in Syrup of Poppies, or Tincture of the
same: against the Falling Sickness, in Lime-flower, or Peony-water, etc.
against Convulsions, in Sage Water. In Diseases of the Breast, in Water,
Tincture, or Decoction of Veronica, or Elecampane. Against Diseases of the
Stomach in Mint or Cinamon-Water. Against the Dropsy in some Diuretic Water,
as of Pars^y, Arsmart, Onions, etc. Against the Colic in Water or Tincture of
Zedoary, or Juniper Berries, against the Stone in the Reins or Bladder in the
last aforementioned-Waters, or in Strawberry, or Saxifrage-Water. Against
putrid and burning Fevers, and to quench Thirst in Sorrel Water, or Julepo
Rosaceo. Against malign Fevers in Water of Goats Rue, Angelica, etc. 34. The
Virtues of the acid Spirit of Vitriol. It is Diuretic, Diaphoretick,
Aperitive, and Inciding, resists Putrefaction, and allays Inflammations,
wherefore it is of great force against all burning Fevers, occasioned by
putrid and malignant Humors, as also against Obstructions of the Liver,
Spleen, and Mesentery; it restores Appetite when lost, strengthens the
Faculties of the Stomach, correcting its defects It eases the Toothache, if
mixed with White Wind, and held in the mouth: and if mixed with Water or Juice of
Celandine, it cures the Scurf, Scab, and Scald of the Head, by washing it
therewith, destroying it in its root, and killing that sharp, acid, corrosive
and malign humor which causes it: in a word, it is a perfect Cure for the
Scurvy, and a most admirable thing given dietetically against a Gonorrhoea, and
the Relics of the French Disease: I speak by the Experience I have had of it
in many Patients, in those Diseases. 35. The Virtues of the Corrosive Oil of
Vitriol: Le Mort, and most other Authors, say, it is not given inwardly, by
reason of its corrosive and catheretic quality, etc. but now with us it is
daily given as the acid Spirit, being mixed with fit and appropriate Vehicles,
and has all the same medical Virtues. Authors say, it is improperly called Oil,
for that it is neither inflamable nor unctuous; but if differing Substances,
many have principles of differing forms, I know not why it may not more
properly be called Oil, than Spirit; and forasmuch as all mixed Bodies are
composed of Earth, Water, Salt, Oil, and Spirit, there is no reason, that
Metals and Minerals should be exempted from being repleat with a respective Oil
also. Lemery says, it may be used like the acid Spirit in continual Fevers,
and other Distempers that are accompanied with a virulent heat. It is also used
in Chemical Operations, as for the dissolution of Metals, fixing of Spirit, and
many other Alchymical Secrets; and according to Helmont, is the chief
Ingredient in the Lapis Butleri. It is a most admirable Catheretick in sordid
and rebellious Ulcers, for that in a moment it puts a stop to the putrefaction,
and puts a period to the eating, etc. 36. The Dose. The volatile sulphurous
Spirit may be given a gut. viij. ad x. or xx. according to Age and Strength. As
for the acid Spirit, and the Oil, there is no better way to limit the Dose,
than by putting in so much, or so many drops into the Vehicle, till the
sharpness be pleasing to the Palate. All these Spirits of Vitriol are good to
kill Worms, have a peculiar faculty to stop internal fluxes of Blood, to cool
Inflammations of the Eyes, or any other part, and to resist and destroy the
malignity of Plague or Pestilence, and all other malign Fevers, as also the
putrefaction proceeding from the Bitings of Vipers, Rattle-Snakes, Mad Dogs, or
any other venomous Creature, inwardly given as before directed, and outwardly
applied to the Wound. 37. A sweet green Oil of Vitriol. Coperas Stones, q. v.
beat them small, and lay them in a cool Cellar, and in twenty or thirty days
they will attract the Air, and look black, and after fourteen days more become
whitish and sweetish, then dissolve them in distilled Rainwater, filter and
evaporate the Water, so will they shoot into green Crystals: these beat small
and dissolve in a Cellar per deliquium, by laying them on a marble stone. This
is a kind of oily Liquor, which some Authors affirm to be Paracelsus's famous
Medicine for the Falling Sickness, a few drops being taken in any appropriate
Liquor. Beware in making, that the Liquor comes at no strong Fire; for then,
says Paracelsus, it loses its greenness, and as much as it loses of that, so
much it loses of its virtue: from this Liquor a Spirit may be drawn by an
ingenious Artist, which will smell like Musk or Ambergrise.

XLII. * Spiritus Vitrioli Coagulatus, Spirit of Vitriol coagulated.
Bate.] Salt of Sorrel j. Spirit of Vitriol iss. mix and coagulate S. A. It is
a Secret in strengthening the Ventricle or Stomach extinguishing Fevers,
quenching Thirst, allaying Inflammations, etc. Dose, so much in any convenient
Liquor, as that the Teeth may not be set on edge. See Mynsicht.

Salmon.] 1. It is done as we have directed in the Spirit of Salt coagulated,
at Sect. 28. 1. aforegoing: save, that instead of the Salt of Wormwood there
used, here is used Salt of Sorrel; which (says Mynsicht, Sect. 1. page 32.) is
even a Divine Medicament and of the greatest efficacy in Medical Practice, as
Experience does testify. 2. It corroborates a debilitated Ventricle, promotes
Digestion, destroys the Essence of Fevers, cools Inflammations, and allays an
exorbitant Thirst. It is used in all Diseases of the Head, Suffocation of the
Womb, Stone, Jaundice, Plague, and all Epidemical Diseases, for it strongly
resists their impression, and preserves from putrefaction. 3. The Dose is, so
much as many change the Vehicle to a pleasing acidity, (Universals being
promised) but not so much as to set the Teeth on edge. It may be given in warm
Broth, or any other appropriate Vehicle. 4. The Author hereof, Mynsicht, says,
That it ought not to be given to such as are troubled with Choler, or black
Choler, but that such ought really to desist its use. And that it may be as
well made with Sal Absinthii, as with Sal Acetosae, and that prepared with the
former, it will be full as effectual as with the latter.

XLIII. Spiritus Vitrioli Diaphoreticus, Spirit of Vitriol Diaphoretick.
Bate.] Salt of Tartar, Hartshorn calcined, A. ij. Spirit of Vitriol iv, mix
and distill by a Retort to dryness: to the distilled Liquor add an equal
quantity of rectified Spirit of Wine, and keep it for use. It purifies the
Blood, takes away Scabs and Itch, opens Obstructions, provokes Sweat in the
Plague, resists and expels Poison, is good against the Dropsy, Jaundice,
Contractions, etc. It is powerful also in cleansing the Lungs. Dose a j. ad ss.

Salmon.] 1. Schroder makes it after the same manner. It is an excellent thing
against all burning and malignant Fevers, and where there is any Obstruction
hindering free breathing. 2. It quenches Thirst admirably, and the use of it
may be continued safely, for it is a good and innocent Medicine: it may be
given as ij. plus-minus, in any appropriate Liquor. See my Pharm. Land. lib. 3.
cap. 11. sect. 90. 3. Of this Diaphoretick Spirit ij. Spirit of Saffron iss.
Aq. Lactis Alexiteriae ij, Sir, Corn Poppies iij. mix for a Sweating Dose. Or
thus: Of this Spirit ij. Mixtura Simplex, Spirit of Angelica A. i. Aqua
Elementaria ij. Syrup of Clovegilliflowers ss. mix then for a Dose.

XLIV. Spiritus Vitrioli Essentificatus, seu Clissus Vitrioli, Essentificated
Spirit, or Powers of Vitriol.
Bate.] Green Vitriol of Mars, purified by a threefold solution and
crystallization, and calcined to yellowness, q. v. dissolve it in Spirit of
Vinegar, filtrate and crystallize, repeating this work three times: calcine
again to yellowness, and distill by a Retort to dryness, with cohobation. Then
distill with an open or naked Fire, till all the Spirits are come forth; from
the Caput Mort. exposed to the Air, extract the Salt, which depurate by many
Solutions, Filtrations, and Crystallizations. Of this Salt p.j. of the
aforesaid Spirit, p.iv. mix, and extract the Tincture, by digesting it a Month,
then filter and keep it for use. It expels noxious humors by insensible
transpiration, provokes Lust, strengthens the Womb, putting a stop to its
inordinate motions, and in both Sexes it stirs up the power of the Seed for
Generation. Dose gut. ij. ad iv.

Salmon.] 1. The derivation of the word Clyssus is obscure, forte (...), abluo,
lavo, to wash: rectus dicetur (...), ablutio, lotio, ita, ut dignetur actio
abluendi Antimonium, vel (...), fluctus, unda, as denoting Violence,
Thundering, and Effervescence, which is heard in the distillation of the vulgar
Clyssus. 2. The vulgar Clyssus is threefold, The Lesser, The Mean, and The
Greater. The lesser is thus made: Hungarian Antimony, and Sulphur A. lb j. as
Schroder has it. The Mean is thus: Antimony, Tartar, and Nitre, A. lb ij. as
Kesler has it under the Title, Liquor Compositus Pneumonicus. The Greater is
thus: Antimony, Tartar, Nitre, Calx of River Pebbles, A. lb j. and some add Sal
Armoniack. The method of the process you may see at large in our Pharmacopoeia
Land. lib. 3. cap. 8. sect. 99. in which place are many good Observations
concerning the same, with their Virtues, Use, and Dose. 3. This here is a
simple preparation of Vitriol, so ^^lled in respect that it contains all the
powers of this concret, and ought not to go without its deserved applause. It
rectifies the whole mass of Blood, resolves thick and tartarous slime, purifies
all the Juyces of the Body, wheresoever placed; it attenuates, incides, and
purges noxious Humors by the Emunctories, as also by Stool, Urine, and Sweat,
4. You may exhibit it in Broth, or any Specific Water, Cephalic, Pectoral,
Splenetick, Lithontriptick, Arthritick, etc. and may be given a gut. iij. ad
viij. or x.

XLV. Spiritus Vitrioli Martis, Spirit of the Vitriol of Mars or Iron.
Bate.] It is distilled from the Vitriol of Mars or Iron calcined, by a Retort
in Sand. It opens Obstructions, cures the Green Sickness in Virgins, and the
Rickets in Children, etc. Dose a gut. v. ad xv.

Salmon.] 1. It differs nothing in the making from the common Spirit of
Vitriol, at Sect. 41. of this Chap. aforegoing. Also at 6. ad 10. of the same
Section, we have exemplified the process from that of Le Mort, with its
rectification, and ot^^^ Phenomenon attending it, ^o that no more need be said
thereof in this place. 2. It is Caustic, and fit for the dissolving of Metals,
for the reducing them into Vitriol, and to extract the Sulphurs of Minerals,
reducing them to a Specific property, as is evident in the Sulphur of Antimony
drawn forth by the means thereof, of which God willing, we shall hereafter
speak. 3. This Spirit cools, represses the Effervescence of Choler, and
admirably provokes Urine. Dose a gut. ij. ad vj. in any proper Vehicle.

XLVI. Spiritus Vitrioli Philosophicus, Philosophic Spirit of Vitriol.
Bate.] It is made from the Water in which the Butter of Antimony is cast to be
sweetened, by exhaling it to a third part, and rectifying it S. A. It is
Cephalic, Antifebritick, and an opener of Obstructions. Dose gut. v. ad xv.

Salmon.] It quenches Thirst, provokes Appetite, strengthens the Digestion, and
is an excellent Antiscorbutick, and Cephalic: I have known the Megrim, and
vehement Head-achs cured by the constant use thereof, when almost all other
things had failed. It is also profitably given against Vapors and Hysteric
Fits, and other Diseases of the Womb. For its other Virtues, see my
Pharmacopoeia Londinensis, lib. 3. cap. 11. sect. 91.

XLVII. Spiritus Vitrioli Tartarisatus, Spirit of Vitriol tartariz'd.
Bate.] Vitriol calcined to whiteness. p. ij. Tartar calcined to blackness, p.
j. mix them being in Powder, and moisten them with Spirit of Wine, then distill
by a Retort in Sand, and rectify. S. A. It has an egregious power for
provoking Sweat in all internal Obstructions, and Congelations of the Blood: it
is good against Scabs, and other Breakings out, purifying and smoothing the
skin. Dose a j. ad iv. in Broth or Wine for three or four Mornings together, as
you shall see fit.

Salmon.] Besides the Virtues ascribed by our Author, it is an approved thing
against the Rickets in Children, having strengthened and restored those who
could not go nor stand for some years together. It is also prevalent against
the Plague or Pestilence, and all manner of malign Fevers, given in some
Antifebritick Water, Universals also being premised. See more of it in my
Pharm. Land. lib. 3. cap. 11. sect. 93. Of this Spirit ij. Centory-water, or
Aqua Lactis Alexiteria iij. Sir. of Clovegilliflowers iv. Tincture of Antimony
or Coral ss. mix for* a Dose, against a malign Fever.

XLVIII. Spiritus Anisi, Spirit of Aniseeds.
Salmon.] 1. Aniseeds lb v. bruise them well, add to them warm Rainwater lb
xviij. Sugar or Melussos lb ij. mix and ferment for some days, till it has
gotten a vinous scent, then distill in an Alembick with its Worm, drawing off lb
xij. of Liquor; this rectify in a Glass Mattress in B. M. drawing off first lb
iv. for Spirit of Aniseeds, and then the remainder to dryness for Ani-seed
Water, or to make new Spirit with. 2. After the same manner you may make the
Spirit with Beer, Ale, Cider, Perry, Hydromel, or Malmsy Wine; but these as
they are stronger and have a Spirit in themselves, so they yield a Spirit in
greater quantity, according to the proportion with which they abound. 3. A
nearer way to the Wood is this: Spirit of Wine lb viij. Ani-seeds bruised lb
iss. mix and distill in B. M. to dryness: but if you distill not in B. M. but in
a Copper Vesica, add Water lb iv. or vj. and distill according to Art lb viij.
of Spirit. 4. This Spirit is Stomatick, Cardiack, and an excellent thing
against Wind, Indigestion, Griping of the Guts, Colic, and other Distempers of
the Bowels proceeding from cold. It also gives relief in Asthma's, Coughs,
Phthisicks, and Shortness of Breath. Dose a ij. ad iv. either alone being
dulcified, or in some proper mixture. Spirit of Aniseeds iij. Baum-water,
Hyssop-water. A. j. Syrup of Corn Poppies iij. mix for a Dose. 5. Or you may
distill green Aniseeds thus: Green Aniseeds lb xij. or xvj. bruise them, and put
them into a great Copper Vessel tinned within: Rainwater, or distilled
Aniseed-water, enough to overtop them four or six inches: fit it with its Head,
Worm, and Receiver, and digest with a very gentle Fire, so much only as
thoroughly to penetrate the Seed, for four days, or longer; then begin the
distillation with a moderate Fire, continuing till about two thirds of the
Water is drawn off, then cease. So have you a Water filled with the volatile
Salt, which is the Spirit, and an Oil swimming a top, which separate for use.
6. What remains in the Still press out strongly, to which add as much more
Ani-seeds as before; after the same manner you may proceed again, if you think
fit. 7. This Spirituous Water will be white, because of the small particles of
Oil which yet remain in it, which you may separate by setting the said Water in
a double Glass Bottle in the Sun, close stopped, for some days; by this means the
Oil which is mixed with the Water, and gives it a whitish color, will ascend to
the top of the Water, and gather together at the neck of the Bottle, from
whence you may separate it. 8. But if you would have the Water clear without
separating of the Oil, you must add to every pint of Water, half a pint of pure
rectified Spirit of Wine, so will it be pure, clear, and spirituous, 9. Or if
you design to have all in a Spirit, to every pint of the Spirit and Oil
together add a pint of pure rectified Spirit of Wine, shake them together, and
unite them by a new distillation in a Glass Cucurbit in B.M. S.A. 10. This
Spirit is stomatick, creates an Appetite and helps Digestion, and is Specific
against Wind, Colicks, dissolving viscous Phlegm which sticks to Lungs, Stomach
and Guts, causing prickings and tortions: It is said also to increase Milk in
Nurses, comfort the Lungs, facilitate the Birth, ease After-pains, and the
sharp Gripings of little Infants, which they many times have in the Month,
proceeding from acid and windy Humors. It also eases Pains and Noises in the
Ears, being dropped into them. Dose a ss. ad ss. according to age and strength.

XLIX. Spiritus Asae Foetidae, Spirit of stinking Assa.
Salmon.] Assa Fetida lb j. put it into a large Retort big enough to hold eight
times the quantity, fit to it a large Receiver, and begin to distill in a Sand
heat with a gentle Fire, till the danger of swelling of the Gum is over, then
gradatim increase the Fire to force over the Oil, continuing the distillation
till the Receiver is absolutely clear: so will you have a phlegm, and acid
spirit, containing the volatile Salt of the Gum, and a thick stinking Oil, all
which you must separate and rectify S. A. 2. Bone Ashes ground fine lb j. put
upon them the former Substances in a Glass Cucurbit, covered with its Head well
luted, and in a Sand heat with a very moderate Fire, draw off the Spirit and
volatile Salt, (which ascend first,) with a very gentle Fire: then changing the
Receiver, force over the Phlegm and Spiritous Oil; which you may separate by a
filter: the Oil you may rectify again upon new Bones. 3. The Spirit and Oil
are both good against Epilepsies, Apoplexies, Lethargies, Palsies, Vapors, and
Hysteric Fits: the sick may both smell to them, and also take them inwardly.
The Spirit may be given a gut. x. ad xx. or xxx. the Oil a gut. ij. ad iv. in
any appropriate Vehicle. 4. The Spirit may also be drawn thus: Assa Fetida in
small powder lb j. put it into a large Retort, upon which affuse Spirit of Wine
lb iv. mix and digest for three of four days, shaking the Glass three or four
times a day; then having fitted to it a large Receiver, distill in a Sand heat,
with a very gentle Fire at first, increasing it by degrees, till the spirituous
and oily parts of the Assa are drawn forth. The Spirit will ascend first
impregnated with the subtle and volatile Oil; which being come over, change the
Receiver, and draw off the remaining part of the thick Oil. The Spirit keep by
itself for use: The Oil you may rectify as before, either from Bone-ashes, or
its equal weight of Vitriol calcined to whiteness, in a little Glass Retort in
a Sand heat, with a very gentle Fire, so will the Oil be less thick, and more
pure then it was, the Vitriol or Bones retaining the thicker and earthy parts.
5. The Spirit is given ad ss. the Oil a gut. ij. ad vj. incorcoprated with fine
Loaf Sugar, and then dissolved in some appropriate Liquor, against the Diseases
aforementioned; for which both the Spirits and Oil are counted admirable
Specificks.

L. Spiritus Aurantiarum Corticum, Spirit of Orange-peels.
Salmon.] The outward Rinds of Oranges fresh, and cut into bits lb iv. Spirit
of Wine lb viij. mix and digest a Week; then in B. M: with a gentle heat draw
off the Spirit to dryness, which you may cohobate twice or thrice, so will you
have a pure and subtle Spirit of Orange-peels very odoriferous, and of great
Virtues. 2. Or thus: Orange-peels, ut supra lb iv. Wine lb xx. mix and digest a
week, then distill in a Copper Vesica with its Worm: draw off lb vj. which is
Spirit of Orange-peels: then changing the Receiver, draw off lb vj. or vij.
more, which keep for Orange-water, or reserve to make more Spirit with as before
directed. 3. Or thus: Orange-peels, ut supra lb iv. Water lb xx. Melussos or
Sugar lb v. mix, ferment gently till it has a vinous scent; then in a Copper
Vesica, with its Head and Worm, draw off the Spirit: the first lb vj. is Spirit
of Orange-peels: change the Receiver, and draw off lbviij. of Water, which you
may keep to make other Spirit with. 4. It is an excellent Cephalic, Stomatick,
Cardiack, and Nephritick, good against the Epilepsy, Apoplexy, Lethargy,
Vertigo, Megrim, and other vehement Head-achs: It strengthens the Stomach,
causes a good Digestion, expels Wind, comforts all the Spirits natural, vital,
and animal, and admirably provokes Urine, removing all stoppages in the urinary
parts. It comforts the Womb, and is said to help Conception. Dose ss. in the
Morning fasting, or when the Stomach is sick, or Bowels griped. It is also the
Plague, and all infectious Diseases.

LI. Spiritus Cinamomi, Spirit of Cinnamon.
Salmon.] 1. Bruised Cinnamon lb j. White Wind a Gallon: digest twenty four
hours in a warm B. M. then distill in an Alembick S. A. drawing off the first lb
iij. for Spirit, and a quart more for Cinamon-water. 2. Or thus: Bruised
Cinnamon lb j. rectified Spirit of Wine lb viij. digest three or four days, and
in a gentle B.M. distill off the Spirit to dryness. 3. It is a most admirable
Cordial Water, comforts all the principal Parts, as Head, Heart, Stomach,
Nerves, Lungs, Liver, Spleen, and Womb; it opens Obstructions, attenuates thick
Humors, and is an excellent Preservative in Pestilential Times, against the
Infection of the Plague, and other malign Diseases: it prevails against
Faintings, Palpitations of the Hea^^, sickness at Stomach, and other Diseases
of like kind. Dose ij. ad iv. in any fit Vehicle. 4. Or you may give it alone
being thus dulcified: Damask Rose Water lb ij. treble refined Sugar. lb iij.
mix, melt, and make a Syrup, which add to lb ij. of the Spirit. Dose ij. or
iij. spoonfuls. 5. Angelica or Borrage-water iv. Syrup of Clove-gilliflowers
iss. Spirit of Cinnamon ij. Tincture of Ambergrise and Musk, gut. 10. mix for a
Cordial, Dose ij. or iij. spoonfuls at a time. Spirit of Cinnamon ij^ Spirit of
Peony iss. Volatile Spirit of Vitriol, gut. 20. Peony-water ij. Syrup of
Citron-peels vj. mix for a Dose against the Epilepsy.

LII. Spiritus Foeniculi dulcis, Spirit of sweet Fennel-seeds.
Salmon.] 1. It is made as we have taught you to make Spirit of Aniseeds at
Sect. 48. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6. aforegoing. 2. It breeds Milk in Nurses, is good
against the Colic, Gripings at Stomach, and Oppression of Wind in the Bowels;
it is also a singular good Pectoral and Stomatick, opening Obstructions of the
Lungs, causing free Breathing, and to take away Coughs, Colds, Wheezings,
Hoarseness, etc. Dose a j ad iv. Spirit of Sweet Fennel-seeds iiss.
Hyssop-water ij. Tincture of Liquorice j. Syrup of Red Poppies ss. mix for a
Dose, for the purposes aforesaid.

LIII. Spiritus Guajaci, Spirit of Guajacum, or Pockwood.
Salmon.] 1. There are several ways to distill the Spirit of Guajacum, of which
the two following are chief: Raspings of Guajacum, q. v. so much as may fill
your Vessel two thirds full, pour upon it Rainwater, so much as may nearly
fill the Vessel, and with Sugar make it to ferment eight or ten days: Or,
Raspings of Guajacum, q. v. put upon them White Wind, or other Urine q. s.
digest forty eight hours: Or, Raspings, q. v. Spirit of Wine, Water A. q. s.
mix and digest: put all into a Copper Vesica tinned within, with its
Alembick-Head tinned within, its Worm, and Receiver: distill first with a gentle
Fire, and continue the distillation, till about one half or two thirds of the
Liquor is drawn off; so will you have subtle Spirit, with some few drops of
Oil. 2. Or thus: Guajacum rasped, or cut into small bits or chips lbvj. put
them into an earthen Retort, in a close Furnace of Reverberation, with a large
Recipient; make a very small Fire at first, only by degrees to heat the Furnace
and Retort, for about an hour; then increase it by degrees, till you see the
watery part of the Wood to come over into the Recipient; continue and increase
the Fire a little more, till you see white Vapors come out of the Retort like
Clouds, which are a Sign that the acid Salt and oily parts of the Guajacum
begin to come forth: at which time open the Cover to the Duomo, and increase
the Fire more and more, till your large Receiver looks clear, at what time your
distillation will be completed; thus have you an acid Spirit repleat with a
volatile Salt of Guajacum, and a blackish stinking Oil. 3. Lemery advises to
fill a a large Retort three quarters full of the shavings or chips of Guajacum,
and in a large Reverberatory with a great capacious Receiver, distill, first
with a very gentle Fire, only to warm the Retort, and to distill the Water or
Phlegm, continue it in this condition till there comes no more drops, which is a
sign that all the Phlegm is come off: fit again the Receiver to the neck of the
Retort, luting the Juncture well, then increase the Fire gradatim, so will the
Spirit and Oil come forth in white Clouds, continue the Fire till no more will
come, let the Vessels cool, and unlute them. 4. Then put that which is in the
Retort into a Funnel lined with brown Paper, so will the Spirit pass through,
leaving the thick, black, and very fetid Oil behind in the Paper, which being
set into another Bottle, and the lower part of the Paper being pierced with a
Bodkin, the Oil will also drop through, which you may keep for use: Or you may
rectify it by mixing it with as much Sand, Bone-ashes, or Tobacco-pipe-Clay in
Powder, as will make it into a Paste, and then putting it into a Retort, place
it in a Furnace in a nacked Fire; you may draw off the Oil by a moderate
Distillation, which will be much more pure than it was before. 5. If you make
the Spirit by 2. it ought to be rectified in a Glass Cucurbit, over a Sand
heat, with its Head and Receiver; and having separated the almost insipid
Water, which will first ascend, receiver and keep a part the spiritous and
volatile acid and salt part, which will succeed, and be attended with an o^y
Volatile, which contains also itts part of the volatile Salt, and may also be
separated and kept apart as well as the acid, and be administered inwardly,
being mixed with fine poudered Sugar, and given in any fit Liquor. 6. After the
very same manner and method you may distill a Spirit and Oil from the Cortex,
which may also in the same manner be rectified, having all the same Properties
and Virtues of the Wood. 7. This is also to be observed, That during the
Distillation of the Spirit (after the Phlegm is come off) you must not make the
Fire too strong, for they coming forth with a great deal of violence, would
then be apt to break either the Retort or Receiver. 8. Guajacum also, tho a dry
Body, yet yields a great quantity of Liquor: for from 64 Ounces of the Wood,
you will have 39 Ounces of Spirit and Phlegm, and five Ounces and half of Oil,
and nineteen Ounces of Coals, from which you may extract four or six Drams of
an alcalious or fixed Salt, which Salt is aperitive and sudorifick, and may
serve to fortify any Vehicle against the French Disease, being given from 10.
gr. to 30. 9. The Spirit of Guajacum is nothing but a dissolution of the
essential Salt of the Wood in a portion of its Phlegm. It is Sudorifick and
Nephritick; it is much applauded in Diseases of the Bladder, to purify the
Mass of Blood, so that some affirm, that by continuing the use of it for
several Weeks a j. ad iij. plus-minus, in its own Water, from four to eight
Ounces, it is able to expel and carry off, through the pores of the skin, the
Venereal Venom, especially if not too inveterate, without making use of
Mercury. It is good for the Cure of Venereal Ulcers which happen in the Mouth,
or other parts, being mixed with Aqua Mellis. It is diaphoretick from its being
repleat with volatile Salt, and is given against all sorts of Rheumatisms,
Scurvey, Gout, etc. from half a Dram to two or three Drams, in a Glass full of
the Decoction of the same Wood, especially when it is required to expel the
sharp Serosities by Sweat, or sensible Transpiration. 10. The Oil stinks above
measure, and therefore is seldom used inwardly by reason of its ill scent; but
outwardly it is successfully used for the cure of all sorts of Ulcers, chiefly
Venereal, to cleanse Wounds, and consume proud Flesh, as also for the opening
and exfoliation of Bones, and to resist Putrefaction. It is plainly of a fiery
nature, and has both a Cathartick and Caustic force: but mixed and prepared
with S. V. rectified, it may be taken inwardly with other Sudorificks, and
Alexipharmicks against the Plague and malign Fevers, as also against the
French Pox, Palsy, Apoplexy, Epilepsy, Hysteric Fits, Vapors, Pains of the
Teeth, and the like; and Authors affirm, that some have been cured of the Pox,
by the constant use of this Oil for some Weeks, from four to ten or twelve,
drops, in a small Decoction of the Wood. Inwardly given, also, it drives forth
the Afterbirth: outwardly it is indeed a good thing for rottenness of the
Bones, and to cleanse old Ulcers, as I said before; also to ripen Aposthumes
and Venereal Bubo's, and resolve cold Tumors. 11. Le Mort rectifies the Spirit
by itsself in a Retort, and says, it contains a double Spirit, viz. a volatile
and an acid Spirit: both which you may separate after this manner: Spirit of
Guajacum lbj. put it into a Cucurbit, and in B.M. abstract iv. which is the
volatile Spirit: what remains in the Cucurbit put into a Glass Retort, and
distill in Sand; so will there come forth, first an insipid Phlegm, which cast
away, then follows the acid Spirit. The volatile Spirit you may again rectify
in B. M. by mixing it with Ashes of Guajacum calcined to whiteness, so will it
come forth most subtle and efficacious: Dose of the volatile Spirit is a gut.
vj. ad xxx. of the acid Spirit a ss. ad ij. or iij. 12. After the same manner
may you draw the Spirits and Oils of the Woods of the Oak, Ash, Cyprus, Cedar,
Box, Juniper, Hazle, Walnut, Chestnut, etc.

LIVE. Spiritus Lavendulae florum, Spirit of Lavender-flowers.
Salmon.] 1. You may make this Spirit two ways: 1. By Fermentation: Green
Lavender-flowers, q. s. bruise them, add to them to every lb of the Flowers lb
iij. of warm Water; and to every lb iij. of Water, a pound of Sugar, or
Melussos, cause them to ferment in awooden Vessel, till it has a kind of
Win^-like scent; then distill, and draw off a third part for Spirit of Lavender:
and a second third part for Lavender-flower Water, which keep for use. 2.
Without Fermentation it is made thus: Lavender-flowers lb vj. Spirit of Wine lb
xviij. mix and digest twenty four hours, then distill in a Glass Body in B. M.
drawing off the Spirit to dryness: So will you have a subtle Spirit endowed
with all Properties of the Lavender-flowers. 3. The Spirit and the Water have
one and the same Virtue, but differ only in strength, the Spirit having thrice
the efficacy of the Water; and therefore may be given in treble Dose. 4. This
Spirits is hot and dry, Cephalic, Neucrotick, and of thin parts: good against
Diseases of the Head and Nerves, and is used chiefly in Epilepsies, Apoplexies,
Palsies, Cramps, Catarrhs, Megrims, Vertigo's, Lethargies, and Trembling. It
provokes Urine and the Terms, expels both Birth and Afterbirth, eases the
Wind; and outwardly applied takes away Pains in the Head, Joints, and Nerves
proceeding from a cold cause. 5. Dose of the Spirit ij. of the Water vj. in any
fit Liquor. Of this Spirit ij. Spirit of Saffron j. Poppy and Angelica-water A.
ij. White Sugar Candy iij. mix and dissolve for a Dose against Fainting and
Swooning. 6. You may make this Spirit also after this manner: Lavender-flowers
lb vj. Manna, Sugar, or Honey lb j. White Wind, in which a little Leven is
dissolved, enough to make them into a soft mass (the Manna and Flowers being
first beaten together well in a Mortar) put all into an earthen Pitcher or
Jarr, filling it well, and pressing it down; carefully stop the mouth with Cork
and a little Wax melted, then set it by to ferment, till it has gotten a
Wine-like scent, or is become somewhat sour; then take all out, and put it into
a Glass Cucurbit with its Head and Receiver; and distill in B. M. so you will
have an Ardent Spirit, repleat with the Odor of the Flowers, this, if you so
please, you may cohobate upon fresh Flowers, by which means it will become
stronger and more efficacious. 7. Now because Flowers are very apt to a
dissipation of their parts, by reason of the tenuity of their substance,
Authors strive to recompense this by the addition of some other parts of the
Plant, adding, for Example-sake, to Roses their Hip: To Orange, Lemon, and
Citron-flowers, the Fruit well stamped: To Flowers of Sage, Rosemary, Marjoram,
Mint, Bawm, Lavender, Thyme, Stechas, Jesamine, etc. their Seeds, well bruised:
To the Flowers of Lilly, Flower-de-luces, Peony, Angelica, etc. their Roots and
Seeds bruised: To Flowers of Petty Muget, Elder, Dwarf-Elder, etc. their
Berries, 8. Others moisten the Flowers with All-Flower-water, and then distill
in B.M. (after a previous Fermentation) cohobating upon fresh Flowers as often
as they please. Some use Spirit of May-dew, insolating first, then distilling
and cohobating upon fresh Flowers; affirming, That Spirit of May-dew, and
Cowsdung, are very necessary in the first distillation of Flowers, but not in
the latter distillations, by which means you will have Water perfectly
odoriferous, of which one Ounce will be more fragrant than ten Ounces distilled
the ordinary way.

LV. Spiritus Limomum, Spirit of Lemon-peels.
Salmon.] 1. It is made exactly as the Spirit of Orange-peels, at Sect. 50.
aforegoing, to which we referr you. In making this Spirit, you must be sure to
take only the outward yellow rind, which you may pare off with a knife. 2. You
must take this rind while it is yet recent and smooth, retaining its fragrant
smell, not when it is faded, grown rugged, and half dry: for being fresh, these
rinds have a subtle and volatile Spirit, which insinuates itself into the
Brain, strengthening and recreating both it and the Nerves; whereas being
withered and shrunk, the taste is unpleasant and bitterish, and void of that
vivacity and pleasantness it had before: This being distilled with rectified
Spirit of Wine in B.M. gives you a most admirable Spirit beyond all comparison
for fragrancy and delicacy: the same may be done in a Copper Vesica from
White Wind, drawing off the one half. 3. This Spirit is a most excellent
Cephalic and Neurotick, curing most cold Diseases of the Head and Brain, as
Apoplexies, Epilepsies, Megrims, Vertigo's, Lethargies, Palsies, Tremblings,
etc. being taken a ss. ad ij. even to ss. in a Glass of Wine, or mixed with some
other Cordial Water. 4. Outwardly it may be used against Pains and Aches from a
cold Cause, cold Gouts, and Headachs, Bruises, and such like. It comforts weak
and feeble Joints and Limbs, adding strength and agility to them, and this by
being used both outwardly and inwardly. It is a Specific in Diseases of the
Womb, and is reported by some Midwives to cure Barrenness. 5. You may make in
Elixir of it after this manner: Of this Spirit viij. of the outward rind ij.
Ambergrise j. Oriental Musk gr. vj. ( both the Perfumes ground with white
Sugar Candy ij.) mix and digest for ten days, then filter and keep it for use.
After the same manner you may make an Elixir both of Orange and Citron-peels.
6. This Elixir is a choice Cordial which has few equals; it is good against
Faintings and Swoonings, Sickness at Heart, Deliquium of the Spirits, and
chiefly in sudden Accidents after violent exercise. It is good both for Men and
Women, except such as are apt to be troubled with Vapors and Hysteric Fits:
In those Cases it may be made without the Musk and Ambergrise, and then this,
as also that made with Orange-peels, you will find to be a Specific to
facilitate and hasten the Birth of Women in Labor, etc. Dose a j. ad j. or
more in a Glass of Wine, or some Cordial-Water.

LVI. Spiritus Menthae, Spirit of Mint.
Salmon.] 1. A good quantity of Mint newly gathered, bruise it, and put to it
(in a wooden Vessel) a good quantity of warm Water, or rather of Mint-water; in
every three quarts of which dissolve a pound of Sugar, or rather as much Manna:
let them lie to ferment till they have acquired a vinous scent; then distill in
B.M. drawing off the third part for Spirit of Mint: the second third part for
Mint-water: what remains in the Still may be cast away. This Spirit and Water
by cohobating again upon fresh Mint, may yet be made stronger. 2. Or thus:
Fresh Mint lb vj. rectified Spirit of Wine lb iv. mix, digest twenty four
hours, then draw off lb iv. of Spirit in B.M. or if you please you may distill
to dryness, which then may be coholobated upon fresh Mint, and repeated again
if you see fit. It is an excellent Spirit. 3. To make the Mint-water
aforementioned. Fresh Mint, q. v. beat it well in a Mortar, put it into a long
earthen Pot, and make it sufficiently moist with Juice of other Mint; cover it,
and leave it so about two days in digestion, then put the matter into a large
Copper Vesica, with its Head and Refrigeratory, as also its Receiver, luting
well the Junctures with a wet Bladder: make a Fire of the second degree, and
distill off about the one half of the Juice which you added, then cease
distilling; so will you have a good Mint-water, repleat with the odor and
flavor of the Herb. Put it in a Bottle, and expose it open to the Sun five or
six days, then stop it up and keep it for use. 4. Now here is to be noted, that
in the distillation of this Water, we add a good quantity of the Juice of Mint,
because there would be no good distilling of the Herb itself, without it was
first moistened with something, and in my Opinion, the Juice of the same Plant
much exceeds fair Water, which other Authors use. And besides, this Juice which
is added serves to imbibe the volatile parts of the Herb, in the fermentation,
and when the Matter is heated, the more spiritous part, as being the lighter,
rises first and smells less of the Empyreuma, than if the Herb was distilled
without being moistened with the said Juice. 5. In these and the like
distillations you must given Fire from the second to the third degree, because
if it should be too little, none of the essential or volatile Salt of the Plant
would rise; but if it be too strong, the Water will taste of an Empyreuma, do
what you can: therefore, if you would proceed rightly, distill so as to make one
drop only to follow another. 6. These Waters so soon as they are distilled have
no great smell; but having lain some time in the Sun, the spiritous parts will
exert their activity in the aqueous, and the Water will become fragrant which
was not so before. 7. What remains in the Still after the Water is drawn off,
strain out by pressing, and evaporate with a gentle heat, till it comes to the
consistency of an Extract, which does contain almost all the essential Salt of
the Plant, and therefore is of greater Virtue than the Water before distilled,
for in this Salt the principal Virtue of the Plant does consist. This Extract
is stomatick and Cardiack, opens Obstructions of the Lungs, Reins, and Womb,
working by perspiration, and may be given a ss. ad ij. dissolved in its proper
Water. 8. The Virtues of the Spirit of Mint. This Spirit is chiefly stomatick,
cephalic and uterine, of thin parts, and subastringent. It is used mostly
against Vomiting, and debility of the Stomach, Crudities, hicket, nauseating
Wind, faintings, Obstructions of the Liver, Pains of the Guts, and the
Belly-ache in Children, Megrim, Vertigo, Lethargy, Coagulation of Milk, Colic,
etc. it opens, attenuates, discusses, cures Diseases of the Womb, provokes the
Terms, strengthens the Liver, and resists Poison, and particularly the
Narcotick quality of Opium; outwardly by bathing on the Region of the Abdomen
it eases the Colic, and takes away the hardness of Women's Breasts, from
curdling of the Milk, by bathing the part, and taking it also inwardly: Dose a
ij. ad vj.

LVII. Spiritus Nucis Moschatae, Spirit of Nutmegs.
Salmon.] 1. Tho Spirits of Nutmegs is a thing seldom made, nor prescribed in
any Author, yet for the Public good sake (since it is a thing of most
excellent use) we shall take the pains to describe it here. Of the best Nutmegs
viij. grate them on a Grater, or beat them very small in an Iron Mortar, put
them into a Glass Cucurbit, and affuse thereon tartarised Spirit of Wine or
Alcohol of S.V. lb v. mix and digest forty eight hours, then distill in B. M. to
dryness. 2. This is an excellent Spirit of Nutmegs* but if you cohobate it upon
the faeces three or four times, it will be much stronger, and more subtle, and
contain more of the oily particles dissolved in itsself. The Feces you may
reserve for other Extractions, to be made use of when you extract a Chemical
Oil, the which, in its place, we shall show. 3. It is Cephalic, Stomatick,
Cardiack, Neurotick, and Uterine; it warms and cherishes a cold and afflicted
Brain, and Habit of Body; comforts the Nerves, strenghens the Stomach, and
causes a sweet Breath. It discusses Wind, eases the Colic, and Gripings of the
Guts, sharpens the Eyesight, comforts the Liver and Spleen, provokes Urine, is
good against the Whites, and a cold Distemper of the Womb, it chears the Heart,
revives the Spirits, is good against the Palsy, Cramp, Tremblings, and other
weaknesses of the Nerves, and prevails against the Apoplexy, Vertigo, Megrim,
Headache, from a cold Cause, Lethargy, and other the Distempers of the Head.
4. Modus Utendi. Aqua Lactis Alexiteria iiss. Spirit of Nutmegs ij. ad ss.
Spirit of Saffron ss. Syrup of Citrons or Lemons vj. mix for a Cordial draught.
Or thus: Aqua Lactin Scorbutica iiiss. Spirit of Nutmegs ij. Volatile Spirit of
Vitriol ss. mix for a Dose to be given in the Morning fasting, against Diseases
of the Head.

LVIII. Spiritus Opii, Spirit of Opium.
Salmon.] 1. This is a Prescript which no Author, that we know of, or have
seen, has in the least treated of; and because the Medicament is excellent, and
there are, or may be various ways of preparing it, some of which exceed others,
we shall do our endeavor to exhibit here the best Methods of its Preparation;
which because we write them out of the Fire, and not from any Author, we hope
will be the more acceptable to all the Sons of Art. 2. Choice Thebian Opium lb
j. cut it into bits, and with your hand dis-dissolve it in a quart, or more, of
pure rectified Spirit of Wine, over a gentle heat: what is dissolved decant,
and add more rectified Spirit, dissolving and decanting so long, till all the
Opium is dissolved, and till you have mixed with it five or six quarts of the
said Spirit, and nothing but a little straw, dross, leaves, and feces to be
left behind, which cast away: Put all these dissolutions of Opium into a Glass
Cucurbit, with its Head, Worm, and Receiver, and in B.M. draw off the Spirit by
a gentle heat to dryness, which that it might comprehend the full of the Opium,
cohobate it again upon the Magma or Feces; digest it in a very gentle heat for
three or four days till the Magma is dissolved, and in like manner distill
again, thus cohobating, digesting, and distilling, three or four several times,
you shall have a most excellent Spirit repleat with the Powers and Virtue of
the Opium, a thousand times transcending for pleasantness all the Tinctures
that can be made of it in the World. 3. Or thus: Thebian Opium lbj. dissolve it
in Vinegar lbiij. digest a Week, and decant the Tincture: to the Magma add
Vinegar lbiij. more, digest and decant as before, not troubling the sediment.
To the Magma put Tartarised S. V. lbiij. mix and digest three days, then gently
decant the Tincture: upon the Magma put tartarised S.V. lbiij. more, mix, and
digest again three days more, then decant the Tincture as before, casting away
the dregs: put these Tinctures of the Vinegar and Spirit of Wine together, mix,
and digest in a very gentle heat for three Months, that they may unite and
meliorate together: then put them into a Glass Cucurbit, and draw off the first
volatile Spirit in B. M. so much as will easily come over: cohobate the Spirit
upon the Magma, and distill again, cohobating and distilling thus four or five
times to dryness, so will you have a volatile Spirit repleat with all the
Virtues and Powers of the Opium, as aforesaid. 4. Or thus: Thebian Opium lb j.
dissolve it in this following Menstruum lb x. ( Tartarised S. V. p. 16. Spirit
of Nitre, or Oil Vitriol, p. j. mix, digest, and unite them by drawing them
over the Helm) Put them into a Glass Cucurbit, digest two or three days then in
B. M. distill to dryness, cohobating and distilling three or four several times.
This is a noble Spirit of Opium, and not inferior to any of the former. 5. Or
thus: Thebian Opium lbj. of the Spiritus Intimus (in our Seplasium, lib. 2.
cap. 6. sect. 19.) lbvj. cut into bits the Opium and dissolve it, digest three
or four days, then distill it in a Glass Cucurbit in B. M. to dryness,
cohobating thrice: so will the Spirit ascend with the volatile Salt of most
admirable use, and for some purposes much transcending any of the former. 6. Or
thus: Thebian Opium in bits lb j. Powers of Turpentine lb x. mix, dissolve,
digest three or four days, and draw off the Spirit in a Glass Cucurbit in B. M.
cohobating thrice. This is a noble Spirit, and of great Virtues. 7. Or thus:
Thebian Opium cut in bits lb j. Rainwater lb iv. mix: put them into a Glass
Mattress, and dissolve over a gentle heat in twenty four hours, stirring it
often, increasing the Fire at the end, that it may just boil; being a little
cooled and settled, decant the clearest of it, which filter through brown Paper
while warm: to the remainder put Rainwater lb iv. more, with which proceed as
with the former, decanting and filtering. To the remaining Sediment in the
Mattress, put of rectified S. V. lb iv. mix, digest close stopped for forty eight
hours, then decant the Tincture, which also filter as before: to the feces in
the Mattress add again tartarized S. V. lb iv. mix, digest, and extract the
Tincture as before, which filter also, casting away the faeces in the Mattress,
as now of no use. Put all these Tinctures both aqueous and spiritous together
into a Glass Cucurbit, with its Head Serpentine and Receiver, and in a Sand
heat draw off a pure Spirit of Opium lb x. which keep for use. What remains in
the Mattress evaporate to the consistency of an Extract, of which you may make a
most excellent Laudanum. 8. There is also a way of extracting the Spirit with
pure Wine Vinegar after this manner: Of the best Thebian Opium in bits,
dissolve it in strong Vinegar, casting away the filth, then distill it in an
Alembick with a strong Fire to dryness, cohobating thrice, and distilling in
like manner. 9. But Opium as it contains, 1. A Phlegm. 2. A Spirit and volatile
Salt. 3. A black stinking Oil; so by distilling it per se, may they be
separated thus: Opium, put it into a Glass Retort with a large Receiver, and
distill in Sand, first with a gentle Fire, afterward increasing it gradually to
the third degree, cause the Phlegm, Spirit, or volatile Salt, and lastly be
thick black stinking Oil to come over the Helm: all which separate and rectify
according to Art. In the bottom of the Retort you will have a Caput Mort.
containing a small quantity of fixed Salt, of the nature of other fixed
alcalious Salts, and a useless Earth, which is to be cast away. 10. Where note,
That this Spirit thus distilled by a Retort, is a volatile urinous Spirit,
which is followed by a copious Sulphur, or oleaginous inflamable substance:
this urinous Spirit is indeed diaphoretick, and by its exceeding subtilty in
penetrating, causes Sweat. However this is not the Spirit intended by our
Author, but rather some one of the former of a sulphurous, or sulphurous saline
nature distilled as aforesaid in a Cucurbit. 11. One Preparation more remains,
which because some may value before all the rest, we shall be willing to
insert. Opium in bits lb j. dissolve by gentle boiling in a gallon of Water,
then strain and cast the filth or feces away: to this add another gallon of
fair Rainwater: add Sugar, or Melussos lb iv. and a good Leven; dissolve, and
being warm, cause the Liquor gently to ferment for some days, till it becomes
of a vinous scent; then put all into a Copper Vesica, with its Head, Serpentine
and Receiver, distill and draw off lb viij. or ix. of Spirit, which keep for
use. What remains in the Vesica pour out, and in an earthen Pan evaporate to
the consistency of an Extract, of which you may make Laudanum. 12. The Magma
left at the end of the distillation, at 2. may be abstracted to the thickness
of an Extract for the making of Laudanum: for the same purpose the dry Magma at
3. may serve, but it has not altogether the same strength and virtue, because
many of the volatile saline particles are carried off by the Spirit. The Magma
also at 4. may serve as an Ingredient for Laudanum, so also those at 5, 6, and
7, 8, and 11. as at the end of the said 7, and 11 Paragraphs we have hinted.
13. From hence it appears, that the Spirit drawn only with sulphurous Spirits,
or that Spirit drawn only with acid or saline Spirits, cannot be altogether so
forcible as Tinctures drawn with the same; for the first contain only an Opiate
Sulphur, with little or none of the volatile Salt: and the other contains
chiefly a volatile opiatick Salt, with little or nothing of an opiate Sulphur.
But that Spirit which is drawn with a sulphurous acid Spirit, or sulphurous
saline Spirit, contains both an opiatick Sulphur, and an acid volatile or
urinous volatile Salt, almost in the same proportion that the Tincture does,
whether it be made with a sulphurous, acid, or saline Menstruum. 14. These
Spirits are all of them much pleasanter than either the Tinctures or Extract of
Opium, or any preparation of Opium which contains the Body of the Concrete; for
they never make the stomach sick; as those other oftentimes do; nor yet disturb
the Head otherwise than it is possible Spirit of Wine may do, which is a
considerable advantage in their Operation. And although they are not altogether
so strong and forcible as is Tincture or Extract of Opium, yet they operate
with much more speed and safety than possibly the others can; for they fly like
lightning through the whole Body, and give ease and relief not only to the
Spirits, but to the whole Body almost in a moment. 15. These Spirits are not
capable of these ill effects which usually happen from other Preparations of
Opium; they suppress not the excretion of Excrements, nor stop the passages of
Urine, they benumb not, nor enervate the Limbs, nor change the natural
complexion of the skin to paleness; they neither cause cold sweats nor yet
shortness of Breath, or difficulty of breathing, with a perturbation of the
Senses, drowsiness and stupefaction of the Animal and Vital Faculties; but they
have all the good effects which are attributed to the most excellent Laudanums,
tho not with the self-same strength and force. 16. They appease all
perturbations, intestine and violent Commotions of the Body; Disquietings,
Rage, Fury, and Madness of the Archeus, (the principal Director of the Spirit
of Life,) restoring again Peace and Concord, and maintaining it between the
Faculties and Motions of the Body; so that after they have softly and silently
(as it were) appeased the pain, and allayed the Grief, they procure a quiet and
pleasant rest and sleep, restore Nature to its pristine state, and repair the
decayed strength, whereby unthought-of Health comes on, with a violent
carreere, and takes possession of its ancient Habitation: Extinguishing in all
Ages and Sexes, and in what Condition soever the sharpness and anguish of
Diseases. Dose a ss. ad j. ij. iij. yea, to iv. according to Age, Strength,
Condition, and Necessity of the Sick. 17. These Spirits are of such an amicable
and kind nature, that scarce any Cordial should be given without them: they may
also themselves be made more Cordial, if after the last cohobation, they be
drawn off with these following additaments: To the quantity of Spirit mentioned
in the former Preparations, add Saffron, Cochineel in Powder, ana iv. Vipers
Flesh, Nutmegs, A. iij. Cloves, Mace, A j. Zedoary, Snake-root, A. ss. mix,
digest twenty four hours, then draw off the Spirit in B. M. and keep it as a
most precious Cordial for use: in the Glass hang a Nodule of Musk gr. 10.
Ambergrise gr. vj. ground with white Sugar Candy ij. to add a fragrancy to it
for refreshing the Animal Spirits.

LIX. Spiritus papaveris erratici Simplex, Spirit of the Wild Poppy, or Corn
Rose.
Salmon.] 1. I presume that what our Author here intends is a simple Spirit
from the Flowers of the Plant; which if so, and you desire a pure and neat
Medicine, you may make it after this manner: Wild Poppy-flowers lb viij.
rectified Spirit of Wine lb xvj. mix, digest a Week, then distill in a Glass
Alembick in B. M. to dryness: Affuse this distilled Liquor, upon as many more
of the same Flowers, digest again three days, and distill as before: this
distilled Liquor affuse again a third time, and if you so please a fourth time
in like manner upon fresh Flowers, distilling each time to dryness; lastly, in
a gentle B. M. draw off three parts of the Liquor, which keep as Spirit of
Poppies simple. 2 Or thus: Fresh Poppy-flowers lb xx. Witne lb xvj. mix, and
with Sugar lb iij. and a large Leven dissolved in the Wine cause a
fermentation, till the whole becomes somewhat acid: then distill in B. M. to
dryness: affuse the Liquor upon lb x. of fresh Flowers digest three days, and
distill in like manner again to dryness: lastly, in a gentle B. M. draw off the
one half of the Liquor, which keep for Spirit of Poppies: Continue the
distillation to dryness, in the same B. M. and keep the Liquor for Aqua
Papaveris, or reserve it for making more Spirit with. 3. If you design a Spirit
from the whole Plant, you may likewise proceed in the same manner as with the
Flowers, by either of the former ways, or otherwise, after this manner: Poppies
the whole Plant q. v. bruise it well in a Mortar, add warm Rainwater four
times the quantity in weight, in every Gallon of Water dissolve lb j. of Sugar:
mix well, and cause them to ferment to a fit acidity; then distill with a Copper
Vesica tinned within, in a proper heat, drawing of the first quarter part of
the humidity for Spirit of Poppies; and half the remaining part for
Poppy-water, which keep for use, or reserve for making new Spirit of Poppies.
4. It is an excellent thing against the Colic, and to alleviate Pains in any
part of the Body: it gives ease in the Stone, and is profitable against
After-pains of Women in Travel, and with a great deal of pleasure induces
sleep: but these things it does more powerfully, if you make a Tincture of the
Flowers with the same: It has in a word the Virtues of the former Spirit, but
not altogether so powerful. Dose a ss. ad iij. Plus-minus.

LX. Spiritus Papaveris albi, Spirit of White Poppies.
Salmon,] 1. It is made either of the Flowers, or of the whole Plant, as the
Spirit of the Corn Poppy is made, in all respects, by 1, 2, 3. of the former
Section. 2. The Virtues are also the same with that, and the Spirit of Opium
aforementioned, save that this is somewhat stronger than the Spirit of the
Wild, tho scarcely so strong as the Spirit of Opium. Dose a ss. ad ij. or more.

LXI. Spiritus Papaveris nigris, Spirit of Black Poppies.
Salmon.] 1. This is also made as the two former, whether you make it of the
Flowers, or of the whole Plant, and therefore in that respect, no more need be
said of it in this place. 2. And the Virtues, Uses, and Doses are the same with
the Spirit of Opium aforegoing, it being much stronger than either of the two
former Spirits: It is an excellent Medicine indeed, and in my Opinion an
excellent thing to go into the composition of most Cordials. 3. Modus Vtendi:
Aq. Lactis Alexiteria iv. Spirit of Saffron ss. Spirit of Black Poppies vj.
Syrup of Clove-gilliflowers j. mix and make a Cordial. Dose three or four
spoonfuls at a time.

LXII. Spiritus Raphani Compositus, Spirit of Radishes compound.
Sal Armoniack, Tartar calcined with Nitre, A. dissolve them in Wormwood-water
compound, distilled without the Spirit, and in Scurvy Grass Water compound, A.
q. s. (see them cap. 1. sect. 62. and 63. of this Book) mix the Solutions, and
distill them in Glass or Tin Vessels in B. M.

Salmon.] 1. How this can be called Spirit of Radishes, without any Radishes at
all in it, I cannot tell, unless the name is given to it from the small
quantity of Horseradish Roots in the Scurvygrass Water mentioned, being but a
fifth part of the Scurvygrass in the said Composition, and not above a twelfth
part of this present Recipe. 2. The best way of making it is thus: The said
Wormwood and Scurvygrass Waters compound A. lb xvj. Horseradish Roots bruised
lb viij. mix and distill in B.M. to dryness, which cohobate twice or thrice,
then take Sal Armoniack and Tartar calcined with Nitre A. lb iv. of the former
distilled Water or Spirit of Horse-Radishes, lb viij. mix and dissolve, and
then distill the Spirit as we have taught you to distill the Spirit of Sal
Armoniack at Sect. 24. 2.8.10. of this Chapter. 3. It has all the Virtues of
the simple Spirit of Sal Armoniack, and therefore is of singular use against
Pleurisies, Quinsies, and all manner of Obstructions whatsoever; besides which,
it is of approved Virtue against the Gravel and Stone, whether in the Reins or
Bladder, or any other matter which may obstruct the Urine in those parts: It
also facilitates the Delivery, if given to a Woman in Labor. Dose a gut. 20.
ad 60. Plus-minus, in a Glass of Wine.

LXIII. Spiritus Rutae, Spirit of Rue.
Salmon.] 1. Fresh Rue bruise it well, put it into a wooden Vessel, and add to
it warm Spring Water q.s. Sugar or Melussos a pound to every gallon of the
whole matter; let it ferment for ten days; then put in more Water, and distill
in a Copper Vesica, drawing off a third part for Spirit of Rue, and a third
part more for Rue-Water, which keep apart for use: the Spirit you may rectify
S.A. 2. Or thus: Fresh Rue bruised lb viij. of the best rectified Spirit of
Wine lb xvj. mix, digest forty eight hours, then distill in B. M. to dryness.
This Spirit put upon as much more of fresh Rue bruised, digest, and distill as
before, which repeat in like manner the third time, so will you have a Spirit
very strong, and fully repleat with all the essential properties of the Herb.
3. It is hot, dry, piercing, and attenuating, discusses and expels Wind, is
Cephalic, Neurotick, Hysteric, and Alexipharmick, used chiefly against the
Plague, and all other malignant Diseases. It is highly Sudorifick, expels
Poison, cures the Pleurisy, weakness of the Stomach, Colic, Gripings of the
Guts, Biting of Mad Dogs, Serpents, and all other venomous Beasts. It is
profitable against Agues, (being bathed on the Backbone) as also the Megrim,
Headache, Vertigo, sickness at Stomach, palpitation of the Heart, Surfeits,
and the like. It is apt to provoke the Terms, and therefore not so very good
for Women with Child. Dose a j. ad iij. in any Cordial Draught, or in a Glass
of Wine.

LXIV. Spiritus de Sassafras, Spirit of Sassafras.
Salmon.] 1. Whether our Author intends the simple Spirit drawn per se, in a
Retort; or the sulphurous Spirit drawn with Spirit of Wine in an Alembick, the
matter is not great: for we are resolved, because we will not miss the right,
to handle both. 2. The sulphurous Spirit of Sassaphras is distilled with Spirit
of Wine, thus: Raspings of Sassafras, or rather the Powder of it ground in a
Mill (as the j grind Powder of Liquorice, etc.) lb xij. rectified Spirit of
Wine lb xxiv. mix, digest two days, then add fair Water lb xxiv. put all into a
Copper Vesica with its Head, both Tinned within, with its Serpentine and
Receiver, and distill first with a gentle fire, and increase it to the second
Degree, continuing the Distillation till the lb xxiiij. of Spirit a come off,
which will be v very strong of the Sassafras: But if you distill in a Glass B.
M. you need add no Water, but may distill to dryness and Cohobate Two or Three
times, by which means it will be yet stronger of the Ingredient. 3. The Acid
Spirit distilled in a Retort per se. This is done exactly, as that of Guajacum
at Sect. 53. 24. aforegoing, to which I refer you. But in these Aromatic Woods
that Spirit is best, and most homogene to our Bodies, which is distilled with
Spirit of Wine, as before directed. 4. This Spirit is accounted as an Antidote
against the French Pox, and an universal Remedy against Catarrhs; It is
Cephalic, Neurotick, Cardiack, and Alexipharmick, attenuates, opens,
discusses, causes Sweat, and cures Barrenness in both Sexes. It is carminative,
expels Wind, and strengthens the Stomach admirably. 5. That distilled with
Spirit of Wine, is the pleasantest, and for all that I know, the most effectual
in the precited Cases; for it sweetens the Blood admirably, and may be given a
j ad iij: That distilled by Retort, has the same Virtues, repleat with the
Volatile Salt of the Concrete, and is more especially good against Vapors, and
hypochondriack Fits, and may be given a j ad ij. in any Fit Vehicle. 6. The Oil
which will be distilled the latter way, is very fetid, and not to be taken
inwardly, unless first rectified from Colcothar, or Bone-Ashes. Then it may
profitably be given against the French Pox, Vapors, Fits of the Mother, etc. a
gut. i. ad iij or iiij. Outwardly it cures Pocky Pustles and Sores, and all
sorts of Putrid and Venomous Ulcers; It also cures Gangreens, and exfoliates
rotten Bones.

LXV. Spiritus Succini, Spirit of Amber.
Salmon.] 1. Spirit of Amber is also twofold: 1. The Acid Spirit. 2. A
Sulphurous Spirit made with Spirit of Wine. 2. Amber grossly beaten, put it into
an Earthen Retort, so as to fill it Two Thirds full; fit to it a large
Receiver, luting the Juncture close: Make a gentle fire first only to warm the
Retort, then augment it gradatim, till the Spirit and Oil come forth,
continuing the fire till no more distills: When cold, and unluted, put about a
Pint of fair warm Water into the Receiver, and stirring it soundly about,
dissolve the Volatile Salt, which many times sticks to the sides of the
Receiver. Put all this Liquor into a Glass Alembick, fit to it a Receiver, and
luting well the Junctures, make first a very gentle fire, which augment by
degrees, so will the Phlegm and Spirit ascend, carrying with them a little White
Oil; Continue the fire till no more arises, so will the thick Oil be left at
bottom. 3. Separate the Phlegm and Spirit from the White Oil; and the Black Oil
(if you so please) you may rectify from Colcothar or Bone-Ashes, as is often
afore-directed. The Phlegm and Spirit yet remains together, which you must thus
separate: Put them into an Earthen or Glass Dish, and evaporate it about two
thirds over a gentle fire, that which remains is the Acid Spirit of Amber,
which keep in a Vial close stopped for use. 4. Where note, That there is little
reason for this trouble of evaporating the Phlegm; for you cannot so securely do
it, but that some of the Volatile Saline Particles will go along with it, which
will be a loss to you: And what need is there of thus separating its own
natural Phlegm from it? for that when it is done, the Spirit cannot be given
alone, but must be mixed with some other Phlegmatic Vehicle to convey it in: And
if so, why should not its own Phlegm be as good as any thing Foreign, for that
a less quantity of another Vehicle would then serve the turn? 5. The Black Oil
remaining in the bottom of the Cucurbit, by reason of its fetidness is scarcely
fit to be given inwardly without rectification; but it may be kept for outward
use to anoint the Noses and Wrists, of Women troubled with Vapors and Fits of
the Mother. 6. But if you would rectify it, mix it with so much Sand as is
necessary to make it into a Body, which put into a Retort, place it in a
Furnace, and force over the Oil, so will it come over-red, but exceeding clear,
which is to be kept by it self, and may serve instead of the White. 7. This, as
also the White Oil, may be given inwardly in all Hysteric Distempers, Palsies,
Apoplexies, Epilepsies, Vertigo's, Lethargies, and other Distempers of the
Brain, Nerves and Womb. Dose a gut. ij ad x. 8. The Spirit is an excellent
Aperitive, and is successfully given against all the aforesaid Distempers, but
chiefly against the Epilepsie, Jaundice, Stoppage of Urine, Ulcers in the Neck
of the Bladder, Scurvey, Cachexia, Dropsies, Rheumatisms, and other the like
Diseases; for that this Spirit is only the Volatile Salt of Amber, dissolved in
some of its Phlegm, and may be given a gut. xij. ad xxx. in some convenient
Liquor. The Oil may be dissolved with the Yolk of an Egg, by grinding them
together, whereby it will easily mix with any Water, Wine or Broth. 9. If you
would separate the Salt from the Phlegm, you may do thus: Evaporate about a
third part of the Spirit over a very gentle fire, then put the remainder into a
cool place, leaving it there ten or twelve days without stirring it, so will it
crystallize, which you are to take and keep in a Vial close stopped. 10. But here
is to be noted, that it is much better to keep the Salt with its Phlegm, for in
Evaporation (though with never so gentle a Fire) some part of it will fly away;
besides, it is easier kept with its phlegm, than apart from it, because it will
be apt to dissolve. 11. This Salt is acid, and like unto the essential Salt of
Plants, and being less volatile than that of Animals cannot rise so high in
rectification, and being heavier than the phlegm, lets the phlegm rise first, for
which reason we choose the method of crystallizing it, rather than that of
subliming it. But there is an excellent and subtle volatile Salt of Amber to be
made by sublimation from the Amber it self, of which we shall say nothing here,
but reserve you to its determined place: These Salts of Amber have the Virtues
of the Spirit aforementioned. 12. The sulphurous Spirit of Amber, made with
Spirit of Wine, is done as we have taught in our Pharmacopoeia Londinensis,
lib. 4. cap. 3. sect. 39. where Amber in Powder, p. i. is mixed with rectified
S. V. p. ij. them put into a Retort so as to fill it not above half full, to
which is fitted a large Receiver, without luting (for that if luted, the S. V.
would break all the Vessels) and then distilling with a gentle fire, increasing
it gradatim, and at last giving a fire of suppression; you will have the
sulphurous, spirituous and volatile Spirit of Amber, equal in quantity to the
Spirit of Wine, and a black fetid Oil, equal to half the weight of the Amber,
which you must separate. 13. This sulphurous volatile Spirit has all the
Virtues of the former Spirit and Oil, and infinitely more pleasant to be taken
inwardly, being a Specific against Hysteric Fits, Epilepsies and all cold and
moist Distempers of the Head, Brain, Nerves, Womb, and Joints: and may be given
a i. ad i. in any proper and specific Vehicle. 14. Outwardly, it is a most
admirable thing against the Palsy, Lameness, Numbness, Trembling of the Limbs,
or Weakness of any singular Part, the Cold Gout, and all manner of Aches and
Pains proceeding from a cold Cause, and Bruises or Hurts of the Nerves, it is
of very thin and subtle parts, and by reason of its penetrative faculty is
resolutive and discussive: It cures Contractions and Sinews shrunk up, from its
balsamic property, and restores such as have lost the use of their Limbs:
drawn up the Nostrils often at one time, and the Head well bathed therewith
also, gives immediate ease in the Headache, though never so extreme, and that
even upon the spot.

CHAP. III. Of OILS Distilled.
I. Oleum Aloeticum, Oil of Aloes.
Bate.] ALoes Epatica lb j. Myrrh ij. Frankincense ss. mix and distill in Sand
with degrees of fire. Being anointed upon the Navel, it purges and kills Worms.

Salmon.] 1. You must put these Ingredients into a Glass Retort, large, deep,
and fit to contain three or four times as much of the Ingredients; fit to it a
large Receiver; begin the distillation with a gentle fire for some time, then
increase the fire by little and little, till you see the Oil to come over, and
continue the fire till you see the Receiver clear; so will you have an acid
Spirit mixed with much phlegm, and a thick, bitter, stinking Oil. Filter all
through brown Paper, so will the Phlegm and Spirit pass through leaving the
fetid Oil behind in the filter. 2. The Spirit you may rectify by putting it
into a glass Cucurbit, with its Head and Receiver; and with a very gentle fire
in Sand, or B. M. distilling the one half, you will have the acid Spirit very
pure ascend first, leaving the phlegm or unprofitable part behind. 3. The Spirit
being given inwardly a gut. x. ad xx. or xxx. in any fit Vehicle, has the same
virtue and operation, that the Oil has being anointed outwardly: they both of
them are good against Vapors and Hysteric Fits, the Spirit being inwardly
taken as aforesaid, and the Oil being outwardly anointed upon the Nostrils,
Universals being prescribed.

II. Olium Antimonii Saccharatum, Oil of Antimony Sugared.
Bate.] It is made from the Powder of crude Antimony and Sugar, ana, distilled
through a Retort by the help of a strong fire, S. A. It is profitable against
both internal and external Diseases: Dose a gut. iij. ad vj. in Quartan Agues
before the Fit.

Salmon.] 1. In our Pharmacopoeia Londinensis, lib. 3. cap. 8. sect. 87, 88,
89, 90, 91, and 92. we have taught six several ways of making this Medicine
from Basil, Sennertus, Fausius, Beguinus, Quercetanus, and Sala, so that much
more need not be said thereof in this place: Yet it seems that this Prescript
of our Author is different from them all, and therefore we shall endeavor here
to explicate what he intends by his sugared Oil. 2. Choice Antimony, white
Sugar Candy, ^.a; grind each severally and being exactly mixed put them into a
Retort, putting over them a handful of clean Hemp or Tow, to hinder the
Ingredients from rising and passing over into the Recipient, when it feels the
heat, and makes an ebulition (which cannot well be otherwise hindered but by
this Tow): place the Retort in a close Reverberatory fitting thereto a large
Recipient; make at first a slow fire, and increase it by degrees, till you see
no more drops nor vapors come over the Helm: let the Vessels cool, and take
the Recipient, and put the distilled matter therein into a glass Mattress, add
to it Tartarised S. V. three inches above it, and digest them together in a
vaporous Balneo for three or four days: then filter all in the Cold through a
Cotton into a small Cucurbit, which place in B. M. and draw off the S. V.
leaving the Sugared Oil at bottom, which keep for use. 3. Lemery makes it thus:
Antimony, Sugarcandy, A. powder and mix them, and put them into a large Glass
Retort, so as to leave two thirds empty, fitting to it a large Receiver: distill
in Sand with a gentle fire, to draw off the Phlegm, which cast away: when red
drops begin to come forth, fit to it another Receiver, lute the Juncture,
increasing the fire gently, which manage prudently (lest the matter rarifie,
and its substance runs into the Receiver, which will force you to begin again)
continue the fire till nothing more comes forth, and when the Vessels are cold,
take and keep what you find in the Receiver for use. 4. In this Composition the
Sugar, as it contains in itself and essential acid Salt, and an Oil; so being
mixed with a portion of the Sulphur of Antimony, it makes an oily Liquor: now
the sweet taste of the Sugar proceeds from a natural mixture of this acid with
the Oil; for if you separate these two substances one from another, neither of
the two will be sweet at all: The Oil alone is insipid upon the Tongue, making
little or no impression on the Nerve that serves for tasting, but being
perfectly mixed with the acid, the points of the acid serve for a Vehicle to the
Oil, to make it penetrate, and superficially smite upon the Nerve, whereby the
Sense of Tasting is produced. And the acid being alone becomes incisive, and
prick the Nervi Gustantes by their points; but being blunted by the ramous
parts of the Oil, they no longer pierce the said Nerves, but only smite them
with a great deal of pleasantness and sweetness. 5. This Oil is a most
excellent and almost miraculous Medicine for the Cure of great Wounds and
Contusions, it cleanses Ulcers also, and heals them, if applied with a Feather
or Cotton; and takes away Tettars, Ring-worms, and other Itchings which infest
the skin. If you find it too sharp, you may qualify it with a little Aqua
Mellis, or some such like thing. 6. Besides, Le Febure affirms it to be a
surprising Remedy against intermitting Fevers, but chiefly against Quartanes,
for the cure of which he also proposes the following Pills therewith. 7. Of
this Sugared Oil of Antimony i. fine Aloes washed with Juice of Carduus Ben.
and reduced into an Extract ss. Ambergrise ij. Tincture of Saffron, evaporated
to the thickness of a Syrup i. mix and make all into a Mass of Pills. Dose a
gr. iv. and xvj. in Conserve of Roses: they purge gently downwards, and
sometimes provoke Sweat, or work by insensible transpiration.

III. Oleum Balsamicum, The Balsamic Oil.
Bate.] Alkanet Roots ij. Oil Olive lb ij, boil till it is of a rubicund
color: strain and add Cyprus Turpentine washed in Violet-water lb ss. Oils of
Hypericon, and of Bay Berries A. j. Oil of Peter, and Chemical Oil of Juniper
Berries, A. ss. distilled Oils of Rhodium and Spike, A. ij. distilled Oils of
Angelica Seeds, and Ani-seeds, A. i. mix them S.A. It prevails against all cold
affects, and dissipates Wind. In the Palsy, Deafness, Pain of the Ears, etc.
it does much; and is a present Remedy against the Cramp, Colic, Dropsy, being
both internally taken, and outwardly applied. Dose a i. ad j. in some
appropriate Vehicle.

Salmon.] It is an approved thing for healing Ulcers of the Lungs, and curing
inward Bruises, for which purposes there is scarcely a better Remedy. Outwardly
also, it is as good a Vulnerary as one shall meet withal; for if immediately
applied, (the Blood being washed off first with common Spirit of Wine) it
commonly performs the Cure at one intention, and by one application; and
therefore ought to be valued as a Jewel. Being applied in the Gout, Sciatica,
or any old ache or pain, it removes the pain, and cures the sick in a short
time.

IV. Oleum Camphorae, Oil of Camphire.
Bate.] Camphire ij. Tobaccopipe-clay iv. mix and make a Mass, and distill by a
Glass Retort in Sand, S. A. Or it may be made by dissolving Camphire ij. in
Spirit of Nitre iv. in a warm place. It is Diaphoretick and Hysteric: Dose ad
gut. x. etc.

Salmon.] 1. In our Pharmacop. Land. lib. 1. cap. 8. sect. 20. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
and 6. we have shown you six several ways of preparing the Oil of Camphire from
Schroder, Hartman, Horstius, and Kesler: And in our Doron Medicum, lib. 1. cap.
2. sect. 7. 2, 3, 4. we have shown three other several ways of doing it from
other Authors: The ways here prescribed by our Author are differing from all
them, which by reason he is very conciso and short therein, require a little
Explication (...) Though it is our Opinion, ( Doron. Med. lib. 1. cap. 25 sect.
102) that Camphire is of so pu^e and exalted a substance, that it can be made
better by no kind of distillation, nor by any other Artifice whatsoever.
However for the sakes of such as cannot rest in that Judgment, we will now come
to the explication of our Author. 2. Camphire. ij. Potters Earth iv. mix them
into Balls, or otherwise, dry in the Sun, and put the mixture into a glas^
Retort, and distill in Sand into a large Receiver which has Rainwater therein:
first there comes forth a white matter, than a clear Water, and at last with a
stronger fire a sweet-scented Oil, which being rectified with Spirit of Wine,
will be as yellow as Gold: Where note, that the white matter which sublimes in
the Alembick, melts and falls into the Receiver. 3. This Oil is an excellent
Remedy, resins putrefaction and poison, and is good against the Plague and all
malignant Diseases, both continual and intermitting Fevers: The Dose is from
gut. i. ad vj. in some appropriate Liquor. The Spirit of Wine is also
camphorated, and good for the same purposes, and may be given a ss. ad i. or
ij. Both Oil and Spirit are good to stop a Gangreen, give ease in the
Toothache, and allay the pains of the Gout and Sciatica. 4. Oil of Camphire by
Spirit of Nitre: Camphire iv. rectified Spirit of Nitre viij. dissolve in a
Mattress, stop the Vessel close, and set it over a Pot full of a Water a little
heated, stir it now and then with a little stick to help forward the
dissolution which will be done in two or three hours: so will the Camphire be
turned into a clear Oil, swimming above the Spirit, which separate and keep in
a Vial well stopped for use. 5. This Oil is of excellent use to cure rebellious
and stubborn Ulcers; to remove the Caries of Bones, and to touch Nerves that
are uncovered in Wounds. 6. Some may think this to be a dangerous Medicine,
because of the violent impression which the corrosive Spirit does give to the
Camphire in its dissolution; but by reason this preparation is never given
inwardly, those scruples are caussess; Medicines much more acrimonious than
this are commonly used, and yet esteemed without peril: and considering the
uses it is put to, the Spirit of Nitre seems to be of absolute necessity, for
the Oil does so much the more and better, cleanse and scale rotten Bones, and
foul Ulcers, and cause them to heal. 7. This Oil is only a dissolution of
Camphire in Spirit of Nitre; for if you mix Water with it, and so destroy the
force of the Spirit, it will return into Camphir as before: And of all the
Rosins, this is the only one that will dissolve with Spirit of Nitre: from
Camphire iij. you will have of Oil iv. the Spirit of Nitre losing an Ounce in
the dissolution. 8. This dissolution is made without ebulition, or sensible
heat, for Acids mixing with Sulphur never make any ebulition, because Sulphurs
always submit without any resistance; and Camphire consisting of thin disunited
parts, the Acids softly enter among them, and make an easy separation: 9. Le
Febure has a compound Oil of Camphire, which is made after this manner:
Camphire in gross Pounder vj. Spirit of Nitre lb xij. put them into a Mattress,
which stop with another, the neck of the one going into the other; lute the
Juncture with a Bladder and Whites of Eggs, and digest in B. V. till the
Camphire is dissolved and become an Oil, swimming above the Spirit: separate
the Oil, and add thereto rectified Oil of Amber, Oil of Juniper Berries, A. iv.
digest till they are united, then distill in a glass Retort in Ashes, cohobating
three times; after which, rectify upon Colcothar of Vitriol, till the Oil
comes forth clear, depurated, and fluid, the Camphire being made incorphoreal,
and perfectly turned into an Oil. 10. This Oil is Sudorifick, and of mighty
force to expel the malignity of the Plague, or Pestilence, Spotted Fever,
Measles, and Smallpox, and Poison itself. It is also a Preservative Remedy in
time of Plague, being both inwardly taken, and outwardly applied. Inwardly, let
it be taken, reduced into a dissoluble Balsam, with double or treble refined
Sugar in Powder: Dose three or four drops in a Glass of Wine: Outwardly, let
the Nostrils, Temples and Wrists at the beating of the Arteries, be anointed
therewith, and by this means (being inwardly taken, and outwardly applied) this
Noble Remedy will sufficiently strengthen the Spirit, and all the Natural and
Vital Faculties so, as that there shall be no fear of their being invaded by
the Infection, or Venom, and Poison of the Plague. 11. The use also of this Oil
cannot be sufficiently commended against Fits of the Mother, Vapors, and other
Hysteric and Splenetick Passions, for it penetrates as in a moment, and
appeases all those Hysteric Irritations. This Oil is also a Noble Specific in
the Epilepsie, whether in Old or Young, but chiefly against that kind which
proceeds from disaffections of the Mesentry and Womb. Dose a gut. ij. ad iv.
viij. or x. according to the Age, Sex, and force of the Disease. 12.
Terebinthinated Oil of Camphir. Camphir iv. Oil of Turpentine viij. mix,
dissolve, and distill it, cohobating twice. It is a subtle Medicine,
Alexipharmick, and Anodyn; gives ease in a cold Gout, and Aches and Pains from
a cold Cause, and is profitable against the Palsy, being anointed upon the
part affected. 13. Rolfincius his Oil of Camphir: Camphir ij. Oil of Sweet
Almonds iij. dissolve the Camphir by digestion in a gentle heat, and cum
homogeneo Menstruo Sulphureo per minima miscetur, and so keep it for use. You
may give it a glorious red color with Alkanet-roots. 14. The celebrated
Virtues of this Oil are beyond all reproof; it provokes Sweat, purifies the
Mass of Blood, strengthens the principal Vescera, resists the Infection of the
Plague or Pestilence, and is profitable against all malign Fevers, if inwardly
taken. Dose a gut. iij. ad vj. or viij. 15. Utendi modus. Generous Wine iv.
Spirit of Saffron ss. of this Oil gut. iv. ad vj. mix for a Draught. Outwardly,
it is anointed upon Gangreenated Parts, by which means it refocilates or
recovers the dying heat, and resists the impending putrefaction. Angelus sala
Hydrelaeologia, cap. 13. Prefert Camphorae in Substantia Vsum, oleis quantum
vis diligenter praeparatis.

V. * Oleum Chartoe, Oil of Paper.
Bate.] Paper, and light it, and put it upon Plates of Jupiter, or Tin, that it
may be burnt, so will the Oil adhere to the Tin-plates, which gather and keep
for use. It wonderfully prevails against an Alopecia, or Fox-like Falling of
the Hair, Herpes, Impetigo, etc It is Anodyn, and eases the Pain of the Teeth.

Salmon.] 1. Lemery makes an Oil and Spirit of it after another order, by
distillation in a Retort, after this manner: Make white Paper up into little
Pellets, and fill with them a greater Earthen Retort, or a glass one convered
with lute, which place in a Reverberatory Furnace, with a large capacious
Recipient well luted to it; make under it a fire, at first very gentle for
about two hours, only to heat the Retort, then increase it with two or three
Coals, and continue it so for two or three hours more, and then increase it to
the third degree, and the Receiver will be filled with white Clouds; when no
more will come, put out the fire; this Operation will be ended in about seven
or eight hours: The Vessels being cold unlute them, and that which you have in
the Receiver filter through brown Paper, so will the Spirit pass through the
filter, and a thick, black, ill-scented Oil, will be left at the bottom of the
filter, which keep in a Vial close stopped for use. 2. The Spirit you may
rectify by distilling it in Sand. It is an excellent Apperitive and Diuretic,
and after an admirable manner takes away all Obstructions of Urine, being given
a gut. x. ad xx. or xxx. in any proper Liquor. This Spirit is very acid in
comparison of the Spirits of other Vegetables, because it comes from a^
essential Salt, which has been put into a very considerable motion. 3. For
considering the many mutations of the Hemp and Flax, before it is brought into
Cloth, or made Canvass of; and afterward what it passes through when Cloth, by
Washings, Boylings, Buckings, Whitings, etc. And lastly, what it meets withal
by being converted into Paper, and the Fermentations which it there receives,
it is possible that its fixed Salt may be so far volatilized, as to become of
the nature of an essential Salt. 4. Now in the distillation all this Salt
becomes dissolved into a Liquor by the Phlegm, and converted into that which is
called Spirit; the which may be demonstrated with almost Mathematical
certitude; for scarcely any fixed Salt at all can be drawn from the feces left
in the Retort, but they are cast away as useless: it takes fire exceeding
easily by reason of a sootiness adhering to it, which gives it the black
color. 5. The Oil is a good Remedy for Deafness, because that Dife^se is often
caused by a thick pituitous humor, which dries and hardens in the Ear, so as to
stop the Auditory N^rve; now this Oil dissolves and thins this humor, or
matter, and disposes it the better for its coming forth, by which means the
noise and ringing in the Ears cease, being caused by Wind which this matter
pent in. It may be dropped into the Ears, and fol^^opt in with a little Cotton,
dipped in the same. It cures the Toothache, much like the Oil of Guajacum; and
being anointed with, it helps Tettars, Ring-worms Herpes, and other like
breakings out: and being smelt to, and the Nostrils touched or anointed
therewith, it represses Vapors, and Hysteric Fits. 6. You ought to use Paper
white and clean, and not written upon, for the Ink thereupon may alter the
Virtue of the Oil and Spirits, and change the natures of the Preparations. 7.
The Receiver also ought to be large, that the white Vapors may have room to
circulate in, for they come forth with that force, that otherwise the Vessel
would break, had they not room enough to play in: be cautious also in your
fire, for if it be too great at first, for the first two or three hours, the
Retort will infallibly be broken: from lbvj. or ninety six Ounces of Paper, you
will have ix. of Oil, and fifty four Ounces of Spirit, there remaining about
thirty Ounces of Coals in the Retort.

VI. Oleum Heracleinum, Oil of Hazel-wood.
Bate.] It is made of Hazel-wood cut down in September or March, cut into
little bits; put them into a Retort and distill in Sand with a gradual fire:
separate the Oil from the Water S. A. It heats, incides, is anodyn, and an
excellent thing against the Epilepsie, and Pain of the Teeth. Gut. ij. iij. or
iv. taken with Crumbs of Bread, kills Worms upon the spot, and brings them forth
by Stool.

Salmon.] 1. Rolfincius, lib. 3. sect. 2. art. 1 cap. 11. makes it after this
manner: Hazel-wood rasped, or in pieces, q. v. fill an earthen Retort
therewith, fit to it a Receiver, and distill with degrees of an open fire, so
will you have Spirit and Oil: separ ate the Oil from the acid Spirit by
filtration, and rectify the Spirit. This Oleum Heraclinum Rulandi, (says he)
Quercetanus judges to be Oil of Box; but Libavius; Hartman, Kesle^, and
Beguinus, say it is the Oil of the Hazel-wood; the Spirit and Oil being
rectified, both cure the Epilepsie, and Apoplexy, being internally taken:
Outwardly, with Cotton or Lint, some drops (...) the Oil applied, it cures ^^e
Toothache; and anoint^^^ upon the Navel, kills ^orms, cases the Pains of ^^e
Colic, and drives forth both Birth and Afterbirth, as also the dead Child.
They are confirmed in the Opinion, that the Oleum Heraclinum is Oil of
Hazel-wood, because the Hazel-nuts are called Nuces Heracleoticae. See Beguinus
Tyro. Chym. lib. 2. cap. 6. 2. Some Authors order the Wood to be ground into
Powder, and then put into the Retort and distilled in Sand: and order the Oil
to be rectified with much Water to make it more pleasant; and the acid Spirit
to be rectified in B. M. But Hartman in his Practical Chemistry, says, it is
more rightly distilled per Descensum, or per Vesicam. 3. Schroderus in Pharmac.
lib. 4. clas. 1. sect. 108. says, That the Oil is made by a Retort with a
naked Fire, or by descent: and that both Spirit and Oil are hot and inciding,
anodyn, and antepileptick, and chiefly cure the Toothache. Some, says he, will
have Rulandus's Oil of the Wood Heracleum to be the Oil of Hazel-wood: for that
the Hazel was first translated from Heraclea Ponti into Greece where it was
called Heracleotica seu Pontica, and the Nuts, Heracleoticae: Though others again
will not allow it, but affirm it to be the Oil of the Box Wood, as Quercetanus,
Tetrade affect. capitis, page 214, 215, 216. where he shows, that the Oil of
Box-wood, abounds with a very Narcotick Sulphur, and commends it against the
Epilepsie and Toothache, Worms in the rotten Teeth, and hollow Teeth, a
Toothpick being put into it, and the then put to the bottom of the hollow
Tooth. 4. But if we may be guided by the name of the thing, adding also the
Authority of the greater number of the most Learned, we are obliged to
conclude, that the Oleum Heraclinum Rulandi, and which our Author here intends,
is truly the Oil of Hazel-wood, and not of Box, to which the appellation has no
relation.

VII. * Oleum Linteorum, Oil of Linen Cloth.
Bate.] It is made from Linen Cloth [or old Linen Rags] kindled and
extinguished upon Plates of Tin, S. A. It is a powerful thing for the curing of
Ophthalmies, a drop thereof being mixed with one of spittle.

Salmon.] It is distilled after the way and manner as Oil of Paper, at Sect. 5.
aforegoing, to which I refer you; and the Virtues and Uses are also the same.
And an Oil likewise may be distilled from the Hemp or Flax after it is peeled
from the Bun, before it is spun or hackled, having the same uses and effects to
every intention and purpose.

VIII. Oleum Ludi, Oil of the Gravelly Substance sticking to the bottoms of
Chamber-pots.
Bate.] The Tartarous matter adhering to the bottoms and sides of Chamber-pots,
which calcine and dissolve per deliquium, S. A. [that is, by passing it through
a Bag in a cool Cellar, or other moist place.] It is prevalent in resolving
Tartar in any part of the Body; yea, even to the dissolving of the greater
Stones whether in the Reins or Bladder, and to expel them. It also conduces
wonderfully to open all Obstructions arising from those causes.

Salmon.] 1. You may calcine the matter sever ways, either with Sal Nit^^ in
about six hours time: (...) with Sulphur and Nitre: (...) with a treble
quantity of Beech-tree Charcoal. 2. Sennertus calcines with a Circulary Fire;
then with Reverberation; then with Beech Charcoal in a Potters Oven, Instit.
lib. 5. par. 3. sect. 3. cap. 5. He also calcines with Nitre, and extracts a
common Salt with Spirit of Wine, then abstracting the Spirit of Wine, sets it
in a cool moist Air to melt per deliquium. Dose a gr. vj. ad xij. in Parfly,
Arsmart, or Onion-water. 3. Others calcine either with Beach Charcoal, or with
Nitre, and elicit the Salt with some proper Diuretical Water, or Spring Water,
or with Phlegm of Nitre or Alum, then filtrate, evaporate, and melt per
deliquium. Dose a gr. iv. ad x. plus-minus. 4. And because this matter is full
of an impure Sulphur, it may be doubly calcined, filtrated, and evaporated as
aforesaid, so will the Oil, per deliquium, be yet pur^r. 5. Lastly, being put
into a Glass Retort and distilled as you do Hartshorn, you will have a volatile
Salt sticking to the Neck of the Retort, and Sides of the Receiver, a Urinous
Spirit, and a little quantity of stinking Oil; all which may be rectified as
other Oils, Volatile Salts and Spirits, etc. These have the same Virtues with
the Oil per deliquium, but much more powerful; and all of them specific
against the Epilepsie, Apoplexy, and Fits of the Mother. 6. Let the Salt be
dissolved in the Spirit, and so kept, of which you may give a gut. x. ad xxx.
or more, in any proper Liquor: the Oil may be given a gut. ij. ad iv. or viij.
first mix with a little of the Yolk of an Egg, and then with the Vehicle.

IX. Oleum Lumbricorum, Oil of Earthworms.
Bate.] It is distilled in a Sand hea^ from Earthworms washed in Spanish Wine,
S. A. It wonderfully prevails in the Cure of the Palsy.

Salmon.] 1. The Worms ought to be carefully dried with a very gentle heat
beforehand, that they may be divested of the greatest part of their phlegm, so
will the Operation be the sooner performed. 2. Then being cut into pieces, put
them into an Earthen Retort, or a Glass one coated, which place in a
Reverberatory Furnace, fit to it a great capacious Receiver, luting the
Juncture close; begin the distillation with a small Fire to warm the Retort,
and drive out the remaining part of the phlegm gutatim; when no more drops fall,
increase the fire a little, and the Spirits will come forth, filling the
Receiver with white Clouds, and at last a black Oil and volatile Salt, sticking
to the sides of the Receiver: continue the fire till all is come forth that
will; then cooling the Vessel, and unluting, shake the Receiver, to loosen and
mix the volatile Salt with the aqueous and spiritous Matter, put all into a
Bolt-head, with its Receiver, luting the Junctures well with a wet Bladder,
then with a gentle Fire in a Sand heat, the volatile Salt will sublime to the
top of the Bolt-head, which separate and keep by it self. 3. What remains
filter through brown Paper, so will the Phlegm and Spirit pass, leaving the Oil
behind; keep each by themselves for their particular uses. The Spirit, you may,
if you so please, rectify from its Phlegm, casting the Phlegm away. 4. The Oil
is fetid, and stinks so abominably, that it is scarce possible to be used
alone, especially unrectified. To rectify it, you must mix it with Powder of
Bone-ashes, or Colcothar, and draw it off from them, so will it be pure, and
divested much of its stinking scent, but scarce tolerable to be used by
Unction. 5. The Spirit, volatile Salt, and Oil, have all one and the same
Virtues, save the volatile Salt is the more powerful, the Spirit next in
virtue, then the Oil: the two first are to be given inwardly, the Oil only to
be used outwardly by Unction, as we shall presently teach you. 6. The Spirit is
given a gut. xx. ad xxx. or xl. The volatile Salt a gr. iv. ad xij. or xiv. in
any Specific Vehicle against the Palsy, Apoplexy, (for which they are
Specificks) Epilepsie, Vertigo, Lethargy, Consumptions, and all other cold and
moist Diseases of the Head, Brain, and Nerves, as also against the Pleurisy,
and all Disaffections of the Lungs, and Womb, as Vapors, Hysteric Fits, and
such like. 7. Outwardly, the Paralytick Parts are to be anointed with the
rectified Oil, as also the Sutures of the Head, Temples, Nostrils, etc. But
because it is so odious by reason of its ill scent and nastiness; we shall here
teach you to convert it into the Potestates of the same, which are a Medicine
so near and cleanly, that it will scarcely foul the finest and cleanest Linen.
8. These Potestates are thus made: Of the best rectified Spirit of Wine lb ij.
Volatile Salt of Earthworms j. mix and digest two Months, till the Spirit is
impregnated with the Salt: decant it from the remaining Salt (for all of it, it
will not suck up) and add thereto of the former rectified Oil j. mix by shaving
them well together, digest two Months, and then draw them off together in an
Alembick, so will they be intimately united and remain together for ever; and
thus have you the Powers of Earthworms, having all the Virtues of the Spirit
and Salt aforementioned; and may be given inwardly a ss. ad i. in any fit
Liquor, and bathed withal outwardly for the Cure of the Palsy, as our Author
has directed, being ten times more effectual than his distilled Oil prescribed,
which stinks (as I said before) so egregiously, that it is scarcely possible to
be used.

X. Oleum Martis, Oil of Mars, or Iron.
Bate.] It is made of the Rust of Mars, contracted by sprinkling it with Aqua
Stygia, then washing it with Water, filtring and exhaling it to an
Oleagniosity, S. A. It is one of the greatest Deobstructors in the World. Dose
gr. iv. or v. etc.

Salmon.] 1. This is not Oleum Martis, for that is Oil made of the Vitriol of
Mars, of which we have nothing to say here, for that there is no difference in
the preparation thereof, from that of the preparation of the Common Oil of
Vitriol, all the same Rules, Directions and Cautions being to be observed in
the one, that is observed in the other. 2. This here is rather a Tincture of
Mars extracted with common Water, the Body of the Mars being beforehand opened
with Aqua Fortis, or Spirit of Nitre, by virtue of which the Tincture of the
Mars is extracted by the Water; which being filtred and abstracted to the
thickness of Oil, receives its denomination from the likeness which it has
thereto. 3. Le Mort makes it after this manner: Filings of Mars xiv. Spirit of
Common Salt j. fair Water viij. mix, and digest for three or four days,
stirring it twice a day: then add Crystals of Tartar in fine Po^der viij. mix
them well again; and add fair Water again a sufficient quantity, boil them
together for an hour in an Iron Pot or Kettle, continually adding fresh Water,
as the Matter evaporates; then filter, or let it settle, pouring off the clear
Liquor, which evaporate to the consistency of a thin Syrup: add an half part of
rectified Spirit of Wine, and keep it for use. 4. Lemery makes it thus: Rust of
Iron xij. White Tartar lb ij. Powder and mix them together, then boil them in
an Iron Pot with lb xij. or xv. of Rainwater for 12 hours with a soft fire:
stir the matter with an Iron-slice often, of almost continually, taking care to
put in more boiling Water into the Iron Pot, according as it consumes: then
leave it for a while to settle, and you will have a black Liquor, which
filtrate and evaporate in an Earthen Pan over a Sand heat to the consistence of
a thin Syrup, or till a little pellicle rises upon it. 5. Now here is to be
noted in this Preparation, that Water alone would not be strong enough to
penetrate the Iron, so as to make a Tincture, though it should be boiled for a
year together; and therefore our Author in his way, makes the Rust with Aqua
Stygia. 6. Le Mort uses Spirit of Salt, and a small proportion of Tartar; but
Lemery, because he uses no Aqua Fortis, nor Sp. Salis, takes so much the larger
a proportion of Tartar; with these things the Water being impregnated it
dissolves the Mars very easily, and gives it strength enough to extract almost
its very Soul. 7. But you must not think that this Oyl-like Body is a perfect
solution of Mars; for if there was an entire solution of it, there would appear
no more Tincture than there does in the Solution of it, with Spirit of Vitriol
and Water; but because the soluble parts of the Tartar, which is the Agent in
this Operation is only an impure acid Salt, it can but grossly rarifie or open
the Mars, and after mixing with it, keep it suspended in the Water. 8. After
the Tincture is drawn, there remains a whitish matter, which may be cast away
as nothing worth, being a mixture of the grosser and unclean parts of the
Tartar and Mars. and the Tincture has a sweetness in it, from whence, as also
from its Consistence or Body, some are pleased to call it a Syrup: Others an
Oil, though in truth, it is neither. 9. It is brought by evaporation to the
consistency of an Oil or Syrup, that it might keep the better; but Le Mort
thought good to add to it Spirit of Wine for its greater security and
preservation.

XI. Oleum Polypodii, Oil of Polipody.
Bate.] It is made from the dried Roots, distilled by a Retort in Sand, S. A.
It serves for catching of Fishes.

Salmon.] 1. It is found on Beech and Hazel-Trees, and stony Places, but that
from the Oak is best. 2. The Root in form of a Decoction, purges Melancholy,
and tough Phlegm, and opens Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, Womb, and
Mesentery, but because it is but a slow Purge it is seldom given alone, but
with other stronger Purges. 3. Being distilled its Cathartick Virtue is totally
destroyed; you having instead thereof a sharp, opening Spirit, and a fetid Oil:
The Spirit is profitably given against Venereal Defedations, and Dietetically;
you may give it a i. ad ij. or more in Drink, or Decoction of Guajacum. 4. The
Oil is so fetid, that it is not possibly to be taken inwardly without
rectification, and then at best it is a loathsome Medicine; which though it may
be good against the Venereal Distemper, Leprosy, and other Impurities of the
Blood, is seldom or never taken; for that many other Medicines, a thousand
times more grateful, and possibly more efficacious, are ever ready at hand to
be had: what its other Properties are, our Author has told you, which is the
Catching of Fish, which it does by drawing them together after it, by reason of
its strong scent. 5. As for the way and manner of making it, there is no
difficulty in it; being cut into bits, you may fill an Earthen Retort full
thereof, and having luted thereto a Receiver, you may perform the distillation
in Sand, first with a gentle fire, then with a stronger, augmenting it even to
the last degree, in all respects as we have before taught you in the
distillation of Guajacum.

XII. Oleum Sacchari Simplex; Oil of Sugar simple.
Bate.] It is made with Sugar Candy, and Spirit of Wine, ana, being mixed and
dissolved in the heat of B. M. then by burning the Spirit away to the
Consistence of a Syrup, S. A.

Salmon.] 1. This is no Oil, but a Syrup, and receives its denomination only
from its Form, Body, or Consistency. 2. It was designed against Coughs, Colds,
Wheezings, Asthma's, Shortness of Breath, Difficulty of Breathing, and other
Distempers of the Breast and Lungs. 3. The way of using it is thus: Of this
Syrup ij. Elecampane in fine Powder, j. Ginger in fine Powder j. Catechu in
fine (...) ss. mix for a Dose (...) Morning and Evening; the Sick may also lick
of it in the day time, as often as the Cough returns.

XIII. * Oleum Sacchari Compositum, Oil of Sugar compound.
Bate.] Dates cut into pieces ij. Figs iij. Hyssop, M. j. Liquorice, Aniseeds,
Cotton-seeds, A. vj. Roots of Florentine Orrice j. Spirit of Wine lb ij. boil
by burning to the consumption of the half, then strain through Hippocrates 's
Sleeve, dissolving in it Sugar Candy a sufficient quantity. It prevails against
Asthma's, Coughs, etc.

Salmon.] 1. This is no Oil of Sugar, any more than the former, and is only so
called with respect to the Form or Consistence, being more properly a Syrup. 2.
The Virtues are the same with the former, but is more Pectoral, and therefore
to be made use of in the more desperate cases, thus: Of this compounded Syrup
j. Elecampane in fine Powder, Aniseeds, ana j. Pepper in fine Powder, gr. x.
mix for a Dose to be taken Morning and Evening, and to be lickt of in th^^
(...) as need requi^^ (...) makes an Oil of Sugar after this manner: Sugar lb
j. Sand, or washed Ashes lb iij. mix them, and put them into a Glass Retort,
and distill with a very gentle fire in Sand, at last increasing the fire almost
to a red hot heat, so have you Oil and Spirit, which you may separate. 4. The
Spirit opens Obstructions of the Breast, Lungs, and urinary parts: The Oil is
Pectoral, and may be mixed with other Pectorals, and so given. Dose of the
Spirit, so much as to give any Wine, Ale, or Cordial Draught a pleasant
acidity: the Oil may be given a gut. vj. ad xij. or more, mixed with proper
Pectorals as before directed.

XIV. * Oleum Saponis, Oil of Soap.
Bate.] It is made of Venetian Soap thin sliced or scraped, and Spirit of Wine,
of each a like quantity, being distilled by a Retort, first with a gentle fire,
then increasing it gradatim. Let the Oil swimming upon the Green Water be
separated. It is good against Convulsions and Pains of the Head, being anointed
upon the Temples, Nape of the Neck and Nostrils. It helps also against the
Gout, Contusions, and Worms, being anointed upon the place affected, and then a
Colwort-leaf applied over them.

Salmon.] 1. Rolfincius, Art. Chimiae, lib. 3. sect. 2. art. 1. cap. 15. makes
it after this manner: Venice Soap thin sliced or rasped lb j. Calx Vive finely
pulverized lb ij. mix them well, then sprinkle them with White Wind: put all
into a strong glass Retort: begin the distillation with a very gentle fire,
increasing it to the third degree, so will you have Phlegm and a rubicund Oil,
which keep in a Glass close stopped for use. 2. It resolves and dissipates cold
Tumors; helps the Spleen and Vapors, being anointed upon the Region of the
Spleen; and anointed upon the Joints it eases the Gout, and dissolves the
Tartarous Nodes thence arising. 3. It stinks much, and therefore it is
necessary that it should be once or twice rectified from Colcothar, or
Bone-ashes, for by that means it will be finer and subtiller, and lose much of
its Empyreuma. 4. A warming and strengthening Emplaster, and good against Fits
of the Mother, you may make after this manner: Galbanum, Ammoniacum, A. ij.
Wax, Oil of Soap, A. j. mix and make an Emplaster.

XV. Oleum Tabaci, Oil of Tobacco.
Bate.] It is made of the dried Leaves by a Retort, or from the Seeds bruised,
by expression. It is of use against Pains of the Gout, Rheumatism, Toothache,
Worms, etc.

Salmon.] 1. By the leave of our Author, there is a vast difference between a
distilled Oil drawn by a Retort from the dried Leaves, and the expressed Oil
from the Seeds: An Ounce of the latter is not equal in Virtue and Power to ten
drops of the former. 2. How this Oil is particularly to be made we shall not
here repeat, forasmuch as we have largely performed that task in Chap. 2. Sect.
34. 3. and 15. where also we have amply shown its rectification, and several
uses, with the way of its exhibition or ^pplication. 3. In making of this Oil
you have also a Spirit filled with volatile Salt, which you are to rectify, as
(in the place cited) you are directed, which has admirable Virtues, and in my
Opinion, much transcending the Oil. 4. To make the Oil of the Seeds by
expression: Let them be ground in a Mustard-Quern as fine as for Mustard, then
put them into a Bag of new strong Canvass; tie the mouth of it fast, and put it
between two Tin-plates, or Plates of Wood lined with Tin, which place in an
Almond-press, squeezing it at first very gently, but afterward with a very
great force, leaving the Bag in the Press, till the Oil has time to drop forth.
5. Now here is to be noted, that if the Seeds be heat in an Earthen Pan, or
Drying Pan, till they be pretty warm, before they are put into the Bag, (which
ought to be wetted and wrung hard out of hot Water) you will have the more of
Oil. 2. That if you press strongly at first, some particles of the Seeds will
be apt to come through the Bag, whereby your Oil will be thick and filthy,
which otherwise would be pure and clear.

XVI. * Oleum Vitrioli ^ulce, Sweet Oil of Vitriol.
Bate.] Rectified Oil of Vitriol j. part: Alcohol of Wine lb iv. digest thirty
or forty days, and then distill by a Retort, cohobating three or four times till
they are united, S. A. It is profitable against the Stone, Tartarous Diseases,
Catarrhs, etc. Dose ij. in some proper Liquor.

Salmon.] 1. By j. part in this place is intended lbj. and it is the same
proportion which is limited in our Pharmacopoeia Londinensis, lib. 3. cap. 11.
sect. 94. where the Process is amply explicated, together with its several
Virtues and Uses. 2. But Monsieur Charras alters the proportion, and makes it
by mixing the two inequal proportions, and then distilling the mixture in a
Glass Alembick in an Ash heat with a moderate fire. By this inward Union (says
he) of the acid of the Vitriol, with the volatile Sulphur of the rectified
Spirit, there arises a composition much more sweet in savor, and gentle in all
its effects, than was the Oil of Vitriol before its conjunction. 3. And though we
must confess, that this Spirit is composed of two; nevertheless, we have a
better Opinion thereof, because they unite without the destruction of each
other, and that by this new disposal of their parts through this Union, that
which both of them had of Violent, is qualified, and their joint operation much
more proper and fitted to our Nature. 4. So that the use of this Spirit is of
much more advantage, than that of the unmixed Spirit, especially to those
Persons to whom Acids are injurious, and that it is much more proper for
several Diseases, especially the Scurvy; for the Spirit of Wine imparts to the
Oil of Vitriol a Diaphoretick Virtue, yet does not deprive it of its quality or
property it has to open Obstructions, and strengthen the parts. 5. Maets takes
Oil of Vitriol lb j. Tartarised S. V. lb iij. digest them together for a Night,
and in the Morning distill them by a Retort, and De Nova, digests for a Night
again, reiterating this Work three or four times, till the Acrimony of the Oil
of Vitriol is apparently abated. Thus, says he, you have a most temperate
Menstruum for extracting the Tinctures of multitude of Vegetables. 6. This
Spirit allays the febrile heat and ardours of the Blood, powerfully cuts tough
Phlegm, and opens the most obdurate Obstructions; it breaks and dissolves the
Stone and Gravel, whether in the Reins or Bladder, expelling the same by Urine.
7. From the Caput Mort. an acid Spirit, but much less violent than that which
is drawn from Vitriol after the ordinary manner, may be extracted by laying it
in a place where it may receive the Beams of the Sun, Influences of the Moon
and Heavenly Bodies, with the Moisture of the Air, but yet so that no Rain may
fall upon it, and leaving it there for about a Year. 8. By this means the Terra
Damnata (being deprived of its own natural Salt, but not of its Ferment) will
be impregnated with the acid Salt of the Air, and become in a sort a new kind
of Vitriol, from whence by the ordinary method, in about twelve hours time, you
may draw an acid Spirit very pleasing (called by some Spiritus Vitrioli
Regeneratus) which being compared with the former strong Oil of Vitriol, may
well be accounted among the number of the sweet Spirits of Vitriol, for which
reason sake, we have discoursed it here. Dose ij. ad j. 9. A sweet Spirit of
Vitriol compound. Vitriol calcined to redness in Powder lb iv. Flints calcined,
and in Powder lb v. Salt of Tartar calcined to whiteness lb j. mix and put
altogether into a Retort, which place upon a naked fire in a close
Reverberatory, with a very large Receiver, and distill as for the common Spirit
and Oil, till all is come forth. This done, cohobate the Liquor upon the Caput
Mort, reiterating the distillation, and repeating this cohobation and
distillation three times. 10. Thus have you a Spirit powerful to open
Obstructions of Liver, Spleen, and Bowels, profitable especially in Dropsies
and Jaundice, being used as you use the former. 11. Spiritus Vitrioli Dulcis
Paracelsi: Common Oil of Vitriol, cohobate it upon the Caput Mort, and distill,
reiterating the Cohobation, and distilling nine times; with this last Spirit
mix the Caput Mort. again, and affuse thereon so much tartarised S. V. as may
make the whole into a Paste, which put into a Retort, distilling with a gradual
fire as before, so have you Paracelsus 's corrected sweet Spirit of Vitriol.
This he commends against the Epilepsie, given a vj. ad xij. drops, or more in
any Antepileptick Water. 12. Hartman's dulcified Antepileptick Spirit of
Vitriol. Hungarian Vitriol, Children's Urine: mix and digest for some days in
B. M. then draw off in the same Balneo the Water or Phlegm to dryness, (which
Water is good against the Gout, and a peculiar Remedy for most Diseases of the
Eyes) powder the feces, put them into a Retort, with a very large Receiver, and
with a naked and gradual fire, forces over the Spirit of an austere savor, and
sulpherous smell, which rectify twice. 13. This (says he) is an infallible
Remedy and absolute Cure for the Epilepsie in Children. Dose j. with a little
Water and Spirit of Peony-Roots and Flowers, giving it in the Fit, and
continuing the use of it so long as need requires.

CHAP. IV. Of BALSAMS Distilled.
I. * Balsamum Apoplecticum, Apoplectick Balsam.
Bate.] DIstilled Oils of Cinnamon, Cloves, Lavender, Limons, Marjoram, Mint,
Rue, Rosemary, Sage, Rhodium, Wormwood, A. gut. vj. Bitumen Judaicum in fine
Powder ij. Oil of Nutmegs by Expression j. Balsamum Peruanum. q. s. mix and
make a Balsam. It comforts the Head, discusses cold Humors, for which reason it
prevails against Apoplexies, Swoonings, and Palsies, being put into the
Nostrils, or otherwise applied. Internally it is given a gr. iij. ad vj. etc.
with some Cephalic Electuary.

Salmon.] 1. This Apoplectick Balsam as it is now used, is only smelt to; but
that can do but little good; if you would have it powerful to the intention,
which is to cure all the parts affected, bathe it well in before a Fire. 2. If
the Head be afflicted you must anoint the Temples, Sutures of the Head, and
Nostrils: if for a Palsy, anoint the Backbone from the Nape of the Neck to
the Rump, as also the Paralytick Parts; and be sure to do it twice a day, for a
Month or six Weeks together, and be not weary; too soon giving over the use of
a Medicine (tho it might be the best in the World) as it frustrates the
intention for which it is used, so it disparages the Medicine, and causes the
Physician to be slighted and despised, who otherwise may be a Man of Learning
and Ability enough. 3. If it be made for Great and Noble Persons who are able
to pay for it, you may add choice Musk, Ambergriese, A. ss. Oriental Civet j.
which being ground together with a few drops of pure Juice of Lemons, may be
mixed with the Composition.

II. * Balsamum Magistrale, The Magistral Balsam.
Bate.] Distilled Oils of Spike, and of Bays, Oil of Peter, A. j. Caranna, red
Sanders in Powder, Oil of Hypericon iss. liquid Storax iv. Wax ivss. Venice
Turpentine viij. Choice Oil Olive lb iss. boil all for an hour, then add
distilled Oil of Juniper Berries j. Oil of Cloves j. Oil of Cinnamon ss. mix
them S. A. It most effectually heals green Wounds whether internal or external,
and is profitable against all sorts of Burnings, Contusions or Bruises, Pains
in the Bones and Nerves. It is good against the Headache, being anointed on the
Nostrils and Temples: being applied to the Sides with warm Cloths, it discusses
Wind, and eases Pain. It gives ease in the Colic, and Pains of the Feet, being
anointed warm thereon, they being first cut or pared to the quick. It stops the
Bleeding of the Nose, kills Worms, being internally given, and outwardly
applied.

Salmon.] 1. The Proportions are not exquisite; For what signifies iss. of Oil
of Hypericon to above forty Ounces of the Composition? it may either be left
out, or ought to be added in a larger proportion, as iv. at least. 2. I dislike
the Preparation; for if you put in the distilled Oils of Spike and Bays, and
the Oil of Peter, before the Boiling, they (by reason of their subtility and
volatility) will all boil away, and so the Medicine will be never the better.
My Opinion is, that they ought to be put in at last after the boiling, with the
Oils of Juniper, Cinnamon, and Cloves. 3. At the end of the work, every thing
being perfectly dissolved that will dissolve, the whole ought to be strained;
for otherwise you will find some kind of filth or feces, which will diminish
the pleasant look of the Balsam.

III. Balsamum Martiale, Balsam of Mars.
Bate.] Mars purified iv. affuse thereon Oil of Turpentine v. after put in
Guttatim Spirit of Nitre iij. digest in a gentle heat for some days; then
decant the pure Balsam, S. A. It is the greatest of Vulneraries.

Salmon.] 1. This is taken from Zwelfer, Mantiss. Spagyric. par. 1. cap. 4.
page 808 but somewhat differs in the Composition. In the Author it is thus:
Pure and clean Filings of Mars ij. Oil of Turpentine, or Oil of Juniper, or
Aniseeds, or Fenuel, which of them you please iij. mix them, and instill thereto
by drops, and at times of the acid chalibeat Spirit of Sal Armoniack; or for
want thereof, a pure Spirit of Nitre: macerate them a little while, so will you
have in the Oil a rubicund Tincture, which separate from its feces by filtring,
and keep for use. 2. The acid chalibeat Spirit of Sal Armoniack, is made from
Sal Armoniack sublimed from an equal quantity of pure Filings of Mars, in a
Glass Alimbeck, or Glazed Earthen Cucurbit, upon a naked Fire, first gentle,
and then increasing it with degrees of heat, till the bottom of the Cucurbit is
red hot (saving the volatile Spirit as it comes forth). This Martial Sublimate,
mix it with the Caput Mort. very well, expose it to the moist Air, that it may
be impregnated, and begins to ascend in Flowers of a yellowish color: put this
impregnated Mass into a large Glass Retort, with a long Neck well coated; place
it in a Reverberatory, on a naked Fire, with a large Receiver, well closed in
the Joint, then distill first with a gentle Fire, to force the Phlegm; then with
a stronger gradatim, that the Spirit in the form of Clouds may follow, by
little and little, which continue till the cloudy Spirits disappear, so will
you have the acid saline Spirit of Sal Ammoniack of a Golden color, (much like
to Spirit of Salt) by one only distillation pure and deflegmated. 3. This is
the Spirit which Zwelfer uses in making of this Balsamum Martiale, for want of
which, he says, you may use Spirit of Nitre, and that our Author to avoid such
a great labor, chose rather to do: however, I thought good to give the
Prescript, that every man may take his choice. 4. This Balsam, says Zwelfer is
a present Remedy against the Stone, and Ulcers of the Reins, the Colic, the
Nephritick Passion, and all other internal Ulcers, of what kind soever, healing
them after a most effectual manner: Dose a ss. ad j. 5. It has also the same
effects upon external Ulcers, doing more than can possible be imagined in a
very short time; and therefore may very well be accounted among the best of
Vulneraries Zwelfer also makes it with Ol. Vitrioli.

IV. Balsamum Paralyticum, The Palsy Balsam.
Bate.] Venice Turpentine lb iv. Olibanum, Aloes, Castor, Myrrh, Xyloaloes,
Flowers of Hypericon, A. j. Gum Elemi, Labdanum, A. iij. Styrax liquida ij.
Balsam of Peru iv. Calamus Aromaticus, Galangal, Cloves, A. vj. Cinnamon iss.
Flowers of Rosemary and Sage, A. x. all being rightly prepared, mix them with
the Turpentine, adding S. V. lb iv. digest warm for six days, then distill
through a large Retort in Ashes, first with a gentle fire for forty eight
hours, so that the Retort by degrees may grow warm: then for some time with a
stronger; and at length with the highest degree of heat; so will you have, 1. A
Water which is called, Matter Balsami. 2. A yellow Oil of a thin substance,
which is called, Balsamum Paralyticum. 3. A thick Oil, which is called, Oleum
Balsami. It wonderfully comforts the Nerves, cures the Palsy and Contractures,
outwardly anointing with it, and inwardly taking of it.

Salmon.] 1. This is taken from Phirovant's Secrets, lib. 3. cap. 2. but
differs something from that Composition; which is this: Venice Turpentine iv.
Olibanum, Myrrh, Gum Hedera, Galbanum A. j. Oil of Bays, Gum Arabic, A. x.
Lignum Aloes, Galingal, Cloves, Consolida Minor, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Zedoary,
Ginger, white Dittany, A. iij. Musk Ambergrise, A. j. beat all these things
together, and put them into a Retort of Glass, well coated, and put thereto
rectified Aqua Vitae lb ij. digest eight days, then distill in Sand, so will you
have a white Water mixed with Oil: let the Fire be but gentle, till a blackish
Oil begins to come; then change your Receiver, and increase the Fire till all
be come forth, so will you have Water and a black Oil, which separate. The
first Water is white, and is called Aqua Balsami, and the Oil separated from it
is called, Oleum Balsami. The second Water which is fetid, is called, Matter
Balsami; and the Oil separated from it called, Balsamum Artificiale. 2. The
first Water is good for the Eyes, and to clear the Skin, being washed
therewith; taken inwardly, it is good against Gravel, and to provoke Urine, and
is prevalent against all manner of Wounds, in what place of the Body soever, if
washed therewith, and Cloths wet therein be laid thereon: It is also good
against Wheesings, Catarrhs, Coughs, Gouts, and such like. 3. The other Water
called, Matter Balsami, cures Scabs in a short time, if washed therewith, as
also the Leprosy, white Scall, and all sorts of Ulcers which are not
corroding, and heals them to a Miracle, without any trouble; as also many other
Diseases of the Nerves and Joints. 4. The Oleum Balsami cures many Diseases,
chiefly Wounds in the Head, tho the Cranium and Membranes should be hurt: It is
good against the Palsy and Gout, from a cold Cause, being anointed with. And
taken inwardly, it is most excellent against the Pleurisy, j. of it being
taken at a time in Balm-water, or some such like thing. 5. The Balsanum
Artificiale, is good against any Stich in the Side, being taken inwardly a j.
ad ss, in any proper Vehicle; as also against Vapors and Fits of the Mother:
It is good against Coughs, Colds, Catarrhs, and Coldness of the Head and
Stomach, as also for Wounds in the Head, the Head and Stomach being anointed
therewith. It is good against a Quartane, the Back, Stomach, Bowels, and Pulses
being anointed therewith; as also against Palsies, and other Diseases of the
Nerves and Joints. 6. But considering of what differing Substances this
Preparation is composed, and how many Aromatic things are in it, we cannot
commend the Modus Preparandi, for that those things which are of themselves,
and in their own nature fragrant and odoriferous, are by this means made
extremely fetid and ungrateful: nor do we think it prudent or necessary to put
odoriferous Ingredients into Medicines which are distilled by a Retort, for by
that means their fragrancy is lost, and the pure odor of the Ingredients
destroyed. 7. If therefore you would prepare this Balsam according to Art, you
must proceed after this manner: Venice Turpentine lb iv. Oblibanum, Myrrh, Gum
Hedera, Galbanum, Aloes, A. lb j. Castoreum, Xyloaloes, Galangal, Zedoary,
Ginger, Acorus, A. lb ss. Flowers of Rosemary, Sage, Lavender, Liquid Styrax,
Labdanum, Gum Elemi, Balsam of Peru, A. iv. Cloves, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, A. iij.
rectified Spirit of Wine lb vj. powder what are to be poudered, and bruise what
are to be bruised, then mix altogether, and put them into a Glass Cucurbit:
digest a Week then distill in B. M. to dryness: so have you a sweet or
odoriferous Spirit and Oil, which take, separate, and keep by themselves. 8.
This done, All the dry matter left in the bottom of the Cucurbit, beat it into
gross Powder, put it into a Retort, and distill upon a naked Fire in a close
Reverberatory, so will you have an acid Water, and a fetid Oil, which take
rectify, separate, and keep by themselves also. By this means you have all the
virtue, power, and efficacy out of the Ingredients, preserving their natural
properties and qualities entire. 9. By the first distillation you have the
odoriferous Spirit and Oil, profitable against most Diseases of the Head,
Brain, Nerves, and Joints: and by the latter distillation, the acid Spirit, and
fetid Balsam; the last of which, may be of good use in many external Diseases,
as is before declared: the acid Spirit is Sudorifick, purifies the Blood, and
is of excellent use against the Lues Venerea. 10. The odoriferous Spirit is
excellent against the Plague or Pestilence, and infallibly cures it, if the
Brain and Heart be not smot, about ij. of it being given in a Glass of fragrant
Wine, and the Stomach anointed with the fragrant Oil, and then the Patient made
to sweat thereupon. It comforts the Stomach, consumes cold Humors, causes an
Appetite and good Digestion, and is an excellent thing against Palfies,
Convulsions, Weakness of the Optic Nerves, and other Diseases of the Head and
Brain. 11. The odoriferous Oil preserves all things from putrefaction, is good
against the Plague or Pestilence, cures the Gout and Sciatica, and is
profitable against Palsies, Convulsions, Cramps, Numbness, Loss of the use of
Limbs, and is good against Rheums, Coughs, Catarrhs, Colds, Stitches,
Pleurisies, and expels the Stone and Gravel, whether in Reins or Bladder. Dose
a gut. viij. ad xx. dropped into white Sugar, and drunk in Parsly-water. 12* It
has all the Virtues of the Natural Balsam, and cures all manner of Wounds
wheresoever, if dressed therewith, and if timely applied, at one application:
held in the Month, also, it gives ease in the Toothache; so also, if a hollow
Tooth be stopped with a little Cotton, or Lint dip therein. 13. The fetid Oil is
of use for curing outwardly Ulcers and Fistula's, and other like stubborn and
rebellious running old Sores; it also allays Vapors, and helps Fits of the
Mother by smelling to it, or anointing it on the Nostrils, and sometimes taking
it inwardly a gut. j. ad iv.

V. Balsamum Saturnium, Balsam of Saturn.
Bate.] Salt of Saturn iv. Spirit of Turpentine xij. mix and digest according
to Art. It is of very great use in Chyrurgery: heals inveterate Ulcers and
Tumors, cures Wounds, and preserves them from Accidents, more especially if a
little Camphir be added thereto: it prevails also against Fistula's, Cancers,
Morphew, etc.

Salmon.] 1. The Prescript is exactly from Le Mort, who when they are mixed,
advises you to let them stand in digestion for six days, till the Oil or Spirit
is tinged of a most rubicund color, and the Sal or Saccharum is wholly
dissolved, still adding a little more, as long as it will dissolve any: And if
j. of Camphir be dissolved in every Ounce of the Balsam, it will be yet more
efficacious. 2. Or thus, according to Lemery: Salt of Saturn viij. rectified
Oil of Turpentine, so much as to cover it four inches deep; being put into a
Mattress, place it in a gentle Sand heat, digesting for a day, or till you have
a red Tincture; which decant, and put on more Oil of Turpentine digesting as
before; then decant the Tincture again, which is a little colored; and there
will remain a little feces at bottom, which you may revive into Lead in a
Crucible. Put these dissolutions into a Glass Retort, place it in Sand, and fit
to it a Receiver, and with a very gentle Fire distill off about two thirds of
the Oil of Turpentine, cease the Fire, and cool the Retort, pouring that out
which is in it, into a Glass Vial, which keep for Balsam of Saturn. 3. It is
excellent for curing Fistula's, cleansing and cicavizing of Ulcers: It heals
Cankers, being but touched with it, tho never so bad, for it mightily resists
putrefaction, heals Wounds, and cures an Atrophy in any particular part. 4. It
is also of wonderful use in a hot Gout, if a little Lint, or Cloth be moistened
in it, and applied to the part. It is said also to cure Suffusions or Cataracts
in the Eyes, and to take away redness and blood-shot in them. 5. It has all the
Virtues of the Saccharum Saturni, but much more powerful, and by reason of the
Correction of the Ol. Terebinth. may be the more safely taken inwardly. Dose a
gut. j. ad vj. 6. Now here is to be noted, That this Oil of Turpentine
dissolves Lead, and easily unites with it, because of its sulphurous nature,
and therefore if you should persist in putting on new Spirit or Oil of
Turpentine on the remaining matter, all the Saccharum would at last dissolve.
7. A Compound Balsam of Saturn. Filing of Mars cleansed q. v. put upon them
rectified Spirit of Salt, so much as to overtop them four inches: let them
stand together till the effervescence ceases, and the Spirit of Salt grows
sweet; which sign appearing, filtrate the Spirit, and evaporate to one half:
then add an equal quantity of Saccharum Saturni, put them into a Retort, and
with a gentle fire draw off the superfluous Liquor to dryness; so in the bottom
of the Retort will remain a mass of a rubicund ^olour, sweet like to Sugar, and
most powerfully astringent. 8. This being given inwardly, it most happily cures
Dysenteries Hemorrhagies, and the overflowing of the Terms, as also the
Hepatick Flux, and the Caeliack Passion. 9. Outwardly, mixed with any
convenient Vehicle, and injected by a Syringe into Wounds, it cures their
Hemorrhage or Bleeding, obtunds the sharpness of Humors, mitigate the Pain,
and stops their flux to the wounded part. Inwardly, it is given in Vulnerary
Potions a gr. iv. ad x.

VI. * Balsamum Succini, Balsam of Amber.
Bate.] White Amber in subtle Powder ij. pure Oil of Turpentine iv. insolate
them so long till the Amber is perfectly dissolved. It strengthens the Brain
and Senses, comforts all the Nerves, and is profitable against all their
Disaffections, as Convulsions, Epilepsies, Hysteric Fits, etc. It is also a
great Diuretic.

Salmon.] 1. Rolfincius, Artis Chymiae, lib. 4. sect. 5. cap. 2. makes it thus:
Beeswax white or red, in fine Powder, q. v. affuse thereon a sufficient
quantity of Oil of Amber, that may dissolve the Powder: mix and digest with a
gentle heat to a just Consistency. This, says he, most powerfully comforts the
Brain, and may be given inwardly in Broth to ss, without nauseousness:
Outwardly it is to be anointed on the Coronal and Sagittal Sutures, upon the
Forehead and Temples.

2. That which I use is thus made: Pure Oil of Nutmegs or Mace by Expression,
ij. Choice Oil of Amber j. Salt of Amber ss. mix them well together, so have
you an excellent Balsam of Amber.

3. The Virtues thereof we will give you from Grulingius, Florilegii, par. 11.
cap. 2. It excells other Balsams, being used against the Epilepsie, Apoplexy,
and Vertigo; it comforts the Memory after an admirable manner; it cures all
Diseases of the Head and Brain; it stops the overflowing of the Terms, Fluxes
of Blood, and Suffocation of the Womb; it facilitates the Birth, being anointed
upon the Navel, for which reason also it gives ease in the Colic [and in
After-pains of Women lying in]; it is good against the Strangury, and
strengthens the Concoction of the Stomach; and is a famous Medicament against
the Plague, and all Epidemick Diseases. Dose of it inwardly a j. ad ij.

VII. Balsamum Sulphuris Antimonii, Balsam of the Sulphur of Antimony.
Bate.] Combustible Sulphur of Antimony, Salt of Tartar, A. j, Spirit or Oil of
Turpentine iv. digest them together, S. A. It is profitable against sordid
Ulcers, Fistula's, etc. Dose inwardly ad gut. x.

Salmon.] 1. This combustible Sulphur of Antimony is thus made: Aqua Regia (
made of Spirit of Nitre iv. in which j. of the Powder of Sal Gem is dissolved,
and distilled by a Retort in Sand to dryness) iv. most fine Powder of crude
Antimony j. mix them together in a long Cucurbit, putting in the Powder into
the Spirit by degrees, always waiting till the former effervescence ceases: all
the Powder being put in, digest twenty four hours: then pour off the Solution
into a white Ware Pot or Basin almost filled with pure Water, so will the whole
become like Milk after a little while decant the milky Water into another clean
Pot or Basin, and in the bottom you will have a thick and heavy Powder, which
is the inflamable Sulphur of Antimony, which is so often to be washed with pure
fair Water, till it ceases to come away milkie, then dry it, and keep it for
use.

2. Or thus: Fine Powder of crude Antimony, q. v. to which put by degrees Aqua
Regia, in a Glass Retort, so long till the effervescence ceases, then draw off
the Aqua Regia, by a gentle distillation in a soft fire, but exciting it
vehemently toward the end, so in the neck of the Retort, you will find the
inflamable Sulphur of Antimony sublimed of a subcitrine color, which take and
keep for use.

3. Otto Tachenius in his Hippocrates Chymicus, cap. 23. says, Simple Aqua
Fortis of Nitre and Alum, or Vitriol, corrodes not, nor dissolves crude
Antimony; but adding to this Water so much fine cleanly poudred fused Salt, as
it can dissolve; if it be then superfused on the Powder of crude Antimony, it
will with a gentle heat presently act on the Antimony, and corrode the Regulus
of it, on which presently pouring cold Water, you will see the Sulphur
separated and swimming upon the top of the Water like Pitch: where note, That
at one Operation you must not dissolve above ij. or thereabouts, for in a
greater quantity, the Sulphur will also be corroded by the Water, and turn to
feces: dulcifie this Sulphur with cold Water, and it will look like the common
Sulphur, only a little greener.

4. In making the Balsam you ought to stir the mixture continually till the
Sulphur is dissolved in the Oil, for otherwise it will coagulate and settle to
the bottom into a mass, and never dissolve so as to bring the Oil into a
Balsam: the fire must be gentle and not extreme, and you must be cautious, that
it kindle not, least you set the House on Fire: the Sulphur being once
dissolved, it ought to digest for a Week or more in a gentle heat, to perfect
the Unition.

5. This Sulphur is an excellent thing against all Wounds and Ulcers
whatsoever, and stops Bleeding admirably. It is also good against Coughs,
Colds, Asthma's, and all Oppressions and Obstructions of the Lungs, Difficulty
of Breathing Shortness of Breath, etc. Dose a gut. vj. ad xij.

VIII. * Balsamum Sulphuris Anisatum, Balsam of Sulphur Anisated.
Bate.] Flowers of Sulphur ij. Oil of Aniseeds viij. mix and digest till the
Sulphur is dissolved, and the Balsam becomes of a rubicund color. It is of
admirable use against Catarrhs, or Defluxions upon the Breast and Lungs, Coughs,
Asthma's, Phthisicks, Pleurisies, Colic, the Plague or Pestilence, Epilepsie,
and all sorts of Apostemes, and Putrefactions of the Body. Dose ad j.

Salmon.] 1. It is only a solution of the oily parts of the Sulphur in the Oil
of Aniseeds: put the Ingredients into a Glass Mattress in Sand, and give a
digesting fire for two hours; afterward increase it a little for four hours
more, stirring it very often; the Vessel being cold, separate the clear Balsam
from the Sulphur that will not dissolve.

2. In this our Prescript the Proportion is as j. to iv. but Grulingius, and
Monsieur Charras in his Royal Pharmacopoeia, makes it as j. to vj. Flowers of
Sulphur j. Oil of Aniseeds by Expression vj. put them into a Mattress, which
stop exactly, and set it in digestion over a moderate fire till the Flowers of
Sulphur are almost all dissolved in the Oil; take off the Mattress, and when the
Ingredients are cool, separate the Balsam by inclination from the feces, which
keep in a Bottle close stopped.

3. Now here is to be noted, that the volatility of the Oil of Aniseeds
requires that the Mattress should be well stopped; but you must be careful in the
time of digestion to shake the Mattress often, to hasten the dissolution of the
Flowers.

4. It is also to be observed, that the Oil by Expression may make a
dissolution of the Sulphur; yet the Oil by distillation would do better, (and
that is it which is intended by our Author) but being more volatile, it is
absolutely necessary, that the Vessel should be well stopped.

5. Le Mort makes it after this manner: Sulphur, or its Flowers ij. Salt of
Tartar j. mix and melt them together exactly, till they become of a darkish
purple color; this done, powder them, and to two Ounces of the Mass add Oil of
Aniseeds iij. boil them in B. M. for eight hours often stirring the Materials:
then the Vessel being cold, decant the tinged supernating Oil, and keep it for
use.

6. This you see is made by the help or addition of Salt of Tartar; which tho
it may be made without it, yet by this means the Body of the Sulphur is not
only prepared, and somewhat opened beforehand, but also the acid particles
thereof, are corrected, so as they may not hurt the Lungs.

7. But in our Phylaxa Medicinae, cap. 55. sect. 1. we have taught you to make
it from Lac Sulphuris, for that the Body of the Sulphur is yet better opened by
the Alcali, and Experience has confirmed the Effects thereof to be more
excellent, than that otherwise prepared.

8. Our Author thinks this Balsam to be little inferior to Natural Balsam, for
that it moderately heats and dries and preserves from Corruption. It is highly
recommended against Diseases of the Breast and Lungs, as Coughs Colds, Asthma's,
Pleurisies and Ulcers of the Lungs. It is very good against the Colic,
Oppressions of Wind, Gripings of the Guts, Weakness and Indigestion of the
Stomach, want of Appetite, Heart-burnings, etc. It is also good against the
Plague or Pestilence, and all Epidemick Diseases, continual and intermitting
Fevers.

9. Grulingius, par. 17: cap. 5. page 385. Florilegii, calls it the most
perfect of Balsams, and says it has all the Virtues of the Natural Balsam, and
the greatest Conservative Power in preserving from putrefaction; and besides
all the former Diseases for which it is good, he commends it as an excellent
thing against the Lues Venerea, and all Apostemes proceeding from putrefaction.
Dose a gut. iv. ad xij. or xvj.

10. If you would take it in a Potion, it will be best to dissolve it first in
a little of the Yolk of an Egg, and then to mix it with the Broth, Wine, or
Waters which you design as a Vehiculum. For the Colic anoint it on the Navel
and Belly.

IX. Balsamum Sulphuris Benzoinatum, Benjamin Balsam of Sulphur.
Bate.] It is made of the Flowers of Sulphur, and Oil of Benjamin, in like
manner as the Anisated Balsam. It is a wonderful Pulmonick and Antiasthmatick,
and strangely prevails in drying up Catarrhs.

Salmon.] 1. What this Oil is, and how it it is distilled, we shall here show.
Having made the Flowers of Benjamin, as we shall hereafter (in this Book)
declare; you are to take what remains after the Flowers are sublimed and put
into a little Glass Retort, and then to distill with a fit Sand heat a thick and
fragrant Oil, continuing the distillation till no more will come forth, and
nothing but a spongy Earth remains behind in the Retort.

2. Grulingius in Florilegium teaches you to mix the Benjamin with Sand, and to
fill the Retort half full, then to distill with degrees of Fire; so have you a
Water and Oil thick like Butter: But this is fetid, and not fit for our
purpose, and therefore he prescribes a rectification; this, tho it renders it
more grateful, yet is unfit for this work.

3. Charras makes it thus: Benjamin lb j. in Powder put it into a Glass Retort
having a longer neck then ordinary; add rectified S. V. lb iij. mix them well,
and lute to it a Vessel of Rencounter, setting the Retort upright for twenty
four hours, upon a very gentle Sand heat, stirring the Substances from time to
time to hasten the dissolution of the Benjamin: this done, place the Retort in
a Sand heat, take off the Vessel of Rencounter, and fit to it an half Ball,
luted with a wet Bladder, and with a moderate Fire distill off the Spirit of
Wine, after which the Flowers will rise: as soon as you see them appear, set to
a new Receiver, in the place of the former, luting the Juncture slightly, that
you may take out from time to time, the Flowers that shall fall into it, and
such as stop the neck of the Retort, keeping them by themselves for their
particular use. The Flowers being past Lute to another Receiver, so will you
have at first a thick Liquor or Oil. 2. An acid Water. 3. A yellow, clear, and
odoriferous Oil, (which is the thing designed in our Prescript.) 4. And by
continuance a fat and thick Oil; which is only of use to cleanse and heal old
Ulcers.

4. We will yet (because of the excellency thereof) show another way of
distilling our intended Oil, which is thus: Benjamin in Powder, so much as may
fill the third part, or less, of the Retort, (which if of Glass must be coated)
affuse thereon Spirit of Salt, q. s. but so as the Retort may not be too full,
least the matter should flow over: place it in Sand, and give Fire by degrees,
so will you have, 1. A Phlegm. 2. A clear transparent Oil together with the
Spirit of Salt, which must be kept by itself. 3. A yellow Oil, which is to be
kept by itself, and is that intended in the Prescript. 4. A thick fat Oil;
which, tho it is not to be cast away. yet is very unlike to the former, and
serves only for outward uses, to be mixed with Ointments and Emplasters.

5. The Water or Phlegm is very subtle and penetrating, good against
Contractions of the Nerves, Pains, Aches, Palsies, etc. The clear Oil is more
powerful, and does Wonders in cold Diseases of the Nerves. The yellow Oil which
is the intended matter of the Prescript, is yet more powerful than either of
the former, and a Specific in the Palsy, etc.

6. Having gotten this yellow odoriferous Oil of Benjamin, you are to put into
it a fourth part of the Flowers of Sulphur, in a Glass Mattress, which being
stopped up close, you are to pursue the Operation in all respects in the former
Anisated Balsam of Sulphur.

7. This Balsam is singularly good for Asthmatick Persons, and such as Wheeze,
are Short-winded, and cannot easily fetch their Breath; and is especially good
for such as have a vehement Catarrh, which falls violently upon the Breast and
Lungs: It is good against a Phthisic, or Ulcer of the Lungs, and by its
Balsamic property, quickly heals and cures it: It is also good against the
Colic, and Griping of the Guts, more especially if it proceeds from a
Dysentery or Bloody Flux. Dose a gut. vj. ad xij. or xvj.

8. Outwardly it is vulnerary, and speedily cures any green Wound, or old
Ulcer, being applied either alone, or with some other proper Balsam or
Emplaster. It cures the Gout, as also old Aches and Pains proceeding from a
cold Cause, the places afflicted being often anointed therewith, and Cloths
dipped in the same laid thereon, at least twice a day.

X. Balsamum Sulphuris Knoephelii, Knephely his Balsam of Sulphur.
Bate.] It is made from the Hepar Sulphuris poudered, p. 4. fresh Lin-seed Oil,
p. iij. and then boiled to a thickness, and cautiously distilled by a Retort;
then mixing the Oil (first separated from the Water) with half the quantity of
the Colcothar of Vitriol, upon a gentle Fire; which being cooled are to be put
into a Glass Retort in Sand, to be distilled, or rather rectified: this
rectified Oil is to be mixed with half the quantity of Oil of Aniseed, and to
be digested, S. A. into a red Balsam. It is a most excellent Balsam for the
Lungs, drying up Catarrhs, helping Asthma's, Coughs, Phthisicks, the Colic,
etc. It helps Expectoration, stops Defluxions to the Joints, discusses
Ventosities, and prevents them. Dose a gut. iv. ad xij.

Salmon.] 1. This is taken out of the Messis Medico-Spagyrica, or the Edition
of Schroder in Folio, page 733. from whence we shall a little explicate the
process: moreover, in the original Prescript the Sulphur and the Linseed Oil
are in equal quantities.

2. The best yellow Sulphur finely poudred, fresh made Linseed-Oyl, A. lb iij.
mix them together, and boil them in a very large Copper Vessel, but upon a very
gentle fire, continually stirring them with a wooden Spatula, till they begin
to grow thick: then remove the Kettle or Skellet from the fire, and put it into
a great Vessel filled with cold Water, so will the matter ascend, and be
condensed like Liver, but all spongy; which being cooled, and taken out upon a
wooden Table, let it be cut into little bits, which put into a strong Retort,
well luted and coated; then put it into a Reverberatory, affixing a proper
Receiver, and distill with degrees of fire: for the first five hours, there
comes forth Phlegm; after that, a milkie Liquor, which will also continue for
six or seven hours: cautiously proceed farther to fifteen hours, prudently
managing the Fire (if you would save your Receiver, and not take pains in vain,
which you are friendly advised of) till little white Clouds begin to come
forth, then increasing the Fire (by adding more Coals) a most red Oil will
distill forth; in which degree of heat continually keep it, till the whole
radical humidity is distilled over, and till no more Clouds appear, then
exciting the fire to the highest violence, so as the Retort may be red hot, the
thick Oil, like to Butter, will come forth, but yet in small quantity.

3. In this last distillation, you shall see the whole Furnace (chiefly in the
Night) of a Cerulean color, for that all the Sulphur being kindled does burn,
and the whole House will be filled with a Sulphurous Odor; and almost all
Metalick Vessels, chiefly such as are made of Silver and Copper, or Iron,
spotted and blemished, or changed into diverse colors, as if they had been
stained with Verdigrise, so subtle is this Spirit, to pierce all the Vessels,
the Walls of the Furnace, and the several Coatings. This Butter, like Oil being
come forth, the Fire is to be removed or diminished, that every thing may cool.

4. The distillation being done, the milkie Liquor is to be separated from the
Oil, which is wont to coagulate itself into a thick and stiff Mass, which yet
notwithstanding, upon the Fire is again easily melted, and it is to be
rectified after this manner:

5. Of this coagulated Oil p. ij. Colcothar of Vitriol, p. j. mix them upon the
Fire in a large Pan, stirring them with a wooden Spatula: being mixed and
cooled, break it into small bits, put them into a Glass Retort, and distill in
Sand, and again in the space of twenty four hours the Phlegm will come forth
with Oil; then augmenting the Fire, there comes forth together with the Spirits
a thick Oil, not much unlike Glue, which being all come forth, is again to be
separated from the Phlegm.

6. Of this Oil separated from the Phlegm; for Example sake, iv. Oil of Aniseeds
ij. mix them in a Phial hermetically sealed, and digest for forty days in a
gentle and Philosophic digestion, and so long till they are perfectly united,
so have you the true Antihectick Tincture, red like a Ruby.

7. It is one of the greatest Arcanums that is, for the Cure of the Phthisick,
and all Diseases of the Breast and Lungs, so that in the World a greater or
better is scarcely to be found (for which the Name of the most great and good
God be eternally blessed and praised). In the Plague it is as it were a Divine
Remedy, as well for the preservation from, as the Cure of that Disease. And as
it is a Balsam for both Lungs and Liver, so also it is an excellent
Antepileptick and Antilunatick. Dose a gut. iij. ad x. in any fit Vehicle.

8. Now here is to be noted, That the Work will the better succeed, if some
Salt of Tartar be added by mixing it with the crude Sulphur in the first work,
before you mix it with the Linseed Oil. Agricola in his Tract of Sulphur, page
397. and Joh. Poppius in Hodegetico, make mention of this Oily Medicament. So
also Paracelsus, Libro de Naturalibus rebus, cap. 8. 7. And Rolfincius Artis
Chymiae, lib. 4. sect. 1. art. 1. cap. 2. describes it from Paracelsus.

9. It does wonders in the Colic, Stone, Palsy, Contractions of the Limbs, in
expelling Worms, and in healing, old, fetid, and rebellious Ulcers. The white
Liquor separated in the first distillation (which has no internal use) is a
singular thing against the Psora, Scab, Leprosy, and an Alopecia Leprosa, or
Leprous Falling of the Hair. It is good for Pustuls, and other Breakings out in
the Face and Skin, Scurf, Morphew, Gutta Rosacea, being mixed with other
Liquors; and some say it is profitable for such as labor under an Hydrophobia.

XI. * Balsamum Sulphuris Succinatum, Balsam of Sulphur with Amber.
Bate.] It is made of the Flowers of Sulphur with Oil of Amber, in all respects
as you make the Anisated Balsam. It prevails against the Colic, etc.

Salmon.] 1. The Vulgar Chemist has another way of making this Balsam, besides
the common way of the Terebinthinated, or Anisated Balsam, and it is thus: Of
the thick Terebinthinated Balsam of Sulphur ( the Preparation of which see in
Sect. 12. next following) j. Pure Oil of Amber ij. mix them well together, by
shaking them in a Vial, then put them into B. M. and gently boil them, so will
the Oil dissolve the Balsams, enter into it, and mix with it, and this is
Balsamum Sulphuris Succinatum.

2. Other Authors advise not to boil the Terebinthinated Balsam, and the Oil of
Amber together, but only to digest them together in a boiling B. M. till the
Balsam is dissolved in the Oil: but by this way it will be thinner, and want of
the true Consistency of the Balsam of Sulphur.

3. It is a good Vulnerary; both inwardly taken, and outwardly applied heals
Ulcers of the Lungs; it heats, attenuates, incides, dries, resolves thick Phlegm
both in Stomach and Lungs, is of good use against the Jaundice, Coughs, Colds,
and Shortness of Breath, allays Vapors, and helps Hysteric Fits; and in a
word, it is good against most Diseases of the Breast, Lungs, and Womb. It also
kills Worms, and strengthens the Bowels. Dose a gut. iv. ad xx. mixed with some
proper Syrup.

XII. * Balsamum Sulphuris Terebinthinatum, Balsam of Sulphur Terebinthinated.
Bate.] It is made with Oil of Turpentine, as that with Oil of Aniseeds
aforegoing. See the Virtues of the Anisated Balsam.

Salmon.] 1. Sulphur in fine Powder, or rather Flowers of Sulphur iv. pure Oil
of Turpentine xvj. put them into a Glass Mattress, which place in Sand with a
digesting fire for two hours; then increase it a little for four hours, so will
the Oil dissolve part of the Sulphur, and extract out of it a red color: let
the Vessel cool, then separate the clear Balsam from the Sulphur that will not
dissolve.

2. Now here is to be noted, that in making this Balsam, the Mattress ought not
to be above half full: and whereas, we here prescribe it to be made in a Sand
heat, some make it in a boiling Balneo, and fit another Mattress to it, thereby
making a double Vessel.

3. In this heat (whether in B. M. or Sand) the Spirit will begin to simper,
and presently after the Sulphur will melt, and ting the Oil of a deep red
color: the fire is to be so governed as to hinder the Oil from boiling, and in
about two hours time the Operation will be done; yet it will be better to keep
it in the same heat for three or four hours longer.

4. This done, decant the dissolution while it is hot, into an Earthen white
Ware Vessel, so will the undissolved Sulphur as it grows cold, settle to the
bottom in a yellow Lump, the pure Balsam remaining above, which then you are to
pour off by inclination, and keep in a Glass close stopped for use.

5. There is no need of a great Fire for this operation, because the Sulphur
being a fat Body, does easily incorporate with Oils, and commonly gives them a
red color, that which remains undissolved in the Mattress, Lemery says, is the
acid or saline part of the Sulphur, and is found crystallized.

6. In this Operation the Oil draws with the color the odor also of the
Sulphur, so much, as almost to lose all its own scent.

7. Le Mort first mixes the Flowers, p. ij. with Salt of Tartar, p. j. by
exactly melting them together, till they are of a blackish purple color, then
poudering the Mass, adds to it double the weight of the Flowers of the Oil of
Turpentine, and then boyls them in a Glass Mattress in Sand for three hours,
after which being cold, he separates the clear Balsam for use.

8. And this addition of Salt of Tartar may seem necessary, for that thereby
the Body of the Sulphur is in a great measure opened, whereby it the easier
dissolves and yields its Tincture to the Oil: and though without the Salt of
Tartar the substance of the Sulphur will dissolve in the Oil; yet by the help
thereof, the Balsam is made much more efficacious. So that this Balsam thus
made, is nothing but a conjunction of the Sulphur, or its oily parts, with
distilled Oils, which by the addition of a fixed Salt is accelerated, for that
it breaks the Chains of the acid, which holds the particles of the Sulphurous
Body together.

9. It is a most excellent Anodyn and Healer of Wounds and Burns of the Nerves,
and Nervous parts: It cures also Ulcers of the Breast and Lungs, and is
admirable against Coughs of all sorts, Colds, Hoarseness, Loss of Voice,
Shortness of Breath, Difficulty of Breathing, and other Diseases of the Breast
and Lungs. It cures also the Pain of the Ears, being dropped into them. It heats,
dries, attenuates, incides, resolves, and provokes both Sweat and Urine. Dose a
gut. iv. ad xx.

10. Modus Utendi. Of this Balsam q. v. mix with it so much double or treble
refined Sugar, as will make it into a kind of a rough moist Powder: to which
add so much pure fresh Butter, as may make it into the Body of a Balsam fit to
be cut like Butter, of a perfect bright golden color.

11. By this means the Balsam is rendered pleasant both to the Eye and Palate,
so that the most delicate Stomach will hardly refuse it, it having lost all the
scent both of the Sulphur and the Oil, and acquired by the mixing of the Sugar,
the true scent of Lime-Juyce, or Juice of Limons: but that it may have this
smell certainly, it is requisite that in the first making of the Balsam, you
never give it so great a heat as to make it boil. Of this Balsam thus
compounded, the Patient may take the quantity of a pretty large Chestnut, three
or four several times a day, and particulary, first in the Morning fasting, and
last at Night going to Bed. It is an admirable thing, and does wonders. Thus
compounded, it is given to Children for the Worms.

12. The Balsam of Sulphur may also be reduced to the Consistence of an
Unguent, by evaporation, and then it is of use to cleanse and heal Wounds,
especially of the Nerves and Nervous parts, and to cure old Ulcers, Running
Sores, and Fistula's. See our Pharm. Land. lib. 3. cap. 12. sect. 12.

XIII. Balsamum Tartari, Balsam of Tartar.
Bate.] Oil of Tartar per deliquium ix. Cremor Tartari poudred viij. digest and
evaporate to dryness; affuse thereon Spirit of Wine or Vinegar, with which
extract a Tincture, filter and abstract to the Consistence of Honey, S. A. It
is a most powerful Medicament against the Gout and Stone, and loosens the
Belly. Dose ad ss. Outwardly parts pained are anointed therewith: It is good
also against all chronick and stubborn Diseases.

Salmon.] 1. This is the Balsamum Samech Paracelsi, whose usual preparation is
this: Of the best Salt of Tartar lb j. and with a sufficient quantity of Water
make of it a strong Lixivium: take also Cremor Tartari lb j. and dissolve is in
Rainwater by boiling: mix these Solutions together guttatim, so long till you
see all the Effervescence cease, then immediately filter it, and evaporate to
the form of a Salt. To this affuse the best Tartarised S. V. so much as may
cover or overtop it three or four inches; let it stand in digestion, so long
till the S. V. has contracted the highest redness; then decant the S. V. and
affufe-new S. V. as before; this Work continue till you have extracted all the
Tincture out of the Salt: mix these Tinctures together, and in a Glass Alembick
in B. M. draw off the one half of the Spirit, so will the Balsam remain at the
bottom.

2. Now here is to be noted, that the first part of the preparation, where the
two Liquors being mixed together, till the Effervescence ceases, then filtrated
and evaporated to the form of a Salt, is that which is properly called the
Balsamum Samech, and is given a ss. ad ss. in some Diuretic Liquor.

3. It is a Medicine that powerfully educes the Tartar of the Blood by Urine,
and effectually expels Sand, Gravel, and Stone from the Reins and Bladder, for
which reason it is esteemed as a potent Medicine against the Gout. It is
exhibited as a Specific against the Dropsy, Podagra, Scrophula, and
Obstructions of the Terms, Green Sickness in Virgins, etc.

4. The Tincture (which is the latter part of the Preparation) has all the same
Virtues with the Salt, but is much more powerful to the said intentions, and
may be given a j. ad j.

XIV. Balsamum Veneris, Balsam of Venus.
Bate.] It is made of Plates of Copper, digested with Oil of Turpentine, till a
green Balsam is formed, S. A. It chiefly cleanses Wounds, Ulcers, Fistula's,
etc. being mixed with other convenient Medicaments.

Salmon.] 1. Schroderus in Pharm. lib. 3. cap. 12. sect. 4. 3. advises to take
Filings of Copper, and to add to them Spirit of Turpentine, then to digest till
it is green, so have you a thing useful in Surgery.

2. But the best way of making this Balsam is thus: Verdigrise, and dissolve it
in Spirit of Vinegar, filter, and abstract to dryness, or let it crystallize,
so have you a pure Verdigrise: of this take j. Spirit or Oil of Turpentine vj.
mix and digest, till the Oil has drawn the Tincture of the Verdigrise into its
Body.

3. It is of excellent use in all inveterate running Sores, old Ulcers,
Fistula's, the Synovia, or Running of Water from Wounds and Ulcers in the
Joints, and all other stubborn and rebellious Maladies of like nature, doing
that which scarcely any other Medicine will do besides; but it is not usually
applied alone. 4. The best way is to mix it with some other proper Ointment or
Balsam, and so apply it. It is a Medicament not to be despised, though it is
composed of things of small price, and easily made.

CHAP. V. Of ESSENCES, Or POWERS.
I. Essentia Absinthii, Powers of Wormwood.
Bate.] THE Spiritus Ardens, or burning and inflamable Spirit distilled from
the green fermented Herb xij, distilled Oil of the same ij. of the thick
Extract of the same, Salt of Wormwood, A. ss. digest them S. A. till they are
united, then filter and keep them for use. After the same manner you may
prepare Essences of other Vegetable Productions.

Salmon.] 1. The Ardent or Inflamable Spirit of Wormwood is thus made: A good
quantity of Wormwood newly gathered, bruise it, and put to it (in a wooden
Vessel) a good quantity of Wormwood-Water, or rather Juice of Wormwood, in
every lb vj. of which dissolve lb j. of Sugar, or rather as much Manna, or
Honey, let them lie to ferment, till they have acquired a Vinous scent, then
distill in B. M. drawing off the third part for Spirit of Wormwood, and the
second third part for Wormwood-Water: what remains in the Still may be cast
away.

2. This Spirit of Wormwood you must Tartarise, or rectify upon Salt of
Tartar, till it is so pure as it will fire Gunpowder, and is perfectly
dephlegmated, otherwise it will be wholly unfit for this Work.

3. The Extract must not be made of what remains in the Still after the usual
manner; for seeing it is the Remains of a fermented matter, after the volatile
and subtle Sulphur and Spirit is drawn out of it; it is reasonable to believe
the best parts of it are lost; and therefore it behooves you to make an Extract
of fresh Wormwood, or its Juice, which yet never past any fermentation, for by
this means, the Aqueous parts will only ascend, leaving the essential,
spiritous, and saline parts behind in the Extract.

4. It is thus done: Juice of Wormwood, q. v. evaporate in Sand, or B. M. to
dryness: this beat into fine Powder, and keep for the use intended.

5. The Salt must be made of green Wormwood well calcined to pure white Ashes,
(for being dried, it will yield but very little Salt, as that which is once
rotten will yield you none). These Ashes you must make a Lixivium of with
Wormwood-Water, or Spring Water, then filtrate and evaporate to dryness, gently
calcining of it till it is of a blew color.

6. This being done, you are presently in an Iron Mortar almost red hot, to
beat it to a subtle Powder, mixing it with four or six times the quantity of
fine Powder of Bone-ashes; and then immediately to put all into the Spirit,
with the Oil of Wormwood, so will the Oil join with the Spirit, and together
extract the Tincture out of the Salt, which by long digestion will be of an
intense red color.

7. The Spirit Oil and Salt having been mixed and digested together a Month,
(for in much less time the Tincture of the Salt will not be drawn out) you are
to put in the Powder of the Extract, which being digested about ten days,
shaking it well once every day, you may then decant the clear Tincture of the
Extract, which you are to filter, and keep in a Bottle close stopped for use.
This is the ESSENCE, or rather POWERS of Wormwood.

8. And this is the common way of making the Potestates, or Powers of
Vegetables, which is with the Spirit, Oil, and fixed Salt of the Plant; but
there is a better way of doing it, with Spirit, Oil, and Volatile Salt of
Plants, (which Volatile Salt all Plants have) which how that Volatile Salt is
to be made, we shall in its proper place teach.

9. The Virtues: These Potestates, or Powers are possibly the greatest
Stomatick Medicament that is in rerum Natura, for they cleanse, strengthen, and
fortify the Stomach to a wonder, making it able to digest Food, tho almost
never so weak; I speak what I know by Experience upon my own Body, besides the
use of the Medicine a thousand times in other Patients. It is cleansing, yet a
little Styptick, Stomatick, Splenetick, Hepatick, Opening, Attenuating,
Discutient, Sudorifick, Antifebritick, Hypnotick, and Strengthening.

10. It prevents and helps Surfeits and Fevers, chiefly Tertians, opens
Obstructions of the Liver, Womb, and Reins; it is Alexipharmick, resists
Poison, and cures the Plague, and all Malign and Pestilential Fevers, as also
the Cachexia, Dropsy, and Jaundice.

11. It is Sudorifick, expelling watery Humors through the pores of the skin,
expels Wind, and gives ease in the Colic and Griping of the Guts* It is a
Preservative from ill Airs and Scents, and against Pestilential Infection, for
that it wonderfully resists Putrefaction: It cures stinking Breaths, evacuates
Choler, and kills Worms in Children. Dose a gut. xx. ad lx.

12. Utendi modus. Potestatum Absinthii ss. Spirit of Saffron j. Tincture of
Musk and Ambergrise gut. iv. Damask Rose Water iij. Syrup of Poppies iij. mix
for a Cordial Dose, for a Man or Woman, or for two Doses for a Child. This
mixture is good against any Deliquium of the Spirits, as fainting and swooning
Fits sickness at Stomach, Vomiting, Palpitation of the Heart, and other
Diseases of like kind. See our Doron Medicum, lib. 2. cap. 5. sect. 1. where
the Virtues of these Powers are more fully explicated. Price Eighteen-pence an
Ounce.

II. Essentia Cardui Benedicti, Powers of Carduus Benedictus.
Bate.] This Essence is made in all respects like that of Wormwood aforegoing.

Salmon.] 1. The Powers of Carduus Ben. are not to be accounted among the
number of mean Remedies, for that they have an admirable force against all
putrefactive and contagious Diseases, and therefore are said to be a sure
Antidote against the Smallpox, Measles, Spotted Fever, Callentures, Plague and
all malign and pestilential Diseases.

2. They are Cardiack, and Alexipharmick, prevalent against Fainting, Swooning,
Heart-qualms, and all manner of Poison whatsoever, chiefly the Bitings of
Serpents, mad Dogs, or any other venomous Beast.

3. They attenuate, open Obstructions, discuss Wind, are good against the
Colic and Gripings of the Bowels, kills Worms, and expel Sand or Gravel from
the Reins, and esteemed as an Antidote against the Scurvy, and French Pox,
being an excellent sweetner of the Blood, and a restorer of it to its purity.

4. They are Cephalic, Neurotick, and Antihysterick, cure Head-achs,
Lethargies, Vertigo's, Loss of Memory, Deafness, and Dimness of the Sight; they
are said to cure Quartans, allay Vapors, and resist Hysteric Fits. Dose a j.
ad j. or iv.

III. Essentia Hyssopi, Powers of Hyssop.
Bate.] After the same manner also are made Powers of Hyssop.

Salmon.] 1. They are certainly one of the greatest Pectoral Medicaments in the
World, upon all Obstructions of the Breast and Lungs whatsoever, prevail against
Coughs, Colds, Asthma's; Wheezings, Loss of Voice, Shortness of Breath, and
Difficulty of Breathing.

2. They are also good against inward Bruises of the Breast and Stomach,
Spitting of Blood, Apostems, Tumors, and Ulcers of the Lungs, as also a
Peripneumonica, or Inflammation of those parts: they are of thin and subtle
parts, and as they open Obstructions, so likewise they cleanse and digest, and
ripens Tumors in the Mouth, Throat, and Breast.

3. They are good against Pleurisies, preventing them before they come, by
opening the obstruction, and hindering the stagnation of the Blood, thereby
removing the cause; and also curing them after they are present, by
de-obstructing the Parts, and resolving the coagulated Humor.

4. They are also Traumatick, and Vulnerary, advancing the Cure of Wounds and
Ulcers, by cleansing, strengthening the Parts, and and healing them to a
Miracle, being inwardly taken, and outwardly applied, according to the Prudence
of the Physician. You may mix them with any Vulnerary, Lotion ij. to a pint,
and so wash therewith, by which means the healing will be advanced more than
five to one. Dose inwardly a ss. ad j. or iv.

IV. Essentia Martis, Essence of Mars.
Bate.] Filings of Mars iv, put them into a long, or capacious Glass, and
affuse thereon Spirit of Nitre iij. rectified Oil of Vitriol ij. stirring it
thrice, or oftener, with a Spatula: then dilute or loosen the Mass (before it be
too much compacted or hardened) with the Phlegm of Vitriol x, and make a rubicund
Tincture, or an Essence of a very deep yellow, which decant, filter, and keep
for use. It powerfully opens Obstructions of what kind soever, it provokes the
Courses, cures the Cachexia, Green Sickness, Dropsy, etc. Dose a gut. v. ad xv.

Salmon.] 1. This Recipe is taken from Grulingius his Florilegium, par. 19.
cap. 2. sect. 3. where he advises to take iv. or vj. of the pure Filings of
Mars, and to put in the Spirit of Nitre, and Oil of Vitriol by drops, and
leisurely, lest there should be too great an Effervescence, and the Matter
should be as it were inflamed, then to stir the Matter with an Iron Spatula,
lest it should grow hard and break the Vessel: and the Spirit being all dropped
in, to dilute the Mass (before it is too compact) with Phlegm of Vitriol x. or
as much of the Phlegm of the acid Spirit of Sal Armoniack by which a rubicund or
highly yellow Essence will be made.

2. Now here is to be noted, That this Essence may be made only with Spirit of
Nitre, and Phlegm of Vitriol, the Oil of Vitriol being omitted.

3. It is a powerful Opener of all Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, Mesentery
and Womb, insomuch, that those who look like Death itself, and are scarcely
able to go the length of an ordinary Room, or move or stir about, it gives
relief to in three or four times taking, insomuch, that it seems to be a
Miracle of a Medicine; nor will any Man scarcely be able to believe what a
mighty alteration it will so suddenly make, in the most deplorable Objects of
that kind, that shall not behold the same with his Eyes, as we have done, so
that to say all that has been truly done with it, would be to an incredulous or
ignorant Man, only a kind of a farfetcht, or strained Romance.

4. It provokes the Terms in Women, and cures all the other Diseases mentioned
by our Author; and most effectually softens and resolves the hardest external
Tumors, especially such as proceed from a scrophulous Humor, or Habit of Body.

5. Grulingius in the place cited, gives us a History of a very hard Tumor of
the nature of a Wen, which was in his Wrist near his Hand, which by the only
application of this Essence, with double Linen Cloths dipped, or moistened in the
same, was taken away, and perfectly cured.

6. But if you would render this Essence more efficacious in Diseases of the
Liver, and Disaffections of the Womb, he advises you to compound it after this
manner: Zwelfer 's true soluble Magistery of Red Coral (prepared with the
Spirit of Venus, see page 54. of his Appendix) vj. dissolve it in the best
Cinamon-water iss. then add of this Essence of Mars ij. mix them, so have you a
deobstructive hepatick Essence, which contains both the Virtues of the said
Tincture of Mars, and Magistery of Coral, both thing and name.

7. In this first Essence of Mars, this is to be observed, That if the humidity
be abstracted by distillation, none of the Vitriol will be left behind, but it
will also ascend and come over the Helm; whereas in other Solutions of Mars,
made with Spirit or Oil of Vitriol alone, it will not; by which it is evident,
that this Preparation is much more subtle and volatile, and consequently more
penetrating, than any of these Preparations can possibly be.

8. Marggrave makes the Essence of Mars after this manner: Pure Filings of Mars
ij. Spirit of Vinegar iij. put them into a Glass Cucurbit, and digest in Sand
for a Day and Night, increasing the Fire to the second and third degree, and in
twenty four hours time you will extract a most red Tincture, which decant and
filter: add to this double or treble refined Sugar, such a quantity as may
bring it to the consistency of a Syrup, and Aromatize it with two or thre^
drops of Oil of Cinnamon, or Cloves.

9. This Essence attemperates the Acrimony of acid Humors, and melts them
though never so tough and obdurate, opens Obstructions, stimulates the Womb to
action, cures Cachexies, Jaundice, Scurvy, etc. Dose half a spoonful in Wine or
Ale.

V. Essentia Pulegii, Powers of Pennyroyal.
Bate.] They are made after the self-same manner in all respects, as Powers of
Wormwood, at sect. 1. aforegoing.

Salmon.] 1. They are an excellent Cephalic, Pectoral, Uterine, and
Nephritick: Cures Diseases of the Head, Brain, Nerves, and Joints, as
Apoplexies, Vertigo's, Lethargies, Corns, Megrim, Headache, Coughs, Colds,
Asthma's, Pleurisies, Obstructions of the Lungs, Vapors, Obstructions of the
Terms, Hysteric Fits, Convulsions, Palsies, Tremblings, Numbness, Loss of the
use of Limbs, and other Disaffections of the Nerves; as also Pains and Aches,
Gouts, and Sciatica's proceeding from a cold cause, by taking them inwardly,
and bathing them outwardly upon the parts affected.

2. They warm a cold Stomach, give ease in Pains of the Colic, and Gripings of
the Guts, proceeding from what cause soever: and being drawn gently up the
Nostrils, give ease to the Megrim or Headache, tho never so vehement.

3. It is a famous thing for easing After-pains of Women in Childbed, being
inwardly taken, and the Belly well bathed with the same two or three times a
day. See Dor. Med. lib. 2. cap. 5. sect. 15.

ESSENCES added by the Translator, out of Collectanea Chymica.
VI. Essentia Regia, The Royal Powers.
1. Musk ss. Civet gr. v. Balsam of Peru, gut. xij. Oil of Cloves, gut. iv. Oil
of Rhodium, gut. ij. Salt of Tartar ss. mix them all well together, and digest
till they are well united; then add Tartarised S.V. ij. keep them together in a
warm Plate for three days, stirring or shaking them twice a day; after,
separate the clear from the faeces by inclination, so have you a most
odoriferous Essence.

2. It is a great Cardiack, chiefly if gut. ij. of Oil of Cinnamon be added in
the mixture to the Composition; takes away Fainting, and Swooning Fits: It also
renders other Medicines more grateful and pleasant.

3. With this Essence you may prepare an odoriferous Water, (which may be
called, Aqua Moschata and Ambrata) after this manner: Aqua Rosarum Damase. j.
of this Essence gut. ij. mix them, and it will be most fragrant.

4. Also with it you may make Aqua Vitae Ambrata, thus: Aqua Vitae lb j. of
this Essence gut. xx. mix them. The like you may do with other Liquors.

5. Vinum Moschatum may also be made, by putting into every pint of White Wind,
gut. ij. of this Essence. Or thus: Of Cider Royal lb j. of this Essence gut.
iij. mix them. These Compositions emulate Ambergrise.

6. Confects and Conserves may also be made most odoriferous, if to every Ounce
of the Confect, etc. gut. iij. or iv. of this Essence be added.

7. A Water may also be made to perfume Clothes, Vestments, Linen, Gloves,
etc. after this manner: Damask Rose Water, Lavender-water, ana lb j Essentiae
Regiae j. mix them. Or thus: Damask Rose Water, Orange-peel-water, A. lb j. of
this Royal Essence j. mix them as before. And they who love Tobacco, may
perfume their Tobacco with the same.

VII. Essentia Metallica ad Vermes, Metallic Powers against Worms.
1. Saccharum Saturni, Vitriol of Mars, ana j. Mercurius Dulcis ij. mix them
well together, and affuse thereon the best rectified S. V. so much as may
overtop it some inches: digest them together for two days, till the Spirit is
tinged of a high red, then decant it and keep for use.

2. It powerfully opens all Obstructions, kills Worms in Children, or Elder
Persons, and is a very good thing against the Yellow Jaundice.

3. If it be given in a larger Dose than ordinary, it provokes both Vomiting
and Stool; forces down the Terms, discusses internal Apostems, and resists
putrefaction. Dose a gut. iij. ad xx.

VIII Essentia Asthmatica, An Essence against the Asthma.
1. Of the best Honey, Liquorice-root, A. iv. Flowers of Benjamin, Opium
prepared, A. j. Camphir ij. Oil of Aniseeds ss. Salt of Tartar j. Tartarised S.
V. so much as may overtop it some inches: digest altogether for viij. or x.
days, then decant the clear, filter, and keep it for use, adding to every Ounce
thereof j. of the Tincture of Saffron.

2. It is an excellent Pectoral, opening all Obstructions of the Breast and
Lungs, and gives great ease in the most stubborn and inveterate Cough.

3. It thickens thin Humors, obtunds such as are sharp, and absorbs acidities;
it cures most Diseases of the Lungs, is good against Pleurisies, eases pains of
those parts, helps shortness of Breath, difficulty of Breathing; and takes away
the Swellings of the Amygdalae, and Soreness of the Throat. Dose a j. ad j.

IX. Essentia Antihysterica, Powers against Fits of the Mother.
1. The best Castor, Assa Fetida, A. ss. Oil of Amber j. Oil of Rue j. Oil of
Savin ss. Camphir j. Tartarised S. V. x. mix and digest them together, then
distill: cohobate the Spirit upon the Feces, adding Spirit of Hartshorn mixed
with its Volatile Salt ij. distill again, the one half (in B. M.) keeping the
distilled Spirit for use; then draw off the remaining Spirit to dryness,
keeping it also for the same purposes, but as a weaker Medicine.

2. It is a great Antihysterick, and Antiparalytick, as also an Antepileptick,
curing those Diseases, as also Lethargies, Vertigo's, and most other Distempers
of the Head, Brain, Nerves, and Womb to a wonder.

3. It provokes Sweat egregiously in the Plague, and all Pestilential Diseases,
is eminently good against the Measles, Smallpox, and all malign Fevers,
prevails in Apoplexies, expels the Foetus, and gives ease in the Gout. Dose a
gut. vj. ad ss.

X. Essentia Alexipharmica, and Bezoartica, The Alexipharmick, and Bezoartick
Powers.
1. Roots of Valerian, Butter-bur, Angelica, Masterwort, A. j. Leaves of
Scordium, Mint, Rue, A. M. j. Seeds of Lovage, Cumin, Anise, A. ij. Cubebs,
lesser Cardamoms, A. ss. Cloves, Nutmegs, A. j. Common Spirit of Wine lb v.
Salt of Tartar ij. mix and digest all together for two days at least; then draw
off about two thirds of the Liquor for Spirit: In this Spirit infuse a fresh,
Sassafras rasped, outward Orange-peels, Citron-peels, A. iij. digest twenty
four hours, then distill off one half of the Liquor: to this Spirit put
Contrayerva ij. Saffron j. Roots of Angelica, Masterwort, Valerian, Butter-bur,
A. vj. all dry, and in gross Powder: Choice Myrrh, Resin of Guajacum, A. ss.
Salt of Tartar calcined to blewness, or the Scoria of Antimony calcined for an
hour in a very strong Fire ij. mix and digest in B. M. the longer the better;
then decant the clear Essence, and keep it for use.

2. Now here is to be noted, That if you intend to give it in intermitting
Fevers, it will be convenient to add to the last Extraction ij. of the
Jesuits Bark.

3. In this Preparation the Roots and Seeds are to be first reduced into a
gross Powder; and the Salt of Tartar, immediately while hot, is to be ground to
a fine Powder, in a hot Iron Mortar, with a hot Pestil, and so forthwith to be
put into the Spirit; for otherwise, should it take any Air, so as in the Mortar
to grow moist, it would not yield any of its Tincture.

4. This is an incomparable Essence against many Diseases; it is good against
all manner of Malign and Pestilential Fevers, which it radically takes away.
It is a present Remedy against Poison, the Biting of Mad Dogs, Serpents, or any
other venomous Creatures: It also presently cures the Measles and Smallpox,
and is said to be an infallible Cure for the Pestilence itself: You may safely
give it to all Ages and Sexes. Dose a ss. ad ij.

5. Utendi modus. Borrage, or Angelica-water, Damask Rose Water, A. iij. Spirit
of Saffron, Tincture of Cochinele, ana ij. of this Essence iij. Syrup of Limons
ij. Of the Royal Essence gut. vj. mix for a Cordial for four Doses. Or you may
give a spoonful or two of it now and then upon any Fainting or Sickness at
Heart; if to sweat upon, when the sick is in their Bed well covered. Damask
Rose Water, Poppy-water, A. j. of this Essence ij. Tincture of Cochinele j.
Royal Essence. gut. ij. mix for a Sweating Dose against the Measles Smallpox
or Plague. It Is an excellent thing in suchlike; but you may increase the Dose
according as you see the strength of the Sick, or exigency of the Distemper
requires.

CHAP. VI. Of ELIXIRS.
1. Elixir Camphoratum, The Camphorated Elixir.
Bate.] IT is made by dissolving Camphir ss. in Tartarised S. V. tinged with
Saffron vj. S. A. It is a most admirable thing against the Plague, as well to
preserve as to cure.: it prevails also against the Hysteric Passion. Dose j.

Salmon.] 1. This is nothing but the rectified Spirit of Wine, with Saffron,
impregnated with the Body of Camphir: and is called by other Authors, Spirit of
Wine camphorated. Rolfinc. lib. 4. sect. 2. cap. 5. but he makes it without
Saffron, or any limitation of the quantity of the Spirit of Wine; not differing
much from Quercetan's Tartarized Essence of Camphir with Aqua Vitae,

2. Rectified S. V. vj. Choice Saffron iij. mix, and in five or six days
extract a pure Tincture, which decant and filtrate: put it into a Glass
Mattress, to which put the Camphir ss, or better; fit to this Mattress another
little one, and so make a double Vessel; lute them well together with slices of
Paper and Paste: place your Vessel in a Sand Furnace, letting the Camphir stand
till it be entirely dissolved in the S. V. the Spirit or Dissolution will be
pure and transparent as before, and the Camphir will give it a pleasant smell.

3. Camphir is a Gum Rosin, and therefore may easily be dissolved in Spirit of
Wine, whose property it is to dissolve Resinous Substances by the homogenity of
its substance, and the tenuity of its parts.

4. It is a Cephalic, Cardiack, Antiarthritick, and an Alexipharmick, having a
very great Diaphoretick force, and therefore very excellent against all manner
of Malign or Pestilential Fevers, as the Measles, Smallpox, Calenture,
Spotted Fever, yea, and the Plague itself. Dose a ss. ad ss. or ij. in any
Cordial Water, or medicated Wine.

5. It chears the Heart, strengthens Nature, fortifies the Faculties, expels
Wind, and to a Miracle cures the Colic, and Griping of the Guts, Rheumatisms,
Gouts, etc. and revives all the Spirits, Natural, Vital, and Animal.

6. It is an excellent anodyn to appease the Toothache, by putting a little
Cotton dipped therein to the pained Tooth, and it is good to help the Pains in
the Ears, by dipping in it a little Conies or Rabbets Wool, and putting it into
the Ear: Outwardly bathed upon places having the Gout, it cures them.

7. It is also good in the Apoplexy, Lethargy, Vertigo, Megrim, Palsy, and
other old Diseases of the Head, Brain, and Nerves, as also against Vapors, and
other Hysterical Maladies. Bathed upon an Inflammation in any part, it preserves
it from a Mortification, and retrieves a Gangreen in the beginning.

II. Elixir Proprietatis Dulce, Sweet Elixir Proprietatis.
Bate.] It is made of Myrrh, Aloes, and Saffron, A. j. extracted with S. V.
viij. digested and filtrated, S. A. It is used profitably against all Malign
Diseases, Hypochondriacal and Uterine; it takes away the crudity of the
Stomach, and restores a lost Appetite. Outwardly it serves for cleansing of
sordid Ulcers.

Salmon.] 1. This is called Sweet, (not that it is sweet in taste, but) in
opposition to that which is made with Spirit of Sulphur; otherwise it is bitter
like the Aloes it is made of.

2. The preparation hereof without an acid, we have taught in our Doron
Medicum, lib. 2. cap. 6. sect. 1. where also you have at large its Virtues and
Use. The preparation of that with an Acid, in our Pharm. Land. lib. 4. cap. 6.
sect. 1. from the Colleges Prescription, with Animadversions thereon. Besides
which, there are several other Prescriptions, which we shall give you here.

3. Tartarised S.V. affuse it upon Flowers of Sal Armoniack, so as to overtop
it four or five inches: digest them together till the Alcohol of the Wine is
sufficiently impregnated with the Volatile Sal Armoniack: take of this Spirit
viij. Saffron j. mix and extract a Tincture in ten days: this done, decant the
clear Tincture, and add to it Myrrh and Aloes in fine Powder, A. j. mix, digest
a Month, shaking it every day, then decant the clear Tincture for use. By this
means your Elixir Proprietatis will be of much greater power, more pleasant in
taste, and more grateful in smell.

4. Maets makes it thus: Saffron, Myrrh, Aloes, A* q. v. the Gums being in
Powder, and the Saffron chopped small, affuse thereon Ol. Tartari per deliquium,
so much as to moisten it, and make it a thick kind of pap: digest them in a
warm Balneo for twenty four hours: to this fermented Mass, affuse Tartarised S.
V. so much as to cover it four inches over: digest (often stirring it) till the
Alcohol of the Wine is impregnated with the more subtle and pure Sulphur, and
Volatile Salt of the mixture, and becomes intensly of the color of Blood, then
decant it from the feces, and keep it for use. Dose a j. ad iv. It purges well.

5. This, if you would have more Noble, you may fortify thus: Of the precedent
Elixir i. Volatile oily Salt ij. mix and digest them together for twenty four
hours with a gentle digestion, so will they be firmly united, and make a most
admirable Balsamic Elixir. Dose a j. ad ij.

6. But prepared with the Tincture of Sena, it is more Cathartick, and better
in Operation: Make a strong Tincture of Sena, with Tartarised S. V. or if you
please, with common Spirit: of which take viij. Saffron, Myrrh, Aloes, A. i.
mix, and make an Elixir as before directed. This is superior to all those
which are ordinarily sold, and it is an excellent Medicine, which I cannot
sufficiently commend.

7. I also prepare it thus: Powers of Amber, Aniseeds, Carraways, or Juniper
Berries viij. Saffron, Myrrh, Aloes, A. i. mix and make an Elixir. And if you
add Sena i. it fully answers the Intentions of all the former Preparations, and
becomes a Noble Stomatick and Cardiack, wonderfully restoring and conserving
the Balsam of the Blood.

8. It provokes the Terms, opens all inward Obstructions, and is a wonderful
thing against Hypochondriack Melancholy: It cures the Green Sickness in
Virgins, and the Scurvy, from a sharp and austere ferment in Elder People; it
is also given successfully against all sorts of Malign and Pestilential
Fevers: it also resists Putrefaction and Poison, helps the weakness of the
Stomach, Crudities and Indigestion, and cures the Jaundice and Dropsy.

9. It gently purges downwards, and is a Specific against Tertians, which it
is said radically to take away: It is indeed a kind of Universal Remedy,
warming, drying, strengthening, evacuating, altering, and comforting, and may be
given in all Diseases, in all Ages, and to all Sexes. Dose a j. ad iij. or more.

10. Hitherto we have been showing you how it is made dulcid, or without an
Acid, we shall now show you how it is made with an acid from Lemery. Myrrh,
Aloes, A. ij. Saffron j. S. V. so much as may overtop it a finger's height
above it, put all into a Bolt-head, which stop well, digest two days, then add
Spirit of Sulphur, till the Liquor is four fingers above the matter, shake all
well together, and fit another Bolt-head to the former, making thereof a
Circulating Vessel, digest in Horse-dung, or a gentle B. M. for four days, then
decant the Tincture, strain, and keep it for use. It fortifies the Heart,
purifies the Blood, and works by Sweat. Dose a j. ad ij.

11. From the remaining feces you may draw more Tincture, but it will not be so
strong, nor so good as the former, because it has already parted with its more
volatile and pure parts; yet this second Tincture may serve to make new withal.
Lemery also allows but j. of Saffron, because it not only takes up much room by
its lightness, but is withal sufficient to fill the Pores or Body of the
Menstruum, so that if more should be added, it would receive no more.

12. He first infused the Ingredients in S. V. thereby to draw there more
Sulphurous parts; then he adds the acid Spirit, which being sweetened by the
ramous parts of the S. V. it will have no more power or force, but only to load
itself with the Tincture. And by this mixture of the S. V. with the Spirit of
Sulphur, the Elixir acquires a very pleasant smell.

12. Le Febure makes his Elixir, which he calls Elixir Proprietatum, with the
volatile Spirit of Hartshorn, charged and saturated with its volatile Salt,
thus: Saffron, Myrrh, Aloes, A. iij. put the Saffron, with the others, in
Powder, into a Bolt-head with a long Neck, and large, or at least two inches
diameter: to which put rectified Spirit of Hartshorn, saturated with its
volatile Salt, as much as it is able to dissolve, and xx. of Tartarised S. V.
stop the Vessel with a Circulatory, luting the Juncture with a wet Bladder,
Whites of Eggs and Flour, and digest in a very gentle B. M. for three days:
then distill off xv. slowly: and if the volatile Salt does sublime, dissolve it
again in the Spirit distilled, cohobating, digesting again three days, and then
distilling xx. which cohobate, again digesting for three days more, which done,
leave it till it is cold, then decant the clear, filter, and keep it for use.

13. It alters and rectifies the Mass of Blood, cures the Scurvy, Jaundice, and
Green Sickness, opens all Obstructions, cures Palsies and Atrophies, and is a
most admirable thing against Hypochondriack Melancholy, and Hysteric Fits.
Dose a gut. x. ad xl. or j. in the Morning fasting.

14. Paracelsus was the Author of this Medicine; but the Prescript of Crollius;
which makes it with Spirit of Sulphur, has been best approved of, though without
much reason, since that Spirit is enough to burn the pure substance of the
Ingredients: Others as much disapprove of alcholizate Liquors, made with
Vegetable Salts, for that they think their Acrimony does enervate the most pure
and essential parts; both which Objections may in part be true, and as easily
removed on both hands, if a wise Man has it in managing.

15. Charras makes it thus: Saffron, Myrrh, Aloes, A. in fine Powder, mix, and
slightly sprinkle them with a small quantity of Spirit of Sulphur, mixed with
equal parts of rectified S. V. to which put Baum-water, so much as may overtop
the Ingredients three fingers: mix well, and cover the Cucurbit with a Vessel
of Rencounter, well luting the Juncture, digest in B. M. for fifteen days,
stirring them from time to time; then decant the Tincture; putting in a third
part more of Spirit of Wine, than you put before of Bawm-water: lute the
Vessels together again, and digest for two Months, stirring the Ingredients
from time to time: then decant the Tincture, which filter; and affuse new S. V.
reiterating the maceration, if you so please, (tho I suppose it will scarce be
worth the trouble). Put the two first Tinctures together into a Cucurbit, which
cover with its Head, lute the Juncture, and in Sand, or B. M. with a very
gentle Fire draw off about two thirds of the Liquor; taking what remains in the
Cucurbit, as the Elixir, which keep for use.

16. Marggrave makes it thus: Best English Saffron, choice Myrrh, Aloes
Socotrina, Spir. Sulphuris per Campanum A. i. Tartarised S. V. viij. mix,
digest a Month, decant the Tincture, and keep it for use. Or thus: English
Saffron, Myrrh, Aloes, A. i. Tartariz'd S. V. xx. mix and digest eight days,
then add Spirit of Sulphur j. digest again twenty days, and decant the pure
black Tincture for use.

17. Le Mort thus: English Saffron, Myrrh, Aloes, A. ij. moisten them first
with S. V. then affuse so much Spirit of Sulphur, as may overtop them two
inches, and digest twenty four hours: decant the Tincture, and to the faeces
put Tartarised S. V. so much as to overtop it three inches, digest again for
two days, till the Spirit is well tinged; mix these Tinctures together, filter
them, digest a week, and keep it for use.

18. These are the variety of ways Authors have taught, which seem not to be so
natural and excellent as the three following Methods, which we are willing to
communicate to the World, for the benefit of Mankind: The first two are
performed with Alcalious Menstruums, the latter with an Acid.

19. The first way: English Saffron, Myrrh, Aloes, Sena, A. i. Spiritus Intimus
x. mix, digest a Month, shaking them once a day, then let them settle, decant
the clear, and keep it for use,

20. The second way: English Saffron, Myrrh, Aloes, Sena, A. i. Powers of
Aniseeds, Carraways, Juniper Berries, Lavender, or Rosemary x. mix, digest a
Month, then decant the clear, keeping it for use.

20. The third way with an Acid: English Saffron, Myrrh, Aloes, Sena, A. i.
Spirit of Wine rectified (accuated and digested with a quarter part of the best
Spirit of Nitre or Sulphur, beforehand) x. mix, digest a Month, then decant
the clear, and keep it in a Glass close stopped for use. These three last ways,
are not only new Methods of making this Elixir, but also the best ways, and
much exceeding all the former, as they who shall please to make trial will
certainly find. Price 2 s. 6 d. an Ounce.

III. Elixir Proprietatis Pestilentiale, Elixir of Property against the Plague.
Bate.] Saffron, Myrrh, Aloes A. ss. Spirit of Hartshorn ij. mix and unite them
with the Alcohol of the Spirit of Wine iv. digest, decant, filter, and keep it
for use.

Salmon.] 1. This is from Le Febure, and is the same preparation with what we
have before declared at 12. of the former Section: and in 13. of the same, you
have its Virtues at large, so that no more need be said of it in this place.

2. But if you would make it an absolute Antipestilential Medicament, you ought
to make it thus: English Saffron, Myrrh, Aloes, Camphir, A. i. Powers of
Juniper xij. accuated with Spirit of Nitre i. mix, digest, decant, filter and
keep it for use.

3. This has more than treble the Virtues and Force in curing the Plague, and
all sorts of Malign and Pestilential Diseases of what kind soever, for it
strikes at the root of the Disease, and enervates the Poison to a Miracle: it
not only cures, but also preserves from all kinds of contagious Diseases
whatsoever, in the time of their greatest rage and violence, so that he that
takes this Medicine, needs fear no danger.

4. It expels Wind, and is a safe and sure Remedy against the Colic and
Griping of the Guts, how vehement soever; it kills Worms, and opens all
Obstructions of the Reins and Bladder, provokes Urine, and expels Sand, Gravel,
and all other things which obstruct those parts: I have given it to Children
against the Measles and Smallpox, and with such success, that of some scores
which I have given it to, I remember not one single Patient that has died, or
done amiss. Dose a ss. ad ss. i. plus minus, according to the Age and Condition
of the sick.

5. It is good also against Hypochondriack Melancholy, Madness, Diseases of the
Head, Brain, and Nerves; and is of singular use against Lethargies, Vertigo's,
Palsies, Cramps, Convulsions, and Hysteric Fits, being taken inwardly in a fit
Dose Morning and Evening, and the parts afflicted being outwardly bathed with
the same.

6. It cures the Scurvy, want of Appetite, Indigestion, Rheumatisms, and
wandering Pains, though of many years standing; and is accounted a Specific
against the Yellow Jaundice. I have had a long experience of this latter
Preparation, insomuch, that I think I cannot say enough of it, I am sure not
too much and therefore once more recommend it to the Thoughts Consideration,
and Use of all the industrious Practisers of our Art.

IV. Elixir Proprietatis Tartarisatum, Elixir of Property Tartarisated.
Bate.] It is made of Myrrh, Aloes, and Saffron, A. i. with Tincture of the
Salt of Tartar xij. digesting and filtering. S. A.

Salmon.] 1. How Tincture of Salt of Tartar is to be made, shall be showed in
its proper place; and with that the Tinctures of the other things are to be
extracted; so that this Elixir is only a Tincture extracted with a Tincture, or
a Tincture extracted with the Sulphur of the Salt of Tartar, joined with the
Sulphurous S. V.

2. Le Mort makes it thus: Aloes, Myrrh, Saffron, A. j. Salt of Tartar ss.
rectified S. V. xx. then digest fix days in B. M. etc. so that he would make
the Sulphur of the Wine to extract two Tinctures at one time, viz. the Tincture
of the Ingredients, and the Tincture of the Salt, which answers not the
intention; for this Elixir is to be valued by reason of the Menstruum
extracting; and it is notoriously known, that the Tincture of Salt of Tartar
much excels the best rectified S. V.

3. If it be objected, that by this way of Le Mort's, you will have a Tincture
of a Salt of Tartar, extracted with the Tincture of the other Ingredients, and
so that upon the matter, it will be the same thing; we answer, No. For the
rectified S. V. will first act upon the Vegetable Ingredients, by which it will
be enervated, or weakened, and clogged, that it will have no ability to extract
the Tincture of the Salt, which is the design of the Prescript.

4. It has all the Virtues of the Vulgar or Common Elixir Proprietatis, at
Sect. 2. aforegoing; besides which, it more powerfully opens Obstructions, and
more absolutely sweetens the Blood, and other Juices; absorbing the Acidity,
and dissolving Coagulums in any part of the Body. Dose a j. ad ij.

V. Elixir Salutis, The Elixir of Health.
Bate.] Leaves of Sena iv. Raspings of Guajacum, Elecampane dried, Aniseeds,
Carraways, Coriander, Liquorice A. ij. Raisons stoned viij. Aqua Vitae lb vj.
digest cold for four days, then strain through Hippocrates 's Sleeve. Some add
Salt of Tartar, Rhubarb, Scammony, etc. Dose one or two spoonfuls at Bedtime,
and three or four more in the Morning.

Salmon.] 1. There are many Prescipts of this Medicine, the Basis of which are
Aqua Vitae and Sena, 3 Quarts of the one, to 6 Ounces of the other in
proportion, which is the true Recipe: but to make it stronger, better, and more
effectual, it ought to be Sena ix. to Aq. Vitae lb vj. what is less than this
is too little: the other things are added as a Complement to take off the
Griping quality of the Sena, and therefore whatsoever things will do that, and
not hurt the taste of the Medicine, may be used instead of, or as well as them.

2. Among those things which do that, Liquorice-Roots, and Carminatives are the
chief; and of Carminatives, Aniseeds, and Juniper Berries bear away the Bell:
To which may be added a Pectoral, such as is Elecampane.

3. The Raisons are chiefly added to sweeten it, tho they have also a slimy,
and laxative, or loosning quality withal; so also has Honey, which will purge
some Persons of itself: But since the whole Cathartick Virtue depends upon the
Sena, a Syrup of refined Sugar may serve as well to dulcifie the Mixture, for
that all Melaginous and Saccharine Bodies are very apt, and that naturally to
loosen the Body.

4. Aqua Vitae, Aniseed-water, or Spirit of Wine, are made use of, not for that
they extract the Virtue of the Sena better than some other Menstruum, but
because, 1. The Medicine will better keep, than when it is prepared with a
simple Aqueous Body. 2. They better correct the Griping quality of the Sena,
than Water can. 3. They much better extract the Virtues of the Correctives,
whose Sulphurs could scarcely be drawn forth with a simple watery Menstruum.

5. Some Prescripts have Powder of Jallap j. which does somewhat quicken it as
to its Operation: and that (if any other Cathartick is added to the Sena) is
the best Purger which we know of, which has so little ill taste: now if Jallap
be added, you must be certain to use a Spirituous Menstruum, for an Aqueous
one, will draw nothing out of it.

6. If you prepare it with the Jallap you may order the Proportions after this
manner: Alexandrian Sena iv. Powder of Resinous Jallap i. Aniseeds,
Juniper Berries, Liquorice, Elecampane, (all bruised) ana ij. Aqua Vitae a
Gallon: mix, digest, strain, and dulcifie it with a Syrup made with double
refined Sugar.

7. If you prepare it without Jallap, you may order the Proportions thus:
Choice Sena xvj. Elecampane dried, Liquorice, Aniseeds, Juniper Berries, A. vj.
Aqua Vitae, three Gallons: mix, digest a week, strain, and then dulcifie it in
Syrup of Liquorice made with doublerefined Sugar.

8. It is a good Purgative, and by reason it is made with a Spirituous
Menstruum, it is the more apt to insinuate itself into the Blood and Humors,
and so to cleanse and depurate them: It cures the Scurvy, Dropsy, Gout, and
Jaundice; is good against the Sciatica, King's Evil, Scabs, and all manner of
Breakingsout in the Body; it opens Obstructions in the Stomach, Gall, Liver,
Spleen, Reins, and other Viscera; it is Pectoral, and prevails after an eminent
manner against Diseases of the Lungs, as Coughs, Colds, Asthma's, Obstructions
of the Lungs, Shortness of Breath, Difficulty of Breathing, and other
Distempers of those parts of like nature. It is also an excellent Remedy
against the Griping of the Guts, Belly-ache, etc. carrying off the cold, acid,
and viscous Humors, sticking to the Tunicles of the Guts, causing those
Diseases.

9. It is truly an excellent thing against Rheumatisms, or wandering Pains
running up and down in any part of the Body; draws forth and expels watery
Humors, and prevails mightily against Disaffections of the Stomach and Bowels:
you may take it alone of itself, without mixing it with any other thing, for it
is pleasant enough: Some take it as the Author has directed; others take it
altogether in the Morning, three or four spoonfuls or more at a time. It is a
Medicine I much use, and is a good general Purger, and may be had ready
prepared at my House at Eighteen-pence a small Bottle: but I deviate something
in the Preparation from the former Prescription.

VI. Elixir Vitae, Elixir of Life.
Bate,] Nutmegs, Mace, best Cinnamon A. i. Cloves ss. the yellow of Orange and
Citron-peels A. iij. best Saffron ij. Tartarised S. V. lb iij. mix, digest, and
filtrate, S. A.

Salmon.] 1. This is properly but a Tincture, extracted from the Ingredients
with Tartarisated S. V. but if you would have the Spirit Elixitrated, it ought
to be first drawn off from the Matter with a very gentle Fire, cohobated upon
the feces several times, till the Spirit becomes maturated with the Spirituous
Sulphur of the particulars.

2. This done, you are to take the like fresh Ingredients, and then to digest
them in this Elixirated Spirit for 20 days, in a temperate place, by which
means you will extract also the Corporeal Sulphur, which by digestion will be
united with the Spirituous, and so make an excellent Medicine.

3. It is a great Cordial, revives all the Spirits Natural, Vital, and Animal,
fortifies the Faculties, strengthens the Head, Brain, Nerves, Heart, and all
the other principal parts, and comforts the whole Body.

4. It is good against all manner of Infectious Diseases, as Measles,
Smallpox, Spotted Fever, Purples, and the Plague itself: It prevails against
Faintings, Swoonings, Sickness at Stomach, and all other Diseases of the Heart
and Praecordia. You may give it a j. ad ij. or more, in any proper Vehicle.

VII. Elixir Vitrioli, Elixir of Vitriol.
Bate.] Cinnamon, Ginger, Cloves, A. iij. Calamus Aromat. j. Galangal iss.
Leaves of Sage, Spear-Mint, A. ss. Cubebs, Nutmegs, A. ij. Wood of Aloes,
Citron-peels, A. j. make all into a fine Powder; and add thereto White
Sugar Candy iij. Spirit of Wine lb iss. Oil of Vitriol lb j. extract a Tincture
by digesting it twenty days S. A. then filter, and keep it for use. It
wonderfully comforts the Stomach and Bowels, and ^rovokes Appetite: it
pre^erves from the Epilepsie and Apoplexy, purges the Brain, and dries the
Head, and whole Body, whose Natural Habit is overturned with a ^eneral
Phlegmatic Catarrh, ^reeing it wonderfully from ^ain. Dose a ss. ad j.

Salmon.] 1. In making ^f this Medicine, we are to ^onsider, 1. The Menstruum.
^. The Ingredients. 3. The ^reparation.

2. As to the Menstruum, (...) consists of two parts, Spirit ^f Wine, and Oil
of Vitriol: ^he Spirit of Wine ought to ^e that which is highest recti^ied or
tartariz'd, whereby it ^ay be freed from its chief ^legmatick parts: the Oil of
^itriol ought also to be pure and free from its Phlegm: These two pure
Substances ^re to be mixed together, and ^igested till they are united; and the
Menstruum will be ^o much the better if it be ^istilled, and brought over ^he
Helm; for by that means ^he conjunctions will be the more firm.

3. The Menstruum being thus prepared, the Ingredients are next to be
considered; and therein you will do well if you except the Sugarcandy; for
that, by its too sudden dissolution will be apt to blunt the edge of the
Menstruum, whereby it will not well extract the whole Virtue of the other
Ingredients.

4. This done, put in the several Particulars into the Liquor, and digest for
twenty days, shaking the Glass once or twice a day; then decant the clear and
filter: this is but a Tincture, but if you would elixirate it, you must draw it
off in a Glass Alembick in B. M. to dryness, and cohobate it three or four
times, so will you have a subtle and volatile Elixir, of such pure and thin
parts as will be able to penetrate through the whole Body in a moment.

5. After the last Cohobation, you may put in your Sugarcandy in fine Powder,
which being dissolved, let the Liquor stand till it is fine, and keep it for
use.

6. It is an excellent Stomatick, Cephalic, and Neurotick, good against and
cold and moist Diseases of the Head and Brain, Palsies, Indisposotions of the
Stomach, the Scurvy, in a cold Habit of Body, Rheumatisms, Sickness at Heart,
Faintings, Swoonings, and the like. Dose a ss. ad j.

VIII. Elixir Vitae Maetsianum, Mates his Elixir of Life.
Salmon.] Fresh Damask Roses preserved with Salt lb j. Tartariz'd S. V. lb
iiss. digest them together for two days; and then distill with a very gentle
Fire, hanging in the Beak of the Alembick, Ambergrise ss. Oriental Musk ss.
mixed together: to the distilled Liquor add of the best Lignum Aloes finely
rasped, or in Powder ij. Yellow of Orange-peels, A. ss. Yellow of Limon-peels
iss. Oil of Cinnamon iss. digest them together for two or three days; so will
you have a Cordial Elixir of almost infinite Virtues.

2. It is a great Cephalic, Neurotick, Cardiack, and Alexipharmick, and an
egregious Remedy against all Diseases proceeding from cold and moisture in any
part of the Body. It is good against the Lethargy, Carus, Apop^^xy, Epilepsie,
Palsy, and ^old and mo^st Distempers of ^he Womb, and is good for Barrenness
in Women. It is singular good against Paint^^^^* Swoonings, Palp^ta^^^n and
Sickness at Heart, Weakness of the Stomach, Indigestion, and want of Appetite.

3. Where note, That if you would have it more grateful to the Palate, you
ought to dulcifie it either with the best double refined Sugar, or with a Syrup
made of the Yellow of Limon-peels. Dose a ss. ad j. or iss. in a Glass of Wine.

IX. Elixir Anodynum Le Motianum, Le Mort's Elixir Anodyne.
Salmon.] 1. S. V. rectified after the following manner: Vitriol calcined to
whitness with a very gentle Fire lb j. Nutmegs, Saffron A. ij. Camphir iv.
Tartarised S. V. lb v. digest all together for three or four days, then distill
off the one half: the Feces evaporate with a very gentle Fire to dryness, and
cohobate the former distilled Spirit upon them. and distill in B. M. to dryness.
To this put Thebian Opium made with Water i. ^ho^^c^ S^ffron s^. Nutmegs,
Lignum A^oe^* (...). Camph^r i^* ye^^^^ (...) ^^s i. mix and digest (...)
^^^ether, for two or three days, the longer the better.

2. This is a troublesome way of making the Menstruum for Extraction; a simple
rectificated S. V. from Potashes by cohobation, may do nearly as well, and so
save much labor: and a rectification upon any Alcalious Salt without
distillation will do the same.

3. It is highly Anodyn, and gives ease in all sorts of Pains whatsoever: it
gently induces Sleep and Rest, and renders the Spirits cheerful, and is a most
excellent thing in Fevers, and other like Acute Diseases. It ceases the too
great Effervescence of the Blood, if made with the Vitriol as before directed.

4. But if made with the Alcali Salt, it opens more, and therefore, provokes
the Terms, and moves Sweat, more especially if mixed with other Sudorificks.
Dose a gut. vj. ad ss.

X. Elixir Menstruale Le Mortianum, Le Mort's Urerine Elixir.
Salmon.] 1. Rosemary, Rue, Savin, A. Mij. Lavender, Marjoram, Pennyroyal,
Motherwort, A. M. j. Roots of round Cypress, Levisticum, A. ss. Sassafras,
Orange-peels, A. ss. Seeds of Daucus, Lovage' Anise, A. vj. Cinnamon ij. Spirit
of Wine lbiv. cut what are to be cut, and bruise what are to be bruised, then
mix all together, and macerate them for twenty four hours, then distill to one
half: the Spirit drawn off, mix with fresh S. V. and rectify again upon the
same Herbs; and repeat once more the same operation. Then add Filings of Steel
lb j. Cremor Tart. lb iss. Spring Water lb viij. boil them together, till the
Liquor becomes of a red color, filter, and evaporate to the consistency of a
Syrup, which keep for use. Lastly, A third part of the former Spirit, Saffron
ss. mix and extract a Tincture. Another third part of the said Spirit,
sweet smelling round Cypress-roots iss. mix, and extract a Tincture. The last
third part of the same Spirit, of the former Syrup of Mars, double the quantity
of the Spirit: mix them, and extract a Tincture: mix all these three Tinctures
together, and keep them for use.

2. It is an excellent thing to open all Obstructions of the Womb, as also of
the Liver and Spleen; and a most admirable Medicine to cure the Green Sickness
in Virgins: It is also of singular use to facilitate the Birth, and to expel
the Birth and Afterbirth; it strengthens all the Viscera or inward parts, and
causes a good color in the Face.

3. It is given a ss. ad ij. in all Diseases of the Womb, as Vapors, Fits of
the Mother, Obstructions of the Courses, and the like, in which, it is possible
it may do more, than many other more famed Medicines for those purposes.

4. It sweetens the Blood, and by a constancy in taking it, alters the ferment
of all the Juices, so that more may be done by this Medicine in ten days time,
than by many others in an hundred; besides which, it is an excellent Cordial,
as the Saffron, and other Cordial Ingredients of which it is compounded
demonstrate.

5. It is given with success in all fainting and swooning Fits, and in
Palpitations, and other Distempers of the Heart and Praecordia, as also in
Diseases of the Breast and Lungs, as Asthma's, Shortness of Breath, Difficulty
of Breathing, Wheezing, etc.

XI. Elixir Juniperinum Rolfincii, Elixir of Juniper.
Salmon.] Rob of Juniper Berries, or the Melaginous Extract iij. Malago-wine lb
iss. mix them well in a Marble or Glass Mortar, then let them stand in
digestion: the Tincture separate by straining through a Hypocras Bag, and keep
it for use.

2. If some few drops of the Oil, and iv. of the inflamable Spirit of
Juniper Berries be added, it will yet be better.

3. It opens, attenuates the Blood, and breaks or dissolves any tartarous or
sabulous coagulation in the Reins or Ureters, and expels it to admiration. Dose
a ss. ad j. in any appropriate Vehicle.

CHAP. VII. Of TINCTVRES.
I. * Tinctura Absinthii, Tincture of Wormwood.
Bate.] DRied tops of common Wormwood freed from the stalks v. being bruised,
add to them Tartarisated S. V. xx. digest in B. M. for some days, then strain
out by a strong expression: in the Liquor infuse more tops of dried Wormwood,
and express as before, repeating this Work the third time; then filter through
brown Paper, and keep it for use. Dose gut. vj. plus-minus, in a Glass of Wine,
Beer, or Ale.

Salmon.] 1. Tho it is not impossible to make the Medicaments in these
proportions, yet I can assure you, upon many Trials, that the quantity of the
S. V. is by much too little; it ought to be xxx. at least: and if at last to
this Tincture thirty drops of the Oil of Wormwood be added, it will yet be so
much the better.

2. It is a great Stomatick, strengthening and fort^^fying of those parts to a
wonder. It causes a good Appetite to Food, and by cherishing and exciting the
languid Heat of the Part, causes a good digestion; by which means good Blood is
generated, and a good Habit of Body created. It both preserves from, and cures
the Scurvy in a cold Habit of Body, and is an excellent thing for such as are
inclinable to the Jaundice and Dropsy.

3. Being constantly taken for some time, after due purging, it opens
Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and Womb, and provokes the Terms in Women.
Dose a gut. x. ad xx. in Wine or Ale, or some appropriate Vehicle.

II. * Tinctura Amygdaloides, The Almond-like Tincture.
Bate.] The white parts of Benjamin. Styrax, Calamita, Tartarised S. V. lbj.
digest till they are dissolved, then filter and abstract the Spirit to the one
half. It is an excellent Pectoral and Neurotick, good against Catarrhs,
Asthma's, Diseases of the Nerves, and provokes Sweat, etc. Dose a ij. ad vj.

Salmon.] 1. In my Opinion, it will be best to preserve the Tincture with the
whole quantity of Spirit, for it is little enough; lest by that abstraction the
disabled Gums should in part precipitate, or fall down to the bottom; and you
will find the Tincture strong enough, so that at the utmost Dose, you need not
give above iv. or half an Ounce thereof.

2. It must always be given in some proper Vehicle, for by reason of its great
strength it is impossible to be taken alone: being mixed with Wine, or any
other Aqueous Vehicle, it makes it immediately look white like Milk, or an
Emulsion of Almonds, from which it may take its Name, as well as from the
Almond-like pieces of the Benjamin, of which it is in part made.

3. Le Mort makes it of Flowers of Benjamin, thus: Flowers of Benjamin j.
rectified S. V. twice distilled from Carminatives iv. mix and digest with a
gentle heat, in a Vial with a long Neck, or Bolt-head, till the Spirit is
tinged of a deep yellow color.

4. This, says he, contains much greater Virtues than the simple Flowers of
Benjamin. It discusses Wind, cures an inveterate Asthma and Cough, and helps
the shortness of Breath, and difficulty of Breathing, as also gives present
ease in the Colic. Dose a gut. vj. ad xx. or xxiv.

5. Or thus, from the same Le Mort: Tartarised S. V. iij. or iv. Benjamin in
fine Powder i. Oil of Rhodium gut vj. digest till the Spirit is tinged of a
rubicund color. Take of this some drops, and mix it with an Ounce of Damask
Rose Water, and it will become like Milk; it helps Spots and Pimples in the
Face, Redness of the Eyes, and is good against all sorts of Inflammations.
Inwardly you may give it mixed with Syrup of Hyssop, Liquorice, or Coltsfoot,
and exhibit it to such as are Asthmatick.

6. He prepares it also thus: Tartarised S. V. ij. Flowers of Benjamin iss.
Styrax Calamita, ss. Oil of Rhodium, gut. vij. Musk gr. iij. Civet gr. ij. mix
and digest, till the Tincture is of a rubicund color; then decant the clear
from the feces.

7. Of this he makes a Lac Virginale thus: Of this Tincture i. Water of white
Lillies, or white Roses, or of Damask Roses ij. mix them: It cures Inflammations
of the Eyes, and an Erysipelas, etc. It is a most precious thing even for the
most noble and delicate sort of People.

8. It is also thus made: Flowers of Benjamin j. Styrax Calamita ss. Oil of
Rhodium, or of Jessamy, gut. viij. Civet gr. viij. mix the Civet and Styrax
together, then add the Oil of Rhodium, and after that the Flowers of Benjamin,
to which affuse the S. V. and digest two or three days, then decanting the
clear from the feces.

9. This last Preparation is an excellent Perfume, for Gloves, Clothes, Linen,
etc. in this manner: Damask Rose Water, or other perfumed Water i. of this
Tincture forty drops, in which let them be dipped or besmeared, and then gently
dried in the shade: It is also accounted an excellent Cosmetick, washing the
skin therewith; and allays Inflammations, more especially if a little Camphir be
added to the Tincture.

10. This of our Author's Prescription (as well as all the Preparations
following it) is an admirable Pectoral, and Antiasthmatick, helping such as are
troubled with difficulty of Breathing, or shortness of Breath. It is Cordial,
moves Sweat, and by reason of its fragrant Odor wonderfully comforts the
Animal Spirits, suppresses noxious Vapors, and resists the malignity of
Contagious Fevers. Dose a gut. x. ad xxx. in any proper Vehicle.

11. Locum Ambrae-grysieae obtinere potest, si loco Spiritus Vini and Olei
Ligni Rhodii, substituatur Spiritus Rosarum Damascenarum fragrantissimus and
Oleum Cinnamomi eadem proportione.

III. * Tinctura Antimonii Emetica, Vomiting Tincture of Antimony.
Bate.] It is extracted out of the Glass of Antimony with Spirit of Vinegar,
then filtring and exhaling to dryness. The Matter dissolved in Water,
filtrated, and again abstracted to dryness, digest with [Tartariz'd] S. V. till
it is of a rubicund color, which filter. A Tincture may also be extracted from
the Scoria of the Regulus of Antimony, with Tartarised S. V. digested and
filtred. Or you may extract a Tincture from the Vitrum Antimonii, with
rectified Spirit of Venus, which being decanted, may be abstracted in an
Alembick, but not to dryness; then extract the Tincture therefrom with
rectified S. V. which filter, and exhale to a convenient thickness. Dose to gr.
x.

Salmon.] 1. These Preparations are in general Terms; but because the Medicine
is admirable beyond many others of much greater Names and Account, and because
by these general Prescriptions (for want of Proportions) the young Tyro may
easily err in the Process, we shall take the pains to explicate every thing
more particularly.

2. Maets makes it thus: Alcohol of Vitrum Antimonii q. v. affuse thereon
rectified Spirit of Venus drawn with Mineral Sulphur, so much as may overtop
it three inches: set it in a continual digestion, stirring it with a wooden
stick two or three times a day, so long till the Menstruum has extracted a most
yellow Tincture from the Antimony: decant the Tincture, and if you think good,
affuse more fresh Menstruum, extracting as before: mix the Tinctures, and by a
Glass Alembick abstract the humidity, till the Magma is of the thickness of
Oil: to this Magma affuse Alcohol of S. V. so much as may overtop it the depth
of three inches; set it in a warm digestion, till the Spirit is impregnated
with the Tincture of Antimony; which decant, and in a Glass Alembeck in B. M.
abstract the S. V. to one half, so will the Tincture of Antimony remain behind.

3. This Tincture, if you would have it high colored, and more efficacious,
you must impregnate it with the Crocus of Sol thus: Of this Tincture of
Antimony p. iij. Croci Solis p. j. mix them in a Porcelane Vessel, and over a
gentle Fire evaporate to dryness. This is a dry Tincture, and is given a gr.
ij. ad vj. against all Diseases which are to be cured by Sweat, as Measles,
Smallpox, Spotted Fever, Plague or Pestilence, and all kinds of Pestilential
and Malign Diseases, but chiefly in the French Pox, Leprosy, profound Scab,
inveterate Herpes, Apoplexies, Contractures, etc.

4. This Crocus of Sol is thus made: Pure Sol purged by Antimony p. j. purified
Mercury p. vj. make S. A. an Amalgama, which commix with double its whole
quantity of Sulphur: mix them well, and calcine them upon a Tile, continually
stirring it, till all the Sulphur and Mercury are gone; so have you the Crocus
Solis, which wash, and dry for use.

5. Le Mort makes it thus: Alcohol of Vitrum Antim. q. v. sweet Spirit of Salt.
to which a few drops of Spirit of Nitre are added: mix and digest for some
days, till a very yellow Tincture is extracted: this decant, and draw off the
Spirit in B. M. till a fourth part only remains, to which affuse Alcohol of S.
V. xij. and digest as before, so have you a Tincture of great Virtues.

6. Or thus: Rectified Spirit of Salt iij. rectified Spirit of Nitre ij.
Alcohol of S. V. xij. digest, and then distill, cohobating twice, till the
Spirits are well united, with which extract a Tincture as before. This
Tincture, says he, is like a Panacea in all Diseases which are to be cured by
Sweat, which it performs with much less labor and time, than the Tincture
which is made by the help of distilled Vinegar, and may be given a gut. j. ad
x. or xx. in Wine.

7. He also has this: Antimony, Nitre, A. p. j. Salt of Tartar p. ij. mix them
well, and put them by spoonfuls into a large red hot Crucible, letting them
melt together for at least half an hour: then being cooled, let the matter be
poudred, and with Tartariz'd S. V. q. s. or so much as may overtop the Powder
three or four inches, extract a Blood-red Tincture, by digesting for some days
in a Phial close stopped: this Tincture decant, and affuse new Spirit upon the
feces, digesting as before, and thus continuing till the matter will yield no
more Tincture: all these Extractions mix, and obstract the Spirit in B. M. till
one half only remains.

8. Marggrave makes it thus: Alcohol of Vitrum Antimonii i. put it into a Glass
Mattress, to which put rectified Spirit of Venus iv. stop it close, and digest
fourteen days in a gentle heat, till the Tincture is of a Blood-red color:
this decant gently from the feces, and so often till it is perfectly fine and
pure: then put it into a Glass Retort, and with a gentle Fire (or if it may be
in B. M.) draw off the Spirit of Venus to dryness: sic recuperabitur Spiritus
Veneris:) in the bottom you have a rubicund Powder, to which affuse Tartarised
S. V. so much as may overtop it the depth of four inches: digest for some
days, till you have a red Tincture, which decant, and by a Glass Retort
abstract the Spirit to one half; so will there remain a rubicund Liquor, fat
like Oil, which Chemists call the Gemuine Tincture of Antimony.

9. Charras extracts the Tincture thus: Alcohol of Vitrum Antimonii ij. put it
into a Mattress; and affuse thereon rectified Oil of Amber, or of Juniper
Berries, or of Turpentine xx. cover it with its blind Head, lute the Juncture,
and digest in a strong Sand heat, till the Liquor seems ready to boil, which
continue till it is very deeply colored. This Tincture works by Stool, or by
Sweat, and is given a gut. ij. ad v. or vj. in any proper Liquor.

10. Le Febure has two ways of making this Tincture, First, With the Spirit of
Venus, as we have taught from Marggrave at 8. above. Secondly, With this
following Menstruum: The Menstruum: Choice Vitriol, pure common Salt,
Quicklime A lb j, Sal Armoniack iv. make each feverally into Powder, then mix
them, and put them into a Cucurbit, adding good Spirit of Vinegar lb iij. cover
it with its blind Head, which lute on, and digest with a slow heat twenty four
hours, which done, put all into a Report, and with degrees of Fire, draw the
Spirit in about twenty four or thirty hours: weigh the Spirit distilled, and
add its equal weight of common Salt to it, and rectify it in a gradual heat,
so as what distills may come over fair and clear, and nothing of troubledness in
it.

11. Then take Alcohol of Vitrum Antimonii lb j. put it into a large Mattress,
upon which affuse the former prepared Menstruum: mix them together, and put
them into digestion in Ashes, in an equal heat, till the Vitrum is dissolved:
decant the clear by inclination, and filter the remainder; put all into a
Cucurbit, which cover with its Head: lute and place it in B. M. and distill to
dryness with a gentle heat: at bottom of the Cucurbit will be a thick blackish
matter, which in a cold Cellar upon a square Glass will dissolve into an oily
or red Liquor, which Liquor put into a small glass Cucurbit, and in Ashes
abstact the moisture to dryness; this done, immediately (before it takes air)
affuse thereon Alcohol of S. V. put all into a Pelican, or double Digester,
lu^e the Joints, and digest in a very gentle Bal. Vap. till the Spirit is
tinged of a fair high red color, which decant, and add more Spirit, thus
continuing till the Spirit will be no more tinged: those Tinctures mix,
filtrate, and abstract from them two thirds of their Spirit, in a gentle B. M.
so will the wonderful, and almost invaluable Tincture be left at the bottom for
use.

12. Now here is to be noted, That this red Liquor made in the Cellar upon a
square Glass, is one of the best Balsams in the World, for curing of Wounds,
and all kind of malignant Ulcers, be they never so inveterate or dangerous, but
chiefly those which proceed from the Pox, King's Evil, Cancers, etc. It is also
good aganst Pocky Nodes, for which reason it is necessary always to be kept in
the form ready prepared.

13. The Virtues of these Tinctures of Antimony. Le Febure says, They are
endowed with infinite Virtues; for they are Sovereign Remedies against all
inveterate Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and all other parts of the
inferior Ventricle; they open Obstructions of the Lungs, provoke the Terms,
cure the Green Sickness, Yellow and Black Jaundice, Dropsy, Phthisick, Asthma,
Difficulty of Breathing, Pleurisy, Cachexia, and Hypochondriacal Melancholy.

14. They are excellent against all manner of Ulcers, both internal and
external, tho in the Lungs, Stomach, Reins, and Ureters, or Bladder, are good
against the Leprosy, Plague, Great and Smallpox, and all sorts of
Pestilential and Malignant Fevers, as Measles, Spotted Fever, etc. They are
good against all kinds of Itch, Scabs, and Breakings-out, and generally all ill
Humors and Habits of Body which destroy Health.

15. They purge and drive away whatever is hateful to the Body, by Sweat,
Urine, and insensible Transpiration, and sometimes by Vomit: The Dose in
general may be from gut. iij. ad x. or xij. in Spanish Wine, or Canary, or
Mead, Hydromel, or other Analagous Liquor. Let it be taken in Bed, the sick
expecting its Sudorifick operation, reiterating it every day, or every second
or third day, as need requires: but for prevention of any Sickness, once a week
will be enough, or seldomer.

IV. Tinctura Antimonii Purgans, Purging Tincture of Antimony.
Bate.] Glass of Antimony finely poudred i. Spirit of Vitriol not rectified
viij. digest in B. M. till the Tincture becomes of a black red color. It is
accounted as a Panchymagogon for the cure of all Diseases: it strengthens the
Stomach, opens Obstructions, cures the Green Sickness, Cachexia, etc. Dose a
gut. vj. ad x.

Salmon.] 1. This Tincture is drawn from the Sulphur of the Antimony, which in
its own nature is an Emetick, and so would be now, were it drawn with many
other Vehicles, or not corrected with the Spirit of Vitriol, which Spirit does
two things at once, viz. both draws the Tincture, and corrects it.

2. The same may also be done with Spirit of Sulphur in like manner, and it
will have the same operation downwards which this has, whereas that which is
drawn with Spirit of Vinegar, is for the most part wholly Emetick.

3. It may also be made with Spirit of Venus drawn from Vitriol of Venus, or
from Verdigrise, in all respects as you make common Oil of Vitriol, and with
this Menstruum it is that Maets makes it, who says, It is good against all
Diseases which are to be cured by Sweat, and is of principal use against the
Leprosy, and French Disease, as also against inveterate Fevers, Apoplexies,
etc.

4. Le Mort makes it with sweet Spirit of Salt, adding only a few drops of
Spirit of Nitre: But that the Nitre does little, I am very well satisfied, for
putting the Spirit of Nitre alone upon the Powder of the Vitrum, it makes no
alteration at all, whereas if to the Spirit of Nitre you add as much Spirit of
Vitriol, it will so dissolve the Vitrum, as the whole will become a Pulp, and
drink up all the humidity, and this it will continually do, till the Vitrum has
drunk up seven or eight times its weight of the Spirit of Vitriol; this Mass
being washed with fair warm Water, several times, till it is freed from the
Salts, leaves a Milk or rather Cream white Powder behind it, which will work
both upwards and downwards in a small Dose, (tho mostly downwards) and in a
very small Dose, viz. a half gr. ad gr. iiss. but generally gr. j. will be Dose
large enough for any ordinary Person; or gr. iss. at most, very few
Constitutions being able to bear gr. ij. and a half, or gr. iij.

5. This Tincture is accounted as a Panacaea against all Diseases, which
require much labor and time in curing: I know it to be a Specific against the
King's Evil, and in that Disease I have done wonders with it: it is a Specific
also against all sorts of Fevers, and powerfully opens all Obstructions in
both Reins and Bladder; and cures the Greensickness in Virgins. It resists
Putrefaction, and the Plague, and all manner of Infection and Poison. It
purifies and corroborates the Blood, and frees it from all Impurities,
rendering it, as some Authors say, incorruptible. Dicitur curare Elephantiasin,
Lepram, omnesque alios insanabiles morbos. Collect. Chym. page 48.

V. Tinctura Armoniaci, Tincture of Sal Armoniack.
Bate.] Sal Armoniack lbij. [Filings] of Mars lbj. mix them well together by
beating and grinding, and distill them by a Retort with a gradual heat: save the
Spirit of Sal Armoniack by itself: The Mars remaining at the bottom of the
Retort, powder and sweeten it by manifold washings with fair Water: after add
Spirit of Wine lbij. and digest warm for eight days: decant the Spirit, and
affuse new Spirits, digesting as before eight days: then abstract the Spirit of
Wine lbiij. in B. M. so that lbj. only may remain, which is the Tincture. It
prevails wonderfully in opening all Obstructions of both Liver and Spleen; also
against Hypochondriack Melancholy, Quartane Agues, the Cachexie, Dropsy,
Greensickness, Scurvy, Stoppage of the Terms, and their too much overflowing.
Dose a gut. vj. ad xij. in any convenient Liquor.

Salmon.] 1. This is rather a Tincture of Mars, than a Tincture of Sal
Armoniack, the chief work of the Salt being to open the Body of the Mars, that
it may the better yield its Tincture.

2. But Le Febure makes it of Vitriol of Mars after this manner: White Vitriol
of Mars (prepared as we shall hereafter teach) ij. in fine Powder, and as much
Sal Tartari foliated (but some say Sal Saturni, others Sal Armoniack) in
Powder: mix them in a Marble Mortar, so will the Salt on a sudden, after a
wonderful manner, draw forth the Soul of the Mars, or its Sulphur, out of the
Center of its Vitriol; for although this Vitriol is white, and this Salt also,
yet in an instant will a deep red predominate, higher in color than that of
Saffron: this Mass stir so long till it is reduced to a pap, then expose it to
the moist Air, that the whole may be resolved into a Liquor, which is already
an Aperitive and Deopulative Remedy, and may be given against all manner of
Obstructions, and against the coagulation of Tartar in Man's Body, from gut.
vj. ad xvj. in any Broth or proper Vehicle.

3. But this is not the perfection Le Febure aims at: To this end, says he,
weigh this red matter or substance, after mixing in the Marble Mortar, and note
the weight: weigh it also after the dissolution in the open Air; to draw off by
distillation in B. M. the weight of the moisture it has attracted, and to pour
upon it as much Spirit of Venus, as that moisture weights: then digest in Bal.
V. in a digesting or double Vessel for twenty four hours, after which draw off
the Spirit with a Still-head, till the remainder is of the consistency of a
Syrup, upon which put Tartarised S. V. to overtop it four inches; close up the
Vessel with a blind Head, digesting three days; after which filtrate the
Tincture cold, and then draw off half of the Spirit in B. M. with a slow heat,
so have you a noble Tincture, as well pleasant in Taste, as excellent in Virtue.

4. This excellent Tincture of Le Febure's does resolve all sorts of Tartar in
Man's Body, (the cause of all Obstructions) opens Opilations of the Liver and
Spleen, and may be safely and profitably given against all Diseases proceeding
from Stoppages in any part; but the most wonderful thing of all is, that it
bears no weight upon the Stomach, as most Medicines prepared from Mars do; but
on the contrary, it strengthens the Ventricle, purifying it from tartarous,
coagulated, and clammy Humors and Viscosities, which are for the most part the
cause of the Scurvy, loss of Appetite, Disaffections of the Spleen,
Putrefaction of the Blood, Gout, Stone, Jaundice, Dropsy, Rheumatism, and many
other pernicious Diseases. Dose a gut. vj. ad xxx. in some proper Liquor.

5. But the Tincture of our Author is exactly taken from Mynsicht's Thesaurus
sect. 2. page 49. of the Leyden Impression; who commends it as a singular
Experiment against all Obstructions, Hypochondriack Disaffections, etc. being
given in Wine, or some proper Syrup or Decoction, by means of which Vehicle it
will the more easily penetrate to the more remote parts and corners of the
Body: but in the use hereof this is to be observed, that the Body ought often
to be purged from the peccant Humors, and a good Diet to be observed.

6. Rolfincius in his Art. Chym. lib. 4. sect. 1. art. 3. cap. 11. has it
exactly according to Mynsicht, and our Author's, but in cap. 13. almost after
Le Febure's Method, thus: Vitriol of Mars in Powder, but not calcined, Terrae
foliatae Tartari, A. i. mix and place them in a cold and moist Cellar for three
days; the color being changed, and the mixture rendered fluid by the
intromission of the Air, let it be strained, and add thereto Spirit of Wine.
Dose. gr. xx. ad xxx in Wine, or Broth, against Obstructions of the Viscera,
and other the aforenamed Diseases.

VI. Tinctura Asae fetida, Tincture of stinking Assa.
Bate.] Asa fetida ij. Alcohol of S. V. lb j. mix, and extract a Tincture. It
is Uterine, Traumatick Splenetick. Dose a j. ad ij. etc. in any proper Liquor.

Salmon.] 1. It is hot and dry in quality, and therefore of excellent use to
dry up the Humidities of the Brain, and is used chiefly in the Suffocation of
the Womb, Peripneumony, and Wounds, whether inward or outward; as also against
the Epilepsie, Vertigo, Apoplexy, and other Diseases of the Head.

2. It is good against a swollen Spleen, Suffocation of the Womb, Vapors, etc.
being bathed upon those parts. Ulcers also being washed with it, it disposes
them to a more speedy healing.

3. But for the Epilepsie, and other Diseases of the Head and Womb, it would be
better if it be thus prepared: Assa fetida, Woodsoot of a Pitch-like
consistency, A. ij. Tartariz'd S. V. lb ij. mix, digest, make a Tincture,
filter, then add Vol. Salt of Man's Skull i. and keep it for use.

4. This is much more effectual than that in the Prescript, and upon the
occasion of an Epilepsie (for which it is a Specific) may be given from a
spoonful to two spoonfuls in a Draught, of any Antepileptick Water. Let it be
given in the Morning fasting, and last at Night going to Bed, for four or five
days before the Full and Change of the Moon, and as many days after. This
Medicine alone, has cured several of that Disease.

VII. * Tinctura Asthmatica, A Tincture against the Asthma.
Bate.] Roots of Elecampane, Florentine Orrice, Seeds of Anise, Caraways,
Liquorice, A. ij. Leaves of Carduus Ben. M. ij. Raisons of the Sun stoned lb j.
Sena cleansed vj. Aniseed-water lb vj. mix, and digest four days: then strain.
Dose two spoonfuls at Bedtime, and three or four spoonfuls the Morning
following.

Salmon.] 1. In my Opinion, it is best in making of Medicines, if bitter, to
put bitter things together; but if sweet and pleasant, to put sweet and
pleasant things together, and not promiscuously to mix sweet and bitter
together, especially in such Medicines (as this is) which are to be often a
taking.

2. Tho Carduus is really a good thing, yet by reason of its bitterness it
spoils this Composition, which would be better made without it; and this ought
to be a general Observation in all Compositions whatsoever.

3. As to the Proportions, they are not so exactly adjusted as might be
desired; for if composed according to this Recipe, it will be in the general
use but a slow worker: you cannot put in less than ix. Ounces of Sena into the
Composition; and if you add Powder of Resinous Jallap iss. it will be better by
all the cost.

4. If I might advise it, it should be made thus: Roots of Elecampane,
Florentine Orrice, Seeds of sweet Fennel, Caraways, Liquorice bruised, A. ij.
Potashes, i. Raisons stoned lb j. Sena ix. Powder of Jallap iss. Aniseed-water
lb vj. mix, digest ten or twelve days, shaking the Vessel every day, then
strain out the Tincture, which let settle, and decant the clear for use.

5. This is not only good against the Asthma, and all Diseases of the Breast and
Lungs, but also effectually cleanses all the Bowels, car^ying off all the
Crudities, and Tartarous Matter, with which they abound. It is an excellent
thing against the King's Evil, the Scurvy, Gout, Stone, Gravel, and all
Obstructions, whether in Reins or Bladder, Rheumatisms, Sciatica, Gripings of
the Guts, dry Belly-ache, Drop^ie, and Yellow Jaundice: and in a word, performs
whatever may be expected from an excellent Purger.

6, It has cured such as have been Bedridden many Years, and restored to several
the use of their Limbs, taking away, even by the Roots, supposed incurable
Diseases, and that after all hope of Recovery has been past; for by reason of
the Spirituous Menstruum, with which the Purgatives are mixed, their Virtue is
more immediately, and more effectually conveyed into the Blood, intimately mixed
with it, and thereby dispersed into the Habit of the whole Body, by which means
those things are done and effected, by such a seeming inconsiderable Medicine,
which possibly a thousand times more Great, and more Noble, would never perform.

VIII. * Tinctura Aurea, The Golden Tincture.
Bate.] Pulp of Colocynthis freed from the Seeds, cut and beaten to a gross
Powder iss. Aniseeds j. Saffron ss. Cloves n^ vj. Spirit of Wine xx. digest a
Month, and filter. Dose a ij. ad iss.

Salmon.] 1. There are various Considerations to be taken Notice of in the
making this Tincture, according to the Methods of several Men. Maets makes it
thus: Pulp of Colocynthis iss. choice Rhubarb v. Cinnamon iv. Malago Wine
xxviij. Spirit of Vinegar xlv. mix and digest together in a warm place for
three days, then express strongly out and filter: add Gum Tragacanth, Arabic,
Bdellum, A. iiiss. digest three days more, decant and filter, and keep it for
use. Dose a ij. ad ss. The Gums here are supposed to be put in to correct the
Violence of the Colocynth.

2. But as Colocynthis contains as well a watery Salt, as a purging Refine, so
some Authors make the Extraction or Tincture with differing Menstruums, that
they may have a Tincture comprehending the whole Virtue of the mixed, tho it is
true that Rulandus, and some others, only drew it with Spirit of Wine.

3. If therefore you would have it to contain a due proportion of both
substances, you may make it thus: Pulp of Colocynthis cut small lb j put it
into an indifferent large Cucurbit on a Sand heat, on which affuse White Wind
lb vj. cover the Cucurbit with its Head, which lute well, with a Recipient to
its Beak, and make a very gentle Fire under it, for ten or twelve hours. Then
strain out the Liquor by pressing, setting it apart: to the feces, returned
into the Gourd, put good S. V. lb vj. or pints, and all the Wine made use of in
the former Tincture, which was distilled in the Recipient: cover the Cucurbit
with a Vessel of Rencounter, luting it well, and digest in B. M. for twelve
hours more, but with a little more heat, afterward strain forth the Tincture
by pressing strongly, which mix with the former Tincture, and filter through
brown Paper, so have you the true Tincture of Coloquintida.

4. This Tincture you may, if you so please, reduce to a Rob, or more, thin
Extract, by putting it again into the Cucurbit, and with a gentle Fire in B. M.
abstracting the S. V. (which will serve for the like use again) you may
afterward in an open Vessel evaporate the superfluous humidity, till it comes
to the consistence of a Rob, which you may use as occasion serves, by mixing it
with other Extracts or Purging Pills: or you may continue the evaporation till
it comes to a sufficient consistency of itself, to form into Pills in like
manner.

5. This Extract is excellent to cure Dropsies, and expel Serosities from the
most remote parts of the Body, in such Patients where no other Medicines will
prevail. It is also a most excellent thing in Diseases of the Joints, and in
Rheumatisms; and wonderfully prevails against the Gout, whether taken alone, or
mixed with other Purgers, especially with that of Rhubarb, which qualifies its
violence, and strengthens the parts at one and the same ^ime. It is given alone
in Pills a gr. iij. ad x. at most, ^r proportionably mixed with ^ther Extracts,
as necessity, ^r the Physician shall see requisite.

6. Le Febure makes this Spiritus Aureus Rulandi, of Troches of Colocynthis,
which ^e forms thus: Pulp of Colocynthis cut small with Scizzars, and made into
Powder by ^eating, anointing the Mortar ^ith a little Oil of Nutmegs, ^r Oil of
Mastich by distillation: this Powder reduce into Paste, by beating with Spirit
of Vinegar, of which Paste make T^^ches, which dry in the Sha^e between Papers:
being dry, beat them a second time into Powder, which with the same Spirit of
Vinegar form into Troches as before, and dry them; these are much better than
those prepared the old way, with Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth.

7. Now to make this Golden Tincture do thus: Powder of the aforesaid Troches
j. put it into a Circulatory, or double Vessel, called a Vessel of Rencounter:
affuse thereon Tartariz'd S. V. lb j. lute the Juncture, and digest in the
Reverberation of the Sunbeams (or such other like heat) for fifteen days:
after which open the Vessel, and add more of these Troches ss. close and digest
again in like manner: open the Vessel again, and add the third and last time
ij. more of the said Troches in Powder, digesting as before fifteen days more,
then strain out the Liquor by pressing, and filter through brown Paper; so have
you the Spiritus Vitae aureus Rulandi, in perfection, to be used in all cases
aforementioned, a j. ad vj. or to j. as need shall require. But if you reduce
it to an Extract (by abstracting the S. V.) the Dose is a gr. vj. ad xxiv.

IX. Tinctura Bezoartica, The Bezoartick Tincture.
Bate.] Roots of Elecampane, Angelica, Zedoary, Virginian Snake-root, A. iss.
best Saffron j. Myrrh, Cinnamon, Yellow of Citron-peels dried, A. vj. Leaves of
Scordium, Rue, A. Mss. Venice Treacle iij. Thebian Opium ij. rectified Spirit
of Tartar xv. Spirit of Vitriol iij. rectified Spirits of Elder, and
Juniper Berries A. xviij. mix, digest according to Art, and filter: then add
Salt of Amber j. Camphir ij. digest again and keep it for use. Dose iij. ad j.
It is given against the Plague, and all Malign Diseases; it wonderfully
recreates and revives the Spirits, etc.

Salmon.] 1. The Opium is put in as an Ingredient to provoke Sweat, which is
very proper and necessary for the intention; but the quantity for this
Composition is much too little, ss. is as small a proportion as you can take,
and if it was vj. it would be yet better; for the Opium being augmented, the
Dose, if needful, may be diminished at pleasure.

2. It is an excellent Medicine, not only against the Plague, and Pestilential
Distempers, but also against the Measles, Smallpox, Purple Fever, and the
like: for it drives the Infection from the Heart, and expels the Malign matter
through the pores of the skin, sometimes by insensible transpiration, but for
the most part by a gentle and pleasant sweat.

3. When it is taken, the Patient ought to be in his Bed; and the Dose a ij. ad
vj. or to j. in strong People, is to be given in a Glass of Sack, or some
proper Bezoardick Water, and so the Patient to rest upon it.

4. Or you may administer it after this manner: Of our Aqua Bezoardica, or Aqua
Mirabilis iss. simple Angelica-water iij. Syrup of Clovegilliflowers vj. of
this Bezoardick Tincture a iv. ad vj. or j. mix for a Dose, covering the sick
very well to sweat upon it.

5. In the interim of Sweating, if the sick requires any thing to drink, or the
next Morning, you may give this: Water in which Ashes of Hartshorn have been
boiled, choice Canary, A. ij. Spirit of Sulphur gut. ij. iij. or iv. to make it
grateful, which will very much compose and strengthen the Stomach, and and
resist the highest degree of Infection.

X. * Tinctura Cardamomi, Tincture of Cardamoms.
Bate] The lesser Cardamoms hulled and bruised iv. Alcohol of Spirit of Wine
xvj. digest, express, and filter S. A. It powerfully discusses Wind, and
comforts the Brain. Dose a j. ad iij. in any fit Vehicle.

Salmon.] 1. Although the rectified Spirit of Wine may extract a good Tincture out
of the Grains, yet there are other Menstruums which will do it better; among
which, as chief, we commend, 1. The Tincture of the Salt of Tartar, which more
powerfully opens the Body of the mixed. The Powers of Cardamoms, which as it is
a Menstruum more homogene than the simple S. V. so will it more exalt and
elixivate the prepared Medicament.

2. It is a powerful thing against the Colic, Pains in the Stomach and Sides,
whether proceeding from Wind or Cold, Stiches, Gripings of the Guts, and the
most extreme Torture of the Bowels. It mightily strengthens the Stomach, causes
a good Appetite, and extremely helps the Digestion, so that it causes those to
hunger after their Food, that have either a nauseousness and loathing or have
not eaten with any delight for many weeks together.

3. If you give it for the Colic, you may administer it thus: Of this Tincture
a ij. ad vj. of our Gutte Vitae or Cordial Drops, gut. xxv. or in place thereof
the former Bezoartick Tincture j. Angelick water, Poppy-water, A. ij. Syrup of
Citron-peels ss. mix for a Dose, to be given to the Patient upon the Spot,
letting him immediately repair to his Bed.

XI. * Tinctura Carui, Tincture of Caraways.
Bate.] It is made of Caraway-seeds, and Alcohol of Spirit of Wine, in all
respects as the former: And does the same thing.

Salmon.] 1. This (as the former) is also better to be prepared with Tincture
of Salt of Tartar; or otherwise with the Potestates Carui, by which the
Tincture will be as it were Elixirated.

2. It has all the Virtues of the former, and is found also of good use against
the Stone and Gravel in the Reins and Bladder; and indeed against most Diseases
of the Urinary parts: It is also good against Fainting and Swooning Fits, and
being taken in due Doses, and at fit Times, (after Universals have been
premised) it provokes the Terms, and effectually opens Obstructions of the Womb.

3. It is also a singular Cephalic, Neurotick, Stomatick, Pectoral, and
Alexipharmick; it prevails against the Lethargy, Carus, Apoplexy, Vertigo,
Megrim, Obstructions of the Lungs and Nerves, Palsies, Convulsions, Cramps, etc.

4. The way of using it is manifold, 1. Inwardly, by taking it in the Morning
fasting, an hour before Dinner, and at Night going to Bed a ij. ad ss. or vj.
in a little Beer, Ale, or Wine. 2. By smelling to it often in a day, and
drawing it up the Nostrils for most Diseases of the Head. 3. By bathing the
Parts afflicted with Pains, Aches, Gouts, Palsies, Cramps, Convulsions,
Contusions, Weaknesses, Tumors, etc. therewith, Morning and Evening.

XII. Tinctura Cathartica Ridglei, The Purging Tincture of Dr. Ridgley.
Bate.] Of the best Sena i. Cloves iss. Saffron j. Spanish Wine chalybeated
lbiss infuse for some days, then express and filter. Dose two three, or four
spoonfuls every day, for a long time, against stubborn Fevers, etc.

Salmon.] 1. This is a good Medicine, and in some Constitutions may work well
enough; but for the generality, being made up in this Proportion, you will find
it but a slow Purger.

2. If you would have it more effectual to purge, you must make it thus:
Sherry-Wine lbiss. Sena xv^ij. Cloves, Saffron, A. j. Salt of Tartar ss. mix,
digest twelve days, then strain out, filter, and keep it for use. This quantity
will be enough for six or seven Doses.

3. It is a general Purger, and besides its usefulness in stubborn and
rebellious Fevers and Agues, it is a Remedy, approved by manifold Experiments
against Gouts of all sorts, though of never so long standing, Sciatica's,
Rheumatisms, Scurvy, (even when it is become scandalous) Dropsies of all kinds,
Jaundice, and all other Diseases proceeding either from Obstructions, or from a
cold, moist, watery, slimy, mucilaginous, or tartarous matter.

4. It enters readily into the Mass of Blood, purifies it, and expels the
morbifick cause of Diseases, almost to a Miracle, I speak what I know of it, by
daily Practice: and therefore commend it to the honest Countryman, as a
Medicament worth his taking notice of.

XIII. * Tinctura Cerussae, Tincture of Ceruse.
Bate.] Venetian Ceruse finely poudred iv. Camphir ss. Oil of Tartar, per
deliquium iij. Spirit of Vinegar xvj. macerate or digest them in a cold place,
then filter. It is good against Defedations of the Skin, Inflammations,
Burnings, etc.

Salmon.] 1. Tho this is mostly applied to outward uses against Inflammations,
Pains, Aches, Gouts, etc. yet it is also of good use for inward Diseases, being
given in a fit Dose, and a proper Vehicle.

2. It gives ease in a vehement Colic, and is profitable against a violent
Haemorrhage of the Womb, or overflowing of the Courses, as also in Burning
Fevers, the Plague, or Pestilence, and all manner of Malign and Pestilential
Diseases, being given a gut. xx. ad xxx. or more, in a Glass of Wine, or some
proper Cordial Water.

3. It prevails against a hot Gout, if a little Tow, or Linen Cloth be dipped in
it, and applied to the place. In a Gonorrhea, where, by the acidity of the
Venereal ferment, the urinary Ductus is corroded, it is of excellent use, being
mixed with Rosewater or Milk, and so injected with a Spring, it gives immediate
ease.

4. If a Fistula happens to be in the Canthus of the Eye, being first cleansed
by mundificatives, you may put into it some few drops of this Tincture, so will
it be in a short time filled with Flesh, and cicatrized.

5. In other Diseases of the Eyes, you may mix it either with Aqua Lactis,
Rosewater, Fennel-water, or some such like, and wash the Eyes daily therewith
several times a day, so will they in a short time be healed and cured.

XIV. * Tinctura Chamaemeli, Tincture of Camomil.
Bate.] It is extracted from the dried Flowers with rectified S. V. as is
Tincture of Wormwood. The Virtues are the same with Tincture of Caraways.

Salmon.] 1. This is a good Tincture thus drawn but yet it will be much better,
and more powerful and efficacious, if it be made with Tincture of Salt of
Tartar, or otherwise with the Powers of Camomil.

2. It is an excellent thing against all Fevers whatever, whether non-putrid,
putrid, or Malign and Pestilential; whether they be continent, continual, or
intermitting: It is an excellent Cephalic, Neurotick, Stomatick, Splenetick,
Hepatick, Utrine, Nephritick, Arthritick, and Alexipharmick. It is Anodine,
Diaphoretick, and Diuretic; an Opener of Obstructions, Discusser of Wind,
Repeller of the Colic, Provoker of Urine, Easer of Pain, and Restorer of the
Nerves, in Cramps, Convulsions, Palsies, Gouts, Sciatica's, Rheumatisms, and
such like.

3. It is given inwardly Morning, Noon, and Night, in some proper Cordial, or
Antifebritick, Anodyn, or Diuretic Vehicle, according as the nature of the
Disease requires. Dose a j. ad iv. according to Age, and necessity urging.

4. Outwardly the Belly in the Colic, the Stomach and Sides in a Palpitation
of the Heart, or a Pleurisy, the Joints in a Gout, the Nerves and Parts
affected in Convulsions, Cramps, and Palsies are duly to be bathed therewith
Morning and Night for sixteen or twenty days, but cold; if this course be
taken, and duly followed, I am very confident, that the Patient will very
rarely fail of his expectation, or miss the Cure of his Disease.

XV. * Tinctura Cochleariae composite, Tincture of Scurvy Grass compound.
Bate.] Clean Filings of Mars iv. red Sage, Agrimony, A. M. iij. choice
Sea-Scurvygrass-leaves lbij. Garden Scurvy Grass, M. iij. Wormwood, Rosemary,
A. M. ij. Horseradish Roots iv. Cut all small, and add to them White Wind, and
Sherry-wine, A. lbiv. digest or infuse for three days, then strain out. Dose ad
iv. twice a day, for twenty, thirty, or forty days: It has cured many sick of a
deplorable Dropsy, accompanied with a Scurvy, (or a Dropsy in a Scorbutic
Habit of Body) even when they have been past all hope, and after that many
other Medicines had been used in vain.

Salmon.] 1. Tho this is a good Tincture, yet that is much stronger, and truly
better, which is made with the best Spirit of Scurvygrass, made according to
our Order; but then it is to be observed, that it is to be given in a much
lesser Dose.

2. It not only cures deplorable Dropsies, and inveterate Scurvies, but also
the Gout, Jaundice, Rheumatism, Tremblings, Palsies, and many other Distempers
of the Nerves, vitiated by a cold, mucilaginous, and tartarous Matter.

3. If it be made with Spirit of Scurvy Grass, you may give it inwardly a ij.
ad iv. in some proper Vehicle, and in some extraordinary occasions to vj.

4. It is also to be noted, That was I to make it for my own use, I would have
added Mustard Seed iv. bruised and tied up in a rag; for by that Ingredient it
becomes more Diuretic, and has a greater influence upon Diseases of the Reins
and Bladder: for from the infusion of Mustard Seed alone in White Wind, I have
known supposed incurable Dropsies to be cured, and perfectly taken away.

XVI. Tinctura Corallii, Tincture of Coral.
Bate.] Dissolve red Coral in Spirit of Bread, filter and evaporate, from which
extract a Tincture with Spirit of Wine, then filter and exhale to a due
consistency, S. A. It is Cadiack, Diuretic, and a Killer of Worms, etc. Dose
gut. xxx. xl. etc. in some appropriate Liquor.

Salmon.] 1. Where note, That the Coral must be first reduced into an
impalpable Powder before it is put into the Spirit: And that this Spirit is an
Acid drawn by Retort from Wheaten-bread, Leavened, or Rye-Bread, or rather from
Bread made of a mixture of Wheat and Rye, Leavened as aforesaid, which Spirit
so distilled is an incomperable Acid.

2. The ordinary Preparations of Coral reduces it into a Powder almost
impalpable, grinding it upon Porphyry; but it may be better done, with the
Engine of Monsieur Joel Langelot, Physician to the Duke of Holsatia, which is
an exquisite kind of Steel-Mill: this opens the Body well, and divides it
almost into imperceptible Atoms, and recommends this Engine to all other
Preparations which require any mixed Body to be reduced into minute parts.

3. Being thus reduced into an impalpable Powder, it is so much the better for
an Acid Spirit to work upon, and from that to extract its Tincture.

4. But there is another way of making this Tincture with Juice of Limons, as
we have taught in our Seplasium, lib. 4. cap. 21. sect. 9. It is made also with
the acid Spirit of Honey, or Sugar, as it is in our Doron Medicum lib. 2. cap.
7. sect. 20. Glauber does it with Salt of Tartar, and Grulingius with Spirit of
Nitre; as you may see in our Pharm. Land. lib. 4. cap. 7. sect. 22, etc. 23.
Besides eight several other ways, which are taught in the said Pharm. Land.
lib. 3. cap. 13. sect. 79, ad 90.

5. Marggrave makes it also with Spirit of Nitre, in the following Proportions:
Powder of red Coral j. best rectified Sp. Nitri iv. put them into a Glass
Phial, with a long Neck, and digest for fourteen days, so will the Menstruum be
tinged of a Golden color, which decant several times from the feces, till it
is most pure; then distill in a Glass Retort with a gentle Fire to dryness, so
will a red Powder be left at bottom: to which affuse the Alcohol of S.V. and
digest for one day, then decant the rubicund Tincture; and this is one of the
best Tinctures of Coral.

6. It is an admirable Cardiack, depurates the whole Mass of Blood, and
preserves it from corruption: it is a Medicament of great use among Chemical
Physicians, but chiefly for the conservation of the Health of Human Bodies: it
is also good against all sorts of Fevers, especially such as are burning,
putrid, or malign, as also the Plague itself.

7. There is also a preparation of this Tincture with the acid Spirit of
Guajacum; and Rolfincius, lib. 4. sect. 1. art. 5. cap. 3. Art. Chym. prepares
it with Juice of Citrons, in the same manner as we prepare it with Juice of
Limons, the work of which being so plain and easy, we shall say no more of it
in this place. Le Febure has the making of this Tincture with other Menstruums,
the consideration of which we shall pretermit, till we come to discourse
thereof in our Officina Chymica, which Book is also now in the Press.

XVII. * Tinctura Ferri, Tincture of Iron.
Bate.] Clean Filings or Pleces of old Iron overcome with Rust iv. Roman
Wormwood M.j. Raspings of Ivory, white Sanders, A. iss. Red Wine ^ij. digest
forty eight hours, then strain, filter, and keep it for use. It is much more
effectual than Vinum Chalybeatum, to open all kinds of Obstructions, etc. Dose
from two spoonfuls to five, every Morning for a long time.

Salmon.] 1. The Filings or Pieces of Iron ought to be fully rusted
beforehand, which may be done by spreading them in a broad Trey, or Earthen
Pan, and exposing them for some considerable time all Night in the open Air, so
as the Dew may effectually fall thereupon: or otherwise, they may be daily
sprinkled with Rainwater, and permitted each time to dry, stirring them
constantly every day, till such times as their thorough Rusting is completed.

2. This done (whereby the Body of the Iron will be in a good measure opened)
put this rusted Matter into a Bolt-head with a long Neck, and affuse thereon,
to every i.. a pint of choice Red (or rather in my Opinion White-) Wine, which
digest for some days, till the Wine has extracted the Tincture therefrom.

3. Our Author here advises to digest only for two days, but I, who have many
times made it, can tell you, that the longer you digest it, the better it is;
and if it be digested two Months, yea, four or six Months, it will be yet so
much the better, and more efficacious to the purposes intended.

4. It not only opens all manner of Obstructions, but most effectually cures
the Green Sickness in Virgins; and it performs this Cure so admirably, that it
is even to a wonder, for the Person who even but now looked pale, wan, and thin,
obstructed in the Breast and Lungs, so that they could hardly breath, without
Stomach, loathing all manner of Food, scarce able to move or stir, without much
uneasiness or trouble, nor hardly able to go up Stairs, without blowing, as if
they strove for Life, weakened in an extreme manner, and seemingly as it were in
a very deep Consumption; such a Person as this, has been retrieved, as it were,
out of the Jaws of Death, and by taking of but two Doses so sensibly benefited,
that all who conversed with them could not but take notice of it: the shortness
of Breath, difficulty of Breathing went away, the Sick was pleasant and easy,
began to eat with a good Stomach, and to receive their Food with a great deal
of pleasure; and in a word, the whole Habit of the Body did seem to be changing.

5. This is indeed the nature and property of this Medicament; if then it does
thus much at two or three times taking, what may it be thought to effect, if
its use be continued for some reasonable time? The truth of the matter is this;
no certain space of time can be limited for the taking thereof, but it must be
according to the nature of the Body afflicted, obduracy of the Obstructions,
and length of time wherein the Disease has prevailed; some need not take it
above three Weeks or a Month at most; whereas other some again, must be obliged
to take it for two or three Months; yea, sometimes for four or five Months, or
longer.

6. The sick ought to take it for some considerable time after they seem to be
well; for this Disease being of a stubborn and rebellious nature, and not
easily rooted out, may leave its Seeds or Roots behind it; and tho the Body of
the Tree, be as it were cut down, and the Patient seems to be perfectly well,
yet (the use of the Medicine being given over too soon) the Disease revives
again out of the remanent Seeds or Roots, contrary to all expectation, and the
Patient becomes presently as bad again, or worse than ever.

7. In such cases as these it is requisite, that the Sick should begin as at
first, and then to continue the taking of it so long, till it is evident a
perfect Cure is completed.

8. Dose three, four, five or six spoonfuls in a Glass of White Wind, Ale, or
Mild Beer, and to be taken either at Night going to Bed: or if in the Morning,
so as the Sick may lie or keep their Bed two or three hours after taking it,
and this so long till they have gotten strength enough to stir more, and go
abroad, then it may be better to be at work, and industrious in some stirring
Exercise, or to take a Walk of two or three Miles upon a stretch, and so back
again, by which means the stagnating Juices and Humors will be put into motion,
and the Operation of the Medicine facilitated, to the very great benefit of the
Patient.

XVIII. Tinctura Guajaci, Tincture of Guajacum, or Pockwood.
Bate.] Cortex of Guajacum in fine Powder lbj. Ambergrise gr. xv. Aniseeds,
Liquorices, A. i. S.V. lbiv. digest and strain out for use. It provokes Sweat,
conduces admirably to the cure of the French Pox, cures the Toothache, is
Pulmonick, and profitable against Catarrhs, etc. Dose vj. ad iss. etc.

Salmon.] 1. The better way to make this, will be to leave out the Ambergrise,
till the digestion is over, and the Spirit strained off from the Ingredients,
which if you would be yet more curious, ought to be filtred; after which the
Ambergrise being in fine Powder is to be put in, and so long digested, till its
whole Tincture is extracted, and after all the Tincture to be kept upon it,
till it is all used.

2. This Tincture is used by way of Diet in the French Pox, and may be taken in
place of a Diet-drink, for that it performs more than any Diet-drink can do; it
ought to be taken two or three times a day, viz. in the Morning fasting, an
hour before Dinner, and last at Night going to Bed, but at least twice a day:
nor do I think it would be amiss for the sick to take some of it in all the
Drink he drinks, for thereby the Habit of the Body will be more easily
replenished with its excellent properties and effects.

3. It is not only beneficial against the Diseases named, but also (by reason
of its drying Virtue) to dry up, and consume watery Humors, and take away the
Water in Dropsies, and therefore prevails against Cachexia's, Cachochymia's,
and all other ill Habits of Body, as Rheumatisms, wandering Pains about the
Body, Gripings of the Guts, praeternatural Fluxes, Weaknesses and Lassitudes in
what part soever; as also against the Gout, Sciatica, Weakness of the Joints
and Limbs, and the Scurvy, in a cold and moist Habit of Body.

XIX. Tinctura Galbaneti, Tincture Galbanated.
Bate.] It is extracted from the Galbanetum of Sennertus, with double quantity
of the Tincture of the Salt of Tartar, by circulation, and afterward by
separating the Oil from the Tincture S. A. It is Hysteric, Paralytick,
Scorbutic, Emmenagogick, or provoking the Terms, etc. Dose gut. 10, 20, 30,
etc.

Salmon.] 1. How the Galbanetum is made, you may see in our Pharm. Land. lib.
1. cap. 8. sect. 30. which is only Galbanum p. j. mixed with Oil of Turpentine
p. ij. digested ten days, and then distilled in a Retort in Sand. Le Mort
advises to take Galbanum cut into pieces, q. v. and to affuse thereon so much
Oil of Turpentine, as may overtop it the depth of two inches, then to digest
twenty four hours, and to distill; so will you obtain an Oil of Turpentine
impregnated with a most potent volatile Salt and Sulphur of the Galbanum; and
this is that which is called Galbanetum.

2. This Galbanated Tincture (separated from the Oil of Turpentine) is a most
admirable Opener of Obstructions, even in the Nerves, and Womb, for which
reason it is said to cure Palsies, Cramps, Convulsions, Vapors, Fits of the
Mother, Faintings, Swoonings, and Palpitation of the Heart; to rectify the
Blood, and other Juices contaminated with a Scorbutic taint, whereby it
becomes of excellent use against Rheumatisms, running and wandering Pains in
the Limbs and Joints, Obstructions of the Courses, etc.

3. It may be taken Morning and Night a gut. xx. ad lx. in a Glass of Wine, or
some other proper Vehicle good against the Disease intended; and if the Patient
sometimes sweats upon it, its effects will be so much the sweeter and better.

XX. Tincturae Haematitae, Tincture of the Stone Haematite.
Bate.] It is drawn forth by the help of Spirit of Wine from Lapis Hematitis
sublimed with Sal Armoniack. Its use is to stop all sorts of Hemorrhagies, or
Fluxes of Blood. Dose j. ij. etc.

Salmon.] 1. Maets makes the Sublimation of the Lapis thus: Impalpable Ponder
of Lapis Hematitis lbj. Sal Armoniack in Powder lb ss. mix them well together:
put them into a Glass Cucurbit, which cover with a Glass Alembick, luting the
Junctures, then sublime according to Art; so by a more gentle Fire the Spirit
of Sal Arm. will first ascend, after which will follow the Flowers tinged of an
excellent Golden color, and impregnated with a subtle and fine Martial Sulphur.

2. From these Flowers it is, that the Tincture is extracted, which must be
done with the Alcohol of S. V. you may put upon the Flowers so much as may
overtop them about four inches; and they are to stand in digestion, till the
Alcohol of the Wine has extract a yellowness.

3. From the Feces there is also an Aqueous Tincture to be extracted thus: To
the Feces put Rainwater, and digest them together till the Water is tinged of
a reddish yellow color, which filter and keep for use. This Aqueous Tincture
in all Resolutions and Fluxes, both of the Bowels and Womb, all sorts of
Hemorrhages, Diarrhea's, Gonorrhea's, etc. and may be given a gut. vj. ad xij.
in any proper Vehicle.

4. The Feces, after the Aqueous Tincture being calcined with a
Reverberatoryfire, and reduced into a fine Powder, become Crocus Martis, whose
use in all Hypochondriack Affections, and Obstructions of the Courses, forcing
them down, tho many Months stopped; it opens Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen,
Mesentery, and other Bowels, more especially if it is given with Gum
Ammoniacum, Sagapenum, Myrrh, or other aperients, and exhibited in the form of
a Pill.

5. The Spirituous Tincture is a most egregious Styptick, and Astringent; so
that if a Sponge be moistened in the same, and be applied even to the greatest
Arceries or Veins, being wounded or cut, it will in a short time astringe them,
and stop the flux of Blood: So also given inwardly, in some fit Liquor it cures
Spitting of Blood, a Bloody Flux, and Hepatick Flux, as also the overflowing of
the Terms, for which purposes there is scarcely such another Medicine in Nature.

6. This Tincture is said to be made more beneficial against a Dysentery, and
other Fluxes of the Bowels and Womb, and Bleeding at Nose, if it be thus
prepared: Of this Spirituous Tincture j. Tincture of Opium made with Tincture
of Salt of Tartar ij. Tincture of Saffron and Cinnamon, A. vj. mix them. Besides
the former Virtues, this mixture eases all manner of Pain, takes away the too
great Acrimony of Humors in Fevers, and is an excellent thing against all
Camp-Diseases, as Fluxes, Bloody Fluxes, Vomitings, Calentures, etc. Dose a
gut. iv. ad xij. or xx.

7. This is also farther to be noted, that the Feces, after the extracting of
the first Spirituous Tincture, if they be put into a moist Cellar for fourteen
or twenty days, they will melt into a Liquor, which contains the Acid Spirit of
Sal Armoniack, in which the Lapis Hematitis does subsist dissolved: from this
Liquor evaporated to dryness, may be made an Universal Menstruum, for the
dissolving of all sorts of Minerals, after this manner.

8. Of this Salt xij. Tartarised S. V. vj. mix and digest for some days, then
with a gentle Fire abstract the S.V. The remaining Salt mix with
Tobaccopipe-clay, or Bole Armoniack, and distill in a Glass Retort almost to a
red-hot heat, so will an Acid Spirit come forth descending in streaks almost
like S. V. which keep in a Glass close stopped for your use.

9. This Spirit, or Universal Menstruum, is a Medium between a fixed Acid and a
Volatile; and by its benign acidity is much better accommodated to internal
uses than other Acids, chiefly in Dropsies, Burning Fevers, Calentures, the
Plague, and all other malign and infectious Diseases.

10. It is also of extraordinary use for Chemical Operations, in extracting the
Anima Metallorum etc. Mineralium, (which Soul with the Chemists is the most
subtle Essence) and is chiefly their Sulphurs, as of Gold. Antimony, Talck,
etc. Dose inwardly a gut. iij. ad xij.

XXI. * Tinctura Hierae, The Holy Tincture, commonly called Tinctura Sacra.
Bate.] Species of Hiera picra simple j. Cochinele j. Sherry Wine lb iiss. mix
and digest for some days, stirring it often in a day, then filter and keep it
for use. It is given in Pains of the Stomach, Ca^hexia's, Belchings, kills
Worms, etc. It is exhibited before the E^^s of Tertian and Quartan Agues, it
commonly curing at the third time of taking. Dose ab ij. adiv.

Salmon.] 1. This has been a Medicine of admirable use for many Years last
past, and truly it has been used not without singular success, for the
intentions it was designed: being prevalent against all manner of Obstructions
of the Viscera whatsoever.

2. It opens the Opilations of the Liver and Spleen, is good against
Hypochondriack Melancholy, Cachexia's, Rheumatisms, Dropsies, Gouts, Sciatica,
Palsies, and Convulsions, and indeed most Distempers of the Nerves, Womb, and
Joints.

3. It provokes the Terms in Women, strengthens the Stomach, causes a good
Appetite and Digestion, and makes a good Color and Complexion in the Face.
Given to Children affected with the Rickets it cures them, taking away
Obstructions of the Lungs, and superfluous Phlegm, and causes a free breathing.
Of ordinary and plain Medicines, there are but few better than this Tincture
the World.

4. The constant use of it for some Weeks, cures stinking Breaths, tho of long
standing; which I have observed to be well performed Two or Three several times.

XXII. Tinctura Juniperi, Tincture of Juniper Berries.
Bate.] It is made of the Rob of the Berries i. and a Spirit of Juniper Berries
distilled from their fermented substance; the Tincture digest and filter, S. A.
Dose three spoonfuls thrice a day, against the Dropsy, Colic, Stone, etc. for
which Diseases it is a singular Remedy.

Salmon.] 1. Rolfincius Art. Chym. lib. 3. sect. 2. cap. 9. makes it of the
simple Berries thus: The Berries alone q. v. bruise them well: add Spirit of
Wine q. s. mix and extract the Tincture with a gentle heat. It is a wonderful
thing, says he, in the depuration of the Blood, and preserves from
Pestilential Contagion.

2. The principal use of this Tincture is to open, discuss, resolve, attenuate,
and dissipate, to provoke Urine and Sweat, bring down the Terms in Women,
remove Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, strengthens the Brain, Nerves,
Breast, Stomach, and Lungs, and indeed all the Viscera, it cures Coughs,
Hoarsness, Asthma's expels Wind in the Bowels, and cures the Colic, but above
all dissolving and evacuating any sandy, viscous, slimy, or tartarous substance
in the Reins, Ureters, and Bladder. It is also a great Preservative against the
malignity of the Plague, and all infectious and pestilential Airs.

3. It is also a singular thing against both Palsies, Convulsions, and
Rheumatisms, being daily taken inwardly in a fit Dose, and outwardly bathing
the parts affected therewith Morning and Evening.

4. But this is to be observed, that if you will make this Tincture to
Perfection, you ought to make it of the rectified Spirit of Juniper Berries,
distilled from their fermented substance, and also from the ripe Berries
immediately bruised, rather than from the Rob; for that in making of the Rob,
many of the subtle volatile, and essential parts of the Berries will be lost.

5. This Tincture thus made, penetrates in a moment the whole Body, and may be
given against all Diseases the Berries are good for: and that this is certain,
as also that it intimately mixes with the whole Mass of Blood, does plainly
appear, for that the Patient having but two or three Doses of it, the first
Urine he makes will be sure to smell thereof, or rather something resembling
Florentine Orrice, or Violets. Give it in Whitewine, or its own Water.

6 This Preparation of our Author you may see in Etmuller, Tom. 2. page 55.
which seems to be taken from Hoffmans Animadversions upon Schroder, Messis
Medico-Spagyrica, page 430. b. Save that he adds a half part of Mallaga-Wine,
and then calls it, Elixir of Jumper.

7. Le Febure makes it otherwise, and calls it also an Elixir, which is yet
nothing but a Tincture, and does it after this manner: Best Juniper Berries
well bruised lb j. Juice of Pellitory of the Wall, or Golden Rod lb ij. mix and
digest in B. M. three days, then strain out by expression, and abstract in B.
M. with a slow fire the humidity, till the Extract or Rob is of a middle
consistency; which done, add Spirit of Juniper lb j. mix well, lute up the
Vessel, digest and circulate in Bal. Vap. for eight days: after which, all
being decant the Tincture, filter and keep it for use.

8. This Tincture has the Virtues of the former, but its Authors says, it is a
Sovereign Remedy to preserve from, or cure the Plague, and other malignant and
pestilential Diseases; but is peculiarly dedicated to the Kidneys and Bladder,
not only to evacuate what is viscous and sandy in them, but also to remove the
Seminary thereof, and hinder, (by the constant use of it) the farther
Generations of Sand, Gravel, or Stories.

9. It is also a Stomatick and Hysteric, Specific, which by its Heat,
Balsamic Property, Alexiterick Principles, and Cordial Virtue, does dissipate
Flatus or Wind, or whatever may cause any ill Disposition in the Viscera, or
Womb.

XXIII. Tinctura Lunae, Tincture of Luna, or Silver.
Bate.] Luna precipitated i. Common Salt ij. Sal Armoniack ij. mix and
reverberate eight days: wash the Calcinate from the Salts, and extract Cerulean
Tincture by the help of sweet Spirit of Vitriol, then decant and abstract. Its
chief use is in Diseases of the Head, and more especially against the
Epilepsie: and it dries up the Water in Dropsies. Dose gr. 4, 5, 6, etc.

Salmon.] 1. Either you abstract the humidity wholly, or not; if wholly, it is
to be accounted nothing but a Tincture, and such are many of the Tinctures of
Metals. But the Liquid Tincture we have taught you two ways of making in Our
Doron Medic. lib. 1. cap. 25. sect. 143. And lib. 2. cap. 7. sect. 28.
Clossaeus has another way: So also Beguinus, Kelser, and Basil Valentine; all
which you may see in Our Pharm. Land. lib. 3. cap. 2. sect. 8, 9, 10, 11, 15.

2. The making the Luna into Calx, Lime, or Precipitate is thus: Refined Leaf
Silver i. choice Sp. Nitri iij. put them into a Glass Mattress, and digest in a
moderately hot Sand Furnace, till the Silver is dissolved: then impregnate
Water lb j. with Sea Salt, as much as it wit suck up, filter it, and affuse it
on the dissolved Luna; so will the fixed Salt unite with the volatile saline
Sulphur of the Spirit of Nitre, and make the Spirit quit its hold of the Silver
which it had dissolved, and make it precipitate to the bottom; which it will
also the better do, if you pour on a good quantity more of fair Water, whereby
the Spirit being weakened in all its parts, all the Particles of the Silver will
more easily and perfectly fall down.

3. Now here is one thing to be specially noted, that the Tincture of Luna is
colorless; for the more it contains of a Cerulean, or Azure color, the more
it has of Copper in it; and if it is perfectly free from Copper, it will be
perfectly free from that blew color, as Le Mort has well observed: Si Argentum
(says he) in Aqua Forti dissolvatur, quo liquor magis caerulescit, eo impurius
est Argentum: Luna enim per se coloris est expers.

4. Having drawn what quantity of Tincture you please out of the Calx of your
Silver, you may if you so please, reduce it into a Mass of Silver again, thus;
Tartar, Powder of Flints, A. i. Nitre iv. Charcole in Powder ij. put them all
into a red-hot Crucible, and let them fulminate a little; then pour them melted
into a hot Mortar: when they are cold; then take the said Calx of Silver, and
mix therewith, its equal weight of the aforesaid mixture, and put them into a
Crucible upon a melting Fire, so will the Calx resume its former Body of Silver.

5. The fixed Salts of Tartar and Nitre, are here absolutely necessary, to
hinder the volatility of the Salts of Tartar and Urine, wherewith the Calx of
Luna was digested, and to fix the parts of those Salts, which carry away some
part in evaporation; and the Powder of Flints and Coals serve to cause the
fulmination, and make the volatile Spirit of Nitre exhale.

6. Etmuller, Tom. 2. page 256. extracts the Tincture from the Calx of Luna
dissolved in AF. and calcined, with a Menstruum, or Liquor extracted by the
help of a strong Fire, from Sal Am. and Calx Vive, ana, or from Sal Armoniack
p. j. and Calx Vive p. ij. from this Tincture, the Menstruum being extracted,
with Tartarised S. V. the Lunar Tincture is at lengh exalted to its highest
perfection.

7. Neudorfferus extracts it from the Calx of Luna with this Menstruum: Oil of
Tartar per deliq. Sal Arm. an q. s. mix and distill gently in Ashes; so will you
have a subtle Spirit with a volatile Salt, which mixed with Tartarised S. V.
and well united, will extract a Tincture out of the said Lunar Calx: from this
Tincture, the Menstruum is abstracted till it is as thick it Honey; after which
fair Water is added; and by a fourth distillation the Salts of the Menstruum
are drawn forth: and from what remains with Tartariz'd S. V. the Tincture is
extracted, whose Dose is a gut. x. ad xx. Morning, Noon before Dinner, and at
Night against the Epilepsie, and other Diseases of the Head. It is an elegant
Preparation, but not the true Tincture.

8. Le Febure first makes an Amalgama of the Luna with Quicksilver, then
separates the Mercury with a little Salt, and a gradual Circulatory Fire,
grinds then the Calx on a Marble with Rainwater, and with it washes it from
the Salt, then dissolves it in three times of its weight of Spirit of Nitre,
after abstracts the Menstrum by distillation in Ashes to dryness, and perfectly
sweetens the Calx with distilled Rainwater, and dries it: which done, he
affuses thereon Spir. Veneris, so much as to ever-top it four inches, covers it
with a blind Head, l^^es the Juncture, and digests in a continual and gentle
heat for fifteen days; decants the Tincture which will be (says he) blew, and
thus goes on digesting and extracting, till the Menstruum takes no more color:
these Tinctures are mixed together, filtrated, and the Menstruum drawn off in
B. M. to the Consistence of a thick Syrup: upon this he affuses rectified S. V.
accuated with a sixteenth part of its weight of Volatile Salt of Urine, and
putting to a blind Head, luting the Juncture, he digests in Bal. Vap. for
twenty one days, and so extracts a Tincture; which (says he) contains the
Centeral Sulphur of Luna; from whence abstracting in B. M. the two thirds of
the Spirit, you have remaining the true Antepileptick Tincture or Essence,
which is the grand Specific against all Diseases of the Head, Brain, and Womb.
Dose a gut. ij. ad x.

9. The same Le Febure makes another Tincture of Luna, after this manner: First
he makes a Menstruum of pure Sal Arm. p. j. of Minium or Red Lead, p. ij. mix
and put them into a Retort in Sand, with a Receiver luted to it, the Retort
having a wide Neck, that if any sublimation should happen, the Spirit might yet
have a free passage, and not stop in the Neck, to hazard the breaking the
Retort: give a gradual fire, and continue it till the Vapors and Drops be over,
the Vessel being cooled, take this Spirit, and rectify it in Ashes for use.
Calx of Luna (made with Sp. Nitri, precipitated with salt Water, edulcorated
and dried) p. j. of the aforesaid recitified Spirit p. vj. digest in Bal Vap.
till it has drawn the Tincture, which decant; putting fresh rectified Spirit in
the place, continue the digestion, till you have a sufficient quantity of
Tincture: then put them all together, filtrate and abstract the Menstruum to
dryness: upon the bottoms affuse distilled Rainwater to cover it three inches
high, which abstract by distillation; affuse new digefied Rainwater, and
abstract in like manner, till the Lunar Powder has lost its ill Vrineus smell,
made by the Sal Arm. put this dried Feces or Powder into a Circulatory Vessel,
and affuse thereon the Alcohol of S. V. to overtop it three inches: stop
exactly, and digest in Bal. Vap. till the Spirit has drawn the Tincture, then
abstract the half of the Spirit, and keep the remainder for use.

10. This last Tincture, (says the Author) is the true Essence of Silver, and
very excellent against all Affections of the Brain, particularly against
Madness, or Maniacal Passion, Apoplexy, Epipilepsie, and Passie, given a gut.
j. ad viij. in some fit Liquor, as Spirits of Black Cherries, or of
Elder-berries.

11. Another Tincture of Le Febure's, more Philosophical than the former: Pure
fine Silver in very thin plates, q. v. which put in a Crucible, stratum super
stratum, with very dry Vitriolated Salt of Tartar (prepared with pure Salt of
Tartar, and rectified Oil of Vitriol): begin and end the lays with the Salt,
cover and lute the Crucible, and let it dry, and then calcine in a Circulatory
Fire for four hours: take then the Luna which will be calcined and brittle, and
of a Glass color: beat it to Powder, which put into a Cucurbit, affuse thereon
Spirit of Vinegar to overtop it three inches: digest in a moderate Ash heat,
for eight or ten days, to extract the Tincture, which decant, and affuse new
Spirit, decanting and affusing in like manner till you have enough: put all the
Tinctures together, and filtrate them. The Sediment in the bottom of the Vessel
of a yellowish color, is the remainder of the Silver, and its Earth divested
of its Sulphur. Put the filtrated Liquor into a Cucurbit, and in B. M. with a
gradual heat, draw off the Menstruum, till the Magma is of the Consistency of a
thick Syrup, upon which S. V. Tartarised, to over top it four inches: cover the
Cucurbit with its blind Head, and circulate in B. V. in Sawdust for forty days:
decant the pure Tincture impregnated with the Centeral Sulphur of Luna; and in
a Cucurbit in B. M. draw off two thirds of the Spirit, the remainder is the
Tincture of Luna.

12. The Virtues of this are the same with the former, but by him esteemed more
excellent; for it is an excellent Remedy to evacuate insensibly Water in a
Dropsy. Dose a gut. j. ad viij. in Broth, or White Wind, or in any proper
Vehicle.

13. Lastly, That tho we have declared the Tincture of pure Luna (if free from
all mixture of Venus) to be colorless, yet it many times contracts an
adventitious color to it, from the quality of the Menstruum used in the
Extraction: for the Luna, as fine Luna only, has a fixed Body, and a fixed
Mercury, with a white Sulphur, void of all Tincture, whether Blew or Green, yet
it is apt to admit of different appearances, from the differing Particles of
those Saline Menstruums, whether of Sal Arm. Niter, Aqua Fortis, or Vitriol,
etc. being after a new manner joined with it, in most Minute Particles.

XXIV. Tinctura Martis, Tincture of Mars or Iron.
Bate.] It is extracted from Flowers of Sal Arm sublimed from Mars, by the help
of the Alcohol of Wine, S. A. It has the same Virtues with the Tincture of Sal
Armoniack.

Salmon.] 1. How this Sal Arm. is to be sublimed from the Mars, you may see in
Our Pharm. Land. lib. 3. cap. 11. sect. 28. where you are to note, That you may
as well make use of Filings of Iron corroded with the Salt, as of the Martiated
Salt, sublimed from Gads of Iron; for that the Salt suffidently enough opens
the Body of the Mars, so as it may easily yield its Tincture to other
Menstruums.

2. Mynsicht has another Preparation, which differs something from this of our
Author, yet in the main is very like it. See it in Pharm. Land. lib. 4. cap. 7.
sect. 34. which is only the Body of Steel or Iron opened with the Sal Arm. and
extracted with S. V.

3. A Tincture of Mars from Maets, which is called Potable Mars: Niter, Tartar,
A. q. v. both in Powder, mix, and kindle it with a red hot Iron, stirring till
it is calcined: of this take lb j. fresh Urine lb iv. digest in Horse-dung
three Months; then in a Glass Cucurbit with its Alembick, and a very gentle
heat, draw off the Spirit, which will be watery and fiery, and serves
principally to draw the Tinctures from calcined Metals. This Spirit is able to
draw from the Crocus of Sol a yellow Tincture, which being freed from the same
Menstruum by distillation, till it comes to the form of an Oil, will then yield
its Tincture, by digestion to the Alcohol of S. V. with which it will unite,
whereby you have an Aurum Potabile of great Virtue; but this by the way.

4. After the same manner from Crocus Martis (made by the Vapors of Vinegar,
or otherwise) you may extract a Tincture with this Menstruum, which being
abstracted by distillation, you may then with the Alcohol of S. V. draw forth a
very fine Tincture of Mars, called by some Mars Potabilis. Dose a gut. vj. ad
xxx. in any proper Liquor.

5. Some make an Astringent Tincture thus: Scoria of Mars in Powder q. v. to
which affuse Spirit of Vinegar to overtop it four inches: digest fourteen or
twenty days, or till the Spirit has contracted a blood-red color, then decant,
it from the Feces, filter, and keep it for use. This is Astringent, and cures
Spitting of Blood, or other Fluxes of Blood, whether in the Bowels or Womb,
after an admirable manner. Dose j. ad ij.

6. An opening Tincture from Le Mort. Vitriol of Mars calcined to redness, q.
v. affuse thereon Sp. Aceti, so as to overtop it two inches: which digest till
it is of a blood-red color, decant, filter, evaporate to the Consistence of
Honey, and with tartariz'd S. V. extract all the Tincture, which S. V. abstract
in B. M. till only one third, which is the Tincture of Mars remains.

7. This Tincture of Mars is a Specific against the Worms in Children, the
Cachexia and Chlorosis in Maidens, and the Dropsy, and Suppression of the
Terms in Women. It opens Obstructions in Liver, Spleen, and Mesentery, and
cures Diseases thence arising. Dose a gut. iv. ad ij.

8. Rolfincius Art. Chym. lib. 4. sect. 8. art. 3. cap. 6. gives us from
Hartman a Tincture of Mars, made with Malaga Wine, thus: Filings of Mars
(rusted with moisture) lb ss. Malaga Wine lb j. mix and digest in a Sand heat,
for some days, so will the opening Virtue of Mars by degrees be transplanted
into the Wine. It opens all Tartarous Obstructions, and sweetly cures both the
Dropsy, and Yellow Jaundice; and is profitable against Tertian and Quartan
Agues. Dose a ij. ad ss. in the Morning Fasting, at Noon before Dinner, and
last at Night going to Bed.

9. In the next Chapter he makes the said Tincture in the same manner (which he
calls his Black Essence) with Wine-Vinegar: this, he says, has a singular
Virtue of opening, dissolving, inciding, and removing all Obstructions from
thick and melancholy Humors, purifying also the Blood and Juyces, Dose a ss.
ad j.

10. In the next Chapter he prepares it after the same nanner, by a gentle
digestion in the depurated Juice of Sorrel, or Wood Sorrel, p. vj. depurated
Juice of Tumerinds p j. or somemhat better, being mixed together, whose Virtues
and Use is like the former.

11. In the next Chapter he prepares it with recent Juice of Apples (but Cider
to my knowledge will do as well) in which digesting the Filings for some days,
and stirring the mixture often with a wooden stick, or Iron pin, he at length
decants the Tincture, filtrates, and keeps it for use: but he extracts
continually with fresh Juice, till he has Tincture enough, or the Sulphur is
wholly extracted, conjoyns the extractions, and abstracts the humidity to the
half, or better: and then to make it the more penetrating, he takes of this
Tincture vj. Anisated Spirit of Wine ij. Spirit of Scurvy Grass i. mixes them
together, digests and keeps it for use.

12. This Tincture (says he) is of great Virtues; it resolves thick and
feculent Humors, which are mixed with the Mass of Blood, expels those which are
acred and serous, and cures the Scurvy. Dose a i. ad ij. in Wine.

13. And in his twelfth Chapter following, he makes it of the Scoria of
Antimonial Regulus of Mars, thus: Scoria of Antimonial Regulus in fine Powder,
Sal Arm. A parts equales; by sublimamation raise the Salt into Flowers:
extract from the Caput Mort. in fine Powder with Rainwater, a Lixivium: this
Lixivium exbale, but very gently, not calcining it to dryness: upon this
Coagulum affuse S. V. so will it extract a yellow Tincture, which opens,
incides, and cures Hypochondriack Melancholy. Dose a ss. ad j.

14. From what has been said, it appears that the Body of Mars is apt to be
penetrated and dissolved, not only by corroding Spirits, and by volatile and
fixed Salts, but also by Dew, by Wine, and other Juices of Vegetables,
provided, that being in small filings, the Menstruums may be allowed a due time
to work upon, penetrate and dissolve the parts.

15. And tho neither Water nor Wine can totally dissolve Mars, nor operate upon
it with that force and celerity as corroding Salts and Spirits; yet
nevertheless they are able to dissolve a considerable quantity of its parts, of
which the taste of the Tincture by them extracted, is an evident demonstration.

16. Water with which Filings of Mars are penetrated, converts them into Rust,
which you may afterward dissolve in a larger quantity of Water, and change
into a yellow Tincture, of great use to open Obstructions.

17. But Filings being digested (though cold) for some weeks in White Wind or
Cider, in a double Glass well stopped, will extract a much better Tincture than
could ever be possible to be drawn by Water; for the Acid and Volatile Salt of
the Wine, will make a larger dissolution of the parts of the Mars, and so
thereby extract a stronger, deeper, and more effectual Tincture; which may be
given from one spoonful to two or three spoonfuls in the Morning fasting (to be
continued for many days) against all sorts of Obstructions of Liver, Spleen,
and Womb.

18. Or you may make a Syrup of it with fine Sugar, which may be given ab i. ad
iij. at a time, either alone by itself, or mixed in a Glass of White or Rhenish,
or Malaga Wine, or Cider. But to make the Tincture of Mars by these Menstruums,
it will be long, and that is the chief reason that we use other stronger
dissolvents, as is above declared.

19. The Prescript of our Author is exactly from Marggrave, whose words are
these: Batiturae Martis, Sal Ammoniacum in fine Powder, A. iv. mix, and from a
earthen Cucurbit on a naked Fire, a Glass head being applied, sublime for a
while what will ascend, so will the Mars be volatalized, and ascend with the
Sal Armoniack of a r^ddish yellow* color, which are commonly called, Flores
Salis Ammoniaci Martiales: and from these it is, that with S.V. he extracts his
Tincture.

20. Hofma^ in his Notes upon Schroderus, gives us this caution, That if we
would extract a Tincture of Mars with S. V. from Crocus Martis, that it will
not well succeed, unless the Crocus made by reverberation be first dissolved in
some Saline Menstruum, as Spirit of Salt, Spirit of Nitre, Spirit of
Verdigrise, or Venus, etc. and then reduced to a Crocus again.

21. Basil Valentine's Tincture of Mars, which you may see in my Pharm. Land.
lib. 3. cap. 4. sect. 20. made of Filings, red Spirit of Vitriol, and Spirit of
Vinegar, etc. is commended also by Hofman, (Messis medico Spagyrica, page 248.)
as a present Remedy against the Megrim, Epilepsie, Stone, internal Ulcers, to
cleanse them, and to purify the Blood. But, says he, Basil's Tincture may be
better made thus: Vitriol of Mars calcined to redness, or Caput Mort. thereof,
q. v. and with repeated affusions of Spirit of Vinegar, extracts all its saline
particles; these Extractions filtrate, and in an Alembick extract in B. M. to
the thickness of Honey: with this mix Sand, put all into a Glass Retort well
coated, and with a naked Fire (augmenting it by degrees) distill a most rubicund
Liquor. But by this Learned Man's favor, I take this to be rather a distilled
Spirit of Vinegar, than an extracted and digested Tincture of Mars.

22. It is evident then, in the Preparation of this Tincture, that acid Salts,
and such as are purely Salt, dissolve Mars with equal force; and that Mars thus
dissolved beforehand, and prepared, is more fit to be given into Man's Body,
than that which is Crude; forasmuch as the Crude Mars can do nothing in the
Stomach, till it, by its acid Juices has dissolved and opened it, so that the
Stomach and its Juices must first prepare and cure the Medicine, before the
Medicine can prepare the Humors, and cure the Disease.

23. So that by being first dissolved by an acid saline Salt, it is prepared
aforehand to remedy more effectually the Disorders of the Microcosm, produced
by Obstructions, and the Scorbutic taint of the Blood and Juices; and this
Tincture is so much the more able to open all the Obstructions of the Viscera,
and their Vessels, by reason of the Auxillary help it receives from its
Dissolvents, which not only open the Body of the Mars, but without diminishing
any of its good qualities; strengthens all the parts through which the said
Tincture passes, and thereby helps also to dissolve the obstructing matter, and
to carry it off by the ordinary ways.

24. The Tincture also which is extracted from the Crocus which Alcohol of S.
V. is a more particular Specific in the Dropsy, to comfort and strengthen the
Tone of the Bowels, weakened by the long continuance of the watery humor; for it
restores the Lymphatick Vessels, (now as it were relaxed) by which they let
loose the Serosities over the whole Habit of the Body.

25. Lastly, By putting Filings of Steel into an Iron Pot, Kettle, or Pan, and
moistening them with Vinegar, drying it over the Fire, and stirring it often
with an Iron Spatula, with several repetitions of this operation, the Body of
the Mars will be so well opened, that by being digested some days in Canary,
(stirring it once or twice a day) a very good Tincture will be extracted, which
may be given from one spoonful to two or three, every Morning fasting, against
the Greensickness in Virgins, and all the Obstructions of Womankind.

XXV, Tinctura Martis Aurea, The Golden colored Tincture of Mars.
Bate.] Crocus of Mars i. Spirit of Salt iv. infuse two days, often stirring of
it: then add rectified S. V. iv. digest warm for three or four days more, then
filter, and the Tincture will be of a Golden color. Dose ad gut. 20.

Salmon.] 1. The only difference between this and the former Tincture of Mars,
is chiefly, that this is made of the Crocus of Iron, these of the Filings, or
Filings rusted with Water, and the difference of the Saline Menstruum, this
being Spirit of Salt.

2. Zwelfer Mantissae Spagyricae, par. 1. cap. 3. makes it of the Crocus, with
Spirit of Venus, thus: Crocus Martis Cachecticus q. s. to which affuse Spirit
of Venus so much as may overtop it three or four inches: digest in a gentle
heat, till the Spirit is imbued of a rubicund color, which decant, and affuse
more fresh Spirit, and that so often as need shall require, till the Spirit
will be tinged: put all these tinged Spirits together, and in B. M. abstract to
an oleaginity. To the remaining thick Matter put Tartarized S. V. and extract a
Golden colored Tincture, which abstract in part again, leaving the yellow
Tincture at bottom.

3. This Golden Tincture of Mars made by either way, is a most excellent thing
against the Cachexia, Green Sickness in Virgins, and all Obstructions of the
Viscera, being taken a gut. xij. ad xxx. or more in any proper Liquor: but this
is peculiar to the Tincture of the Crocus, more than to the other Tinctures,
that they strengthen (in Dropsies, and other like Diseases) the Bowels more
than the other, as Hofman has observed: See 24. of the former Section.

4. Kesler makes this Tincture of the Crocus with Sal Armoniack; but
Quercetanus with A. F. the Preparations of which you may see in our Pharm.
Land. lib. 3. cap. 4. sect. 19, 22.

5. But in making this, and all other Preparations of this kind, you are to
take heed, that your acids be not too extreme; for so Etmuller, Tom. 2. page
mea 606. has advised, by reason that being so prepared and taken into the Body,
they little or nothing operate. Pari ratione (says he) Tincturae martiales
nimis acidi praeparetae intra corpus assumptae parum aut nihil operantur, si
vero cum alkalibus aut blandis acidulis praeparentur, suam merentur laudem.

6. Equal to this Tincture of the Crocus, Zwelfer, accounts his Tincture of the
Vitriol of Mars, which is prepared from the said Vitriol with Terra foliata
Tartari, which is indeed a Medicine of great use, and preferred before most
others.

7. There is a preparation of the Crocus with Sp. Vitrioli; but this, says
Hofman, is nothing but the Vitriol of Mars dissolved, and extracted with Spirit
of Wine, which opens Obstructions, and after an admirable manner relieves the
Hypochondriacal: but that which is made from the Vitriol of Mars, and Crystals
of Venus, ana, dissolved and inspissated to the thickness of Honey, and then
extracted with S. V. is accounted by Ettmuller, Pyrotechnia Rationalis, lib. 2.
sect. 1. cap. 2. page mea 606. as a most excellent thing against Affections of
the Reins, Bladder, and Urinary Parts. Dose a gut. x. ad xxx. or more, in a fit
Vehicle.

XXVI. Tinctura Martis Tartarisata, Tartarised Tincture of Mars.
Bate.] White Tartar in Powder lb ij. Rust of Mars lb j. mix and boil in an
Iron Vessel or Pot, with fair Water lb xvj. for twelve hours, stirring it
continually with an Iron Spatula, and adding as need requires more Water
boiling hot, at last, letting it settle, filter the Liquor, and exhale to a
convenient thickness, S. A. Dose j. ad iij.

Solmon.] 1. This is exactly Lemery's Process, which you may see expressed more
at large in our Doron Medicum. lib. 2. cap. 7. sect. 19. with some Observations
upon the making thereof, its Virtues, Uses, and Dose.

2. Nor does this differ from that of Charras, par. 3. lib. 3. cap. 53. of his
Pharmacopoeia, save in the matter of the Body of the Mars: for whereas Lemery
prescribes Rust of Mars to be taken, Charras takes the pure Filings, making it
after this manner:

3. Filings of Mars lb ss. white Tartar in fine Powder lb ij. put them into a
large Iron Pot, or Kettle, filled almost quite full of Water: boil, stirring
the Matter from time to time, to facilitate the dissolution of the Mars, adding
still more Water, as you see need, from its boiling away: continue this boiling
for ten or twelve hours, till you perceive the Filings are almost dissolved in
the Liquor* which will be of a brown color when filtred, the sediment being of
a whitish gray: whilst warm filter it, and it will be very clear, but of a
brown red, and a sour taste, like that of Cremor Tartari. The filtred Liquor
put into the Iron Kettle, being first washed clean, and evaporate the
superfluous humidity over a gentle Fire, till it becomes of the thickness of a
Syrup, which when cool* keep it in a Glass close stopped for use.

4. This is indeed a good Preparation of the Tartarized Tincture of Steel; but
if you follow Lemery's Method, to use Rust of Iron, instead of the bright
Filings, and so to proceed in all respects as is before declared, you will
sooner and more easily accomplish the Preparation; for by so much as the
Filings are rusted, by so much the Body of the Mars is opened beforehand, in
order to the work.

5. This Operation and Solution will be so much the more accelerated, if a
little Spirit of Nitre be added; or if the Filings and Tartar being mixed
together be gently sprinkled with Water, or moistened, and so exposed for some
Days to the Air; for by this means a greater plenty of the Tincture will be
had, and also more easily.

6. Le Mort makes it after this manner: Filings of Mars iij. Crystals of Tartar
in Powder viij. mix, moisten with Water, and expose them to the open Air for
some days, that they may be thoroughly rusted: then boil in an Iron Kettle for
four hours, with a sufficient quantity of Water, continually stirring the
matter with a Spatula, adding Water as the former boyls away, till it is
sufficiently colored: then evaporate to dryness, taking heed toward the end,
that the Matter be not burnt: of this Powder take iij. Rhenishwine x. mix and
digest in a gentle Bal. M. for two days: and being settled, decant the clear
Tincture for use.

7. It is a most egregious Deoppilative, and conduces in the highest degree for
the killing of Worms; and it momentarily opens all Obstructions of the Liver,
Spleen, and Mesentery, curing Dropsies, Jaundice, and the Green Sickness in
Virgins to a wonder. Dose a gut. x. ad xxx. or xl. or more, even a ij. ad iv.
or vj. according to the Age and Quality of the Patient, in some convenient
Vehicle, as the Bitter Draught, Canary, Ale, etc.

8. Where Note, That in the Preparation of this Tincture, a Phlegmatic
Menstruum, or a Spirit mixed with Phlegm, is required to extract its Tincture, so
that the Salts which promote the attenuation and dissolution of the Mars, may
be dissolved also; for which reason Le Mort has here chosen Wine, as the most
proper Medium and Expedient.

XXVII. * Tinctura Melampodii, Tincture of Black Hellebor.
Bate.] Roots of Black Hellebor iss. Calamus Aromaticus ij. Galangal ss.
Saffron iss. lesser Cardamoms iij. Canary, or Spanish Wine lb iv. mix and
digest in a Vessel close stopped for twenty hours in a warm place, afterward in
a cold place for four, five, or six days; then press out and filter. Dose two
spoonfuls at the time of going to Rest or Sleep, and three spoonfuls in the
Morning for some days. It is of signal use for Distempers of the Head,
Headaches, Melancholy, Asthma's, etc.

Salmon.] 1. This Preparation is well enough corrected, and may be of great use
for such as are Maniacal, or troubled with Madness, especially that kind of
Madness, which proceeds from a profound or deep Melancholy; for which, and all
Obstructions and Oppressions of the Spleen, Discontents, vain Fears, and
foolish Fantasies and Imaginations, it is a Specific, and a very excellent
thing.

2. They who cannot go to the Charge of Canary, or Sherry, may make it with our
Spiritus Intimus; and truly in my Opinion, though the Menstruum's much cheaper,
yet the Medicine therewith prepared will be much better, and more valuable; and
also more corrected for that the saline particles thereof, do in a great
measure bridle the violence of the Black Hellebor, and being thus made, you may
give it a ij. ad iv. or vj. in any fit Vehicle.

3. It is an excellent Remedy against most Diseases of the Head and Brain, as
Headachs, Megrims, Vertigo's, Apoplexies, Lethargies, Carus, Palsies, and
suchlike; for it attracts and carries forth the cold, moist, and Morbifick
Matter of the Disease, and leaves the parts disburthened of their load.

4. In like manner, it gives ease and help in most Diseases of the Breast and
Lungs, opening their Obstructions, and calling forth the offending Matter which
causes Coughs, Hoarsness, Wheezings, shortness of Breath, difficulty of
Breathing, stinking of the Breath, loathing of Food, sickness of Stomach, and
the like: and if the Stomach be foul it cleanses it, for he most part by a
gentle kind of Vomiting; by means of which, it carries off the slimy Mucilage,
and tartarous Matter which breeds both the Stone and Gout, and many times is
the cause of Gripings in the Guts, Vomitings, Convulsions, and other
Indispositions of the Viscera; for which purpose account this Medicine a Jewel.

XXVIII. * Tinctura Melissae, Tincture of Bawm.
Bate.] Red or Claretwine lb xvj. or two Gall. Bawm fresh gathered, M. viij.
distill in B. M. to dryness: to the distilled Water add fresh Bawm, a little
dried, M. viij. distill by an Alembick lb iv. into a Stone Receiver filled full
with fresh and choice Bawmleaves not bruised: afterward strain out, and
sweeten with double refined Sugar, hanging a Nodule in the same containing
Ambergrise, gr. v. Musk gr. i. It is a wonderful Cordial.

Salmon.] 1. There is first made a small Spirit of Bawm, by distilling of Wine
from Bawm, which will be yet better if it be cohobated upon the Feces, or other
fresh Bawm.

2. Or you may distill a Spirit from it, as we have taught you to distill Spirit
of Hyssop, cap. 2. sect. 16. of this Book afore-going; this ought to be
tartarised, or perfectly deflegmated, and then put upon well dried and choice
Bawm, which by a due digestion will extract its Tincture.

3. But you will have yet a much better Tincture, if you use in the place of
all these, Tincture of the Salt of Tartar, which as it more excellently opens
the Body of the Vegetable, and penetrates it, so in like manner it extracts a
more complete and pure Tincture.

4. But for the meaner sort of People, who cannot go to the charge, you may
extract a Tincture with our Spiritus Intimus, which will not be much inferior
to the former; but here is to be noted, that if the Sp. Intimus be used as a
Menstruum, there will be no need at all to dry the Bawm: and yet
notwithstanding, you shall have a Medicament of most admirable use.

5. It admirably chears the Heart, revives the Spirits, comforts Nature, and
restores weak and decayed Bodies, who want their natural heat, and are verging
toward a Consumption. It is also a Specific against Sadness, Melancholy, and
Pensiveness of Spirit; for it really recreates the Vital and Animal Spirits.
Dose a j. ad ij. iij. or iv.

XXIX. * Tinctura Mellis, Tincture of Honey.
Bate.] The best Honey lb ij. fine, white, and dry Sand, lb iij. Spirit of Wine
lb ij. digest warm, filter, and in B.M. evaporate to the Consistence of a
Syrup. It is given against the Phthisick, and for Nourishment to the Body. Dose
two or three spoonfuls.

Salmon.] 1. Le Mort in his Chymia Medico-Physica, page 178. makes it after
this manner: Virgin Honey vj. Spirit of Wine twice rectified from Carminatives
x. Salt of Tartar j. mix and digest together in B. M. for two or three days,
stirring the matter twice or thrice a day, that the Tincture may be of a
subrubid color, then separate the tinged Liquor from the Feces.

2. The reason why this Spirit is twice rectified from Carminatives is, that it
might be imbued or filled with their Volatile Salts and Spirits, and pure
Etherial Oils, by reason of which it will the better penetrate, and by the help
of the Salt of Tartar attenuate and incide the Matter, and so promote the
extraction of the Tincture.

3. And whereas the highest rectified Spirit is used, it is as well (with the
help of the Salt of Tartar) to give it a grateful Odor and Sapor, and so exalt
it to the height of goodness; for otherwise, if it be not well deflegmated, it
will make no extraction of the Tincture, but only a dissolution of the Body of
the Honey.

4. The same Le Mort makes it also thus: Pure Virgin Honey, fine dry Sand, A.
q. v. the highest rectified Spirit of Honey, q. s. mix, digest in a Cucurbit
having a broad bottom, till the Spirit is tinged of a Golden color: decant the
Tincture, and put fresh Spirit upon the Feces, so long till it will be no more
tinged: the Tinctures mix together, and abstract the Spirit (till a third only
remains) in B. M. so will you have the Tincture at bottom.

5. The Prescript in our Text is from Beguinus Tyrocinii Chymici. lib. 2. cap.
10. page 159. mea. But the best of the three Preparations is the First of Le
Mort's: and the Second would yet be better than that, were it but twice
rectified in like manner from Carminatives.

6. There is a Fourth Prescription not yet in Print, which is this: Virgin
Honey, put it into a Glass Body, and in B.M, draw off an Aqua Mellis, almost to
dryness: the Magma at bottom mix with equal quantities of fine, white, dry
Sand, and with Tincture of Salt of Tartar, made of ardent Spirit of Honey, or
with tartarised Spirit of Honey twice rectified from Carminatives, q.s. make a
Tincture in a gentle digestion: this much transcends any of the former
Preparations.

7. All these several Tinctures, tho one may be better than another, as to
their goodness or excellency, yet they have but one and the same Virtue, being
accounted by Authors as the highest Remedy against an Asthma, Phthisic, and an
inveterate Cough, as also Catarrhs, difficulty of Breathing, and other Diseases
of the Breast and Lungs.

8. Beguinus prescribes it rather to the truly Hectical, or such as are in deep
Consumptions, to be given daily, Morning and Evening, either alone, or in some
Pectoral Decoction.

9. The first of Le Mort's, besides all the former Virtues, wonderfully
discusses and expels Wind, cuts and expectorates tough Phlegm, and may be given
a j. ad ij. or more: his Second Tincture he gives from half a spoonful to a
spoonful: The Fourth Preparation a ss. ad iss. or ij. in any fit Vehicle.

XXX. Tinctura a Myrrhae, Tincture of Myrrh.
Bate.] The best Myrrh, fine Aloes, A. i. Alcohol of Spirit of Wine lb j. mix,
digest, and filter. It is an admirable Vulnerary, cleanses, astringes,
strengthens, consolidates, and hinders putrefaction, and prevents Gangreens.

Salmon.] 1. You ought to choose that Myrrh which is friable, light, and
everywhere of one color, which being broken has white lines (as it were)
running between, bitter in taste, well scented, and fat: that which is acred,
heavy, of an ill smell, and of a Pitch color, is naught.

2. The Alcohol of Spirit of Wine, if it be rectified from Carminatives, it
will yet be better, and make a more Absolute Tincture, of singular uses to the
purpose intended.

3. The chief intention of this Medicament is to prevent Gangreens, and hinder
putrefaction, or mortification in Incarnations, and to restore the Natural heat
almost extinct, by bathing with it hot, and fomenting the part therewith, and
laying over the Affect Cloths dipped in the same.

4. But besides all the things aforementioned, it is a most admirable thing
against the Plague, and all Pestilential and Malign Diseases, being given
inwardly, as well in a preventive as curative sense; and so may be given a j.
ad ij. in a Glass of Wine, first, and in the Morning fasting, before Dinner,
and last at Night going to Bed; and in Pestilential times it will be good
continually to smell to it, and besmear the Nostrils therewith, to resist the
malignity of the Pestilential Air.

5. You may reduce the Tincture into an Extract, by abstracting the Spirit to a
due consistency, of such a Body as it may be made up into Pills. Dole a ss. ad
j.

XXXI. Tinctura Oculorum Cancrorum, Tincture of Crabs Eyes.
Bate.] Crabs Eyes in fine Powder iv. the best Wine Vinegar xvj. mix, extract
the Tincture and filter. Dose two spoonfuls thrice a day, for the Curing of
Ulcers. K. D. E. A.

Salmon.] 1. This is from Sir Kenelm Digby, and is rather a dissolution of
Crabs Eyes than a Tincture; if you would extract the true Tincture, it must be
done in all respects as that of Coral, or Pearl.

2. The chief use of this Medicine is in the curing of old Ulcers and
Fistula's, which have been of long standing, and supposed to be past cure, in
which it is said to do wonders; but in my Opinion, it would be much better to
precipitate the dissolved Matter, and free it from the acidity of the Vinegar,
by many Lotions, and then it may be given a j. ad ij. But as to this, let
Experience guide you, for that the dissolution of the Oculi do better in some,
the precipitate in others.

3. Whether you give the dissolution, or the precipitate, this is always to be
understood, that they ought to be given in a proper Traumatick or Vulnerary
Liquor, which may also contribute to the same intention.

4. The way by which this Medicine works is, by a Diuretic property, carrying
off the Morbifick Matter, which feeds the Disease, by Urine, which it does very
sensibly, in such who continue the use of it for some time.

5. Hofman is of the Opinion, That if this Liquor be made, it ought to be done
with the Spirit of Venus, or Juice of Citrons; the one is a better Dissolver
than Vin^gar, and the other makes a better dissolution, and without doubt is to
be preferred before that made with Vinegar: but the Artist may use what likes
him best.

XXXII. Tinctura Odontalgica, A Tincture for the Toothache.
Bate.] Guajacum ij. Pyrethium j. Pomgranatepeels, Galls, Seeds of Henbane and
Stavesagree, A. ss. Cloves, Ginger, Long Pepper, Olibanum, A. ij. Opium,
Camphir, A. j. Indian Tobacco, Sage, Horse-Mint, A. ij. S.V. lb iij. mix,
digest, and filter or strain. A little of this is to be held warm in the Mouth,
and kept in for a while, then spit out, and reiterated. Vide Mynsicht.

Salmon.] 1. This is something altered from that of Mynsicht: the true Recipe
you have in our Pharm. Land. lib. 3. cap. 7. sect. 35. In this there is Ginger,
Pepper, Pomgranate-peels, Galls, Sage, Mint, Tobacco, and Camphir, more than in
that of Mynsicht: and in Mynsicht there are, Sassafras, Sarsaparilla,
Flea-wort, Origanum, Saffron, Alum, and Nitre, more than in this of our
Author's.

2. So that the main things in which they agree, are the Raspings of Guajacum,
the Pyrethrum, Seeds of Stavesacre, and Hen-bane, Cloves, and Opium, in which
six things the chief force of the Composition lies.

3. But if to these six things you add out of Our Author, the Pomgranate-peels,
Galls, Pepper, Ginger, Tobacco, and Camphir: and out of Mynsicht, the Saffron,
Alum, and Nitre, the Composition will be better than either of them, which you
may proportion thus:

4. Raspings of Guajacum ij. Pyrethrum, Alum, Nitre, Henbane-seeds, Stavesacre,
Galls, Pomgranate-peels, A. vj. Opium, Camphir, Saffron, A. iij. Cloves,
Pepper, Ginger, Tobacco, A. iss. Spirit of Wine, and Wine Vinegar A. lbiss.
mix, digest, and make a Tincture.

5. You are to hold it for a while in your Mouth, upon the place where the Pain
is, and after you have spit it out, you must reiterate it, which so long
continue till the Pain ceases; which it most effectually accomplishes, though
never so acute or sharp, and withal, prevents after an admirable manner the
farther afflux of Humors.

XXXIII. * Tinctura Paralytica, The Palsy Tincture.
Bate.] Ponder of Cantharides ij. Bishops-weed vj. Spirit of Wine rectified lb
iss. mix and extract a Tincture, which strain. It is to be rubbed upon the
Paralytick Members.

Salmon.] 1. The intention of this Medicine is only for friction, which is so
often to be repeated, till the part grows red, and in some thin skinned People,
is blistred, till Blisters arise you may use it twice a day, or oftener; for by
this means the Animal Spirits are attracted into the part, and the natural heat
is revived.

2. Whilst this is in use ontwardly, some thing proper to the same purpose
ought to be given inwardly, as the Tinctura in Paralysi Milii, which see in our
Pharm. Lend. lib. 4. cap. 7. sect. 36. and other things of like nature.

3. But the more excellent of this kind are the Potestates Rosmarini,
Lavendulae, or Limonum, made and repleat with the Volatile Salt of the same
Vegetables, of which fifty or sixty drops may be given at a time in a Glass of
Wine in the Morning fasting; as much an hour before Dinner; and the little
quantity at four in the Afternoon, giving at Night going to Bed ten or twelve
grains of the volatile Salt of Vipers, or Man's Skull, in some proper Vehicle.

XXXIV. Tinctura Perlarum, Tincture of Pearls.
Bate.] It is made in all respects as the Tincture of Coral.

Salmon.] 1. And therefore for the same reason sake, we shall chiefly reserve
you to the said Process, in Sect. 16. of this Chapter. Libavius's Tincture made
with Spirit of Salt, etc. you may see in our Pharm. Land. lib. 4. cap. 13. sect
99. And an Arcanum in Sect. 100. following it, made with Spirit of Vinegar.

2. But the Arcanum Perlarum, prepared with Spirit of Guajacum, is commended as
a much better preparation, which you may see in the place cited, Sect. 97.
which afterward according to Ettmuller's Opinion, Tom. 2. page 219. mea, is to
be extracted with perfectly deflegmated S. V. or rather with some appropriate
Spirit, rectified upon Salt of Tartar, and then (says he) it is a Medicament
not to be contemned.

3. Grulingius in his Florilegium, page 262. advises to dissolve them in Spirit
of Vinegar, digesting them in a Glass close stopped in Sand for some days, then
decanting the Spirit, and assusing new, and reiterating this work, till the
Pearls are all dissolved, and the Shells only as it were remain, then joining
the dissolutions, and in B. M. abstracting the Spirit to the consistency of an
Extract; which dissolve in some proper distilled Water, and filter: this whilst
liquid is his Essence or Tincture, but the humidity being abstracted, you have
the Magistery.

4. Yet when all is done, that made with Sprit of Guajacum, and after extracted
with some Specific Tartarised Spirit is much to be preferred, for all the
purposes it is intended for, being indeed, a Specific against the French Pox,
virulent Gonorrhea, malignant Whites, and all Defedations of that kind.

5. It is a Noble Cordial, excellent against Phrensies, Convulsions,
Contractions, and Resolutions of the Nerves; it comforts the Brain and Memory,
chears the Heart, preserves from Apoplexies and Vertigo's, dries and consumes
up evil Humors, and destroys the Tartarous Matter which breeds the Gout, Stone,
and pernicious Fevers.

6. It is a certain Preservative against the Palsy, an Arcanum against the
Epilepsie, helps the Palpitation of the Heart, and is good against Fainting and
Swooning Fits; strengthens the Child in the Womb, is a Preservative against the
Plague, and all sorts of Malign Fevers, increases, and renovates or restores
the Radical Moisture, and the Debilities of Old Age, keeping the Body sound and
in good health. Dose a gut. xx. ad xxx. or more, in Cinamon-water, Wine, or
other Specific Liquor.

XXXV. * Tinctura Piperis, Tincture of Pepper.
Bate.] It is made of Black Pepper, and the Alcohol of Wine, in the same manner
as Tincture of Cardamoms: and has the Virtues of Pepper.

Salmon.] 1. Something like this you may meet with in our Doron Medicum, lib.
2. cap. 7. sect. 14. only there is added a small proportion of Cardamons, viz.
Tartariz'd S. V. lb ij. Black Pepper in fine Powder vj. Cardamoms in Powder i.
mix and digest to a kind of redness, etc.

2. Now here is to be noted, That the best rectified S. V. extracts only an
Amber colored Tincture, unless it continues some Months in a very gentle
warmth upon the Feces; if so, the Tincture at length becomes of a reddish
color, like the color of Blood mixed with Water; and this I have only done
with Black Pepper; from White, or Long Pepper, tho I have digested never so
long, no such Tincture will arise, which makes me think that that Red color
proceeds from the Husk of the Black Pepper alone.

3. It is an excellent Stomatick, causes an Appetite and a good Digestion,
expels Wind admirably, and gives ease in the Colic, almost to a Miracle; it
provokes Urine and the Terms, hastens the Labor, and facilitates both Birth and
Afterbirth.

4. It is an excellent thing against Coughs, Colds, Catarrhs, Sore and Swelled
Throats, Tumors of the Amygdalae, etc. and is an approved thing against Pinings
and Consumptions, whether in Old or Young. Dose a j. ad iv. in a Glass of Ale:
it may seem tedious, and very hot indie Mouth and Throat at first: but as the
Medicament is without danger, so the assiduous use thereof takes away much of
the sense of its heat.

XXXVI. Tinctura Proprietatis, Tincture of Property.
Bate.] Best Aloes, choice Myrrh, ana, vj. Best English Saffron iv. being
reduced into Powder, add Oleum Tartari per deliquium ij. digest in a close
Vessel twenty four hours; then add of the Alcohol of S. V. xvj. digest and
filter, S. A. It has the same Virtues and Operations with Elixir Proprietatis
dulce.

Salmon.] 1. This is nothing but Elixir Proprietatis dulce, made with an
alcalized Salt, by which the Bodies of the Ingredients are not only better
opened, and the bitterness somewhat abated, but the Griping property of the
Aloes is in a good measure corrected.

2. It is good against the Plague, and all sorts of Malign and Pestilential
Fevers, strengthens and fortifies a weak Stomach, causes a good Digestion, and
an excellent Appetite.

3. It is a good Hysteric, provokes the Terms in Women, opens Obstructions of
the Womb, and is prevalent against the Green Sickness in Virgins, more
especially if in giving of it, you mix it with an equal part of the Tincture of
Mars, etc.

4. It is also a kind of Specific against all Oppressions of the Spirits,
Hypochondriack Melancholy, Obstructions of the Mesentery, and Hypogastrick
Diseases, being daily taken in the Morning fasting a ij. ad vj. or more, in a
Glass of Ale.

XXXVII. * Tinctura Rabarbari, Tincture of Rhubarb.
Bate.] The best Rhubarb, Liquorice A. ij. Raisons stoned no 60. Aniseeds j.
Sugar Candy vj. S. V. lb ij. digest S.A. and strain out. Dose two, three, or
four spoonfuls in a Morning, against Colic, and Gripings of the Guts, etc.
which it wonderfully cures.

Salmon.] 1. It ought to be digested eight or ten days in a very gentle heat,
shaking it two or three times a day, then letting it settle, decant the clear,
and keep it in a Bottle close stopped for use.

2. It purges gently, and collects and expels the acrid and tartarous humor,
which adhering to the Tunicles of the Viscera, causes violent Pains and
Gripings; for which purpose it is indeed a Specific, and one of the greatest
things in Nature against all the Weaknesses and Distempers of the Bowels,
especially if accompanied with painful Dejections.

3. It is also of singular use to purge such as are troubled with any simple
Gonorrhea, Weeping, or Glee^; as also the Whites in Women, Universals being
premised; for tho it gently purges, yet it strengthens admirably, and stops all
sorts of Fluxes, as Diarrhea's, Dysenteria's, and Lienteria's, to a wonder.

XXXVIII. * Tinctura Rosarum, Tincture of Roses.
Bate.] Red Roses exungulated ss. Fountain Water boiling hot lb iiss. Oil of
Vitriol gut. xxx. digest three hours, strain out, and to the clear add white
Sugar Candy in Powder iij. It refrigerates in Fevers, and comforts the Liver,
helps Concoction, stops Fluxes, as also the overflowing of the Terms. Dose ij.
ad iv.

Salmon.] 1. It is a pleasing Julep to allay the heat in Fevers, and quench
Thirst: and is of good use to be given in the Measles or Smallpox, if any Flux
be present or feared. It is also of approved success in the Plague, and all
Malign or Pestilential Fevers, destroying the Root of the Morbifick Cause.

2. It may also be given as a Cordial after this manner: Of this Tincture or
Julep iij. Aqua Mirabilis j. Tincture of Coral compound, gut. xij. mix for a
Draught against Faintings, Swoonings, Sickness at Stomach, Palpitation of the
Heart.

XXXIX. * Tinctura Sassafras, Tincture of Sassafras.
Bate.] Sassafras Bark iv. dried Sage ij. Nutmegs j. Cinnamon ss. Ambergrice ss.
extract the Tincture with S. V. lb ij. S. A. Dose two spoonfuls: it gives ease
in the Running Gout.

Salmon.] 1. The Tincture ought to be extracted with Tartarised S. V. at least,
for thereby the Sulphur of the Medicaments are the more firmly embraced; and it
will yet be more excellent, if it be done with Tincture of Salt of Tartar.

2. It is an excellent Cordial Medicament, fortifies Nature, strengthens the
Faculties, chears the Heart, revives the Spirits, sweetens the Juices, and
restores such as are in Consumptions.

3. It is an excellent thing against Rheumatisms, for which it seems to be
designed, as also against the Gout in Hands or Feet; and for such as have got
any Venereal Distemper, an Old or New Clap, King's Evil, Scurvy, and other like
Diseases in which there seems to be an universal taint of the Blood.

4. It is also used Dietetically for such as have the French Pox, or have
lately been fluxt, forasmuch as it brings the Blood to its pristine state and
rectitude. Dose two spoonfuls at a time, twice a day at least, in Ale, or other
convenient Vehicle.

5. Or you may give it thus: Decoction of Raisons stoned in Water, or in
Barleywater viij. of this Tincture iss. ad ij. mix for a Draught to be taken
twice or thrice a day.

XL. Tinctura Saturni, Tincture of Saturn or Lead.
Bate.] Thin Leaves of Lead, extract a Tincture with Spirit of Saturn
essentificated; filter and abstract S. A. It chiefly conduces to the cure of
Madness, Melancholy, Quartans, Phthisicks, etc. Dose a gut. j. ad v. etc.

Salmon.] 1. This is the same Medicine which is called Manna of Lead by
Schroder: and it is extracted with that Spirit of Saturn which is impregnated
with its Essence; which is not so well done, as some think, with the ardent
Spirit of Saturn, which is little more than the pure Sulphur of Vinegar or
Wine, and can but meanly operate upon the Crude Lead, as with the yellow, red,
or purple Liquor or Spirit, which some (tho improperly) call Oil of Lead.

2. But Tincture of Saturn is made almost as many other ways besides this, as
there are Authors, as Clossaeus's Tincture made with Red Lead; Kesler his
Tincture made with Crystals of Lead; and the Sulphur Saturni made with this
Tincture or Manna, from Kesler: all which see in our Pharm. Land. lib. 3. cap.
6. sect. 11, 12, 13, 14.

3. Tinctura Saturni Clossaei, from Cream of Lead: Spirit of Vinegar x. Sp.
Salis ij. Lead Ore in fine Powder j. mix, digest eight days in Ashes, or
longer, till the Spirit is sweet: filter the solution, and exhale; in the
exhaling, with a glass spoon take off the Snow-like Cream as it arises, till
you have enough, (the rest Crystalize for other uses) put this Cream into a
fixing Vessel, luted, in Ashes; first with a gentle Fire for forty days, taking
heed that it melt not, (as in the common Salt of Lead it is inevitable) try
then upon a red-hot Plate if it flow with fume; if so, continue the digestion
longer, till it fumes not, and begins to be yellow, then increase the Fire till
it be a Red Powder, from which with Tartarised S. V. make a Tincture. The
Virtues are the same with the former.

4. Another Tincture: Crystals of Lead, q.v. Rainwater eight times distilled,
q.s. mix and dissolve as much as may be: decant and distill the Liquor to
dryness: then add Spirit of Honey, circulated forty days, and distill, often
cohobating: abstract the Spirit of Honey, and to the remaining add the Common
Salt from the Caput Mort. of Lead: circulate eighty days with Alcohol of S. V.
then abstract the Spirit, so have you a Magistery, or red Tincture of Lead.
This is an excellent Medicine against Madness, Melancholy, Quartans,
Consumptions, and removes Obstructions of the Spleen, and Oppression of the
Hypochonders.

5. Basil's Tincture from the Galss of Lead: Lead by force of Fire, and
Bellows, on a Test is brought to a yellow Gum or Glass of an Orange color,
transparent and meltable, not fuming in the Fire, but a most noble Body, which
says Rhodian draws the Colors, Scents, and Tastes of all Metals to it, with a
conservation of their Vegetative Faculties. Mix the Calls of any Metal with this
Gum, and bring the mixture into a Smaltus or Enamel, which powder finely: from
which with Spirit of Vinegar extract a Tincture: if the Calx mixed therewith was
of Lead, the Tincture will be of a green yellow: if of Tin or Silver, a yellow
Tincture: if of Copper a dark green: if of Iron, a Blood color: if of Gold, a
Hyacinth color: the Solvent being abstracted, the remainder is distilled in a
Retort, so have you a white fume coming forth cold, which at length turns to
Oil of a Vegetative Nature.

6. Le Mort's Tinctura Saturni: Litharge of Gold viij. Spir. Aceti xx. mix and
digest together twenty four hours: decant the sweet Vinegar, and evaporate to
an oleaginity: to this put Rainwater viij. that it may be white like Milk; the
Milky Liquor decant gently, and again evaporate, this so often repeat with
Water, till the Odor of the Vinegar is plainly gone, and the Liquor comes
forth sweet: evaporate to the consistence of Honey ad rectified S. V. and by
digestion extract a Tincture, which will be most sweet. It cools, astringes,
extinguishes Lust, it allays all Inflammations whether internal or external: it
cures also malignant and eating Ulcers, suddenly cleansing, and healing them.

7. There is yet another Tincture of Saturn made with our Spiritus Vniversalis,
the making of which you may see in our Seplasium, lib: 1. cap. 21. sect. 6.
which is a thing of good use.

8. The Essentificated Spirit of Saturn: The pure yellow Oil of Saturn, and
digest it upon Crocus of Sol, or Calx of Gold well opened in a gentle heat of a
Bal. Vap. in a Circulatory Vessel Hermetically sealed for a hundred days, so
will it become as red as Blood, and with this fortified Spirit you may extract
a Tincture out of Crude Lead, as our Author teaches. It is a great Arcanum
against all Diseases of Head, Brain, and Heart, as Vertigo's, Apoplexies,
Frenzy, Madness, Headache, Megrim, Faintings, Swoonings, Palpitation, etc. Dose
a gut. ij. ad vj. in choice Canary, or some Antepileptick Water.

XLI. * Tinctura Scorbutica, Tincture against the Scurvy.
Bate.] Scurvy Grass, Watercresses A. M j. Horse-Radish-roots ij. Rhubarb iv.
Polypody of the Oak iss. Sena. i Spirit of Wine lb ij. mix, infuse two days,
then strain. Dose i. or ij. every Morning with Scurvygrass-Water: it is
mavelous how great a Relief it gives to Hydropick and Scorbutic People.

Salmon.] 1. Tho the Scurvygrass and Watercresses be used green, yet the Spirit
ought to be rectified or tartarised, for by that means it will be the stronger
(being mixed with the Phlegmatic part of the Herbs) to extract the Tinctures of
the other things; for otherwise, were it common Spirit, the Phlegm of the Herbs
would so much weaken it, that it would scarcely have force enough to reach the
internal saline and sulphurous Principles of the Ingredients.

2. You must also allow it a longer time to digest in, viz. seven or eight, or
ten days, the longer the better; unless you digest warm, (which I presume our
Author intends not) then indeed a much shorter time might suffice; the
Potential heat of the Menstruum being assisted with the actual heat of the
Fire, Vis unita fortior.

3. It is really a very good Cathartick to purge all such Bodies as abound with
ill Humors, or are gross and and pursie, and cannot move up and down without
puffing and blowing; as also for such as are Scrophulous, or troubled with the
King's Evil, or affected with stubborn and rebellious, or ill natured Sores,
old running Ulcers, or Fistula's, which are hard and difficult to heal.

4. It is also a singular thing for such as are troubled with old Coughs,
Colds, Asthma's, Shortness of Breath, Obstructions of the Lungs, Liver, Spleen,
Womb, or Ureters; and for all such as are troubled with the Scurvy, Dropsy, or
Gout, carrying forth the Wind, Water, and Tartarous Matter, both by Stool and
Urine.

5. And given by a prudent Hand, and in a due Dose, it perfectly cures the
Rickets in Children, and kills Worms, whether in the Stomach or Bowels.

XLII. * Tinctura Serpylli, Tincture of Wild Time, or Mother of Time.
Bate.] It is made of the Herb, whilst in Flower, being dried, and digested in
Tartarised S. V. in the same manner as we have taught to make Tincture of
Wormwood. It is Diuretic, Hysteric, Stomatick, etc. Dose a gut. v. ad xv.

Salmon.] 1. That is, you ought to take to every Ounce of the Herb, and its
Tops freed from the Stalks, six Ounces of Tartarised Spirit; less quantity of
the Spirit will not do well.

2. And tho Tartarised S. V. will draw a very good Tincture, yet it is certain
from real experience, that the Tincture of the Salt of Tartar will do it vastly
beyond the other, and make the Medicine much more powerful to all the purposes
it is intended for, and not much inferior to that, will the Tincture be, if
drawn with the Potestates Thymi, filled with the volatile Salt.

3. Besides what our Author ascribes to it as its Virtues, this we know
experimentally, that it is an excellent Cephalic, Neurotick, Arthritick,
Carminative, and Antiscorbutick; for it comforts the Head and Brain to a
wonder, is good against Megrims, Head-achs, Vertigo's, Lethargies, Apoplexies,
Palsies, Convulsions, Cramps, weakness of the Back, Nerves, and Joints: Gouts,
whether in Hands or Feet, and the most vehement Colicks: It is also of special
use to all such as are troubled with the Scurvy, in a cold and moist Habit of
Body, for weakness of the Stomach and Indigestion, Dose a gut. xv. ad xxx. or
xl. in a fit Vehicle.

XLIII. * Tinctura Stomachica, Stomach-Tincture.
Bate.] Species Hiera simple i. Cochinel j. Spirit of Wine lb ij. digest and
filter, S. A. Dose one, two, or three spoonfuls, before eating, against Crudity
and Pain of the Stomach. If iij. of it be exhibited half an hour before the Fit
of a Tertian, it most effectually cures it; and sometimes also it cures a
Quartan.

Salmon.] 1. This differs from the Tinctura Sacra, or Hierae aforegoing chiefly
in the Menstruum, which is, that this is extracted with Spirit of Wine, that
with Sherry-wine; and are therefore both good for the same Diseases: save, that
whereas this is extracted with the hotter Menstruum, it ought to be given to
the colder Constitution.

2. It is a good Stomatick, warming a cold Ventricle, and expelling Cold and
Phlegmatic Humors out of the Stomach and Guts, and carrying off the Crude
Humors, which cause Pains, Gripings, and the Colic.

3. And therefore for the same reason, it is an absolute and specific
Antiscorbutick and Antiarthritick, in all cold and moist Habits of Body, for
that it effectually carries off the scorbutic taint, and tartarous mucilage,
with which such People are afflicted, warming the Stomach and Bowels,
rectifying the Blood and Humors, and strengthening all the vitiated and weakened
parts.

XLIV. * Tinctura Succini, Tincture of Amber.
Bate.] White Amber in fine Powder iv. Alcohol of Wine lb j. mix and digest to
the solution of the Amber: decant, filter, and abstract the third part in B. M.
It is a Cephalic, Hysteric, Anticolick, Nervous Medicament, etc. Dose a j. ad
iij. etc.

Salmon.] 1. Several Men have taught the making of this Tincture, and not much
differing, among whom you have that of John Dan. Horstius, in our Pharm. Land.
lib. 2. cap. 7. sect. 46. But a more ample Process you have from Charras, in
our Doron Medicum, lib. 2. cap. 7. sect. 20. which agrees both with the Process
of Le Febure, and Lemery.

2. These differ little from this of our Author, save in the abstraction of the
Spirit or Menstruum, which they advise to be done to a half part; but our
Author more prudently, only to a third part, lest if too much of the Spirit
should be drawn off, the dissolved sulphurous particles of the Amber should
subside.

3. In this Operation you must be sure that the Amber be finely poudred, for
then the Menstruum will the better open its Body, and extract its Tincture,
which is nothing but the sulphurous or oily parts of the Amber, joined to, or
impregnating the S.V. or Sulphur of Wine.

4. A Liquor stronger, and not sulphurous, might perchance dissolve the Amber
in substance, and thereby make it the more impure, whereas a sulphurous
Menstruum only dissolves and extracts the more pure and sulphurous, or resinous
parts thereof, rendering the Tincture more subtle: for this is a Rule, To use
always a Menstruum of the same nature, with the nature of the substance you
would extract: So that if you would have a sulphurous Tincture, you ought to
use a sulphurous Menstruum; if a Saline, a Saline, etc.

5. And after the Method of Horstius aforementioned, Grulingius in his
Florilegium, par. 12. cap. 2. teaches the making of this Tincture, but as was
said before, 'twill be to the advantage of the Medicine, to abstract but only a
Third part of the Spirit.

6. Marggravius teaches to extract it with the fixed Liquor of Nitre, or
Glawber's Alcahest, which they call, The Universal Menstruum; this dissolves
the Particles of the Matter, which afterward by the affusion of the Alcohol of
Wine, and a gentle digestion, a new and essential Tincture is produced.

7. Maets and Ettmuller makes it thus: Amber in fine Powder q. v. Flowers of
Sal Armoniack, a half part: beat and mix them well together, upon which affuse
the Alcohol of S. V. so much as to overtop it four inches; which let stand in
digestion, till a yellow Tincture is extracted, which decant and keep for use.

8. This Tincture, says he, has the greatest success in the Colic, proceeding
from an acrid, austere, and pituitose Humors; and above all things in the
Obstructions of Women's Courses; as also in Deafness, occasioned from a Catarrh
or Flux of Humors to the Ears, being dropped into them, and and then stopped with a
little Lint or Cotton dipped in the same. Dose a gut. xv. ad xl.

9. Another way: Amber in fine Powder q. v. Oleum Tartari per deliquium, q. s.
let them stand in digestion twenty four hours; and then add Alcohol of S. V. so
much as to overtop them four inches; which digest together, till the Spirit
extracts a rubicund Tincture.

10. Or thus, according to Le Mort: S. V. (thrice rectified from Sal Armoniack)
iv. yellow Amber in subtle Powder i. mix and digest in B. M. for three days,
till the Tincture is extracted, and becomes clear, which keep in a Glass close
stopped for use.

11. The Sal Armoniack is here added, that the Spirit may thereby be accuated,
and made the more penetrating, to promote the dissolution of the Sulphur, and
unless the Spirit be rectified to the highest, you can do nothing; for if there
be any Phlegm in it, it leaves the Amber untouched. It is given to the most
delicate, against Hysteric Fits, and the Colic, and provokes Urine and Sweat.
Dose a gut. viij. ad ss.

12. Otherwise from the same Le Mort: S. V. tartarised q. v. and put thereto so
much of the best rectified Spirit of Salt, till the Effervescence ceases, let
it remain a while, till the Salt shall subside, and the Spirit becomes clear:
Fine Powder of yellow Amber i. of the former Menstruum so much as to overtop
it three or four inches; and digest four days, till the yellow Tincture is
extracted, which separate, affusing upon the Feces new Menstruum, so long till
the Amber will give no more Tincture.

13. This, they say, is a most egregious Diuretic; allays the Hysteric
Passion, breaks the Stones, kills Worms and cures the Plague: and may be given
a gut. x. ad j. in any Specific Vehicle.

14. But Paracelsus takes Amber in fine Powder, and affuses upon it his
Circulatum, which he digests in Ashes for some days, then abstracts and
cohobates, till the oily Tincture appears at bottom, Archidox. lib. 6. p. 1.

15. This, says Hoffman, ( Messis Medica Spagyric. page 344.) is a Noble
Medicament for the Head, Stomach, Bowels, and whole Nervous System, and a most
efficacious thing against the Stone.

16. And this Medicament, says Schroder, as it is only the purer fulphurous,
or resinous part of the Amber, separated from the grosser and more terrene by
solution, so it has not only the same, but stronger Virtues than the Amber
itself has.

17. Nor is this Tincture to be despised, tho it seems to be only a part of the
Amber dissolved: as Ettmuller rationally enough suggests, Tom. 2. page 548.
from the affusion of an Aqueous Body thereon, for that a kind of Cream in a
short time supernates upon it, (he rather approving that made by the Alcahest
of Glawber) for the impalpable Powder of Amber, ground upon a Porphiry, is of
excellent use, being given in Diseases of the Brain, Stomach, Bowels, Womb, and
Joints, and in losses of Blood, where there is a necessity of closing the
parts, as also in malignant Fevers, Pleurisies, and the like.

XLV. Tinctura Sulphuris, Tincture of Sulphur.
Bate.] Liver of Sulphur ij. S.V. lb j. digest and filter. You may also extract
it by the means of S. V. from the Balsam of Sulphur Terebinthinated, boiled or
abstracted to dryness in B. M. It is a very great Pectoral. Dose ad gr. xij.

Salmon. 1. The first way is exactly that which is taught by Le Mort in his
Chym. Medico-Physica, page 201. The Spirit, says he, will be colored of a
subrubid Tincture, which by digestion will become deeper and deeper. And it is
the same with that of Zwelfer, in Phar. Aug. Reformat. page 859. save that at
last be advises to free the Tincture from that great plenty of Spirits, which
is done by abstraction in B. M.

2. This Tincture, says Zwelfer, is a most excellent thing against contagious
Diseases, and the very Plague itself, from which it is a Preservative; it opens
Obstructions of the Viscera; and cures most Diseases of the Breast and Lungs, as
Coughs, Colds, Wheezings, shortness of Breath, difficulty of Breathing, Ulcers
of the Lungs, Consumptions, etc.

3. But Paracelsus, from a mixture of Salt of Tartar and Flores Sulphuris, with
Linseed-Oyl, extracts a Balsamic Tincture by boiling, it being cautiously to
be done, lest it runs over in the operation, and so hazards the firing of the
House. This is in color red like Blood.

4. This oily Tincture takes the place of a Balsam, and is profitable in all
Diseases of the Breast and Lungs: and tho Linseed-Oyl seems to be an abject
thing, and of small price, yet notwithstanding this Tincture is of great value,
for it is a Specific in Pleurisies, and a present cure for a Dysentery, or
Bloodyflux; it also strengthens the Joints, and is good against the Gout, being
anointed. In Clysters it cures Ulcers of the Guts.

5. Rolfincius in Art. Chym. lib. 4. sect. 1. art. 4. cap. 2. makes the
Tincture of Sulphur after this manner: Liver of Sulphur q. v. Caput Mort. of
Vitriol q. s. mix them to a more solid consistence; distill by Retort first a
milky Liquor, then a blood-red Oil. But this, with that learned Man's leave, is
rather a Spirit than a Tincture, and without doubt he only called it a Tincture
from its red color, not its way of making.

6. This, says he, cures a Phthisis, or Consumption of the Lungs, and purifies
the whole entire Body, even as Antimony purifies Gold: it cures also
Epilepsies, and other Diseases of the Brain.

7. The second way of our Author is Le Mort's Tinctura Diasulphuris, where he
advises the Balsam only to be made thick: Yet doubtless if it be abstracted to
dryness, the S. V. will extract a more excellent Tincture.

8. This, says he, is a most admirable Nephritick; it provokes the Terms,
gently loosens the Belly, cures all Diseases of the Breast and Lungs,
Phthisicks, Consumptions, and the like: if it be farther prepared with Honey,
it becomes an excellent Antiasthmatick. Dose a gut. x. ad xxx. See our Pharm.
Land. lib. 3. cap. 12. sect. 16. And Sect. 17. of the same, where you have two
other ways of preparing it, both from Clossaeus.

9. Beguinus makes it after the same manner as Le Mort. But his Commentator
will have it to be made thus: Flowers of Sulphur q. v. melt them in a Crucible;
but that they may not grow hard, put in guttatim Oil of Tartar per deliquium,
as much in weight as the Flowers, stir them together and mix, till they become
of a dark red, or Liver color: beat this to fine Powder in a very hot Mortar,
and immediately affuse thereon tartarised S. V. so will you have in a short
time a most rubicund Tincture.

10. It is indeed an excellent thing against the Phthysick, and heal Ulcers of
the Lungs, and to preserve from the Plague, and all contagious Diseases: it
prevails against Coughs Colds, Rheums, Hoarsness, Wheezing, and shortness of
Breath. Dose a gut. viij. ad xx.

11. The making of the Liver of Sulphur we shall show in its place, in the mean
season we must tell you, that as it is only composed of Flowers of Sulphur, and
Salt of Tartar, yet notwithstanding they very much differ in the Proportions of
the mixture. Some will have Sulphur p. ij. and Sale of Tartar p. j. Others, as
Ettmuller, Tom. 2. page 502. Flowers of Sulphur, Salt of Tartar, ana: And
Zwelfer, Mantissae Spagyricae, page 859. has it Fl. Sulphuris, p. j. Salt of
Tartar p. j. or rather, if you please, says he, p. ij. melt them gently
together in a Ladle, or Earthen Pan, continually stirring them till they are
mixed, and taking great care withal, that the Sulphur may not be inflamed.

12. This latter proportion, in my Opinion, is to be chosen, for that the Salt
of Tarter so divides the Particles of the Sulphur, and opens its Body; and
therefore the more of the Salt, the better it will perform its work.

13. Hofman's Tincture of Sulphur ( Messis Medico-Spagyric. page 341.) Choice
Sulphur Salt of Tartar, Nitre, ana, make them to flow in a Crucible, (but
without inflaming them) then putting them out into a hot Mortar, beat them into
a fine Powder, and with tartarised S. V. extract a rubicund Tincture.

14. The Volatile Tincture of Sulphur from the same Hofman: Sulphur in fine
Powder: Sal Armoniack, A. v. Calx Vive vj. mix and put them into a Retort, and
distill in Sand, with degrees of Fire; at length increase the heat, and there
will come forth the red volatile Tincture of Sulphur, of wonderful use against
the Plague, and in all Diseases of the Breast and Lungs, not sufficiently to be
praised. Dose a gut. vj. ad xx. where note, that it colors the Fingers black.

15. Le Febure's Tincture of Sulphur: Choice Sulphur iv. pure Nitre in fine
Powder lb j. mix, put them by spoonfuls into a Crucible, red fire hot on all
sides, renewing it after every detonation is past, till all is put in, and then
increasing the Fire till it be reduced into a red mass or lump, which powder in
a hot Mortar, put it into a Mattress affusing thereon Tartarised S. V. and
extract a Tincture as before directed, abstracting afterward half the
Menstruum.

16. It is a Specific against the Plague, Agues, Scurvy, Obstructions of the
Liver, and all Diseases of the Breast and Lungs. Dose a gut. iv. ad xij.

17. In our Text, our Author's second way is extracting it from the Balsam of
Sulphur, which we shall here a little explicate, and show the best way how the
Balsam may be abstracted to dryness: Put the Balsam into a Cucurbit p. j.
distilled Rainwater p. ij. and in B.M. distill, so will the Aetherial Spirit,
or Oil of Turpentine ascend with the Water, and leave the true Balsam of
Sulphur in the bottom, from which, with Alcohol of S. V. you may extract the
Tincture as our Author directs: and then at least to abstract one half, or two
thirds of the Spirit, leaving a thick Tincture at bottom.

18. This Tincture exceeds all the Balsams of Sulphur, because it is more open,
and more exalted through the help of the Tartariz'd Spirit, and as it is more
volatile, so also more able to penetrate into the inward recesses of the
afflicted parts; and therefore is used with a quite different success from that
of the said Balsams. Dose a gut. iv. ad xij. in some Pectoral, or Alexiterical
Syrup.

19. From this last Tincture of Sulphur you may make Crystals, and of them a
more excellent Tincture thus: The last mentioned Tincture, abstract the one
half of its humidity, and then set it into a cool Cellar, and it will
Crystallize. These Crystals contain in themselves all the Essential and Central
Virtues of the Sulphur. These Crystals from their Liquor, dissolve them in new
S. V. and abstract one third part by distillation: set them to crystallize
again, and dissolve again in new S. V. repeating this Crystallizing, and
dissolving till seven times is completed, so have you a true dry Tincture of
Sulphur, freed from all its evil smell and taste, and useful in all respects as
any of the former. Dose a g. iij. ad xij. in some fit Vehicle, Liquor, Lozenge,
Conserve, or Electuary.

XLVI. Tinctura Veneris, Tincture of Venus.
Bate.] It is extracted by the help of Spirit of Wine from the Flowers of
Verdigrise, p. j. Sal Armoniack p. ij. being mixed in a Crucible upon the Fire,
S. A. It is a most powerful Remedy against the Falling Sickness, Hysteric
Passion, etc. being given in any convenient Liquor.

Salmon.] 1. The Flowers of Verdigrise are made by subliming it with Sal
Armoniack, and edulcorated, or thus: Quicklime lb ij. Sal. Armoniack lb j.
mix, coagulate, mix with Bole Armon, p. iij. and distill an Aqua Fortis with
degrees of Fire, which rectify: of this Spirit take p. iv. Verdigrise, p. j.
mix and dissolve over a gentle heat, put in more, till only light black Feces
remain, abstract the Water, and what remains force in an open Fire in a Still,
so will the Verdigrise be elevated in Flowers, which are those to be made use
of in this preparation.

2. Hence it appears, that the Menstruum must be made of volatile urinous
Salts, which impregnate themselves with the Flowers of the Verdigrise, and
prepare them for sublimation: this is indeed precious.

3. And these Flowers may be used externally in Ointments, Plasters,
Cerecloths, etc. These Flowers are very carefully to be edulcorated with fair
warm Water, that no corrosiveness of the Menstruum may remain in them, or as
little as may be: Thus after all, the Flowers are only Verdigrise purified, and
the Body opened, and made more subtle, that it may yield its Sulphur the better
to the S. V.

4. Flowers by Precipitation from Hofman: Vitriol of Verdigrise q. v. Phlegm of
Vitriol, so much as to overtop it four inches, to which add an eighth part of
Spirit of Vitriol: digest warm for three days and nights, then filter and
precipitate with Oil of Tartar per deliquium, and sweeten the Flowers by many
ablutions in warm Water.

5. These Flowers will serve for this Tincture as well as the former: besides
which, they are an Arcanum against Worms; they move Vomiting; but being joined
with common Salt and Nitre, they are commended against Quotidian and Tertian
Agues. Dose of them a gr. iij. ad x. in some fit Vehicle.

6. As for this present Tincture, you may see the whole process more at large
in our Pharm. Land. lib. 3. cap. 3. sect. 14. and is given inwardly a gut. iv.
ad x. in any proper Vehicle.

7. Utendi modus: Spirit of Lavender, or of Limons j. Black-cherry, or Lilly
Convally-water iij. Syrup of Peony-flowers i. of this Tincture of Venus gr.
viij. or x. mix for a Dose, to be given in the Morning fasting, and last at
Night going to Bed: the Stomach being first cleansed with a Dose of Tartar
Emetick of Mynsicht. It prevails against the Epilepsie, and most other Diseases
of the Head.

8. Maets makes it thus: Verdigrise, or Copper calcined with Nitre to redness,
in subtle Powder j. of the best Nitre xij. put them into a strong Crucible, and
with degrees of a naked Fire calcine till it turns into Scoria's of a subvirid
or greenish blew color, upon which affuse the following Menstruum, which will
extract a most rubicund Tincture, which separate, add more of the same
Menstruum, digest and separate, which repeat so often till all the Tincture is
drawn forth: mix these extractions together, and abstract till they come to the
form or thickness of Oil: upon this put S.V. tartarised, which keep in a warm
digestion, till the sulphurous parts of the Verdigrise is united with the
Sulphur of the Spirit, which is a Specific against the Epilepsie, and most
other Diseases of the Head and Brain, and is given a gut. vj. ad x.

9. The Menstruum aforementioned is thus made: Nitrated Salt of Tartar lb j.
new made Urine lb iv. digest in Horse-dung for three months, then with a gentle
fire abstract the volatile Spirit, which is highly both watery and fiery, and is
able to extract the Tinctures from the Calces of all Metals. From the Crocus or
Calx of Sol, it extracts a yellow Tincture, which by distillation is freed from
the Menstruum, and brought to the form or body of an Oil; from which with
tartarised S.V. in a gentle digestion, you may extract the Tincture of Sol, the
Sulphur of the Spirit uniting itself with the Sulphur of the Gold, as we have
before declared, in the extraction of the Tincture of Verdigrise.

10. Marggrave's Tincture of Venus. Filings of Venus, or pure Verdigrise ss.
Spirit of Urine made by fermentation viij. or x. digest some days, so have you
an excellent Tincture for outward uses, tho some give it inwardly against
diverse fermentations of the Ventricle; outwardly it kills an ulcerated Cancer,
a Gangreen, and a Sphacelous, or Mortification.

11. The same thing may be done with the Calx of Venus calcined to redness;
this some give inwardly to destroy an acid ferment in the Stomach, but it is not
very safe: It is powerful against most Affects of the Eyes, as Rheums,
Inflammations, Blood-shot, Pearls, Films, etc. in curing old and inveterate
Ulcers, and in easing the pains of the Gout. It is also of use to Anatomists,
to demonstrate the Capillary Vessels.

XLVII. * Tinctura Virginiana, Tincture of Virginian Snake-root.
Bate.] Virginian Snake-root in fine Powder ij. Tincture of Salt of Tartar xvj.
extract a Tincture by digestion, S. A. It is an Alexiterick, Cardiack,
Sudorifick, Antiscorbutick, etc. Dose a j. ad iij. etc.

Salmon.] 1. The common way of making this Tincture is with rectified S. V. but
this of our Author is vastly to be preferred before that, for that the sharp
particles of the Sulphur of the Salt of Tartar, more effectually open the Body
of the Ingredient than simple S. V. can possibly do.

2. It resists Poison, cures the Bites of the Rattle-Snake (the most poisonous
of all living Creatures) Vipers, and other Serpents, the Biting of Mad Dogs,
the Malignity of the Plague, and of all other contagious or infectious Diseases.

3. And by reason of its subtilty and volatility, it powerfully provokes Sweat,
expelling all noxious Vapors from the Heart: It chears the Spirits, comforts
Nature, and prevails against Fainting and Swooning Fits, Palpitation of the
Heart, and other Diseases of the Precordia.

4. As it is also a high Alcaly, so it encounters and resists all Distempers
proceeding v from Acids, and the putrefaction of Humors, the chief of which
are the Scurvy, Gout, Surfeits, and such other as proceeds from a Tartarous
Mucilage: It is also commended against intermitting Fevers.

5. Modus Utendi. Of this Tincture iss. ad ij. Aquae Bezoartiae nost. ss.
Mint-water iv. Syrup of Clovegilliflowers i. mix for a Dose, the Patient being
in Bed, and covered warm, to sweat upon it.

XLVIII. Mars Potabilis, Potable Mars.
Bate.] Dissolve tartarised Chalybs, in fair Water filter coagulate, S. A. It
is most powerful against the Cachexia, Dropsy, Scurvy, Greensickness, Quartan
Agne, etc.

Salmon.] 1. This is a dry Tincture of Mars; but in my Opinion will be better
to be kept in a liquid form, which it may be, by adding to it a quarter part of
good Spirit of Wine, and so it will be always the more ready for use.

2. It opens all Obstructions of the Viscera, tho of never so long standing,
and cures many seeming incurable Diseases: yet it ought not to be given to
Bodies which are apt to be Costive, nor to have such as are troubled with a
Scirrhus, which is bred or produced from the highest Stypticity in Nature;
forasmuch, as tho this Medicine is extremely opening, yet it is of a vehement
Styptick quality, which is easily discerned by tasting it upon the Tongue.

3. It cures Fluxes of the Belly of all sorts, as Dysenteries, Lienteries, and
Diarrhea's, by Virtue of its Stypticity, strengthening and comforting all those
parts, making them able to resist, or withstand Diseases.

4. It has much the Nature, Properties, and Virtues of the Tinctura Martis
Tartarisata, at Sect. 26. aforegoing, and therefore to that I refer you. If
given in a solid or dry form, it may be given a ss. ad iss. or more: if in a
liquid form, according to our Advice, from one spoonful to three or four, in
any convenient Vehicle.

XLIX. Tinctura Absinthii, Tincture of Wormwood.
Salmon.] 1. Dried Tops of Common Wormwood freed from the Stalks v. Tincture of
Salt of Tartar, or Powers of Wormwood xxx. mix, digest for some days, and then
decant the Tincture, being of a reddish color.

2. It is highly Stomatick, and causes a good Appetite to Food, curing the
Scurvy in a cold and moist habit of Body, as also the Cachexia, and is a very
good thing in a Leucophlegmatia, after due Purging.

3. It comforts and strengthens all the inward parts; and restores such as are
in a Consumption, from Obstructions created through cold.

4. You may give it a gut. xv. ad xxv. or xxx. or more, in a Glass of Ale or
Wine; it will make it taste like Wormwood-Ale, or Wine, and be very grateful
and pleasing to the Stomach: The constant use of it for some time, warms the
whole Mass of Blood, preserves Health, and makes such as look sickly, pale and
wan, to be strong and lusty, and to have a ruddy and florid Countenance.

L. Tinctura Amara Composita, The Bitter Tincture compound.
Centaury the less v. Gentian iv. Flowers of Camomil iij. Wormwood ij. mix, and
with S. V. extract a Tincture.

Salmon.] 1. It ought to be extracted with Tartarised S. V. at least; but if
you do it with Tincture of the Salt of Tartar, it will be so much the better,
for that sulphurous Tincture is better able to unlock, or open the Bodies of
the Ingredients.

2. The next thing to be considered is the quantity of the Spirit or Tincture,
which ought to be used to this proportion of the Simples; you may well take
lbivss. with less you cannot well make the extraction; and with more, the
Tincture will be too weak unless it be designed to be given in a larger Dose.

3. It has all the Virtues of the former, wonderfully corroborating and
comforting all the internal parts: but it much more powerfully opens
Obstructions of the Viscera, and after an admirable manner gives ease in the
most profound or exquisite Colic.

4. It provokes Urine, and is said to be a Specific in curing Quotidian and
Tertian Agues, being given in a large Dose two hours or better before the Fit,
and always in the Morning fasting, an hour before Dinner, and an hour after
Supper at Night going to Bed.

5. It may be given a j. ad iij. in Ale or Wine. Or thus: Of this Tincture ij.
Aqua Mirabilis iij. Poppywater, Syrup of Citrons i. mix for a Dose. Or thus: Of
the Tincture ij. choice Canary, or Sherry iij. Syrup of Clovegilliflowers i.
mix for a Dose.

LI. Tinctura Ambraegriseae, Tincture of Ambergrise.
Salmon.] 1. Choice Ambergrise j. Musk, Civet, A. gr. xx. Spirit of Damask
Roses iij. Ashes of Bones in fine Powder iv. mix and grind all well together in
a Glass Mortar, till it comes to a pulp: then add Salt of Tartar ss. grind
again till they are well mixed; which done, put all into a Glass Mattress, and
affuse thereon Tincture of Salt of Tartar viij. stop it close up, and digest
for forty days, shaking it once a day, then decant the clear Tincture, and keep
it for use.

2. Here is to be noted, that the Civit, and burning Spirit of Roses are added,
the better to open the Bodies of the other Perfumes: and the Bone-ashes are
added to separate the Particles of the other Ingredients, that the Menstruum
may the better extract the Essence, or Sulphur of the Perfumes.

3. It is a great Cordial, revives all the Spirits, Natural, Vital, and Animal,
chears the Heart, recreates Nature, and restores in deep Consumptions. It
comforts the Brain beyond most other things in the World, and is a most
admirable Neurotick, strengthening and confirming the Nerves, and therefore a
most excellent thing against Convulsions and Palsies.

4. It is good against any Deliquium of the Mind, Fainting, and Swooning Fits,
Palpitation of the Heart, most cold Diseases of the Head, as Headaches,
Vertigo's, Megrims, Apoplexies, Lethargies, and the like, which may proceed
from Cold, Weakness, or Obstructions of the parts affected; but it ought not to
be given to Women subject to Hysteric Fits, or Vapors, because it is apt to
excite them in such Persons.

5. Dose a gut. vi. ad xij. or xv. in any convenient Cordial, thus: Of our Aqua
Bezoartica, or Aqua Mirabilis i. Syrup of Red Poppies, Syrup of Citrons, A.
iij. Borrage-water ij. of this Tincture gut. x. or xij. mix for a Dose, to be
given in a Fainting Fit, or Sickness at Heart. Or thus: Aq. Bezoartica j.
Tincture of Cochinele ss. Syrup of Citrons vj. simple Angelica-water ij. of
this Tincture gut x. mix for a Dose.

LII. Tinctura Ammoniaci, Tincture of Gum Ammoniacum.
Salmon.] 1. Gum Ammoniacum q. v. dissolve it in Water or Wine-Vinegar, by a
gentle boiling, and strain it through a thin cloth, and then inspissate to a
fit thickness. Of this inspissated Gum ij. Tartarised S. V. lb iij. mix, and
digest till the Body of the Spirit is full of the Rosin, then decant the
Tincture, and keep it for use.

2. It is dissolutive, digestive, and opening, dissolves tartarous Mucilage in
the Reins and Joints, as also in the Breast, Lungs, and Mesentery; opens
Obstructions both of Liver, Spleen, and Womb, and is particularly prevalent
against the Stone and Gout, a Scirrhus, Scrofula, and other hard Tumors of like
kind, being both inwardly used, and outwardly applied.

3. You may give it a j. ad ij. or more, thus: Of this Tincture ij. Tincture of
Juice of Liquorice iss. Succory, or Fumitory-water iv. mix for a Dose, to be
given in the Morning fasting, and last at Night going to Bed: Outwardly, bathe
it upon the Joints in a Gout, the Region of the Spleen and Hypochonders in
Hypochondriack Melancholy: the Belly in a vehement Colic, etc.

4. You may also make it thus: Of the prepared or inspissated Gum ij. Spiritus
Intimus lb iij. mix, digest, dissolve, and extract a Tincture, which decant and
keep for use.

5. This has all the Virtues of the former, but is much more powerful to open
and dissolve, clears the Breast and Lungs better, and more specifically
dissolves Tartar in the Reins or Bladder, and may be given a i. ad ij. mixed as
aforesaid with i. of Tincture of Liquorice, and a Glass of White, or
Rhenish-wine.

LIII. Tinctura Seminum Angelicae, i. Celestis, Tincture of Angelica-Seeds, or
the Heavenly Tincture.
Salmon.] 1. Angelica-Seeds bruised iss. Tincture of Salt of Tartar lb j. mix,
digest a week, then decant the clear and keep it for use.

2. It is Cordial, opens Obstructions, and prevails against Faintings,
Swoonings, Sickness at Heart, Palpitation, and suchlike: it strengthens and
fortifies the Stomach, sweetens the Blood and is good against all tartarous
Mucilage in the Lungs and Precordia, and is an excellent thing in good earnest
against the Scurvy, continual Fevers, as also putrid and contagious, not
excepting the Plague itself.

3. You may use it thus: Of this Tincture a gut. xx. ad xxx. Tincture of
Virginian Snake-root gut. xv. Aquae Bezoarticaenost, or in place thereof Aq.
Mirabilis ss. Aquae Lactis iv. Syrup of red Poppies iij. mix for a Dose, to be
given the sick being in a naked Bed, gently to sweat upon: but if the Smallpox
is feared, or the Plague is present, you may add to the Dose, gr. xij. of
Bezoar Minerale.

LIVE. Tinctura Antiemetica, vel Menthae, Tincture against Vomiting, or Tincture
of Mint.
Salmon.] 1. Mint gathered in its prime, and carefully dried i. Tartarised S.V.
or Spirit of Mint rectified; or Tincture of Salt of Tartar lb j. mix, digest
and extract a Tincture in seven days: decant the clear, and put into it as much
more dried Mint, digesting and extracting as before, after forty days decant
the clear Tincture, and keep it for use.

2. Here is to be noted, that that which is made with Tincture of Salt of
Tartar, much transcends that made with the Spirit of Mint, or simple tartarised
S. V. but that if you are obliged to use the said tartarised S. V. the
Menstruum will be much more effectual to the work, if it be a little accuated
with Oil or Spirit of Vitriol, Sulphur or Nitre; for by that means the Spirit
will become the more penetrative, and more effectually pervading the Matter,
will extract a more substantial Tincture.

3. It is a great Stomatick, and strengthens and fortifies all the Faculties of
the Stomach, tho never so much debilitated, it stops Vomiting upon the spot,
takes away loathing of Meat, and causes a good Appetite.

4. Some make it thus: Tartarised S. V. xij. depurated Juice of Limons vj. mix
them, then add the dried Mint iss. digest ten days, decant the clear, and add
more dried Mint iss. digest forty days, and decant the clear for use.

5. As to the length of the time of digestion, it is possible that the Tincture
may be extracted in much lesser time, and may be nearly as effectual in all
cases in which it is used, as if it had stood the full length of 40 days: But
this is certain, it will not be so pleasant to the Eye; for, being kept
digested upon the Feces 6 or 7 weeks or more, yea, 10 or 12 if need be, it
acquires a much greater Purity and Clarity, and withal, a kind of reddish
color, which without that long digestion upon the Feces it will never attain;
whereby it appears, that somewhat more of the internal Sulphur of the
Ingredients is attracted by such a long digestion, than if it had stood a
shorter time.

6. This is notoriously evident in the Tincture of Wormwood, which possibly is
the most florid Green in the World, and yet by a long digestion upon the dried
Herb, it wholly loses that green color, and acquires (to look through the
Glass) an intense or deep red: And the same red Tincture will black Pepper also
have, if it be long digested, etc.

LV. Tinctura Antepileptica, i. Lavendulae florum, Antepileptick Tincture, or
Tincture of Lavender Flowers.
Salmon.] 1. the best rectified Spirit of Lavender, or Tincture of Salt of
Tartar xiiij. dried Flowers of Lavender i. mix, digest 10 days, then decant the
clear from the feces; add more dried Lavender-flowers i digest again 10 days;
decant again, and lastly add again more Flowers i. digest 40 days, and keep the
Tincture for use.

2. Or you may extract the Tincture with Spiritus Intimus, adding of liquid or
roping Pitchlike Soot iij. so will it yet be more effectual to the purposes
intended, and may be given; as also the former a i. ad ii. or iiij. in any
convenient Vehicle.

3. Now here is one thing worthy of note, in the extraction of all these kinds
of Vegetable Tinctures: That if the Powder of the Herb be ground in a hot
Mortar with Salt of Tartar, and then immediately put into the Menstruum, the
Salt will so admirably open the Body of the Ingredients, that they will yield
their sulphurous Tincture, in a quarter of the time that it would be extracted
without the Salt; yea, as it were upon the spot; so powerful are saline Bodies
to open other Vegetable Substances.

4. Thus: dried Lavender-flowers, Salt of Tartar, or for want thereof Salt of
Potashes, A. i. grind all together in a hot Mortar to a Powder, then put it
into the Menstruum xiv. mix and digest, and repeat the Operation, so you will
have in a short time a deep red volatile Tincture of Lavender.

5. And if the dried Herbs be in like manner ground with volatile Sal Ammoniac,
and then put to extract in their proper menstruum, you will have a Tincture yet
much more effectual against the Falling Sickness, and most other Distempers of
the Brain.

6. All these various Tinctures of Lavender-flowers are accounted Specificks
against the Falling Sickness; Besides which, they are excellent Cephalicks, and
cure most Diseases of the Head, Brain, and Nerves, proceeding from a cold and
moist Cause, or from Obstructions, such as are Vertigoes, Megrims, Headachs,
Carus, Lethargies, Convulsions, Apoplexies, Palsies, Tremblings of the Limbs,
Numbness, and other like Distempers of those parts.

7. It is given thus: of any of these Tinctures a i. ad iij. Milk-wat. or
Peony-wat. iiij. Salt of Vipers, or Man's Skull, gr. iiij. Syrup of
Citron-peels vj. mix for a dose to be given in the morning fasting. Or thus: of
this Tincture a i. ad ij. or iij. Powers of Rosemary i. Water of Lilly-convally
or of Tile-flowers iiij. Syrup of Peony-flowers vj. mix for a Draught, to be
given in the morning as aforesaid, and to be repeated for a Month together, as
the Stomach, Age, Sex, and Necessity of the Distemper requires.

LVI. Tinctura Anticolica, i. Baccarum Juniperi; the Anticolick Tincture, or
Tincture of Juniper Berries.
Salmon.] 1. Juniper Berries well bruised, grains and all, Bone-ashes, ana,
iiij. best rectified Spirit of Juniper Berries, made by fermentation, or
Tincture of Salt of Tartar made therewith, lb j. iiij. mix, digest 20 days. and
then decant the clear for use.

2. Or you may make the Tincture thus: of the bruised Berries iij. Powers of
Juniper repleat with the volatile Salt, lb j. mix, digest 20 days, and then
decant the clear Tincture for use.

3. Or you may make it thus: of the bruised Berries iij. Spiritus Intimus lb j.
mix, digest 2 days, or more, then decant the pure Liquor, which is a saline
Tincture, and more powerful in opening all manner of Obstructions in the
Urinary parts.

4. All these Tinctures are of excellent use against the Stone, Sand, Gravel,
and all other Obstructions of tartarous matter in the Reins' Ureters, and
Bladder; for, it powerfully provokes Urine, and gives almost immediate Ease in
these Distempers, even in an exquisite Strangury from what cause soever; but,
in all these cases, the last Preparation is best, as aforesaid.

5. These Tinctures dispel Vapors in the Stomach, expel Wind, and are an
excellent thing against the Cholick, or Griping of the Guts, more especially if
it proceeds from Cold, Moisture, or eating of crude and unripe Fruits,
Surfeitings, or the like.

6. It preserves the Body in Health, as also from the Infection of the Plague,
Spotted Fever, Measles, Small Pox, or any other infectious and contagious
Disease: It is good against Poison, and the bitings of Serpents, or any other
venomous Creature, and is of very great efficacy in purifying of the Blood.

7. As to the Dose, Rolfincius says, it is given a ss. ad j. in some convenient
Liquor: But I know from Experience, that you may give the first Preparation a
j. ad ij; the second Preparation a ss. ad j; and the third Preparation a j. ad
iij. in any fit Vehicle, and it may be taken morning fasting for Prevention,
and last at night going to Bed, and at any other time, when a Fit of the
Cholick or Stone is present.

LVII. Tinctura Antihydropica, i. Jalapii; Tincture against the Dropsy, or
Tincture of Jalap.
Salmon.] 1. Aqua Vitae, or rectified Spirit of Wine, lb j. Jallap in fine
Powder ij. put them into a Mattress, which stop with another whose Neck enters
into it, lute well the Junctures with a wet Bladder, digest 3 or 4 days in a
gentle Sand-heat, till the Spirit has extracted a red Tincture; decant, filter,
and keep it for use.

2. It opens all Obstructions in the Bodies of Man, Woman, or Child, and is
generally used as a Specific for Dropsies and King's Evil, and to purge away
Serosities, for which purposes it is an extraordinary Medicine, and may be
given in any convenient Vehicle a j. ad iij. and in very strong Bodies, to iiij.

3. This Tincture consists of the Rosinous parts of the Jalap, or its gross
Sulphur, and therefore upon mixing it with the Vehicle you give it in, (if
liquid or aqueous as Wine, Posset Drink, etc.) it commonly turns them of a
milky color.

4. This Tincture is called in Grulingius ( Florileg. page 126.) Phalaja
Rhumelii, which, says he, is an Infusion of Jalap in Spirit of Wine; which
being afterward affused on Citron-peels, or Damask Roses, (or otherwise, if
some part of their Spirits be added to it) it becomes a most pleasant Purge.

5. The same Author has a Compound Tincture of Jalap, which he calls Elixir
Citri purgans, thus made: Jalap in powder iss. Carthamus Seeds j. Cambogia,
Rosinous Scammony, A. ss. Elixir Citri, q. s. ( or about xvi. mix and extract a
Tincture, to which add a little strong Cinnamon Water, and Syrup of the juice
of Citrons. Dose a ij. ad iij.

6. The said Elixir of Citrons is thus made: Cut off the yellow of the Peels or
Rind very thin, and take the remaining Pulp, put it into a Mattress, which close
well, and digest it in a Sand Furnace for 8 or 10 days, then take forth and
express the juice, which distill by a Cucurbit; so will you have a Spirit
emulating Spirit of Wine; put this Spirit upon the yellow Parings
aforementioned, so will you have a yellow Elixir, most pleasant both to the
Taste and Sight. This is the natural way, and what Grulingius teaches, but the
shorter way is to do it with Spirit of Wine.

7. All the purgative Virtue of the Jalap is extracted into this Tincture; and
from the feces an alcalious Salt may be made, but in a very small quantity.

8. What Reason may be given for this Tincture 's so powerfully purging watery
Humors, does not plainly appear, unless it is, that it contains more
acrimonious Particles than other Purgatives do; and so consequently may be more
powerful to open the Lymphatick Vessels, and to incide and attenuate the
Viscosities in humane Bodies, till they become like Water.

LVIII. Tinctura Antimelancholica, i. Ellebori utriusque: Tincture against
Melancholy, or of both Hellebors.
Salmon.] 1. bark of black Hellebor, and strings, white Hellebor A. iiij.
Aniseed-water viij. white wind lb iij. mix, digest in a close Vessel, and
extract a Tincture in two or three days, which decant, filter, and keep for use.

2. This is the best Tincture of the Hellebors, and in my Opinion much exceeds
that made with Spirit of Wine (though it may be done with that too) because it
consists of but little Resinious and many Aqueous parts, so that it was thought
fit to be done with a more phlegmatic Menstruum, for that being but a little
acuated with S. V. it is sufficient enough to penetrate and extract all its
vital and purging parts, and withal, to preserve it a considerable time without
corruption; whereas that which is wholly done with S. V. has but a small, or
almost no Cathartick Power with it, forasmuch as the Cathartick Aqueous
Particles of the Roots will not intimately join with the Sulphur of the S. V.

3. And in consideration that the Aqueous Menstruum ought to be acuated with a
sulphurous Spirit, that of Anniseed-water was made choice of, that it might in
some measure correct the malignity of the Hellebors, and obtund the Acrimony or
Sharpness of their Particles.

4. But Maets is of opinion, that all such things as abound with an Acrid and
Caustic Salt, ought to be prepared with Spirit of Nitre, Collect. Chymic. page
189. Now because Vegetable Substances dissolve not in it, like Animal
Substances, it may be good in this case to acuate the Spirit of Wine with the
Spirit of Nitre, and with that mixture to extract a Tincture after this manner.

5. Spirit of Wine lb ij. Spirit of Nitre lb j. mix, digest, and if you please
distill them together, cohobating twice: To this Spirit put of both the
Hellebors, Ana iiij. mix well, digest 8 or 10 days, and then decant the clear
Tincture.

6. The Title shows you its Virtues, or what it is chiefly good against, which
is Melancholy, and that whether Hypochondriack or Cerebrose, the which I have
had particular experience of, and have not only given it successfully to such
as have been Spleenetick, and vehemently troubled with Vapors from the
Hypochonders, but also to such as have been troubled with a mad Melancholy, and
even to such as have been afflicted with an exquisite Mania, or Madness it self.

7. The first Tincture may be given a j. ad ij. iij. or iiij, as the Sick is in
Age and Strength, but you ought to begin with the smaller Dose first, and
increase it gradually, as you see the strength of the Patient is able to bear
it: Of the other Tincture, prepared with S.V. acuated with Spirit of Niter, you
may give a ss ad j. or more, increasing the Dose gradually, as before directed.

8. But for the meaner sort of People, the Physician may prepare it with
Spiritus Intimus, which though it will be much cheaper, yet I do not think is
any whit inferior to either of the former Preparations: black and white
Hellebor in fine Powder, A. iiij. Spiritus Intimus lb iij. mix, digest 24 or 48
hours, let it settle, and decant the clear for use: Dose a j. ad iij, as the
Pati^nt is in Age and Strength.

9. But here is to be noted, that if the Patient is directly and downright mad,
you may venture to give a much larger Dose, than if otherwise; for it is found
by Experience, that upon such, Medicines operate not so naturally as upon
others, and upon some of them the very strongest will hardly operate at all.

LIX. Tinctura Antiscorbutica, i. Winterani; Tincture against the Scurvy; or
Tincture of Capt. Winter's Cinnamon.
Salmon] 1. Spirit of Winter' s Cinnamon, or Tartariz'd S. V. or Tincture of
Salt of Tartar lb iiij. Winter' s Cinnamon in Powder viij. mix, digest 10 or 20
days, shaking the Glass once a day, then letting it stand till it is clear,
decant it off, and keep it for use.

2. Or thus for the meaner sort of People, who cannot so well go to the price
of the former. Spiritus Intim. lb iiij, of the bark viij, or x. in Powder; mix,
digest 2 days, then decant the clear Tincture for use.

3. It is a good Medicine for the Stomach, and a Cure for all Stomach Diseases,
such as the Scurvy, Cachexia, etc. are; the Scurvy being of old called
Stomachacia, or the Stomach-Disease, by way of Eminency from its prime or chief
Cause. It strengthens a weak Stomach, expels Wind, and is of singular use for
all such as have taken any Surfeit, either by over-eating or drinking
themselves, or by over-heating themselves, through any violent Exercise.

4. It prevails against the Plague, and all sorts of Pestilential Fevers,
Poison, and the Bitings of Serpents, mad Dogs, or any other venomous Beast; and
is of known Excellency against all Diseases of the Head and Womb, proceeding
from Cold and Moisture; for it strengthens the Nerves, stops Defluxions, and
other like Diseases proceeding from Lethargies, Vertigoes, Apoplexies, Palsies,
Convulsions, Rheumatisms, and other Distempers afflicting those Parts.

5. It helps Concoction, takes away a stinking Breath, cures fainting and
swooning Fits, and Palpitation of the Heart, and is as good an Alexipharmick as
most is. Dose of those made with the Spirit of the Bark, or Tartarised S. V. a
j. ad ij. of that made with Tincture of Salt of Tartar a ss. ad j. of that made
with Spiritus Intimus, a j. ad iij. in any proper Vehicle.

LX. Tinctura Asae foetidae, Tincture of stinking Assa.
Salmon.] 1. fine Assa fetida, make it into small bits, ij. Bone-ashes iiij. or
more, mix them, and put them into a Glass Bottle, to which affuse Aqua vitae,
or common Spirit of Wine, lb ij. mix, digest warm, shaking the Bottle well
twice a day, for 10 or 12 days, then let it settle, and decant the clear for
use.

2. In this Preparation two things are to be noted; first, that the Bone-ashes
are added not for any particular Virtue which is in them, but only to make a
separation of the Particles of the Gum, so that the Spirit of Wine might the
better penetrate it to extract its Tincture.

3. Secondly, That Aqua vitae or Common Spirit of Wine is used, not rectified
Spirits, because the Gum consists of more Aqueous than Resinous parts, and so
being apt to be dissolved in a watery body, it was thought that common Spirit
would have power and strength enough, so to open it Body, as to make it yield
all its Tincture.

4. You may also make it without Spirit of Wine, with Spiritus Intimus, after
this manner: fine Assafetida in small bits ij. Boneashes iiij. Spiritus Intimus
lb ij. mix, digest warm for two days, then being settled, decant the clear, and
keep it for use.

5. This latter Preparation seems to be more than a Tincture, for that some of
the finest and most subtle Substance of the Gum is dissolved in the Menstruum:
However, it is not only cheaper than the former for the Poor, but also in many
cases much more effectual than that made with Spirit of Wine.

6. It is intended against Vapors, rising of the Lights, Fits of the Mother,
Obstructions of the Spleen, Peripneumony, and other Distempers of the Viscera;
and it is found by certain Experience, to be an excellent Traumatick and
Vulnerary, as also to be a Specific against the Epilepsy and other Diseases of
the Head, Brain, and Nerves.

7. But there is a compound Tincture, much more valuable than the former, and
so specific for the curing of the Epilepsy, that I have known several cured by
taking of it some few times. It is thus made: fine Assafoetida in small bits,
ropey or pitchlike Wood-soot, Ana ij. filings of Man's Scull, Castoreum, A. j.
volatile Salt of Man's Scull ij. Bone-ashes viij. Spirit of Wine lb iiij. mix,
digest 20 days, shaking the Glass once every day, then being settled, decant
the clear for use.

8. Than this, perhaps, there is not a better Medicine, nor more specific
against the Falling Sickness; it is given both in and out of the Paroxysm, as
also in the approaching thereof; Dose one or two spoonfuls at a time in Wine or
any convenient Vehicle; it ought to be given 10 or 15 days together, first in
the morning fasting, and last at night going to Bed, as also constantly upon
the approach of the Fit. It has done Cures beyond credit.

9. Now here is to be noted, that in making this compound Tincture, you may use
instead of Spirit of Wine Spiritus Intimus, in the same quantity and
proportion, for that in my opinion it can better open and penetrate the Bodies
of some of the Ingredients, than Spirit of Wine can, and for that reason draw a
more excellent and powerful Tincture; which I have often used against Vapors
and Suffocation of the Womb to admiration. Dose ad iij.

LXI. Tinctura Balsami Capivii, Tincture of the natural Balsam of Copayba.
Salmon.] 1. Tincture of Salt of Tartar, or for want of it the best tartarised
S.V. viij. Balsam. Capivii ij. mix, digest, dissolve, and extract a red
Tincture for use.

2. This is the simple Tincture, but there is a Compound made according to Le
Mort, after this manner: Balsam Copaybae ij. Gum Guajaci ss. Oil of Sassafras
j. Alcohol of S. V. x. mix, and digest together, with the addition of a little
Salt of Tartar, for 24 hours, so will you have an excellent Tincture.

3. In this latter Preparation the Oil of Sassafras is added not so much for
its Virtues sake, as to strengthen and fortify the Menstruum, that thereby it
may the more powerfully open the body of the Gums, and readily extract their
Tincture, which without this addition would not so easily be done.

4. This Tincture, whether Simple or Compound, is a notable Antivenereal, and a
Specific in the curing of the Gonorrhea, for which it is highly profitable, as
also in the cure of the French Pox itself.

5. It provokes Sweat powerfully, and prevails against all Diseases which are
to be cured by sweating: You may give either of them a gut xij. ad j. or iss.
in any convenient Liquor antivenerial; as for example, in a Decoction of
Guajacum against the French Pox.

LXII. Tinctura Balsami Tolutani, Tincture of the Balsam de Tolu.
Salmon.] 1. choice Balsam de Tolu iiij. Tincture of Salt of Tartar, or
tartarised S. V. lb ij. mix, digest, dissolve and extract a Tincture in a cool
place.

2. Or thus: Balsam of Tolu iiij. Oil of Sassafras ss. tartarised S. V. lb ij.
mix, and with the addition of Salt of Tartar in fine Powder ss. extract a fine
red Tincture in two days, which decant and keep for use.

3. It provokes Sweat powerfully, purifies the Blood, and is an excellent thing
against the Gonorrhea, or any Relics of the French Pox; it is good also
against the Scurvy, Dropsy, Gout, and Rheumatism, or running and wandering
Pains which afflict the Head, Nerves, Limbs, and Joints. Held in the Mouth, it
also cures the Toothache, and heals any Canker or Ulcer in the Mouth, though
never so rebellious. Dose a gut xx. ad 40. or 60. in any proper Vehicle.

4. This Tincture is only the Resinous parts of the Balsam dissolved in the
Spirit of Wine, which being mixed with any other Aqueous body, makes the mixture
to become troubled or thick, and of a milky or yellowish color. It is a
delicate fragrant Tincture, and of manifold Virtues.

5. Modus Vtendi. Aq. Lactis alexiteriae iiij. Syrup of red Poppies ss, of this
Tincture j. or more, mix for a draught, to sweat, or against a Gonorrhea.
Decoction of Guajacum vj. Syrup of red Poppies j. of this Tincture iss. mix for
a draught, against the Lues.

LXIII. Tinctura Benzoini, Tincture of Benjamin.
Salmon.] 1. the Benjamin Amygdaloides iiiss. powder it grossly, and put it into
a Mattress half empty, and affuse there on tartarised S. V. lb j. stop the
Vessel close, and set it in warm Horse-dung, or other proper heat, and leave it
in digestion for 14 days, after which decant the clear Tincture and filtrate
it, which keep in a Vial close stopped for use.

2. Or thus, according to Lemery: Benjamin iij. Storax ss. both in gross
Powder: Balsam of Peru ss. Spirit of Wine lb j. mix, digest a fortnight, and
extract a Tincture.

3. This Tincture is only a Dissolution of the Resin of the Benjamin, etc. in
Spirit of Wine, which when it is mixed with a great deal of Water, makes the
mixture white like Milk, because the Water weakens the S. V. and makes it quit
what it held up dissolved.

4. If you let this Milk settle, the Resin will precipitate to the bottom of
the Vessel, and the Water become clear.

5. The Storax, and the Balsam of Peru in the latter Prescript, are both added
chiefly to increase the fragrancy of the smell, and to add to the Luxury of the
Odor.

6. Authors prescribe this Tincture, to take away Spots in the Face, thus:
Damask-Rose-water iiij. of this Tincture j. mix them, and make Virgins milk; it
serves to wash with for the purpose aforesaid. Or thus: Orange-flower-water
iiij. of this Tincture j. Essence of Musk and Ambergrise, gut iiij. mix for a
Wash for the Face.

7. If this Tincture be made with a S. V. drawn off from Benjamin (before the
making of the Flowers) as it contains many of the sulphurous and volatile
Particles of the Benjamin; so will it also be more powerful and effectual to
all the purposes it is intended for; and this Tincture will contain all the
good parts of the Benjamin dissolved in it self; the Hetetogene Feces remaining
at bottom, and which the S. V. could not dissolve, being of little worth.

8. You may also be sure that the S. V. which rises first in the distillation
of the Benjamin (in making the Flowers) certainly carrys off some Particles of
the volatile Salt of the Resin, with which the sulphurous part has a singular
Congruity, as you may perceive by its fragrant Odor, and the good effects it
produces being taken inwardly.

9. This latter Tincture made with its proper Spirit, is a more excellent
Cosmetick than the former, for it cleanses, scowres, and penetrates better than
they.

10. Tincture of the Flowers of Benjamin, most excellent. Flowers of Benjamin,
or the Buttery substance thereof, j. Spirit of Benjamin (made in distilling
before the Flowers arise) lb j. mix* digest, and extract a famous Tincture,
more pure and subtle, and which will operate in a less quantity than the simple
Tincture of Benjamin made with Spirit of Wine.

11. And as there is no doubt to be made, but that the Flowers of Benjamin are
the most essential part of it; so the Tincture made thereof must be more pure
and subtle, and so more powerful to subtilize bad Humors, and to expel them
through the Pores of the Skin, being taken inwardly a j. ad ij. in some proper
Water or Decoction, especially when you would provoke Sweating.

12. These Tinctures also cut, loosen, and expel by the ordinary ways tartarous
viscous and thick Humors lodging in the Breast and Lungs, given in the
proportional Dose aforesaid, in some proper pectoral Tincture, Infusion, or
Decoction, etc.

13. Le Mort says, That the Tincture of Benjamin has many great Virtues, and is
to be preferred before the simple Flowers thereof: It discusses Wind, helps
Difficulty of Breathing, cures an inveterate Cough, and the Pains of the
Colic, Asthma, etc. being given in Syrup of Colsfoot, or of Hyssop, or some
pectoral Water. Outwardly, it helps Defedations of the Skin, redness of the
Eyes, and all external Inflammations of what kind soever.

LXIV. Tinctura Callefaciens, i. Caryophylorum, Tincture heating, or Tincture
of Cloves.
Salmon.] 1. Choice Cloves j. in gross Powder, Alcohol of Spirit of Cloves xij.
mix, digest in a Mattress, close stopped for 10 or 20 days (the longer the better)
so will you have a pure red Tincture, which decant and keep for use.

2. Or thus: Cloves in Powder j. Tincture of Salt of Tartar lb j. mix, digest,
and 01 make a Tincture as aforesaid.

3. The Alcoholiz'd Spirit of Cloves is thus made: Cloves bruised viij. Spirit
of Wine lb iiij. mix, digest 20 days, add Damask-rose-water lb vj. digest 3 or
4 days more, then put all into a Copper Vesica tinned within, fitting to it its
Head, Worm, and Receiver, and with a very gentle fire draw off the first pint
and half of Spirit, which is the highest, and fit for making our Tincture of
Cloves: Continue the Fire, and draw off lb ij. more of the Spirit, which keep
as common Spirit of Cloves, and after that draw off the Clove-water, which keep
for use, as a Vehicle for any Cordial, or to take this present Tincture of
Cloves in.

4. Or you may make the said Alcholiz'd Spirit thus: Cloves bruised viij.
Spirit of Wine tartarised lb ij. mix, digest 2 or 3 days, and with a Glass
Vesica, in B. M. having its Head, Worm, and Receiver, draw off the Spirit to
dryness, and cohobate, for the purpose aforesaid of making the Tincture.

5. It is a noble Cordial Tincture, Cephalic, Neurotick, Hysteric, and
Arthritick, and is given with good success in all cold and moist Diseases of
the Head, Brain, Nerves, Stomach, Heart, Womb, and Joints: It cures Headachs,
Cramps, Aches, Pains, Numbness, and Palsies in what part soever: It discusses
Wind, eases the Colic, comforts a cold Stomach, and warms the Bowels, being
chilled by a long and excoriating Flux: It promotes the circulation of the
Blood, and helps such as are troubled with the Scurvy.

6. It is given a gut xij. ad 20, 30, or 40, as the occasion may be, in any
proper Infusion, Decoction, or Water, or in a Glass of Ale, Beer, or Wine, etc.
mixed with equal quantities of Wine, and held in the Mouth, it eases the Pain
proceeding from rotten Teeth.

LXV. Tinctura calida major, i. Cardamomi, The greater hot Tincture, or
Tincture of Cardamoms.
Salmon.] 1. Cardamoms greater and lesser beaten into Powder, A. j. Salt of
Tartar vj. grind them together into a small Powder, in a hot Iron Mortar, put
all into a Glass Mattress, and affuse thereon rectified Spirit of Cardamoms, or
Tincture of Salt of Tartar lb ij. mix, digest close stopped for 20 days, then
decant the clear Tincture for use.

2. Or thus: Cardamoms greater and lesser in Powder, A. j. Tartarised S. V.
acuated with Spirit of Nitre or Sulphur lb ij. mix, digest 10 days, and then
decant the clear Tincture for use.

3. Or thus: Cardamoms great and less in Powder A. j. Spiritus Intimus xvj.
mix, digest 2 days in a gentle heat, shaking the Glass twice a day, then being
settled, decant the clear Tincture for use.

4. This Tincture is Cephalic, Neurotick, Cardiack, Uterine, and Arthritick:
It discusses Wind, gives Ease in the Colic, and all sorts of Gripings and
Tortions of the Guts; it is an excellent Stomatick, comforting and warming a
cold and moist Stomach; it eases Pains of the Womb, provokes the Terms,
facilitates the Birth, and brings away both dead Child and Afterbirth.

5. Outwardly used, by bathing, it gives Ease in Pains of the Head, Nerves, and
Joints, proceeding from a cold Cause, and is found to be of singular use
against the Gout, and other Rheumatick Pains, Palsies, Numbness, and Weakness
of any Part or Parts.

6. If it be given to suppress Wind or Vapors, or against the Colic that made
with S. V. acuated with Spirit of Nitre, is most specific, if you will believe
the Judgment of the famous Sylvius de le Boe; and truly, daily Experience it
self says the same thing. It strengthens the Stomach also, and causes a good
Digestion.

7. Dose of the first is a j. ad ij. of the second a ss. ad j. several times a
day; of the last j. ad iij. but they ought to be given in some proper or
appropriate Vehicle, respecting the Disease and Party afflicted.

LXVI. Tinctura Calida minor, i. Cubebarum; The lesser hot Tincture, or
Tincture of Cubebs.
Salmon.] 1. Cubebs in fine Powder ij. rectified Spirit of Cubebs, or Tincture
of Salt of Tartar lb iss. put all into a Bolt-head, which stop close, and
digest only in a Bloodwarm heat for 12 or 14 days, shaking the Bottle once a
day; then being settled, decant the clear, filter, and keep it for use.

2. Where note, that if the Tincture is made with Spirit of Cubebs, you ought
to grind the Powder of the Cubebs in a very hot Iron Mortar with Salt of Tartar
calcined to blewness j. till they are well mixed, and them to put the mixture
into the Glass Mattress, and so to affuse thereon the rectified Spirit of
Cubebs, freed from all its Phlegm: By this means you will have a very deep
Tincture from the Ingredients, and that in half the time you would otherwise
get it.

3. It is a most excellent Tincture to strengthen the Head, Stomach, and
Bowels; it attenuates Diseases, and expels Wind admirably, comforting and
warming a cold and moist Constitution. This Tincture corroborates the Womb, and
takes away the accidental Causes of Barrenness, warming, comforting. and
strengthening the Instruments of Generation.

4. You may give it thus: Black-cherry-water iiij. Essence of Motherwort ss.
Tincture of Cubes j. ad ij. Syrup of Peony-flowers vj. 01 mix for a Draught, to
be given Morning and Evening for a Month together. Or thus: Choice Tent or
Alicant iiij. or vj. of this Tincture a j. ad ij. mix for a Draught, to be
given as aforesaid.

LXVII. Tinctura Carannae, Tincture of Gum Caranna.
Salmon.] 1. Gum Caranna ij. in Powder, tartari-sed S. V. xx. put all into a
Bolt-head, which close well up, and digest for 10 days in a warm place, then
decant the clear Tincture, and keep it for use in a Glass close stopped.

2. Or thus: Gum Caranna in fine Powder ij. Bone-ashes in Powder vj. mix them,
and put them into a Bottle-head, on which affuse Spiritus Intimus lb ij. stop
up the Vessel well, and digest in a gentle heat 8 or 10 days, so will you have
a high-colour'd saline Tincture of the Gum of great Virtue.

3. It is Cephalic, Neurotick, Uterin and Arthritick; is good against
Rheumatisms, or running and wandering Pains, stops Defluxions of Humors to any
part, and allays Pains in the Brain, Nerves, Womb, and Joints; it strengthens
the Stomach, and stops fluxes of Humors upon the Eyes, fluxes of the Bowels,
and other Weaknesses of the Viscera.

4. Outwardly, by bathing therewith it strengthens the Nerves and Joints, eases
Pains and Aches from a cold cause, prevails against the Gout, digests,
dissolves, softens and discusses Tumors, cures Convulsions, and prevents
Gangreens.

5. But if you intend it against any Distemper of the Womb, and parts adjacent,
my Advice is, that you use the latter Preparation, made with Spiritus Intimus,
for that more powerfully opens Obstructions, and better corrects the acidity
and other Vices of the Blood and Humors.

6. The Dose of the first is a ss. ad j. of the second a j. ad ij. or more:
Your best way of taking it, will be to mix it with an ounce of some proper
Syrup, and then with 3 or 4 ounces of some fit Water, and so to drink it up, at
night going to Bed, and early in the morning fasting, and to continue the use
of it for some days.

7. Take for example sake of this Tincture, prepared with S. V. j. Syrup of
Peony j. mix them well together, then add 4 ounces of Black-cherry-water, mix
for a Dose for the Brain and Nerves. Milk-water iiij. Syrup of Citron-peels j.
of the latter Tincture ij. mix for a Dose against Distempers of the Womb.

LXVIII. Tinctura Cardiaca, i. Croci, The Cordial Tincture, or Tincture of
Saffron.
Salmon.] 1. Choice English Saffron j. Spirit of Saffron, or Tincture of Salt
of Tartar lb j. mix, put them into a Bolt-head, and digest in a very gentle
heat, close stopped for 7 or 8 days, then decant the clear Tincture, and keep it
for use.

2. It is a great Cordial and of singular use against Fainting, and swooning
Fits, Palpitation of the Heart, Sickness at Stomach, and other like Distempers;
it also is good against the Measles, Smallpox, and all sorts of malign
Fevers; opens Obstructions of the Womb, provokes the Terms, and is prevalent
to facilitate the Birth, and expel the Afterbirth.

3. Modus Utendi. Borrage or Angelica-water iij. Syrup of Citron-peels ss.
Tincture of Saffron j. mix for a Cordial, to give in fainting and swooning
Fits. Persicary-water iiij. Syrup of Motherwort or Pennyroyal j. of this
Tincture ij. mix for a Dose, to facilitate the Birth or bring away the
Afterbirth. Treacle-water ij. Syrup of Clovegilliflowers vj. of this Tincture
iss. mix for a Dose, to give in a malignant Fever, or expel the Measles or
Smallpox.

4. But in this latter Case, viz. against all sorts of malign or pestilential
Fevers, the compound Tincture is much better; which is thus made: Choice
English Saffron, choice Cochenele in fine Powder, A. j. Cloves, Nutmegs, A. ij.
Spirit of Saffron, or Tincture of Salt of Tartar 40. mix, digest in a Bolt-head
close stopped, for 7 or 8 days, then decant the clear Tincture, and keep it for
use.

5. Besides its Use against malign and pestilential Diseases, it is much a
greater Cordial than the former, strengthens the Head, Brain, Nerves, Stomach,
Heart, and all the Spirits, natural, vital, and animal. Dose is the same with
that, viz. a ss. ad j. or ij. according as the Exigency of the Patient requires.

LXIX. Tinctura Cardiaca restringens, i. Cinnamomi; The strengthening Cordial
Tincture; or Tincture of Cinnamon.
Salmon.] 1. Spirit of Cinnamon rectified, or Tincture of Salt of Tartar lb ij.
Cinnamon bruised iiij. put all into a large Bolt-head, which close well, digest
only in a warm place for 7 days, shaking the Glass once a day, then decant the
clear, and keep it for use.

2. Now here is to be noted, that you must be careful to choose good Cinnamon,
which is such as has a sharp and biting Taste, and therefore in the choice of
it you are obliged to bite and taste every Stick of it, if you will not be
cheated; for lb j. of that which is sharp and biting upon the Tongue, is worth
an hundred weight of that which is tastless, for that without all doubt has
already past the Hands of the Artist, and the pure Oil and volatile Spirit have
already been extracted from it by Distillation in much Water: This being dried,
is afterward mixed with some more that is really good, that so they may both be
put off together.

3. Although it is my Opinion, that this Tincture is better to be kept, as it
is here now made, yet some make this following addition: They take
Damask-Rosewater lb ij. dissolve therein white Sugarcandy, or double refined
Sugar viij. of which they make a Syrup, the which they add to the aforemade
Tincture, hanging therein a Nodule of Musk and Ambergrise, ana gr. iij. and so
keep it in a cool and quiet place till it is fine.

4. It is a great strengthening Cordial, of extraordinary use in Comsumptions,
weakness of the Stomach, want of Digestion, and other Distempers of the
Viscera, proceeding from Weakness. It is prevalent against Fainting-fits,
Swooning, Sickness at Heart, and other Diseases of the Precordia, as Straitness
of the Breast, Swelling of the Stomach, Palpitation, etc. Dose a j. ad ij. of
the pure simple Tincture, in any proper Vehicle.

5. Utendi Modus. Black-cherry-water iiij. Syrup of Clovegilliflowers, or of
Citron-peels, or of the juice of Citrons vj. of this simple and pure Tincture
iss. Tincture of Cochenele ss. mix for a Cordial-draught, against fainting
Fits, Swoonings, Palpitation, Sickness at Heart, etc.

6. That if you shall be pleased to dulcifie it, it will be good to do it in
two several Vessels, one half in one Glass, and the other half in another, that
the one part of it may be without the Musk and Ambergrise, as the more fit
Medicine to be given to such Women as are troubled with Vapors, or are subject
to Hysteric Fits.

7. This Tincture will be yet much more powerful if to the whole quantity you
add j. of the pure Oil, made by distillation in much Water; and then it will be
an admirable thing to stop Vomiting, being given in Mint-water with Syrup of
Quinces.

LXX Tinctura Castorei; Tincture of Castor.
Salmon.] 1. Fresh Castor j. Salt of Tartar ij. rectified S. V. iij. cut the
Castoreum into thin slices, and bruise it, to which put the Salt of Tartar and
S. V. digest all together for three days, till the Spirit is become of a
Rubicund color; decant the tinged Spirit from the Feces, and letting it settle
for three or four hours, decant it again from the subsiding Feces, being most
pure, and keep it for use. Thus Le Mort.

2. Where note, that in making those kinds of Tinctures, which are in some
measure ungrateful to the Smell, as is the Tincture of Castor, or those which
are ungrateful to the Taste, as is the Elixir Proprietatis, etc. The longer you
keep them in a gentle digestion, the more grateful they become, because a
gentle heat better unites the Particles, and brings them to a state of
maturity. So the Elixir Proprietatis now mentioned, will have not only a much
greater Energie, but also a much more grateful Odor and Taste, being digested
for a month or two, than if it had stood only a day or two.

3. It is Uterine and Antihysterick, of notable use against Vapors, and all
sorts of Fits whatsoever: It cures the Palsy and Apoplexy, Epilepsy, Vertigo,
Lethargy, and most other Diseases of the Head and Brain; but it will be much
more efficacious, if to every ounce you add j. of Spirit of Sal Armoniack: It
is of singular use for such as are troubled with the Gout, if to every ounce
thereof j. of Camphir, and iij. of Spirit of Sal Armoniack be added, and a
Cloth dipped therein be applied to the place affected. Dose a gut. x. ad xxx. in
a fit Vehicle.

4. Now, in my Opinion, the quantity of Spirit of Wine in the aforegoing Recipe
is too little for the quantity of Castor, and so I suppose the Author himself
thought, when he advised the following Proportions, which are more fit. Castor
in Powder j. Salt of Tartar in Powder vj. rectified S. V. v. mix and digest 3
or 4 days in B. M. so have you the greatest Hysteric, Antepileptick,
Neurotick, and Cephalic that is.

5. There is another Preparation hereof in our Pharm. Land. lib. 4. cap. 7.
sect. 2. where the Tincture is made with Spirit of Castor, which is indeed much
better than simple Spirit of Wine: And this may be done either with the
Compound Spirit in our Pharm. Land. lib. 4. cap. 1. sect. 5. or with the simple
Spirit of Castor, which you may make thus.

6. Spiritus Castorei simplex: Castor thin sliced and bruised iiij. rectified
S. V. lb iiij. mix, digest 20 or 28 days, then distill in a Glass body in B. M.
and cohobate three or four times, distilling to dryness, and keep the Spirit
for use, But there is another Spirit of Castor, which is the acid Spirit made
with the Oil by Retort, which is not at all intended here.

7. An ordinary cheap Tincture of Castor for poor People, yet of great virtue
and use: choice Castoreum in fine powder ij. Spiritus Intimus viij. mix, digest
6 or 7 days, shaking the Vessel once or twice a day, then letting it stand till
it grows fine, decant the clear Tincture for use. It has all the Virtues of the
former, and in my opinion more powerful against Hysteric Passions: Dose a j.
ad iij. in any proper Hysteric Water: It is also good against Poison, the
bitings of Serpents, mad Dogs, or any other venomous Creature, Defluxions upon
the Joints, Colic, Deafness, etc.

8. Tincture of Castor from Charras. Having taken off the unctuous part, which
lies in the Bladder by it self, at the top of the Bags, you must take the
fleshy Substance, which cut or bruise, putting it in a proportional Mattress,
affuse thereon well rectified S. V. so much as to overtop it four inches; stop
well the Mattress, and place it on a Bakers Oven, or in a Sand Furnace of equal
heat, digesting for 15 days, 3 weeks, or longer, shaking the Ingredients from
time to time, so will the Spirit be impregnated of a high color, containing
the most essential parts of the Castor, which strain and squeeze out, keeping
the Tincture in a Glass close stopped for use.

9. This Tincture, by the addition of Salt of Tartar, would have been much
deeper; for though the Salt adds not much to the Spirit, yet it does two things
at once, viz. it helps to open the body of the Castor, whereby it the more
easily yields its Tincture: And it dephlegmates more perfectly the S. V.
whereby it is the more able to extract the essential parts of the Mixed.

10. Thus have you a Tincture truly noble, and of great prevalency against all
cold Diseases of the Head, Brain, Nerves, and Stomach, but more particularly
for those of the Womb. Dose a ss. ad ij. and sometimes says Charras to ss.
mixing it with some proper Cephalic, Neurotick, Stomatick, or Hysteric Water.

LXXI. Tinctura Cephalica, i. Salviae; Tincture for the Head, or Tincture of
Sage.
Salmon.] 1. choice Red Sage purely dried iiij. Salt of Tartar ij. grind them
to powder in a very hot Iron Mortar, put them into a Mattress, and add
Tartarised S. V. or Spirit of Sage, or Tincture of Salt of Tartar lb ij. mix,
digest, close stopped 15, 20 or 30 days, then decant the clear Tincture, and keep
it for use.

2. For poor People you may make it thus: dried Sage iiij. Spiritus Intimus lb
iss- mix, digest, close stopped in a gentle heat for 2 or 3 days, then decant the
clear, and keep it for use.

3. The Virtues of both are much alike, but the latter more powerfully opens
Obstructions, and provokes the Terms in Women. They are appropriated to the
Head, and therefore called the Cephalic or head Tincture, being indeed of
excellent use for most cold and moist Diseases of the Head, Brain, and Nerves,
as Lethargies, Sleepiness, Dullness, Heaviness, Vertigo, Apoplexy, Epilepsy,
Palsies, Convulsions, Cramps, Melancholy, and the Gout: It comforts a cold and
moist Womb, and is said to remove the Cause of Barrenness in Women.

4. It is prevalent against Diseases of the Stomach, Breast and Lungs, drys up
Catarrhs, and hinders Defluxions of Rheum upon any part, is good against
Coughs, Colds, Stoppages in the Head, and, in a word, after an admirable manner
strengthens all the inward parts, and the whole frame of the Body; it resists
Poison, and is of good use against all putrid, malign, and pestilential
Fevers. Dose of the first, a ss. ad j. of the second a j. ad ij. in some
proper Vehicle.

5. Outwardly bathed upon any part, it eases Pains from a cold and moist Cause,
as also Gouts and Sciatica's, discusses Tumors, takes away Inflammations, and
prevents Gangreens, restores Contusions, and strengthens the Head, Stomach,
Nerves, and Joints. Bathed upon the lower parts of the Belly after Travail, it
prevents or gives ease in After-pains.

LXXII. Tinctura Cephalica Cordialis, i. Nucis Moschatae; The Cephalic Cordial
Tincture, or Tincture of Nutmegs.
Salmon.] 1. Nutmegs grated into powder iiij. Salt of Tartar ij. in a hot Iron
Mortar, grind them well, then add rectified Spirit of Nutmegs lb j. or so much
as in a large Glass Mattress, or long Bolt-head, may overtop the Ingredients
about two or three inches: Mix, stop close up, and digest in a very good heat
14 or 15 days, the longer the better, shaking the Glass at least once or twice
a day; then letting it grow fine, decant the clear Tincture for use.

2. The Title shows you its general Virtues, for which it is a most excellent
thing: It is indeed a Remedy against all cold and moist Diseases of the Head,
Brain, Nerves, and Womb, such a one, as has scarcely any Vegetable Preparation
of this kind which does exceed it; I think, scarcely equal it: It fortifies the
Heart and Brain, and is a singular good thing against Headachs, Megrims,
Vertigo's, Epilepsies, Palsies, Apoplexies, Lethargies, Convulsions, Cramps,
Numbness, loss of Memory, Smelling, Tasting, and weakness or dullness of the
Sight.

3. And as it is truly a Cordial, so after an admirable manner it gives relief
in fainting and swooning Fits, Pain at the Stomach, Sickness at Heart,
Palpitation, and other like Diseases of those parts: It strengthens and
comforts the Womb, and makes it fruitful, or fit for Generation, and is a
singular thing against the Scurvy in a cold habit of Body.

4. Outwardly bathed upon any part, it comforts and strengthens it, eases Pains
and Aches from a cold Cause, as also scorbutic and anthritick Pains, helps
Contusions, discusses Swellings, and prevents Gangreens. Dose a ss. ad iss.

LXXIII. Tinctura contra Iliacum, i. Chamaemeli florum; Tincture against the
Iliack Passion, or of Camomil Flowers.
Salmon.] 1. Camomil Flowers dried ij. Salt of Tartar i. grind them together in
a hot Iron Mortar, then put them into a large Glass Mattress, or Bolthead with a
long neck, upon which immediately affuse rectified Spirit of Camomil, or
Tincture of Salt of Tartar lb iss. mix. stop close the neck or mouth of the
Glass and digest in a very gentle heat, for 10, 20, or 30 days, then being
fine, decant the clear Tincture, and keep it for use.

2. Or rather thus: of the aforesaid Tincture, being very fine, lb j. pure
Camphir ij. mix and dissolve, and keep it for use: It is double in Power and
Efficacy to the former.

3. This yet is commended above them all: of our Spiritus Anticolicus (in
Phylaxa Medicinae, lib. 1. cap. 12. sect. 1.) lbij. Camomil-flowers dried iiij.
Camphir in bits iiij. mix, dissolve, digest, and extract; after 12 or 14 days
decant the clear Tincture, and keep it in a Glass close stopped for use.

4. They have all one and the same Virtues, save that one is more powerful than
another; the second is more powerful than the first, and the third much more
powerful than the second.

5. They are all Specificks in the Colic, and ease the Pain thereof upon the
spot; they strengthen the Stomach, help Digestion, fortify the Head, Brain,
and Nerves, discuss Wind, and are most admirable against the Plague, or any
malign or pestilential Fever, more especially the last of them.

6. The two first taken by the Mouth, and also drawn up by the Nostrils, or put
into the Ears, ease Pains in the Head and Teeth, and are good against all
Bruises in any part, Palsies, Apoplexies, Cramps, Convulsions, Gouts, old Aches
and Pains, Palpitations of the Heart, Faintings, Swoonings, etc. being inwardly
given, and outwardly bathed upon the parts afflicted.

7. For inward Uses, take the last of them, as being most powerful; but for
outward Uses the first, or rather the second, because the third of them is not
so fit to be applied outwardly, by reason of the Spiritus Anticolicus; yet in
any extremity of the Gout you may make bold with it.

8. The Dose of the first is about one spoonful and half, of the second a
spoonful, of the third from 16 to 30, 40, or 50 drops, or more, in a Glass of
Ale, Wine, or other proper Vehicle.

9. There is one thing more also to be noted in the use of this third
Preparation against the Colic, viz. That if the Colic has been inveterate and
rebellious, or of any long standing, this Medicine must be constantly used some
days or weeks, and in all the Liquor the Sick drinks, by which means, and that
only, the malignity of the Disease will be overcome.

LXXIV. Tinctura Cordialis, The Cordial Tincture.
Aqua Cordialis, q. v. Juice of Kermes Berries, a sufficient quantity to
satiate the Water, or fully impregnate it.

Salmon.] 1. What this Cordial Water is, you may see chap. 1. sect. 66.
aforegoing in this Book; but for want thereof, you may, in its place, use the
Spirit of Saffron or our Aqua Bezoartica, described in Phylaxa Medicinae, lib.
1. cap. 2. sect. 1. or any other proper Cordial Water whatsoever.

. 2. But, to complete this Cordial Tincture, you ought to make it after this
manner: the said Cordial Water, or Spirit of Angelica, or Saffron lb ij. Juice
of Kermes-berries viij. Cochenele in fine powder ss. English Saffron j. mix,
digest in a Glass Mattress or Bolthead in a very* gentle heat, for 14 days, then
being well settled, or fine, decant the clear Tincture for use.

3. It is not only an extraordinary Cordial to revive the Spirits, natural,
vital, and animal, cheer the Heart, resist Melancholy, and help all sorts of
fainting and swooning Fits, Palpitation of the Heart, etc. but it is a famous
thing in all continual, putrid, malign, and pestilential Fevers, yea, against
the Plague it self; it powerfully brings out the Measles and Smallpox, and
secures the Patient from danger.

4. Modus Utendi. Aquae Lactis Alexiteriae iiij. Syrup of the Juice of Citrons
j. of this Tincture a ss. ad iss. or ij. mix for a Cordial Dose, against
Fainting, Swooning, Sickness at Heart, Plague, etc. Aquae Cerasorum nigrorum
iiij. Syrup of Citron-peels vi. of this Tincture iss. Bezoar-Mineral gr. x. mix
for a Dose, to bring forth the Smallpox or Measles.

LXXV. Tinctura Cordialis antepidemica, i. Contra-yervae; A Cordial
Plague-Tincture, or Tincture of Contra-yerva.
Salmon.] 1. Spirit of Contra-yerva, or rectified Spirit of Saffron, or of
Angelica lb ij. Contra-yerva in gross powder, or well bruised iij. Salt of
Tartar iss. grind all the Ingredients in a hot Iron Mortar, in a Glass Mattress,
or long Bolthead, mix them with the Spirit, which stop close up, and digest 14
days in a very gentle heat, then decant the clear Tincture for use.

2. Or thus: Contra-yerva iij. Virginia Snake-root iss. or ij. Camphir ss.
Tincture of Salt of Tartar lb iij. mix, digest 14 days, then decant the clear
Tincture, which keep in a Glass close stopped for use.

3. Or thus: Contra-yerva iij. Snake-root ij. Camphir ss. Spiritus Anticolicus
lb iij. mix, digest a week in a Bolthead close stopped, then decant the clear,
and keep it for use.

4: Of these the second Tincture is more powerful than the first, and the third
more powerful than the second; and are all famous Antidotes against the Plague,
and all sorts of malign, putrid, and pestilential Diseases: It takes off the
Contagion of the Disease, and destroys the Putrefaction; so that I believe
there is scarcely a greater Antidote or Preservative in the World against the
Malignity and Poison of the Plague than this Medicament, chiefly the third
Preparation.

5. The first may be given a ij. ad iss. the second a ss. ad ij. and the third
from gut. xij. ad 30, 40, 50. or more, in Carduus Water, or Aqua Theriacalis,
or a Glass of Sack, or some other proper Vehicle, as Water, Infusion,
Decoction, etc.

6. These Tinctures are also famous things against the Colic, and all
Oppressions of Wind whatsoever; and as they powerfully open Obstructions of the
Viscera, so they as admirably destroy Putrefaction, and the Seeds of all malign
Diseases, particularly they resist the King's Evil, Gout, and Scurvy in all
their appearances.

7. Lastly, for the Poor and ordinary People, you may make it with our Spiritus
Intimus, that they may not want an Antidote or Remedy to save them in the day
of Necessity, when possibly they may have little or no Money to pay for it.

LXXVI. Tinctura Corroborans, i. Limonum Corticum; The Strengthening Tincture,
or Tincture of Limon-peels.
Salmon.] 1. the yellow of Limon-peels fresh cut off, viij. Spirit of
Limon-peels lb ij. or as much of the Tincture of Salt of Tartar; put all into a
Mattress or Bolthead, and digest in a gentle heat for 14 or 20 days, then decant
the clear Tincture for use.

2. Or you may make it in like manner with Spiritus Anticolicus, which will
extract the Tincture with all its Perfections in two days: Or for want of that
with Spirit of Limon-peels acuated with Spirit or Oil of Sulphur.

3. These Tinctures strengthen all the vital Powers, and recreate all the
Spirits natural, vital and animal; they strengthen and fortify the Stomach,
cause a good Appetite and a strong Digestion.

4. They are Cephalic, Neurotick, Stomatick, Cardiack, and Uterine, good
against all manner of Diseases of the Head, Brain, and Nerves, as Headachs,
Megrims, Apoplexies, Epilepsies, Lethargies, Vertigo's, Palsies, Lameness,
Numbness, Weakness of the Nerves and Joints, Lassitude of the Womb, and
Barrenness, proceeding from Cold and Moisture of the same.

5. They are famous Cordials being given in any proper Vehicle, and defend the
Heart and Vitals against all manner of Infection of the Measles, Smallpox,
Purples, Spotted-Feaver, or any other malign Fever; yea, and against the
Plague it self: They also cure the bitings of Serpents, mad Dogs, or any other
venomous Creature.

6. The Dose of the first is from j. ad ij. of the second a gut. 10 ad 20 or
more, as the necessity of the Patient may require. Aqua Lactis alexiteria iij.
Syrup of Citron or Limon-peels j. of this Tincture a j. ad ij. for a Dose in a
malign Fever. Aqua^ Theriacalis i. Cerasorum Nigrorum iij. of this Tincture
iss. Bezoar mineral gr. xii. mix for a Dose, against the Plague.

LXXVII. Tinctura Exonerans, i. Scammonii; The Purging Tincture, or Tincture of
Scammony.
Salmon.] 1. Resinous Scammony as much as you please; bruise it into a Powder,
and affuse thereon common Spirit of Wine, so much as may overtop it four
inches; digest 3 or 4 days in a gentle heat, and then decant the clear
Tincture. To the Feces put more Spirit, and extract till they will yield no
more Tincture. These latter Tinctures, if they be not strong enough, are to be
put upon fresh Scammony.

2. Here note, that if you please you may make the Tincture with Aqua Vitae or
Aniseed-water, whereby it will in some measure be corrected, and besides, it
will be pleasanter to the Patient.

3. Tentzelius's purging Spirit. Scammony 4 parts, Juice of Quinces 2 parts;
set them in a gentle heat, and stir them daily till they are hard, then beat
the Scammony to powder, and with Spirit of Wine extract a Tincture as
aforesaid. It purges without any molestation or trouble.

4. The Dose must be according to the quantity of Scammony; for example sake,
an ounce of Scammony will make about 32 purging Doses; and therefore if you
have the complete Tincture of i. of Scammony in a quart or xxxij. of Aqua
Vitae, Aniseed-water, or S. V. you may give i. of that Tincture for a Dose, and
so proportion it ab ss ad x. according to Age and Strength.

5. But Experience, which is the chief Mistress of Arts, tells us, that this
Tincture will purge nothing near so well as the Scammony it self; and I have
many times given an ounce, yea, two ounces and more at a time, without any
effect at all; and in many Patients the Body has rather been bound than purged,
which I conceived came from the Spirit, overcoming the Cathartick Property of
the Scammony (all sulphurous Spirits being of a binding quality.)

6. For this Cause sake I bethought my self of an Expedient to promote the
purging faculty of the Scammony, and overcome the binding (I had almost said
styptick) Property of the Spirit of Wine, and that was by the addition of Sena,
which the Spirit cannot mas^^^; and it is thus: Spirit of Wine, or Aqua Vitae,
or Aniseed-water xxxij. Scammony in powder Alexandrian Sena A. ij. mix, digest
2 or 3 days in a gentle heat, then strain forth the Tincture by pressing, which
being fine, decant the clear, and keep it for use.

7. It is an excellent Purge, and carries off all Humors in the Body, whether
Phlegm, Choler, Melancholy or Watery Humors, is good against the Dropsy, Scurvy
and Gout, Rheumatisms, King's Evil, and other stubborn Diseases, not easy to
be overcome. Dose ab ss. ad j. or x. according to the strength of the Disease,
and Patient's Condition and Habit of Body.

LXXVIII. Tinctura Febrifuga, i. Schaenanthi; Tincture against Fevers, or
Tincture of Camels Hay.
Salmon.] 1. Camels Hay in powder iiij. Salt of Tartar ij. grind them together
well in a hot Mortar, then put them into a Glass Mattress, to which put
tartarized Spirit of Wine lb iiss. digest close stopped in a very gentle heat for
20 or 30 days, then decant the clear Tincture for use.

2. Or thus: Camels Hay ij. Tincture of Salt of Tartar xv. mix, digest in a
large Vessel 14 days, then decant the clear for use.

3. Or thus, for the meaner sort of People: Camels Hay in gross powder iiij.
Spiritus Intimus xxxij. mix, digest close stopped for two days, in a gentle
Sand-heat, and then decant the clear Liquor.

4. The Title shows the Use, which is chiefly against all sorts of continent
and continual Fevers, whether nonputrid, putrid, or malign, expelling the
Morbifick Matter through the pores of the Skin, and by Urine; but besides all
this, it is an excellent Stomatick, strengthens the Ventricle, causes a good
Appetite and a quick Digestion; it expels Wind, provokes Urine and the Courses,
digests crude and tough Humors, and helps spitting of Blood, there being some
astriction in it, and eases the after-Pains of Women in Childbed. Dose a ss. ad
iss. and ij. of the last.

LXXIX. Tinctura Galbani, Tincture of Galbanum.
Salmon.] 1. Galbanum i. to which put in a Glass Vessel so much Liquor of fixed
Nitre, or of Glauber 's Alcahest so much as thoroughly to moisten it, or in some
measure to dissolve it: Digest for some hours in Sand, then affuse thereon
tartarized S. V. so much as may overtop it three or four inches, digest again
for some few hours, then enclining the Glass, decant the Tincture, (taking care
that none of the Alcahest come off with it) and reserve it for use. To the
remaining Gum put new S. V. and continue it in digestion again for some time,
till the Alcohol will be no more tinged, but remain of a white color.

2. Now here is to be noted, that the S. V. ought to be purely rectified, and
freed from all its Phlegm, for simply rectified S. V. is apt to mix and
confound itself with the Alcahest, whereby your Tincture will be impure and
savor thereof, the which it ought not to do in the least.

3. When all the Tincture shall be extracted out of the Gum, nothing will
remain but Feces and Alcahest, which being joined with the Alcohol of Wine,
will always fall down to the bottom, nor ever w^ll mix therewith.

4. This Tincture is an approved thing against Vapors, Hysteric Fits, and
Hypochondriack Melancholy; it prevails against all cold Diseases of the Womb,
opens its Obstructions, and brings away both Birth and Afterbirth; it provokes
the Courses, and prevails against Convulsions, Falling Sickness, Swelling,
Obstructions, and pain of the Spleen, Scirrhus of the Spleen, inward Ruptures
of Veins, shortness of Breath, Cough, Pains in the Sides, and Torment in the
Bowels; it kills Worms, resists Poison, and is an Antidote against the bitings
of Serpents, mad Dogs, or any other venomous Beast, and by some is affirmed to
be a Specific against the Colic. Dose a ss. ad j.

5. But for the meaner sort of People, you may extract it with Spiritus
Intimus, which will be done in 12 or 24 hours; and this, though it will not be so
fine and pleasant a Medicine to look upon yet may be full as virtuous and
efficacious as the former, and in some cases more prevalent: Dose a j. ad ij.

6. And from this saline Tincture you may (if you so please) extract also a
sulphurous Tincture, as before, if you affuse thereon the Alcohol of S. V. q.
s. and digest close stopped some hours, from which you may separate the Tincture
by inclination and decantation, as in the former.

7. Outwardly, being bathed with it, is good to ease Pain, and dissolve hard
Tumors, and being bathed upon the Stomach, expels the Fits of the Mother,
Vapors, and suchlike. It also cleanses and heals Wounds and Ulcers.

LXXX. Tinctura Cambogiae, Tincture of Camboge.
Salmon.] 1. Cambogia j. (infine powder) tartarised S. V. xvj. mix, digest, and
extract a Tincture, which being fine, decant from the Feces, and keep for use.
Or thus: Camboge in powder i. Spiritus Intimus lb ij. mix and dissolve, and
with the Alcohol of S. V. extract a Tincture, which separate by inclination and
decanting.

2. Its chief use is to purge serous and watery Humors, which it does without
any great violence, and therefore is profitable against the Dropsy, chiefly the
Anasarca and Ascites.

3. It also prevails against the Jaundice, Gout, and most Obstructions of the
Liver and Spleen; sometimes it provokes Vomit; sometimes it only works
downward, and sometimes it works both ways, and sometimes by accident it works
only by Sweat.

4. But the certainest way to give it for working, is to mix it with an
Infusion of Sena, thus: Sena iss. Whitewine or Spring Water v. Salt of Tartar
j. mix, and make an Infusion over a gentle fire; strain out, and add to it of
the Tincture of Cambogia ij. or iij. mix and give it for a Dose. It purges
watery and scorbutic Humors, and prevails both against Dropsy and Jaundice.
Dose of the Tincture alone in any proper Vehicle is a ij. ad iiij.

LXXXI. Trinctura Guajaci, Tincture of the Wood Guajacum.
Salmon.] 1. shavings of Guajacum beaten small and past through a Sieve ij.
affuse thereon Alcohol of S. V. vj. digest in a Bolt-head with a long neck for
8 or 10 days, (the longer the better) then decant the Bloodcolour'd Tincture,
strain it through a Cloth, and keep it for use.

2. Or thus: powder of Lignum Guajacum viij. Spiritus Intimus lb ij. mix,
digest close stopped in a gentle heat for 2 or 3 days, then decant the clear,
filter through brown Paper, and keep the Tincture for use.

3. The first is a sulphurous Tincture made with S. V. the latter is a saline
Tincture, and they both have their various uses and intentions, though both are
alike good in some cases, and for some purposes.

4. The first Tincture is sudorifick and alexipharmick, heats, drys, stops
Catarrhs, helps Diseases of the Stomach, prevails against Rheumatisms, wandering
Pains and the Relics of the Venereal Disease, it being an Antidote against
the malignity and venom of the Pox. Dose a j. ad ij. in decoction of Guajacum.

5. The latter or saline Tincture has many of the virtues of the former, as
being a Help for Rheumatisms, Venereal Relics, and the like, but it operates
more by Urine than by Sweat, cleansing and purifying the Reins, Ureters, and
Spermatick Vessels, and therefore the more fit to be used against Gonorrhea's,
whether simple or virulent, Whites, etc. to be taken dietetically, a j. ad iij.
in some proper Vehicle.

LXXXII. Tinctura Hypnotica, i. Opii; Tincture procuring Sleep, or Tincture of
Opium.
Salmon.] 1. Pure Thebian Opium i. S. V. acuated with Spirit of Sulphur lb j.
mix, dissolve, digest in a Bolthead well stopped for 8 or 10 days, then decant
the clear for use. This is the simple Tincture.

2. A Tincture of Opium with a more compound Menstruum: Spirit of Castor,
Spirit of Saffron, Spirit of Cloves, Spirit of Virginia Snake-root, ana iiij.
which acuate with Spirit of Sulphur, in which dissolve Thebian Opium x. adding
Cochenele in fine powder iij. mix, digest close stopped for 10 or 14 days in a
very gentle heat, then decant the clear Tincture, which keep in a Glass close
stopped for use.

3. Now in both these Processes here is to be noted, that a Menstruum acuated
with Spirit of Sulphur, Spirit of Salt, or some other Acid, is rather chosen
than one that is not, because it is the nature of Opium to make the Stomach
sick in many persons, and in some vehemently sick with violent Reachings and
Vomitings, and in others who take it with less trouble, yet it is apt to
disturb the Stomach, and make it out of order, for which reason it was thought
necessary to be corrected, and among Correctives, none are found so powerful
and prevalent for this purpose as a proper Acid, among the several Varieties of
which you may choose what agrees most with your Intention; but for the general
this is certain, that the Menstruum being acuated with any Acid, it corrects
its emetick Property, and makes the Tincture become more benign and friendly
not only to the Stomach in particular, but to the Universal Body in general.

4. It is chiefly to be given at night going to Bed, (you may give either of
the Tinctures, but the latter and compounded is more cordial than the former.)
Dose a gut. xij. ad 20, 30, or 40, increasing the Dose according to the Age and
Strength of the Sick, and vehemence of the Disease afflicting.

5. Given thus at night in a Glass of Canary, or other fit Vehicle, it
admirably induces Sleep, and gives ease in all manner of tormenting and
excruciating Pains, and stops the flux or motions of all sorts of Humors in any
part of the Body, partly by thickening the matter, and partly by constringing
or shutting up the Mouths of the Vessels, as also by perspiring the more
fusible and liquid Juice through the Pores of the Skin, for it induces a
sweating posture after a very excellent and easy manner.

6. It gives ease in the most exquisite Colic, helps a Pleurisy, cures all
sorts of Fluxes of the Bowels, as Diarrhoea, Dysenteria, Lienteria, and the
Hepatick Flux, stops the Menses and the Whites, and is very prevalent against
Catarrhs, Coughs, Colds, and other Distempers of those parts, proceeding from
flowing, thin, sharp or salt Humors.

7. It is a singular thing against a Gonorrhoea, eases the Pains of the Gout,
Sciatica, and Rheumatism, let them proceed from what cause soever. It is also
approved against intermitting Fevers or Agues of all sorts, and in a short
time puts a stop to the current of the Disease. There is scarcely any Case
wherein exquisite Pain is present, in which this most admirable Remedy is not a
Relief: Esteem it as a Jewel.

8. Marggrave his Tincture of Opium is thus made. Thebian Opium i. put it into
a Bolt-head, and affuse thereon Spirit of Vinegar, q. s. or so much as may
overtop it some inches; mix, dissolve and digest for one day (or more) then
press all hard out through a Cloth; this straining take and digest again till
the Feces subside, and the liquor becomes clear, which decant, and keep it
close stopped for use.

9. It is anodyn, narcotick, and somniserous, inducing Sleep after an admirable
manner; it takes away all sorts of Pains, and is a mighty Anodyn even outwardly
applied, the part pained being bathed therewith, and a double Cloth dipped
therein being applied or laid over. Dose a gut. ij. ad iiij. vel vj.

LXXXIII. Tinctura Mastiches, Tincture of Mastick.
Salmon.] 1. Mastick in fine powder i. tartariz'd S. V. v. put them into a
Bolt-head with a long neck, which stop close up; digest in a very gentle heat
for 14, or 16, or 20 days, shaking the Glass once day, then being clear,
decant, filter, and keep it for use. This is nothing but Vernish, and not so
fit this way made for inward uses.

2. The true medicinal Tincture is thus made: Mastick in powder i. put it into
a Glass Vessel, and affuse thereon so much Liquor of fixed Nitre, or the
Alcahest of Glauber, so much as may thoroughly moisten it; digest 24 hours in a
Sand-heat; then affuse thereon the highest alcoholiz'd S. V. (for the ordinary
will scarcely do) so much as may overtop it three or four inches, and digest
again for another day, shaking the Glass now and then; being clear, incline the
Glass, and decant the Tincture, taking heed that you pour out none of the
Alcahest; and to the remaining matter put new Alcohol, and digest again,
continuing this Work so long, till it will yield no more Tincture.

3. It is an excellent Cephalic and Stomatick, strengthening the Stomach in
all its faculties; it stops Vomiting, and helps the retentive faculty, causing
a good Digestion; it stops fluxes of the Bowels of all sorts, helps against
spitting of Blood, and is good for Coughs, Colds, Catarrhs, and Fluxes of
Rheum; it takes away Acrimony, and represses all sorts of sharp Humors.

4. It is prevalent against most Diseases of the Head, Brain, and Nerves, as
Megrims, Vertigo's, Lethargies, Apoplexies, Epilepsies, Palsies, Convulsions,
and other Diseases of those parts. It cures Pains and Sickness at Stomach, and
represses Vapors arising from the Mother. Dose a gut. 20 ad 60 more or less in
a Glass of Wine, as Canary, Sherry, etc.

5. Lastly, for the meaner sort my advice is, that it should be made with the
Spiritus Intimus, allowing ij. to lb j. of the Spirit, mixing, digesting and
filtring according to Art. Dose of this a ss. ad ij.

LXXXIV. Tinctura Moschi, Tincture of Musk.
Salmon.] 1. Alcohol of S. V. acuated with Spirit of Sulphur lb j. Spiritus
Rosarum Damascenarum i. mix, and digest a week, then add choice Oriental Musk
iij. digest again for 20 days, shaking the Glass once a day, then keep it upon
the Feces for use.

2. It is a great Cordial, and revives all the Spirits, natural, vital, and
animal, but must not be given to hysteric Women, nor such as are troubled with
Vapors. It is good to comfort and corroborate the Brain, strengthen the Memory,
take away sleepiness and dullness of the Senses, and is profitable against a
Vertigo, Lethargy, Apoplexy, Fainting, Swoonning, and the like, and is chiefly
used as a Perfume for to make grateful other Medicaments.

3. If to the Composition you add Cochenele in fine powder ss. the Medicament
will be so much the better, and by far the more Cordial.

4. A perfumed or musked Water; Damask-Rose-water iiij. of this Tincture gut.
xij. mix them, and keep it close stopped for use.

LXXXV. Tinctura Myrrhae, Tincture of Myrrh.
Salmon.] 1. choice Myrrh in powder ij. put it into a Bolt-head, upon which put
Spirit of Wine, so much as to overtop it 4 inches; stir them well together, and
digest in a gentle Sand-heat 3 or 4 days, till the S. V. is loaded with the
Tincture of the Myrrh, then decant the clear, and keep it in a Glass close
stopped for use.

2. This is Lemery's Method, and is only a Solution of the Oily parts of the
Myrrh in Spirit of Wine, and though it is commonly made with Wine alone, yet
this is much better which is made with Spirit of Wine, because the Menstruum is
not only more able to dissolve, but also to receive and retain the Oily or
Balsamic parts of the Myrrh; whereas the Phlegm of Wine does cause the
substance of the Myrrh to dissolve, and will be impregnated as well with the
more earthy as with the oily parts of the mixed.

3. Some use to evaporate this Tincture to the consistency of an Extract, but
in so doing they lose the more subtle and volatile parts of the Myrrh, which
evanish with the Spirit; so that in my opinion the Tincture itself is much more
efficacious and valuable.

4. It is of great use to hasten Women's Labor, to bring away both Birth and
Afterbirth; it provokes the Terms, and opens Obstructions of the Womb, is a
singular good thing against Vapors, and all sorts of hysteric Fits, hysteric
Colicks, and the like; it prevails against the Vertigo, Megrim, Headache,
Apoplexy, Lethargy, Palsy, and all Diseases which proceed from Corruption of
the Humors: It is and Antidote against the Plague and all malign and
pestilential Diseases, hinders Putrefaction, and is sudorifick and aperitive.
Dose a gut x. ad xx. and I have sometimes given it a ss. ad j. with success.

5. Outwardly bathed on the Stomach, it allays Vapors, and helps Fits of the
Mother, and eases pain in any part, especially the Pain and Weakness of the
Back; mixed with Tincture of Aloes, it discusses cold Tumors, and softens and
dissolves Tumors; It prevents Gangreens, scales rotten Bones, and hinders the
spreading of a Sphacelus.

6. If this Tincture be made Compound after this manner, it will be yet more
efficacious and valuable for Cephalic and Uterine Diseases: Myrrh, Castoreum,
both in powder, A. i. powder of Oxhorus, Saffron, A. ss. Spirit of Wine, so
much as may overtop the Ingredients about 4 inches; mix, digest, close stopped
for 14 or 20 days, shaking the Glass once a day, then decent the clear
Tincture, and keep it for use. Dose a j. ad j. in some fit Vehicle.

7. Or you may make the Tincture according to Marggrave's method, after this
manner: Myrrh in fine powder, put it into a Glass, and affuse thereon the
Liquor of fixed Nitre, or Glauber 's Alcahest, so much as that the powder may
be well moistened; digest them together for 24 hours, then affuse thereon the
Alcohol of S. V. so much as may overtop it three or four inches; digest again
for an hour or two (but should it be for a day or two it would be better) and
then carefully decant the Tincture. Upon the Feces affuse more S. V. and digest
for 24 hours as before, decanting and repeating this work till the Myrrh will
yield no more Tincture. The Alcahest you may recuperate, as we shall in its
proper place declare. Dose of the Tincture a j. ad ij. or j. upon an
extraordinary occasion.

8. But for the meaner sort of People, you may instead of S. V. make it with
Spiritus Intimus, which will in 24 hours, extract all the chief Virtues of the
Myrrh, and make an excellent Medicine. Dose a j. ad ij.

LXXXVI. Tinctura Nutritiva, i. Chinae; a nourishing or restoring Tincture, or
Tincture of China.
Salmon.] 1. Choice Canary lb iiij. rectified S. V. lb ij. China in gross
Powder, or well bruised lb j. mix, digest in a Glass Mattress with a blind Head,
well luted in a gentle Sand-heat for 14 days, shaking the Vessel once a day;
then being fine, decant the clear Tincture for use.

2. Where note, that if you make it of equal parts, of China and Sarsaparilla,
the Medicine will be never the worse, for Sarsa sweetens the Blood more
powerfully than China, and nourishes and restores as much.

3. That the Menstruum here made use of is two parts Canary to one of Spirit of
Wine; the reason of which is, that because China (and Sarsa also) consist more
of Aqueous Particles, than Sulphurous, Resinous or Oily, an Aqueous Menstruum,
or one more abounding with Aqueous Particles than S. V. does, was thought not
only strong enough, but also more homogeneous to the nature of the Body to be
extracted: Besides which, though S. V. chears and exhilerates the Spirits, yet it
nourishes but little; and it was our business to choose such a Menstruum, which
being strong enough to extract the nutritive virtue and power of the China,
might also be nutritive itself, which Canary is in the highest measure, if it
be joined with other things nourishing and restorative, with a due proportion
of Spirits to enliven the matter, and promote the Operations of Nature.

4. The intention of this Medicament was to nourish and restore such as were
extremely ematiated and wasted with a Pocky Consumption, which it does do
admirably: But beside this, it restores in all other Consumptions, adding
Strength, and nourishing the whole Body almost to a Miracle. It moistens the
dried parts, increases their Substance, strengthens the Nerves, revives the
Spirits, and adds Life and Activity to the whole human Frame.

5. In taking of it you may a little dulcifie it with double-refined Sugar, or
white Sugarcandy, and you may give it in the morning fasting, a little before
Dinner, and last at night going to Bed, after this manner.

6. Modus Vtendi. of this Tincture iiij. white Sugar ij. Volatile Salt of
Hogsflesh, gr. x. or xij. mix together for a Dose: Half an hour or an hour
after taking of it, let the Patient take half a Pint or more of strong
Chicken-broth, Mutton-broth, or fresh Beef-broth, made so strong as to be
almost a Jelly.

LXXXVII. Tinctura Olibani; Tincture of Olibanum.
Salmon.] 1. Olibanum in fine Powder, q. v. put it into a Glass Mattress, and
affuse thereon Liquor of fixed Nitre, or Glauber 's Alcahest, so much as may
well moisten it; digest 24 hours, then affuse thereon the Alcohol of S. V. so
much as may overtop it four inches; digest again for 24 hours, and then
cautiously decant the clear Tincture. Upon the Feces affuse more Alcohol of S.
V. and digest again as before, decanting and repeating this Work till the
Olibanum will yield no more Tincture.

2. But for the meaner sort of People, you may extract it with Spiritus
Intimus, which may be used for all the same Intentions; the former is a j. ad
ij. or iij.

3. These Tinctures are hot and dry, subastringent, and strengthening, used
chiefly against Diseases of the Head, Nerves, Breast, Lungs, and Bowels; it
stops Fluxes of the Womb and Bowels, stays Vomiting, helps spitting Blood,
strengthens the Head and Nerves, discusses Catarrhs and dries them up, cures
Green-wounds and old Ulcers, and helps the Piles being bathed therewith: Dropped
into the Eyes mixed with a third part of Rosewater, it stops their Rheums,
strengthens them, and takes away Clouds and Bloodshot. Dose inwardly is a ss.
ad j. in some proper Liquor.

4. Modus Utendi. Blackcherry-water iiij. Syrup of Citron-peels vj. of this
Tincture j. mix for a Dose, against Pains of the Head, Vertigo, etc. Aqueous
Tincture of the juice of Liquorice, Aqua Lactis, A. ij. Syrup of Limons vj. of
this Tincture j. mix for a Dose, against Coughs, and Obstructions of the Lungs.
Poppy-water iij. Syrup of red Poppies ss. of this Tincture iss. mix for a Dose,
against Catarrhs and violent fluxes of Rheum from the Head upon the Eyes,
Teeth, Breast, Lungs, etc.

LXXXVIII. Tinctura Opii Composita; seu, Laudanum Liquidum, Tincture of Opium
Compound.
Nutmegs, Saffron, A* p. ij. Castoreum p. j. Spirit of Wine, q. s. mix and
distill. A smaller weak Spirit may suffice, and therefore you may mix two or
three parts of Water to one of the distilled Spirit, and being thus mixed, you
must dissolve your Opium in it, so much as may sufficiently saturate it.

Salmon.] 2. Let your Opium be crude and not torrefied, for that dissipates its
best and most volatile parts; and the Water you mix with the Spirit ought to be
Maydew or Rainwater at least, because impregnated with a volatile, nitrous,
astral quality.

3. The reason why Water is mixed with the Spirit for Extraction, is because
Opium consisting of many Aqueous Particles, is the more easily dissolved in
such a Menstruum as is homogeneous with it, which being joined in a due
proportion with a Spirituous Menstruum, is made able to extract all the good
and essential parts of the Opium.

4. It is a good Cordial if given with cordial things, and is chiefly used to
pacify the irritated Spirits, provoke Sleep, stop Catarrhs, and violent
Coughs, stay the immoderate fluxes of the Belly, and to sweeten the Acrimony of
Humors.

5. It is used after general Remedies against Defluxions upon the Breast and
Lungs, Vapors, and Hysteric Fits, to appease the Torments of the Gout, and
ease other internal Pains, inwardly taken, and outwardly applied. Dose a gut.
10. ad 20.

6. Modus Utendi. Blackcherry-water iiij. Syrup of Poppies ss. of this Tincture
a gut. 10 ad 20. Powers of Amber a gut. 20 ad 40. mix for a Dose, against
Vapors and Fits of the Mother. Aquae Lactis iiij. Syrup of Poppies ss. of this
Tincture a gut. 10 ad 30. mix for a Dose, against the Gout, and to procure Rest.

LXXXIX. Tinctura Pectoralis, i. Glycyrrhizae; a Pectoral Tincture, or Tincture
of Liquorice.
Salmon.] 1. Take the best Spanish Juice of Liquorice cut into thin slices, or
bruised in a Mortar xviij. Rainwater or May- dew, so much as may overtop it
five or six inches, or three pints; mix, and set it in a gentle digestion for
24 hours, or 2 days, viz. till the whole body of the Juice is thoroughly
softened and dissolved; Spirit of Wine six pints: Mix, digest 12 or 14 days,
till the Tincture is wholly drawn up into the body of the Menstruum, then
decant the clear, filter, and keep it for use.

2. Now here is to be noted, that Water alone would extract the most of the
Liquorice, but being a thing of constant use, and which ought to be kept always
ready prepared, the S. V. is added* that it might the better keep, which now it
will do a year or two, or longer; moreover the Spirit of Wine is a kind of
Balsam, and adds to the virtue of the Medicine.

3. Or thus: Choice English Liquorice bruised well xviij. common Spirit of Wine
four pints; mix, digest 21 or 28 days, then decant the clear for use: Where
note, that if you use dried Liquorice, you may take the Powder xvij. and mix it
with Salt of Potashes ix. grinding them together in a hot Iron Mortar, and then
with four pints of the best rectified S. V. extract the Tincture according to
Art.

4. Or thus: Spanish Juice well bruised iiij. Spiritus Intimus lb iiij. mix,
digest in a gentle Sand-heat for 24 hours, then decant the clear Tincture,
which filter, and keep it for use.

5. Or thus: English green Liquorice well bruised viij. Spiritus Intimus lb
iiij. mix, digest 48 hours, then decant the clear Tincture, which filter and
keep for use. Where note, that if in the time of the digestion you add an
eighth part of Aniseeds, the Medicine will yet be the more pectoral.

6. It is an excellent Pectoral, stops Coughs and violent Catarrhs,
expectorates tough Phlegm from the Lungs and Kidneys, abates sharpness, lenifies
roughness, takes away hoarseness, helps corrosion of the Bladder and sharpness
of the Urine, and mollifies the Bellies of Infants.

7. Modus Utendi. Aquae Lactis iiij. Syrup of Poppies ss. of this Tincture i.
to ij. mix for a Dose, against Coughs, Colds, Catarrhs, sharpness of Urine,
Obstructions of the Breast and Lungs, etc.

XC. Tinctura Quartanaria, i. Peruviana; Tincture for Quartans, or Tincture of
the Jesuite's Bark.
Salmon.] 1. Cortex Peruvianus, or Jesuit's Bark in fine powder newly made lb
j. Sal. Tart. lb ss. Spirit of Wine lb iiij. put all into a Bolt-head, mix or
shake them well together; close it up, and digest in a very gentle heat for 14
days, shaking the Glass once a day, then being fine, decant the clear and keep
it for use.

2. Or rather thus: Jesuite's Bark newly made into fine powder lb j. Claret
wine lb ix. Spirit of Wine lb iij. mix in a Bolt-head, close it well up, and
digest cold for a month, then decant the clear Tincture for use.

3. Where note, That it is to be beaten into powder but just when you use it,
for if it lies long, if but 24 hours, it loses much of its virtue; for there
are certain volatile Particles in it which easily and almost immediately fly
away, and that is the reason that it sometimes fails of its Operation, having
been beaten long beforehand.

4. That of these two Tinctures the latter is the better, because it is made
with a Menstruum more homogene with it than is all S. V. as containing in it a
greater number of Styptick Particles: I know some make it wholly with the one
or the other, but neither are best alone.

5. For Spirit of Wine is not styptick enough to confirm and corroborate, or
extract all the specific Virtue of the Cortex; and Claret Wine, though it is
homogene with it in Property, and styptick enough, yet it has not sharpness
enough sufficiently to penetrate and open the Body thereof: Now acuating the
Wine with the Spirit you have a Menstruum strong enough to extract all the
Virtue of the Bark, and to confirm it in its Virtue and Operation, as being of
the same styptick Property with it: Besides which, it will keep much better,
and not easily decay; whereas was it made with the Claret alone, it would
quickly grow sour, and so lose its whole Power and Force.

6. The first Tincture may be given in simple Claret Wine, or a Decoction of
the lesser Century, a j. ad iij. ad iiij. the latter from 4 to 6 ounces alone
of it self.

7. But before you use this Remedy some Cautions are necessary to be premised:
I. That you never use it to such Women who have an Obstruction of the Menses,
or are troubled with the Green Sickness, nor to other persons who are
frequently afflicted with a Constipation of the Bowels, or have a continent or
continual Fever, whether putrid, malign, or pestilential; for in the case of
all those kinds of Fevers, it is commonly mortal, and does the work as surely
in a manner as if the Hangman did it.

8. About the time of the writing of this, I knew four men seized with a
continual Fever, two were highly malignant, and the other two more apparently
the Spotted-Feaver; two Doctors, of great names, but no Physicians, were sent
for, who presently prescribed the Pulvis Patrum, and in three days time the
Victim yielded to the fatal blow. Afterward to the second they gave the same
in like manner, who died the fourth day. To the third they gave it also, who
had the Spotted-Feaver, and he died in 2 days. They yet continued to give the
same Medicine to a fourth, and in order after they had seen the ill effects in
the former three, and this likewise became a Sacrifice with the rest.

9. Another Youth fell sick (after the other four) with the Spotted-Feaver, to
whom the same persons prescribed the same course, (so senceless, or rather
wilful and ignorant, were those Coblets and Botchers in Physic, those Legal,
as they say, and Priviledg'd Quacks:) but the Relations of the Youth having the
Massacres of the other four just before their Eyes, would not yield to it, but
forbad their fatal Proceedings; and having some knowledge of me, immediately
came to me, and carried me to the Sick; I viewed the Patient, and they told me
what had been prescribed; I confess I forbad it, as they valued their Sons and
Relations Life, and counseled to other things; my Advice was followed, and the
young man recovered, did well, and is now abroad and healthy again, though in the
Opinion of all that saw him, the Hope of Life was past. I cured a second
Patient in the same House, of the same Disease, though delirious, by the very
same method, who is now alive and well; and also a third, in the same place,
who after fell sick, and with the same Medicines, with the same good success.

10. I give this Relation of these Experiences to convince, if possible, those
Homicides of their Barbarity and Male practice, and to give the unthinking
World a Caution to be no more imposed upon for the future, by such base,
ignorant, mercenary and merciless, yet vainglorious Pretenders to Physic. But
to proceed.

11. II. Let the Patient be first very well cleansed, both upwards and
downwards, by some general Remedies, such as are the Tartar Emetick of
Mynsicht, Infusion of Crocus Metallorum, or Vinum Benedictum, Antimoniale, or
some suchlike; and for the greater Security sake, purge them also, either with
our Family-pills or Family-pouder, or an Infusion of Sena, Electuarium
Lenitivum, or other Medicines proper to the Constitution.

12. This being done, you may now come safely to the use of the Cortex, or of
this Tincture; for the Malignity and Morbifick Cause being thus generally
carried off, you need not fear the shutting it up, and locking it into the Body
to do more mischief, the which if not carried off, it must infallibly do.

13. What must become of the Venom in a malign and pestilential Fever, when by
this Medicament it is locked up within the Body? When by it the Diaphoresis is
hindered, the Pores of the Body constringed, and the other Passages by it stopped
up, so that there is no way made for the Poison to pass off or transpire;
doubtless it recurrs to the Center and smites the Heart and Vitals in a moment,
and immediately makes the miserable Patient a Sacrifice to Ignorance and Pride:
The truth of which Position I think was too well verified or made out in the
four above enumerated Examples.

14. It now remains, that we show for what Intentions this Remedy is used, and
the Order, Method, and Reason of taking it. The Diseases it is most proper
against, and for which it is a Specific, are all sorts of intermitting
Fevers, vulgarly called Agues, (in the cases of continent or continual Fevers
it is as bad as Poison) and in all Fluxes of Blood, as spitting of Blood,
bleeding at the Nose, overflowing of the Menses, a Dysentery, and the Hepatick
Flux, and indeed in all other Fluxes of the Bowels, or Fluxes of sharp Humors
upon the Lungs called Catarrhs, or upon the Limbs and Joints, called a
Rheumatism. In these and the like cases it is the most famed Remedy in the
World, nor is there any Remedy yet found out, that is equal to it in Virtue and
Goodness, for those Intentions, and if rightly used, and given by a skilful,
prudent, and honest Hand, it is as safe as it is sure and excellent.

15. Universally being thus premised, you may come to the use of the Cortex, or
this Tincture. In Children and tender persons the Dose is to be less, but often
reiterated and longer continued: In Tertians and Quartans you ought to use it
at the end of the Fit, and then again to be repeated when the force of it is
over, which may be every 6 or 8 hours; but because of its heat from the
Menstruum, if any should fear it might inflame the Body, by the so often
repeating of its Doses, to prevent any Danger of that kind, you may give it
thus: of this Tincture a iij. ad vj. Blackcherry-water (or some suchlike) vj.
or viij. mix for a Dose, and give or repeat it at diverse intervals, till the
time of the next Fit; when that is over, repeat the Remedy again in the same
manner, till the time that another Fit should be, if it be not prevented by
what is given.

16. The bigger the Dose, the longer must be the Intervals between each Dose;
and if the Fits cease, so that the Sick thinks himself well, yet he must be
sure to continue the Dose morning and night, or twice or thrice a day for at
least 12 or 14 days after that, lest the Disease should return again. If this
course be taken, and the Sick forbears purging after it, (for that also makes
the Ague recurr) you need not fear but to have an absolute and perfect Cure.

17. Many after the first taking of it have had no more Fits, so powerful and
absolute a Remedy it is; but if it should so chance, that the Paroxysm or Fit
should return again, you must again repeat the whole former course (the purging
excepted) and you may be sure that it will not fail to produce the desired
effects, viz. so perfectly to cure the Ague, that it shall no more return upon
that Basis, or from the Old Cause or Foundation.

18. A Quotidian is commonly mastered at the first Fit, after taking the first
Dose; a single and double Tertian at the second Fit, or at most at the third,
oftentimes at the first; and a single and double Quartan at the third or fourth
Fit at most, be it never so stubborn.

19. Lastly, you must be sure not to give it at the beginning of a Fit, nor yet
during the time of it, because then, instead of abating the Force and Violence
of the Disease, it would be apt, by reason of the turgency of the Febritick
Spring, to excite a more fierce Conflict, and make the Fit the more violent and
obnoxious. See our Seplasium, lib. 8. cap. 2. sect. 14. where you may receive
abundant satisfaction.

XCI. Tinctura Rhabarbari Absinthiata; Wormwood Tincture of Rhubarb.
Salmon.] 1. Rhubarb very thin sliced, or grossly bruised iiij. Aquae Absinthii
compositae* (which see Cap. 50. Sect. 62. of this Book aforegoing) lb ij. mix
in a Bolthead, digest in a gentle heat, close stopped for 14 days, shaking the
Bottle once a day, then being settled and fine, decant the clear, and keep it
for use.

2. You may also, for want of this, make the Tincture with choice
Cinnamonwater, or with any other Cordial-water, which may answer the Intention
of the Medicine.

3. This Tincture has both a purging and an astringent Property, for it purges
gently Choler, Phlegm, and clammy tartarous Humors which cause the Colic and
Griping of the Guts, from the Stomach and Bowels; besides which, it has a
Cordial and strengthening Virtue; it is especially good for the Heart, Liver,
and Spleen, is good against Fainting and Swooning, Sickness at Heart,
Obstructions of Liver and Spleen, cures the Jaundice, and all sorts of Fluxes,
as Diarrhoeas, Dysenteries, Lienteries, and the Hepatick Flux, from its
astringent Property.

4. Indeed I must needs say, I know it to be a Specific in the most vehement
Fluxes of the Bowels, and will do that (in those cases) which a thousand other
Medicines will not do; and I have cured Colicks and vehement Gripings of the
Bowels with it, of several Months standing, and when I have been failed by many
other Medicaments.

5. Utendi Modus. When given for purging, use it thus: of this Tincture i.
choice Whitewine, in which a few leaves of Sena have been infused iiij. Syrup
of Damask-Roses ss. mix for a Dose. The Body being sufficiently cleansed, when
you would stop a Flux and strengthen the parts, give it thus: Cinnamon Water,
Blackcherrywater, A. ij. of this Tincture, Tincture of Catechu A. ss. Syrup of
red Poppies vi. mix for a Dose, and let the Sick drink it all the day long in
all the Drink he takes, about fifty or sixty drops at a time, in a little time
it will so alter and corroborate the Bowels, and the whole Habit of the Body,
that the Patient will think himself to be almost a new man.

XCII. Tinctura Rubra, i. Papaveris erratici; The Red Tincture, or Tincture of
Corn-Poppies.
Salmon.] 1. Corn-poppyflowers new and fresh gathered lb x. rectified Spirit of
Wine drawn off from Opium lb xx. digest in a Mattress covered with a blind Head,
and well luted to, for 14 days, then strain out by pressing; digest again till
the Recrements subside, then decant the clear, filter, and keep it in a Vessel
close stopped for use.

2. Now here is to be noted, that if you would have the Tincture stronger of
the Flowers, you may affuse the same upon a like quantity of fresh Flowers,
digesting, pressing out, digesting again and filtring as before.

3. If also you add some Spices, as Jamaica-pepper in powder iij. Nutmegs in
powder j. Mace i. Cloves ss. mix and digest with the Flowers aforesaid; they
will give the Tincture a more pleasing Flavor, correct the crude taste of the
Flowers, and make it much more stomatick and cordial.

4. It is a Specific against Surfeits, Vomiting, Sickness at Stomach, Coughs,
Catarrhs, Rheums; it strengthens the Stomach, causes Digestion, prevents and
cures Pleurisies, gently induces Sleep, cures the Colic and Gripings of the
Guts even to a Miracle, resists Poison, and eases the Pains of the Spleen and
Hypochonders.

5. Held in the Mouth, it eases the Tcothach; and taken inwardly, it helps the
oppression of the Stomach, the Chin-Cough, or Whooping-Cough* stops Fluxes of
all sorts, strengthens the Bowels, and helps the overflowing of the Terms in
Women.

6. It cools the Blood, helps sharp and gnawing Rheums, cures the Phthisick,
spitting of Blood, Pains and Stitches in the Sides, prevails against Megrims,
Headachs, Frenzies, and Madness. Dose a ss. ad ij. or iiij. according to
Strength, Age, urgency of the Disease, and customary Use thereof, at Night
going to Bed, either with an equal quantity of Syrup or Clovegilliflower, or
mixed with iiij of Blackcherry-water.

XCIII. Tinctura Rutae; Tincture of Rue.
Salmon.] 1. Rue carefully dried iiij. Salt of Tartar ij. Grind them together
in a hot Iron Mortar, put them into a Glass Mattress, to which affuse of the
best rectified Spirit of Rue lb iij. mix and cover the Vessel immediately with
a blind Head, luting well the juncture; digest all in a very gentle heat for 14
days, shaking the Glass once a day, then being-fine, decant off the clear
Tincture, and keep it for use.

2. This Tincture is Cephalic, Neurotick, Stomatick, Cardiack, and Uterine; it
incides, attenuates, digests, discusses; is alexipharmick, and resists Poison,
used chiefly in the Plague and other malign Diseases, to cure them, and
preserve from them, to expel Poison, extinguish Lust, cure the Pleurisy, the
Colic, bitings of Serpents, mad Dogs or other venomous Creatures.

3. Outwardly used, it is beneficial against Ague-Fits, bathing the Backbone
therewith; it helps also the Headache, Megrim, Vertigo, Lethargy, and malignant
or pestilential Fevers by way of Epithem, being given withal inwardly
according to Art.

4. The Dose is a j. ad ij. in some proper Vehicle, after this manner; Angelica
or Blackcherry-water iiij. Syrup of Citron-peels vj. of this Tincture a j. ad
ij. mix for a Dose, against Diseases of the Head and Womb, Poison, bitings of
mad Dogs, etc. Carduus-water, or Aquae Lactis alexiteriae iij. Syrup of Limons
i. of this Tincture j. to ij. mix for a Dose, against the Plague and all
pestilential and malign Diseases.

5. This Tincture may also be profitably made with the same quantity of the
Tincture of Salt of Tartar, to be given a ss. to j. So also with Spiritus
Intimus, to be given a j. to iij. it is cheaper, and so fitter for the meaner
sort of People, not much inferior to either of the former Preparations, and in
some cases superior to them.

XCIV. Tinctura Salviae absinthiata; Wormwood-Tincture of Sage.
Salmon.] 1. Red Sage carefully dried iiij. Aquae absinthii compositae (whose
Preparation see Chap. 1. Sect. 62. of this Book aforegoing) lb ij. mix in a
Bolthead; digest in a gentle heat close stopped for 14 days, shaking the Glass
once a day; then being very fine, decant the clear Tincture, and keep it for
use.

2. Or for want of this Water, you may make it with Spirit of Sage and addition
of Salt of Tartar; or otherwise with Tincture of Salt of Tartar; as we have in
many other places at large directed.

3. It is Cephalic, Neurotick, Stomatick, Cordiack, Uterine and Arthritick;
provokes Urine and the Terms in Women, yet correct them when too many; is good
against Headachs, Megrims, Vertigoes, Lethargies, Palsies, Convulsions, Cramps,
Catarrhs, Weakness of the Stomach, Indigestion, want of Appetite, Fainting and
Swooning Fits, Vapors, Fits of the Mother, Gout and running Pains in the Limbs,
inwardly given and outwardly bathing the parts affected therewith.

4. Dose a j. ad ij. in some proper Vehicle. Angelica-water, or Carduus or
Blackcherry-water iij. or iiij. Syrup of Black-cherries i. of this Tincture a
j. ad ij. Mix for a Dose to be given in a Morning fasting.

XCV. Tinctura Senae absinthiata; Wormwood-Tincture of Sena.
Salmon.] 1. Choice Alexandrian Sena lb j. Aquae absinthii compositae (in Cap.
1. Sect. 62. of this Book) lb ix. put all into a Glass Mattress, which cover
with a blind Head, and lute well; digest three or four days (or a fortnight,
which is better) in a very gentle heat, then decant the pure red Tincture, and
keep it for use.

2. It is an excellent Purge, and carries off all Humors which are predominant
but chiefly Wind, Water and Melancholy by a Specific Property: It opens
Obstructions of the Spleen, and helps such as are spleenetick and melancholy;
it prevails against Catarrhs and Rheumatisms, the Scurvy, Dropsy, Jaundice,
Gout, and King's Evil; and cures many reputed incurable Diseases. I have also
found it an excellent thing to cure the Rickets in Children, being mixed with a
fit Vehicle.

3. I choose a fortnights digestion rather than two or three days; for though
that shorter time seems to extract as deep Tincture as a longer; yet by
Experience I can tell you, That that which has stood fourteen days upon the
Ingredients, purges almost as much more as the other, which stands only the
shorter time; and without doubt, by that long digestion, the more inward
Vegetable Salt and Sulphur of the Sena are more effectually loosened and
extracted.

4. Dose ab i. ad ij. according to Age and Strength. Carduus-water iiij. of
this Tincture ab i. ad ij. Syrup of Prunes made with Sena i. mix for a Dose;
which is most effectual in the Cases before enumerated. Scurvygrass-water ij.
of this Tincture from ss. ad i. or more; Syrup of Prunes, or Maidenhair, or
Liverwort i. mix for a Dose against the Rickets and King's Evil in Children.

5. But if you desire that it should purge yet more briskly, and carry off the
morbifick cause more absolutely in the Scurvy, Dropsy, Jaundice, Gout and
King's Evil; you may add to the Composition of Resinous Jalap in fine powder
iij. and then it will answer Expectation according to your Desire.

XCVI. Tinctura Stomachica Cordialis, i. Aurantiarum Corticum; The Cordial
Stomach Tincture.
Salmon.] 1. the yellow of Orange-peels fresh and thinly cut lb j. Spirit of
Orange-peels, or instead thereof Tincture of Salt of Tartar lb vj. mix in a
Glass Mattress, which cover with a blind Head; digest in a very gentle heat for
12 or 14 days, then decant the clear Tincture for use.

2. This is the best, most noble and substantial Tincture; but for ordinary use
among the meaner sort, you extract it with rectified S. V. yea, it may be of
good use and service, though done only with common Spirit of Wine.

3. It is a famous Cephalic, Neurotick, Stomatick, Cardiack, Uterine, and
Nephritick; it is also an opener of Obstructions, a provoker of Sweat, a
resister of Poison, an Antidote against Malignity, especially of the Plague and
Spotted-Feaver, hindering Putrefaction, and a singular Diuretic.

4. It cures the Vertigo, Apoplexy, Megrim, Headache, (from a cold cause)
Lethargy, Palsy, Convulsions, and admirable to correct the coldness,
windiness, and weakness of the Stomach, want of Appetite, and Indigestion: It
is an extraordinary Cordial, cheers the Heart, revives the Spirits, represses
Melancholy, is good against Vapors and Fits of the Mother, and after a peculiar
manner rectifies the cold and moist Distemper of the Womb, as also the weakness
thereof, which are commonly together the causes of Barrenness.

5. Dose a ss. ad j. or iss. thus: Angelica or Borrage water iv. Syrup of
Citrons vj. of this Tincture iss. Tincture of Cochenele ss. mix for a Cordial
Dose, against Faintings, Swoonings, Fits, Sickness at Heart, etc.
Blackcherry-water iv. Syrup of Citron-peels vj. of this Tincture a j. ad iss.
Tincture of Man's-Skull ss. mix for a Dose against Distempers of the Head,
Brain and Nerves, bitings of Serpents, and mad Dogs.

XCVII. Tinctura Styracis, Tincture of Styrax.
Salmon.] 1. Styrax Calamita, the best and most Resinous ij. put it into a
Glass Cucurbit, upon which affuse the best tartarised S. V. so much as may
overtop it 4 or 5 inches; digest in a warm Balneo for one day, till the Spirit
is tinged of a red color, which decant, adding more Spirit and digesting, if
you see any of the Resinous parts yet remain: Pu^ these Tinctures together, and
keep them for use.

2. But because this Gum needs a prior Extraction, before you can well extract
the Tincture thereof, we will show you Zwelfer's Method of doing it: the best
and most Resinous Styrax Calamita, beat or hreak it grossly in a Mortar, put it
into an earthen Pan, to which affuse Wine, or Rose Water q. s. dissolve it over
the Fire by boiling, then putting all into a Bag, by the help of a Press strein
it forth hot, after which carefully separate the Rosin from the watery matter,
and keep it for the former use.

3. Schroder advises to choose the fat and clammy Storax, which is red, and with
white Fragments, for that (says he) is best; or the yellow with a sweet scent,
that yields like Honey when it is softened; the branny, black, or moldy,
without scent, is naught.

4. This Tincture is cephalic, pectoral and digestive, good against Colds,
Coughs, Catarrhs, or Distillations of Rheum, Hoarsness, Astma's, and the like:
It mollifies the hardness of the Womb, provokes the Terms, and resists Poison.

5. Dropped into the Ears, it helps the singing and noise in them, and gives ease
in Pains and Aches from any cold cause, being bathed upon the parts afflicted:
It strengthens the Nerves, and is singularly good against Palsies, Cramps,
Convulsions, Bruises, overstraining of the Joints, etc.

6. Taken constantly for some time, it is said to cure Barrenness. I will not
affirm this without any exception, but I knew one Woman which had been without
Children fifteen years, who after she had taken this Tincture constantly for
three or four months, conceived, and had a lusty Child: And another who had
been eight years without a Child, after she had taken it for two months,
conceived and brought forth a lusty Boy. Dose a j. ad ij.

XCVIII. Tinctura Sudorifica, i. Serpentariae Virginianae; The Sudorifick
Tincture, or Tincture of Virginia Snakeroot.
Salmon.] 1. Radix Serpentaria, or Virginian Snakeroot well bruised iss. or ij.
Salt of Tartar i. be at all into a small powder in a hot Iron Mortar, put it
into a Glass Mattress, and affuse thereon the best tartariz'd S. V. lb iss.
cover it with a blind Head, luting the Juncture, and digest for a Month in a
very gentle heat, shaking the Glass once a day; then being fine, decant the
clear Tincture for use.

2. You may also extract it with Tincture of Salt of Tartar, which will be
better than the former; or with tartarised S. V. acuated with Spirit of Nitre
or Sulphur both in the same proportion, which latter will be better against all
malign and pestilential Diseases.

3. It is one of the greatest Antidotes and Alexipharmicks in the World,
performing that which no other Alexipharmick will do. It infallibly cures the
biting of the Rattle-Snake, (the most venomous of all Serpents) and immediately
secures the Patient from Death; its sanative Virtue being as volatile and swift
as the volatility and acuteness of the Poison is fierce and dangerous; yea, and
exceeding it in those respects, it defends the Heart and Vitals from all manner
of danger in that case, as also from the bitings of other Serpents, mad Dogs,
or any other venomous Creature.

4. All these Tinctures are nearly of equal strength, but the last of them is
the more powerful Antidote against the Plague or Pestilence, Spotted-Feaver,
and suchlike malign Diseases: They defend the Heart against the most vigorous
Assaults of the Pestilential Poison, and like an Angel of Peace, speak Safety
to the Sick, if timely given, or before the fatal Signals of Death appear.

5. Dose of any of them a ss. ad j. or iss. thus: Carduus-water iv. Syrup of
Limons i. of any of these Tinctures a ss. ad iss. Bezoar minerale ss. mix for a
Dose, for one assaulted with the Plague or Spotted Fever. Snakeroot-water iv.
Syrup of Juice of Citrons vj. of this Tincture j. Cochenele gr. xvj. mix for a
Dose, against the bitings of Serpents, Rattle-snakes, mad Dogs, Plague, Poison,
etc. It provokes Sweat powerfully.

XCIX. Tinctura Sudorifica minor, i. Valerianae; The lesser Sweating Tincture,
or Tincture of Valerian.
Salmon.] 1. Valerian Roots in powder vj. pure Salt of Tartar j. grind them
together in a hot Iron Mortar, then put them into a Mattress, and affuse
thereon, of the best tartarised S. V. lb iss. mix, digest us in the former, and
decant the clear Tincture for use.

2. You may also make it in the same Proportions with Tincture of Salt of
Tartar, or tartarised S. V. acuated with Spirit of Nitre or Sulphur, or with
the Spiritus Intimus for meaner People, as we have before several times
directed.

3. It is an excellent Sudorifick, and sends out the malignity of the Measles,
Smallpox, Plague, Spotted-Feaver, or of any other malign and pestilential
Distemper, through the Pores of the Skin, saving and defending the Heart and
Vitals from the Poison and Danger.

4. It is aperitive and diuretic, opens Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and
Ureters, used much in Asthma's, Pleurisies, weakness of Sight, Catarrhs,
Jaundice, Ruptures, etc.

5. Outwardly, mixed with an equal quantity of Rosewater, and put into the
Eyes, it strengthens the Sight, and cleanses the Spots thereof: Bathed on the
Head and Temples, it cures the Headache, eases Pains and Aches in other parts
being applied, and is good to cleanse and heal old Ulcers and running Sores.

6. Dose a ss. ad iss. Carduus or Valerian-water iiij. Syrup of Limons i. of
this Tincture j. Bezoar-mineral gr. 10. mix for a Dose, against the Plague,
Spotted Fever, Measles, Smallpox, bitings of Serpents, mad Dogs, etc.

C. Tinctura Taccamahaccae; Tincture of Taccamahac.
Salmon.] 1. Taccamahac in small bits ij. tartarised S. V. lb j. put all into a
Mattress, which cover with a blind Head; digest in a very gentle heat for some
few days, then decant the clear Tincture for use.

2. The same may be done likewise with Tincture of Salt of Tartar, or Powers of
Turpentine, or Spirit of Wine acuated with Spirit of Nitre, or Sulphur, or
Spiritus Intimus.

3. Made either way, it is an excellent Cephalic, Neurotick, Uterine, and
Arthritick. It digests, dissolves, strengthens, softens and discusses Wind; it
eases Pains in the Head, Nerves, Joints, and other parts, proceeding of cold,
being bathed thereon.

4. Inwardly taken, it represses Vapors, and helps the suffocation of the Womb,
strengthens the Stomach and other Viscera, and stops all Defluxions from the
Head to the Eyes, Nose, Mouth, Teeth, Lungs, etc. Dose a ss. ad j.

CI. Tinctura Terebinthinae e Chio; Tincture of Chio Turpentine.
Salmon.] 1. choice Chio Turpentine i. tartariz'd S. V. or Tincture of Salt of
Tartar viij. mix, digest in a Glass Mattress with its blind Head, for 2 or 3
days, in a very gentle heat; so have you Tincture of Turpentine filled with its
thin, aetherial, and volatile Oil.

2. It opens Obstructions of Liver, Spleen, Reins, and Bladder, and is good
against violent Coughs and Distillations of Rheum. It is cephalic, neurotick,
arthritick, uterine, and nephritick. It provokes Urine admirably, dissolves
tartarous Mucilage in the Stomach, Reins, and other parts, and expels with the
Urine, Sand; Gravel, Stones, etc. giving ease in the most intolerable Pains of
that kind.

3. It is given also in a virulent Gonorrhoea, Ulcers of the Urethra, and the
the French Pox; for it is an incomparable Vulnerary, hot, dissolving,
mollifying, and cleansing.

4. It is a good thing also to provoke the Terms, comfort and warm a cold and
weak Womb, and to induce Conception, being daily taken a ss. ad j. thus: choice
Tent, or Mallago Sack iij. or iv. of this Tincture ij. mix for a Dose, to be
taken at night going to Bed.

5. Outwardly, it eases all manner of Pains and Aches proceeding from a cold
cause; is a famous thing in the Gout and Sciatica; dissolves Tumors, and is
prevalent against Numbness, Cramps, Convulsions, Palsies, and other Diseases of
like kind, being only bathed Morning and Evening upon the parts afflicted:
Given inwardly in a Clyster a j. ad ij. it gives ease in the Colic, Stone, and
Griping of the Guts.

6. But Schroder makes it thus: Put the Turpentine into an earthen Dish, and
with a gentle Fire under it, make the Oil to evaporate till there remains only
a very red Colophony, of which draw a Tincture with Spirit of Wine, and at the
bottom there will remain a Balsam to anoint the Reins against the Stone.

7. This Tincture has the Virtues of the former, but not altogether so
powerful, and may be given in the same Dose. In most cases the other is best,
but in a Gonorrhoea, whether simple or virulent, or in an Ulcer of the Reins,
Ureters, or Bladder this much exceeds that.

CII. Tinctura Thymi Citrini; Tincture of Citron, or Limon-Time.
Salmon. 1. Citron or Limon-Time carefully dried and reduced into a fine powder
ij. pure Salt of Tartar i. mix them in a hot Iron Mortar, and grind them well
together; then put them into a Glass Mattress, affusing thereon of tartarised S.
V. xvj. cover it with its blind Head, and digest 14 or 20 days in a very gentle
heat; so will you have a pure red Tincture, having wonderful Virtues, which
keep for use.

2. Or, to the powder of the Time ij. you may put Tincture of Salt of Tartar
xvj. mixing and digesting as before directed, and decanting the Tincture for
use.

3. It is cephalic, neurotick, pectoral, stomatick, cardiack, uterine, and
arthritick: It incides, attenuates, discusses, is alexipharmick, and an
excellent Antiparalitick. It eases Pains of the Head, Nerves, Joints, Stomach,
Bowels, Gripings of the Guts, Colic, Womb, and Joints; helps the Gout, and
Sciatica, bathed on the part, as also Contusions, Bruises, and cold Tumors.

4. It prevails against the Vertigo, Apoplexy, Lethargy, Palsy, Cramp,
Convulsion, Coughs, Colds, Asthma's, Obstructions of the Lungs, Catarrhs,
Fainting, Swooning and Palpitation of the Heart: It warms, comforts and
strengthens any cold, debilitated and weak part, fortifies the Stomach, creates
an Appetite, helps Digestion, provokes the Terms, opens all Obstructions, and
helps most Infirmities of the Womb.

5. It is good against Poison, bitings of Serpents, mad Dogs, or other venomous
Creatures, and expels the malignity and venom of the Spotted-Feaver, Plague,
etc. through the Pores of the Skin. Dose ad j.

CIII. Laudanum liquidum Cydoniatum; Liquid Laudanum with Juice of Quinces.
Bate.] Opium corrected iv. Saffron ij. Juice of Quinces lb iiss. Ale-yest 4
spoonfuls; mix, and let them ferment together in digestion till the Saffron and
Opium have subsided, then express and filter. To the Liquor add Cinnamon ij.
Cloves, Xylo-aloes, yellow Sanders A. j. digest 14 days, then filter, and
evaporate to one half. Willis. It wonderfully eases Pains, induces Sleep, stops
all Fluxes, takes away Anguish, comforts Nature, composes the unquiet Spirits
in the Frenzy, alleviates the Gout, Epilepsy, etc. and being applied, it
admirably takes away the pains of the Gout.

Salmon.] 1. If the Opium be choice Thebean, it is much better without any such
correction; as we have sufficiently proved in our Seplasium, lib. 9. cap. 41.
sect. ^. for being corrected by drying it upon hot Iron plates, as is the usual
way, a great part of the volatile Sulphur (and Salt too) is lost, in which lies
the best and most valuable part of the Opium: And of this Opinion we are not
alone, but also Thibaut, Lemery, and Charras do all of them maintain the same.

2. Liquid Laudanum is often made with S. V. but this is done with an Acid, for
another intention: If the design be to ease the Headache, correct Insomniums, or
vehemently to stupefie, then that made with S. V. is best: But if it is to stop
a Diarrhoea, Dysentery, or Lienteria, or to assuage the pains of the Colic,
pain of the Stomach, Spleen or Hypochonders, then this made with the Juice of
Quinces is to be preferred.

3. Besides this advantage, there is in a Laudanum made with an Acid, that it
never makes the Stomach sick, or causes vomiting; whereas that made with S.V.
often does so, insomuch that it is impossible for some constitutions to bear it.

4. If your Opium be very clean, and without filth, it will convert almost all
of it into Tincture, and leave but little Feces, not above an eighth part of
the whole Mass will be left in the Caput Mortuum.

5. It is a most certain Somniferick and Sudorifick; it allays all pains which
proceed from the motion and activity of Humors, stops spitting of Blood, and
all other Fluxes of Blood, the Menses, and all other Fluxes of the Bowels,
gives immediate ease in the Colic and Stone, stops Defluxions of Rheum on the
Eyes, Nose, Teeth, Jaws, and other parts; and provokes Sweat, by opening the
Pores after a singular manner.

6. Dose a gut. 10 ad 20 or 30. Blackcherry water iv. Tincture of Castor ss. of
this Laudanum gut. 20 or 25, Syrup of Limons vj. mix for a Dose, to stop Fluxes
of the Bowels, etc.

CIV. Laudanum Liquidum Tartarisatum; Liquid Laudanum tartariz'd.
Bate.] Opium ij. Saffron i. Cinnamon, Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, Xylo-aloes, A. j.
Tincture of Salt of Tartar lb ij. mix, digest some days, filter and exhale to
one half. The Virtues and Dose are the same with the former.

Salmon.] 1. This is better to induce Sleep than the former, quiets the Archeus
after a wonderful manner, by sweetening the Juices and Humors, and taking away
their acidity and arimony; it makes those sleep who are troubled with continual
Watchings.

2. It asswages great Headachs, thickens and softens all harsh and sharp Humors
flowing to the Breast and Lungs, stops Fluxes, as Diarrheas, Dysenteries, and
Lienteries; helps a bilious Colic, stops the most vehement Cough and Catarrh,
or any Flux of Humors upon the Lungs or other parts.

3. But in giving of this and all other Laudanums you ought to be cautious, and
not to give them while the Body is full, and has not been evacuated
sufficiently by proper Emeticks, Catharticks, or Clysters, by some of them or
all of them, as the Prudence of the Physician shall determine; nor while there
is a copiousfluxion upon the Breast, caused by thick Humors; nor when there is
pain and stoppage of Breath; or when the Patient is very weak, the Pulses low
and slow, and the natural heat but little, or almost extinct. Dose a gut. xii.
ad 24 or 30.

CHAP. VIII. Of EXTRACTS.
I. Laudanum sine Opio; Landanum without Opium.
Bate.] THE best Myrrh, Mummy, red and yellow Sanders, A. iss. Mace,
Cardamoms, Pepper, Galangal, A. ivss. S. V. lb iij. mix and extract a Tincture
according to Art; filter and add thereto the narcotick Sulphur of Vitriol lb
iij. mix and digest for a month. If you please you may evaporate to a
mellaginous substance, to which you may add Saffron iss. Salt of Pearl iss.
completing the mixture S. A. It is a most powerful Anodyn, stops all sorts of
Fluxes, Catarrhs, Rheums, Coughs, etc. and has the same Virtues with the two
former.

Salmon.] 1. This Medicine is much better in Tincture than in the Extract; for
being extracted with Spirit of Wine, the Sulphur of the Wine in evaporation
will certainly carry off some of the best, most volatile and subtle Particles
of the Ingredients, and leave the Medicine much weaker and dispirited; and
therefore I should choose to add the Saffron, viz. ij. in the first Digestion,
and after decanting and filtering, to add the Salt of Pearl, most of which will
dissolve in the Tincture, because it is made with common S. V. not rectified.

2. This Preparation is taken from Tilingius's Prodromus, clas. 2. tit. 8. p.
463. but differs something both in the number of Ingredients and their
Proportions. Tilingius has it thus: Red Myrrh, Egyptian Mummy, A. j. extract a
Tincture with Succory water. Pouders of red and yellow Sanders, A. i. Mace,
Pepper black and long, Galingal, A. iij. Xylo-aloes, Cardamoms greater and
lesser, A. ij. mix, and with S. V. extract a Tincture as is usual; both these
Tinctures filter apart, and conjoyn, and add narcotick Sulphur of Vitriol ij.
circulate all in a Vessel close stopped for five days, then abstract the S. V. by
distillation in a gentle B. M. to the thickness of Honey, to which add Extract
of Saffron ss. Salt or Magistery of Pearl and Coral, A. i. mix, and make a
Mass. Dose a gr. vi. ad x.

3. But how this narcotick Sulphur is to be made is next to be enquired into,
which Tilingius makes two ways: I. Filings of Mars, p. j. Hungarian Vitriol, or
Vitriol of Venus, p. ij. mix them well, put them into a Glass Cucurbit, upon
which affuse Spirit of Vinegar, so much as to overtop it half an inch; boil and
coagulate in a Sand-heat to dryness, and urge the Fire yet more till it grows
red: To this powder affuse more Spirit of Vinegar, so as to overtop it four
inches; digest some hours in a warm place, and the Tincture will arise, which
decant, filter, and upon the Feces affuse more Spirit, digesting, decanting and
filtering as before, continuing this Work till all the Tincture is extracted;
put these Extractions together, and drop in Gutatim, Oleum Tartari q. s. and
the Sulphur will immediately precipitate; the supernating Spirit of Vinegar
decant and cast away, and sweeten by many ablutions in warm Water; so have you
the Anodyn and fixed Sulphur of Vitriol before mentioned.

4. II. Or thus: Vitriol in fine powder, and by a gentle heat evaporated to
whiteness lb ss. S. V. tartarised xxx. mix and digest for a month in
Horse-dung; decant from the Feces, and distill in B. M. till the residence is of
a yellow color, and of the substance of some distilled Vegetable Oil, as Oil
of Rosemary, Limons, etc. this keep for use.

5. If following the Prescript of our Author, you keep it in Tincture, you may
give it a ss. ad j. but if you reduce it to an Extract according to the
Prescript, you may give it a gr. viij. ad xvj. or to j. Authors say, it is a
famous, great, and most powerful Anodyn, eases all Pains, induces Sleep, and
may be given in all cases in which Laudanum Opiatum is exhibited.

II. * Extractum Absinthii; Extract of Wormwood.
Bate.] It is made of a Tincture drawn forth from the Tops of Wormwood dried,
which being filtrated, is evaporated to the consistency of an Extract; to every
ounce of which there is to be added ss. of the fixed or elementary Salt: You
may also prepare this Extract from the deparated Juice by evaporation in B. M.
S. A.

Salmon.] 1. In making the Tincture you ought to grind the dried Wormwood p.
ij. with Salt of Wormwood or Tartar, p. j. in a hot Iron Mortar, and then
putting them into the Mattress, affuse your tartarised S. V. for by this means
the Tincture will be the sooner and more easily elicited.

2. As to the choice of the Extracts, which is most valuable, whether that made
by Tincture, or that by the Juice: I must confess, the first is the siner
Medicine in some respects, but I cannot be beaten out of this Opinion, That the
Spirit of Wine carries away with it some of the finest, subtilest, and most
valuable parts of the Wormwood, and therefore in that respect should rather
choose the latter.

3. That in making the Extract with S. V. it is better to save the Spirit than
lose it by evaporation, which you may do by drawing it off in a gentle B. M.
and it may well enough go for Spirit of Wormwood; or (being dulcified with
Syrup made of double-refined Sugar and simple Wormwood-water) it may go very
well for a strong Wormwood-water.

4. Either of them are admirable stomatick Medicaments, strengthen and fortify
the Ventricle and all its Faculties, cause a good Appetite and an excellent
Digestion, heat, dry, comfort, and take away the debility and wateriness
thereof: It is good against nauseousness and vomiting; kills Worms, and opens
Obstructions of the Mesentery, and is an excellent thing against the Scurvy in
a cold habit of Body.

5. Dose a ss. ad j. either in a Bolus, with Conserve of Wormwood, or in a Pill
made up with Powder of Wormwood, or dissolved in some of the aforesaid
Wormwood-water and so taken. It is a good thing against intermitting Fevers or
Agues.

III. Extractum Alhandal; Extract of Coloquintida.
Bate.] Pulp of Colocynthis, choice, freed from the Seeds, and in fine powder
iv. Liquorice, Aniseeds a ss. Limewater filtred lb iv. digest 20 days, express
out, and evaporate to a due consistency, S. A. Dose a gr. v. ad xv. and beyond.

Salmon.] 1. It is a famous Purge, and not inferior to any other in the World;
for it universally purges all Humors, and carries off the Recrements from all
parts of the Body, and attracts even from the most extreme even from the most
extreme parts, as Head, Fingers, Toes, Joints, Skin, etc. It prevails against
the Dropsy, Cachexy, Jaundice, and Green Sickness in Virgins, and is a famous
Remedy against the Gout, Sciatica, Rheumatism, King's Evil and the Scurvy in a
cold and moist habit of Body; it provokes the Terms, and brings away both Birth
and Afterbirth, expels the Mola or dead Child; and is excellent against all
Diseases of the Brain, Nerves, Joints, and Lungs, and is therefore of singular
use in Vertigo's, Apoplexies, Lethargies, Epilepsies, Megrim, and inveterate
Headachs.

2. It is the only Specific Purge in all Venereal cases, and may be given for
that purpose a gr. vi. ad j. made up into Pills, or into a Bolus with the Pulp
of Prunes or of a roasted Apple, after which the Sick may drink a draught of
warm Ale, or Metheglin, or choice Canary. I must confess, I can say by
experience, it does more in Pocky Distempers than any other vegetable Purge
whatsoever, its Effects in that Disease being admirable, yea, sometimes
stupendous, so that a man may trust to what it will do.

3. Le Febur's Extract of Colocynthis: the whitest and lightest Colocynthis in
gross powder (but he takes of the Pulp, p. ij. of the Seed p. j. which I
approve not of) imbibe it by little and little with Spirit of Vinegar
impregnated with half an ounce of Sennertus 's Salt of Tartar to every pound of
the Spirit, and put on so much of this Spirit, that it may overtop the
moistened Mass 4 inches; digest in a gentle Ash or Sand-heat for 8 days,
shaking the Glass three or four times, or oftener, every day; let the Mattress
be so large, as not to be above half full, because the Pulp will swell
extraordinarily, and hazard the breaking of the Glass; this done, strain out by
pressing the Tincture, and filter through a Linen Cloth: To the Cake affuse
more fresh Menstruum, shaking and digesting as before 8 days renewing the
Menstruum even the third time; by which means you will extract the whole virtue
and power of the Colocynthis: Join these Tinctures together, and gently
evaporate to the consistency of a^ Extract.

4. It may be given alone in most ordinary Diseases a gr. iij. ad ss. even to
j. after which let the Sick drink a draught of Malmsy, Canary, or Malago Sack,
or strong Mead, or other generous Wine: Or you may mix it with some Mercurial
Preparation, such as is Aurum Vitae, the Prince's Powder, or the like, to be
given against the French Pox, or any Relics of the same; as also against
Dropsies, King's Evil, Rheumatisms, and all arthritical and paralytical
Distempers; after which let the Patient drink warm Broth in which a little Mace
has been boiled.

5. But he proceeds to perfect his Extract after this manner. of the former
Extract iij. soluble Magistry of Coral i. tartarised S. V. so much as to
overtop it 4 inches; digest 30 or 40 days in a very gentle B. M. then add to it
Oil of Nutmegs by expressum iij. mixed with doublere^^ed Sugar in powder vj.
all being well mixed together, abstract the S. V. by distillation, and then
evaporate to the consistency of an Extract. It has all the former Virtues, but
is more corrected, and may be given a j. ad ij.

6. Charras his Extract of Colocynthis. Pulp of white and pure Colocynthis cut
very small lb j. put it into a very large Cucurbit on a Sandheat, and affuse
thereon good new Whitewine 6 pints, cover it with its Head and a Receiver,
luting well the Junctures, and digest with a gentle fire for 12 hours, after
which strain out the Infusion by pressing: Put the Sediment into the Cucurbit,
and affuse upon it a pint or two of good S. V. cover the Vessel with a blind
Head, luting the Juncture, and digest again 12 hours more, but with a little
more heat, then strain and press forth the Tincture with a good strength; mix
it with the former, and filter both through brown Paper; put it again into the
Cucurbit, and abstract in B. M. or a gentle Sand-heat the S. V. which will
serve again for the like work; then put all the remains into a glazed earthen
Pipkin, and in a gentle Sand-heat evaporate all the remaining humidity, till it
comes to the consistency of a Rob or Extract, which keep in a wide-mouthed
Bottle close stopped, to mix with other purging Extracts.

7. This Extract is proper to expel the Serosities of the remote parts of the
Body, and therefore is very good for Dropsies, where gentle Medicines will not
prevail: It is also an excellent thing in Diseases of the Joints and
Rheumatisms, especially against the Gout, Sciatica, and King's Evil, and all
sorts of strumous Swellings, mixing it with other Extracts, as that of Rhubarb,
to qualify its activity, and fortify the Bowels at the same time. Dose alone
in Pills a gr. iij. ad. x. and accordingly to be proportioned, with respect to
the strength of those it is mixed withal.

8. Or thus, according to Le Mort. Pulp of Colocynthis q. v. affuse thereon
boiling Water, which digest thereon in a Sand-heat 24 hours; express the
Liquor, and put on more boiling Water, which digest and express, as before; and
continue this operation so long, till the Water be no more colored: Put all
these tinged Liquors together, and evaporate to the consistency of Honey, to
which put a half part of rectified S. V. and keep it in a wide-mouthed Glass
close stopped for use. It is more gentle than other Preparations, and works in
less dose.

9. I now come to propose an Extract of my own. choice white Pulp of
Coloquintida cut small with a pair of Sizers lb j. Rain or Spring Water lb xij.
mix and boil all in a large Earthen or Iron-pot for 6 or 8 hours, then express
strongly: To the Feces put Water lb xij. more; boil again 10 or 12 hours with a
good Fire, and whilst hot express again strongly: To the Feces put more Water
lb vj. or viij. and boil again for 14 or 16 hours, and strain out again
strongly: Mix all these Decoctions together, and boil them till half the liquor
is evaporated; this being cold, will be a perfect Liver or Gelly, which you may
cut: Continue a gentle evaporation, till it comes to the consistency of an
Extract to be made up into Pills: But if you determine it for any long keeping,
you must evaporate most of the humidity, and then moisten it with Chemical Oil
of Limons, or Caraways, and so keep it in a Jar-glass or Gallypot, tied close
over with a wet Bladder for use. It has all the before enumerated Virtues, and
may be given a gr. iij. ad x. more or less, according to Age, Strength, and the
Disease.

10. In this last Preparation here is to be noted, that at length you will not
have a quarter part of Feces to be cast away, but the greatest part of the Pulp
dissolves, and becomes a Gummy Extract, a Medicine truly great, and beyond any
other Purger in the vegetable Kingdom.

11. Also instead of the chemical Oil of Limons or Caraways, if they cannot be
had, you may add a quarter part of pure and true Oil of Nutmegs, or Mace by
expression, which will not only correct its Violence, but also preserve it from
decay.

IV. * Exeractum Antiscorbuti^^m: Extract against the Scurvy.
Bate.] It is made of the Magma of the Aqua Antiscorbutica in chap. 1. sect. 4.
of this Book.

Salmon.] 1. It is a good thing against the Cachexia, Dropsy, Leucophlegmatia,
Jaundice, Scurvy, and other like Diseases which infest the Blood and Flumors:
It strengthens the Stomach, and makes a good digestion.

2. Dose ss. ad j. You may take it thus: Conserve of Damask-roses ij. of the
Extract ij. mix for a Dose, to be taken at night going to Bed. Or thus:
Blackcherry-water iv. Aq. Antiscorbuticae i. of this Extract ss. dissolve and
mix for a Dose in the morning fasting.

V. * Extractum Chalybis; Extract of Steel.
Bate.] Juice of Sorrel depurated lb iv. Tamerinds i. boil a little and
clarify: In this macerate warm, Filings of Mars ij. for 4 days, often stirring
it; then strain out, and in B. M. inspissate to a due consistency. This is also
called the Magistery of Mars. It is otherwise prepared in like manner with
Juice of Apples, instead of the Juice of Sorrel and Tamarinds. Dose a ss. ad j.

Salmon.] 1. You may prepare it also with many other things, as with strong
Beer, White Wind, Rhenish-wine, Juice of Oranges or Limons or Quinces, etc.

2. And whereas our Author advises only to 4 days digestion, it is true, it may
serve; but I who have made the Medicine many times over, can tell that it will
be much better if it stands a much longer time; and if you have the patience to
attend the digestion, I can assure you, the longer it stands, the better you
will find your Preparation.

3. It will gradually change color, and by long standing grow thick and black,
like Ink, but this it will not come to in a few days, the body of Mars is not
so easily opened: The last time I made it, it stood 7 or 8 months upon the
Filings, which produced me a most incomparable Medicine.

4. But such a length of time you cannot permit it upon Juice of Sorrel, or any
other unfermented juice, because it will be apt to corrupt: In this case, at
the end of 3, 4, or 5 days, you must put in lbiss. or more of double-refined
Sugar, and then digest on in order.

5. It is a famous Medicine against the Cachexy, Dropsy, Obstructions of Liver,
Spleen, Mesentery, and Womb, and in particular, a powerful thing against the
Greensickness in Virgins; it commonly gives some relief at second or third
dose, and by a constant taking of it, in a little time a perfect Cure.

6. It is best to be given at night going to Bed, in a Glass of new Beer or
Rhenish-wine and Sugar, because then the Patient keeps warm upon it; but if it
be taken in the morning, the Sick ought to rise, and stir after it, to get
themselves into a good heat, without which it has not so good an effect: And
since the weakness of many will not permit this early rising and exercise, they
must take it at night, as before directed.

VI. * Extractum Diatessaron; An Extract of the Species of Diatessaron.
Bate.] Species of Diatessaron iij. Roots of Angelica i. Zedoary ss. Seeds of
Carduus ij. Waters of Scordium Compound, of Carduus, of Bawm, of Angelica, A.
lb j. mix, and extract a Tincture S. A. and exhale to a due consistency. It is
good against cold Diseases, both of the Head and Brain, as the Palsy, and of
the Ventricle or Stomach, as Inflations or Wind, and from that pain, want of
Digestion, etc. and of the Liver also, as the Dropsy, Cachexy, Obstructions. It
is powerful also against the bitings of mad Dogs, and prevails against Poison.

Salmon.] 1. What the Species Diatessaron are you may see in our Pharm. Land.
lib. 4. cap. 22. sect. 18. which are Roots of Gentian, round Birthwort, Myrrh,
and Bayberries, Ana.

2. That the Menstruum will be too weak to make a good Extraction: Your best
way will be, to abate the full half of the quantities of the cold Waters, and
add as much to it of good Spirit of Wine.

3. Or else, after the Extraction is made with the cold Waters, decanting the
Tincture, to affuse on the Magma lb ij. or better of good Spirit of Wine, to
digest 4 or 6 days in a gentle heat, and then decanting this Tincture also, to
mix it with the former Tincture, and then in B. M. to abstract the S. V. which
having obtained, you may in a small clean earthen Sa^cepan, or some suchlike,
evaporate the remaining humidity to a just consistency. Dose a ss. ad iss.

VII. * Extractum Drasticum; The active or working Extract.
Bate.] Choice Scammony finely pounder'd iij. Juice of Oranges expressed with
the Peels lb ij. mix, and digest warm for 6 days; strain out by expressing, and
exhale to the consistency of a Mass for Pills. Dose a ss. ad ss.

Salmon.] 1. (...) activum significat, quod vires suas in profundum
transmittit, and penitus transfundit. The Title shows the mighty power and
force of the Medicine, which is able to send and extend its efficacy, both to
the most extreme parts, and the most recluse Caverns of Nature in Man's Body.

2. Yet it works gently and pleasantly, without griping or making sick, or
scarcely any disturbance to Nature, carrying off the most inveterate and
rebellious Diseases. It purges all Humors, and is a Specific against the Gout,
Rheumatisms, and most other Pains and Aches of the Joints, especially if coming
of Cold.

3. It is indeed an excellent thing, as it is now prepared, yet it will work
but slowly in some Bodies: In this case it will be good to add to each Dose gr.
iij. or iv. of Extract of Colocynthis. It will not only make the Medicine work
more lively and briskly, but also vastly augment its Virtue, to all the
purposes it is intended for.

VIII. * Extractum Ecphracticum; The opening Extract.
Bate.] Wood of Aloes, Galingal, Cloves, A. ss. Cinnamon, Gentian, Cortex
Winteranus, A. i. Horse-radish-roots ij. Calamint, Pennyroyal, Wormwood, A. M.
j. Mars prepared with Sulphur viij. White Wind, and a decoction of white
Tartar, A. lb iiss. Digest, strain out, and exhale, to a due consistency S. A.
adding fine Aloes in fine powder i. Myrrh ij. Micklethw. It is a most effectual
Remedy against the Green Sickness in Virgins, and the Scurvy. It has a great
Virtue in opening Obstructions, chiefly of the Liver, Spleen, Womb, and
Mesentery, and curing those Diseases proceeding therefrom.

Salmon.] 1. (...) medicamenta, apud Galenum, quae meatus obstructos expediunt.
An Ecphractick Medicament is such a one as opens Obstructions of the Passages,
and a powerful one of that kind is this here of our Authors.

2. You had better make it thus: First extract a strong Tincture from the
Species with S. V. grinding their pouders first with Salt of Tartar in a hot
Iron Mortar, then make a strong Extract of the Mars by itself, with the
White Wind and decoction of white Tartar: Put these Tinctures together, and in
B. M. abstract the S. V. after which evaporate the remaining humidity to a due
consistency, and so add the Aloes and Myrrh as before directed.

3. The Mars is thus to be prepared: Common Sulphur iij. Filings of Mars i. mix
and put them over a Fire, and kindle the Sulphur, oftentimes stirring of it,
till the deflagration is over; to what remains add more fresh Sulphur ij.
deflagrate again, then being cold, grind it into a subtle powder for the
intended use.

4. It is good against the Cachexia, Dropsy, yellow Jaundice, black Jaundice,
Obstructions of the Courses, Vapors, and Fits of the Mother; it sweetens the
Blood and Juices, and is excellent in many other cases. Dose a ss. ad iss. in a
proper Vehicle.

IX. * Extractum Febrifugum; The Ague Extract.
Bate.] Jesuits Bark in fine powder iv. Centory the less, Gentian, A. ij.
Virginian Snakeroot i. Spirit of Wine lb iv. vel q. s. extract a Tincture, and
evaporate, S. A. The Title shows the Virtues. Dose a ss. ad ss.

Salmon.] 1. The best way will be, to draw off the S. V. in B. M. to preserve
it, with which you may make an Extraction another time.

2. It Is a famous Ague-frighter, seldom or never failing the Cure at some few
Doses taking; though, to speak not only my own Thoughts, but my Experience
also, the Tincture extracted with a good, strong, and rough Claret Wine, or red
Port, is much more powerful to the intention it is given for, and more
certainly effects the Cure; for it is certain, that the S. V. in the abstraction
or evaporation carries away many of the volatile Particles of the mixed with it,
and such as, circulating with the Blood, convey the power, virtue, and force of
Medicament into it.

3. It ought not to be given to such as are apt to be costive, or have hard and
dry Bodies, or afflicted with any fly prick Humor, or Scirrhous, or Cancerous
Tumors; ^or to Women whose Courses are stopped, or are apt to be troubled with
Vapors or Hysteric Fits.

4. And before it is given, the Body ought to be well cleansed, if possible
both upwards and downwards, lest it lock up into it the morbifick matter, or
the malignity of the Distemper, which reverting inwards, immediately smights
the Vitals, and puts a period to Life.

5. Above all things, you ought to avoid giving it in any continent or
continual Fever, for in those Distempers it is no better than Poison, and
certainly fatal if accompanied with any Putrefaction or Malignity; for, the
Pores of the Body being by it constringed, and the other Avenues stopped up, the
Poison of the Disease unavoidably strikes the Heart, and makes the vital Flame
a Sacrifice.

6. You are to vary the Dose according to the kind of the Ague, the age of the
Patient, and strength or contumacy of the Distemper; on which considerations
you may give it from ss. ad j. yea, in some Constitutions ad iss.

X. Extractum Fellis; Extract of Galls.
Bate.] Bullocks Galls dried in the Sun ij. S. V. lb iss. mix and extract a
Tincture, which evaporate S. A. It provokes the Terms. Dose a j. ad ss. daily.
It operates by Stool.

Salmon.] 1. This is deduced from Hartman's Tincture of Bulls Gall, designed by
him for beautifying the Face and Skin, and for taking away heat, pimples,
freckles, sunburnings, tawniness, and other Deformities thereof.

2. You are either to augment or diminish the Dose, according to the Age of the
Person and Exigency of the Distemper; to an elder person, and where the
Obstruction has been long, you may give from ss. ad j. To young Girls, and
where the Obstruction is recent, from j. ad ss. But if it be a Chlorosis, or
Greensickness confirmed, you must not dispute, but give it in the largest dose,
and that every night going to Bed.

3. It is also an approved Medicine for killing Worms, and expelling them out
of the Body. I knew it given to a young Girl of about 14 years of age, who
looked pale, and always complained of a pain at her Stomach; the Physicians
declared it to be the Greensickness, which I believe was the least of the
effects; however, giving this Extract to ij. and repeating the dose several
nights going to Bed, with an intention to provoke the Terms, it had this effect
upon her, that it brought away long Worms, about 8 or 10, (I remember not
exactly which) and the Patient immediately thereupon grew perfectly well; and
afterward being repeated, it plentifully brought down her Courses.

4. I have also known it given to several others with the same success against
the Worms; and I knew one person from whom at times it brought away about
fourteen long Worms.

5. Dissolved in a Decoction of Centory the less and Carduus, and exhibited
Clyster-wise, it kills the Worms called Ascarides, and brings them away in
great quantities, even the very bags wherein their Eggs or Seed is lodged, and
in which they engender: But if you give it Clyster-wise, you may increase the
dose a j. ad ij. or more.

XI. * Extractum Ictericum; The Extract against the yellow Jaundice.
Bate.] Fresh made Sheeps-dung iv. Celandineroots x. Turmerick iss. Earthworms
prepared vj. Centory the less, M. ij. Mars prepared ij. Juice of Limons vj.
Cichory-water lb iv. infuse all for 48 hours, and then express out, which
evaporate to a consistency for Pills, adding Earthworms prepared iss. ^red
Coral, Amber, Ivory, A. ij. mix them. Dose ss. thrice a day, drinking after it
iv. of the Icterick Decoction.

Salmon.] 1. I am of opinion, that Goose-dung is better than Sheeps-dung, but
you may take what is readiest at hand: And the Celandine-roots must be of the
greater* Celandine, not the Roots of Pilewort.

2. The Earthworms are prepared by putting them alive into a Pail of Water all
night in which they will cleanse and purify themselves, the next day take them
out and dry them gently in the Sun, or in a Baker's Oven after the Bread is
taken out; being through ^ry, out them into bits, and beat them into a fine
powder, which keep for this use.

3. The Mars is thus prepared: Filings of Mars q. v. put it into a Glass
Vessel, and affuse thereon AF. q. s. or so much till it will no longer
effervesce, and put it into digestion for 24 hours, then over a gentle heat
evaporate the AF. to dryness, so will you have in the bottom a red Calx, which
reverberate in a Crucible red hot, then cool, levigate, and keep it for use.

4. The Title shows the intention, besides which it is very powerful to open
all sorts of Obstructions of the Viscera, and cure the Greensickness in
Virgins; you may give it a j. ad ij. or j.

XII. Extractum Maltae compositum; Extract of Malt Compound.
Bate.] Leaves of Coltsfoot, fresh-spotted Lungwort, A. vj. Liquorice viij.
Raisin^ stoned lb ij. strongest Ale not hopt, of a due age, Gall. vj. boil to
the Consumption of Gall. iv. then express strongly, and evaporate to the
consistency of Honey. Dose ij. twice or thrice a day, against the Phthisick, or
Consumption of the Lungs, etc.

Salmon.] 1. If you add to each ounce of the Extract Catechu in fine powder,
Bezoar-mineral, A. j. volatile Salt of Vipers, or volatile Salt of Hogs-flesh,
Cochinele, A. ss. It will be much more effectual to the purpose intended, for
volatile Animal Salts are the very radical matter of Flesh, and the very things
without which it cannot well be generated: The Bezoar-mineral absorbs the
acidity of the Ulcer, and the Catechu heals and constringes, whilst the
Cochinele agreeing with the Volatile Salt, conspire to the perfect restoration.

2. This Extractum Malti is really a good thing for this purpose; but besides
that, it is famous for strengthening weak Backs, and easing the pain thereof,
though never so vehement. I knew a Woman who could scarcely go or stand
upright, but had been for many months in extreme misery and pain, who by the
taking this Extract, with the addition here made, but for 14 days, was
perfectly cured beyond expectation.

3. This very Medicine with the addition of the volatile Animal Salt, does not
only cure a Phthisis, but also a Tabes or Pining, and sometimes that incurable
Disease called Marasmos; at least, it prevails against a Hectic, and restores
all the Decays of Nature.

4. You may give it a j. ad iij. morning fasting, an hour before Dinner, and
last at night, drinking after it half or three quarters of a pint or more of
strong Broth.

XIII. * Extractum Melampodii; Extract of black Hellebor.
Bate.] The Roots of the true black Hellebor, with the string in gross powder
vj. Aniseeds i. Spirit of Wine lb iij. infuse all in a gentle heat for 6 days,
then express and evaporate. Dose a ss ad j.

Salmon.] 1. The better way will be to make a double Extract, first with Water
and Salt of Tartar, and then drying the Roots to make a second Extraction with
S. V. then joining these Tinctures together, to abstract the S. V. in B. M. and
after to evaporate the humidity to a just consistency.

2. By this means you will have all the good parts of the Hellebor, which the
S. V. would not be able to extract of itself; for the more aqueous Particles
are first drawn forth by the Water and Salt of Tartar; then the resinous parts
are extracted with the S. V. so that joining these two together, and
abstracting, you must necessarily have all that is excellent out of the
Hellebor.

3. You may give it in strong Bodies to ss. It powerfully opens Obstructions of
the Spleen, corrects and evacuates Melancholy, and is a Specific against
Madness, and of great use to be constantly given (for some time) to such as are
apt to have their Paroxisms return at some certain times.

4. Where there is a real Madness, there you may venture to give it in a much
larger dose, because Experience does daily evince, that in such persons even
very strong Medicaments work very hardly, and sometimes not at all: Yet that
you may be sure not to over-dose them, the best way will be to increase them
gradually, till you see the utmost which may be safely given them.

XIV. Extractum Paregorgicum; The Extract easing Pain.
Bate.] Philonum Romanum iss. Mithridate v. London Treacle, Diascordium, A.
iij. Carduus-water lb j. S. V. iij. digest, strain out, and evaporate S. A. It
is profitable against contagious Diseases, Catarrhs, Pains, Watchings, etc.

Salmon.] 1. The Composition of the Philonum Romanum, its Virtues and Uses, you
may see in our Pharmacopoeia Londinensis, lib. 4. cap. 22. sect. 22. which is
the Philonum majus Nicolai. The Mithridate, London Treacle, and Diascordium,
you may also see in the same Dispensatory, so that upon the matter this is only
a Composition made of many other Compounds.

2. The Extraction will be best to be done first with the Carduus-water, and
afterward with a sufficient quantity of the S. V. then these two Tinctures or
Extractions to be mixed together and digested for some little time, which being
done, the S. V. may be abstracted in B. M. and the aqueous humidity evaporated
to the due consistency of an Extract.

3. It has all the Virtues of Laudanum, famous against all manner of Pains,
whether external or internal in any part of the Body; it stops Fluxes of Rheum
upon any part, Fluxes of the Bowels, as Diarrhoea, Bloody Flux, Lienteria, and
Flux of the Liver, as also the overflowing of the Terms, Whites, etc. It
prevails wonderfully against the Strangury and Colic, and is famous against
Coughs, Colds, Catarrhs, etc. Dose a j. ad j.

XV. * Extractum Pectorale; The Pectoral Extract.
Bate.] Leaves of Scabiose, Hyssop, Ground Ivy, A. M. xij. white Horebound,
***Knapweed, A. M. x. Coltsfoot, Elecampane, A. M. xviij. bruise, and express
the Juice, depurate it, and evaporate to the consistence of Honey, S. A. Dose
one spoonful thrice a day, drinking after it the Pectoral Decoction.

Salmon.] 1. If you evaporate it to a higher consistency than that of Honey,
and then add a third part of Honey or double-refined Sugar, it will be never
the worse, and I am sure will keep much the better.

2. The pectoral Decoction, with its Virtues and Use, you may see in our Pharm.
Londinensis, lib. 4. cap. 14. sect. 4. which is also designed against the same
Diseases, of which the Patient may take half a pint at a time.

3. It opens Obstructions of the Breast and Lungs, is good against Coughs, Cold,
Asthma's, Wheesings, shortness of Breath, viscous Phlegm lodged in the
Ventricle, as also in the Bowels, Reins, or Bladder: It takes away Hoarseness,
and recovers the Voice of such as have lost it.

XVI. * Extracticum Peticum; Extract of Tobacco.
Bate.] Leaves of outlandish Tobacco ij. Liquorice i. fresh leaves of
Asarabacca x. Aniseeds iij. Coriander ij. Roots of Galingal, Angelica, A. viij.
Hydromel xx. mix, and digest warm for 24 ounces, then express out the juice or
humidity, and exhale to a due consistency. Dose ad ij. It powerfully purges
thick Humors, both by Vomiting and Stool, and is happily given against Asthma's
and tartarous Obstructions of the Lungs, as also against Fevers, chiefly
Tertians and Quartans; it is profitable against the Jaundice, Dropsy and Gout.

Salmon.] 1. It is a good Medicine for the purposes intended, but in some
strong Bodies you must be forced to give it to j. else it will scarcely work,
but only make the Patient very sick.

2. In the working of it you must be sure to provide two or three quarts of
Posset Drink or Broth aforehand, before it is given, and after every Vomit,
immediately to cause the Sick to drink three quarters of a pint thereof, for by
that means the Vomit will work with much more ease and pleasure, and the
Patient will be only vehemently sick at the moment of vomiting.

3. That in some Constitutions it will work but moderately, as 5 or 6 times,
whereas in others it will work even extravagantly, and give sometimes twenty or
more Vomits: In this latter case you may quell the Violence of it, by giving
very hot Broth well seasoned with Salt, and repeating thereof for a while, so
will the vomiting cease, and the Medicine exercise its force downwards.

4. Some exhibit it thus: Carduus-water iv. Oxymel of Squils simple vj. of this
Extract ij. mix for a dose, to be given in a morning fasting. It is excellent
against tertian and quartan Agues, to be given 3 or 4 hours before the Fit.

XVII. * Extractum Sarfae; Extract of Sarsaparilla.
Bate.] It is made out of the Magma of the Aqua Sarsae composita, ( in Chap. 1.
Sect. 52.) aforegoing.

Salmon.] 1. It is an excellent thing to sweeten the Blood and Humors,
strengthen the Stomach, resist the progress of the Scurvy, and restore in
Consumptions, and is in particular an Antidote against the French Disease.

2. It may be given from j. to ij. or more, in some proper Stomatick,
Restorative, Antiscorbutick, or Antivenereal-water, according to the quality of
the Distemper and disposition of the Body taking it; and it is to be given
every night going to Bed, for some considerable time.

3. For as it is only an Alterative, so it alters the Body but by degrees, and
not all at once; and such kind of Medicines are not to be given only for a
little while, for a spurt and away, but assiduously for several weeks together,
that thereby they may accomplish a change of the Habit, and so effect what they
are designed for.

XVIII. Extractum Catarrahale; An Extract against Catarrhs.
It is made of the Tinctures constituting the Extractum Panchymagogum at Sect.
21. following, mixed together in the same proportion; to which you may add
Tincture of Opium, in such proportion, as that ss. of the Extract may contain
gr. j. of Opium.

Salmon.] 1. Or thus: Of all the Tinctures of the Panchymagoge Extract, in the
same proportion xxx. strongest Tincture of Opium i. mix and evaporate to an
Extract. Or thus: Take of the said Tinctures evaporated to an Extract iij. vj.
Extract of Opium j. mix them well together.

2. It is not only good to stop Catarrhs, or Defluxions of Rheum upon the
Thorax and Lungs, but prevails against a Rheumatism over the whole Body, eases
pains in any part, and particularly is a Specific in the Gout.

3. For it not only gives ease by virtue of the Opium, but also effectually
carries off the morbifick cause, and that without any pain, griping of the
Bowels, or molestation of the Stomach, and that so pleasantly, as if the Sick
had taken no Physic at all.

4. Dose a ss. ad ij. and in very strong Bodies to j. it ought to be given
overnight, and it will work the next morning very well and kindly, for the
Opium being added, hinders its immediate operation.

XIX. Extractum Hypnoticum, seu Laudanum; The sleeping Extract.
Opium x. Nutmegs, Saffron, A. ij. Castoreum i. make an Extract with S. V. S. A.

Salmon.] 1. The Ingredients being of differing natures and qualities, ought to
have different ways of extraction; the Opium ought to be extracted with a
twofold Menstruum, viz. first with Water, then with S. V. and these Tinctures
to be added together, and then the S. V. to be abstracted in B. M. and the
aqueous humidity to be evaporated, as we have taught in our Seplasium, lib. 9.
cap. of Opium, the reason of which double Extraction you will there see.

2. The Tincture of the Nutmegs ought to be extracted with the Tincture of Salt
of Tartar; so also the Tinctures of the Saffron and of the Castoreum, but each
apart: Or, the Saffron being gently dried, and ground with Salt of Tartar in a
hot Mortar, may be extracted with rectified S. V. and the Castoreum with Spirit
of Castor; as in the proper places we have taught.

3. These several Tinctures are to be mixed together, and the S. V. abstracted
in B. M. to the consistency of an Extract, which then you are to mix exactly
with the Extract of the Opium, and so keep it for use.

4. It causes Sleep and Rest, alleviates all manner of Pains, in what part of
the Body soever; stops Fluxes, whether of Humors or of the Bowels; stops a
Cough, and is good against most Diseases of the Breast and Lungs, having indeed
all the virtues of Laudanum. Dose a gr. j. ad gr. ij. or iij. at night going to
bed.

XX. Extractum Lenitivum; The Lenitive Extract.
Aloes, Jalap, A. vj. Rhubarb Sena, A. xij. extract the Tinctures with
rectified S. V. with which mix Centory the less, Gentian, Wormwood, Myrrh,
Camomile-flowers, Gum Ammoniacum, Nutmegs, Saffron, A. ij. Castoreum i. Assa
foetida ss. abstract to a due consistency of the Extract.

Salmon.] 1. These differing Substances ought to have different ways of
extracting, or are to be extracted apart, and with differing Menstruums. The
Aloes ought not to be extracted with S. V. but only with Water, or some proper
juice, as of Violets, Damask-Roses, etc. because the resinous Substance of the
Aloes, is of no use in this Medicament, but rather hurtful, causing by its
tenacious quality, (whereby it adheres more than it ought to do, to the
Tunicles of the Stomach, and Bowels, etc.) Gripings, and other ill accidents in
its operation.

2. To save the labor in extracting of the Jalap, you may take the Rosin
thereof, which is ready done to your Hands, otherwise the Tincture is to be
extracted with tartariz'd S. V.

3. The Rhubarb and Sena, by reason they consist mostly of aqueous Particles,
may be extracted with a mixed Menstruum: Being reduced to Powder, let them be
ground in a hot Mortar with Salt of Tartar iij. and then infused in Whitewine,
or Mead, or Metheglin 6 quarts, increasing the heat till it simpers, or comes
almost to boiling, for the space of 10 or 12 hours, being close covered, after
which the Infusion is to be strongly strained out by expression.

4. The Cemory, Genrian, Wormwood and Saffron being thoroughly dried, and in
powder, are to be ground in a hot Iron Mortar, with their half quantity of Salt
of Tartar, and then their Tincture is to be extracted with tartarised S. V.

5. The Nutmegs and Castoreum are to be extracted with Tincture of Salt of
Tartar; the Assa foetida and Myrrh with Spirit of Wine, and the Ammoniacum with
some proper Water, or Vinegar, or Juice of Limons: This done, all those done
with Aqueous Menstruums are to be mixed together, and the humidity evaporated
to a due consistency.

6. In like manner those done with the Spirituous Menstruums, as Tincture of
Salt of Tartar, and S. V. they are to be mixed together, and the S. V.
abstracted in B. M. which done, these two kinds of Extracts are to be mixed
exactly together, so will you have a generous Lenitive Extract, freed from all
the ill qualities of the Ingredients, as making sick at Stomach, Vomitings,
Gripings, etc.

7. It purges gently and pleasantly, opens Obstructions of the Viscera, and is
a famous Antifebritick, being good against both Tertians and Quartans. It
strengthens and fortifies the Stomach, creates a good Appetite, takes away
fainting and sick Fits, caused by the quantity and sharpness of Humors lurking
in those parts.

8. It is also a singular thing in hypochondriack Melancholy, and gives ease in
Distempers of the Spleen though of many years standing: It expels Wind, brings
down the hardness of Childrens Bellies, and is a Specific against the Colic,
carrying off the viscous and tartarous Humors which cause it. Dose a ss. ad j.
in the morning fasting, with observation as in other Purges.

XXI. Extractum Panchymagogon; The universal purging Extract; or Extract
purging all Humors.
Aloes, Jalap, A. vj. Rhubarb Sena, A. xij. Scammory i. black Hellebor,
Turbeth, A. iij. extract a Tincture with rectified S. V. to which add Gentian,
Centory the less Camomile-flowers, Gum Ammoniacum, Nutmegs, Saffron, A. iij.
Castoreum iss. Assa foetida vj. extract to a due consistency, S. A.

Salmon.] 1. What Ingredients in this are the same with the former, are to be
extracted in like manner, so that we need not repeat the same things over again.

2. The Scammony and Turbith are to be extracted with S. V. tartarised, because
their purging Properties consist most in resinous Particles. Or you may extract
them as also the Tincture of Hellebor, as we have before taught in Chap. 7.
Sect. 27. and Sect. 58, and 77. of this Book.

3. This done, put the aqueous Extractions together, and evaporate to the
consistency of an Extract; and put the Spiritous Extractions, and abstract in
B. M. the S. V. leaving the Magma of a due consistency, which mix well with the
former aqueous Extract, and keep it for use.

4. It purges all tartarous and viscous Humors admirably from all parts of the
Body, even from the most remote, by which means it carries off the
progenerative cause of the Scurvy, Dropsy, Stone and Gout, and all other
Diseases having affinity with them.

5. It is a singular good Purge in Melancholy, and to carry off the Recrements
of the Spleen, and to evacuate and cleanse the Stomach and Bowels in Agues,
before the administration of the Cortex or Pulvis patrum; for which purpose it
ought to be given 2 or 3 times, after which you need not fear to administer the
Cortex with both success and safety.

6. It opens Obstructions of the Womb, provokes the Terms, and is good against
hysteric Fits, and cleanses the uterine parts of all Impurities. It prevails
against old Headachs, the Megrim, Lethargy, Vertigo, Apoplexy, Palsy, and most
other cold and moist Diseases of the Head, Brain and Nerves.

7. Being made into long Pellets, and put up the Nostrils as an Errhine (whilst
soft) it purges the Head admirably, and cures inveterate Headachs, Lethargies,
Apoplexies, by drawing away the morbifick cause through the Nostrils. Dose
inwardly a j. ad ij. in the morning fasting, with Cautions as in other Purges.

XXII. Phosphorus; An Extract out of Urine.
Bate.] It is made of the Magma after the distillation of the Spirit of Wine,
with a little Sal Armoniack, by distilling with degrees of Fire in a Glass
Retort into a Receiver half full of Water. It is diuretic and diaphoretick:
Dose ss.

Salmon.] 1. How the solid Phosphorus is made, with several Observations upon
it, you may see at large in our Seplasium, lib. 5. cap. 1. sect. 11, 12, 13,
14, 15, 16, and 17. so that we need not say much more of it in this place.

2. The Aereal or Liquid Noctiluca or Phosphorus, which according to Mr. Boyl's
Process is thus: Take a considerable quantity of humane Urine, (because it
yields but a small quantity or proportion of Luciferous matter) let it be
digested or putrefied a competent time before it be used, then distill it with a
moderate heat till the spirituous parts are drawn off, and abstract the
superfluous moisture, till the remaining substance be brought to a consistence
somewhat thick like a Syrup, or a thin Extract, this well incorporate with
thrice its weight of fine white Sand, to which join a large Receiver: The two
Vessels being carefully luted together, place the Vessel upon a naked fire,
which make and increase gradually for 5 or 6 hours, that all that is either
phlegmatic or otherwise volatile, may come first over: This done, increase the
fire for 5 or 6 hours more, which let be as strong and intense as a strong
Furnace may be capable of giving; so will there come over good store of white
Fumes, (almost like those which appear in the distillation of Oil of Vitriol)
which when they are past, and the Receiver grows clear, after a while there
will succeed another sort, which in the Receiver will seem to give a bluish
light, almost like that of little burning Matches dipped into Sulphur: And last
of all, the fire being very vehement, there will come over another Substance,
supposed to be more ponderous than the former, for that it falls through the
Water to the bottom of the Receiver, which when taken out (and partly even
whilst is stays there) appears by several effects, and other Phoenomena, to be
of a Luciferous nature.

3. From the foregoing Process (says he) occasion may be taken to enquire,
whether the matter wherein the shining faculty chiefly resides does not
consist, not (as one would expect) in or of the volatile and spirituous parts
of our Animal Liquor, but of its (not absolutely, but) more fixed Salt and,
ponderous fetid Oil, associated or mixed in a peculiar manner or proportion.

4. From whence occasion may be taken to propose Conjectures of the cause of
the lucidness of the Luciferous matter, and also, both to add somewhat about
the despised Sapa of Urine, in reference to some uncommon Menstruums, and to
make enquiry into other things, relating to the nature of Light and Flame,
especially as found in the Noctiluca.

5. And since we have been discoursing of this Noctiluca or Phosphorus, it will
not be much from the matter to give you here with it the Phosphorus Balduini,
or Bolonian Stone, (as is supposed) at least something like to it, from the
same Author, which is this. Fine white Chalk, dissolve it in good Spirit of
Nitre, or clean Aquafortis, filtrate it through Cap-paper, and the clear
Solution evaporate, till there remains a dry Substance; with this white Calx
overlay the inside of some Vessel made of good Earth, which will endure the
Fire, and that of a round figure, which is more convenient than that of
ordinary Crucibles, and to the matter contained in this Vessel give a due
degree of fire for about half an hour, or an hour, (according to the largeness
of it and other circumstances) which it is not easy to hit, and requires a
conveniently-shap'd Vessel, whereby the flame or heat may be reverberated, till
you perceive the matter to have acquired a disposition to retain the light;
after which the said earthen Vessel, which usually ought to be somewhat
shallow, and not to exceed many inches in diameter, is to have a Cover of fine
Glass or Crystal, carefully cemented on to it, to preserve it from its great
Enemy the Air.

6. Now Chemists in former times working upon Urine, sought only after the
volatile, saline, and sulphurous parts of the Concrete, which they thought to
be the only spiritual and noble substance therefore, casting away the rest as
filthy and useless; whereas you may now see from the former process, that in
that so despicable substance the Wisdom and Bounty of the great Author of
Nature is apparent almost to a Miracle, for that in so contemptible a matter,
so glorious and excellent a thing as a self-existing Fire and self-shining
Substance should be lodged; which, though it be but admired now, may possibly be
highly prized hereafter, when it shall be brought to greater perfection, and
more of its Uses shall be discovered in relation both to Physic and Chemistry.

7. And since it is evident, that it is not constituted of the volatile Salt
and Sulphur of the Concrete, it remains then, that it must be formed out of its
other parts, which are a fixed or elementary Salt, and a terren fetid Oil, mixed
in such an harmonious proportion, as may excite the precited Phoenomena. These
things being considered, you may from the Principles constituting it, make a
judgment of its medical Virtues and various Effects, with relation to human
kind.

CHAP. IX. Of MAGISTERIES and ARCANVMS.
1. Magist^^ium Antimonii Diaph^^etici; The Magistery of Antimony Diaphoretick.
Bate* IT (...) made of Antimony diaphoretick, ^oyled in Water and filtrated,
by a^^^^^g ^^^m dissolved, precipi^^^ng and washing, S. A. Dose (...) ad j. It
has the same Virtues with Ceruse of A^^imony.

Salmon.] 1. It is an excellent Sudorifick and Diaphoretick, resolves the
coagulation of the Blood, opens Obstructions, sweetens the Juices of the Body,
prevails against Fevers, Pleurisies, and the like Diseases. Dose a j. ad iss.

2. Now whereas that Antimony diaphoretick, either by Age or some other
accident, does many times acquire an Emetick quality, th^^* by means of this
Operation, is freed therefrom, and the Patient more secure in the taking of it.

3. You may give it in all cases wherein Pearl is given, and it is ordinarily
exhibited in the so much celebrated Pearl-Cordials, and for the same intentions
is of good use.

4. Le Febur makes this Magistery or Precipitate out of the first Water wherein
the fixed Nitre is dissolved, which comes off from the first washing of the
Diaphoretick Antimony, because, says he, the nature of this Salt is altered by
the Sulphur of the Antimony, and is become of the condition of an Alcali and
lixivial Salt, whose quality and essence is subtle, penetrating and igneous,
rather than corrosive, which is the reason it has dissolved the purest part of
the Antimonial Regulus, impregnated with its fixed and solar Sulphur, very well
concocted and digested, by the action of the Fire and Nitre.

5. And though this Water appears clear, yet it has contracted a weight and
substance out of the Antimony, which must be precipitated: This our Author does
with Alum dissolved in Water, but Le Febur with Spirit of Vinegar, so (says he)
will it turn immediately as white as Milk, because the Diaphoretick was hidden
in the dissolution of it, and does manifest itself with no unpleasant smell,
but contrariwise has the very smell of Cream or sowrish Whey, whilst it is
edulcorating, which is done with fair Water, then dried and kept for use.

6. And this Precipitate is of a very good smell, by reason of the fixedness of
its internal Sulphur; whereas that prepared out of the common Sulphur Auratum
with Spirit of Vinegar, has a very ill and unpleasing smell, because it is
nothing else but the external, impure, and volatile Sulphur, which the Salt had
drawn to it self, being not sufficient to draw it and expel it away, much less
to fix it, the parts of the Nitre and Antimony in making Crocus Metallorum
being but equal; whereas in making Antimony Diaphoretick there is Nitre, p. ij.
to Antimony p. j. and after the Detonation is over, Nitre, p. j. more, is
added, to perfect the maturation and fixation of all the crude and indigested
remaining matter.

7. This is thought necessary to be said, to inform the Sons of Art, That
whatsoever fixes a Substance ought ever to be at least in tripple proportion to
the matter to be fixed, and contrariwise, whatever is to be volatilized must be
less in the same tripple proportion to the matter volatilizing, if not
sometimes quadruple; as iv. of Spirit to volatilize i. of Salt, and iv. of Salt
to fix i. of Spirit; which Note is worthy of your observation.

8. The common Dose is but to gr. xx. but we have with good success given it
many times to xxx, and more; in this matter you must be guided by your Reason.

9. The Virtue of this Remedy is very estimable, and of high value in Physic:
And though it is here said to be fixed, it is to be understood only comparatively
to other Antimonial Remedies, which provoke violent vomitings and purgings,
this Diaphoretick only working by an irradiation of Virtue, and an efficacy not
easily conceivable.

10. For it naturally and gently strengthens the internal Archaeus, which is
the principal director of all the Functions of Life, either in Health or
Sickness, and there fore its use must be continued without interruption, for a^
least 30 or 40 days, because that during that time, it will make the alteration
and change in the Blood, and other Juyces desired.

11. It is of singular us^ to resist any Corruption o^ Putrefaction which may
lurk in any part of the Body, mundifying and rectifying the whole mass of
Blood, whereby it becomes capable of opening the most inveterate Obstructions
of the Liver, Spleen, Mesentery, Pancrea's, Womb, and other Viscera.

12. Besides, it removes the obstruction of the Menses, cures the
Greensickness, Dropsy, and Hypochondriacal Melancholy, cleanses and heals
inward and outward Ulcers, and is a singular good Remedy against malign and
pestilential Fevers, Measles, Smallpox, Spotted-Feaver, and the Plague itself.

II. * Magisterium Benzoini; Magistery of Benjamin.
Bate.] It is made of the white parts of the Benjamin, being dissolved in
Alcohol of Wine, precipitated with Milkwater, and drying it, according to Art.
Dose a ss. ad j. It is a noble Pectoral.

Salmon.] 1. This is nothing but a Tincture of Benjamin precipitated with
Water; for the Tincture made with the Alcohol of Wine, being mixed with a great
deal of Water, makes a kind of Milk, (which by some is called Virgins Milk, and
serves for a Wash for the Face and Skin) because the Water weakens the S. V.
and makes it quit what it held up dissolved, if you let this Milk be still a
while, the Rosin or Magistery precipitates to the bottom of the Vessel, and the
Water becomes clear.

2. Le Febur makes it thus: Benjamin ij. in fine powder, put it into a Mattress,
upon which affuse Alcohol of S. V. prepared upon Salt of Venus vj. shake them
together nimbly, and digest a while in a warm B. M. so will the Benjamin
dissolve in a very short time, (by which it is evident, that this Concrete
contains a very pure and subtle sulphurous volatile Salt; for if it was
composed of a gross and unctuous Sulphur, the Alcohol of S. V. would make but a
simple Extraction of it, not a perfect Dissolution:) This Dissolution, which
will be red and transparent, must be filtrated into a Vial or Glass; the one
half you may keep for Tincture, the other for Magistery, or precipitate, which
is done by affusion of a good quantity of common fair Water, then in B. M.
abstract the S. V, in a small Cucurbit, so will the Magistery be left at
bottom, with the Water upon it, which you may decant by inclination, and if you
please, wash it with Damask-rose-water, then dry and keep it for use.

3. The Tincture, to speak the Truth, is only a dissolution of the Benjamin,
yet however, its Virtues is increased by reason of the excellency and nobleness
of the Menstruum, for which reason it may be used inwardly for Diseases of the
Breast and Lungs, as well as outwardly for a Wash; as in its proper place we
have declared.

4. However, this we add concerning this Tincture, That outwardly applied, it
is said to be a wonderful Cosmetick, cleansing the Skin beyond any other thing,
taking away all Spots and Pimples, as also other Tumors, Pustles, Buds, or
redness in the Skin, and dissipating all harsh, virulent, and malignant
Serosities, with which it is many times infested. You must apply it toward
Bedtime upon all the places which you find wanting it, and the next day wash
the same places with Barleywater, in which Veal has been boiled, which you
shall turn to a Milk-colour with some few drops of this Tincture, and then wipe
the Skin (whether of Hands or Face) with a very dry, soft Linen Cloth. And as
the Tincture, used simply or alone, will cure the Defects of the Skin
aforementioned, so washing with the white Water made by this Tincture will
prevent for the future the coming again of other Pimples, Redness, Pustles, etc.

5. Inwardly, it may be given a gut. iiij. ad xx. mixed with the Yolk of an Egg,
or in a spoonful of Syrup of Hyssop, against Asthma's, Shortness of Breath,
Phthisicks, old Coughs, etc. in the morning fasting, and an hour before Supper.

6. The Magistery is a Specific for Diseases of the Breast and Lungs, and by
reason of its subtle, volatile, and balsamic parts, is appropriated, by the
help of the Archeus, to the digestions of the diseased parts, and is given
instead of the Tincture, to such as have an aversion to Spirit of Wine, for all
the purposes aforesaid.

7. It may be exhibited in the Yolk of a newlaid Egg, or some pectoral Conserve
or Syrup a gr. x. ad xx. or xxv. Or you may give it in Tablers, or Lozenges, or
mixed with some proper Electuary, and so made up into a Bolus.

8. To make excellent Washballs: Your Soap being prepared, and brought to a due
consistency with new Milk, feed it for soon days with Tincture of Benjamin,
adding also to each pound of Soap of the Magistery ss. or more, and a few
grains of Musk and Ambergrise, then frame it into little Balls each weighing
ij. or iij. (...) yo^ like best your self, which carefully lay to dry, and then
keep them for use.

9. These Washballs, for their sweetness and excellency, in cleansing and
preserving the Skin both of Face and Hands, much exceed the Bolonian Washballs,
which have had such a great repute in the World.

III. Magisterium Bismuthi; Magistery of Marcasite or Tin-Glass; or, Spanish
White.
Bate.] Marcasite in fine powder, p. j. Spirit of Nitre, p. iij. mix and
dissolve, precipitate with Salt water, edulcorate and dry, S. A. It is good
against the Vices of the Skin, as Freckles, Lentils, Impetigo or Ringworms,
Scabbiness of the Hands, and the like, for which intentions it is a most
absolute Cosmetick or Beautifier.

Salmon.] 1. Rolfincius Art. Chym. lib. 5. sect. 2. cap. 34. makes it thus: Of
the Marcasite of Lead, which they call Bismuth, and by us Tin-Glass, q. v.
Aquaefortis made with Alum and Nitre, A. q. s. mix and dissolve in a gentle
heat; what is dissolved pour off, and precipitate with Oleum Tartari per
diliquium, so in a moment you will have the Alcohol of Bismuth, most pure
white, like the new-faln Snow: Dulcifie it by many ablutions in fair water,
which will free it from all its saltness and acrimony, and then dry it.

2. This (says he) is a most wonderful Cosmetick, freeing the Face and Hands
from Freckles, Spots, and other Defedations. In using it to cleanie the Face,
let it be applied with Bean-flower-water; to take away the Freckles and Spots
of the Hands with Vnguentum Pomatum, or Hogs Lard well washed, for by this
means it removes Lentils, Freckles, Ringworms, Tetters, and all sorts of Scabs
whatsoever.

3. But the way most agreeable with the Process of our Author you may see
explicated at large, with a Rationale thereon, in our Pharm. Land. lib. 3. cap.
10. sect. 6. wherein you have many Observations in the making thereof worthy of
noting.

4. Lemery's Magistery of Bismuth. Bismuth in powder i. put it into a Glass
Mattress with Spirit of Nitre iij. put the Dissolution into a clean white Ware
Vessel, and affuse thereon five or six pints of Fountain Water, in which you
have dissolved beforehand an ounce of Sea Salt, so will you have a white
Powder, precipitate to the bottom; decant the Water by inclination, and wash
the Magistery several times, drying it in the shade.

5. This is that which is called Spanish White, and is a most excellent
Cosmetick, for that it serves to cleanse the Skin and whiten the Complexion;
and it is used mixed either with Pomatum or Lilly-water.

6. Now, in the making of this, you must be sure to use a very large Bolthead
to dissolve the Bismuth in, because of the great Ebulition; for as soon as the
Spirit of Nitre is put upon it, it takes up much room to move in, sending forth
many Vapors, of which beware, for they are very pernicious to the Head, Brain,
Breast and Lungs.

7. Now this great Ebulition proceeds from the Acid's penetration of the large
Pores of the Bismuth, which violently divide all that oppose their motion: In
this operation the Bolthead grows so hot, that a man cannot endure his Hand upon
it, which comes from the points of the Acid chafing against the solid body of
the Bismuth, which makes a heat much after the manner, as when two solid Bodies
are rubbed hard one against another: And the great store of Igneous Particles
contained in the Spirit, help much also to increase this Heat.

8. If the Dissolution becomes troubled through some Impurities in the Bismuth,
you must put into it twice as much Water and filter it, for if you should
filter it without Water, it would coagulate in the filter like Salt, and not
pass through. This Coagulation proceeds from the acid Spirits of the Nitre,
included in the Particles of the Bismuth, which having not room or moisture
enough to swim in or disperse, do gather together when the Dissolution is cold,
into Crystals.

9. The Impurity which commonly swims upon the Dissolution of the Marcasite is
a fat or bituminous matter, which the Spirit of Nitre is not table to dissolve;
and indeed Marcasite is nothing but an Excrement of a Metal, or a fat Earth
impregnated with metalick parts.

10. That is, it is a sulphurous Substance found in the Tin Mines, (thought by
some to be an imperfect Tin, which partakes of good store of Arsenick) but its
Pores are disposed in another manner than those of Tin; which is evident from
the operation of the Menstruum, for that it perfectly dissolves Bismuth, but
has nothing near such an operation upon Tin.

11. This Magistery may also be made by affusion of a great quantity of
Fountain Water into the Dissolution, without any Salt, but it is made the
quicker when you do it with Salt, and the Precipitation is the better, because
the Salt Particles do encounter and break the Acids, which Water alone was not
sufficiently able to enervate or weaken. Thus you see the Acid of the Salt
overcomes the Acid of the Spirit of Nitre.

12. Now how fair Water alone should be able to precipitate Lead, Antimony, and
Marcasite, being dissolved by the Acid, and yet cannot precipitate Gold,
Silver, or Mercury, without the help of some Salt or other Body, is worthy to
be enquired into: Without doubt the largeness of the Pores of the former give
the Water a greater liberty to pervade them, and force away the Acids, which
cannot stick so close as they do in Gold, Silver, and Mercury, where the Pores
are very much finer and smaller, by which reason the Acid sticks not only the
closer, but the Water for the same reason is denied that easy entrance, and so
can make no separation, without the help of a more piercing and active body.

13. In making of this Magistery there is a considerable augmentation of the
Bismuth, but this proceeds from part of the Spirit of Nitre remaining in it,
and which cannot be separated by the precipitation nor lotion, though never so
often repeated.

14. And what we have here taught you from Bismuth, or the Marcasite of Load,
or Silver, as some call it, the same you may do from Zinck, or the Marcasite of
Gold, which much resembles Bismuth; and the operation is performed in like
manner in all respects: But in the whole operation avoid the use of AF. (made
with Vitriol) for that, by reason of the Vitriol, will blacken or foul the
Precipitate, do what you can.

15. Modus Vtendi. You may mix j. of this Magistery with Orange-flower-water or
Damask-rose-water iv. Or with choice Pomatum, or well-washed Hogs-Lard i. It
softens the Skin very much, and is also good against the Itch, because it feeds
upon those Acids or Salts which cause and nourish this Disease.

16. Le Febur makes it thus: A. F. made of equal parts of Nitre and common
Salt, lb ss. Bismuth in powder iv. mix and dissolve, and if there be any
foulness in it, filter it, then precipitate with tartarized S. V. abstract the
Liquor swimming above the Magistery, and wash it with distilled Rainwater,
till it is sufficiently dulcified. Thus Schroder and Beguinus.

17. It is, says he, a very good Remedy for all the Vices and Eruptions of the
Skin, and above all against the Itch: It takes away Spots and Freckles in it,
and smooths the roughness of the Face and Hands: But if you would make there
with a pure and white Cosmetick, and use it either with or without Pomatum, he
advises to precipitate with Oil of Vitriol, (though I think Oil of Sulphur would
be better) so (says he) you shall have an almost incomparable White, which you
must dulcifie, dry; and keep for use.

18. Charras makes it in all respects, as does Le Febur, in a large Glass
Cucurbit, but with this difference. That whereas Le Febur allows for the
Bismuth, but p. ij. Charras allows the full tripple quantity, and then when the
dissolution is perfected, precipitates with the best tartarized Spirit of Wine,
and pouring thereon a good quantity of fair Water, lets it settle, decants the
Water by inclination, and perfectly edulcorates it by many ablutions, then
dries it in the shade between two Papers, and keeps it for use.

19. This (says he) is a very white Magistery, fit for all Deformities of the
Skin, and to beautify the Complexions of Ladies, mixing it with proper Waters
and Pomatums. And here note, that the Water of the first L^^ion is very good to
cure Tetters Ringworms, and the Itch.

20. This Bismuth is a Mineral Body, half metalick, composed of Mercury, or the
first manner of Tin ill digested, a ^oul terrestial Sulphur no^ ripened, and an
impure Arsenical Salt, as aforesaid, which Arsenical Salt making one part of
the Composition, is the reason that no Preparations made thereof are ever taken
inwardly.

IV. * Magisterium Gittae; Magistery of Cambogia.
Bate.] Cambogia pure and in powder iij. Tincture of Red roses lb iss. Juice of
Limons lb ss. Spirit of Vitriol j. mix. digest, and evaporate, to the
consistency of an Extract. Or thus: Make a fine powder of choice Cambogia ij.
add to it Oleum Tartari per deliquium j. S. V. iiij. digest and evaporate S. A.
It purges (...) sursum and deorsum, upwards and downwards, chiefly serous and
watery Humors. It is profitably used in the Dropsy, Scab, Itch, etc. Dose gr.
x. ad ss.

Salmon.] 1. Mynsicht extracts it with S. V. Rolfincius with S. V. acuated with
Spirit of Vitriol; Schroder with Oil of Tartar per deliquium; all which see in
our Seplasium, lib. 9. cap. 17. sect. 4, 5, and 8.

2. Mindererus dissolves in Spiritus Vitrioli, then abstracts the Spirit, and
drys it gently, so as it grows not black, but may retain its color: This, if
you please, you may edulcorate with much washing. Dose a gut. xv. ad xx. Sane (
dixit Grulingius) extractum hoc maxim laudandum, id quod sine molestia, sine
torminibus humores, (...), evacuat, inprimis serosos and biliosos, nec diu in
corpore haeret; vomitu quoque in ventriculo congesto expellit.

3. The following Composition is accounted with Physicians, among the Catholic
Secrets. Of the Magistery of Cambogia gr. viij. Mecohacan in powder j. Mastick
gr. vij. Oils of Anise and Fennel, A. gut. ij. mix and make a powder for one
Dose. Or thus: Of this Magistery gr. viij. of Tartar Vitriolate j. Magistery of
Pearls gr. v. Oils of Citrons and Cinnamon, A. gut. j. mix, and for a Dose, to
be given in Broth, Malaga-wine, Wormwood-wine, Cinnamon Water, or the like.

4. But being thus compounded, it is more profitable against the Dropsy. Of
this Magistery a gr. vj. ad xij. Extract of wild Cucumbers gr. x. mix, and with
Syrup of Cinnamon make Pills for a dose. Or thus: Of this Magistery gr. vij.
Troches Alhandal a gr. iv. ad vij. Oleum Anisi, gut. ij. with Sugar dissolved
in Cinnamon Water, make a Confection in Lozenges and Rouls.

V. * Magisterium Jovis, Magistery of Jupiter or Tin.
Bate.] It is made of the Flowers of Jupiter, dissolved in Water and filtred,
precipitating with Oil of Tartar per deliquium, or a dissolution of Alum,
edulcorating by many ablutions in warm Water, and drying it again. Dose gr. 4,
5, 6, etc. See the Virtues of the Salt of Jupiter.

Salmon.] 1. This Prescript is from Lemery, but by all that is said, it does
not appear of what kind the Flowers are, of which this Magistery is to be made;
they are twofold, viz. a sublimation of Tin, either with Sal Armoniack or with
Nitre: What the latter is, we shall show in its place; what the former is
(which without doubt is the Subject of this Prescript) we shall here show.

2. Flowers of Tin, with Sal Armoniack, from Lemery. Tin, p. j. Sal Armoniack
in powder p. ij. mix them well together, put them into a strong earthen
Cucurbit, so large, as that not above a third part may be full, fit to it a
blind Head, luting the Juncture, and place the Vessel on the Grate in a small
Furnace and a naked Fire, and only so open, as that the Fire may pass through
the Registers, for which reason you must stop up the top of the Furnace with
Bricks and Lime, leaving some holes in the sides, which are called Registers,
and let the Cucurbit enter a third part of its height into the Furnace; then
make a Fire small at first, and increase it by degrees, till the bottom of the
Cucurbit is red hot, which Fire continue till nothing more will sublime, which
you will know by the Heads growing cold, and then the sublimation will be at an
end; the Flowers will stick to the Head, and to the top of the Body, which take
and keep for the making of the aforesaid Magistery.

3. These Flowers are nothing but some Particles of the Tin, raised up by the
volatility of the Sal Armoniack, and at the bottom of the Body you will find
some of the Tin revived.

4. But that this may be the more effectually done, your Tin ought first to be
reduced into a Calx by the means of Fire, for the better mixing it with the Sal
Armoniack, which is thus done: Put Tin into a large unglaz'd earthen Pan, place
it in a circular Fire, so will the Tin melt, then stir it with a Spatula, till
it comes into a powder, continue a great Fire to it 36 hours, stirring it from
time to time, so will you have the Calx of Tin fit for sublimation.

5. In this Operation an unglaz'd Earthen Vessel is used, lest the Lead with
which it is glazed should mix with the Tin, and hurt its Purity; and the Vessel
is broad, that it might by stirring be the sooner reduced to Powder, in which
it will be easier done in 36 hours, than in 4 or 5 days in a Crucible.

6. It is impossible to make Tin ascend in Flowers without any mixture; and
therefore, though the mixture of Salts may be found fault with, yet since it is
not to be sublimed without them, it must be born withal, but the fault is the
less, by reason of the facility of separating the said Salts again from the
Metal by Lotion, of which our Author's Prescript here gives the Example.

7. Some take equal quantities of Tin and Sal Armoniack; but Charras takes Calx
of Tin, iij. Sal Armoniack xij. and being mixed in fine powder, he sublimes in a
good Aludel upon a proper Furnace, covered with 3 or 4 of its pots, one upon
another, and the Junctures well luted, and the uppermost covered with a little
Head, then kindles a Coal-Fire under the Aludel, increasing it by degrees, till
the Aludel is red hot in all its lower parts, at which time he throws in at the
hole about ss. of the powder, and then closes it immediately, by which means
the Tin and Sal Armoniack rise together in Vapors, which condense in Flowers,
on the insides of the Pots; then throws in another like quantity at the hole,
and repeats this Operation till all the powder is spent, keeping a good Fire
under the Aludel, to facilitate the sublimation of the Tin which by this means
will be all sublimed.

8. Now, should you take equal parts of Tin and Sal Arm. the Tin would remain
almost all at the bottom of the Aludel: Nor is it to be wondered at, since it
is impossible to make Metals ascend in Flowers, without the assistance of 3 or
4 times their weight of volatile Salts mixed with them, or at least without
several constant Cohobations, directed to be made use of.

9. This Magistery is a delicate White, being mixed with Pomatum, and serves for
a Paint: The Precipitate thus washed, is in order to deprive the Flowers of
Jupiter of the volatile Salt which they derive from the Sal Armoniack in
sublimation: It is desicative, and is used in Pomatums, for that purpose of
drying up running Sores and Ulcers, and it is found to be of good use to
repress Vapors, and resist Fits of the Mother.

VI. Magisterium Saturni; Magistery of Saturn or Lead.
Bate.] Red Lead, boil it in Spirit of Vinegar, filter, precipitate with Oil of
Vitriol, and edulcorate S. A. It is of use against Phthisicks, or Ulcers of the
Lungs, Hecticks, burning Fevers, and other inward Inflammations; also in
Quartans, Affections of the Spleen, the Colic, and French Pox, it is a Secret.
Dose gr. 4, 5, 6, etc. Outwardly it prevails against Cankers of the Mouth,
malign Ulcers, Cancers, the Wolf, Fistula, Burnings, red Pustles of the Face,
redness of the Eyes, etc.

Salmon.] 1. Lemery makes it thus: Salt of Saturn iij. well purified, dissolve
it in a sufficient quantity of Water and Spirit of Vinegar; filter, and affuse
on it drop by drop Oil of Tartar per deliquium, so will it become a kind of
Milk, and then a kind of Coagulum, which will precipitate into the bottom of
the Vessel in a white powder; boil it a little, and then filter again, so will
the Liquor pass through, leaving the Precipitate behind very white, which wash
feveral times with warm Water, to abolish all the acid Particles of the
Vinegar, which being dried, will be a very white Magistery.

2. It is used for a Fucus, like Bismuth, and it is likewise mixed in Pomatums
for Tetters, Ringworms, Pustles, and other breakings out of the Face and Skin.

3. Here is to be noted, that if you should use only Water, you would make but
a kind of Virgins Milk, and the Saturn would not dissolve but precipitate,
leaving some particles of its Body yet in the Water; wherefore it is better to
take equal quantities of Water and Spirit of Vinegar, for thereby the Salt will
be dissolved, into which dropping the alcalious Oil of Tartar, the edges or
points of the Acid are destroyed, which held up the Salt, and the matter
precipitates by its own weight.

4. In this Operation there is no effervescency, for the Acids of the Vinegar
being broken and weakened, it has not strength nor activity enough left to
enter the Pores of the Salt of Tartar, so as to make such an operation; and it
is the same in all other substances dissolved by Vinegar; but if the
Dissolution be performed with stronger Acids, as Oils of Vitriol or Sulphur,
Spirit of Nitre, etc. an Ebulition is made.

5. This Powder being washed and dried, is nothing but a Ceruse made exceeding
pure and fine. It is used by some for Paint; but this Cosmetick, as well as
others made of metallic Substances, such as Tin, Bismuth, etc. do often black
the Skin, after having whitened it, because the heat of the Flesh gathering
together these metallic Particles (which owe all their whiteness to their
alcoholization) does often make them revive.

6. But Le Febur makes a twofold Magistery of Saturn; 1. The false made from
Red Lead, with Spirit of Vinegar, as our Author here directs, but precipitated
with Oil of Tartar. 2. The true Magistery, which he makes thus: Ceruse ij. in
fine powder, Spirit of Venus vj. put it in by little and little, and stir them
together, that the Spirit may penetrate to the bottom; place the Mattress in B.
M. and digest warm for 12 hours, then filter and let the filtrated Liquor rest
one night in a cold place, so will you find it coagulated into white Crystals;
separate the superfluous liquor, and abstract the Spirit by distillation in
Balneo to dryness, so will you have at bottom the Magistery of Saturn,
dissoluble in all kinds of liquors, and like unto the first which was in
Crystals, in respect of its Virtue; which dry in a gentle heat between two
Papers.

7. This Magistery may be given in all Diseases for which the Salt of Saturn is
given, and you will find from it much better and quicker effects than from that
made with Vinegar, but the Dose is less, and may be given a gr. ij. ad vj. yea,
to xij. says Febur.

8. You are also to note, that the Spirit of Venus used in this Operation, and
drawn off again by distillation, is yet good for the same Work again, or any
other for which it is proper, having lost but very little of its Power and
Virtue.

9. It is also to be noted, that you may indifferently make use of Litharg,
Minium, White-Lead, Ceruse, or other Calces of Lead, for this Preparation; for
it is sufficient to have a Lead that is open, and in a condition easily to be
dissolved by Spirit of Vinegar: But because this Medicine calcined to whiteness
comes nearest to the color of its Salt and Magistery, it is better to make use
of Ceruse, or some other white Lead, but be sure to choose a true Ceruse of
Lead, such as we call Venetian Ceruse, and not that which is counterfeited, as
being mixed with Chalk, Whiting, or other like Substances, having neither the
brittleness, weight, nor whiteness of the true Ceruse, or that of Venice.

10. This Magistery of Saturn may also be made by weakening the Spirit of
Vinegar, impregnated with the Ceruse or Salt of Lead, with Water only; but then
it behooves you to use a great quantity of Water, without which you cannot
therewith alone be able to make it quit its hold, and let fall the whole
dissolved matter, or most part thereof, to the bottom.

11. Some also dissolve thin plates of Lead in A. F. made with Nitre and Alum,
and upon this Dissolution affuse Salt Water filtred, whereby they precipitate a
Magistery extraordinary white, which is dulcified by many Lotions with fair
Water, then dried in the shade between 2 Papers, and kept for the uses
aforesaid.

VII. Magisterium Sulphuris, i. Lac Sulphuris; Magistery or Milk of Sulphur.
Bate.] Flowers of Sulphur p. j. Quicklime, or Salt of Tartar p. iij. boil
them in a sufficient quantity of Water to the Solution of the Sulphur; filter
it while hot, and precipitate with Spirit of Vinegar or Spirit of Nitre, then
edulcorate and dry S. A. It is a Balsam for the Lungs, healing and drying,
being profitable against Catarrhs, Asthma's, Coughs, Phthisicks, Colicks, etc.
Dose ss. ad j.

Salmon.] 1. This is explicated at large in our Pharm. Lord. lib. 3. cap. 12.
sect 8. from Quercetans Prescription: Clossaeus has another done with
Quicklime, and precipitated with Piss, which you may see in the same place.

2. Lemery and Charras makes it also almost exactly according to this Prescript
of our Author; but to dissolve the Flowers, he boils 5 or 6 hours with Water,
lb ii. to every ounce of Sal, or Salt of fixed Nitre, and so drys it in the
shade.

3. Now here is to be observed, that as simple Water is not able to dissolve
the Sulphur, but an alcalious Salt is made use of, to divide it into
imperceptible Particles; so on the contrary the Acid afterward pierces the
Alcali, and by separating its parts, makes it let go its hold of the Sulphur,
whereby it falls down in a white Powder, which being edulcorated, may be said
to be only Flowers of Sulphur Alcoholiz'd.

4. And the change of the color into a white, comes from its being more
rarefied, and obtaining a smoother Surface than it had before, to reflect the
light in a direct line to our Eyes.

5. And this operation (says he) may give us an Idea of Chylification and
Sanguification; for as the Sulphur becomes white in the Magistery, so the
Aliments being fermented, and their substance attenuated in our Stomachs, are
in part reduced into Chyle of a white color; and as the Sulphur when entirely
dissolved, turns of a red color, so the parts of the Chyle being exalted and
dissolved by repeated Circulations, become red, and turn into Blood, which
Blood in Apostems turning into Pus, becomes white again, by reason of the
praeternatural Acid assisting anew in that operation.

6. Also when you make this Preparation, let no Vessels of Silver be near where
it is performed, for the Vapors proceeding from the Sulphur and Alcali, with
the Acid, will make it black.

7. As to the Dose, our Author limits it in the largest to 20 grains; whereas
Lemery limits it to 15, because (says he) 15 grains of this Powder will do as
much as double the quantity of Flowers of Sulphur, in Diseases of the Breast,
and yet it does not heat so much: But notwithstanding this, I have given it to
j. yea, to gr. xxv. with very good success.

8. Marggrave makes it thus: Flowers of Sulphur ss. melt them in a clean
earthen Pan, and then add Oil of Tartar per deliquium iss. stir them
continually with an Iron Spatula to dryness, and till it acquires a spadiceous
or brown color; reduce it to powder, and with Alcohol of S. V. extract a
Blood-red Tincture in some few hours; from this, in some few days space, a gray
powder will spontaneously precipitate, which Beguinus calls the gray Magistery
of Sulphur; But this Tincture (says he) with Vinegar is precipitated into a
most white Mass, which when dried, is called Lac Sulphuris.

9. Le Mort makes it with Flores Sulphuris p. j. Quicklime p. ij. which he
boyls in Water to redness, then filter the Water, and precipitates with Spirit
of Vinegar, which he edulcorates with many washings. The same he also does with
Cineres Clavellatorum or Potashes.

10. Rolfincius, lib. 5. sect. 2. cap. 35. Art. Chym. says, That in the
preparation thereof there are four distinct Operations; 1. (...), by Solution,
which is done in some fit saline Menstruum, as an alcalious Salt, with which
the fat or oily parts of the Sulphur will mix easily; this is twofold, viz.
either vulgar as a Lixivium of Quicklime alone, or with Tartar; or singular,
as Salt of Tartar: But the first of these he suspects, for (says he) the Atoms
of the terra damnata of the Calx will inseparably unite themselves with the
Lixivium and pass through the filter: The other, which is a solution of the
Salt of Tartar, is much the more noble. 2. (...), by precipitation, which he
performed by Spirit of Wine-Vinegar. 3. Edulcatione, sweetening by washing with
much Water. 4. Exsiccation, by drying, as is before taught.

11. To this Opinion of Rolsincius, Le Febur seems to assent, for (says he) we
recommend the Purity of Materials, which makes us make choice of Salt of Tartar
in the dissolution of Sulphur, notwithstanding several Authors content
themselves with Ashes of Wine-lees or Sandiver; but as these Salts have not the
penetrating and fiery Vigor which is required for the dissolution of Sulphur
and maturation of that Mineral, so neither can they make the Medicament so good
nor so fai^* ^o^ endow it with the requisite virtues.

12. These things being considered, he takes Flowers of Sulphur ^wice sublimed,
and dissolves the Salt of Tartar in in 15 parts of distilled Rainwater; but
before the affusion of the Water, he grinds the Flowers of Salt of Tartar
together dry* in a warm Marble Mortar, then affuses the Water, and boyls 5 or 6
hours to the dissolution of Sulphur; this done while hot, he only decants the
clear Solution, (but filtrates not, because it cannot be soon enough performed,
for that as soon as the Menstruum begins to co^l, the Sulphur returns into a
body again) and then precipitates with Spirit of Vinegar, performing all the
rest of the Operation as before directed.

13. This is also to be noted, that your first Water is not to be thrown away
but reserved and evaporated, for so you will find again your Salt of Tartar,
which reverberate in a Crucible to redness, dissolve and filter again, and then
coagulate, so will it be as good and as pure as before, and serve for the same
operation, or any other that Salt of Tartar is fit for. Lastly, he washes the
Magistery in equal parts of Cinnamon and Rose Water, and so drys it slowly for
use.

14. This Remedy is called the Balsam of the Lungs, which consumes and drys up
all malignant, serous, and watery Superfluities, for which reasons it is
exhibited in melting and suffocating Catarrhs, Asthma's, Phthisicks, and to
such as are afflicted with old and inveterate Coughs, Colicks, Ventosities, or
Wind, malignant Humors and Serosities in the Joints; it hinders and dissipates
Vapors, facilitates Expectoration, and wonderfully strengthens the Breast and
Lungs.

15. Dose so much as will turn Bawm or Cinnamon Water milk-white, and may be
given every day morning and evening.

16. But says Charras, by reason of the various alterations happening to the
Sulphur in its dissolution and precipitation, the ill qualities which it
receives from the Substances with which it is mixed, (and of which the ill scent
remaining after the washing is a sign) it will be better to lay it aside, and
make use of the Spirit of Sulphur in its place.

17. And Le Febur says, Though this Remedy is highly celebrated by Authors, it is
better rather to trust to the Tincture extracted from it, than to this body,
yet too course and material, to hope from it all the good and commendable
effects which are attributed unto it.

18. However we cannot rely wholly upon what these Gentlemen say, for the
Medicine is not so despicable as they would make it, though it be none of the
highest Preparations; and notwithstanding Le Febur says, it is yet too course
and material, we say it is much more subtle than a thousand other Medicaments
much esteemed above it, and will do that by touching only outwardly with it,
which other more esteemed sublime Medicines will not do neither by inward nor
outward application.

19. By simply rubbing it on an Itchy person, it will absolutely cure him;
which shows the great sublimity of its Substances, and what it may do and
effect if it be prudently given inwardly. This very thing shows, there is
something more in the texture of its parts than Artists are ordinarily aware
of, and that it has a subtilty in its nature able to penetrate the whole human
frame, and an alexipharmick Property able to overcome and ruinate the most
inveterate, malignant, and rebellious Humors whatsoever, destroying them in
their Crasis, and undoing them in their very Essence and Being.

VIII. Magisterium Tartari; Magistery of Tartar.
Bate.] Salt of Tartar q. v. impregnate it with the best Vinegar so long, till
the Tartar will receive no more acidity, then affuse thereon S. V. and abstract
again, cohobating several times, at length place the Tartar so as it may melt,
and you will have a red Oil, which purges per inferiora, or downwards. It is of
profitable use in all deplorable Diseases. Dose a ss. ad j.

Salmon.] 1. Le Mort makes it otherwise, and calls it soluble Tartar, thus:
Crystals of Tartar in powder iij. Oil of Tartar per deliquium iv. dissolve them
together, filter the Solution, and affuse ther^on Spirit of Vinegar ^x. shake
them together, and (...) them stand for a time, then evaporate to the
consumption of a third part, and set the remaining matter in a oool Cellar to
crystallize, the Crystals take, dry gently, and keep them for use.

2. If you would have them yet more grateful, dissolve them again in Spirit of
Vinegar, f^^rate and evaporate as before, so will they be both more pure and
more pleasant to the Palate and Stomach. They break the S^one, and expel it,
and have all the virtues of Cremor Tartari, but four times stronger. Dose a gr.
viij. ad j. or ss. or to a pleasing acidity in Broth or Wine. E vinis Gallicis
vina Rh^n^na extempore conficiunt^r a^^^^do circiter drachmam ^^^n pin^^ae uni.

3. Another process of the same Le Mort. Crystals of Tartar vj. Oil of Tartar
per deliq. i. dissolve in a warm place, and at length an earthy powder will
fall to the bottom, which hindered the solubility of the Tartar. This Solution
filtrate, and add to it Spirit of Vinegar, to take away the ungrateful taste of
the Alcali; evaporate a third part of the humidity, and set it to crystallize,
which dry and keep for use: These, if not acid enough, dissolve again in more
Spirit of Vinegar.

4. It is admirably penetrating, and dissoluble in any Liquor, it breaks the
Stone, eases the Gout, takes away Pain, and strengthens weak parts, powerfully
provokes Urine, and wonderfully quickens the Operation of other Purges. It
prevails also against Hypochondriack Melancholy, the Jaundice, and all
Obstructions of the Bowels.

5. We will now deliver you the Process of Sennertus's Magistery or purgative
Salt of Tartar, which is the very thing with which Le Febur makes his Armoniack
Tincture of Mars, the Prescript of which you have in Chap. 7. Sect. 2.
aforegoing. The said Magistery of Sennertus is thus done.

6. Pure Salt of Tartar lb ij. put it into a Glass Cucurbit, affuse thereon
strong Spirit of Vinegar lb iv. stir them together till the Salt is well
dissolved, place the Cucurbit in a Sand or Ash heat, and abstract the humidity,
which will come off tastless as fair Water; put on more Spirit of Vinegar, and
continue to distill softly; and so often repeat this work, till what you distill
off comes forth with the same strength as when it went on, which will happen
after you have reitterated the operation about 20 times: The Salt remaining
after all this work will be very black, but have lost all its lixiviate taste,
and become of a pleasant acidity. The last time you draw off the Vinegar, you
must dry this Salt with a pretty strong Fire, that no moisture may remain with
it: Dissolve the same in the Alcohol of S. V. and filtrate, to separate from it
the blackness it has contracted; then put it into B. M. and abstract the Spirit
to dryness; dissolve again, filtrate and abstract again, until the fourth time;
the fifth time cohobating the Spirit, abstract in Ashes, and continue these
cohobations, giving still more and more a stronger fire toward the latter end,
until the Salt becomes white: After all, put the Salt in a clean Glass Vessel,
and in a cool moist Cellar, so will it easily dissolve into a red liquor, which
filter, and either keep it in a liquor, or evaporating the humidity to dryness,
keep the dried Salt in a Vial close stopped, to preserve it from dissolving.

7. In this Operation the change which happens in the taste of this Salt,
proves this Truth, that acid and alcalious Salts convert one another into a
neutral substance, which is no more either the one or the other, and yet
possesses a less hurtful and more excellent virtue than the Bodies of which
they have been compounded.

8. This evidently appears in the Example of Tartar Vitriolate, for Oil of
Vitriol is a very strong and fiery Corrosive, like an all-consuming Fire; and
strong Oil of Tartar per deliquium, or Soap-boilers strongest Lees, is a very
fine Alcali, of a biting, urinous, and unpleasing taste; nevertheless the
Result of both being mixed, makes a very pleasing Magistery, containing no more
the simple qualities of either of the Bodies of which it is compounded, except
that of a penetrative, subtle, and dissolutive property.

9. And this appears in our present Magistery, in that the Vinegar loses all
its acidity, and turns into an insipid Water; and this volatile-acid Salt of
the Vinegar (for such it is) checks, and turns the edge and ill taste of the
Alcali, or Salt of Tartar, and makes it to become an extraordinary Remedy.

10. We cannot choose therefore but recommend this magisterial Salt in the
highest manner considering the wonderful effects it is able to produce, for it
is beyond most other Remedies in opening the Obstructions of all the Viscera,
or in any other part of the Body, (for which reason it is an excellent thing
against the Palsy) and to evacuate gently any morbifick matter lodged in the
said Viscera, and parts adjacent to the same.

11. It purges gently, and without violence, through all the Emunctories and
prevails against all chronick and desperate Diseases, which have been of so
rebellious a nature, as to yield to no other Remedies.

12. Dose a ss. ad j. if dry, or from j. or 20 drops, to ij. or 40 drops, if
liquid: You may give it in Veal or Chicken Broth, or Veal boiled with
Parsly-roots, or White Wind in which Damask-Roses have been infused and
aromatiz'd with a little Cinnamon: Give it fasting in the morning, and if need
require, reiterate it at night going to Bed.

IX. Magisterium Turpethi; The Magistery of Turbith Mineral.
Bate.] Corrosive Sublimate q. s. boil it in Rainwater till it is dissolved,
filter, and with Oil of Tartar per deliquium precipitate, then edulcorate with
distilled water S. A. It is a famous thing against the French Pox, Worms,
Tetters, Scald Heads King's Evil, etc. Dose ss. ad gr. xv. with Comfectio
Hamech ij. or iij.

Salmon.] 1. Mynsicht is the Author of this Prescript, and calls it Turpethum
Minerale Verum, but he advises the solution of the Mercury to be several times
filtred, and the precipitation with the Oil of Tartar to be made Guttatim, and
then to be edulcorated with common Water, till it be freed from its sharpness
and saltness, and after that, that it should be cohobated with the best Aqua
Mellis, rectified six or seven times, so often, till the powder is become
exceeding subtle; and lastly, affusing thereon the best Alcohol of S. V. that
it may be well moistened, to deflagrate it, continually stirring it round with
an Iron Spatula, till all the S. V. is consumed. The Dose of which he limits to
be a gr. iv. ad vj. or vij. in some proper Vehicle.

2. But the latter part of this Preparation of Mynsicht would be better done,
in my opinion, by abstraction of the S. V. in B. M. two or three several times,
from the Magistery, rather than by deflagration, because the actual heat of the
fire in that Operation is apt to vivifie some of the Particles of the Mercury;
for being very small and subtle, a small Fire has a great power over them.

3. Tilingius in Prod. Chymic. Chap. 3. Tit. 24. Page 899. gives us another
Prescript made with simple red Precipitate, which is this. Simple red
Precipitate iss upon which affuse Oil of Tartar per deliquium, as much; digest
for one or two days, then edulcorate with simple fair water, and calcine it a
little with a very gentle fire: Lastly, affuse thereon Alcohol of S. V.
deflagrate and keep the Magistery for use. Dose a gr. iv. ad vij.

4. Here is to be noted, that for want of Salt of Tartar, you may do the work
with Salt of Potashes, or a Lixivium thereof; and some do it with a Lixivium
of Quicklime.

5. The first Water which is decanted off after precipitation, you may reserve
as a Jewel, for it cures even to a Miracle all old Ulcers, running Sores, and
inveterate Fistula's, only by washing them therewith, and laying a Cloth wet
therein upon them; and this it performs, though of never so many years
standing, without any other Medicine for any pain or discomposure.

6. A man who had a foul filthy Ulcer upon his Leg, and been troubled with it
for near 30 years, and could get no Remedy, but was declared by all his
Chyrurgions to be past cure, was herewith cured perfectly in less than a months
time. And a Serving-maid, who had been troubled with a like stubborn Ulcer for
about 12 years, I cured) only by washing herewith, and laying a Cloth wet
therein over the Sore) in less than 6 weeks time. So that for suchlike
purposes this Water is almost above value.

7. As to the Precipitate it self, it works strongly, and must be given with
caution; but therewith a wise man may cure the French Disease withal its
Symptoms.

8. If it be given in any great quantities, or often, it will certainly Flux,
but that may be prevented, if the next day a Cathartick Dose be given, or it
self be first mixed with a Cathartick Dose, and then exhibited with Caution,
that the Sick should beware of taking cold.

9. Mixed with Ointments or Balsams, or Hogs-Lard, and outwardly applied, it
cures Tetters, Ringworms, Itch, Scurf, Morphew, or any other Breakings out, or
deformities of the Skin; and this it has done after all other things have
failed and proved fruitless.

X. Alumen Dulce; Sugar of Alum.
Bate.] Alum, and dissolve it in Water, and coagulate; repeat this work thrice,
that the Alum may be sweet, this is called Sugar of Alum. It is commended in
Diseases of the Breast, chiefly those contracted from Mineral Fumes: And it
eases the Toothache, being applied to the Gums.

Salmon.] 1. We will show the Method from Le Febur, more explicitly. Roch-Alum
lb iij. put it into a good glass Retort, and in a gradual Sand heat abstract
the Phlegm; cohobate this Phlegm upon the desiccated Alum, and digest them
together in a gentle vaporous balneo for 24 hours, then in Sand again abstract
the Phlegm, which cohobation, digestion, and abstraction repeat seven times;
this done, after the seventh time, or separation of the Phlegm, put that which
remains in the bottom of the Vessel, into a Cellar, or other cool place, to
dissolve per deliquium into Liquor; this Liquor filter, and digest it in a
double or circulatory Vessel, in a gentle heat in Ashes, for 12 or 14 days,
then put it into a Cucurbit, and in Ashes abstract again the moisture to
dryness, so will the Sugar of the Alum remain behind.

2. It is a peculiar Remedy against Diseases of the Breast and Lungs, especially
for such as are affected with any metallic, mercuriel, mineral, or arsenical
Vapors or Fumes. It is cooling, and allays the extremity of Thirst in Fevers.

3. It is of singular use for such as feel heats and prejudicial pains about
the Sternon, or Region of the Breast, arising from malignant, sharp, and biting
Serosities, proceeding from a venereous taint, especially in such as have had
the stain long upon them.

4. Applied to the Gums, it eases the Toothache, and cures Cankers and Sores in
the Mouth and Throat: It works inwardly by Urine* Spitting, Sweats, and an
insensible transpiration. Dose a gr. vj. ad xvj. or xx. in Broth, or some
pectoral or diuretic Water, Infusion, or Decoction. This Process of Le Febur
is exactly the same with that of Schroder.

5. There is also an Alumen Dulce Liquidum, which according to Charras is thus
made. Roch-Alum q. v. dissolve it in Rainwater, filter it, put it into a low
Glass Cucurbit, and in Ashes distill to dryness: The Caput. Mort. dissolve again
in the distilled Water, filter and distill anew in like manner to dryness; this
Work of dissolving, filtering, and distilling, continue till the Alum is truly
freed from all its terrestreities, and its pure substance wholly ascends in
distillation.

6. This is a liquid sweet Alum, or the Magisterial Spirit of Alum, and is
accounted one of the best Stypticks that is known in the World, and without
doubt, being mixed in Gargarisms for the Mouth, ( j. of this Spirit to x.
ounces of the Gargarism) it may be of singular use to heal all manner of Sores
and Ulcers in those parts, kill Cankers, and stop Defluxions of Humors when the
maxillary Glands are too much extended, and the Pores or Mouths of the
salivatick Vessels too open: It cools, cleanses, and binds, and is of use for
Diseases of other parts, as well as of the Mouth, where there is need of
cooling, cleansing, and strengthening; as also to stop a defluxion of Humors
upon the same, Fluxes of the Bowels, Gonorrhoeas, heat of Urine, etc.

7. It may also be put into vulnerary Drinks, and traumaticks, ( p. j. to p.
20. of the Drink) and so drank in the morning fasting, and last at night going
to Bed, or otherwise, as the urgency of the Disease shall seem to require.

8. Thus having this Spirit in a readiness, you may mix it as you see occasion,
with any proper distilled Water, Decoction, or Juice, specific to your
purpose, which will be incomparably much better than all the distilled
Aluminous Waters, found ordinarily in Books.

XI. Alumen Febrifugum; A Febrifuge Alum, or Aluminous Fever-frighter.
Bate.] Dissolve Alum iij. in Water of Carduus Benedictus (well tinged with
Dragons Blood, and filtred) lb iss. then evaporate to dryness S. A. Dose j.
before the febrile Paroxism, it induces Sweating, etc. Vide Mynsicht.

Salmon.] 1. Mynsicht has it thus. Crude Alum j. Magistery of Dragons blood ss.
dissolve in Water of Carduus Benedictus, and coagulate or evaporate the
humidity, S. A.

2. This, says he, is a wonderful Medicament against Fevers, and a Remedy even
for the quartan Ague it self; besides which, it is a Secret for the Bloody
Flux, and other Fluxes of the Bowels: Let it be given in some appropriate
Vehicle, some hours before the Fit of the Ague: The Author advises, in Aqua
Nicotianae, or distilled Water of Indian Tobacco, provoking Sweat withal, if
possible.

3. Charras his Aluminous Febrifuge is this: Burnt Alum q. v. put it into a
Glass Cucurbit, which place in asand beat, and affuse thereon as much good
Vinegar as is needful to dissolve it; filter the dissolution, and evaporate in
the same bath till a film cover the top of it, then set it to crystallize in a
cool place, which separate, dry, and keep for use.

4. It is given for the cure of Tertian Agues, a little before the Fit, a gr.
xij. ad xx. in some proper purging Liquor. The Author had it doubtless by
report, for he professes to know nothing of it by Experience: Yet this is
certain, that it is cooling, and extremely styptick, and as such, it may be
esteemed a good thing against Agues of all sorts, forasmuch as Experience has
confirmed to us, that styptick Medicaments are the chief profligators of those
Diseases.

5. Le Febur makes it after this manner: Pure Roch-Alum lb iij. calcine it in
an unglaz'd earthen pot, in a moderate heat, till all the phlegm is vanished
away, then increase the fire by degrees, till the Pot and Alum grow red hot,
which done, have in a readiness in a great earthen Pan, Spirit of Vinegar lb
ij. into which put this calcined Alum thus red hot, so will it draw
immediately, and take to it self the Essence and Magistery of Alum, (and the
remainder of the Body will precipitate it self in the bottom of the Vessel,
into a white Powder, which being separated, may by ablutions be sweetened and
dried, for other particular Intentions) This Vinegar impregnated with the
virtues of the Alum, filter and add to it Tincture of Elderberries, made with
its own fermented Spirit ss. put all into a Cucurbit, and in B. M. abstract all
the superfluous humidity, to the consistency of a Syrup, then setting the
Vessel in a cool place for 4 or 5 days, it will crystalize, which separate,
dry, and keep for use.

6. These Crystals are sudorifick, diuretic, and stomatick, and therefore a
good Remedy against the Scurvy; but their chief intention is for the cure of
Tertain Agues, being given a gr. x. ad xx. in decoction or Juice of
Nettle-roots, or Chervil well depurated and mixed with a little Whitewine, a
little before the Fit: In other cases it may be taken in like manner in the
morning fasting.

XII. Arcanum Aluminis; The Arcanum of Alum.
Bate.] It is made of Alumen Dulce ij. fused or melted Salt vj. being mixed
together and reverberated, and washed with Water S. A. The Virtues are the same
with those of the Alumen Dulce, or Sugar of Alum.

Salmon.] 1. This is only Sugar of Alum, yet more purified and corrected, by
the fused or melted Salt, which Salt is afterward separated from it by
washing, the Arcanum Aluminis precipitating.

2. It is esteemed better than the Alumen Dulce, and thought not inferior to
the Essence of Chalybs or Iron, Loadstone, etc. and is given a gr. x. ad xx. in
any proper astringent Liquor.

3. It is said to perform all the Operations of a good Styptick, and is not
only good against Fevers and Agues, but also stops all immoderate Fluxes of the
Bowels, and Fluxes of Seed, Gonorrhoea's in Men, and Whites in Women, or heat
of Urine from a venereal cause, the Pocky taint being first taken off by some
proper and specific Remedy, according as the Prudence of the Physician shall
direct.

4. Modus Vtendi. Aq. Lactis alexiter. iv. Syrup of Citron-peels vj. of this
Arcanum gr. xx. liquid Laudanum gut. x. mix for a Dose, against the Gonorrhoea,
Whites, weakness of the Back. etc. Universals being first premised. Centory or
Carduus-water iv. Syrup of Limons j. of this Arcanum gr. xx. of our volatile
Laudanum gr. ij. mix for a Dose, against a Tertian Ague, to be given three
hours, or better, before the Fit, putting also the Sick into a condition of
Sweating, that when the time of the cold Fit should come, the Patient may be in
the midst of a good Sweat, by which means the violence of the Paroxism will be
anticipated.

XIII. * Arcanum Corallinum; The Coralline Secret.
Bate.] It is made of crude Mercury lb j. Spirit of Nitre lb ij. distilled
therefrom with cohobations, so will the Arcanum remain in the bottom which is
to be edulcorated either by calcination, or washing it with Water S. A. Dose a
gr. iv. ad vj. or more. It purges chiefly downwards, is a great Secret in the
Lues Venerea, Dropsy, Gout, Ulcers, Scabs, Cancers.

Salmon.] 1. We have shown you another way of making it in our Pharm. Lon. lib.
3. cap. 7. sect. 23. which is with red Precipitate and Spirit of Salt, which is
from Thibaut. And in Sect. 27. following you have another Coralline Arcanum
from Schroder, in these or the like words. Fine Quicksilver, rectified Spirit
of Nitre, A. iij. digest till dissolution, draw off the Spirit in Sand, with a
longneck'd Glass; to the Mercury left and powdered add as much fresh Spirit,
viz. iij. more, draw it off again, and repeat this with iij. of fresh Spirit of
Nitre the third time, so will you have a fine corallated Mercury, which calcine
with a gentle fire, and it will be sweet without any corrosion.

2. Now the difference between this Prescript, and that of our Author is only
this; that whereas Schroder, or rather Hartman, prescribes but an equal
quantity of Spirit with the Mercury, and the operation to be three times
repeated with the same quantity of fresh Spirit. Our Author prescribes a
trebble quantity of Spirit at once, and the same to be 3 times cohobated, which
to me seems to make the Preparation the better by all the Cohobations, though
Lemery seems to be of another opinion. He makes it thus.

3. Mercury revived from Cinnaber viij. Spirit of Nitre viij. or ix. mix, and
dissolve, put the dissolution into a Vial or Mattress with a short Neck, set in
Sand, and evaporate all the moisture with a gentle heat, until there remains a
white Mass, then quicken the Fire by little and little, to the third degree,
and keep it in this condition till all the matter is turned red, then take it
off from the Fire, let it cool, and break the Vial, so will you have ix. of
Precipitate. Some put this red Precipitate into an earthen Pot, and pour upon
it S. V. well rectified, then fire it, letting it burn till it is consumed, and
then adding more, and burning it off as before: They repeat this Operation of
deflagration six times, and call it Arcanum Corallinum.

4. Now here is to be noted, that Lemery is of opinion, that the distilling
Spirit of Nitre three times off from the white Mass, or cohobating of it, to
the increase of its redness, is of no use, and as I apprehend him, adds nothing
to the Virtue of the Medicine.

5. But that it reduces the Mass into smaller Particles, is apparent; for if
iij. of Spirit of Nitre will reduce the Mercury into Particles so fine, ix. of
Spirit, from the same reason, must reduce it into Particles three times as
fine. And this was the Opinion of Paracelsus; and that the Particles at length
might be made so fine, as to become Oily, else in vain was the Engine of Joel
Langelot made, for the grinding of Gold, thereby to reduce it into Oil, if the
smalness of the Particles added not something to that Reduction.

6. And if the reducing of the Mercury into small Particles accidentally add to
the Virtue of the Mercury, by enlarging the surface thereof; if then by adding
three times the quantity of Spirit, the Particles be made three times as small,
it follows by parity of Reason, that its Virtues must be three times as great.

7. The white Mass which remains after the first evaporation of the humidity,
is a mixture of Mercury with a great many acid Spirits, for it weighs three
ounces more than the crude Mercury did; and it is extreme corrosive and fiery,
if applied to the Flesh.

8. But according as it is calcined, to make it red, the Points of the Spirit
of Nitre which caused the corrosion, do strike off, and fly into the Air;
whence it comes to pass, that the more it is calcined, the more we increase in
nedness, and the more diminish its weight, and the less, it corrodes even in
outward application. And therefore some Chyrurgions observing this, when they
would make an Eschar quickly, choose the Precipitate that is less red, or less
red than usual, the more red being less escharotick.

9. Therefore being continued for some hours under the red Mass, will cause it
to sublime, and yet still retain its red color, but this sublimate is hot so
corrosive as the other; from whence it appears, that the Points or Acids of the
Spirit of Salt are necessary to make a sublimate very corroding.

10. And the reason why it will sublime, is, because the Mercury being freed
from many of the acid Spirits, which did fix it, has power to sublime with
those that remain; but because those remaining Spirits do a little clog it in
its career or volatility, it commonly makes its station in the middle of the
Vial.

11. Le Mort makes it in all respects as Schroder or Hartman does, but after
the dissolution and abstraction of the Spirit of Nitre, he affuses Spirit of
Vinegar, so much as to overtop in 4 inches, digests two days, after evaporates
to dryness, then affuses tartarized S. V. to overtop it 3 inches, digests and
abstracts in Sand to dryness, cohobating the same Spirit upon the Mercury, so
long till it acquires an acidity. Lastly, affuses fresh Spirit of Wine upon the
matter, and abstract again, so have you an Arcanum Corallinum, which you may
keep under the name of Aurum Horizontalis.

12. It brings forth all noxious humors in the French Pox, Leprofie,
King's Evil, etc. being given a gr. j. ad vj. It is a specific Purge in all
ulcerous Affects, or any venereal Relic; and if prudently given with proper
Catharticks, it cures the Dropsy, and all Diseases proceeding from cold glassy
Phlegm and watery Humors.

13. Marggrave makes it of crude Mercury, and but double the Spirit of Nitre,
with one single dissolution and abstraction of the Spirit and calcination to
redness, abstracting several times from it the Alcohol of S. V. to remove from
it its Acrimony.

14. Charras makes it thus: Quicksilver iv. (revived from Cinnaber) Spirit of
Nitre iv. put all into a Mattress, being first placed in a gentle Sand-heat; the
being dissolved, incline the neck of the Mattress a little, and by increasing
the fire, evaporate the Spirit; this repeat three times with equal quantities
of Spirit of Nitre, and at last increase the fire, till the matter looks
perfectly red, powder it, affuse thereon the best rectified S. V. a little to
overtop it, then deflagrate, and repeat the deflagration six times; powder it,
and keep it for use.

15. He not only gives it against all venereal Distempers, but also against
Dropsies, Rheumatisms, and intermitting Agues, it purging universally bad
Humors, chiefly Phlegm, which it dissolves and carries off by the most
commodious ways.

16. It is given in some Conserve or Confection, from gr. iij. (says he) ad.
gr. viij. or x. It is used outwardly for the cure of old Ulcers, Fistula's,
etc. chiefly such as are venereal; and in Pomatums, to take away all sorts of
Scabs, Leprosies, Scurf, Morphew, and other defedations of the Skin.

17. Le Febur takes to Mercury purified iv. Spirit of Nitre ivss. dissolves in
a gentle Ash-heat, in a short-neckt Mattress, and abstracts the Spirit to
dryness, and repeats this same work twice more with fresh Spirit of Nitre ivss.
each time (by which means the Particles are made much finer than by any of the
former. Operations) then poudering it finely in a Glass Mortar, calcines it in
a Crucible by degrees in an open fire, till it is red hot, becomes of a fine
red coralline color, and insipid in taste. Lastly, being in fine powder;
deflagrates rectified S. V. from it seven times, as is before taught.

18. This, says he, is a purgative Precipitate, capable of working many noble
effects, and without any corrosion. Dose (says he) is from gr. ij. ad x. in
purgative Extracts, or a Dose of the Pilulae Angelicae of Grulingius, commonly
called the Frankfort Pill; which you may see in our Pharm. Land. lib. 4. cap.
3. sect. 86. with its Virtues at large.

19. It is a real and true Arcanum against the French Pox, with all its
regiment of evil Symptoms, for it equally and universally purges away all that
is hurtful and superfluous, and therefore is good against hydroptick humors,
Gouts, Sciatica's Rheumatisms, King's Evil, intermitting Fevers or Agues,
scirrhus Tumors, whether inward in the Bowels, or outward in other parts of the
Body; it resolves Fluxions, and Cararrhs, and is good against the malignity of
the Plague.

20. Outwardly no Remedy surpasses it in the cure of corrosive, or eating and
malignant Ulcers; it is good against Itch, Scabs, Leprosy, and all irruptions
of the skin if mixed in Pomatums j. of it to j. of the Ointment, and so the
Pulses in the Wrists, Feet, Fingers, and other parts be anointed therewith.

21. One thing I have to remind you of here, which is that being taken
inwardly, but 6, 8, or 10 doses, it is a Specific in removing nocturnal pains,
which it so absolutely cures, that they never return any more from that
oc^^^^on. You may give it a gr. iij. ad v. or vj. mixed with j. of Cinnaber of
Antimony, or native Cinnaber in fine powder, which being mixed with the Pap of
an Apple, is to be swallowed at night going to bed, and repeated in like manner
the next night, then intermitting 2, 3 or 4 nights, (as the strength of the
Patient requires) to be in like manner repeated again for two other nights, and
this course to be followed till 8 or 10 Doses are taken, at the end of which
course you may probably (through God's Blessing) find your Patient perfectly well.

22. Lastly, this Arcanum being put into a Vial hermetically sealed, and set
for 8 whole days in a Sand-heat, a Tincture of Gold may be extracted from it,
red like blood, leaving in the bottom a white substance or body of Gold; in
another Phiol hermetically sealed coagulate it with a gentle fire in an
Athenar, into a red stone, which upon a Porphory, in a cold moist place,
dissolve into Oil, which afterward purged from its feces, coagulate, and
repeat the same coagulation a third time: This Precipitate, Elixir of Life and
Mercurial Laudanum carefully keep in a Glass close stopped.

23. Dose gr. j. with Extract of Treacle, and Powder of Liquorice, enough to
make it up into Pills. In every Disease, after taking it, the Sick may drink a
draught of Wine, repeating the Dose if necessity urge. Note, that the white
substance of Gold remaining in the bottom of the Phiol, which is wont to be
called fixed Silver, recovers its pristine color, if precipitated with
Antimony. See Paracelsus's Chyrurg. Mag.

XIV. Arcanum Corallinum Paracelsi; Paracelsus his Coralline Secret.
Bate.] Crude Mercury, Vitriol calcined, Nitre, A. lb ij. mix and sublime, the
sublimate mix with Nitre and Salt a little calcined, A. lb j. Wine-Vinegar q.
s. so as to make a Paste, which again sublime, separating the red from the
yellow; wash each apart, or by it self, deflagrating thereon S. V. S. A. Dose a
gr. iv. ad vij. It exceeds in virtue and power Mercurius Dulcis, and is a
Secret in the French Pox, Dropsy, Scabs, etc.

Salmon.] 1. Schroder has an Arcanum not much unlike to this, which he calls
the Panacaea Mercurii, or fixed Mercury, and it is thus made: Crude Mercury lb
iij. yellow Sulphur lb ij. Sal Armoniack lb iss. mix them well till no Mercury
appears, then sublime, mix the sublimate again with its own feces, and sublime
still afresh, then increase the fire, and that at the bottom is the great
Secret. It is (says he) sudorifick, drys up all bad Humors, and expels them by
Sweat. Dose a ss. ad j. or ss.

2. This Operation more fixes the Mercury than the former, for in the former
Operation it all sublimes, whereas in this the Spirit of the Sulphur, by
several sublimations, brings it to a singular degree of fixity, insomuch that
it may be taken in all respects as safely as Mercurius Dulcis.

3. Hartman has also an Arcanum, which answers all the same intentions, but it
is prepared after another manner, which because it may be of service to the
Sons of Art, we will here impart. Crude Mercury purified, digest it in red Oil
of Vitriol, till it become as Water, abstract the Oil by a Retort in Sand, and
you will have a Precipitate at bottom; take this Precipitate and add to it an
equal weight of Silver calcined, and as much of Sal. Armoniack; mix and
sublime, so the Sal Armoniack will ascend, leaving the Mercury and Silver at
bottom, like pure Gold, which sweeten by many ablutions in fair Water, or by a
gentle calcination, and it will become red. Dose a gr. iij. ad viij. or x.
against the Pox, Dropsy, Scab, Leprosy, Gout, Stone, etc.

4. This Arcanum or Matter being put into a Crucible, in a melting Fire, turns
both the Ingredients, viz. the Mercury and Silver, into Glass; Harim. Disp.
Chym. Med. 7. Th. 127. Vitrum hoc (dixit ille) infinitarum virtutum est, quas
singulas hoc loco recensere neque instituti, neque aequitatis est: Sed
demonstrato conficiendi modo, solerti Chymiatria indagatori committimus. It may
be given a gr. iij. ad iv. and it will yield its Virtue to Wine by infusion, as
other Glasses of the like kind will.

5. But what the Arcamon Corallinum of Paracelsus was, does not plainly appear
by what we have from him, for in his Fragmenta libri secundi ( page mea 70.)
speaking of the perfect cure of the Gout by his Coralline Arcanum, he says,
Podagricut primo plene, perfect que per Arcamon Corallinum purgandus est. Per
hoc fluxus podagrici usque adeo expurgantur, ut locus illi morbo amplius non
detur: in isto siquidens Corallino, quod ex essentia Auri preparatum est,
facultas adeo insignis latet, ut impossible sit, Medicum citra illam
purgationem Podagram inquirere, etc. By the Essence of Gold he may possibly
mean Mercury, for that the Hermetick Philosophers always accounted it the very
Root and Foundation, or Essence of that Metal. And De Vita Longa, lib. 2. cap.
1. he says, Tria quae ad perfectam podagrae curam requiruntur; purgatio,
apertio, deinde Cura in hanc sententionem: Principio purgetur omnis podagricus
plena ac perfecta purgatione, and id ipsum Arcano Corallino, quo interveniente,
eliciuntur fluxus podagriae, adeo ut ne locus porro relinquatur podagrae: In
hoc Corallino quod ex essentia Auri est, tanta vis, ac virtus inest, ut eam,
nisi hac purgatione a medico deprehendi impossible sit: fiat ista purgandi
ratio sexies, aut septies, pro vetustate sive duritia, sive natura podagrae.
All this we were willing to say in the Author's own words, that at least its
use might the better be understood.

6. However, this of our Author's, going under the Name of Paracelsus, is taken
from Crollius, and by Hartman attributed to Paracelsus, though he confesses it is
no where to be found in his Works. Libavius also denies it to be his, because
the genuine Preparation is no where in any of his Writings; therefore Hartman
questions whether Libavius ever saw Paracelsus's Key (which he sent in Writing
to a certain Friend, and has lain hid among some few, as especially with
Heuserus, who set forth Paracelsus his Works, and afterward by Rhenanus it was
in part divulged) or had yet read Geber de Fornacibus, or the Ninth Chapter of
the same; or whether he understood how Mercury with Saltpeter is sublimed, red,
and splendid.

7. In this Preparation the crude Mercury ought to be purified, which is done
with a Lixivium of Calx Vive, and Potashes, 6 or 7 times repeated, and
afterward washed with Salt and Vinegar so long, till it has a celestial
color, so will it be fit for sublimation.

8. Or thus: Crude Mercury, put it into a long Glass, no part cut off, put on
it the best S. V. so much as to cover it 2 inches; keep it well stopped with your
Thumb, and shake the Glass between your hands very well, so will the Mercurial
blackness be separated in the Spirit of Wine, and to the sides of the Vessel;
the S. V. thus fouled, decant and affuse fresh S. V. shaking as before, which
Operation continue and repeat, till the whole blackness be removed (which in
some kinds of Mercury which are very foul, will be almost a fourth part of
their weight) and the Mercury appears of a most pure, bright, and celestial
color. The S. V. you may abstract in B. M. from the filth, and keep it for
use, reserving the Feces for killing Lice, Nits, Worms, Itch, etc. as you shall
see fit.

9. The Saltpeter or Nitre must be also diligently purified, and separated from
all vulgar Salt, otherwise the Sublimate or Arcanum will be above measure
corrosive. Now a Trial whether the Salt be duly separated, is thus made: If the
Nitre be put upon a red-hot Iron Plate, and it all burn up and fly away,
leaving no sign of that remaining, it is fine and pure, and fit for this work,
otherwise not: How to purify it, see in its proper place.

10. The incorporation will be best done with a wooden Pestel, and so long till
the Mercury seems wholly mortified, or does disappear, then put the whole Mass
into a conveniently large earthen Cucurbit, being very clean, and begin the
distillation in Sand, or a naked Fire, but moderate it first for one night,
that the Phlegm may come forth, then by gradual increasing the Fire for 24 hours
or more, sublime the matter; so will the crude Mercury ascend to the head of
the Alembick with a very dark color, in the middle of the Alembick it will be
of a yellow color, and a little above the matter of a rubicund color; then
break the Glass, and gather all the sublimate Powder, as well the red ^s the
yellow, and take of Nitre, and of Alum calcined (not too lightly, lest the
Mercury revive with it, not too strongly, lest the Spirits vanish) of each as
much as your Mercury purified was at first; mix them with the Mercury by
beating, moistening them with the phlegm of the former distilled Vinegar, then
sublime in a new Alembick as before, and in contin^ing the fire for the space
of 12 hours (the last two thereof the bottom of the Cucurbit being very hot)
the Operation ^ill be done, and the powder as^end, below of a most red color,
a little above that yellow, and in the top black.

11. The Vessels and Matter being co^led, break the Glass, and carefully take
all out; that which is red, and sticks to the sides of the Glass, a little
above the Caput Mortu^m, is ^^^e, and fit for use, because the Mercury has
acquired a Coralline color; this keep apart, and ^dulcorate with Cordial
Waters, as of Rosemary flowers, Damask-Roses, and the like, and lastly, burn
often from it the best S. V.

12. The yellow flowers gather also apart, and in a Crucible, with a moderate
fire, calcine, that it may be red, and afterward, in the same manner,
edulcorate it: Or rather mix at first the red and yellow flowers together, and
put them into a Phial or Bolt-head, and set them in a sand-heat for certain
days, till they are red.

13. The black Feces in the top, with the Caput Mort. you may either cast away,
or otherwise keep it, and from thence revive Mercury.

14. It cures not only the French Pox, with all its Attendants, and the
Dropsy, but also the Gout, Scabs, and Leprosy; this needs not seem strange to
them who know that Mercury is the Balsam of Nature, in which is an incarnative
and regenerative Virtue, wonderfully renovative and restorative, and cleansing
from all Impurities.

15. Hartman has another Arcanum Coralinum of his own, much of this kind, which
(says he) is more easy to make, and more excellent than the former of
Paracelsus, and it is thus: Salt (extracted out of the Caput Mort. of AF. made
of Vitriol and Nitre) vj. and Mercury well purged ij. Nitre purified ij. mix
and grind them well together, imbibing them with Vinegar until in those Salts
the Mercury be quite consumed, then in a Cucurbit, with its Alembick, sublime
after the usual manner: Some will be white, some yellowish Saffron like, and
some of it will be most red, without any corrosion. Gather the Saffron colored
and red, rejecting the rest; when mixed, put them into a Bolt-head, and in a
very hot sand-heat, or otherwise, sublime it per se, that all may be very red,
afterward wash or edulcorate it, and upon it burn S. V. tartarized.

16. It cures Scabs, Ulcers, Cancers, Fistula's, Pox, Gonorrhoea, Dropsy,
Gout, Leprosy, etc. and the Dose is as in the former, being a true metallic
Laudanum, or Treacle of Metals.

XV. Arcanum Cosmeticum; The beautifying Secret.
Bate.] Venice Talck made into subtle powder, according to Art, p. j. Oil of
Camphir, p. ij. digest in B. M. to the greatest whiteness, S. A.

Salmon.] 1. There are several ways of reducing Talck into Powder; as we have
showed in our Pharm. Land. lib. 3. cap. 13. sect. 102. and 103. but Schroder,
from whom the Recipe is taken, says it must be crude Talck in Powder, and if
so, you must take the Powder made by rubbing it with Pumexstones, or filed with
a Goldsmith's Smoothing-file, or otherwise by heating it in a hot Mortar.

2. The Oil of Camphir also here intended, is that which we have described cap.
3. sect; 4. 2. of this Book aforegoing, so that no more need be said of it here.

3. This Oil being poured upon the fine Powder of the Talck aforementioned* or
a Powder made by calcination, it will grow white, as Schroder says, by two days
maceration in B. M. which, says he, is a brave fucus for Ladies Faces. See our
Seplasium, lib. 4. cap. 60. sect; 9, 10, and 11.

XVI. Arcanum Duplex, seu Sal Duplex; The Duplicate Secret, or Salt.
Bate.] It is drawn forth out of the Caput Mortuum of double AF. dissolved in
warm Water, filtred and evaporated S. A. It is of egregious use in melancholy
affects, all sorts of Fevers, Stone, Scurvy, etc. Dose a j. ad ij.

Salmon.] 1. What the single Aquafortis is, you may see in our Pharm. Land.
lib. 3. cap. 10. sect. 48. the Double here intended is described in cap. 1.
sect. 27. of this Book aforegoing.

2. It is drawn forth with warm Water, because by reason of the heat, it melts
the Salt, and so both more easily and sooner makes the Extraction.

3. Mynsicht seems to be the Author hereof, and calls it Arcanum Duplicatum,
but he calcines the elicited Sal, (being first ground into Powder on a Marble)
in a Glass Cucurbit, well luted, by a good gradual increase of the Fire for 12
hours, so that at length the bottom of the Cucurbit becomes red hot, which Work
of poudering and calcining he repeats to the third time.

4. And from Mynsicht Rolfincius assumed it, who makes the Calcination in a
Glass Retort, affirming Georgius Bussius to be the first Inventor. He says it
opens and incides and cures Obstructions of the Hypochonders, having also a
diuretic force.

5. Mynsicht says it is a Secret against Melancholy, Madness, alienation of
the Mind, Fevers, Plague, and Epidemick Diseases; and it works variously, by
Sweat, Stool, and sometimes induces Sleep.

6. Marggrave calls it Nitrum Vitriolatum, or Sal Ducis Holsatiae, and prepares
it only by a simple solution and digestion for 24 hours, then filtration,
evaporation, ad cuticulam, or to dryness, by which you have a very white Salt
enclining to greenness: This Salt he well dries upon Paper in hot Sand, till it
becomes hard and white, and so keeps it for use without any farther
calcination, as the other Authors advise.

7 He ascribes also the same Virtues to it, and withal says, it is very acute
and penetrating, conducing to the cure of acute Diseases, the Scurvy, and
Hypocondriack Distempers: It is to be given in Broth, in the morning fasting.

8. Schroder depurates the Salt by many Solutions and Coagulations, till it is
white, then pouders it, and puts it into a luted Cucurbit or Still, calcines
and melts, and for the better melting, adds some Sal Nitre, to make it melt the
easier, which work he repeats four times, but after the second or third time
depurates the matter again from the feces, by solution and coagulation.

9. Others, to make it melt, instead of Sal Nitre, take Sal Prunellae p. j. to
the Salt of the Caput Mort. p. ij.

10. Joel Langelot says, he has proved it by a thousand Experiences, in Fevers,
Agues, Melancholy, Stone, Scurvy, etc. And Schroder says, he has often observed
it to cause Sleep chiefly in melancholy Persons; also that it cost his Prince
five hundred Dolars or Crowns, and that they spent some pounds of it every day.

11. Some add to the Salt p. vij. Calx of Gold rightly prepared p. j. then
mixing and grinding them together upon a Crucible, keep the mixture as a great
Treasure.

12. Le Febure puts the Caput Mort, to digest in boiling distilled Rainwater,
and stirs it often the better to extract the Salt; then filters and slowly
evaporates in Ashes, in an earthen Pan or glass vessel, and when the Cuticula
appears, puts it to crystallize, and after that, evaporates to dryness, that he
may have all the Salt, which he often dissolves, filtrates, evaporates, and
crystalizes, till it is very clear and pure.

13. Then he takes of this Salt p. v. of Crystal Mineral p. j. mixes them in
fine powder, puts them into a luted Cucurbit, and calcines them in an open
gradual Fire, in this Cucurbit, till all be melted into a Mass. This Work he
repeats a second time, then dissolves again, filtrates and evaporates in B. M.
to dryness; of this Salt he takes p. vij. Calx of Sol p. j. mixes and gives
them together, and in a new-luted Cucurbit calcines it in a well-graduated
fire, till it melts, which then he takes and keeps as a great Remedy.

14, He ascribes to it all the Virtues before enumerated, and says, that its
manner of operating cannot sufficiently enough be praised, for that it sweetly
provokes Sleep, and settles the Archaeus of the Ventricle in its ordinary state
and calmness when it is out of order.

15. Briefly, says he, there is a certain hidden Mystery in it, whereof it is
very difficult to render any reason, unless it be, that this Salt has received
the Eradiations of the Anodyn Sulphur of Vitriol, by the mighty power and force
of the Fire, or sufficiently opening the Gold, makes it yield and communicate
its salutiferary Influences and Virtues, etc.

XVII. Arcanum Joviale; The Jovial Arcanum, or Secret of Tin.
Bate.] Make an Amalgama of equal parts of purified Mercury, and English Tin,
which reduce into a powder, digest it into rectified Spirit of Nitre, and
distill off the Spirit by retort to dryness; the mass in the bottom grind and
edulcorate it, by a manifold accension of S. V. S. A. Dose a gr. iij. ad viij.
It is a great sudorisick.

Salmon.] 1. You must first melt the Tin, and then add the Mercury, stirring
them together in a hot Mortar with an Iron Pestel, till the Substances are well
mixed and reduced into Powder, then putting the metalline Powder into a Glass
Stillatory, you are to digest them together for some time before distillation;
the more in quantity the Spirit of Nitre is, the better will be the Arcanum,
because there is a more ample union made not only between the metalline
Sulphurs, among themselves, but also between the metalline and saline Sulphurs,
so that they may be said to enter into one another Properties.

2. In this Preparation, though the Spirit of Nitre opens both the bodies, and
also in some measure unites them, yet that is but a part of the work, for the
body of the Mercury is also in a great measure fixed by the substance of the
Jupiter, so that it is not so apt to fly upwards and cause Salivations as
otherwise, nor has it half the dangerous and pernicious consequences, which
attends most other Preparations of Mercury.

3. It is a great Secret in the cure of the Pox, and all sorts of Pocky
Symptoms, as also Leprosies, Ringworms, rebellious Herpes, Rheumatisms, Scurvy,
etc. in any part of the Body. If it be given in a small dose, it powerfully
provokes Sweat, but if in a larger dose, as a gr. viij. ad gr. xij. ad xvj. or
xx. in very strong People it does Wonders in a short time.

4. I am not aware that I ever observed it to flux any one, but it powerfully
provokes Sweat, if given in a moderate dose, as ss. or gr. xij. for sometimes
it cures almost incurable Diseases, and that by an insensible way. I deny not
but it may cause spitting in some, but it is very rare, and what I never found
by the use of the Medicine.

5. It is a Specific against the Worms in Children, the King's Evil, though of
many years standing, Cancers in Women's Breasts, or elsewhere, and a confirmed
Leprosy.

XVIII. Arcanum Scriptorium, A Secret for Writing, or The Sympathetical Ink.
Bate.] It is made of the Salt of Saturn j. dissolved in an ounce of Water, for
the Writing Liquor, and of Arsenick or Orpiment in powder, mixed with
Quicklime, A ss. digested in Water iv. for the oblineatory Liquor.

Salmon.] 1. The Process from Le Mort, who calls it Atramentum Sympatheticum.
It is composed, says he, of two liquors the first of which is thus made:
Litharge of Gold j. Spirit of Vinegar iij. mix and boil a little, till the
Spirit of Vinegar grows sweet, or has extracted the salt of the Lead, then let
it be filtred, and kept for use.

2. The second Liquor is thus made: Auripigment in fine powder j. Calx Vive
about ij. mix and boil 'em well together in a sufficient quantity of Water,
till the Liquor acquire a subvirid color, then filter, and keep it for use.

3. Whatsoever is written with the first Liquor will not appear, unless the
second be put to it, or over it, near it, for then the inapparent Writing done
with the first Liquor appears black, yea, although some others Bodies be
interposed between them; as suppose it be a moderately thick Book, so that the
written Paper may be on the upper part of the Book lying along, and another
Paper moistened with the latter Liquor, be put on the under side of the Book,
and so pressed hard together for some little time.

4. Lemery has it somewhat more explicitly, with the additions of a third
Liquor; first get an impregnation of Saturn with Spirit of Vinegar, or dissolve
so much Saturn as a quantity of Water is able to receive.

5. Secondly, Burn Cork and quench it in Aqua-vitae, then dissolve it in a
sufficient quantity of Water, in which a little Gum-Arabick has been melted, in
order to make an Ink as black as common Ink: The Cork that wont dissolve and
mix, separate, and if the Ink be not black enough, add more burnt Cork, as
before.

6. Thirdly, Take Quicklime j. Orpiment in fine powder ss. mix them together,
put the mixture into a Mattress, and pour upon it water v. or vj. so that it may
be three inches above the powder; stop the Mattress with Cork, Wax, and a
Bladder, and set it in digestion in a gentle sand-heat for 10 or 12 hours,
shaking the Mattress often; then let it settle, that the liquor may become
clear, like common Water.

7. The first Experiment. Write with the first Liquor or Impregnation of Saturn
on Paper, with a new Pen, and take notice of the place where you wrote, and let
it dry, then nothing at all will appear. Write upon the invisible Writing with
the Ink made of burnt Cork, and let it dry, which will appear as if it had been
done with common Ink. Dip a little Cotton in the third or last Liquor, being
first filtred, or very clear, and rub the place you wrote upon with this
Cotton, so will that which before appeared, being written with the Cork-Ink,
immediately disappear; and that which was written with the Impregnation of
Saturn, and not to be seen, will immediately appear, and be visible.

8. The second Experiment. Take a Book four inches in thickness, or thicker if
you please, write on the first leaf with the Impregnation of Saturn, or else
lay a Paper which you have written in the same place, then turn the other side
of the Book, and having observed as near as may be, the opposite place to your
Writing, rub the last leaf of the Book, or another Paper, with the third Liquor
made of Quicklime and Orpiment, which lay in the place of that last leaf, and
leave the Cotton on the place, clap a folded Paper presently upon it, and
shutting the Book quickly, strike upon it with your Hand 4 or 5 good strokes,
then turn the Book, and put it into a Press for half a quarter of an hour, take
it out and open it, and you will find the place appear black, where you had
wrote with the first Liquor or Impregnation of Saturn: And the same thing would
be done, was the thickness of 2 or 3 Ream of Paper between, provided they were
in like manner pressed, to hinder the evaporating of the Spirits.

XIX. Aurum Fulminans; Lightning or Thundering Gold.
Bate.] It is made of Sol dissolved in A. R. and precipitated with Oil of
Tartar per deliq. then edulcorating and drying, S. A. They usually give 3 or 4
grains thereof to provoke Sweating.

Salmon.] 1. Maets makes it in this proportion; Filings of fine Gold, p. j.
Aquae Regiae p. iij. or iv. dissolve the Sol in a gentle sand-hea^ to which
dissolution affuse Oil of Tartar per deliquium, drop by drop, till the
effervescence of the Salts shall cease. This is made a regeneration of Nitre,
for the most subtle parts of the Nitre intimately mix themselves with the
Particles of the Gold, in such sorts, that if they be affected with too great a
heat, they break forth into a flame with a thundering noise.

2. Lemery makes it thus. Gold in thin Plates or Leaves, q. v. put it into a
Vial or Mattress, and affuse thereon gradatim, 3 or 4 times as much A. R. digest
on warm Sand till the Gold is dissolved, or the A. R. has swallowed up as much
of the Sol as it can hold, which you may know by the ceasing of the Ebulition.
Decant the solution into a Glass Vessel, and affuse thereon five or six times
as much common water, then drop into this mixture Gutatim, volatile Spirit of
Sal Armoniack or Oleum Tartari per deliq. so will the Gold precipitate. After a
good while settling, that all the Gold may fall down, decant off the Water by
Inclination, wash the Precipitate with warm Water, till it grows insipid, and
so dry it in a Paper at a gentle fire, because it is apt to take fire, and fly
away with a noise and violence like Thunder and Lightning.

3. Now here is to be noted that Plates or Leaves of Gold are used in this
Operation, that its dissolution may the more easily be performed: And you must
put on the A. R. gradatim, to avoid the mighty effervescency, which would
possibly drive it out of the Mattress; which effervescency proceeds from the
violent division of the metalline Particles, for when it finds no more
Particles to work upon, having divided the body of the Gold into as many Atoms
as it is possible, the Ebulition ceases, and the Sol remains in the A. R.
imperceptible to us, so that the Water seems not to be changed from what it was
before, it is, so perfectly clear and transparent, except that it has received
a golden color, and is become yellow.

4. This dissolution of Gold is only a suspension of the Particles of the Metal
in the Water, made by the Points of the A. R. for it is not enough, that the A.
R. does divide the Gold into subtle Particles, but it is farther requisite
that the said points or edges should hold up the Atoms, otherwise they would
always fall to the bottom in a Powder, though never so subtle.

5. These acid edges are bodies exceeding light, in comparison of the Particles
of Gold, and they have their superficies more extended, consequently take up
more room in the phlegm, and this is that that holds them up, and makes them
swim; for as a piece of Wood will swim in Water, and a piece of Metal sink, yet
if the Metal be fixed on the Wood, or suspended by it, they both will swim
together.

6. The Oil of Tartar, or Spirit of Sal Armoniack used in this Precipitation,
contain each of them an alcalious Salt, which being mixed with Acids, causes an
immediate fermentation, in which the Parts of the A. R. which held up the
Particles of the Gold, do grow weak, and so weak, as to be able to hold them no
longer; by which means, through their own weight, they precipitate.

7. Now the reason why the volatile Spirit of Sal Armoniack weakens the A. R.
which is compounded of Sal Armoniack, is this; The strength of the A. R. not
proceeding so much from the volatile part of the Sal Armoniack, as from the
Sea Salt, which in great plenty is mixed with it, and from which indeed the
mighty force of the A. R. proceeds, it follows that as the only Sea Salt which
is a fixed Acid, can strengthen it, so whatsoever is opposite to it, such as is
a volatile Alcali, (and such is the volatile Spirit of Sal Arm.) must in like
manner weaken and destroy it, by absorbing in some measure its acidity: And
indeed, both Sea-salts and Sal Gem may either of them be indifferently
substituted in the place of Sal Armoniack for making Aqua Regis, as I may
elsewhere observe and demonstrate.

8. From what has been said it appears, that this Operation is only Particles
of Gold, impregnated with acid Spirits, which causes it, when set over the
Fire, to give such a loud or thundering crack.

9. And it is also observable from the precise weighing the Gold, that from
iij. of fine Gold, you will have iv. of Aurum Fulminans, when well dried.

10. Now the reason why the dissolvent quits the Body it dissolved and held up,
is the adding some Body which by its motion and figure is able to engage the
Acids, so much as to break them, whereby the Particles of Gold being at
liberty, through their own weight they subside; and this is done through any
alcalious Salt: And such are Oil of Tartar. and volatile Spirit of Sal
Armoniack, which being very active Salts in their kind, and finding Bodies at
rest, presently move them, and by a quick and rapid motion shake them so
violently, as to break the Points by which the metalline Particles were
suspended; which fragments of Points being thus disengaged from the Gold, act
now upon the alcalious Salt, piercing and dividing their Particles asunder,
which are much more soluble in their nature than the Gold; and from hence
proceeds this new Ebulition, etc.

11. By this means the remaining A. R. is rendered incapable of dissolving any
more Gold, because it has no more power left of making a penetration: And the
precipitated Gold is impregnated with some parts of the Dissolvent, for that
the sharpest part of these points remain within the Particles of the
Precipitate, in which they are so closely locked up, that though it be several
times washed in warm Water, they cannot possibly be disengaged from their hold.

12. And this is plainly apparent, when put upon the fire, from the great
detonation or noise which is made, which can proceed from nothing else but the
enclosed Spirits, which violently break the most compact body of Gold, to get
speedily out, when they are forced to it by the virtue of Fire.

13. This Aurum Fulminans has a force vastly stronger than Gunpouder, viz. as
1. to 200. for j. of this Fulminant Gold put into a Silver Spoon or Ladle, and
held over the Fire, will give a louder bounce than 200 or xxv. of the finest
and best Gunpouder.

14. But from this Violence no Fear need to arise; as to the taking of it
inwardly, though much heated by the Stomach, for the humidities thereof mixing
with it, hinder it from making such a thundering noise, as when set over the
Fire in a Spoon; for so much the more moisture comes to it, so much the less
noise it does make.

15. This Medicine causes Sweat, and drives out malign and pestilential Humors
by transpiration, and may be given in the Small Pox a gr. ij. ad vj. in
Conserve of Roses, or Electuary, or some proper Syrup: It stops Vomiting, and
moderates the activity of Mercury; and some Authors think it to be the best
Medicine in the World to expel Mercury out of the Body by Sweat, when it has
been given by unskilful Hands: And as Gold represses the violence of Mercury,
because it does amalgamate with it, so Aurum Fulminans does it much better; for
being volatile, it is more easily carried through all the Body, and fails not
to find out the Mercury, wherever it lies.

16. And as taken inwardly it causes Sweat, because the heat of the Body
volatilizes it, and forces it through the Pores; so also, if the Pores are very
open, it will only cause an insensible transpiration, for from the closeness of
the Pores, it remains a longer time before it can pass through, whereby the
vaporous humidity which accompanies it condenses upon the Skin, and is that
which we call Sweat.

17. That the Gold and Spirit of Nitre, jointly together, causes this
Operation, is almost manifestly apparent, for it is very probable that these
Spirits do carry with them some parts of the Gold, with which they are so
intimately mixed; and being thus armed (as it were) with the Particles of the
Gold, it is made the more powerful, to conquer and overcome what shall oppose
in its Passage, than if it were singly given of it self.

18. Charras says it must not be washed above once or twice, if you intend to
preserve the Purgative faculty, which the Salts impart to it: It is, says he,
very diaphoretick, and may be given a gr. iij. ad vj. in some Conserve or
Confection.

19. The violent and wonderful effects of this Aurum Fulminans ought to oblige
the Artist to great circumspection in the drying of it, as also in the keeping
and giving of it. It Is true also, that its fulminating or thundering force may
easily be obtunded, by moistening it with Spirit of Vitriol, Salt, or Sulphur,
before it be wholly dried, because those Acids joining themselves to the
Particles of the other Acids, which were intimately mixed with the Precipitate
of Gold, break the Union, and hinder the violence which they would exert in
taking fire.

20. By this means you may afterward dry this Precipitate over the fire
without any danger, yea, and make it red hot in a Crucible, o^ melt it without
fear of any fulmination; but then it would be a question whether it would be so
efficacious to the purposes intended, as it was before; and therefore, in my
opinion, it is better to have it according to its genuine proportion, though it
costs more care and circumspection in the performance thereof.

XX. Aurum Vitae; Living or Vital Gold.
Bate.] It is made of fine Gold ij. and purified Mercury ij. each dissolved by
themselves in their proper Menstruums, then mixed together and distilled in a
Retort to dryness: This remaining Calx is to be calcined, and edulcorated by
ablution in Water and Accension of S. V. S. A. It is said to excel, and is
preferred before all other kinds of Catharticks; it kills Worms, cures the
French Pox, and overcomes the Spotted Fever, Plague, Quartan Agues, etc. Dose a
gr. iij. ad vj. vel viij. in Sugar of Roses, or in the yolk of an Egg. or in
Broth, or in Pills, more especially if mixed with Scammony, and moistened with
burnt Aqua Vitae.

Salmon.] 1. We have given you several Preparations of this Medicament, from
diverse Authors, as from Bovius, Hartman, and Sennertus, all which you may see
in our Pharmacop. Londinensis, lib. 3. cap. 7. sect. 37, 38, 39. but this of
our. Author differs from them all, as we shall anon show.

2. Others makes it thus: Fine Gold in Filings or Leaves ij. Aqua Regis viij.
mix and dissolve, keeping the dissolution in a hot place: Take also crude
Quicksilver well cleansed xij. common A. F. lb ij. xxiv. mix and dissolve; mix
the Solutions together, and in a little time all will appear very black; by an
Alembick in Sand distill it with a gentle heat, increasing the fire gradually,
till what is in the bottom begins to be red, and the Spirits are seen to
evaporate, afterward increase the heat, that the Cucurbit in the bottom may be
very hot; this done, take it out, and if any thing shall be sublimed, take it
also and mix with the other, put all into a Crucible, and calcine it till the
Spirits be well separated, stirring it with an Iron Rod, then edulcorate it by
washing it in warm Water, and draw off from it rectified S. V. with many
cohobations.

3. This of our Author is thus to be done: The Gold ij. (...) to be dissolved
in the A. R. iv. described in the afore-cited Chapter, sect. 27. These two
Solutions you are to mix together, and perfect the Precipitate by distillation,
calcination, ablution, and accension of S. V. (...) the Prescript directs.

4. The difference of all these five Prescripts has relation either as to the
manner of making, or to the Proportions: As to the manner of making, Bovius,
Hartman, Bate, and the Prescript aforegoing, agree, in dissolving the Gold and
Mercury apart: Sennertus alone makes first an Amalgama, and then dissolves it
in A. F. As to the Proportions, they all differ; Bovius has p. j. of Sol to p.
iv. of Mercury; Tilingius and the Prescript we have here inserted, has 1 of
Gold to 6 of Mercury; Bate, our Author, has 1 of Gold to 8 of Mercury;
Sennertus has 1 of Gold to 10 of Mercury; lastly, Crollius and Hartman have one
of Gold to 12 of Mercury.

5. Without doubt, as it has the suffrage of the greater number, to dissolve
each Metal apart by it self, so it seems to be the more natural way,
notwithstanding the smallness of the Particles, which some think the Mercury by
amalgamation reduces the Gold to, the A. F. only acting upon the Mercury in
this Preparation, and not upon the Gold at all; whereas in the other
Preparations the Gold receives a singular volatility and openness from the A.
R. as upon occasion I am able to demonstrate, and has such a union with some
parts of the Armoniack Salt, as can scarcely ever be separated from it again,
without loss of some parts of the Gold.

6. As to the proportions, if it be made after Sennertus's way, the longer
proportions are the better; but in the other methods, that in a mean between 4
and 12, is in my judgment to be chosen, which is the proportion assigned by our
Author; for if you amalgamate, the more the Mercury is in quantity, the more
minute Particles it reduces the Body of the Gold into; but if you dissolve
apart in Strong Water, you do two things at once, in some measure volatilize
the Gold, and make more fixed the Mercury, by a unition of dissolved Particles
in their Menstruums, and a gentle fixation together in a calcinatory heat.

7. The Virtues of this Medicine are many and great, (take which Preparation
you please) it easily, safely, and speedily roots out any old, malign,
rebellious, ^or deplorable Disease; it cures the French Pox, with all its
symptoms, to a wonder, kills Worms in old or young, cures the King's Evil,
Dropsy, Gout, Sciatica, Leprosy, Scurvy, Tetters, Ring-worms, rebellious
Herpes, Plague, Poison, and all sorts of Fevers, whether continual or
intermitting: It also cures the Green Sickness in Virgins, the Cholick, from
what cause soever, Cancers in any part of the Body, dissolves Scirrhus Tumors,
and removes all manner of Obstructions, in what part of the Body soever; and it
is said in these Distempers to begin, continue, and perfect the Cure alone.
Truly, I can say upon my own large experience, it performs wonderfully in all
long, old, rebellious, and undetermined Diseases, performing Cures many times
beyond all expectation.

XXI. Aethiops Minerale; The Mineral Black.
Bate.] Flowers of Sulphur p. ij. crude Mercury p. j. mix them exactly, and
kindle or fire them, so as they may be made into a most black powder, S. A. It
is of use in the French Pox, Dropsy, etc. and fluxes not.

Salmon.] 1. Some make the mixture with Flowers of Sulphur, and crude Mercury,
ana. But a late Writer will have it to be Flowers of Sulphur vj. crude
Quicksilver j to be only mixed together in a Mortar, by grinding till the
Quicksilver disappears, and is reduced into a subtle brown powder, which
grows very black. This thus made, and in this proportion, he gives a gr. xxv.
ad xxx. Morning and Evening (gently purging the Body the fourth day) to kill
Worms, for which it is doubtless a good Medicine.

2. But that it may be always given safely, without danger of fluxing or
salivating, I dare not affirm; for my self, who have used it above this twenty
years with extraordinary success, (prepared only by grinding together) although I
often used it without any sear of Salivation, yet sometimes, contrary to my
expectation, it would raise a gentle Flux or Spitting.

3. My usual proportion was this: Crude Quicksilver, Flowers of Sulphur, ana.
mix them together ^y grinding in an Iron or Marble Mortar, till the Mercury
disappears, and becomes with the Sulphur an impalpable Powder* as black as Jet,
which by much rubbing in this Mortar it will easily be made.

4. The first Light I had for making this Medicine, I received from the Learned
Barbet, by reading of his Chyrurgery; and some little hint I gave of such a
like Medicine (made of Sulphur and Mercury by grinding) about ten years since
in my Doron. Medicum, lib. 2. cap. 21. sect. 16. printed anno 1683.

5. And this Medicine made of the two Ingredients in equal proportion, I have
all a long used, and do still, not esteeming it much inferior to many other
Preparations of Mercury, much more famed than it; but where I meet with fluxile
and tender Bodies, and where the Humors are apt to be put into motion, I
always take the Proportions of our Author, but complete it without
deflagration, thus: Flowers of Sulphur ij. crude Quicksilver j. mix by
grinding in an Iron or Marble Mortar, till the Mercury disappears, and with the
Sulphur becomes an impalpable powder of a deep black color.

6. The Medicine made according to this last Prescript, I take to be very safe,
and have given it often with all the desired effects imaginable; nor do I
remember that it ever produced a Salivation, or any thing like it, in any
person I ever gave it to, whether old or young.

7. If you shall yet scruple to use this mean Preparation, but rather make
choice of that of our Author, made by deflagration, you have your liberty, and
may do it, but for my part, I shall always use that made by simple grinding,
etc.

8. That with double quantity of Sulphur I give a j. ad ij. but that with equal
quantities a j. ad ss. and according as the Patient is strong, and able to bear
Medicines: The Doses of each may yet be increased to ss. more, but this is to
be limited and directed according to the Prudence of the Physician.

9. Besides the killing of Worms in Children, and elder persons also, it is an
excellent Remedy against the French Disease, and all its Attendants, cures
Pocky Scabs, Ulcers, Impetigo, Serpigo, and other defedations of the Skin,
proceeding from a Pocky Venom: It is also good against Nodes, Gums, Tophs,
Nocturnal Pains, and the like; for being taken inwardly, (constantly for some
time) in some proper Conserve or Bolus, it gives relief almost like Opium, and
makes that Herd of Symptoms vanish, as if it was done by Enchantment. It is
excellent against the Scurvy, prevails against the Gout, and all tartarous
Diseases through the whole Body, and perfectly cures a Rheumatism.

10. Where note, that such as cannot take it in a Bolus, may make it up into a
Pill or Pills, with the Pap of an Apple, or a little Cypress, or Chio
Turpentine, which may be taken as before directed.

XXII. Antifebrile Concharum; The Antifebritick of Muscle-shells.
Bate.] Muscle-shells, affuse thereon Vinegar, and macerate them 24 hours, then
wash away the external Mucus and dry them, after which reduce them into powder,
often sprinkling in, in the time of poudering, a spoonful of Carduus-water, by
which means the more subtle powder will be retained, then dry and keep it for
use. Dose j. it is a noble Febrifuge, and provokes Sweat powerfully.

Salmon.] 1. It is an Antisebritick, like those prepared from Pearls,
Oi^tershells, Crabs Claws, Crab's-eyes, and suchlike, and may be given in the
same manner, and to all the same purposes which those Preparations are given
for.

2. It is a notable fixed Alcali, and ablorbs Acids admirably, destroying the
Root of all such Diseases, which proceed from acid Humors; and therefore since
it is believed that Fevers proceed from Acidities, it is very probable, that
assaulting them in their Root, it may so undermine them, as by degrees, and at
length, totally to overcome and extirpate them.

3. This Operation, it is probable, may be most perspicuous in the beginning of
Fevers, and while they have been of no long standing, so as that the whole mass
of Blood and Humors are not yet infected; but then you must have recourse to
stronger Remedies, viz. to volatile Alcalies, and such as by the stability of
their Parts, and volatility of their Effluviums, are able to pervade the whole
Human Frame, and undo them not only in their Root, but in their very Essence
and Existence; of which kind are volatile Spirit of Sal Armoniack, Horns, etc.

XXIII. * Antihecticum Poterij; The Antihectick of Poterius.
Bate.] It is made of Regulus of Antimony, of Mars and English Tin, ana.
melting and detonating them with a treble quantity of Sal Nitre, and
edulcorating with Water, S. A. Dose gr. vj. ad xx. in the Pox, Dropsy, Scurvy,
Consumption.

Salmon.]. 1. This of equal Proportions of the Regulus of Antimony and Tin,
agrees with Maets's first way, where he makes the Detonation and Calcination
with but a half part of purified Nitre.

2. His second way is thus: Regulus of Antimony xij. English Tin vj. melt them
together, and being cold, reduce them into a fine powder, to the which add an
equal weight of pure Sal Nitre, viz. xviij. beat and mingle them well together,
and make the detonation in a red-hot Crucible, as you do in making Antimony
diaphoretick; when all is well calcined, take it out of the Crucible, break it
and reduce it to a subtle powder, affuse thereon warm Rainwater, stirring it
up and down with a Pestel, so will the Rainwater grow white, which leisurely
and gently decant: To the remaining bottom put more fresh Rainwater,
proceeding as before, and thus continue so long, till nothing but a thick
Gummous Matter or Sordes remain: These white or milky Liquors put all together,
which put in a still quiet place, free from dirt or Ashes, so will a very white
powder precipitate to the bottom, the Water swimming above, which has imbibed
in it self all the nitrous Salt: This Powder oftentimes wash even so long, till
the Acrimony of the Nitre is wholly taken away, then dry, and keep it for use.

3. This Powder, says he, Is exhibited in hectic Fevers, and in Dropsies with
Rob of Elder-berries; chiefly it is used in malign and inveterate Ulcers, and
in the Scurvy, which neither by Decoctions (of Guajacum) nor by any other more
benigh Gallenical Medicaments, are possible to be cured; in all those cases it
is a most powerful Medicament.

4. In some it operates by Vomit, if the Stomach be very foul and ob^tructed,
for for then possibly it may give a Vomit or two, in others it works by Sweat,
in some by Urine, and in some by stool: It is given in the beginning of a
Hectic, and in Obstructions of the Womb; in each Body it operates according to
the habit and disposition.

5. Methodus Exhibendi. First begin with four or five grains, and increase the
dose gradually, till it begins to nauseate the Stomach, then diminish that
larger dose a little, and proceed in the use of it in that proportion for
several days.

6. Modus Vtendi. In the French Pox, and in inveterate Ulcers, let it be
exhibited in Decoction of Guajacum, Sarsaparilla, Sassafras, etc. where it
operates by Urine, you will presently see inveterate and malign Ulcers, in such
Persons, to remit of their violence and malignity, and to submit to Ointments,
Balsams, Emplasters, etc. Outwardly, It is successfully sprinkled upon Ulcers,
or mixed with Emp^astrum Diasulphuris Ru^andi.

XXIV. * Antimonium Diaphoreticum; Diaphoretick or Sweating Antimony.
Bate.] It is made of Antimony p. j. Sal Nitre p. iij. detonating and
edulcorating with Water, S. A. Dose j. twice a day for many days, augmenting
the quantity daily grada^im, till it comes to j. ^or a Dose, Its use is to
purify the Blood in Cachexies, Dropsies, the Scurvy, French Pox, etc.

Salmon] 1. Having poudered and mixed the Ingredients well together, and having
a Crucible heat red hot in the Coals in a readiness, cast into i^ a spoonful of
the mixture, which will presently make a thundering noise; which being done,
cast in another spoonful, and this continue till the whole quantity of your
Powder is done; then make a great fire about it f^r about 2 hours, after which
cast the white matter into an earthen Pan* almost full of fair Water, where
leave it for 12, 14, or 16 hours, that the Nitre may dissolve in the Water,
which separate by inclination, and wash the white Powder which remains in the
bottom five or six times with fresh warm Water, and then dry it.

2. This is a Preparation of Antimony, whose Sulphurs are fixed by the Nitre,
and are thereby hindered from working otherwise than by Sweating.

3. The first separated Liquor may be evaporated, and a fixed Nitre will be
found at bottom of the Vessel, which is much of the nature and will work much
like the Sal Polychrestum. This fixed Nitre unites it self in the operation with
the Antimony, making the volatile Parts thereof to ^y away, and thereby hinders
the Antimony from being emetick.

4. This Medicament is sudorifick, resi^^s Malignity and Poison, and therefore
is said. (...) be good against the Measles, Small Pox, Spotted Fever, Plague,
and all other malign Contagions, and pestilential Distempers* Dose a gr. 10 ad
30. and by a gradual increase to j. in some specific or appropriate Liquor.

5. It is ordered to be 5 or 6 times washed, but should the Lotions be never so
manifold, they could never wash away all the Salt which had joined it self to
the Antimony* for each Particle of Antimony is so closely united to as many
Particles of fixed Nitre, that they can never be separated therefrom, without
recourse to some reductive Salt, which is the reason that this Preparation is
said to be not at all vomitive, but only sudorifick, though in my opinion this
latter Effect is not very sensibly apparent; but all Authors, affirm it, and so
we submit? And possibly some of its Sulphur may be separated by the heat of the
Body, which not being strong enough to be emetick, may have a force by
Transpiration, either sensible or insensible, as the Pores of the Body may be
more or less open.

6. Some will have this Antim. Diaphoreticum to be a fixed Alcali, like Pearl,
Coral* calcined Hartshorn, Chalk, Crab's-eyes, etc. and so like them, to absorb
sharp and acid Humors, which are the Causes of many Diseases: But in this
doubtless they are mistaken, for put any Acid upon it, it will never dissolve
at all, nor absorb the Acid, though after a long Infusion, but let it remain as
strong as ever; which is a demonstration strong enough, that it is no Alcali.

7. It may be quaeried, why a treble quantity of Nitre being mixed, will not
make so great a detonation, as if it was mixed in equal quantities with the
Antimony? But this is eafily answered; for that there is too little Sulphur in
the Antimony, for such a great proportion of Nitre, and that some parts of the
Sulphur of the Antimony remain unactive in the fixed Nitre, which admits not of
flagration, the volarile parts of the Nitre not burning, but according to the
proportion of Sulphur with which it is mixed.

8. There is another Preparation of this Medicament in our Pharm. Land. lib. 3.
cap. 8. sect. 57. with double Nitre, and a treble Calcination, and that either
with crude Antimony, or with its Regulus; which see in the place cited.

9. Maets takes first equal parts of crude Antimony and Nitre, and therewith
makes a Crocus Metallorum; this Crocus, in fine powder, he again mixes with an
equal quantity of pure Nitre, and calcines as before, by which repeated
calcination, says he, the Sulphur and volatile Salts of the Antimony are made
to fly, whereby the remaining Calx of the Antimony becomes totally deprived of
its Emotick and Cathartick Properties. After the same manner Beguinus makes it
also, as he has taught in his Tyrocinium Chymicum, lib. 2. cap. 12.

10. Marggrave takes equal quantities of Antimony and Nitre, and makes the
proportion by a treble detonation, adding equal parts of fresh Nitre each time.

11. Le Mort makes it thus. Crude Antimony p j. pure Nitre p. iij. mix in fine
powder, and make the detonation as before directed, keep it in the fire for
half an hour, but so as it may not flow or melt, then cast it into a Pot almost
full of warm Rainwater, so will the Salts upon the Spot be dissolved, which
with the supernating Water are to be poured off, and new or fresh Water is to
affused, stirring all together, till the Water grows white like Milk, from a
good quantity of the powder swimming in it, which decant, and affuse more Water
again, stirring and decanting it as before, and repeating this Operation so
long, as the affused Water will grow white. Put all the decanted Liquors
together, which let rest for a while, that the Powder may settle, which
carefully dry, and keep for use.

12. Where note, that Le Mort uses a broad Earthen Pot or Pan, rather than a
Crucible, which Blasius the Commentator upon Beguinus would have to be large,
for the more easy separation of the matter.

13. Secondly, if the Nitre be not pure, the Antimonium Diaphoreticum will be
of a yellowish color.

14. It ought not to be too long detained in the Fire, because the longer it is
calcined, it is not made the better, but the worse, for then the Nitre will
degenerate into an alcalious nature, and the Antimony be apt to a fusion, from
the fusion and coalition of which, some reguline Particles will be formed,
which will cause a revivification of the emetick Property of the Antimony,
which in this Preparation we ought by all means to avoid.

15. The more pure the Mineral of the Antimony is, the purer and whiter will be
the Antimonium Diaphoreticum; from whence it is, that that which is made of the
Regulus is judged to be better than that which is made of the crude Antimony.

16. Le Feburc takes to pure crude Antimony p. j. most pure Nitre p. ij. mixes
them in subtle Powder, and detonates in a red-hot Crucible, as before
directed; by which Operation (says he) the Nitre does forcibly carry away and
expel the impure Sulphur of the Antimony, and its Mercury is digested, ripened,
and forced by the property of the fixed Salt of Nitre, and the action of the
Fire: Being thus once calcicined, he adds another like quantity of pure Nitre,
to what is in the Vessel, that it may flow with the Matter, and perfect the
coction and fixation of it, by the penetration and action of the Spirits of
Nitre, which by their subtilty and quickness insinuate themse^ves into the
least Atoms of the Antimony, by which it concocts, purifies, and fixes it in a
white friable substance; and in this heat he keeps it one or two hours, which
past, letting the Crucible cool, and free^ng it from all the filth hanging to
it, he puts it into a Pot full of boiling Water, which dissolves the whole mass
from which he separates the Antimony Diaphoreticum, as is taught at 11.
aforegoing, then dries it, and keeps it for use.

17. The decanted clear Water containing the fixed Salt of Nitre, which is
impr^gnated with the internal Sulphur of Antimony, and is of a penetrating and
igneous nature (but not corrosive) is a truly-fixt and Solar Sulphur, well
concocted and digested by the action of the Fire and Nitre. This Water, I say,
containing a Salt impregnated with such a Sulphur, though it appears clear, has a
weight and solid substance in it, which with Spirit of Vinegar may be
precipitated, (the Water turning white as M^lk, and of a pleasing acid s^^^l)

18. This Precipitate, which is called Ceruse of Antimony also, is a
Diaphoretick proceeding from the fixed internal Sulphur now mentioned, (Dose a
gr. iij. ad xx.) whereas the Sulphur Auratum precipitated with the like Spirit
of Vinegar, has a very unpleasing smell, because it is nothing else but the
external, impure, and volatile Sulphur, which the Salt had drawn to its self,
not being able to force it away, or fix it, the parts in the Nitre and Antimony
to make the Crocus Metallorum being equal; whereas in this Preparation there is
three parts of Nitre to one of Antimony, which does perfect the maturation and
fixation of the remaining crude and indigested Sulphur.

19. And it is this Author's opinion, that whatever must fix a volatile
substance ought to be in triple proportion to what is to be fixed; and
contrariwise, what is to be volatilized, must in the same proportion be less
than that which is to volatilize it, and sometimes the proportion is to be
quadruplicated, as iij. or iiij. of Spirit to volatilize j. of Salt, and iij.
or iiij. of Salt to fix j. of Spirit, etc.

20. This Diaphoretick Antimony, faith Le Febure, is said to be fixed only
comparatively to other Antimonial Remedies, which are violently Cathartick or
Emetick, this being sudorifick by an irradiation of virtue and efficacy,
strengthening the internal Archaeus, which is the principal director of all the
functions of Life, both in Health and Sickness, for which cause its use must be
continued, without irruption, for the space of 40 days, since in that time it
is able to alter and change the habit of the whole humane frame, for the better.

21. It resists Corruption, rectifies the whole mass of Blood, and is capable
to open the most inveterate Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, Lungs, Pancreas,
Mesentery, and all the other Viscera, provokes the Terms, cures the
Greensickness, Dropsy, Hypochondriacal Melancholy, Pox with all its symptoms,
cleanses and heals inward and outward Ulcers, and is singular against all sorts
of malign and pestilential Fevers of what kind soever, as Measles, Small Pox,
Spotted Fever, and the very Plague it self, as aforesaid.

22. Rolfincius Art. Chym. lib. 5. sect. 7. cap. 2. agrees in the manner of the
Preparation with Le Mort and others, as also in the triple proportion of the
Nitre to the Antimony, but says, that the decanted clear Water being
evaporated, the one half is an egregious Anodyn; and the evaporation being
continued to a just degree, it will in a cool Cellar shoot into Crystals which
he calls Nitrum Anodynum, but Schroder, Lapis Prunellae Antimonialis. This,
says Rolfincius, is impregnated with many Atoms of the first Ens of Metals,
cools the Blood, and as a Gargle, helps the Inflammation of the Fauces and the
Quinsey, prevails against the Pleurisy, expels Urine, gently loosens the
Belly, and discusses serous Humors by Sweat, and is given in substance ad gr.
vj.

23. Charras takes equalquantities in fine powder, which gradually be puts into
a red-hot Crucible (in the midst of the Fireplace of a Wind furnace) fitted
with a Cover, into which putting it by spoonfuls; after each spoonful he covers
the Crucible at the same time, leaving the Powder to fulminate, and thus
continues the calcination till all the mass is gone, adding afterward, by
degrees, the two other parts of the Nitre, stirring it each time with a long
Iron Spatula, and keeping a good fire for two or three hours, or till the
Antimony and Nitre have lost their fluidity, and are reduced in the Crucible to
a white and solid mass, after which he perfects the Preparation according to
the Method of Le Mort, at 11. aforegoing; yet stops not there, but puts it into
a Crucible, and holds it over the fire for two or three hours, after which he
burns off from it good S.V. and then keeps it close stopped for use.

24. From what has been said, it appears, that most Authors agree to three
parts of Nitre to one of Antimony, only some would have all the Nitre mixed at
once with the Antimony, others but two parts at first, others but one part,
adding the other one or two parts successively to the Mass. Now it is true, the
event of all these various Proportions differs not much, provided the triple
quantity of Nitre be used; yet Charras thinks it much better to mix but a third
part at first, which will make a fulmination violent enough to raise the gross
Sulphur of the Antimony, though not able to dissipate the volatile parts, and
then to add afterward by degrees the other two parts of the Nitre, which though
they cause no more fulmination, yet will consume the rest of the volatile and
impure parts of the Antimony, for that the spirituous and fixed parts of the
Nitre have now the liberty to use all their time and force upon the Antimony,
to change its emetick and cathartick qualities into diaphoretick, and to fix
the essential Properties of this Mineral.

25. Lemery gives us another Preparation, by which he saves the volatile parts
of the Antimony, which sublime from it, and it is thus: Take an unglaz'd
earthen Pot (able to resist the Fire) with a hole in the middle of its height,
and a stopple to it, set it in a fit and proper Furnace, and fit to it three
earthen Pots more, all three open at bottom, and a glass Head to the uppermost
Pot, with a Vial or Receiver, luting all the Junctures well, let the Fire
transpire through some proper holes in the Furnace, but be only so strong as to
warm the bottom of the lowermost Pot, then give Fire by degrees, heating the
said Pot gradatim, till it is red-hot.

26. Then take your mixture made of three parts of Nitre, and one of Antimony,
and cast it into the red-hot Pot, through the hole, by spoonfuls, stopping it
again immediately till the detonation is over, after which cast in another
spoonful, and thus continue till your whole quantity is spent, then increase
the Fire to the utmost for half an hours time, after which let it go out: When
the Vessels are cold, you will find a little Spirit of Nitre in the Receiver,
white Flowers in the three upper Pots, and a white Mass in the lowermost, which
you must wash, as before directed at 1. or 11. to make your Antimonium
Diaphoreticum, which dry and keep for use; which is full as good as any of the
former.

27. In all these Operations it appears, that though Antimmy is naturally black,
it becomes altogether white, when it is well rarefied; for whatever is seen in
this Operation is a pure-white (if the Nitre he pure) as well the volatile as
the fixed; which shows, that Colors have only an accidental, not an essential
Being.

28. In this last Preparation the Sulphurous or volatile parts of the Antimony,
which stick to the sides of the Pots in Flowers, though unwasht, will not be so
emetick as other Flowers of Antimony, because the Acid of the Nitre, which
arises with them, hinders their activity.

29. In the Receiver an Acid Spirit will be found which is only Spirit of
Nitre, and is of good use in the Colic, being given a gut. iv. ad. viij. in
Broth, or some other fit Vehicle.

30. In this Operation you have of Antimony Diaphoretick v. after it is well
washed and dried; of fixed Nitre x. after it is crystalized; Spirit of Nitre
ss. and Flowers of Antimony washed and dried ij. out of a mixture of five
ounces of Antimony, and 15 ounces of Nitre; but this crystalliz'd Nitre will
not be above half fixed, for being thrown upon Coals, it will flame. By this it
appears there is lost in this Operation iv. and better of the whole, which may
come from what it loses by the hole of the Pot through which it is cast in the
detonation; for stop it as well as you can, much fume will come forth that way;
which the Artist ought to beware of, lest it hurt him.

31. Though the volatile parts of the Antimony arise with the volatile parts of
the Nitre, in the detonation, yet the Antimony Diaphoretick will weigh as much
as the Crude Antimony, because that in place of the volatile parts of the
Antimony, as many fixed parts of the Nitre do inseparably join themselves with
the remainder, whereby it becomes fixed, and is hindered from being emetick.

32. An Antimony Diaphoretick made with a Sulphur of Antimony, which will burn
like common Sulphur. Crude Antimony in fine powder viij. Aqua Regis xxiv. mix
them in a Glass Body (within a Chimney) so will there be a strong ebulition
with red fumes (which are to be avoided) and the Antimony will dissolve; being
dissolved, affuse thereon a great deal of Water, so the Aqua Regis being
weakened, the whole will become milky or white, and a Precipitate in a white
Powder will fall to the bottom; upon the top of the Water a gray scum will
swim, which gather and dry in the shade: This is inflamable Sulphur of
Antimony, and burns like common Sulphur, having the same virtues and effects,
and therefrom a Spirit of Sulphur may be drawn: Decant the water from the
Precipitate, and wash the Precipitate diverse times, till it is sweet, then dry
it, and you have Antimony Diaphoretick, of the same virtues and use with the
former, and by some preferred before all the other Preparations.

XXV. Antimonium Diaphoreticum fixum; Fixed Sweating Antimony.
Bate.] Antimony and Nitre, A. make the detonation, wash and dry; with this
Powder mix again an equal quantity of Nitre, calcine again, wash and dry;
lastly, mix again with that Powder an equal quantity of Nitre, make the
detonation or calcination, put this into boiling Water, filter and precipitate
with Spirit of Vinegar, then sweeten by washing it, and dry it. It has the same
virtues with the former, and to be used in the same dose.

Salmon.] 1. This differs little or nothing from Le Febure's Precipitate at 17.
of the former Section, it being properly a Diaphoretick made of the internal
Sulphur of the Antimony.

2. Modus Vtendi. Of this Precipitate j. ad ss. Syrup of Clovegilliflowers or
Citron-peels ss. Aquae Cerasorum nigr. iss, mix for a dose, to sweat upon, in
the Measles, Smallpox, Spotted Fever, Calenture Plague, or any malign or
pestilential Distemper.

XXVI. Antimonium Medicamentosum; Medicinal Antimony.
Bate.] Antimony in powder p. v. Common Salt p. iv. Nitre, Tartar, p. j. mix,
melt into a Regulus, and edulcorate. It differs little from the former in
virtue.

Salmon.] 1. Hartman in his Chemical Disputations has something like this, and
it is thus made: Antimony, Common Salt, Sal Nitre, Ana. powder them asunder,
and put them into a Vessel well luted, with a hole left at the top, and set
them in a Wind-fornace, blow with Bellows till all melt, and till it ceases to
smoke, then for a quarter of an hour increase the fire, after which take it
off* and you shall have Antimony like Cinnaber-glass at the bottom separated
from the Salts like a Regulus from the Scales, and easy to be broken with a
Hammer.

2. This of Hartman purges most downward, and is good against Epilepsies,
Pleurisies, Obstructions and Foulness of the Stomach, Melancholy, Fevers,
Plague, congealation of the Blood, and Gout.

3. But let Hartman say what he will, my Experience has told me, that it will
sometimes vomit, especially if the Stomach be obstructed and foul.

4. The Dose is from gr. iij. ad x. but it will be prudent to increase the dose
gradually, till you see what the strength of the Patient will bear: It may be
given in Clysters a j. ad j. boil it in proper Water or Wine, strain, and add
emollient Herbs, to be given against a Colic.

5. This of our Author's is said to be sudorifick, and to agree in nature and
virtue with Antimonium Diaphoreticum; but this I can assure you also upon
Experience, that it has the virtue of the Regulus with it; and though in some
strong Constitutions it may provoke sweating, yet in weaker it gives both
Vomits and Stools, and therefore the Dose is with Art and Caution to be
proportioned: Begin with gr. v. or vj. and so increase it gradually, as you see
the Body of the Sick is able to bear it.

6. Lastly, this of our Author's is of that nature, that having freed the
Stomach and Body from the peccant matter, it will not then operate at all,
whatever the Operation of it was before, which single Property is enough to
commend it to the consideration and use of all the lovers of Art.

XXVII. Antimonium Resuscitatum; Antimony revived.
Bate.] Sublime Antimony, and Sal Armoniack, of each equal parts, with a triple
cohobation; digest the Sublimate with Spirit of Vinegar, exhale, and sweeten by
washing S. A. It is said to be diaphoretick, and gently to provoke Vomit.

Salmon.] 1. The Learned and Ingenious Dr. Gideon Harvey is said to be the
Author of this Medicine; and that you may be sure to have the true Recipe, we
will give you it from himself, as he has published it in his Discovery of the
Venereal Evil, lib. 2. Art. 10. page 141. word for word.

2. A sufficient proportion of Hungarian glistering Antimony, add thereto an
anatick quantity of Sal Armoniack, grind them well together in a Mortar, put
the mixture into a sublimatory, and sublime it into yellow and red Flowers,
these conves into a Bolthead, affuse upon them Acetum distillatum ad eminentiam
Palmae Unius, after 7 or 8 days digestion, abstract the Liqu^r by distillation
or evaporation, grind the whitish residue, and edulcorate it with warm Water,
whereby it is ultimately reduced to its pristine color.

3. This having left behind it its ferocity, malignity and venom, results a
most gentle Vomitory, Dejectory, and Diaphoretick, accommodated to all Ages,
Sexes, and Climes, radically curing all Opilations, Jaundices, Fevers,
Dropsies, initial Phthises, Convulsions in Children; But more particularly
(says he) we have removed with it several Agues in Children, Obstructions of
Courses in Women, and incipient Consumptions in Men. In short, Crocus
Metallorum, or Vitrum Antimonii, are Poisons in comparison to this Preparation.

4. Than this (says he) in a frontier Pox, no Cure is more admirable: Or, in
short, this, if parallelling it with other Cures, is the sole Method that cures
tuto, cito and jucunde.

5. His way of prescribing it is thus: Antimonium Resuscitatum, from gr. iv. ad
viij. or x. Mercurius Dulcis a gr. 15 ad 25. fresh Conserve of Roses a
sufficient quantity, mix, and make a Bolus; Capiat cum Regimine. Let this be
reiterated thrice, for three days successively, or intermitting every other
day, if the Patient's Strength counterindicates.

6. This he calls The Hermaphrodite Cure of the Venereal Lues, from the
Commixture of Heterogeneous Minerals, and Grand from the Regimen or Custodia,
the Patient being obliged to confine himself within doors. Its duration is
seldom protracted beyond twelve or fourteen days.

7. His Diet is required to be thin and dry; his usual Drink Fountain Water
boiled with a small quantity of Sassafras and Liquorice: After this course is
over, the rest of the Cure is to be pursued with this Prescript: Antimonium
Diaphoreticum a gr. vj. ad x. Oil of Juniper a gut. ij. ad iv. Syrup of Bawm q.
s. mix, and make Pills, No. 3 or 5, which let be gilded, or rouled in
Liquorice-pouder, for one dose, to be taken in the morning, and the Patient
well covered for sweating.

8. These are to be continued four days together, the Patient composing himself
to sweat after them; but if he be too much enervated by the Precedents, the
first Sweat may be remitted to him: If his Strength can bear another at night,
he may propose to himself a securer and shorter cure.

9. The fifth or eighth day, if you compute from the commencement of the Cure,
the Patient must breakfast with his purgative Bole, and be re-acquainted with
his Antivenereal Pills, for the four next ensuing days, afterward let him take
his farwell of his Bole, by repeating it once more.

10. Marggrave has an Antimonium Regeneratum, which he makes after this manner:
The Caput Mortuum left in the distillation of the Butter of Antimony, put it
into a Glass Retort coated, and distill in an open Fire, so as the Retort may be
thoroughly red fire-hot, and in an hour, or hour and half, the whole Caput
Mortuum will be sublimed into the neck of the Retort, leaving in the bottom of
the Retort a little crude Antimony, which Chemists call Antimonium Regeneratum.
What ascends or sublimes is Cinnaber of Antimony, which being reduced into
powder, may be several times rectified and sublimed by it self, etc.

XXVIII. Aurum Mosaicum; Mosaic Gold.
Bate.] It is made of Jupiter, Mercury, Sal Armoniack and Sulphur, mixed and
sublimed S. A. It is a noble Sudorifick. Dose ad gr. x. vel xij.

Salmon.] 1. Our Author here gives you the matter of the Composition, but not
the proportions thereof; several men have given them directly, but those
proportions are the best which bring the Preparation nearest to the color of
Gold.

2. In our Doron Medicum, lib. 2. cap. 21. sect. 40. you have these
Proportions: Crude Tin ij. crude Mercury q. s. or j. mix and make an Amalgama;
Flowers of Sal Armoniack, Flowers of Sulphur, A. j. mix and sublime.

3. But this Proportion is said to be better, and more natural: Block Tin,
crude Mercury, A. j. make an Amalgama, then mix therewith Flowers of Sal
Armoniack flower of Sulphur, A. j. mix and sublime with a very strong fire.

4. Or thus, from Maets. Tin j. crude Mercury ij. mix, and make an Amalgama, to
which add Sulphur and Sal Armoniack, Ana. j. mix, and sublime, as before.

5. Or thus, from the same Maets: The Marcasite of Gold, crude Mercury, A. j.
mix, and amalgamate, to which (being in fine powder) add Sulphur and Sal
Armoniack, A j. then mix and sublime in a coated Glass Cucurbit.

6. Or thus, from the same: The best English Tin j. Mercury purified from its
blackness ss. Sulphur in fine powder, Sal Armoniack. A. ss. make an Amalg. of
the two first, which reduce into fine powder, which mix with the other in
powder, and sublime.

7. In making this Preparation you must first make the Amalgama, which is done
by putting the crude Mercury to the melted Tin, and stirring them together,
till they are mixed, and the Mercury coagulated, then being well poudered, they
are to be mixed with the other Ingredients in fine powder.

8. Here you see some prepare it with Flowers of Sulphur, and Flowers of Sal
Armoniack, others with the crude Sulphur and unsublimed Salt, but without doubt
the purer the Substances are, the better will the Preparation be, and the finer
the color.

9. Some also take a double quantity of Tin to the Mercury; others take them in
equal quantities, and say, that such a Proportion gives the most orient and
true color; but my Experience tells me, that the color arises in the main
from the goodness and purity of the Ingredients, for I have produced good from
both the proportions, and ill-coloured too; so that by choice of the Manner, and
many Trials, you may find out the exact Truth only; and therefore it will be
good to make Trials but in small quantities first.

sect; 10. It is a good Sudorifick, and may be given ad j. in some proper
Conserve, Electuary, or Bolus, against Fits of the Mother, Wind, Vapors, and
Hypochondriack Disaffections, as also against Diseases from a foul cause, and
of a malign nature.

XXIX. Bezoar Animale; Animal. Bezoar.
Bate.] Hartshorn cal^in'd to the highest whiteness, and powdered iv. levigate
it upon a Marble, till it becomes an impalpable powder, affusing thereon
Guttatim, Spirit of Vitriol q. s. or so much as will make it into a Paste, of
which make little Balls, which let be forthwith dried. It is an Alexipharmick,
Sudorifick, and Destroyer of Worms; stops the flux of the Whites, quenches
Thirst, etc. it is a Medicine for Infants, Second to none.

Salmon.] 1. It ought to be done with pure rectified Oil of Vitriol, or rather
Sulphur, and stirred with an Ivory Spatula, unless you mix them in a Glass
Mortar with a Glass Pestel.

2. The burning of Hartshorn is thus: The Caput Mortuum of the Horn, left
after the distillation of the Spirit and Oil, put it into an open Fire, and
leave it there for one or two hours, or till it becomes most pure and white,
which is the sign of its perfect calcination.

3. This is the thing intended by our Author, but Charras thinks when it is
thus calcined, it has but all its chief and essential virtues, at least, its
volatile Properties; yet in my opinion it has that left which answer the
intention of the Medicine.

4. Le Febure is also for the Philosophic Calcination, because, says he, by
the former way it is deprived of its Spirit and volatile Salt, whereas by this
way its Virtue is preserved; and it is thus done:

5. Choice Hartshorn saw it in pieces of the length of a Pan about the ends,
then putting two sticks cross-ways, toward the top of such a Glass Body as
usually serves for distillation of Spirits and Waters, there suspend with a
Packthread the cut pieces of the Horn aforementioned, when you are to distill
any Cordial-waters, or rather Spirits, which send forth most penetrative and
subtle Vapors; cover the Glass Body with an Alembick, and give the same degree
of Fire, as for the distillation of Aqua Vitae, so shall these Vapors
penetrate into the very Center of the Hartshorn, and make it so brittle, as
that it may be reduced into as fine a Powder as if calcined with open fire.

6. But this Work of Distillation must be prosecuted 4 or 5 days without
intermission or opening the Vessel, for which reason the Glass Vessel must have
a hole toward the upper part, placed side-wise, whereby to recruit it with
warm Water, proportionably as it diminishes by distillation.

7. But in this Work you must take care that the Liquor touches not the
suspended Horns, nor yet come near them by at least half a foot.

8. If it be objected, that the Vapors may carry along with them the most
subtle Spirits and volatile Salt, it is answered, That some part of the
Spirits may possibly be lost, but the volatile Salt is held in too strong a
Prison, to be with so easy a force and heat set at liberty, not being yet
disunited with its oily and earthy Particles.

9. And therefore if this Preparation be used to make this Animal Bezoar with,
it will be yet more powerful to the Purposes intended, both to provoke Sweat,
and to strengthen, as also to give to Children against the Worms, and hinder
all those Corruptions which breed for the most part in their tender Stomachs.

10. It is good also against all manner of malign and pestilential Diseases,
the Spotted Fever, Calenture, yea, and the Plague it self; Dose a gr. iv. ad j.
in some proper Vehicle, Conserve, Preserve, Electuary, Bolus, (...) Cordial and
Antipestilential Water.

11. There is another Bezoarticum Animale, made of the Flesh of Serpents, or
rather Vipers, the Preparation of which see in our Pharmac. Land. lib. 2. cap.
5. sect. 23. 6. which has all the Virtues before mentioned, besides which, it
is an Antidote against Poysonings of Mad Dogs, Serpents, or other venomous
Beasts, French Pox, and Leprosy, and a Cure for Consumptions. Dose ad j.

XXX. * Bezoarticum Joviale; The Bezoartick of Tin.
Bate.] Regulus of Antimony iij. which melt in a Crucible to which add English
block Tin ij. in like manner ^elted, so as thereof to make a ^ew Regulus; this
Regulus ^eat into fine Powder, or levigate, and mix therewith Mer^ury sublimate
vj. distill by a Retort, so will you have a Butter, which fix with Spirit ^f
Nitre by a threefold distillation, afterward calcine, and being red-hot,
extinguish it in ^. V. and dry it, so will you ^ave a gray powder. It is a
^upendious Diaphoretick, and ^revails against all Diseases ^f the Womb, and
many ^ther Diseases of Women^ind: It prevails also against Fevers, Plague,
Scurvy, etc. Dose a gr. iij. ad vj.

Salmon.] 1. This is exactly the same with that in our Pharm. Land. lib. 3.
cap. 7. sect. 13. excepting in the quantity of the Mercury, which there (to the
same proportions) is but v.

2. You may, according to Maets, either first melt the Tin in a Crucible, and
then presently put in the Regulus of Antimony in fine Powder, and make them
flow together: Or the Regulus being in Powder, may be put into a red-hot
Crucible first, and then the Tin in a lump may be added, which in a moment will
flow with the Regulus, which being poured out into a fusory Cone, or other
clean Crucible, you will have the Regulus of Jupiter, in a hard and white Mass,
but brittle.

3. Rolfincius, in Art. Chym. lib. 5. sect. 6. cap. 10. makes it thus: English
Tin, Mercury Sublimate, A. lb ss. mix, and distill by Retort a Butter or Gummy
Liquor, upon which put Spirit of Nitre, q. s. which the Ebulition ceasing, draw
off by an Alembick with a trebble distillation; the powder remaining calcine in
a Crucible, till it becomes a white Powder.

4. In this Recipe the Regulus of Antimony is forgotten, which whether it was
the Author's or Printer's fault I cannot tell, but possibly it might be the
Printer's; however, without the Regulus of Antimony the Medicine cannot be made.

5. It is diaphoretick, used chiefly in Diseases of the Womb, and to expel
noxious and serous Humors there, as also to comfort the part. It is given ad
gr. vj. and in some cases to viij. or x. in some proper Water, or Syrup of
Mugwort.

6. Tilingius makes it with simple Regulus of Antimony vj. English Tin iv.
which he amalgamates, and reduces it into a subtle Powder, and adds thereto of
the best Sublimate Mercury x. and then by Retort distills a Butter, which with
Spirit of Nitre he fixes by a threefold distillation, then calcines,
extinguishes in S. V. and dries.

7. This (he says) is a potent Sudorifick, and a kind of Universal
De-obstructor of the Liver, the Dose being but from gr. j. ad ij. but I am
confident he has under-dosed it. I have many times given it to gr. vj. vij. or
viij. according to the disposition of my Patient.

8. Beguinus makes it exactly after the same manner as our Author here
prescribes, but differs in the proportion of the corrosive Sublimate, which is
double to the joynt-quantity of the Regulus and Tin; so that if the Regulus be
iij. the Tin ij. the Sublimate is x. etc. And with him agrees Grulingius.

9. Zwelser, Mantiss. Spagyr. par. 1. cap. 5. makes it thus: Tin finely filed
iv. Corrosive Sublimate ij. mix them exactly, put them i^ to a Glass Retort,
and distill i^ Sand by degrees of Fire, so will you have a Buttery Substance,
like Butter of Antimony, which dissolve in the best Spiritu^ Nitri, q. s.
dropping it in Guttatim, till the noise and ebulition ceases; this done,
abstract in an Alembick to dryness, leaving a white Mass, which grind on a
Porphory, and put it again into the Glass Cucurbit, affusing thereon fresh
Spirit of Nitre, and distill again to dryness, increasing the Fire at length to
the highest degree, that the bottom of the Vessel may be red-hot; lastly, take
the Mass at bottom, grind it a aforesaid, edulcorate by washing with Water, and
calcine it i^ a Crucible for an hour or t^^^ with a red-hot heat, and keepi^^
for use.

10. It is a Specific in Hysteric Fits, or Suffocation of the Womb, and cures
burning Fevers by Sweating. Dose gr. vj. ad x. and xij. in some proper Liquor.

11. We shall give you Charras's way of making it, and so conclude this
Section. Regulus of Antimony iij. Pure Tin ij. melt them in a Crucible, and
cast them in an Iron Cone greased within, beat this into fine Powder, and mix
it with double its weight of corrosive Sublimate; put all into a Glass Retort
coated, and draw off as well the Butter as the Mercury, and precipitate with
fair Water, which Precipitate wash and edulcorate, after which you may, if you
please, keep some part of the Powder for use, to purge gently upwards and
downwards in Hysteric Diseases, giving it from gr. ij. ad v. in some proper
Conserve or Confection.

12. But to complete the Bezoartick of Jupiter, weigh the remaining powder, put
it into a small Glass Cucurbit, and affuse thereon best Spirit of Nitre, three
times its weight, and in a Sand-heat, over a moderate fire, evaporate the
Spirit of Nitre to dryness, which powder edulcorate by many washings, dry it,
and keep it in a Glass well stopped for use.

13. This Jovial Bezoartick is one of the best Preparations that can be made of
Tin, for it is not only a Specific against all Diseases of the Womb, but a
famous Sudorifick in all malignant, pestilential, and venereal Distempers,
where the malignity is to be cast out by Sweat. Dose a gr. vj. ad j.

XXXI. Bezoarticum Lunare' The Lunar Bezoar, or Silver Bezoartick.
Bate.] It is made of Luna dissolved in Spirit of Nitre and Butter of Antimony
proceeding as above with the Jovial Bezoar. It is a Specific in the Epilepsie,
Convulsions, Megrim, Apoplexia, etc. it is anodyn and sudorifick, and prevails
admirably in the cure of an Erysipelas. Dose a gr. vj. ad xij.

Salmon.] 1. Zwelfer, Mantis. Spagyr. par. 1. cap. 2. makes it thus. Fine
Silver, or in Leaves, j. Spirit of Nitre q. s. mix and dissolve. Again, Butter
of Antimony rectified from its Cinnaber, ij. or iij. Spirit of Nitre q. s. mix
and dissolve, putting on the Sp. Nitri on the Butter gutatim, so long till all
the effervescence and noise ceases, which is the sign of a perfect dissolution;
these two solutions join together, and abstract by distilling in a Glass
Cucurbit, in a sand-heat, to a dryness, so will you have a greenish white mass:
To this Residence put again fresh Spirit of Nitre, and abstract, repeating this
three or four times, at the last time augment the fire to the highest degree,
that all the corrosive Spirits may be forced away, then beating the mass into a
subtle powder, wash and edulcorate with fair warm Water, till it is perfectly
freed from the Acrimony of the Spirits of Nitre, after which put it into a
Crucible in a naked fire, calcine it for two hours, and keep it for use. Where
note, that every time after the abstraction of the Sp. Nitri, you are to grind
it on a Porphyry, before the affusion of new or fresh Spirit.

2. This (says he) prevails against all Lunar Diseases, viz. Diseases of the
Head and Brain, and the Epilepsie, Apoplexy, Palsy, Melancholy and Madness: It
is also a most powerful Alexipharmick, or Resister of Poison. Dose j ad ss.

3. In our Pharm. Land. lib. 3. cap. 7. sect. 18. we have given you several
other ways of making this Lunar Bezoartick, which are taken from Schroder, and
therefore shall not be here again repeated. But here is to be noted, that in
the third of those ways, Hofman, instead of that Sky-colour'd Tincture there
mentioned, takes the Magistery of Silver, which with the Butter of Antimony he
dissolves apart, not in AF. as Schroder prescribes, but in Spirit of Nitre,
then joins the solutions, and perfects the Medicine according to the Prescript.
Now here is to be noted, that this Magistery may be made from the Tinctura
Lunae, by the affusion of Oleum Tartari per deliquium, etc.

4. Grulingius Florileg. par. 8. cap. 3. makes it thus. Luna, dissolve it in
Spirit of Nitre, so as the weight thereof may be well augmented, and reduce it
by digestion into a viscid Water, to one part of which put ten parts of the
Gummy Liquor (i. e. Butter of Antimony) well rectified and liquified, and upon
this mixture the Spirit of Nitre; which abstract from it two or three times,
giving toward the end agreat fire; after which calcine it in a Crucible for an
hour and a half, then powder it finely, and burn from it S.V.

5. Rolfincius, Art. Chym lib. 5. sect. 6. cap. 8. prepares it as Zwelfer
aforesaid, in all respects, excepting the triple affusion and abstraction of
the Sp. Nitri, but after all, dislikes it; first, because of the ungrateful
Vitriolick taste, from which it cannot be freed, causing nauseating and
vomiting: Secondly, because of its color, appearing blackish in superficie,
(though inwardly in it self white) which is not to be mended. Therefore he
prefers it to be made of the Magistery of Luna (of which opinion Hofman is, as
aforementioned) perfectly freed from its corrosive Salts.

6. This Magistery he thus makes: Leaf-silver j. AF. iij. mix and dissolve,
precipitate with Oleum Tartari per deliquium, affused gutatim, in a large
quantity, that all the corrosive Salts may be absorbed and the Water may come
forth sweet; the powder edulcorate with many affusions and lotions of warm
Water.

7. Tilingius. Prod. Chym. Class. 3. Tit. 2. has it word for word from Zwelfer,
but without so much as naming his Author. From all these Descriptions the
proportions of the Ingredients, and the method of preparing it, is manifest;
but that without doubt is best, which makes the Dissolution the most perfect,
and frees the Bezoartick the most absolutely from the Salts

8. As to its Virtues, Zwelfer has been large and plain, and it is doubtless a
famous Cephalic. I cured a Gentlewoman of a vehement Headache with it, after a
vast number of Medicines had been before tried in vain and when the hope of
Life was past. And another I cured of an Epilepsie with it, by taking about
sixty Doses thereof, in a continued course.

XXXII. Bezoarticum Martiale; The Martial Bezoartick.
Bate.] It is made of the Crocus of Mars with the Butter of Antimony dissolved
and then fixing of it, as in the former. Or, it is made by dissolving Mars j.
in A. R. q. s. affusing by little and little, Butter of Antimony viij. and then
proceeding with Spirit of Nitre. It powerfully stops the hepatick Flux, and all
other Fluxes, strengthens the Bowels, etc. Dose ad ss.

Salmon.] 1. This we have taught you the way of preparing more fully, in our
Pharm. Land. lib. 3. cap. 7. sect. 24. from Schroder. This says Hofman, Though
it is not to be despised, yet the best Bezoartick is made from the Regulus of
Mars, reduced into Butter, with corrosive Sublimate, and then fixed with Spirit
of Nitre.

2. It is profitable in Fevers, accompanied with a Diarrhoea, or Flux of the
Bowels; also is an Epidemick Dysenteria; for by reason of the Mars, it has the
power of astringing or binding, and by virtue of the Nitre it is cooling and
anodyn.

3. Grulingius Florileg. par. 8. cap. 3. Takes Regulus of Mars infine powder j.
Mercury Metorisatede, i. e. Corrosive Sublimate ij. mixes and distills by
Retort, and so obtains a Gummy Liquor, or Butter, which he fixes with Spirit of
Nitre, as in the making of Bezoar Mineral. This agrees exactly with Beguinus.
It is principally good in all Fluxes of the Liver.

4. Rolfincius, Art. Chym. lib. 5. sect. 6. cap. 9. makes it of the Antimonial
Regulus of Mars, and corrosive Sublimate, of each equal parts, from which by
Retort he draws a Butter, not urging the fire very much, lost the Mercury
should follow; then he dissolves, precipitates, and fixes with Spirit of Nitre,
and distills the same by an Alembick, with a threefold cohobation; the matter at
bottom reduces by calcination in a clean Crucible, into a subrubid or
Liver-colour'd soft Calx.

5. This made of the Regulus is a more noble Bezoardick than the other kind, in
all hypochondriack Disaffections Diseases of the Bowels, and Faults of the
first Concoction; it incides, attenuates, opens, and discusses vicious Humors,
per (...), or by Sweating: Dose a gr. iij. ad vj. or x. in any specific
Vehicle, or antihypochondriack Wine or Decoction.

XXXIII, * Bezoarticum Minerale; The Mineral Bezoar.
Bate. It is made of the Butter of Antimony lb j. and Spirit of Nitre lb iij.
vel q. s ('it is Spirit of Salt in the Latin Copy, I suppose that is a Mistake)
mixed and distilled by a treble cohobation, as in the Jovial Bezoar. Or it may
be prepared from the Caput Mortuum of the Bezoardick Spirit of Nitre. It is a
great Alexiterick, or Resister of Poison. and a most saluberrious Remedy, which
Effects it demonstrates by powerfully provoking Sweat in all pestilential, and
venene or malign Disaffections. Dose a gr. vj. ad xij. and more.

Salmon.] 1. The Colleges way and method of preparing this Medicine, with
several Notes and Animadversions thereon, you may see in our Pharm. Land. lib,
3. cap. 7. sect. 11. to which we refer you: What other Authors say upon the
matter, we now come to examine.

2. Rolfincius, lib. 5. sect. 6. cap. 6. Art. Chym. makes it of the Butter of
Antimony, with Spirit of Nitre, a sufficient quantity, (but not limiting the
proportion) which he distills Guttatim, till the Ebulition ceases, then distills
by an Alembick with a treble cohobation, then calcines it for 6 hours in a
Crucible, till it becomes a Chalk like powder, and sometimes of a subincarnate
color.

3. What the Bezoardick Spirit of Nitre is, you shall have from Marggrave, viz.
That it is that Spirit with which the Bezoar Mineral was prepared, or which was
thrice abstracted from it: Hic dicitur Bezoardicus, non quod vim Bezoardicam
contineat, sed quia a Bezoardico minerali aliquoties abstractus est.

4. Le Mort makes it thus: Butter of Antimony q. v. put upon it Spirit of Nitre
q. s. till the noise or effervescence ceases; this mixture evaporate, or
abstract by Retort to dryness, then put into a Crucible, and calcine it, first
with a gentle fire, till the powder appears of a Citrine color, after augment
the fire, till the Crucible and that within it is red-hot, then let it cool,
and keep the white powder for use.

5. The effervescency is caused from the occurse of the greater and lesser
Acid, viz. from the concentrated Spirit of Salt, and common Spirit of Nitre,
concurring with the Antimonial Particles, which the Spirits of Vitriol and Salt
were neither strong enough, nor in quantity enough to make an entire Solution
of, but only gnawed them into smaller bits, with a light adhesion; but those
Spirits of Vitriol and Salt being once concentrated with the Spirit of Nitre,
they act with much more force, dividing every Particle, and rendering them
almost imperceptible, and incapable of receiving a more perfect dissolution.

6. Now, by reason of the great effervescency the Sp. Nitri ought to be put in
Guttatim, for fear the matter should rise or swell above the Vessel; and this
effervescency proceeds in part from the resistance which the points of the Sp.
Nitri meet with, entering into the narrow Pores of the Antimonial Particles, in
order to their dissolution, for as soon as that is performed, the ebulition and
noise ceases.

7. How the Butter of Antimony (which was a vehement Caustic, from the acid
Spirits with which it was filled) should by means of another acid Corrosive,
(such as is Spirit of Nitre) suffer such an exceeding change, and become one of
the sweetest and mildest Medicines that is; or how Spirit of Nitre should be
able to sweeten such a corrosive matter, is difficult to conceive.

8. This Doubt receives a twofold Solution; first, that as Acids and Alcalies
are Opposites, and destroy one another, so also in the Acid kingdom there are
opposite Acids, which have like effects, by mixing one with another, the points
of the one entering into the sheaths of the other. Secondly, That as the first
Acids did but adhere superficially to the Antimony in its Butter, and adapted
to the motion of the Antimonial Particles, which served them as a Vehicle, to
display their points, so being dissolved by the Spirit of Nitre, they jointly
fix the Antimony, and destroy its motive quality, and sheath themselves in the
sulphurous parts thereof, whereby they lose all their corrosion.

9. The abstracted Liquor called Bezoardick Spirit of Nitre, (ut supra) is
nothing else but an Aqua Regia from the conjunction of the Spirit of Common
Salt with the Nitrous Spirit; for which reason it dissolves Gold, and will do
all other things which Aq. Regis can. In abstracting this Liquor, much of the
Sulphurs which were in the Butter of Antimony are lost.

10. I know Authors require a reiteration of the Spirit of Nitre, but this says
Le Mort ( Chymic. Medico physica, page 238.) is needless, for that the fluid
Salts require no more thereof to make them let go their Powder, and then by
consequence this Work has no more need of Correction.

11. This same Le Mort in the place cited, has another Bezoardicum Minerale,
made without Sublimate, after this manner: Regulus of Antimony in powder j.
Spirit of Salt prepared with Oil of Vitriol iij. mix them as before; digest
them in a Sand for two days, till the Regulus is dissolved; decant the clear
Liquor, (which will be as limpid as it was before the affusion) and evaporate
the one half of it away by a gentle fire, then affuse Guttatim Spirit of Nitre,
and proceed as before, etc.

12. Or thus, from the same Le Mort. Regulus of Antimony freed from its Scoria
j. Aq. Regia iij. mix them together, and digest them for two days, till all the
Regulus is brought to a very white powder, upon this put a great quantity of
fair Water, so will the white powder precipitate, which edulcorate by many
washings. Both this and the last are egregious Sudorificks, and Bezoardicks,
curing all Diseases that are to be cured by Sweat, and in particular they
resist Plague and Poison. Dose a gr. iv. ad xij.

13. Lemery makes it thus: Butter of Antimony ij. put it into a Bolthead and
melt it, put to it guttatim Spirit of Nitre, so much till the Butter is
perfectly dissolved, which will be about the weight of the Butter) in the
dissolution fumes will arise, which to avoid place the Vessel in a Chimney;
decant the Solution into another Glass Body or Earthen Dish, and evaporate in a
gentle sand-heat to dryness; the white mass being cooled, affuse thereon fresh
Spirit of Nitre ij. and evaporate in Sand as before to dryness; again affuse
fresh Spirit of Nitre ij. and evaporate again, and increasing the fire a
little, calcine the matter for half an hours time, then take it from the fire,
so will you have a white powder, (which is Bezoar Minerale) this keep in a Vial
close stopped. Dose a gr. vj. ad j.

14. This Preparation is only an Antimony fixed by Spirit of Nitre, and
rendered sudorifick; or so many Transformations of the Regulus, made by acid
Spirits, or by Fire; so that by fusion, or by means of some reductive Salt,
they may be recovered into a Regulus again, by destroying those Salts which
kept them under this form.

15. Zwelfer, Mantiss. Spagyr. par. 2. cap. 8. p. 837. makes it in all respects
as Lemery, but orders the dried mass to be ground each time upon a Porphyry,
into a subtle powder, before the affusion of fresh Spirit of Nitre, and then
calcines it (after the third affusion of Spirit) for an hour or two, and so
keeps it without any other Preparation.

16. Charras makes it of Mercurius Vitae, after this manner: Mercurius Vitae j.
Spirit of Nitre iij. put them into a small Glass Cucurbit, on a sand-heat,
which stir with a wooden Spatula steeped well in the Spirit; evaporate all the
humidity to dryness, then wash and perfectly dulcifie it, keeping the white
powder in a Glass Bottle well stopped.

17. This Bezoar, says he, is given to good purpose in all Diseases where the
Bezoar-stone is used: It strengthens very much all the noble parts, and defends
them against Malignity and Poison. It purifies the mass of Blood, and drives
from thence, as well as out of the whole habit of the Body, all those sharp
Serosities which offend Nature, and are to be expelled through the Pores of the
Body, driving them forth either by Sweat or insensible Transpiration.

18. For which reason it is very highly commended against all Diseases
proceeding from corruption or depravation of the Blood and Juices, chiefly the
Scurvy, Cachexia Small Pox, Measles, Plague, Spotted Fever, and all sorts of
malign and pestilential Distempers.

19. By reason of the weight thereof it is seldom given in Liquors, because it
is apt to descend, unless in some thick Syrup, but for the most part in a Bolus
or other proper Electuary or Conserve, a gr. viij. ad xx. or xxx.. It is also
sometimes mixed with Catharticks and Aperitives, to fortify the noble parts
during their operation.

20. Le Mort prepares it also at once, by affusing a triple quantity of Spirit
of Nitre at first, then evaporating and calcining as before taught; affirming
(as aforesaid) that there is no need of a triple affusion or repetition of the
Spirit of Nitre, as most Authors require, because, says he, all the Bodies are
saturated with the Acid, so as they can no more be changed or altered.

21. He also prepares it from Flowers of Antimony, dissolving them with Aqua
Regis, as before with the Regulus, at 11 and 12 aforegoing, and calcining, etc.

22. Marggrave makes it exactly after Zwelfer's method, with a double or treble
cohobation, and gives it a gr. v. ad xv. vel xx after this manner, Bezoar
Mineral, Saffron, A. gr. viij. Salts of Wormwood and Carduus, A. gr. xij.
Crab's-eyes and Coral prepared, A. gr. v. Laudanum Opiatum gr. iss. Confectio de
Hyacintho, or Diascordium, q. s. mix, and make a Bolus.

23. Le Febure puts the Antimonial Butter into a large Mattress, affusing
guttatim its equal weight of good Spirit of Nitre; the Liquor being defecated
and clear, he decants it into a Cucurbit in a sand-heat, and evaporates to
dryness, repeating twice again the same quantity of Spirit of Nitre,
evaporating it the third time, till the mass becomes fair, white, dry, brittle
and insipid, which is the Bezoar Mineral.

24. In this (says he) should there remain yet any pleasant sharpness, can be
no prejudice, wherefore it will be needless to urge the Fire higher, but
contrariwise to take off the Vessel, and let the matter cool, and taking the
Powder at bottom, to keep it in a Glass close stopped for use.

25. The Epithet Minerale is added, to difference it from the Stone Bezoar and
the Animal, for that the virtues of those is not only attributed to it, but it
every way exceeds them in virtue and goodness, possessing many other essential
Properties. that they have not, by reason of the Solar Sulphur that is in it,
the efficacy whereof is not to be exhausted.

26. For this rare Medicine does potently expel by Sweat and Urine, but chiefly
by insensible Transpiration, all the hurtful and poisonous Humors lurking in
the Bodies both of healthy and unhealthy persons, especially in all those
malign and pestilential Diseases where Sweating is absolutely necessary.

27. And this I can affirm from a Thirty years continued Experience, That
whosoever makes use of it in all the aforementioned cases, shall never find
himself deceived, nor disappointed of the help (sooner or later) which he
expected: I, who have for so many years tried, can tell more especially where
malignant Serosities have abounded, as in the Scurvy, Cachexies, Scabs, Itch,
French Pox, etc.

28. Who constantly uses it, ought also to have a Diet of Veal and
Chicken-Broth, with Scorzonea and Sarsaparilla in it, and to keep their Bodies
soluble, by adding every third day to the Broths j. or ss. of Salt of Tartar of
Sennertus, or otherwise with proper Clysters.

29. And as this Remedy is in kind universal, so it may be specificated and
appropriated to some particular parts, by adding any of the Metals, as Sol,
Luna, Venus Jupiter, the eighth part of any of which may be added to the
Regulus of Antimony, with three times as much corrosive Sublimate, and then
distilled into a Butter, to be fixed with Spirit of Nitre, as before directed,
in making the simple Bezoar Minerale.

30. Moebius makes it of Mercurius Vitae, as Charras does, afore-declared.
Hofman exactly follows Zwelfer, with a gentle calcination at last for an hour.
Beguinus is exactly the same with Lemery, save that in the second and third
affusions of Spirit of Nitre, he uses but half the first quantity of the Spirit.

31. From all that has been said, it appears with Le Mort, that a single
affusion of Spirit of Nitre is sufficient, because what is after added is
nugatory and void, as having no operation: Of which Opinion also is Blasius,
the Commentator upon Beguinus; and also with Le Febure, that a simple drying of
the Calx, without calcination or washing, suffices to bring the Medicine to the
perfection desired, and indeed leaves it more efficacious than it would be
otherwise with it.

32. Hic notandum quod Bezoarticum hoc minerale long antecellat Bezoar
Animalis, sicut id express fatetur Dn. Crato in Epistola medicinali dum
inquit; Lapis Bezoar Animalis in febribus pestilentialibus nobis nihil profuit,
quod sane de hoc minime pronunciandum.

XXXIV. Bezoarticum Mercuriale; Mercurial Bezoar.
Bate.] It is made by drawing forth the Tincture from the Glass of Mercurius
Vitae with Butter of Antimony, and fixing it with Spirit of Nitre, S. A. It is
of admirable use in the French Pox.

Salmon.] 1. That is, says Schroder, it is to be made as that of Lead, of the
Glass of Mercurius Vitae, and Butter of Antimony: This Hofman will not have to
participate of Mercury really, but to be of an Antimonial nature; but let
Hofman say what he will; of this, we are sure that it participates of a
Mercurial Property, for it is the nature of that Mineral to display its Beams
wherever its Body has once been, and to leave its Character behind it.

2. This Preparation is taken from Crollius's Basilica Chymica: A red Tincture
(says he) is drawn from Glass of Mercurius Vitae, with rectified Butter of
Antimony, which by Spirit of Nitre is fixed, and becomes an excellent
Bezoardick, not inferior in virtue to any other Bezoar.

3. If you join Mercurius Vitae with Butter of Antimony, and afterward fix it
with Spirit of Nitre, what, I pray you, will be the effects thereof? Is not the
exceeding purging Property of the same Butter corrected, so that it may be
given in a greater Dose? Diligently consider.

4. By this means it is manifest, Bezoardicks, or Diaphoreticks may be made
with all Metals, in which the virtuous parts of those Metals, conjoined with
Butter of Antimony, by the noble menstruum of fixed Nitre, are converted to
excellent Medicines.

5. Likewise many other things may, with these in the former manner be
described and prepared, which perhaps were not thought of by the former Age.

6. This Medicament is a famous Sudorifick in the Lues Venerea, and ought to be
given at night going to Bed, in some proper sudorifick Vehicle, the Patient
being immediately after it well covered in order to sweat upon it.

7. The Dose is a gr. vj. ad j. after this manner: Black-cherry-water iiss.
Mixtura Simplex ij. Syrup of Citron-peels ss. Bezoarticum Mercuriale a g. vj.
ad j. mix for a Dose.

XXXV. Bezoarticum Saturni; Saturnine Bezoar.
Bate.] It is made by extracting the Tincture from Glass of Saturn (which is
made of Minium or Red Lead melted with Flints) with Butter of Antimony not
rectified, and fixing with spirit of Nitre, S. A. It is an Hysteric, and
conduces to curing disaffections of the Spleen. Dose ad gr. vj.

Salmon.] 1. The Recipe is from Crollius, from whom Schroder has borrowed it,
but Hofman not liking it, prepares it after this manner.

2. The Mineral of Saturn, Corrosive sublimate, Ana. mix, and distill by Retort
a saturnine Butter, and a Cinnaber of Saturn, from which with fixed spirit of
Nitre, make a saturnine Bezoardick, according to the methods before delivered.

3. This (says he) is of mighty power against the Plague, Pleurisy, Scurvy,
Scabbiness, and Hypochondriack Melancholy; and I know by experience it is of
great use in curing all Diseases which are to be cured by Sweat, or proceed
from Corruption or Putrefaction.

4. This Butter of Saturn being put upon Saccharum Saturni, and digested, you
may therefrom easily distill by Retort, a subrubid sweet liquor, excellent for
the cure of all sorts of sordid, foetid, and cacoethick Ulcers, being outwardly
applied: And from the same a Mercurius Vitae may be made, excellent against
Saturnine Diseases.

XXXVI. * Bezoarticum Solare; Solar or Golden Bezoar.
Bate.] It is made of Leaf Gold dissolved in Bezoartick spirit of Nitre, then
affusing this solution by little and little upon Butter of Antimony, and
proceeding as above. It is an egregious Sudorifick, of use against the French
Pox, Plague, Gout, Dropsy, Fevers, Obstructions of the Spleen, etc. Dose a gr.
iij. ad viij.

Salmon.] 1. We will more particularly explain it from Crollius. Dissolve Gold
in A. R. (made of Nitre and Sal Armoniack) from the solution by Retort often
distill the same Water, and then pour on fresh, until by Retort the Gold comes
forth most red, which afterward precipitate to the bottom with vulgar Mercury
(well purified from its foeculency, for otherwise the noxious feces of the
Mercury will remain with the Gold) then the Precipitate being delivered from
the Mercury by calcination, comes forth of a purple color. This Powder
dissolve again in A. R. and to the solution join Butter of Antimony in a
tenfold proportion with the same A. R. by Retort draw off the Menstruum, often
repeating the Distillations, then by calcination reduce it to a reddish powder,
which if the calcination be strong, will be of a purple color.

2. In our Pharm. Land. lib. 3. cap. 7. sect. 15, 16. we have shown you several
other ways of preparing it from ^entzelius, Crollius, Schroder, and Hartman, as
also a Com^ound Solar Bezoar of our own ^efignation, the Virtues, Uses and
Doses of which ^ou may see at large in the ^lace cited.

3. But Schroder has another way of preparing the ^olar Bezoar, after this
man^er: Butter of Antimony ^ ss. Cinnabar of Antimony j. ^^ssolve in a
long-neek'd Glass (...) a gentle sand-heat, till they ^ently boil, so the
solution will (...) red, to this add some pints (...) hot Water, and the white
^ouder will precipitate; de^ant the yellow Liquor from it (...) degrees, then
sweeten it by ^ashing, and dry it gently: Then take Leaf-Gold ij. A.R ^ ij.
(made of A. F. and a quar^er part of common Salt) then ^bstract the A. R and
cohobate ^ur times; then dissolve it ^^ain, and add to it of the ^^rmer powder
iij. digest 28 ^ays, and abstract by degrees; ^^hobate the third time, and
^^crease the fire, that the A.R. ^ay fly away, then affuse S. V. and abstract
it several times; (...) have you a Bezoardick Mi^^ral of Gold.

4. This Preparation of ^^r Author seems to be that (...) Crollius, which is
the se^^nd way taught in our Land. ^ispens. but Hofman is pleased to censure
it, by reason of the corporeity of the Gold, and for that it is not rendered
subtle, whereby it is less useful, and not so much augmented in Virtue: How
the Gold is rendered volatile, he shows, by digesting it in the Bezoardick
Spirit of Nitre, and a threefold distillation or cohobation. It is rendered
volatile, at least very subtle, by Crollius's Method here delivered at 1.
above of this present Section.

5. But he shows another way of rendering the Gold subtle, and reducing it
from a corporeal to a more spiritual substance, which is by a Philosophical
Trituration in a Philosophic Mortar, whereby it is reduced into a most subtle
Powder.

6. I suppose this is to be performed by the Engine of Mons. Langelot, which is
a Philosophical Mill, made of well-tempered Steel, into which he puts Leaf Gold
cut into bits with Sissars, which is ground from morning till night for a month
together keeping the Mill covered with a Paper to prevent Dust or other matter
from falling into it.

7. When the Gold is thus reduced to Atoms, he puts it into a Glass Retort
somewhat flat, and having placed it in a sand-heat, and fitted a small
Recipient to the Beak, with a gentle fire at first, and a gradual augmentation
of it, till it is at length very violent, he distills and forces from the Gold
some red drops, which digested alone, or mixed with tartarized S. V. becomes an
Aurum Potabile.

8. And by grinding the Gold which remains in the Retort, as at first, in the
same Mill, and by repeating the same Operations as long as any of it shall
remain in the Retort, he affirms, all the Gold may be reduced into Liquor.

9. The Preparation, says he, though at first it seems plain, yet it requires
great Pains; and if you consider it well, you will find it very rational,
because he has several times experimented, that this way of grinding, assisted
by the heat and natural disposition of the Steel, draws to it the admirable
Salt of the Air, which insinuating by degrees into the Pores of the Gold,
hastens its dissolution; and therefore this Mill is incomparably much better
than all the learned Hofman's Mortars, let them be made of what substance
soever they will. But to proceed,

10. Another way the said Hofman teaches of subtilizing Gold, is by subliming
the Powder thereof with Sal Armoniack.

11. Having made the Gold (by any of these ways) spiritual or subtle, he
dissolves it in spirit of Nitre (not in A. R) and abstracts the solution to
dryness, by an often repetition of the distillation of the Spirit of Nitre, and
then calcines it sub tegula, etc.

12. The Solar Bezoar of Rolfincius, which ( Art. Chym. lib. 5. sect. 6. cap.
12.) he calls Bezoardicus praecipttatus Solaris, or Verum Lazari Riverij
Febrifugum Quartanarum. Leaf Gold ss. dissolve it in A. R. Vitrum Antimonii ss.
dissolve it in A. F. Quicksilver iij. dissolve it also in A. F. join the
solutions, and distill by an Alembick, reiterating the distillation 12 times: To
the Powder in the bottom affuse rectified S. V. which abstract 6 times, then
calcine it with a red-hot heat in a Hascian Crucible.

13. This Process, though Riverius calls it his, yet (says he) it is not a new,
but an old Invention. It cures all forts of Agues, but chiefly Quartans; but
Riverius gave it not usually by it self, but mixed with a proportional part of
Scammony, thus: Febrifugi gr. vj. Scammony gr. xij. Plus minus, pro re nata.

14. Beguinus, Tyro. Chym. lib. 2. cap. 12. and from him Grulingius, Florileg.
par. 8. cap. 3. gives you the Preparation after this manner: Put it into a
Mattress with a long Neck, well rectified Butter of Antimony ij. melt it by a
gentle fire, and affuse thereon guttatim the like quantity of spirit of
sulphurous salt. Fine Gold j. dissolved in A. R. which for the better opening
and attenuating of its body, let be thrice dissolved in fresh or new A. R. upon
this affuse the former Liquor, (which ought to be clear, and of a subrubicund
color) put all into a small Cucurbit, and distill in sand to dryness; then
again affuse thereon ij. more of spirit of sulphurous salt, i. e. spirit of
Nitre, and distill as before, increasing the fire to the height toward the end:
Lastly, put the Matter into Crucible, which calcine with a red-hot heat for the
space of an hour.

15. Zwelfer, Mantis. Spagyr. par. 1. cap. 1. prepares it thus: Fine Leaf Gold
ss. dissolve it in a sufficient quantity of A. R so that all the Gold may be
dissolved; take also Butter of Antimony rectified from its Cinnabar j. which
dissolve by affusion of rectified spirit of Nitre guttatim q. s. or so much as
that the Butter may be all dissolved, the noise and effervescency ceasing, and
the dissolution become of a subrubicund color: Mix these two solutions
together, and by an Alembick distill of dryness: On the remainder affuse fresh
spirit of Nitre iij. and distill as before, increasing the Fire at last to the
highest, for the total expulsion of the corrosive spirits; which Work repeat
also a third time in the same manner with fresh Sp. Nitri: The remaining Mass
edulcorate with fair Water, dry it, and calcine it in a Crucible for the space
of two hours, gently at first, but increasing it to a red heat, which levigate
upon a Porphyry, and keep it in a Glass close stopped for use.

16 From what has been said it appears, first, that the Gold ought to be
spiritualized or subtiliz'd; and the better that Operation is performed, the
better will the Preparation be; also that the proportion of the Gold to the
Butter of Antimony ought to be such, as so much, as the Butter of Antimony may
overcome and dissolve it.

17. Crollius takes to Gold j. Butter of Antimony x. Schroder to Gold j. Butter
of Antimony xij. Beguinus to Gold j. Butter xvj. But Zwelfer to Gold j. Butter
of Antimony iv. Which last Proportion, if the Gold be volatilised first, as it
ought to be, is found by manifold Trials to be the best, and the Medicine so
prepared to exceed in Virtues.

18. It is a famous Sudorifick and Cordial, wonderfully prevalent against the
Plague, and all sorts of malign and pestilential Diseases, epidemic and
contagious Fevers; it powerfully drives forth the Sweat, and frees the Heart
from poisonous Vapors; and Beguinus says, It is a singular Remedy against the
French Pox, Gout, Dropsies, and other Diseases which require sweating.

19. Dose is, says Beguinus, a gr. vj. ad x. and the older it is, the greater
Dose may be given. But Zwelfer says, the Dose may be a j. ad ss. or ij. if need
requires.

20. Lastly, Schroder has a Compound Bezoardick, which take as follows. Solar
Bezoar j. Solution of Cora^ iss. Salts of Rue and Guajacum, A. ss. mix, by
grinding them an hour in a Glass Mortar, then add spirit of Sulphur ss. Extract
of Saffron iss. Oils of Cloves, Amber, Cinnamon, A. j. mix and digest warm in a
close Glass for three days, and keep it for use.

21. It provokes Sweat strongly, and is good in Apoplexies, Palsies, Gouts,
Trembling of the Joints: Dose a gr. iv. ad viij. or x. The Extract of Saffron
is made with S. V. abstracted to the consistence of Honey. The Solution of
Coral is thus made. Sal Armoniack, sublimed (fast, from so much Common S^lt
decripitated; secondly, without Common Salt, by it self) Powder of red Coral,
A. iij. mix and sublime again, so in the bottom of the sublimatory will be the
Calx of Coral, put it on a Glass plate to dissolve; that which remains after
solution purify with Sal Arm. and sublime, dissolving as before on a Glass
plate, till all the Coral is dissolved, which keep for the purpose aforesaid.

XXXVII. Bez^articum Veneris; The Bezoar of Venus.
Bate.] It is made by drawing forth the Tincture from the scales of Copper with
Butter of Antimony rectified, and fixing it with spirit of Nitre S. A. It is
given by some against the Leprosy, and Diseases of the Head and Brain. Dose ad
gr. vj. Externally, it is good against old Ulcers, Fistula's, Tettars,
Ringworms, etc. mix with some appropriate Ointment.

Salmon.] 1. Our Author here uses Copper, but Schroder does it with Scales of
Brass; which Preparation has a Power (besides the Virtues before ascribed by
our Author) to cure the French Disease, virulent Gonorrhoeas, Exulcerations of
the Reins and Genital Parts, with other like Diseases, for which it is an
egregious Medicament, as Hofman affirms.

2. Crollius also does it from Scales of Brass, by digestion with corrected
Butter of Antimony. which he fixes by a manifold distillation of Spirit of
Nitre from it, which, says he, has besides its other Virtues, a most certain
Alexiterick force in every kind of Gonorrhoea.

3. You may give it a gr. iv. ad viij. x. or xij. according to the Strength and
Circumstances of the Patient, (Universals being first premised) which may be
mixed or made up into a Bolus with some proper Alexiterick, Sudorifick, or
Antivenereal Electuary, and given at Night going to Bed, causing the Sick to
sweat well upon it.

XXXVIII. Calx Lunae; Calx of Silver.
Bate.] It is made by dissolving Lunae in A. F. and precipitating it with salt
Water. Or, by amalgamating it with an equal quantity of Mercury, with the
addition of a fourth part of Salt. Or, by cementing it with Tartar Vitriolatum,
or Sal Gem, or Sulphur, etc. Or, by reverberating it for 8 days with Salt,
Sulphur, Sal Armoniack, etc. S. A. It is profitable against Hysteric Fits,
Epilepsies, Apoplexies, etc. Dose ad gr. x.

Salmon.] 1. Here is to be noted, that your Silver ought to be fine Silver, and
totally freed from any mixture of Copper with it, for otherwise being used
physically, it will cause vomiting.

2. The first way by A. F. from Thibaut: A little Matras. with a strait long
Neck, put into it A. F. ij. Leaf-silver j. set it upon a round, covered with
s^nd in a little Wheel-fire Furnace, giving a small Fire to help the
dissolution of the Silver, and to consume the Dissolvant, s^ as after a gentle
boiling, your Matter may dry and change in to a black skum, not unlike a
Pumice-stone then increase your Fire to melt this skum half petrified, and
continue your Fire till the boiling cease, and that there arise no more
Vapors, then take it off the Fire and let it cool so will the matter be
reduced to a white powder, which is the Calx of Luna.

3. Now here is to be noted; that if to this Calx of Silver you give a violent
fire, and and to it half a spoonful of B^rax, it will return again to i^s first
m^tallick nature, and be Silver again in form* hardness, and consistency,
because the violence of the Fire and Borax will carry away the least Particle
of the A. F. which kept the Silver in the form of a Calx.

4. Marggrave does it thus: Leaf silver ss. affuse upon it A. F. iij. mix, and
put them for a night in digestion* till the Silver is wholly dissolved, (unless
by chance any Gold be mixed with it* which will not dissolve, but fall to the
bottom:) the Solution evaporate te dryness, or if you would save the A. F.
distill by a Glass Retort to dryness, and in the bottom you will have the Calx
of Luna.

5. Where note, that if the Luna be pure from any mixture of Venus, the
Solution will be white; but if any Allay of Copper be in it, it will be green.

6. This Calx serves for preparing the Tincture of Luna with, besides the other
Virtues ascribed to it by our Author.

7. Schroder says, That being dissolved in A. F. or Sp. Nitri, the Calx may be
made by precipitation with Salt-brine, Salt Water, or a piece of Brass or
Copper cast in, the Water being put in to a three, four, or sixfold quantity.

8. Le Febur takes fine or cupulated Silver j. A. F. iij. or as much good
Spirit of Nitre, dissolves in a gentle heat in Sand or Ashes, then precipitates
with salt Water, edulcorates with fresh Water, and dries it for use, which is
Calx of Silver.

9. Lemery and Charras also use a treble proportion of A. F. to the Luna, in
dissolution, which is generally received by most other Artists, Thibaut (who
uses but a double quantity) and Marggrave (who uses a sixfold quantity) only
excepted.

10. The second way is by Amalgamation with Quicksilver. Fine Leaf-silver,
Quicksilver depurated, ana, mix and make an Amalgama, adding a fourth part of
Common Salt, or Salt of Vitriol, then exhale the Mercury at the Fire, or bring
it over the Helm and wash the remainder: Where note, that if a double quantity
of Mercury be used, the Calx will yet be the better, or more subtle.

11. The third way by Cementation. Besides Tartar Vitriolate and Sal Gem, which
our Author prescribes, it may be cemented with Precipitate and Sublimate
Mercury, Common Salt, Crude Tartar, Vitriol, etc. thus: Plates of Silver, or
Leaf-silver p. j. Mercury sublimate p. ij. mix and exhale at the Fire, so will
you have the Silver remaining like Rosin, Sennert. Institut.

12. But Hofman says it is better done thus: Leaf-silver, Corrosive Sublimate,
Sal Armoniack, ana. Mix them well together, and put them into a small Bolt-head
with a long neck, close it well with the heat of a Candle, and in a short time
the Mercury will flow in the bottom of the Vessel; and the Glass being broken,
you will find the Mass in a rare Spongy Calx.

13. The reason of which is, from the vehement heat excited by the Contest
between the saline parts of the Sublimate and the Sal Armon. whereby the Silver
is calcined and reduced into minute parts.

14. It is also cemented with twice as much Sal Gem, or four times as much
Common Salt, in 7 or 8 hours.

15. Or thus: Filings of Silver j. Flowers of Sulphur ij. Common salt ss. mix
and sublime seven times, as you make Flowers of Sulphur, still adding to the
Sublimate the remaining matter; cast away the Sublimate the last time, and wash
the remaining Calx.

16. But says Hofman, the calcination will be better done in this last if the
Salt be omitted, and therefrom you may extract and egregious Tincture of Luna
with Spirit of Lilly Convally, and urinous Spirit of Sal Armoniack, adding also
a little Spirit of Vitriol.

17. And thereof a Water of Luna may be thus made. This Calx (calcined with
Sulphur) and affuse thereon some cephalic Water, Simple, or Compound, as of
Rosemary, for a defect of the Memory, or Water of Mans-brain; Waters of Fl^wers
of Hypericon or P^niperne* for Ma^ness; the Epileptick of Lang^us for the
Falling sickness, or of Lilly Convally, or the Flowers of the Tile-Tree, etc.

18 But in this Operation you must be cautious not to take too much Sulphur, to
wit, not above two parts, lest it be over-burnt, as a less quantity would not
do it enough; if you take Leaf-silver j. an ounce and half of Flowers of
Sulphur may suffice.

19. Schroder also says, it may be cemented with Spirit of Salt of Tartar,
(which is a very difficult thing to distill) But, says Hofman, it is more
conveniently done with the volatile Salt thereof.

20. The fourth and last way is by Reverberation: Now, because Silver does more
easily obey the Fire and Calcination than Gold, so it needs not a very tedious
Work: Nor indeed ought it (as Hofman says) be too much calcined, for thereby*
instead of having a good and valuable Medicine, you will only have a vulgar and
common one, apt to cause nauseating and vomiting, from its Vitriolick Sapor.

21. And therefore, says Schroder, if you please, you ^ay elaborate it more
after calcination, and then with Sulphur or Common salt, or Sal Gem, or Sulphur
and Sal Gem, or Common salt and Sal Armoniack; cement it as often as you
please, and so edulcorate it by washing off the salt.

22. As for example. Calx of Silver made by Aqua fortis j. Common salt ij. Sal
Armoniack ij. mix them together, and reverberate for eight days.

XXXIX. Calx Jovis, Calx of Tin.
Bate.] It is made of Tin melted, and continually stirred with an Iron Rake, or
some suchlike thing, till it is perfectly reduced into Ashes: Or, it may be
prepared from Jupiter dissolved in A. F. precipitated and edulcorated S. A. It
is a Specific against Hysteric Fits. Dose to ten grains.

Salmon.] 1. The Calx of Tin is made several ways, as by, 1. Incineration,
according to our Author's method. 2. Reverberation, which is done by putting
the former Calx into a Reverberatory, and continually stirring of it. 3. Vapor,
which is hanging Plates of Tin over Vapors of Vinegar, or other corrosive
Liquors. 4. Cementation, by laying it S. S. S. with Sulphur, Quicklime, or
other proper Cements. 5. Immersion, which is done by dipping Plates of Tin into
corrosive Liquors, as in Sp. of Lead, but usually in Spirit of Vinegar: And
from this Calx by Immersion is made, first, a Salt of Tin, secondly, a
Magistery of Tin.

2. Besides what our Author has signified as to its Virtues for the suffocation
of the Womb, which it is said admirably to cure, this is certain, that
outwardly it is good for all manner of old Sores, putrid Ulcers, weeping
Fistulaes, Cancers, and other rebellious Diseases of like kind.

3. Modus Vtendi. Calx of Tin gr. x. Oil of Man's-scul gut. ij. Salt of Amber
gr. vj. Mithridate j. mix and make a Bolus for one dose. Or thus: Calx of Tin
gr. viij. Oil of Ox-horns gut. ij. Salt of Hartshorn gr. vj. Venice-Treacle
ss. mix for a Dose, to be repeated every night for a Month, and in the morning
also if the Disease is vehement.

4. Calx of Tin j. Oil of Hypericon q. s. mix and make an Ointment for old
Ulcers. Calx of Tin j. Balsamum Lucatelli, Honey A. q. s. mix for a Balsam, to
cure Blindness, which it has done to a Miracle.

XL. * Cerussa Antimonij; Ceruse of Antimony.
Bate.] It is made out of the Regulus of Antimony instead of crude Antimony by
burning, etc. S. A. It has the Virtues of Antimonium Diaphoreticum.

Salmon.] 1. The Regulus is to be calcined with a treble quantity of Crystals
of Nitre, for half an hour or more, then sw^eten, and take away the dross at
bottom, dry it, and the powder is called Ceruse; then calcine it with Nitre, or
reverberate it without, melting till it be yellow, so will it be diaphoretick.

2. This, says Knuffelius, is the white Sulphur of the Philosophers: And, says
Hofman, to one part of the Regulus you must have 3 or 4 parts of the depurated
Crystals of Nitre, otherwise you will have no Ceruse.

3. Le Febur makes it is another way, viz. of the first decanted Water of the
Antimonium Diaphoreticum, as is taught at large in Sect. XIV. 16, 17, 18. of
this Chapter aforegoing, and equals it to the Antimonium Diaphoreticum.

4. Being made according to the Prescript, Hofman says, it cures inveterate
and deplorable Ulcers, proceeding from too great Serosities, and is prevalent
against contumacious Scabs, Measles, and Small Pox, the happy Energy of which
in those cases, he had oftentimes proved.

5. If it be given for the purifying of the Blood, it ought to be taken
continually for 30 days, or more; if for Wounds and Ulcers, it ought to be
administered with vulnerary Drinks and Decoctions, though in truth it much exceeds
them all.

6. Outwardly it dries much, and is used in Cosmetick Waters, as of
Bean-flowers, of Solomon's Seal, and suchlike, for taking away Deformities of
the Face and Skin, which it renders very pure and clean; and it is mixed with
Cosmetick Ointments to heal Fistures, Chaps, and the like.

7. It is (Universals being first premised) thus used to stop a Gonorrhoea.
Ceruse of Antimony j. Roch Alum in fine powder ss. Catechu in fine powder gr.
15. mix, and give it in Jelly of Ising-glass made in Milk for a Dose, which
repeat as long as need requires.

8. The Dose is a gr. x. ad xxx, but some give it ad ij. yea, to j. augmenting
the Dose gradually. Schroder says it works diversely; for in some the two or
three first days it causes a loathing and spitting, at other times it works
insensibly; in some it gently loosens and in others it sweats, and not but at
the conclusion perceived. It may be given at night going to Bed, or in the
morning fasting, but Schroder prescribes it four or 5 hours before Dinner.

9. Charras makes it of the first decanted Liquor of the Antimonium
Diaphoreticum, according to Le Febur's method, precipitating it with Vinegar,
very white, which he washes and dries: Which, says he, fortifies Nature, and
disposes it to expel ill Humors by all sorts of ways, but chiefly by Sweat, and
insensible Transpiration: It is proper to mortify corrosive Salts, especially
Acids, and to prevent fermentation of the Humors, the Corruption whereof it
also hinders cleanses the whole mass of Blood, and gives wonderful Rel^ef in
scorbutic Maladies, if its use be continued for some time.

10. And though it may seem astringent, as well in regard of its substance,
being altogether terrestrial, as in respect to its operation, being disabled
from purging either upwards or downwards, yet being mixed with Catharticks or
Openers, it then seems to assume their Qualities and Operations, by assisting
their activity, and therefore is often mixed with Aperients to open the
Obstructions of the Bowels and Womb.

11. Le Mort makes it thus: Regulus of Antimony j. A. R. iij. digest them
together till the effervescency ceases, then digest again for one day, so the
Regulus corroded will remain in the bottom, the A. R. supernating, which will
be tinged of a yellow color, decant the A. R. and edulcorate the subsiding
powder by many affusions of fair Water, which dry upon Chalk, and keep for use.

12. It is diaphoretick and sudorifick, and emulates (says he) the Virtues of
Bezoar Minerale, the Dose being from gr. iv. ad x. or xii.

13. Cerussa Antimonii solaris Schroderi, a Solar Ceruse of Antimony: Regulus
of Antimony j. fine Gold j. Sal Nitre iij. mix, calcine them without melting in
a Crucible, so the Regulus will be a yellow Powder, but the Sol will lose of
its weight; edulcorate the powder, and if you please calcine again. It has the
Virtues of the former, but is more cordial.

14. The Cerussa Solaris is also made by a calcination by the Sunbeams, thus:
Powder of Antimony, or Regulus, or Flowers thereof, and concentrate the Beams
of the Sun thereon by a Burningglass, so in a short time will the Fumes ascend
from the Antimony, and it will turn white.

15. Where note, 1. That the Flowers are easier to calcine than either the
Crude Antimony or the Regulus. 2. That the weight of the Antimony is rather
increased after calcination than diminished.

16. This Preparation Schroder calls Magical; Bartholettus, in Meth. Med.
Heavenly and Physical; and Poppius, in Basilic. Antimonii, page 21. commends
the same; and Le Febur says, That the Sunbeams does purify and fix Antimony
much better, and with much more efficacy than Nitre can possibly do; which,
says he, is a kind of Calcination Philosophical, and worthy indeed of a Son of
Art, who desires to search into the Wonders of Art and Nature.

17. Behold and contemplate the rare Effects of Magical and Celestial Fire,
drawn from the Rays of the Sun by the help of a Burning or Refracting-Glass,
which but few apprehend, and fewer yet believe what may be done and performed
thereby.

18. And whereas common Fire and Salts do alter and destroy the substance of
Antimony, this noble and miraculous Fire preserves and increases it; which
Wonder will cease, as soon as you do but consider, that this noble Mineral has
a kind of natural Magnet in its self, which makes it capable to attract from
the Heaven it self a noble and familiar Substance which is Light and Fire, by
which both its Substance and Virtues are depurated, exalted, and augmented.

19. Antimony in fine powder gr. xij. calcine it either by simple common Fire,
or by Salts, and it yields a smoaky Vapor, unpleasant and heavy, (which being
preserved in a sublimatory, would be flowers of Antimony) and you will have a
Calx of not above six or seven grains, which will have a purging and emetick
quality.

20. Again, Antimony in fine powder, gr, xij. and calcine it by the Sunbeams
with a Burning-Glass, which may concentrate the Light and Beams of the Sun, so
as to work upon the matter, then will the Mineral yield Vapors also, as when
calcined in a common Fire; and one would think that it should decrease in like
manner in the same proportion, but it is otherwise, for the calcination being
often reiterated, and the Antimony turned into a white Calx, you will find it
to weigh gr. 15 instead of 12, which is eight or nine grains more than by the
former Operation.

21. And a thing more to be admired and less conceivable, is, that these
fifteen grains of Solar Ceruse are neither Emetick nor Cathartick, but
contrariwise Diaphoretick, or Sudorifick, and Cordial; Dose a gr. iij, ad xij.
in all the Diseases before enumerated; and we know that Experience has made it
appear, that this Remedy is incomparably better, and much more excellent than
the other Ceruse prepared by common Fire, or the Vulgar Diaphoretick. How this
Operation is to be performed, we shall hereafter show in our Officina Chymica,
now in the Press.

XLI. Cerussa Martis; The Ceruse of Mars or Iron.
Bate.] It is made of the Regulus of Mars, in all respects as in the Ceruse of
Antimony. It is also prepared with a ninefold quantity of Nitre. It is
Diaphoretick, like the Ceruse of Antimony.

Salmon.] 1. It has all the Virtues of the Antimonial Ceruse added to the
nature of Mars; so that it is not only sudorifick from its Antimonial Property,
but it is also opening and strengthening from its Martial; for which reason it
is of good use to be given to such as have been troubled with a Chlorosis,
(Universals having been first premised) for it confirms the healthful tone of
the parts, and prevents the Sick for falling into the like Distemper again.

2. Modus Vtendi. Ceruse of Mars gr. xij. ad xx. Cochinele in fine powder gr.
vj. Saffron in fine powder gr. iij. Mithridate j. or. ss. mix for a sweating
dose, to be given at Bedtime.

3. Ceruse of Mars gr. xij. Salt of Hartshorn gr. vj. Laudanum Volatile nost.
gr. ij. mix, for a dose against the Bitings of mad Dogs, Serpents, and other
venomous Creatures.

4. Ceruse of Mars, gr. x. ad xx. Rosin of Chio Turpentine j. Roch-Alum in fine
powder gr. vj. mix for a Dose, against the Whites in Women, and Gonorrhoea in
Men, or a continual Gleet, to be given after due purging and taking away the
malign cause with proper Antivenereals.

5. Or thus: Ceruse of Mars, Rosin of Chio Turpentine, A. j. Catechu in fine
powder gr. xv. Roch-Alum in powder, gr. iv. Volatile Laudanum gr. j. ad iij.
Marmalade of Quinces q. s. mix, and make a Bolus, to be taken every night going
to Bed, in the cases last mentioned, after due purging, as before directed.

XLII. Chalcanthum Rubefactum; Rubified Vitriol.
Bate.] It is made by calcining the Vitriol to redness. It wonderfully
astringes and dries, being good against Dysenteries, Haemorrhagies, etc. In
pulling out of Teeth (if a great flux of Blood should happen) it is
successfully applied with Vinegar and Lint.

Salmon.] 1. You may take in place thereof the Caput Mortuum of the Oil of
Vitriol, which does the same thing; where note, that if it be for inward uses,
the Vitriol ought to be purified and cleansed by dissolution, filtration,
evaporation, and crystallization, and then prepared according to Art.

2. Modus Vtendi. Diascordium ss. Rubified Vitriol gr. xij. Catechu gr. viij.
mix and make a Bolus, to be given Morning and Evening, drinking after the same
a Glass of red Wine.

3. Or thus: Mithridate ss. Rubified Vitriol, Bezoar Minerale, A. gr. xij. mix
and make a Bolus, to be given as before directed.

4. Rubified Vitriol, Red Coral levigated, Ana. mix them for a Dentifrice, to
cleanse the Teeth; besides which, it also strengthens, nourishes, and restores
the Gums. Note. Before the inward use of this Medicine, let Universals be
premised.

XLIII. * Chalybs Sine Acido; Chalybs prepared without an Acid.
Bate.] It is prepared by moistening Mars ten times with Salt of Wormwood
dissolved in Cichorf-water, and drying it again in a dry and warm Air; after
which it is reduced into a subtle powder. It powerfully opens Obstructions.
Dose j. ad ss.

Salmon.] 1. In order for the more easy performance of this, you ought to take
Filings of Iron, not Gades, etc. and Iron is better than Steel, because not
only its Body is more porous and open, but it also contains in it a larger
proportion of Sulphur and Mercury.

2. Whereas our Author prescribes the Reduction to be done with Salt of
Wormwood, it may as well be done with Sal^ of Tartar, or the Salt of any other
Vegetable, or instead of any of them, with Salt of Potashes, which may be
dissolved in any other distilled Vegetable-Water, or in Rainwater or May-dew,
etc.

3. This Preparation is indeed only a Rust of Iron, contracted from the
moisture. Lemery makes it thus: Filings of Iron, put them into a broad flat
earthen Pan unglazed, and expose it to the Rain till it turns into a Paste,
then set it to dry in the shade, and it will rust; powder it, and expose it to
Rain, as before, and so let it rust; powder again and reiterate this Operation
for 12 times, then reduce it into subtle powder, and keep it for use.

4. Or thus: Thin Plates of Iron, wash them well, and expose them to the Dew
for a good while, till they rust, which scrape off; put them again to receive
the Dew, and gather the Rust as before; which Work continue till you have
gotten so much as you desire.

5. This Preparation (says Lemery) is really better than all the Preparations
of Iron, which are called Crocus, and is an excellent thing for opening of all
Obstructions whatsoever, but more especially of the Liver, Spleen, Pancreas,
and Mesentery.

6. It is used very successfully against the Green Sickness, to remove the
stoppage of the Terms, cure Dropsies, Jaundice, and other Diseases which
proceed from Oppilations.

7. The Dose a gr. iv. or vj. ad ij. in a Bolus, Lozenges, or Pills: In a Bolus
you may give it thus: Lenitive Electuary j. of this Crocus a ss. ad j. mix and
make a Bolus, to be given at night going to Bed, and to be continued for a
month together, or as long as need shall require.

8. This Preparation of the opening Crocus of Mars is out of the common Road,
and much longer a doing than the rest, but it is the best of all that ever were
invented; the Dew is impregnated with a Dissolvent that very much opens the
Pores of the Iron, and incorporating with it, renders it more active and
soluble than it was before.

9. This Medicine also opens Obstructions, by virtue of its Salt, which being
assisted with the solid parts of the Metal, penetrates farther than other Salts
can; but you ought always to purge and moisten the Body you give it to with
Broths, before you presume to give it, because should it find the Passages of
the small Vessels filled and obstructed with gross Humors, it would (...) ^^^op
and cause In^an^nations whence the Colic would be excited.

10. How Iron performs its Operation many have doubted, yet it seems clear,
that it opens Obstructions as an Alcali, by absorbing the Acid, which causes
the Coagulum: But if any one should object, That Iron does only act according
to the Preparations which the different Juices it meets with in the Stomach do
make, for that these acid Juices not failing to encounter with, and to dissolve
it, there may result from this dissolution a liberty to the parts of the Body
where this Action might be and some other parts adjacent thereto, and
consequently their Restoration.

11. To which we say, that though Mars may act in the Body, sometimes as an
Alcali, by absorbing and sweetening the acid Humor which it meets with, as it
does absorb and sweeten the acid Liquors which are poured upon it: Yet we
conclude not from hence, that its aperitive faculty does always consist in
this effect, for that the Water in which Iron has been put to boil is
aperitive, and yet there is no Alcali in it, to sweeten the Acids of the Body
when it is drunk.

12. That though Steel is always used in Chemical Preparations for Physic and
commonly preferred before it, yet it is nevertheless certain that Iron is much
more fit for that intent than Steel, because it is more soluble; for if the
Action of Iron proceeds from nothing but its Salt (as it is certain) the Salt of
Iron must be much more easily separated than that of Steel because the Pores of
the latter are more close than the Pores of the former, and therefore this must
have quicker effects.

13. But the reason which has induced People to believe that Steel is better
for Physical uses than Iron, was its being thought to be deprived of many
Impurities by calcination; but that which they call the Impurity is the more
open part of the Iron, and therefore the more to be chosen, and the more
effectual.

14. And therefore as Iron by calcination being turned into Seeel, is freed
from its Scories, and also deprived of its more volatile Salt, so it is made
worse for our Uses by that Change; for the Impurities, which is called the
Scories, is the better part of the Iron, that has been rarefied by its Salt;
and though some call the Rust of Iron its Dross, the whole Metal may receive the
same appellation, every Particle thereof being capable of the same change, if
but laid in the open Air.

XLIV. * Chalybs Tartarisatus; Steel tartarised.
Bate. Mars cleansed from filth, white Tartar in powder, A. vj. Fumitory water
q. s. mix, and make a Mass like Paste or an Electuary; boil it in an earthen
Vessel in Clibano, with a gentle heat, to dryness; make it into a subtle
powder, to which add Fumitory water q. s. and boil again to dryness; which
repeat again the third time, reducing it at last into a subtle powder, S. A. Of
this is made Potable Mars.

Salmon.] 1. This is the Arcanum of which Dr. Willis his Tincture of Steel was
made, which made so great a noise, and obtained so great a Reputation in the
World.

2. The Powder may be given against all manner of Obstructions of the Bowels,
but chiefly those of the Liver, Spleen, Stomach, Womb, Pancreas, and Mesentery;
it is indeed a good thing against the Scurvy, Dropsy, Gout, but chiefly
against the Green sickness in Virgins, which it scarcely ever fails to Cure, as
also the Rickets in Children, though in the latter case (in my opinion) it is
better given in a Tincture than in Substance, in which latter form it may be
given a ss. ad ij. more or less, in a fit Vehicle.

3. From this Powder a Tincture may be made, 1. by boiling it in fair Water
till the Liquor looks black, which may be filtrated and evaporated in an
earthen Pan, to the thickness of a Syrup. This is a famous thing against the
Green Sickness, and may be given from one spoonful to two, in a Glass of Ale,
every night going to Bed.

4. Or, 2. by infusion in White or Rhenish-wine, thus. White or Rhenish-wine lb
viij. of the former Crocus lb j. mix, and digest in a very gentle heat, for a
month, so will you have a famous Tincture of Mars, good for all the Purposes
aforesaid, and may be given at night going to Bed, ab ss. ad j. in a Glass Bv
Ale or Wine.

5. Or, 3. by Infusion in tartarised S. V. or as some will have it, in Tincture
of Salt of Tartar, thus: S. V. etc. lb iv. of the former Crocus lb j. mix,
digest for a month in a gentle heat, and decant, and affuse fresh spirit so
long as it will yield any Tincture; put all these Tinctures together, and
abstract one half or three parts of the spirit, according to the quantity which
you used in extracting the Tincture.

6. The latter is more spirituous and penetrating, and has all the Virtues of
any of the former, and may be given a j. ad ij. more or less, in any convenient
Vehicle, and that as well in the morning as at night.

XLV. Cinnabaris Antimonii, Cinnabar of Antimony.
Bate.] It is made by sublimation of the Caput Mortuum left, after the
distillation of the Butter of Antimony, then rectifying it, S. A. It provokes
Sweat plentifully, and prevails against the Gout, French Pox, Falling Sickness,
Palsy, etc. Dose a ss. ad j.

Salmon.] 1. Having prepared all the Matter for distillation of the Butter of
Antimony, (the making of which we shall show in its place) and the Gummy or
Glacial Liquor being come off, you must give by little and little a Fire of
suppression, till the red Liquor also comes forth, then remove the Recipient,
and substitute another, and with a fire of suppression, for an hour or two, (as
Beguinus directs) or four hours, (as Roifincius, Chym. lib. 5. sect. 5. cap. 5.
will have it) or eight hours, (as Blasius the Commentator on Beguinus advises)
increasing toward the end, for some time, till the Retort gr^ws red-hot;
continue the distillation so will you have the Cinnabar sticking to the neck of
the Retort, and in the Receiver a little running Mercury.

2. From a pound and half of each of the Ingredients, viz. from lbiij. of the
first matter, you will have says Rolfincius, a glaciale Butter: an elegant
shining Antimony in the bottom of the Retort lbi: in the latter Receiver
running Mercury a little: and Cinnabar in the neck of the Retort but iij. But
in the latter I know he was mistaken, for if you work rightly, you will have of
Cinnabar xiiiss.

3. Thibaut, in his Art of Chemistry, says, If you would have the Cinnaber of
Antimony, you must toward the end of the first distillation in your luted
Retort, give a violent fire of suppression, and (says he) without any Receiver
to your Retort, which is to be continued till your Retort be sunk and almost
melted: This fire will drive the Mercury to the end and middle of the neck of
the Retort, and when the Operation is done, it will, either be revived into
Quicksilver, or turned into a gray or blackish Powder; and at the mouth of the
Retort you will find an Antimonial substance, which at the end of the operation
will appear in the form of a Crust, as thick as the Back of a Knife, and which
outwardly is of a gray color, but being pared, is within red, and called
Cinnabar of Antimony; and in the bottom of the Retort a congealed Lump, which
is the rest of your Antimony revived.

4. If, says he, you weigh your Mercury, (both the revived and that which is in
powder) you will find that they weigh little more than the corrosive Sublimate
first used. And if you weigh the Cinnabar and the Antimony at bottom of the
Retort, you will see that they will weigh little less than the Antimony first
taken.

5. That when you intend to make Cinnabar of Antimony, you must always take
the best crude Antimony, and not its Regulus; for tho from the latter you will
have a better and more gentle Mercurius Vitae, yet from it you will have no
Cinnabar of Antimony at all, because the Regulus has lost a great part of its
Sulphur.

6. Le Mort, Chymic. Medico-physicae, page 169. says, That if after the
distillation of the Butter of Antimony, you make the fire more intense, you
shall have a Cinnabar; But if you would have it In greater abundance, you are
to make the sublimation in an earthen Retort, with a naked fire; and being made
red-hot, the Work is to be continued for two hours, ( Collect. Chym. cap. 53)
so will all the Mercury mixed with the Sulphur of the Antimony ascend in the
form of Cinnabar.

7. Marggrave makes it thus. The Caput Mort* left in making the Butter of
Antimony, make it into powder, and put it into a Glass Retort coated, which
place upon a naked fire, so as the Retort may be made thoroughly red-hot, and
sublime for the space of an hour or two.

8. The Work being finished, break the Retort, you will find in the first part
of the neck a black matter, which by washing in fair Water will become
Quicksilver; in the other part of the neck you will have a kind of gray
Sublimate, which being freed from its Scoria, and reduced into ponder, will be
red, which is the Cinnabar of Antimony; and in the bottom of the Retort you
will have a little crude Antimony, which Chemists call Antimoninm Regeneratum.

9. The Cinnabar being reduced into ponder, is to be several times rectified,
by subliming it per se, in a Glass Retort in sand, by which means it will
become very pure and red. Chemists advise a sevenfold rectification or
sublimation; but Marggrave is of opinion, that three are enough.

10. From this Cinnabar it is that the Philosophers make an augmentation of
Gold, and some dissolve it in Spirit of common Salt, and then distill it to
dryness, obtaining a most white powder, which they call Chaos Mercurit.

11. Zwelfer performs the Operation the same way, in the space of one or two
hours, but advises that the neck of the Retort should be large.

12. Schroder says, That if you desire Cinnabar rather than Butter of Aniimony,
you must at first give a strong Fire: This Cinnabar, says he, may be purified
with one or two sublimations.

13. Lemery makes it after this manner: Crude Antimony, corrosive Sublimate,
Ana. in fine powder, mix them well together, and therewith fill a Retort half
full, set it in sand, in a small Furnace, and fit thereto a Receiver, luting
the Juncture; distill first with a small fire, so will a clear Liquor distill,
then augment the fire a little, and the Butter of Antimony will come forth
white and thick (which will stop the neck of the Retort and break it, if you
take not care to set live Coals near it, that it may melt and run into the
Receiver) continue the distillation till red Vapors begin to appear, then take
away the Receiver, and put another in its place, without luting the Juncture;
increase the Fire by little and little, till the Retort becomes red-hot;
continue it so three or four hours, then letting the Retort cool, break it, and
you will find the Cinnabar sublimed and fixed to the neck, which separate and
keep for use.

14. From ten ounces of crude Antimony, and ten ounces of corrosive Sublimate,
you will have of Butter of Antimony v. of Cinnabar of Antimony viiss. of
Quicksilver i. and of Antimony regenerate (which remains in the Retort) v. so
that it seems there is iss. of the Matter lost in the Operation, which possibly
might happen while the Cinnabar was rising.

15. The Mass at bottom of the Retort, Lemery says, may be flung away, as being
the more terrestrious part of the Antimony; the Quicksilver is found as well in
the neck of the Retort, as in the last Receiver; and at the end of the neck of
the Retort, there is sometimes a Mossy Substance found, which represents many
little figures, and is the more rarefied Cinnabar.

16. Now the reason why Running Quicksilver is found in this Operation, is,
from the paucity of the Sulphur in the Antimony, there being not enough in that
quantity for the Mercury to adhere to, for that to make Cinnabar, Mercury, and
Sulphur must be sublimed together.

17. Take this Cinnabar in fine powder p. j. Salt of Tartar p. ij. mix, and put
them into a Retort, and distill with a great fire into a Receiver filled with
Water, so will the Mercury come forth, and the Sulphur will remain in the
Retort with the Salt of Tartar, which you may thus separate.

18. Boil what remains in the Retort in a sufficient quantity of Water, filter
the Decoction, and affuse thereon spirit of Vinegar so will a gray powder
precipitate, which edulcorate with Water, and dry; thus have you done the
Sulphur of Antimony, which is much esteemed for Diseases of the Breast and
Lungs, being given a gr. v. ad viij. in some pectoral Vehicle.

19. Le Febure differs little in the form of the Preparation, but much in the
proportion of the Ingredients, for to lb j. of crude Antimony he takes lb iij.
of Corrosive Sublimate, which he puts into a Retort so large, as that of it may
be empty, and lutes the Juncture only with Paper and Paste made of Flower,
performing the Operations as before directed.

20. This Cinnabar, says he, may be used for a Fume to such who are in a course
of Cure for the Pox, but is mostly used as an Internal in the Venereal Disease
and all its Retinue, because this Antimonial Sulphur, (which cleaves to the
Mercury, and coagulates it) is of a much-more exalted Virtue than common
Sulphur, and therefore this Medicament does more effectually absorb Acids,
purifies the mass of Blood, and hinders the corruption and putrefaction of all
the Humors and Juices of the Body, removing the malignity, and destroying the
Venereal Venom.

21. Authors prescribe it a gr. vj. ad xv. or xx. but my Experience has told
me, it may safely be given for a Month together a^. j ad ij. yea, ad j. in a
proper Bolus, or made up with Chio Turpentine, or Balsam of Peru, or other ^^t
Vehicle.

22. Marggrave, Le Mort, and indeed most Authors who have wrote of it, commend
it as a famous thing for the cure of the Epilepsie* and other Diseases
proceeding from an Acid ferment, it being of an alcalious and sulphurous
nature: But in respect to the Epilepsie, it must proceed from an Acid cause,
else it will not have that famed effect.

23. How this Cinnabar of Antimony may be made in a greater plenty we will here
show from Rolfincius, Chym. lib. 5. sect. 5. cap. 6. thus: Crude Antimony,
Corrosive Sublimate, Ana. mix in fine powder, and distill off the Butter, as
before directed; which ceasing to distill, take the Caput Mort. or Matter
remaining in the Retort and mix it again with an equal quantity of Mercury
Sublimate, which put into a new Retort, having a much longer and wider neck
(that the Cinnabar may have a spacious place to be lodged in) begin first with
a gentle fire, then with a more intense, and lastly, with a fire of
suppressi^n, so will the Cinnabar sublime in a much greater plenty, etc.

24. Modus Vtendi. Cinnabar of Antimony, Magisteries of Coral and Pearl, ana.
gr. xv. mix for a Dose, against the Falling Sickness. Hartman.

25. Or thus: Cinnabar of Antimony, Misselto of the Oak, Elks-hoof, A. ss.
Man's-skull filed, or calcined without Fire, i. mix them. Dose a ss. ad j. or
ij. Mynsicht.

26. Or thus: Cinnabar of Antimony, crude Man's skull, Magisteries of Coral and
Pearls, ana. mix, and make a powder. Dose a gr. 10, ad 20, ad 30. in any
convenient Liquor. Sennertus.

27. Cinnabar of Antimony, Magistery of Elks-hoof, A. ij. Eleosaccharum Citri,
Angelicae, A. j. mix, for 12 or 18 Doses. Rolfincius.

28. Or thus: Cinnabar ss. Magisteries of Pearl and Coral, A. ij. Saffron j.
Aurum Fulminans gr. x. mix them. Dose a ss. ad j. or ss. in
Lilly-convally-water, etc. Quercetan.

XLVI. Coleothar Vitrioli; Caput Mortuum of Vitriol.
Bate.] It is nothing else but Vitriol calcined to redness; or the Caput
Mortuum left in the bottom of the Retort after the distillation of the Oil of
Vitriol. Vide Chalcanthum Rubefactum.

Salmon.] 1. You may see the thing more at large in Sect. XLII. aforegoing of
this Chapter, with the Virtues and Uses thereof.

2. Besides what we have there signified, this take notice of, That a Salt may
be extracted out of it, which is indeed a famous Styptick, and stops Bleeding
above any other thing in the World; of which we fully and plainly speak in its
proper place.

XLVII. Corpus sine Anima; A Body without a Soul.
Bate.] Roots of Florentine-Orrice iss. Musk gr. iij. Sugar vj. mix, and make a
powder. It is of use to dissolve Tartar in the Lungs, help Coughs, Asthma's,
etc. and takes away the stinking of the Mouth or Breath.

Salmon.] 1. The name of this Recipe is not stranger to me than the reason for
which it was given: But that it will do something, is certain: If you add to it
ss. of Tartar Vitriolate* it will more completely cut tartarous Humors in the
Lungs, or elsewhere, and remove Obstructions which cause Asthma's, Shortness of
Breath, etc.

2. The Acid of the Tartar will also in some measure open the Body of the Musk,
and makes its redolency so much the greater, by which means it will be much
more effectual in curing stinking Breaths.

3. It may be taken either alone, or dissolved in Ale, Wine, Water, or other
proper pectoral Vehicle: Dose (the Tartar Vitriolate being added to it) a j. ad
ij. or iij, first in the morning fasting, and last at night going to Bed.

XLVIII. Corvus Epilepticus; The Antepileptick Crow or Raven.
Bate.] The greater Crow, deplumate and eviscerate it, casting away its Feet
and Bill, put into its Belly the Heart, Liver, Lungs, Bladder of the Gall, with
Galangal and Aniseeds, A. iv. bake it in a new earthen Vessel well shut or
closed in an Oven with Household-Bread; after it is cooled, separate the flesh
from the sides, and repeat this Operation of baking the second or third time,
but taking great care that it may not be burnt, then reduce it into a fine
powder S. A. Dose j. every day to such as are afflicted with the
Falling Sickness. It is a famous Remedy.

Salmon.] 1. It may be doubtful, what Bird is here intended by our Author,
whether it be the Rook* common Crow* or Raven, the Flesh of all these being
reported by Authors to be good against the Falling Sickness: But if we may make
our Conjecture from the Epithet [Majorem] which is added, we positively
conclude, that the Corvus Leguminalis, or Rook, cannot be it, because it is the
least of all the Crowkind; the Doubr then lies between the common Crow and the
Raven.

2. Since the Crow and the Raven are each indifferently called in Latin Corvus,
(which is the Term our Author has used) the former being much the lesser, the
latter much the greater; and since the Crow has a peculiar Name, proper to its
singular kind, and cannot be applied to the Raven, viz. Cornix, which he has
avoided, and used only the common Name Corvus, (the common Appellation of both
kinds, but proper also to the Raven) and since to the common Appellative Corvum
he added Majorem, we may reasonably conclude, That he intended nothing more nor
less than our common Raven.

3. That this Recipe is an excellent good thing against the Falling Sickness,
we doubt not, nor are we willing to question the Authority which has confirmed
it, since we know 2 or 3 Experiments which have sealed to the truth thereof.

4. But that there may be a more excellent Composition than this, we doubt not,
and are confident that it may be improved to a greater advantage: The
Composition in our Seplasium, lib. 6. cap. 21. sect. 11. seems to excel it,
which is this: Of Ravens flesh in powder (as the former Prescript advises) iij.
Viper-pouder j. Native Cinnabar j. mix, and make a subtle powder for two
Doses, to be given at night going to Bed.

5. If such be the Virtues of the gross Flesh, what would it be if it was
Spagyrically prepared? Since it is the Volatile Salt, Oily parts, and Spirit
which performs these things if they were freed and set at liberty from their
more gross and terrene parts, which are the Chains which hold the active power
of the Concrete in Bondage, what might not this so excellent a Medicine
perform? Since therefore it is the volatile part which performs these things,
we will here show you how to separate them.

6. A whole Raven gently dried, chop all into bits (Head, Bill, Feathers,
Claws, Bones, and Intrails) and put them into an earthen Retort, or a glass
well coated, which fix in a Reverberatory Furnace, with a large Receiver,
luting well the Juncture; distill first with a very gentle fire to warm the
Retort, and bring forth the Phlegm drop by drop; when all that is come over
augment the fire a little, and the acid Spirits will come, filling the
Recipient with white Clouds; increase the fire now to the third degree, so will
you have a blackish fetid Oil, with a volatile Salt sticking partly to the neck
of the Retort, and partly to the sides of the Receiver; increase the fire to
the highest degree, and continue it till no more will come forth.

7. Shake all together in the Receiver, to loosen the volatile Salt, and put
all (Phlegm, Spirit, Oil, and Salt) into a Mattress or Bolt-head with its
Alembick and a small Receiver, luting the Joints with a Bladder met in the
Glair of Eggs; distill in sand in a gentle heat, so will the volatile salt
ascend pure and white to the top of the Vessel, which separate, and keep in a
Glass close stopped for use.

8. The matter remaining in the Mattress filter through brown Paper, so will the
phlegm and spirit pass, leaving the fetid Oil at bottom: The spirit you may
rectify by a glass Alembick in B. M. drawing off the one half thereof; which
is the volatile acid Spirit repleat with volatile Salt, casting the other half
away.

9. The fetid Oil you may mix with Colcothar or Bone-ashes, and put it into a
Glass Retort coated, and by a distillation in Sand you may rectify it, and
make it very pure, freeing it from its thick blackness.

10. This Salt is one of the best Medicines against Epilepsies, Apoplexies,
Palsies, Lethargies, and other Diseases of the Head, Brain, and Nerves, as also
against Diseases of the Womb, as Vapors, Hysteric Fits, Fainting, Swooning,
etc. Dose a gr. viij. ad xvj. vel xx. in any proper Vehicle.

11. The Spirit may begin a gut. 10, ad 30, in Water of Lilly-Convally, or the
like. And the Oil is to be smelt to and may also be given inwardly against Fits
of the Mother, and most Diseases of the Brain and Head, a gut ij. ad iv. being
first dropped into Sugar, and then dissolved in the Vehicle you intend to give it
in.

12. Modus Vtendi. Conserve of Rosemary-flowers ij. Eleosaccharum Citri ss. ad
j. volatile Salt of Ravens gr. xvj. mix for a Dose, to be given last at night
going to Bed, and first in the morning rising.

XLIX. Crocus Jovis; Saffron of Tin, or Jovial Crocus.
Bate.] Make an Amalgama of Jupiter or Tin ss. and of Mercury iss. from which
(evaporating the Mercury) you will have left the Crocus of Jupiter. It is a
great Sudorifick. Dose a gr. iv. ad x. It prevails wonderfully against the
French Pox, Gout, Plague, Suffocation of the Womb, etc. Outwardly it is used
against inveterate Ulcers, Cancers, Fistula's, etc.

Salmon.] 1. You must first melt your Tin by it self, then add your Mercury,
stirring them about continually, till such time as they are thoroughly mixed
together: This done, you may abstract your Mercury by a Retort in Sand, for
otherwise by an open evaporation it would be all lost.

2. It is a Specific against Diseases of the Womb, particularly such as
proceed from Obstruction, Wind, Vapors, and the like.

3. You may use it thus. Conserve of Peony-flowers ij. Crocus of Jupiter gr.
viij. Filings of Horse-hoofs gr. vj. mix for a Dose, to be given at night going
to Bed. Or thus: Mithridate j. Crocus of Jupiter gr. x. or xij. Salt of
Hartshorn gr. vj. mix for a Dose, to be given as aforesaid.

L. Crocus Veneris; Saffron of Venus or Copper.
Bate.] It is made by reverberation of the Vitriol of Venus, S. A. It is
Diuretic* Anticolick, Uterine, and a Febrifuge. Dose gr. x.

Salmon.] 1. Lemery makes a Crocus of Copper after this manner: Copper calcin^d
S. S. S. with Sulphur, q. v. heat it red-hot in a Crucible, and cast it red-hot
into a Pot of Linseed Oil, containing so much as may overtop it four inches,
(covering the Pot immediately, for otherwise it would take fire) in which let
it lie till it is nearly cold: Take the Copper again, and heat it red-hot,
extinguishing it as aforesaid; which Work repeat nine several times, so will
you have a Copper well purified: Calcine it once again, to consume the Oil, and
make it into powder, so have you the Crocus of Venus.

2. The chief use of this Preparation of Lemery is external, being detersive,
and of good effects to eat away the proud Flesh of Wounds and Ulcers, and
remove the Callosity of Fistula's.

3. Le Febur makes it of Copper calcined S. S. S. with Sulphur, till at becomes
spongy, and brittle as Glass, and red when ground to powder, which powder he
reverberates for 24 hours, and repeats the Reverberation three times, by which
means he has a very red and open Crocus, and a fit Ingredient for Salves and
Plasters.

4. But the Crocus of the Vitriol of Venus he thus makes. Vitriol of Venus lb
j. put it into a Cucurbit, place it in a close Reverberatory, and fit to it a
large Recipient, which being exactly luted, give a gradual fire, and keep it 48
hours with Coals; then after this use very dry Wood, to give it the last degree
of flaming fire, for the space of 12 hours, so will you be sure to have
extracted the Phlegm, Volatile Spirit, Acid and Corrosive Spirit or Oil of the
Vitriol of Venus, and in the bottom of the Retort an astringent Crocus high and
subtle, called also Caput Mortuum of the Vitriol of Venus.

5. Some order the calcination of this Vitriol to be done in a Crucible, to
reduce it to a Crocus; but why should one lose the Cost and Pains, and the best
Substance and most full of Virtue, which must necessarily be, if the Work be
done in a Crucible? for all that is found in the Recipient after distillation,
will exhale in the open Air; and the Crocus made by distillation will not be
inferior, but rather superior, better and purer than that made in a Crucible.

6. And if all the Liquor be rectified in Ashes or Sand, and drawn off to
dryness, without any distinction or separation of Substances, it will be a
specifical Spirit, good against cephalic and uterine Diseases, being mixed in
Julaps or Apozems to a pleasant acidity, or used in the ordinary Drink of the
Patient.

7. But as to the Crocus, it is an infallible Remedy to stop bleeding in any
part, outward or inward, and to dry and cicatrize Wounds and Ulcers.

8. It is also a Specific internally applied in Opiates, and externally by
Injection, for the cure of Gonorrhoea's and heat of Urine, and an excellent
Remedy against immoderate looseness of the Belly, Dysenteries, Lienteries, and
spitting or pissing of Blood, if it be exhibited a gr. vj. ad xv. vel xx. in
Conserve of Roses, the Patient being purged beforehand with a Tincture of
Rheubarb, or of Rheubarb and Sena made with Endive and Succory-water.

9. Marggrave makes it in all respects as Le Febur, putting the Vitriol into a
glass Retort, but distills in Sand with a fire of the third degree for 5 or 6
hours, or till no more will come forth: This Caput Mortuum he edulcorates by
several times washing it in fair warm Water, then dries it and keeps it for
use. Collect. Chym. cap. 497.

10. And if you abstract or evaporate this Water to dryness, you will have at
bottom a Salt of Venus, or of the Vitriol of Venus, which is the true Gilla
Theophrasti, which as some think, is not to be given but to strong Bodies.

11. Zwelfer Mantiss. Spagyr. par. 1. cap. 4. says, That the Caput Mortuum
left after the distillation of the Spirit of Venus, having an exsiccating and
astringing Virtue, profitable for the drying of Ulcers, which abound with a
flux of Humors.

12. Charras has a Sulphur of Venus for external uses, thus made: Filings or
thin Plates of Copper, and calcine per se, in a Furnace of Reverberation to
redness. Or thus: Thin plates of Copper, which lay in an earthen Vessel or
Crucible S. S. S. with decripitated Salt in fine powder, which reverberate to
redness, then quench them in Water, and cleanse them well with Iron Brushes;
repeat the calcination S. S. S. with decripitated Salt three times, so will you
have a very red Crocus Veneris, which wash well and reduce into fine powder for
external uses.

13. Or thus: Dissolve Copper in A. F. or Spirit of Nitre, abstract the Spirit
by distillation, so will the Crocus be at bottom in a red powder, which wash,
dry, and keep for use. Or else precipitate the Dissolution, by putting in a
thin plate of Iron, and pouring hot Water upon it, the Dissolvent lets fall a
red powder, which, says Charras, is to be kept as a true Crocus Veneris. But it
is chiefly for external uses, as that of Le Febur at 3. before, being not so fit
to take inwardly.

14. Hartman in his Notes upon Beguinus, set the Prescript of Calcining with
Salt, to Charras; but he says, it ought to be by degrees, and gently calcined,
and then at last the Calx being freed from the saline Particles by boiling
Water, the Crocus Veneris will remain at bottom of a most red color, like
Blood.

15. Schroder Cements Plates of Venus S. S. S. with common Salt and Tartar,
which says Hofman, for its mighty power of consolidating, is commended to dry
up and heal old Sores and Ulcers; but it succeeds not, being calcined with
Tartar alone: the Tartar must be joined in equal proportion with either Salt or
Sulphur, and then laid S. S. S. in order for the Cementation, etc.

LI. Diacreta; Powder of Chalk Compound.
Bate.] White Chalk four times washed in Violet-water j. Liquorice,
Quinceseeds, Crab's-eyes, A. ss. Nutmegs, stone of a Carps-head, A. ij. Pearl,
Red Coral, A. ss. Saffron, Mace a little torrified, A. ss. mix, and make a
subtle powder. It prevails wonderfully in Pains of the Stomach. quenches
Thirst, and removes the Cause of the Evil. Dose j.

Salmon.] 1. The Chalk ought to be levigated, so also the Crab's-eyes, the Stone
of a Carps-head, the Pearl and Coral, and that by the help of Violet or
Damask-Rose-water.

2. The Liquorice ought to be in a very subtle and fine Powder, so also the
Saffron, Mace, and Nutmegs; but how the Quince-seeds will be reduced as they
should be, I know not.

3. If you have not pure Chalk, you may in place thereof take Terra Sigillata,
of the white kind, which will do full as well, if not better.

4. This Remedy prepared with the Terra Sigillata, I have given many times in
Pains of the Stomach, (so vehement, as to be beyond almost all manner of
expression) but never without Success, for those Pains being commonly caused
from the biting of the Acid Humor, this Powder being an Alcali, absorbs the
Acid, and so delivers the Sick. Dose a ss. ad ij.

LII. Diatartarum; Powder of Tartar Compound.
Bate.] Rosin of Scammony, Tartar Vitriolate, A. j. Turbeth, Hermodacts, A. ss.
Oils of Cinnamon and Cloves, A. gr. xij. mix, and make a powder. Dose a j. ad
iv.

Salmon.] 1. How the Rosin of Scammony is made, you may see in our Pharmac.
Londinensis, lib. 1. cap. 8. sect. 68. as also in our Doron Medicum, lib. 2.
cap. 9. sect. 2. where you may have its Virtues, Uses, and Dose.

2. The Tartar Vitriolate is thus made: Pure white Salt of Tartar melted per
deliquium q. v. put it into a large and high glass Cucurbit, where there may be
room enough for the Ebulition, and affuse thereon the Spirit or Oil of Vitriol,
which do gradatim stirring the mixture from time to time, the better to unite
them well; continue to pour in the Spirit or Oil, so long as there is any
Ebulition, and when that ceases give over, for that is a sure sign that the
fixed Salt and acid Spirit have sufficiently penetrated and satiated one
another, and are mixed in their due proportion; then place the Cucurbit in a
gentle sand-heat, and evaporate the superfluous humidity to a Pellicle, and set
it to crystalize, or otherwise evaporate to dryness, and the Tartar Vitriolate
will remain at bottom purely white.

3. Or thus: Pure, white, dry Salt of Tartar in powder, put it into the bottom
of the glass Cucurbit, and gently pour upon it as much good Spirit or Oil of
Vitriol as it can suck up, forbearing to pour any more when you see the
Ebulition ceases, so will you have Tartar vitriolated, very white and dry, and
without any superfluous moisture, and fit for your occasion.

4. The Turbith ought to be resinous, and the Hermodacts pure and white, which
are to be reduced into Powder by beating in an Iron Mortar, adding a few drops
of Oil of sweet Almonds, to keep them from sticking to the bottom of the
Mortar, etc.

5. It is a general Purge, and carries off all Humors by Stool chiefly, being
an excellent thing against the Scurvy, Dropsy, Gout, Jaundice, King's Evil,
Pox, and Obstructions of the Womb: It is to be taken in the morning fasting,
drinking after it warm Broth or Posset Drink, and avoiding the taking cold as
much as may; with Observations as in other Purges.

LIII. * Diatrachia; Powder of Wind-pipes Compound.
Bate.] The Wind-pipes of Sheep cleansed and dried in an Oven iv. Wind-pipes of
Capons in like manner prepared iij. Ivory rasped A. ij. Seahorse Tooth rasped
iss. mix and make a subtle powder, adding Sugar of Roses viij. mix them well.
Dose j. thrice a day, with Syrup of Comfrey; it prevails wonderfully against
incontinency of Urine.

Salmon.] 1. In my opinion, after the cleansing and gently drying of the
Windpipes, those and all the rest of the Ingredients will be best reduced into
Powder, by a Philosophical Calcination, by the Vapors of distilled Waters in
distillation, exactly in the same manner as you perform the Philosophical
Calcination of Hartshorn, which you may see in its place.

2. Considering the Intention of the Medicine, I think it convenient to add
white Henbane-seeds xij. because this simple thing alone has a strange and
admirable Virtue for performing Cures o^ that kind: And I have cu^^d three or
four several persons of a pissing of Bed, who had had it from their Infancy for
fourteen or fifteen years, and some of them for sixteen or seventeen years
together, without being able to obtain any Remedy before it was administered.

sect; 3. And with the same simple thing I have cured several of a Diabetes,
when supposed incurable, and given over, after using very much other means: For
these Reasons it is that I think it necessary that this Ingredient should be
added.

4. And with the white Henbane-seeds xij. I would have added Catechu, Jesuite's
Bark, A. iv. by which means the Remedy will become more absolute, and so
transcendently answer the intention, as that the Disease being once cured by
the use thereof, it will never be in danger of returning any more. Dose a ss.
ad iss. thrice a day, as directed.

LIVE. * Elleborus albus preparatus; White Hellebor prepared.
Bate.] It is done by affusing the Water impregnated with Spirit or Oil of
Vitriol, after the dissolution of Coral upon the Root reduced into powder,
digesting for 24 hours and drying it, and repeating the woik thrice. Dose a ss.
ad ss.

Salmon.] 1. It is the nature of Acids to destroy the emetick power of any
mixture whatsoever; and if they will do it in Antimonial Preparattons, as the
Correction of Mercurius Vitae, much more may it be supposed to be done in mere
Vegetable ^roductions.

2. And therefore as Vegetables are more porous, and apt for dissolution, than
Metals or Minerals, so a weaker Acid may be employed in the performance of that
Work; for if the strongest Acids (or Oils of Vitriol or Sulphur, etc.) were
made use of, they would totally enervate and destroy all the Faculties and
Operation of the Vegetable Mixed they should be applied to.

3. This Preparation is safe enough, and in many will work only downwards; but
in some weak Stomachs, and where the Tone of the Viscera is debilitated or
destroyed, it will (notwithstanding all this preparation) work upwards.

4. In this case the Dose ought to be a little larger, for this proportion will
only make sick, and scarcely induce Vomiting, whereby the Patient will truly be
made more sick and out of order (for want of its due Operation) than if a
larger Dose was given.

5. It is designed against Melancholy, and all the Efforts of a Manical
Disposition of the Mind: it removes Vapors, and helps Obstructions of the
Spleen and Hypochonders, restoring Reason and the Imagination to their right
Stations and Habitudes.

6. If you give it only as Cathartick, use it thus. Jallap, Scammony, Ana, gr.
vj. Of the prepared Hellebor a gr. x. ad xx. mix for a Dose.

7. Or thus* Make an Infusion of ss. of Sena in half a Pint of White Wind,
strain out, then add the Hellebor a ss. ad ss. for one Dose to be taken in the
morning fasting against Melancholy.

8. If you design it for a Vomit, you may give it either Per se, in any proper
Vehicle, a gr. 15. ad ij. Or thus compounded. White Hellebor prepared a ss. ad
ss. Tartar Emetick a gr. i. ad ij. mix for a Dose to be given in the morning
fasting with all the precautions of a Vomit.

LV. * Ens Veneris, The Ens or being of Venus.
Bate.] The Vitriol of Mars, well reverberated and washed, p. j. Sal-Armoniack,
p. ij. mix and sublime according to Art, with three Cohobations. It is an
Anodyn, and pacifier: of admirable use in the Rickets, and to kill Worms in
Children. It prevails against the Pleurisy, and Hysteric Fits. It also opens
Obstructions, etc. Dose, a gr. iiij. ad xij.

Salmon.] 1. This is rather Ens Martis, or Ens Vitrioli Martis than Ens Veneris
for as much as it is only Sal-Armoniack sublimed from the Reverberated Vitriol
of Mars, or the Caput Mortuum of the Vitriol after the Distillation of the Oil.

2. It may also be made by subliming the Sal-Armoniack from the Reverberated
Crocus Martis, and it will be no ways inferior to the former.

3. And from these Flowers edulcorated, you may extract a Tincture with S. V.
and then drawing off the S. V. you will have an Essence of Vitriol at Bottom:
This as Kesler says will precipitate Mercury.

4. It may also be done thus. Sal-Armoniack poudred, filings of Iron, Ana: mix
them well and sublime from Sand; so the faeces will be left at bottom, and the
Sal-Armoniack will ascend pure, impregnated with some of the Iron: mix these
Flowers with the Caput Mort* again well, and sublime as before, and the Flowers
will contain more of the Essence of the Steel, and this work repeat four times
at least.

5. By this means as the opening force of the Steel will be much sharpened by
the Sal-Armoniack, so the Sal-Arm. will more plentifully draw to it self the
Martial Essence, by which means the Medicament will be more successful in
Quartans, Hypochondriack Diseases, the Scurvy, and Hysteric Dispositions, and
perfectly remove the Crudities of the Stomach, being drank in Wormwood-Wine, or
other appropriate Liquor. Dose a gr. v. ad x.

6. But here is to be noted, that if the Sal-Arm. be sublimed from filings of
Steel or Iron, the sublimed Matter will be but little, or in small quantity;
but if you sublime with a Gad of Iron, the Salt will ascend of a yellowish red
color.

7. Or thus. Caput Mort. of Vitriol from which the Salt is drawn, mix it with
an equal quantity of Sal-Armon. And sublime it with a gradual Fire, till it
ascends or smoaks no more, Basil.

8. The Caput Mortuum of dried Vitriol, Sal-Armoniack in fine Powder, A. mix
them well in an Iron Mortar: put all into an Earthen Cucurbit, and sublime in
an open fire, so long as any thing will ascend, which will be done in a few
hours; the yellowish red Flowers gather carefully, and keep them without.
edulcoration for use.

9. These Flowers (says Marggrave) contain the Anodyn Sulphur of Venus; which
if edulcorated with fair Water, and reposed for some days will fall to the
bottom in a very red Powder, which Powder Helmont knew how to bring to the
sweetness of Sugar, and appropriated it to the prolongation of Life.

10. Or thus from the same Marggrave. The red edulcorated Earth of Vitriol,
Sal-Armoniack. A. lb ss. make each apart into fine Powder, which mix well, and
sublime a before: the Flowers separate from the head with fair water; evaporate
the water to dryness, with a very gentle fire, and in the bottom will remain
the flowers of a very red color, composed of the Sal-Armoniack and the Sulphur
of Vitriol.

11. This Sulphur (if you so please) you may separate from the Sal-Armoniack,
if you digest the flowers with Alcohal of Wine, which is afterward to be
decanted, and evaporated, so will the pure Sulphur of Vitriol remain at bottom.

12. It serves for many elaborate Arcanums of Chemists, and is called Ens
pri^^um Veneris (but then I presume it ought to be made of the Caput Mort. of
the Vitriol of Venus) but is a chief Ingredient of the Lapis Butleri apud
Helmontium, cujus descriptio in Helmontij libro Butl^r dicto, extat.

13 This Ens Veneris, or rather Vitriolum Martis, powerfully opens
Obstructions, and cures not only the Rickets (for which it is an approved
Remedy) Pleurisy, etc. but it is found to be a singular thing to cure
Consumptions in old or young, and to root out the King's Evil, though complicated
with other Diseases; and indeed to eradicate many other Chronick Diseases, not
to be prevailed upon with other Remedies.

LVI. Febrifugum Riverij, Riverius his Fever-frighter.
Bate.] Flowers of Antimony thrice thrice sublimed with Sal-Armoniack, and
edulcorated, Glass of Antimony precipitated ( in iiij. of A. F. made of Nitre
and Alum) Ana ss. Mercury precipitate in A. F. (made from Nitre, Vitriol, and
Alum) vj. Sol (dissolved in Aqua Regis) j. mix, and distill by a Retort gradatim
to dryness, with twelve Cohobations: to the Powder five times washed and dried,
add the Alcohol of the S. V. lb ij. distill by a new Retort, cohobating six
times: decant off at last the S. V. and put the Mass at bottom into a Crucible,
well luted in a fire of Rotation for three hours, then affuse there on the
before distilled S. V. which burn off, S. A. Dose gr. vj. ad xx. with an equal
quantity of Scammony sulphurated, etc.

Salmon.] 1. Rolfincius Chym. Lib. 5. Sect. 6. Cap. 12. gives us the Recipe and
it seems as if he was the first Man which brought it to light: however his
Process something differs from this of our Author, which you may take as
follows.

2. Leaf-gold ss. dissolve it in A. R. Glass of Antimony ss. dissolved in A. F.
Quicksilver iij. dissolved in A. F. mix these Sollutions together, and distill
by an Alembick, with twelve Cohobations: at last to the Powder left in the
bottom put S. V. which abstract from it six times, then calcine it upon a Tile,
or in a Crucible, in a Circulary fire; so have you one of the best Remedies for
an Ague yet known, chiefly for Tertians and Quartans.

3. And he gives it thus. Of this Powder six grains; Scammony 12 grains, mix
for a Dose to be given in the Morning the day before the Fit; or in the morning
the same day, if the fit falls out toward night.

4. But the Recipe of our Author is doubtless the best, and that which agrees
most with the Mind of the Riverius, if not the true thing it self: however it
is the same with that in the Arcana Riverij, published since his death, and
adjoined to his Works in Folio, as you may see, page 601.

5. But this is in the Arcana, which is not here in our Text, viz. That the
Glass of Antimony be pellucid and hyacinthine: that the Mercury be such as is
revived from Cinnabar: and that the Powder be washed with some Cordial water:
Lastly, That the Dose of it is a gr. vj. ad x. (in the Folio Impression) ad gr.
xx. (in the Impression of Twelves) mixed with Rosin of Scammony, or Scammony
sulphurated, a gr. xiij. ad gr. 25. according to strength.

6. Or thus. Of this Powder gr. vj. Scammony gr. ix. Gambogia, gr. v. Rosin of
Jalap gr. iij. mix for a Dose to be given in the morning fasting, or six hours
before the Fit.

LVII. Flores Antimonii; Flowers of Antimony.
Bate.] Sublime Antimony with a strong Fire, either perse, or mixed with Sand,
or calcined Tartar; the very white Flowers gather and keep them for use. They
sometimes provoke Vomiting. Dose gr. 2. ad 4. they are also sudorisick.

Salmon.] 1. We have explained the whole Process at large in our Pharmacopoeia
Londinensis, Lib. 3. cap. 8. Sect. 75. with several Observations thereon, so
that no more need be said of that Method in this place.

2. But since there are other methods and ways of doing it, and that that Book
may not be at some times in the Reader's Hand, we shall here deliver other
Processes from variety of Authors.

3. Powder of Crude Antimony, put it into an earthen Still, set it deep in
Sand, fit an Alembick with a Neck and Receiver to it, or add three or four
Necks one within another, make a gradual Fire, not too strong, nor too weak; If
you order the Fire aright you will have white, yellow, and red Flowers; and
Phlegm in the Receiver. Thus Schroder from Sennertus.

4. Now here is to be noted, That Beguinus uses Stibium or Glass of Antimony in
fine Powder instead of Crude Antimony, but in my Opinion the latter may do well
enough; and he sublimes by degrees of fire, ten or twelve hours, whereby he
raises the white Flowers; and twenty four hours to raise the yellow Flowers:
and thirty six hours by which he raises the red Flowers, the fire being all the
time continued and augmented.

5. This Sublimation says the Commentator on Beguinus may be commodiously done
in a short time, from an Earthen Cucurbit with a gentle fire from Crude
Antimony in Powder, observing Schroder's Directions, which are,

6. That the Cucurbit may may have a pipe in its side, by which you may cast in
the Powder of the Antimony, by degrees with a Spoon or other fit Instrument,
and so fired by degrees.

7. That the Cucurbit be set oblique in the Furnace, that the Tube may ascend
perpendicular.

8. That you may sublime in a wind Furnace, and mix with Antimony ij. Sand iij.
Others mix Powder of Charcole with the antimony, and draw forth the Sulphur, a
blew Matter remaining at bottom, in which is the Mercury of Antimony.

9. That a little hole be in the top of the Alembick, and this you must
observe, or you will do all in vain.

10. The Receiver should have a Hole or Canale into another Receiver, through
which the Acid phlegm may fall, for if there be not a hole for the Wind to go
forth, your labor will be in vain.

11. If you govern the fire rightly says Hofman, you will have three kinds of
Flowers, viz: white, yellow, and red, according to the diversity of the
Instruments.

12. These red Flowers of Antimony are not to be used in Physic, unless they
be first Corrected, as Glukradius rightly affirms; and the white Flowers, if
they be circulated with S. V. loose their emetick Property, and work only by
Stool, Beguinus.

13. Le Mort makes them thus. Take a tubulated Retort with a long and wide Neck
which being red-hot, cast into it by degrees in small Spoonfuls Antimony in
Powder; and with a Pair of Bellows blow so that the humid Matter may be forced
into the Receiver: when the fumes cease put in more Antimony, and this continue
so long, till you have a quantity sufficient.

14. Where note, That without the Bellows, the Flowers would rise, but more
slowly; and that being done in this manner, almost all the Antimony will ascend
in flowers, except a little only remaining at bottom. That the Fire be the more
strong. otherwise the Operation will be hindered, and the Flowers will scarcely
ascend. That you beware of the fumes, for they are commonly mortal.

15. The Action of these Flowers vary according to their color and fixity the
whitest and lightest work by Vomit and Stool, violently enough, and are given,
a gr. j. ad iv. The yellow Flowers says Le Mort do the same more gently, and
therefore he gives them, a gr. ij. ad vi.

16. But in this I fear he was mistaken, for if you will believe Thibaut, he
affirms, That the white contain nothing of the Venomous Sulphur of the
Antimony, but a good quantity of the Volatile Salt, and therefore are of its
color; provoking Sweat, and sometimes Vomiting, a gr. iij. ad vij. The yellow
contain a little of the said Sulphur, and are therefore somewhat tinged,
containing a part of the Body of the Regulus, and a little of the Volatile
Salt; these provoke vomiting with violence. The red Flowers abound much with
the said malignant Sulphur, and are therefore highly died; these cause Vomiting
with Convulsions, and many times the Death of the Patient, and therefore are no
ways to be given inwardly till corrected.

17. These red Flowers says Le Mort, sticking to the Neck are easily fixed into
a Sudorifick Powder with Spirit of Nitre, and then they may be given in some
proper Bolus, a gr. iv. ad x.

18. But if any of the kinds of Flowers be used uncorrected, it is much better
to use their Infusion in Wine, than their Substance because of their Violence.
One of the late Duke of Buckingham 's Servants was killed with a single Dose of
them, given by an Outlandish Physician: he was a young lusty Man, and as strong
and likely to live as any Man in London, but the fatal Dose being given he
never ceased Vomiting till he died, and the Vomiting was accompanied with
dreadful Convulsions. The Duke sent for me, but too late, I came so as to see
the miserable Object alive, but 'twas so wretched a sight as my Eyes never
beheld before, and in a few hours after he expired. As I remember he was the
Porter at the Gate at Wallingford House.

19. Rolfincius Chym. Lib. 5. Sect. 6. Cap. 2. Makes them thus. Choice
Hungarian Antimony lb j. powder it and put it into a Cucurbit with its Aludel,
or two or three Earthen-pots superimposed, the uppermost of which let it have a
small hole in its top, for so the Flowers will the more freely ascend, but
without it with some difficulty; increase the Fire to the second degree, and
gather the Flowers.

20. These says he purge vehemently by Vomit, and therefore are not to be
given alone without correction: they are rarely given, because much safer
Vomits, are commonly near at hand.

21. Lemery makes them thus, A good unglazed Earthen-pot, with a ho^^^ in its
side (about the ^^dd^^ ^f its height) and a stopple to it, set it in a Furnace
of an equal proportion, and fit to it three Pots more of the same Earth, all
open at the bottom, and fill a Glass-head to the uppermost Pot, without any
Receiver (for there is no Liquor to fall into it, so that a blind head might
do.) Lute the Junctures well, and let the Fire transpire only through some
little holes, and be but strong enough to warm the bottom of the lowermost Pot,
then give fire gradatim to heat this Pot, by little and little till it is red
hot; which done cast into it a small Spoonful of Antimony through the hole, and
stir the Matter at the bottom of the Pot with a crooked Iron Spatula, which
presently draw out, and stop the hole, so will the Flowers rise and stick in
the upper Pots: Continue a great Fire, that the Pot may still remain red hot,
and when you see nothing more sublime, cast in so much more Antimony doing as
before: this casting in repeat through the hole, so long till you have Flowers
enough: let the fire go out, and when cold unlute the Vessels, and you will find
the Flowers all about the three upper Pots and the Head, gather them together
with a Feather, and keep them in a Vial for use.

22. These Flowers says he are powerfully Emetick, and given in Quartan-Agues
and other intermitting Fevers, and in the Falling Sickness: Dose a gr. ij. ad
vj. in Lozenges or Broth.

23. In this Preparation we ought to have room enough; otherwise the Flowers of
Antimony being forced by the Fire, would be apt to break the Vessel for want of
room to move in; and this is the Reason why so many Pots are thus placed one
upon another.

24. Le Febure makes them wholly after the same Method, with three or four
Pots, but without a Glass-head, the uppermost having a hole of an Inch
diameter, which he as need requires stops with a piece of Clay, and at the end
of your Operation you will find the Antimony sublimed in gray, white, yellow,
and sometimes red Flowers, according to the management of the Fire.

25. These Flowers (says he) are not much in use, by reason of their violent
Operation, for they are properly the Sulphur of the Antimony; but they are fit
to prepare other Remedies after due correction. They may nevertheless be
administered a gr. ij. ad iv. in Conserve of Roses; or make an Infusion of them
in White Wind.

26. But to make these Flowers more gentle you must sublime thus. Powder of
Regulus of Antimony (which is already deprived of most part of its impure
Sulphur) powder of pure Sal-Armoniack A lb ss. mix and put them into a
Glass-body in Sand cover it with its Head, and a fit Receiver, lute the
Junctures, and give five till all is ascended; so will you have Flowers of a
yellow Color, which edulcorate by washing and keep for use.

27. These are much gentler than the former, and are given to lunatic or mad
People, such as are melancholy, or are afflicted with Quartan-Agues. Dose a gr.
ij. ad vj. in Conserve of Roses, or in an Infusion in Wine or Ale.

28. In this Operation, the Sal-Armoniack carries along with it, the purest
Sulphur and Mercury of the Antimony.

29. You may also put the simple Flowers iij. with pure Nitre iv. into a
crucible in the open Fire, and edulcorate them afterward, then digest them
with S.V. for fiveteen days, and deflagrating the Spirit, you will have a
diaphoretical Powder of excellent use for purifying the Blood, being given a
gr. vj. ad vij.

30. The Correction of Flowers of Antimony. Pure white and subtle Flowers j.
Salt of Tartar of Sennertus jss. mix and put them into a good Crucible, and
with a strong Fire melt them in a Wind-fornace, so will they turn to ared lump:
reduce it to a Powder in a hot Mortar, adding to it a dissolluble magistery of
Pearl and Coral, A. ijss. put all into a Matress and affuse thereon S. V.
aromatiz'd with Spices) so much as to overtop it four Inches: cover the Matress
with a blind Head, and digest in a Sand heat for three days, after which
abstract the S. V. in B. M. so will you have a well corrected and pleasant
Antimony, which keep in a Vial well stopped for use, for otherwise in the Air it
would melt.

31. Dose a gr. iv. ad xvj. in some proper Vehicle, against all inveterate
Diseases chiefly against the strongest and most stubborn Impressions of
Melancholy, intermitting Fevers or Agues, and all kinds of Obstructions: it
works variously, according to the Matter it meets with in the Stomach; for it
sometimes provokes Vomiting, but not always; it also purges by Stool and Urine,
but its chief Operation is by insensible transpiration, for by irradiation, and
emanation of its Virtue, it strengthens all the Natural digestions, and causes
the internal Archaeus to drive away or expel from the Center to the
Circumference all the obstructing Particles, and whatsoever is destructive or
hurtful to the Health, Life, and Welfare of the humane Frame.

32. Lemery has also red Flowers of Antimony, which are chiefly the more
Sulphurous parts of the Antimony rarefied by fire. Antimony in Powder lb j.
common Glass in powder lb iv. mix and put them into a coated Glass Retort, so
as it may be but half full, set in a Reverberatory Furnace, fit to it a large
Receiver, luting the Juncture, give fire at first but to warm the Retort, and
augment it gradatim, so will red Flowers come forth into the Receiver, continue
the fire till all is come forth, then gather the Flowers and keep them for use.

33. These are more emetick than any of the former, and are to be used with
much caution; but the safest way is first to correct them as is before taught.
The red color proceeds from the great quantity of Sulphur with which they are
so added.

34. In taking these Flowers of Antimony, or any other Antimonial Emetick, you
ought often to drink Broth or Posset Drink, both to facilitate the Vomiting,
and dull the activity of the Medicine: but because it sometimes happens that
Antimonial Pouders sticking on the Membranes or Tunicles of the Stomach, or
some of its folds, does cause a continual Vomiting, notwithstanding the
continual use of Broths, you must then add the Cream of Tartar, and dissolve it
in the Broth scalding hot, and which is so hot to be taken a quarter of a Pint
at a time, every quarter of an Hour; so the Acid of the Tartar joining with the
Sulphur of the Antimony, fixes them, and so stops the Vomiting, making the
remaining part of the Operation by Stool.

35. Lemery has also another Preparation of Flowers of Antimony, which you may
see at large at Sect. XXIV. 25. and 26. of this Chapter afore-going being
sublimed with Nitre; these Flowers will not be so emetick as others though
unwasht, because the Acid of the Nitre which arises with them, hinders their
activity.

36. And as you make Flowers from the Regulus with Sal-Armoniack, at 26. above,
so also may you make Flowers from the Glass of Antimony, and from Crocus
Metallorum and Regulus Martis having the same Virtues with those Flowers from
the Regulus aforesaid. These Flowers, says Rolfincius purge (...), sursum and
deorsum, upwards and downwards.

37. Charras makes his Flowers after Lemery's Method, whether simple or mixed,
with Nitre, or Sal-Armoniack; save that in subliming with Sal-Armoniack, he
takes double the quantity or weight of Salt to the quantity or weight of
Antimony, whether it be Crude Antimony, Vitrum, Crocus, or Regulus.

38. And he affirms, that the diversity which happens to Flowers of Antimony in
several or the same Preparations or Sublimations, as to their colors being
white, yellow, or red, in respect to their vomitive or purgative Qualities may
be used all alike, provided they be well washed or dulcified: And (says he)
sometimes a Grain of these Flowers is mixed among other Purgatives, or with
Mercurius dulcis upon certain occasions; for serving as a Spur to those
Remedies with which it is mixed, it assists their activity, working only
downwards.

39. Zwelfer's Method (which is that which Le Mort seems to imitate) is thus.
Get a Retort made almost like a Ball or Globe, having two Pipes more on each
side of the middle, place it in a proper Furnace (see the Figure) and kindle
under it a fire sufficient to melt the Antimony, which put in by one of the
Pipes, fitting a Receiver to the other Pipe, having a little hole in its hinder
part, and when the Vapors begin to appear in the Recipient, blow gently with a
small pair of Bellows into the opposite Pipe to the Recipient, so will the
Vapors forced there into, condense there, in Flowers, Mantis. Spagyr. Cap. 6,
and 8, page 817, 833.

40. Margrave prepares the Flowers thus. Crude Antimony in powder iij. put it
into a Glass Cucurbit with its head, on which affuse Spirit of Nitre
Bezoardick, or Aqua Regia for the dissolving of Antimony ix. or xij. or so much
till the Effervescence ceases: shake the Glass till they are well mingled,
cover it with its head till (which a great Effervescence and Ebulition) the
Antimony in the bottom of the Glass is reduced into a very white Substance:
then by affusion of a great quantity of Water precipitate the whole Mass, so
will the Water become milky, and a yellow powder (which is an inflamable
Sulphur of Antimony) precipitate to the bottom: decant immediately this white
water from the said Powder, and let it rest till the whiteness settles to the
bottom; decaut off the clear water; and so the white Matter left at bottom
affuse more fair Water, and edulcorate it by many washings: then filter through
brown Paper, and the white Coagulum left behind dry by a gentle fire, and make
into fine Powder, which keep for use.

41. These are called the white fixed Flowers of Antimony; and they purge by
Stool only, and that gently, and not by Vomit, from which Operation they are
called fixed. Dose gr. iij. or iv.

42. Lastly, Maet's prepares them thus. Flowers of Antimony fixed by a
continued flame into the highest redness; Sal-Armeniack Ana. mix and sublime
them together; so will a part of the Flowers ascend: to that remains in the
bottom add Sal-Armoniack Ana. and sublime as before, continue this Work till
the greatest part of the Flowers are sublimed with the Salt. gather the Flowers
together, and edulcorate them by much washing with fair water.

43. They have the Virtues of all the other, but are accounted safer, and may
be given a gr. j. ad iv. They also serve for the Preparation of the Essence of
Antimony.

LVIII. Flores Antimonii Diaphoretici; Sweating Flowers of Antimony.
Bate.] They are made of Antimony sprinkled with Oil of Sulphur, and calcined
in a close Crucible, S. A. They have the same Virtues with the former.

Salmon.] 1. You have the Process more at large in Sala his Anatomy of
Antimony, S. 3. but there is no difficulty in it, and therefore needs no great
Explication; save that you may perform the Operation with a Coal fire.

2. Some affuse thereon Spirit or Oil of Vitriol, which is again abstracted,
then edulcorated and calcined with a red-hot Heat.

3. These Flowers are less Emetick than the former, and sweat more, and may be
given a gr. j. ad vj. in Conserve of Roses, Mithridate, or other proper Vehicle.

LIX. Flores Benzoini, Flowers of Benjamin.
Bate] They are made of the Powder of the best Benjamin, being put into a Glass
Vessel, and covered with a double Paper Pyramid, subliming with a gentle fire
S. A. the Flowers adhering to the Paper (by often changing the Pyramid) are to
be swept off for use. See the London Dispensatory. They are admirable
Pulmonicks, Bechikiks and Antiastmaticks, stop Catarrhs, and provoke Sweat.
Dose a gr. v. ad xij.

Salmon.] 1. A small hole ought to be in the top of the Pyramid, for there by
the Flowers will the more easily ascend.

2. Every half hour, if the fire be strong enough the Flowers are to be removed
with a Feather, for which reason you ought to have two of the Pyramids at
least, that the second may be put on while the other is a clearing.

3. These Flowers which are only the lighter and purer resinous parts of the
Benjamin, or an Exaltation of the Volatile Salt of the Benjamin, white and
almost like Snow, are to be gathered and kept in a Glass close stopped.

4. The sign of the absolute Sublimation is when the Paper or Alembick shall
appear to be moistened with the Oily parts of the Benjamin, for then all the
Flowers are ascended, that are possible to ascend pure.

5. From lb j. of pure Benjamin you will not have above ij. of pure Flowers,
which are very profitable in Asthma's, and in all Distempers of the Breast and
Lungs; they also provoke Sweat, and may be given a ss. ad j.

6. From these Flowers a Tincture may thus be prepared. S. V. Twice distilled
from Carminatices j. Flowers of Benjamin ij. mix, digest with a very gentle
fire in a bolt head, till the Tincture is of a yellow color. It is much more
powerful than the simple Flowers, discusses Wind, cures inveterate Coughs,
difficulty of Breathing, and the Cholick. Dose a gut. vj. ad xx.

7. An Essence of Benjamin. Flowers of Benjamin ij. best Styrax Calamita j. Oil
of Rhodium, or Jessamy, or rather of Damask Roses gut. iv. Civet, gr. ij. Musk
gr. ij. mix the Civet and Storax with the Oil, which put into a Phial, putting
thereon, the Flowers of Benjamin; S. V. rectified ij. vel q. s. digest two
days, then decant the clear and keep it for use.

8. Where note, That if a little Salt of Tartar be mixed with it before
digestion, the Tincture will be the more easily extracted.

9. It is a most egregious perfume, by which Clothes, Gloves, Linen, etc. may
be made odoriferous in this manner. Damask Rose Water, or other
Odoriferous-water, as Orange Flower-water j. of this Tincture gut. 40. mix
them: and therewith moisten the things you would perfume, drying them in the
Shadow.

10. Le Febure makes the Flowers after the same manner, and says, that they
possess a Volatile sulphurous Salt, very subtle and penetrating; for as soon as
there is heat enough to drive it out from its Body, it invades the Nose, Eyes,
and Breast, by reason of its subtle and volatile Salt, in which lies all the
Power and Activity of the Benjamin.

11. Thibaut makes them thus. Benjamin in powder, q. v. put into a Crucible,
proportioned to the quantity of your Matter, so as it may be but half full, put
your Crucible into an Iron ring which has two Arms, one on each side, which
place upon a second row of Bricks of a Circulatory Furnace, so that your
Crucible may be suspended in the middle of the Furnace, and the fire may
immediately strike upon it fit to the top of your Furnace an Earthen Pyramid,
much like a Sugar Loaf, as broad in the bottom as the Furnace, with a small
hole in its top to give the Fire air, lute it to the Furnace, and make a
moderate fire, so will the Flowers arise in dry fumes and stick to the sides of
the Pyramid in form of white Snow, or Meal-dust: at half an hours end take off
the Capsula or Pyramid, and with a Feather gather all the Flowers, which
presently stop close up in a Glass bottle, and in the Crucible there will be
remaining nothing but black, oily Faeces.

12. Now the Reason why he applies the Capsula to the brim of the Furnace, and
not the brim of the Crucible is, lest the heat striking the outside thereof
should make the Flowers melt and resolve into their first Nature; but to this I
answer, That if the Heat striking on the outside thereof should endanger the
melting of the Flowers; much more, would it do it, when it has the liberty of
striking within, where the Flowers are.

13. These Flowers must be white, because it is their volatile Salt, which
predominates over them, and which consequently invests them with that color,
which is natural to all simple Flowers. but particularly to volatile Salts.

14. Lemery makes it thus. An Earthen pot or Crucible high and narrow, with a
little Border round it, put into it iv. of pure Benjamin grossly poudered, cover
the Pot with a Pyramid of Paper, and tie it round about under the Border; set
the Pot into hot Ashes, and when the Benjamin is heated, the Flowers will
ascend, take off* the Pyramid every two hours, and fix another in its place,
putting the Flowers up quickly into a Glass, which stop close: continue this
Sublimation, till the Flowers begin to appear Oily, and then cease: put what
remains into a little Glass Retort, fitted with a Receiver and distill off a
thick fragrant Oil, in a Sand heat, till nothing more comes forth, there
remaining in the Retort nothing but a spungy Earth.

15. Benjamin being a Substance full of Volatile parts easily sublimes over the
smallest Fire, the Flowers arising in little white needles; but if the Fire be
never so little too much, the Oil will ascend with them in some small quantity,
which will make them yellow and impure; you must therefore do the Operation in
hot Ashes or Sand, to have the Flowers fair. They have a pleasing Acidity, and
are allowed by Lemery to be given but a gr. ij. ad v. other Authors allow them
to be given to 20 grains.

16. Flos ( Dixit Rolfincius) aequivocum est vocabulum, and variis rebus
accomodatur: (...) flos salis in Nitrariis and salinis invenitur officinis,
aeris in aerariis, farinae in Molendinis, lactis, qui and Cremor, in pecuariis,
-- in Chymicis ergasteriis flores nominantur tenuiores and subtiliores parts
Corporis, a Crascioreper sublimationem separatae.

17. Rolfincius, Beguinus, Schroder, Le Mort, Charras, and almost the whole
herd of Authors, follow one and the same way of making these Flowers, which is
that of Lemery's at 14. aforegoing: but there is another way by Distillation,
wherein they are made in greater plenty, which according to Charras his Method
is this.

18. Choice Benjamin lb j. in powder, put it into a large Glass Retort, and
affuse thereon good S. V. lb iij. stir and incorporate them well together; lute
to it a Vessel of Rencounter; and keep the Retort twenty four hours with the
neck upright upon a gentle Sand heat, shaking the Substances often, to hasten
the dissolution of the Rosin in the Spirit; which done, place the Retort in a
Sand heat fitting to its beak a middle sized Receiver, and with a gentle fire
first distill off the S. V. after which the Flowers will ascend; but as soon as
they appear, change the Receiver, which let be dry, and lute it slightly, that
you may be able to draw out from time to time the Flowers, (which you must
immediately stop close up in a Glass) putting another Receiver in its place,
which now you may lute up very exactly, and continue the fire, so will a thick
Liquor distill from the Retort, which is the first Oil of Benjamin: if you
continue still the fire you will have an Acid Liquor, and after that a yellow,
clear and odoriferous Oil, and then lastly an Oil thick and greazy.

19. Le Febure makes the Flowers by distillation after the same manner, but he
advises, 1. To rectified S. V. lb iv. 2. To digest five whole days. 3. To
distill in a great large Retort having a long and broad Neck. 4. To put into the
Ingredients pure clean Sand lb j. Scales of Iron falling from the Anvil lb ss.
5. The Retort to be so large as not be above part full, 6. To lute the Juncture
with a wet Bladder, that it may the easier be removed in changing the Receiver.
7. That the fire be soft at first and increast but little, slowly and by
degrees. 8. That the S. V. and a new Receiver being put to for the Flowers, the
Juncture is not to be luted, because it must be often taken off to gather the
Flowers out of the mouth of the Retort lest they should wholly stop it, and so
break it. 9. That the first Flowers are the whitest and purest. 10. That when
the buttery Substance begins to come, you may then lute the Juncture again with
a wet Bladder, and increase the fire a little, that all the Acid and Mercurial
Liquor may follow the Butter: which done. 11. That then the Receiver is to be
charged again, to receive the true Oil of Benjamin, which will be of a fragrant
Odor, and yellow color, somewhat resembling a Hyacinth. 12. That when the
drops begin to appear red, you must immediately substitute a new Receiver,
which is to take the thick and dark Balsam, which in this Work is the last
action of the Fire.

20. Thus according to Le Febure there is, 1. a S. V. impregnated with a
portion of the volatile, sulphurous and spiritual Salt of the Benjamin. 2. The
Volatile Salt or Flowers in the neck of the Retort. 3. A Butter-like Oil, which
is the grossest part of the Salt and Sulphur. 4. A small quantity of Mercurial
acid Spirit. 5. The Odoriferous yellow or Hyacinth Oil, which will be but
little. 6. A thick blackish Balsam.

21. This S. V. alone and without mixture, or adding any more of the Gum to it
may serve for an Excellent Cosmetick, because it is already filled and
impregnated with the Volatile Salt of the Benjamin, in which the detersive,
mundifying and resolutive Virtue of the Benjamin does confist; and is more
powerful than the vulgar Tincture, because that is mixed with the unctuous Body
of the Benjamin which stops the Pores and dries the Skin. And with this Spirit,
a famous Tincture may be drawn from the Flowers of Benjamin (if pure and white,
and divested of their thick Oily parts) after the manner as is before declared
at 6.

22. The Flowers or Volatile Salt of Benjamin are Pulmonick, Antiastmatick,
Sudorifick, and a great Specific against the French Pox, if given a gr. vj. ad
xx. in a Glass of Infusion of Sassafras in Wine, or a Decoction of Sarsa,
China, and Guajacum bark; for it is a Searcher which immediately penetrates the
whole Body.

23. The Buttery Oil is Vulnerary, and contains a portion of the Flowers, which
you may thus separate. Of the whitest Butter of Benjamin j. dissolve it in
boiling water, and immediately filter the Liquor through Paper, so will the
Flowers be instantly coagulated under the hand: then draw back again the white
Water by inclination, and let it settle, and you shall have in the bottom, a
Magistery, of equal Virtue, with that made by precipitation of the Tincture:
let the Flowers dry, and the Magistery slowly and leisurely between double
Paper, and keep it for use.

24. The Mercurial Spirit, is an Antidote against Malignity and Venom, and
proper against the Poison of the Pox. Dose gut. 20. ad 30.

25. The Odoriferous Oil, besides its excellency for making Perfumes, is an
admirable Vulnerary, and has all the Virtues of the Salt, and may be given a
gut. iij. ad x. in any proper Vehicle. A Perfume may be thus made with it. Of
the Odoriferous Oil ss. pure Salt of Tartar j. Butter of Benjamin j. mix and
grind them well together in a Mortar, to which add this: Musk gr. x.
Ambergrease gr. vj. Civet gr. iij. Salt of Tartar ss. mix or grind them
together, and mix it with the former: Of this: Tincture may be made with
rectified S. V. for perfuming Clothes, Gloves, etc.

26. The thick blackiss Balsam, is also an excellent good Vulnerary, and has a
real Excellency for curing Punctures of the Nerves, old Sores, running Ulcers
and the like: and if it be applied to Gouts, Sciaticaes, Aches or Pains
proceeding from a cold Cause it cures them to admiration. It is also prevalent
against Palsies, Contractions of the Nerves, Cramps, Weaknesses, and other
Distempers of the Nerves; so that in these cases there are not many Remedies
more effectual: put into a hollow Tooth it eases the Pain thereof, and dropped
into the Ears (mixed with Oil of Ben) it helps Deafness, noise and pain in the
Ears, etc.

LX. Flores Bismuthi, Flowers of Bismuth, Marcasite, or Tin-Glass
Bate.] Marcasite calcined, Sal-Armoniack. Ana; mix and sublime S. A. It is
(...) celebrated Cosmetick to whiten the Skin, being mixed with a double
quantity of Pomatum: it is good against Cutaneous defections, as Tettars,
Ring-worms, Pustules, etc.

Salmon.] 1. In a word (says Le Mort) the Flowers of Bismuth, Znick, etc. are
made exactly in the same manner as Flowers of Antimony; but you have another
way of preparing the Flowers in our London Dispensatory, Lib. 3. Cap. 10. Sect.
11. according to Schroder's Method.

2. Bismuth is a sulphurous Marcasite found in the Tin Mines, being nothing but
the Excrement of a Metal Or an Earth impregnated with Metalick parts, Or an
imperfect Tin, mixed with a good quantity of Arsenick: There are several kinds
of it, but the principal one Bismuth and Zinck, of each of which, like
preparations are made.

3. Lemery makes them thus. Calcine Bismuth as you do Lead, then mixing it with
equal parts of Sal-Armoniack proceed to its Sublimation, as you do in that of
Tin following: So will you have Flowers which you may dissolve in Water, and
precipitate with Spirit of Sal-Armoniack, or Oil of Tartar per deliquium.

4. Le Febure makes them after this manner. Bismuth (as it comes from the Mine,
and before it has ever felt the fire) in fine Powder lb. j. New White Wind lb.
ij. mix and digest in a double Vessel the space of three days: after which,
decant the Wine and affuse lb ij. more in the place: and this Work repeat the
third and fourth time: The fourth part of the Wine digested affuse on the
Marcasite in a Cucurbit, which place in Sand, and cover it with an Alembick,
draw off the Menstruum with a moderate heat to dryness: cohabate it with
another fourth part, and distill off to dryness; and so proceed with the third
fourth part, and the last fourth part; distilling to dryness. When all the
Moisture is come over, increase the fire, and there will sublime into the head
silvered Flowers, which you may keep without any farther preparation in a Glass
close stopped; or being put into a Cellar upon a Glass Plate, they will dissolve
into an Oily Liquor.

5. The distilled Liquor being put into a large Cucurbit you may draw off the
S. V. from it, to be used in other universal Operations: The remaining part put
into a stone kind of Earthen Pan, and evaporate in Sand, till it comes to a
Pint: after which set it to Crystallize for three days: if it Crystallizes not,
evaporate it again, till it will; then cast in some little Straws or Sticks,
and in a cold place the Crystals will shoot and stick to them, which are the
Salt of the Marcasite: these Crystals dry slowly, and keep in a Glass also,
close stopped for use.

6. The Flowers are prefertable to the Magistery for outward uses on the Face
and Skin: the Liquor made per deliquium, takes away all Spots and Freckles from
it, whether used alone, or mixed in a Pomatum. And the Liquor and Salt are an
admirable Remedy against Fistula's old running Sores, and all kinds of
Cancerous and malignant Ulcers.

7. The Artist who shall be so prudent as to apply them to their proper uses,
shall find them to be such external Remedies, as are not inferior to any other
Topical Medicament whatsoever.

8. You may mix them with Injections or Vulnerary waters, with which you may
inject, wash, and foment Ulcers, especially such as participate of a Cancerous
and Corroding Nature; for this Mineral being endowed with a Volatile Sulphur,
and a Balsamic Salt cannot be sufficiently valued for softning Tumors, and
allaying Pains, and mortifying the Malignity, and mundifying and bringing to a
perfect Cure the most desperate, earing and malign Ulcers.

9. Charras makes the Flowers exactly after the same manner as Le Febure, save,
that he prescribes, but the weight of the Bismuth in Wine, to be affused
thereon each time; but then he advises the Repetition of the digestion five or
six times one after another: these Flowers (says he) are very proper to take
away blemishes (Defedations I suppose he means) out of the Face and Skin, and
to cure Fistula's, and malign and Cancerous Ulcers.

LXI. Flores Joviales, Flowers of Tin.
Bate. Jupiter p. j. Nitre p. ij. sublime according to Art, washing the Flowers
in warm water. They are of great use in Hysteric Fits, or suffocation of the
Womb, being both inwardly used and outwardly applied. Dose a gr. jj. ad vj.
being several times repeated.

Salmon.] 1. Lemery prepares them thus. Tin ij. Sal-Armoniack in powder iv. mix
and put them into a strong Earthen Cucurbit, able to endure the fire, so large
as it may not be above full; fit to it a blind head, luting the Juncture well,
place it on a Seat in a Furnace, with a naked fire, but covered so as that the
fire may only pass through the Registers, the top of the Furnace being stopped up
with Brick and Lute, etc. The Cucurbit must also be set part of its height deep
in the Furnace, to which give a fire, gentle at first, which increase by
degrees, till the bottom is become red-hot, which heat continue till nothing
more will sublime, which you will know by the growing cold of the head.

2. The Flowers sticking to the top of the head are nothing but Particles of
Tin sublimed by the help of Sal-Armoniack; and at the bottom of the Cucurbit
you will find the rest of the Tin revived. These Flowers being dissolved in
Water q. s. and filtered, you may there from precipitate a very white pouper by
dropping into it drop by drop either Spirit of Sal-Armoniack* or Oleum Tartari
per deliquium; which being edulcorated by many times washing in warm Water, and
dried, is chiefly used as Paint, being a very curious White, and so mixed with
Pomatums

3. In this operation it is only the Acid Salt which is in the Sal-Arm. which
divides the Jovial Particles, and makes them ascend; and therefore it is that
any Alcalious Spirit or Oil makes them precipitate in water.

4. But Lemery has another kind of Flowers made with Nitre, from which this of
our Author seems to be taken, which more explicitly is thus. Tin lb j.
Sal-Nitre lb ij. mix them; then take an unglaz'd Earthen Pot, with a hole in
the midst of its height, and a stople to it, place it in a Furnace of a just
fitness, wherein the Pot may enter only as high as the hole, and with Bricks
and Lute or Mortar, take care that the fire may not transpire; On this Pot fit
three Aludels, with a head to the top-most, luting well the Junctures; then
make a fire, soft at first, and gradually increase it till the part of the
lower Pot lying within the Furnace is red hot; then through the hole cast in
your former Mixture, by Spoonfuls, and presently stop up the hole, so will
there be a Detonation, which when over; cast in another Spoonful, and thus
continue till all your Mixture is spent; which done, you will find in the
Recipient a little Spirit of Nitre, and in the sides of the Aludels very white
Flowers of Tin, which being gathered, you are to edulcorate with warm Water,
and dry in the shade between two Papers to be kept in a Vial close stopped for
use.

5. These Flowers (says he) serve for Paints, and make a delicate White when
mixed with Pomatums, or in some proper Liquor. And at bottom of the Pot, there
is a Calx of Tin mixed with the fixed part of the Nitre; which by boiling in
Water may be edulcorated, and then dried, and is of good use in Deficcative
Ointments.

6. The Flowers are washed in order to edulcorate them, and free them from the
Volatile Salt of the Nitre; and they are dried in the Shade, for that the Sun,
or Fire would dull their Luster and Whiteness, which is caused from the
fineness of the Particles, whereby having another kind of Superficies, they
make a new Reflection of Light.

7. Charras makes the Flowers by subliming with four times the Weight of
Sal-Armoniack, but with Vessels like those of Lemery 's at 4. above, increasing
the fire by degrees, till the Aludel be red-hot in all the lower part; then he
throws in at the hole ss. of the Powder, stopping it immediately, by which
means the Tin and Sal-Armoniack will rise together in Vapors which will
condense in Flowers within side the Pots: this done, cast in another like
quantity, stopping the hole in like manner, and thus continue, till all your
whole mixture is spent.

8. Now there is to be noted in this Operation with Sal-Armoniack, that the Tin
must first be made into a Powder by Calcination, otherwise you will have few or
no Flowers worth looking after.

9. That if you use only equal parts of Tin and Sal-Armoniack, the Tin would
remain almost all of it at the bottom of the Aludel, which is not to be wondered
at since it is impossible to make Metals ascend in Flowers without the
assistance of three or four times their weight of volatile Salts mixed with
them, or several consequent Cohobations of more Salts.

10. That through the whole time of the Operation, a good fire ought to be
kept, by which means the Sublimation will be the more easily absolved.

11. That among the many Preparations of Tin, the Sublimation thereof into
Flowers is esteemed to be one of the best, for though they cannot be made
without any mixture (which some may fault, though without cause) yet by reason
of the easy separation of those Salts by Lotion, the Medicament is found to be
really praiseworthy.

12. The Flowers being gathered from Pots, put into a great Earthen Pot full of
fair warm Water, let it stand quiet for twenty four Hours, then decant the
clear Water, and the Flowers, or rather Calx of Tin, will be found at bottom in
the form of a Magistery, which being sufficiently edulcorated by many Lotions,
are to be dried in the Shade as before directed.

13. But because of the length of time and trouble which is found in the
Calcination of Tin by the ways which Authors have set down, they have sought
for a more easy and advantageous Method, which is the subliming it with Nitre
in the way aforesaid at 4. which Charras does with a trebble proportion of
Nitre, whereas Lemery makes use but of a double.

14. Now whereas it is evident that Tin contains a Sulphur, for that being mixed
with Nitre, and put into a red-hot Pot it will flame, which Nitre of it self
will never do alone, without mixture of some sulphurous Matter: so you must
take care, if you would rightly make your Detonations, to proportion the Nitre
to the Sulphur.

15. For if there be too little of the Nitre, it will have too few Volatile
parts, to unite with the Sulphur, and so not be able to raise it all up; And if
there be too much of the Nitre, whereby its Volatile parts exceed those of the
Sulphur, it will cause but a Sublimation in part, because the great quantity of
the fixed part of this Salt, which remains at the bottom without firing, will
fix some part of the Sulphur, and cause but a very small Detonation.

16. From whence it is concluded, that a double proportion of Nitre will raise
more Flowers from Tin than a treble^ because the Detonation of the double
proportion is greater than that of the trebble, since experience ^hews that a
more perfect detonation raises more Flowers than that which is less perfect.

17. For the fixed Nitre remaining at the bottom sixes some part of the Sulphur
of the Tin, and hinders it from subliming as it should do.

18. And note, That three Aludels and one head are used, because of the great
quantities of Vapors and force of the Detonation, which ought to have room
enough, for otherwise the Vess^ls would break, notwithstanding the casting in
the Matter by little and little.

19. Charras advises that if you use the Flowers inwardly, you should (after
edulcoration with Water, and drying) pour upon them rectified S. V. to overtop
them two Inches, and then set it on fire, reiterating the Operation three or
four times: But what great need there is of this Work I see not, and therefore
leave every Artist to his own Prudence and Ingenuity.

20. You may also make these Flowers according to Zwelfer's Method ( Mantis.
Spagyr. Cap. 6. Page 817.) and use his Vessels, as you may see in the
Preparation of the Flowers of Antimony aforegoing.

LXII. Flores Sulphuris albi, white Flowers of Sulphur.
Bate. Lapis Prunellae calcined for two hours in a Crucible covered (which do
with live Coals laid above and below and round about it) iij. Sulphur vj. mix
and sublime in a Sand heat, S. A. They are equal in Virtues to L^c Sulphuris.
Dose j. ad j.

Salmon.] 1. Lemery makes these white Flowers with Sal-Polychrestum instead of
Lapis Prunellae after this manner. Sulphur in powder lb ij. Sal-Polychrestum lb
j. mix them together; put this mixture by half Pounds into a Glass body, which
place in a small open fire, and cover it with a Pot, or another Cucurbit of
unglazed Earth, so as the neck of the lower may enter into the neck of the
higher: change the upper Cucurbit every half hour, and fit another in its
place, adding likewise new Ingredients: gather your Flowers in the upper
Cucurbit, and continue this work, till all your mixture is added, and there
remains at bottom only a little infignificant spungy Earth.

2. The Salt remaining at bottom of the Cucurbit may be calcined, and if
afterward you purify it by Solution. exhaling and filtering, it will be as
good as before.

3. The whiteness of these Flowers proceeds from the attenuation of the
sulphurous Particles by the adjoined Salt.

4. And exactly as Lemery makes them, you have them in Monsieur Charras both
for Method and proportion of Ingredients; but he uses in his Preparation
Sal-Nitre.

5. But the true Author of the Prescript was Angelus Sala, as you may see in
his Opera Medico-Chymica, page 745. A. who makes it of fixed Nitre, or
Sal-Prunellae in the same proportion, whom our Author is pleased to follow.

6. They are a most famous Pectoral, drying up all Catarrhs and Rheums after a
most admirable manner: and yet withal open Obstructions of the Breast and
Lungs; are good against Coughs, Colds, Hoarsness, Asthma's, shortness of
Breath, difficulty of Breathing, and other Vices of those parts.

7. Motus Vtendi. Of these white Flowers ij. Bezoar mineral gr. xvj. Mithridate
iss. mix for a Dose to be given at Night going to Bed. Of these Flowers j.
Syrup of Comfrey j. mix for a Dose against a Catarrh. Of these Flowers j. Syrup
of Poppies ss. mix for a Dose against a Cough. Of these Flowers ij. Catechu ss.
Venice-treacle j. mix for a Dose against Fluxes of the Bowels.

LXIII. Flores Viridis aeris, Flowers of Verdigrise.
Bate.] Dissolve Verdigrise in Spirit of Vinegar, then filter and Crystallize
S. A. It is the greatest cleanser of Ulcers.

Salmon.] 1. It serves to make the Vnguentum Fuscum Wurtzii, the Composition,
Preparation, Virtues and Uses, of which you may see in our Doron Medicum, Lib.
3. Cap. 6. Sect. 13. which is a famous thing of the kind.

2. Le Mort takes the Verdigrise, and pouders it finely and adds so much Sp. of
Vinegar as may overtop it some Inches, after which he boils it gently, till the
Verdigrise is dissolved, then filters the Liquor, and puts into it little Oak
Twigs or Sticks, and sets it to Crystallize.

3. This he had from Swelfer in Append. ad Animadversiones, page 43 where
(though they are really Crystals of Verdigrise) he calls them Flores Aeris; and
out of the same he prepares his so wonderful and much magnified Spirit of Venus.

4. Lemery has it thus. Verdigrise q. v. put it into a large Mattress: Spirit of
Vinegar, so much as to overtop it four Inches: digest in a Sand heat three
days, stirring it now and then, till the Spirit becomes blew; then decant it,
and affuse new Spirit of Vinegar, which digest as before three days, and decant
again; thus affuse, digest and decant fresh Spirit till about of the Verdigrise
is dissolved, and nothing but an Earthy matter remains: mix these
Impregnations, filter, and in a Glass body evaporate of the moisture, then set
it four or five days in a cool Cellar to Crystallize: from which decant the
Liquor and gather them: evaporate again of this Liquor, and Crystallize again
as before, thus continuing till you have got all your Crystals, which dry and
keep for the Cleansing of Wounds, making the Spirit of Venus, and the Vnguentum
fuscum Wurtzii.

5. But Schroder makes Flowers after another manner by Sublimation thus. Calx
Vive lb ij. Sal-Armoniack lb j. mix and make a Lixivium: coagulate it into a
Salt, and mix with it three times as much Bole, and draw a Spirit from it like
A. F. which rectify: take of this Spirit p. iv. Verdigrise p. j. set them in
the Embers in a luted Vessel, so will the Matter dissolve: decant and pour on
more, till only light black Faeces remain; abstract the Menstruum, and force
the remainder in a naked Fire in a Still, so will the Verdigrise be elevated in
Flowers, which will dissolve in the Air into a green Liquor.

6. It is good against malign and ill-conditioned Ulcers; and if you free it
from the Spirit of Sal-Armoniack it will, as Clossaeus says, cure Wounds and
Ulcers safely without biting, being mixed with Balsams, Unguents, etc.

7. Le Febure follows the same Method with Lemery, and calls it the Volatile
Vitriol of Venus: but (says he) if you desire to be yet more accurate and
successful in you Operation, proceed in the Dissolution of these Crystals in
new Spirit of Vinegar, till you can discover by trying a Distillation in B. M.
or in Ashes, whether the ascending Vinegar be insipid; which if it be so, go on
in the Dissolution, Filteration, Evaporation and Crystallization, till the
Vinegar comes forth with the same Strength and Acidity, with which it was put
in; then have you attained the true point of the desired Perfection, which this
noble Flos is to be brought to, dry it gently between two Papers, which digest
in Alcohol of S. V. three Inches above it in a double digesting Vessel for
twenty four hours, abstract the S. V. and repeat this Operation thrice in B. M.
opening it no more till you make the Spirit of Venus thereof; so will it be
endowed with those Virtues and Perfections, which do shine, and are required in
the Spirit to be drawn from it.

LXIV. Flores Zinci, Flowers of Zinck, or Spelter, called also Tin-glass.
Bate.] They are made as are the Flowers of Bismuth. And they have the same
Virtues.

Salmon.] 1. Zinck is only a differing Marcasite from Bismuth, and therefore
its Flowers are made exactly after the same manner, which you may see at large
in Sect. LX. 3. of this Chapter aforegoing.

2. They are used as a Paint and Cosmetick (being of an exquisite whiteness)
and for that reason are put into Pomatums, Washes, etc.

3. They are proper against Cancerous Ulcers, Strumatick and Sirrhous, as also
against Lentils, Freckles, Pustles, and other Defedations of the Skin; and in a
word, have all the Virtues of the Flores Bismuthi, so that in like cases, each
may be indifferently used.

LXV. Gilla Theophrasti, the Vomiting Vitriol.
Bate.] It is nothing else, but white Vitriol depurated.

Salmon.] 1. Paracelsus de Rebus naturalibus, Lib. 1. Cap. 8. (where he treats
of the Virtues of Crude Vitriol and Colcothar, calls it Grillus non Gilla. This
word Gilla, Schroder interprets to be the Vomiting Salt of Vitriol. Gilla apud
Paracelsum est Vitriolum sua sponte resolutum in Aquam, Lexic. Chym. But the
Word is barbarous, and without any known Etymological Derivation from the
Learned Languages.

2. Beguinus make it of white Vitriol dissolved in common Water, then filters
and coagutes, which he repeats a second time, and a third time dissolves in
Rose Water.

3. Or, He evaporates to a Cuticula, then set it in a cold place to
Crystallize: dissolving, filtering and crystallizing to the third time, which
last time is also done in Rose Water, then drying the Crystals with a gentle
fire.

4. He gives it with happy Success in Fevers, Catarrhs, Crudity of the
Ventricle, fullness of the Stomach, Worms, Plague, etc. a j. ad ss. in a Draught
of Wine or Ale, or Conserve of Roses. But his Commentator says this Dose is too
large, and that it may scarcely be exhibited to ss. let it go so; but I have
oftentimes given it to j. in Broth with good success, never in my whole
practice having any evil Symptoms following it; yet I say for the Caution of
the said Commentor let it be used with Prudence and Discretion; possibly one
may find that by it, which another may not; nor are all Constitutions alike.

5. Beguinus also extracts it from the Caput Mortuum of Vitriol, after the
Sublimation of the Flowers of Sulphur: This he gives ad j. in Fennel-water; and
it moves Vomits, Stools, and Sweat: and sometimes also conciliates Sleep.

6. It may be universally exhitibited in all Vomits, but is carefully to be
avoided in an Asthma, and other Diseases of the Breast and Lungs.

7. Schroder dissolves white Vitriol in Water, filters, evaporates and
crystallizes, which he repeats the third time with Rose Water; this, says he,
is a gentle Vomit, good against all the aforenamed Diseases, as also the
Falling Sickness, and may given a j. ad j. in Wine, Broth, or other Liquors:
But Centory-water more effectually promotes its emetick Property, as Crollius
thinks.

8. This Preparation, says Hofman, deserves praise, for that it exerts its
Emetick property without any suspicion of a Colliquative Malignity. This
following Preparation also he commends. White Vitriol. q. v. dissolve by
boiling in fair Water. Take also prepared Nitre, and dissolve in Water: this
latter dissolution sprinkle in Guttatim upon the former, so will all the
Impurity fall to the bottom; then filter the Clear, evaporate the one half,
till it grows (as it were) milky, and in less than the space of an hour, it
will Crystallize.

9. There are four several sorts of Gilla's, 1. That which is made of
Sky-colour'd Vitriol, dissolved and precipitated with Oil of Tartar, which is
the strongest and sharpest Gilla, and scarcely safe unless given by a prudent
Hand. 2. That which is made of the Vitriol of Iron, according to Crollius,
which has a stiptick Sweetness; this is less Violent. 3. That which is made of
white Vitriol, which is this of our Author, and is yet more safe. 4. That which
is made out of the. Caput Mortuum of Vitriol after the abstraction of its
Spirit and Oil, which is called Salt of Vitriol; this is the most innocent
Gilla, and fit only for Children.

10. But to these you may add a fifth which is extracted out of the Caput
Mortuum of the Vitriol of Venus, which some will have to be the only true Gilla
Theophrasti.

11. Lemery makes it thus. White Vitriol q. v. dissolve it in phlegm of Vitriol,
filter and evaporate set it in a cool place for three days to Crystallize which
separate: evaporate again, and Crystallize again as before, thus continuing
till you have gotten all the Crystals, which dry in the Sun and keep for use.

12. By this Operation the Vitriol is freed from its Earthy parts; and white is
chosen, because it is milder in its operation. Dose, a gr. xij. ad j. in Broth,
or some other proper Liquor.

13. Here note, That sometimes after taking of this Vomit, the Stools will be
black like Ink; but this is when the Vitriolick Particles descending into the
Guts meets with some saline Matter which joins with it, much resembling its
Union with Galls.

14. Le Febure does it the same way, save that he does it with Rainwater, or
May-dew, and then digests a Philosophical Month, separating and digesting till
no more Impurity will precipitate, then filtrates, evaporates and crystallizes.

15. The first Crystallization (says he) does only take away the superficial
and outward foulness: but the second separates the very Central Impurities, and
is to be kept for extraordinary Preparations, which are Tinctures and Arcana's:
this is Vitriol purified from its Metallic Earth.

16. That prepared from the Blew (says he) is violent, and therefore to be
abstained from, and this of the white rather to be used, which may be given a
gr. x. ad iv. in some warm Broth, Ale, or Decoction, etc.

17. Charras also says, if you would perfect the Preparation, and separate it
from its Terrestial parts, we are obliged to have recourse to long Digestions,
by means whereof its Terrestrieties and Metallic parts will precipitate to the
bottom of the Liquor (as Le Febure has said before him) whereby the Crystals
will be much fairer, and more transparent.

LXVI. Jupiter Diaphoreticus, Diaphoretick or Sweating Tin.
Bate.] It is made of the Caput Mortuum of the Flowers of Jupiter, boiled in
Water, precipitated, and edulcorated, S. A. Dose, a gr. iij. ad x. It
powerfully moves Sweat, and is profitable in Hysteric Fits, Gout, Plague, or
Pestilence, French Pox, etc.

Salmon.] 1. Beguinus Tyroc. Chym. Lib. 2. Cap. 14. makes it thus. Filings of
English Block-Tin, or Calcined-Tin ij. Mercury sublimate iv. mix them together,
and distill by Retort in a Sand heat, having adjoined a Receiver half full of
Water; to take what shall begin to distill; give a moderate Fire of suppression,
till all the Liquor is come over, which will precipitate in the Water: that
which sublimes to the neck of the Retort is to be taken away, and digested with
that which was distilled, for one night: the water (impregnated with the Spirit
of Vitriol) separate, and dry the Calx. Dose, a gr. iv. ad vj.

2. Charras takes Filings or Calx of Tin, and double quantity of Corrosive
sublimate, mixes them and distills in a Glass Retort in a small Furnace of close
Reverberation and having slightly fitted a Receiver, he distills first with a
gentle fire, which he continues till the Butter-like Liquor ceases to distill:
then changes the Receiver, and increasing the Fire Gradatim, forces it at
length till all the Mercury in the Sublimate is revived and dropped into the
Recipient: then pouring fair Water upon the white and thick water in the first
Receiver, he precipitates the Substance of the Tin, and leaves it to settle
till it is exactly dulcified, which he dries in the Shade and keeps for use.

3. This is given for the same Distempers which the other Preparations of Tin
are given for. Dose, a gr. iij. ad vj.

4. This Diaphoretick is only a more perfect Calx of Tin made by the Corrosion
of the Corrosive Sublimate, and may be reduced into Tin again.

5. Schroder makes it with Filings or Calx of Tin p. j. mixed with Precipitate
p. iv. and distills by Retort in Sand or a naked Fire into a Receiver half full
of Water, in which a Powder precipitates, which he washes, drys and keeps for
use.

6. Where note, That if after the Butter of Tin is made, you make a Fire of
Suppression by degrees, you will have. Silver Flowers to sublime in the neck of
the Retort. Dose, of the Diaphoretick and of the Flowers, gr. iv. ad vj.

7. Le Febure does it after the same manner with Charras, but uses a tripple
quantity of Corrosive Sublimate distilling in a Retort with a large neck in
Sand; from whence he has, 1. A Spirit continually smoking. 2. A Butter or
Corrosive Oil. 3. A revived or running Mercury; this done, increasing the Fire
downwards, and giving a Fire of Suppression, the Substance of Jupiter, ascends
in the neck of the Retort in form of a gray Gum very hard: which being
immediately reduced to powder, and put on a Sheet of white Lattin edged about,
will melt into a yellow Oil, which may run into a glass Receiver, and being
precipitated is an excellent Diaphoretick.

LXVII. Magnes Praeparatus, Loadstone prepared.
Bate.] It is made of the Powder of the Magnet heat Red-fire-hot in a Crucible:
and affusing thereon an equal quantity of the Oil of Mars, it is with a gentle
fire evaporated to dryness, S. A. mixed with Wax, and so made into an
Emplaister, being applied, it admirably eases pains of the Gout.

Salmon.] 1. The Loadstone is found in diverse parts of England, Scotland,
Germany, Norway, Sweethland, Italy, and the Iron-Mines; and that is to be
chosen which is most of an Iron color, and draws Iron strongly to it.

2. In this Preparation Schroder advises the Cementation to be made with Lime
at a gentle Fire, and then after to quench it in the Oil of Mars, or Solution
of Iron, in order to the strengthening of it.

3. The Emplaister is described by Boethius, and is commended highly to ease the
pains of the Gout, as Hofman affirms.

4. This I know by experience, that it stops Fluxes of Blood, but evacuates
gross and melancholy Humors if rightly given in a proper Vehicle. Elect.
Lenitivum j. Magnet prepared j. mix for a Dose to evacuate melancholy Humors.
Or thus: Syrup of Sena j. Magnet Praep. j. mix for a Dose.

LXVIII. Mars Diaphoreticus, Sweating Mars.
Bate.] Sublime Sal-Armoniack with an equal quantity of Mars, S. A. dissolve
the Sublimate in a small quantity of Fountain Water, which filter, and
precipitate by affusing thereon Oil of Tartar per Deliq. or Spirit of
Sal-Armoniack then dry the Precipitate S. A. It moves Sweat, and is Diuretic,
of great use in Hypochond, Melancholy, Quartans, etc. Dose, ss. ad j.

Salmon.] 1. Schroder advises to take the Filings of Mars and sublime them with
the Sal-Armoniack, so will a part of the Mars or Iron be elevated therewith: if
this (says he) be washed from the Sal-Armoniack it will be like Gun-pouder or
Thundering-gold.

2. But if you sublime from Filings, the Filings will be coroded by the Salt,
and but little of them ascend; it will be better therefore to sublime with Gads
of Iron, so will all the Flowers ascend of a yellowish red color: but this
Medicament is better prepared from Crocus Martis than from either of them.

3. Lemery makes this Diaphoretick after this manner. Rust of Iron in fine
Powder, Sal-Armoniack Ana. mix them well and put them into an Earthen Cucurbit,
which set in a little Furnace, stoping up the bottom with Bricks and Mortar;
that the Fire may only pass through certain Registers: fit to the Cucurbit a
Vessel of Rencounter or Blind-head, making at first only a small fire; augment
it gradatim till the Cucurbit is red-hot, which degree of heat continue till no
more Vapors arise. The Vessels being cold gather the Flowers, put them into
water sufficient only to dissolve them, which filter through brown Paper; and
drop thereon Guttatim Oleum Tartari per Deliq. or Spirit of Sal-Armoniack, so
will a powder precipitate to the bottom of the Vessel, decant the Liquor, and
dry the Precipitate.

4. It is indeed an excellent Medicament against all manner of Diseases
proceeding from Corruption of Humors and Defilements of the Blood; it is
Sudorifick and Diuretic, carrying off Diseases sometimes as well by Urine as
Sweat, according as Nature is most disposed to the Action. It is famous against
Hypochondriack Melancholy, Obstructions of the Spleen and Mesentery, and
Quartan Agues. Dose, a gr. x. ad xxiv. in Pills, Bolus, or some proper Syrup,
as Syrup of Mars.

5. Its Sudorifick property seems to come from the Particles of the
Sal-Armonia^k, yet joined to the precipitated Mars (by reason of the Acid of
the Salt, which makes a strict Conjunction with them) for when these saline
Particles are actuated by the internal heat of the Body, and thereby brought
into a Ferment, they become of a Volatile Nature, and rather fly insensibly
into all the Pores of the Body, than take their course (as fixed Salts do) by
way of Urine; whence Sweating or insensible Transpiration follows.

6. But if they meet not with a fit Matter sufficient to excite this
Fermentation, and cause their Volatibility, they then open the Lymphatick
Vessels, and take their ordinary course by the Reins and Ureters, evacuating
the Disease that way, by which mostly a greater benefit is found than by Sweat,
because the way by Urine is more natural and easy, and debilitates less.

LXIX. Mars Fulminans, Thundering Mars.
Bate.] Nitre ivss. Salt of Tartar jss. Sulphur ij. mix and make a Powder, S.
A. It is diuretic, and provokes the Terms.

Salmon.] 1. What reason there is for the Name of this Medicament (there being
nothing of Mars in it) I know not: Its usual Appellations are Lapis Fulminans,
and Sal Fulminans, by which Names you may meet with it in Authors.

2. Lemery makes it of Nitre iij. Salt of Tartar, ij. Sulphur j. mix together.
This Powder being heated in an Iron-Ladle or Fire-shovel to the weight of j.
gives as thundering noise as a Canon it self. Now the fixed Salt of Tartar
causes the thundering noise in this Powder, which Gold causes in the Aurum
Fulminans, viz. it so chains and locks up the Spirits of the Nitre and Sulphur,
that they cannot break forth out of their Prison, not be separated without an
extraordinary violence.

3. But if you would have it Martial, and to answer the Name given to it, you
ought to add to it a proportional part of the Mars Fulminans at Sect. LXVII. 1.
just aforegoing. after this manner. Fu^minating Mars iv. Nitre iij. Salt of
Tartar ij. Sulphur j^^. mix and make a Powder, which keep in a Glass close
stopped from the Air.

4. Marggrave calls it Nitre Fulminans, and makes it in these proportions.
Nitre p. 18. Salt of Tartar, p. 7. Sulphur p. 6. make each into a fine Powder
and mix them.

5. Le Mort, who calls it Pulvis Tonitruans, makes it in these proportions.
Nitre 18. Sal-Tartari 12. Sulphur 6. mix them S. A. It is by many Trials that
you must find out the true Proportion of the Ingredients; for those quantities
which give in firing, the greatest blow or noise, are those which are truly
adapted to the Composition.

6. It is a singular Diuretic, opens Obstructions of the Viscera, but chiefly
of the Reins and Womb, and has a singular Property in taking away the heat and
sharpness of Urine. Dose, a j. ad j. in any proper Vehicle.

7. It is indeed a curious Experiment, for that it demonstrates the thundering
Property to reside in the Nitre, which consists of an Acid and Alcali, shut up
by the Sulphur.

LXX. Mercurij Purgatio, The Cleansing or Purification of Mercury.
Bate.] It is done diverse ways; either by straining it through Leather; Or
washing it with Vinegar and Salt mixed together; Or with Aqua Calcis Vivae, by
often stirring it; Or by strongly shaking of it with S. V. in a Glass close
stopped; Or by distilling it in Sand by Retort with a strong fire, and that
either by it self; Or with the addition of Salt of Tartar, Quicklime, etc. Or
by Amalgamating it with Sol, or Luna, and then separating it from the same
again by Retort.

Salmon.] 1. Some only wash it with the best Vinegar and Salt, and when it is
dry, then they strain it through Leather; but by this way it may carry Lead or
Bismuth, or some other Mineral wherewith possibly it may be mixed, and therefore
this mode of purifying is not sufficicient.

2. Others put the Mercury into a Glass or Iron Retort, and distill it into a
Receiver half full of Water, by which means if it has been increased by Lead,
Tin, Zinck, or Bismuth, those Metals will remain in the bottom of the Retort,
whilst the Mercury runs simple into the Receiver; but by this way if the
Mercury has been mixed with any Metal or Mineral which has a Volatile Arsenical
Poison, it imbibes it, and carries it along with it.

3. Some put it into a strong Lie made with Quicklime or Potashes, or both,
which they put into a double Glass bottle well stopped, and then shake them
together, to separate the Impurities, then decanting the Liquor, they dry the
and Quicksilver, and strain it through Shammoy Leather; but if it be mixed with
any Foreign matter, it will pass the Leather with it as aforesaid.

4. But a much better way is to mix it with Salt of Tartar Quicklime equally
mixed and poudered; then to put it into an Iron Retort, and distill into a
Receiver filled half full of Water, so will the Impurities remain behind, and
the fixed Alcali will fix the Volatile Poison of the mixed, by which means the
Quicksilver will be very pure.

5. And not inferior to this is the Amalgama of Gold and Silver, from which it
may again be purely separated by di^^illing from a Glass Retort in Sand with a
gradual Fire, leaving all its Foeces, Filth, Impurities and Heterogenities
behind it.

6 But the best way of purifying Mercury, and the fittest for all Chemical
Operations, is to revive Cinnabar into fluid Mercury, by which means you will
be sure to have pure Mercury as it comes from the first hand; because all the
Cinnabar is made near the Mines of Mercury.

7. Moreover, the mixing of Quicksilver with Sulphur by Sublimation is the way
by which Cinnabar is made, and it does in some sort graduate and perfect the
Mercury; and then the reviving of Mercury into fluid Quicksilver from the
Cinnabar by Filings of Iron, deliver it from all impurity: how therefore
Quicksilver revived from Cinnabar (being most sought for) is to be done we now
come to show.

8. But in the first place we shall show you the making of the Artificial
Cinnabar of Quicksilver and common Sulphur, and then from thence the reviving
of it again. Sulphur in powder lb ss. melt it in a large Earthen Pan (glazed
within sa^^ Charras) and put Quicksilver lb jss. into a piece of Shammoy
Leather which tie up hard, through which squeeze it upon the melted Sulphur:
stir the Matter in fusion with a wooden Sputula, and continue ^ressing forth
and stirring, ^ill all the Mercury is squeezed through the Leather, and so
^nited with the Sulphur, that ^he Quicksilver appearing no ^^ore, they both
seem reduced ^^to a black Mass: being cold, ^educe it into a Powder, and
^ublime it in an Aludel or Earthen Subliming pot, with (...) close Fire,
(luting well the ^unctures:) let the Fire be ^^ft at first, and gradually
in^rease it, which continue for some hours; so will the Mer^ury being
incorporated with that portion of Sulphur which (...) fit for it, sublime into
a very hard Mass of a very red ^olour, leaving some Feces at ^ottom, especially
if any Me^al or other Matter had been mixed with it before.

9. The reviving the Quicksilver from the Cinnabar, which is its ultimate
purification. Of this Ar^ificial Cinnabar in fine powder lb j. Filings of Iron
lb j. mix them well together, and put them into a Retort of Earth or Glass well
luted, and set it in a Furnace, and put Coals round about it till it be covered
(...) put lighted Coals above, so that the Fire may kindle by degrees; then
having filled the whole largeness of the Furnace with Coals, cover the Retort
and fit a small Receiver to its neck half full of water; leave the Coals to
kindle of themselves, and the Fire to act at his own pleasure. When the Retort
begins to be red, the Mercury will come into the Receiver drop by drop; for the
Acids of the Sulphur sticking to the Mars, (with the Pores whereof the Figure
of its parts does better agree, than with those of the Mercury) and quiting the
other, the Fire forces it out of the Retort, and makes it (falling into the
water) to resume its former body: by which means all extrinsecal Substances
mixed with the Cinnabar, will be stopped in the Retort with the Filings of Iron
(which Filings will be much rarefied. black and increased in weight, because of
the addition of the Sulphur, etc.) and the Quicksilver will be at bottom, very
pure and fit for any kind of operation.

10. But Lemery does it otherwise with Quicklime, after this manner. Powder of
Artificial Cinnabar lb j. Quicklime in powder lb iij. mix, and put them into
an Earthen or Glass Retort, so large as may be empty: put it into a Furnace of
Reverberation, with a Recipient almost filled with Water: give fire gradatim,
increasing it at length to the height, so will the Mercury run guttatim into
the Recipient: continue the fire till no more will come over, which will be
finished in about seven hours time: the Quicksilver at bottom (which will be
very pure) dry with Linen and keep for use.

11. This Mercury thus revived is very pure; for if any Metal was mixed with it
in the Mine; or if afterward the Cinnabar should be adulterated, the said
Metals, or Heterogene Substances would either remain at bottom, and not rise
with the Mercury, or be separated from it in the Receiver; and if your Cinnabar
was good* you would have out of each Pound of the Artifical 12 of flowing
Quicksilver.

12. A third part of the Retort is left empty, because the rarefied
Quicksilver expands it self with such a vehemence, that it would otherwise be
in danger of breaking the Retort.

13. Now as Cinnabar is nothing but a mixture of Acid Spirits and Mercury
together with some terren Particles of the Sulphur: so if you mix it with an
Alcalious body, and force it upwards by fire, the Acid leaves the Mercury, and
finding the Quicklime very porous, cleaves thereto; so that the Quicksilver
being disingaged from what held it in Chains before, and being forced by the
fire, comes forth of the Retort in form of Spirit, which by the coolness of the
water in the Receiver condenses and becomes again Quicksilver.

14. Having mixed your Cinnabar and Quicklime together, you ought to let it
rest one or two days before you begin your Distillation, that the Lime may
slake as it where a while for otherwise the Retort would burst.

15. But if you use such Quicklime, as has been already slakt in the Air, you
may then begin to distill immediately upon the mixtion: but the former which is
unslakt is said to be better in the Revivification, because the Alcali will the
more strongly absorb the Sulphurous Acid.

16. Upon the Distillation, a great Sulphurous fume is seen to come out of the
Retort, for which reason the Juncture is not to be luted, but the said
Sulphurous fume is to be permitted to fly away, for fear, that being kept in,
it should join with some part of the Mercury and so unite, whereby you might be
put to the trouble of a second Revivification.

LXXI. Mercurius Sublimatus ruber and Flavus, Mercury Sublimate red and yellow.
Bate.] Mercury, Salt, Vitriol, calcined, A. iv. mix them exactly and sublime:
to the Sublimate add Nitre and Alum a little calcined, A. iij. mix and make
them into a Paste with Vinegar, and sublime again: separate the Red from the
Yellow, wash each by it self with water, dry, and deflagrate from each S. V. S.
A. It purges chiefly downwards, and is a great Secret against the Dropsy,
French Pox, Gout, Scabs, Ulcers, Cancers, etc. Dose, gr. 5, 6, 7. etc.

Salmon.] 1. That is, take Corrosive Sublimate, and mix it with Nitre and Alum,
and sublime again* and you shall have red and yellow Sublimate: But how the
Corrosive Sublimate is to be made we shall here show you out of Otte Tachenius
his Hippocrat. Chymic. Cap. 24. and 25.

2. Red Precipitate made either perse, or otherwise of what Condition soever,
mix it with common Salt: urge this Compositum with a moderate fire, and it will
he elevated into a Sublimate Corrosive.

2. Of this Corrosive Sublimate lb 20. Quicksilver lb 280. common Salt,
Saltpeter, A. lb 200. of the Caput Mortuum reserved lb 50. Vitriol rubified lb
400. reduce all these several to ponder (the Quicksilver excepted) under a
Mill Stone, grinding them: then mix the Mercury and Sublimate together, with a
part of the common Salt and Saltpeter; and although the Salts be dry, yet by
this mixture they become moist, so the Mercury in being mixed with the said
Pouders dies; after add the other part of the Salts, proceeding to mix them
with t an Iron Instrument, till the Mercury appears no where quick. This
mixture is very moist, to which if you have a mind to add the rubified Vitriol
(which is very dry) it consumes the Humidity in a moment, and they become
altogether as hard as a Stone; wherefore instead of the aforesaid Vitriol, you
must add the Caput Mortuum either reserved from the first Sublimation, from A.
F. it is all one, so the, mixture becomes moderately dry, which then you must
pass through a Sieve: then you may conveniently mix the sifted Powder with the
rubified Vitriol, so will the mixture be made. With this fill sixteen great
Glass Vessels, a fourth part of each of them to be empty; place them on
Stillatories, and sublime in an Ash heat (not with a naked fire) in four little
Fornaces, each of which is to hold four Vessels: set Limbecks to the Vessels at
least loosely, with their Receivers; and with a slow Fire in twenty four hours,
the Salts will dissolve the Mercury (in which operation it smells like A. F.
and may hazard the strangling of such as suck, it in; after twenty fours the
Smell ceases) and then the Mercury begins to sublime: (the A F. which is
fortified by the other Ingredients, and serves for Precipitation of Mercury
save:) and continue the heat* till the Mercury is wholly separated from the
Caput Mortuum and sublimed to the top, in form of a Cake, which commonly
happens about the fifth day, if ^ou have operated rightly, When all is cooled,
the Glass Vessels (by reas^n of the great weight of the Sublimate) w^ll break
of their own accord: the pieces gather up by themselves, for they have some
Sublimate upon them, which scrape off, and therewith you may at another time
mortify running Mercury, in order to make more Corrosive Sublimate, according
to this present Process.

4. Now here is to be noted, That the Cakes must be curiously taken off with
both Hands (avoiding the Ashes) and laid aside, which they call Loaves; of
which every one will weigh lb 25. or thereabouts, according to the capacity of
the Vessel, which held more or less of the Mixture. So that of lb 280. of
Quicksilver, and lb 20. of Sublimate, you will have lb 380. of fresh
Sublimate: and this is the true way of making Corrosive Sublimate, which every
Artist knows not.

5. Now the Sublimate thus increased in weight lb 80. is not from the Acidity
of the rubified Vitriol, as many Chemists think; but only from the Common Salt,
which is thus proved: Sublime the same Mercury with the same proportion of
Nitre and rubified Vitriol, without common Salt; and the Mercury will ascend
Red, acquiring nothing of weight, or taking from the Corrosive.

6. So also if the same Mercury be precipitated with A. F. made of Sure and
Vitriol, it will be of a shining Red, but require no farther weight. The reason
is, that the Sulphur of the Nitre being joined with the Sulphur of the Vitriol,
do act jointly upon the external Sulphur of the Mercury, whereby it can
increase nothing at all, nor assume a Corrosive Virtue.

7. From what has been said it appears, that rubified Vitriol is not added to
increase the weight of the Mercury, as most Chemists think; for then it should
not be calcined to the highest red, but to whiteness only, so that its Spirit
is net needful to be added to the weight of the Mercury; but the said rubified
Vitriol is added that the Sulphurous Nitre, might apprehend the Sulphur of the
immature Metal lying hid in the rubified Vitriol, and so by their joint forces
dissolve the Mercury.

8. But the quantity is Quadruple to that of the Salts, because they are of
easy fusion in the Fire, from which by the rubified Vitriol, they are
preserved.

9 Authors to perfect the Sublimate, say that it must be twice or thrice
repeated with new Pouders of Salt and Vitriol: But why, and to what purpose is
this repeated Sublimation with new Pouders? Mercury being once saturated with
the Acid Spirits, what needs any reiteration of the Labor? for it absorbs and
imbibes as much as it can bear, and as much as it wants from its first
Sublimation; and though it be resublimed afterward an hundred times either by
it self, or with new Pouders, it will still remain the same sublimated
Mercury:so that that Repetition seems only to be Labor in vain.

10. And because the same sublimed Mercury puts not off, nor deposes the Acid
Spirits it has once absorbed, so as to need a resuming the same again from new
Ingredients, therefore it needs no Resublimation, nor if it should be
resublimed an hundred times with fresh Salt and Vitriol would it become ever
the purer or more efficaous.

11. Having thus shown you the true way of Making the Corrosive Sublimate, the
remaining part of the Process, for making the Sublimate red and yellow, is so
plain that it needs no Explication: It is thus. Corrosive Sublimate v. Nitre,
Alum a little calcind, A iij. mix and make a Paste with Vinegar, and sublime,
S. A. so will you have red and yellow Flowers which separate, etc. according to
the Prescript.

12. Schroder teaches two ways of making this Sublimate which you may see at
large in Our Pharmacopoeia, Land. Lib. 3. Cap. 7. S. 52, 53. The latter of
which he calls Metallic Laudanum; and may be given either of them a gr. iv. ad
viij. They purge all vicious Humors chiefly, downwards, and admirably ease
pains.

LXXII. Mercurius praecipitatus albus, white Precipitate.
Bate.] Dissolve Mercury: or Quicksilver in A. F. precipitate with Salt Water,
wash or sweeten and dry. Albus Subdulcis; sweet white Precipitate. Dissolve
Quicksilver in Spirit of Nitre, precipitate with S. V. dry, and often burn off
from it S. V. S A. The Dose is the same with Mercurius Dulcis: It is used in
the French Pox, Dropsy, Gout, Yellow Jaundice, etc.

Salmon.] 1. Precipitation is an Operation which belongs to all Magisteries;
but that Medicament which is signified by the simple name of Precipitate is
chiefly Mercury or Quicksilver dissolved in A. F. and separated again
according to the following Method.

2 Quicksilver revived from Cinnabar viij. A. F. xiij. mix and dissolve, then
precipitate with Oil of Tartar per Deliq. or with Salt-brine, i. e. water in
which common Salt is dissolved; decant the clear Liquor, and edulcerate the
Precipitate with many affusions of fair water, till it is freed from all its
Acrimony. Dose, a gr. vj. ad x. Rolfincius Chym. Lib. 5. Sect. 6. Cap. 1. It is
given in Pills or Bolus: outwardly it is used against Freckles, Spots, and
Defedations of the Face, and is called therefore Mercurius Cosmeticus.

3. This is the same way with that declared in our Pharm. Land. Lib. 3. Cap. 7.
Sect. 21. but the Proportions differ, for the College prescribes to
Quicksilver, P. ij. A. F. p. j. which is indeed too little of the A.F. by p.
ij. for if the Quicksilver be ij. the A. F. ought to be iij. for that with a
less quantity a complete and perfect Dissolution will not so well be made.

4. Zwelfer limits no Proportions but requires a sufficient quantity of the
A.F. to be taken. Lemery uses Spirit of Nitre instead of A. F. and to
Quicksilver viij. takes of Spirit of Nitre x. and precipitates with Salt Water
filterated, made of water lb iv. common Salt x. adding unto it Volatile Spirit
of Sal-Armoniack ss. and then washes the Precipitate seven times with
Fountain Water, drying it in the shade.

5. If you would have the Precipitate very white, the Q. S. ought to be
dissolved in a Vessel whose mouth is very large, that so the red Vapors of the
Sp. N. may vanish the more easily: and if the Dissolution is made without Fire,
it will yet be the whiter.

6. Nor need you religiously retain the exact quantity of Spirit of Nitre here
limited, you may either use a little more or less, according to the strength of
the Spirit, or its being deflegmated; if perfectly deflegmated, an equal
quantity may do.

7. In the Precipitation, you must not make the Water too Salt, because the
quantity of Salt would keep the Precipitate from falling. But it may seem
strange that an Acid Salt (such as Sea Salt) should be able to precipitate that
which the Acidity of Spirit of Nitre had dissolved.

8. To which is answered, that the Acids do all perform the same things, in
pricking and piercing; yet they all differ in the Figure and Sharpness of their
Points, as their Fermentation is more or less, so their Points are more subtle,
sharp and light; or more thick and dull, which not only the Taste but the Sight
also evinces: if you Crystallize various Acids, you will have as many kinds of
Crystals, each different in figure, as there were different Dissolutions.

9. And as the Crystals of Vinegar will be sharper than those of Spirit of
Nitre; so those of Spirit of Nitre will be sharper than those of Spirit of
Vitriol; and those made by Spirit of Vitriol sharper than those made by Spirit
of Alum; and those made by Spirit of Alum sharper than those made by Spirit of
Salt; each kind of Crystal retaining the figure of its Constituent parts.

10. This being known, it will not be difficult to explicate the Phenomenon;
for that Salt or its Spirit containing Points more gross than those of Spirit
of Nitre, and falling on this dissolution, they move, shake, and easily break
the Points of the Nitre, impregnated with the Quicksilver, making them let go
their hold, and so the Mercury falls down by its own weight.

11. But to facilitate this Precipitation he adds a little Volatile Spirit of
Sal-Armoniack. which contains a great Alcali, which by reason of its subtilty
and agility penetrates every recess of the Liquor, where possibly the Sea Salt
(by reason of the obtuseness of its points) cannot go.

12. This is evident by this demonstration. First precipitate with Salt Water,
the Liquor being clear decant it: into this decanted Liquor drop Volatile
Spirit of Sal-Armoniack, and you will find a considerable quantity of
Precipitate more to fall, which plainly shows, that the Salt Water had not
precipitated all: And if instead of the Spirit of Sal-Armoniack you use Oil of
Tartar per Deliquium, you will have more Precipitate, but of an Orange tawny
color.

13. The Precipitation may be made as well with the Spirit of Salt, as with the
Salt in Substance: but this Precipitation is not so easily made in Mercury, as
in Zinck or Bismuth, because the Pores of the former are smaller than those of
the latter, and therefore retain more strongly the Acids with which they are
joined: Also Mercury (being of a Volatile Nature) does more easily swim in the
dissolvent than Zinck, etc. the latter being bodies more sixth.

14. The Dose of white Precipitate is less than that ^f Mercurius dulcis,
because it contains a greater quantity of Acid Spirits; but if you ^ublime it
alone in a Mattress in a gradual Sand heat (as Charras speaks) you will have a
Sublimate as sweet as the other; for that the Fire having acted upon it,
de^^roys most of its Acid points, so that it may then be given in full as large
a Dose as the common Mercurius dulcis, in Vencral and other inveterate
Diseases! it is given in a Bolus a gr. 10. ad 20. or 30. or mixed with some
Conserve, or other purgative Remedy.

15. Charras makes his white Precipitate with Q. S. viij. A. F. (made of Nitre
and Alum without Vitriol) xij. which he mixes and dissolves: and then
precipitates with water 24. or 32. in which Bay Salt viij. has been dissolved
and fi^tred; putting upon the dissolved Mercury first fair water lb ij. and
then the Salt Water; by which means the Mercury coagulates into a very white
Substance, precipitating to the bottom: the Precipitate being settled, decant
the clear Liquor; and edulcorate the Precipitate by many washings with filtered
water, which dry and keep for use.

16. From this clear decanted Liquor you may with Volatile Spirit of
Sal-Armoniack produce more Precipitate as aforesaid, which remains insensibly
in the Particles of the Liquor; or you may have an Orange tawny, by doing it
with a fixed Alcali, as Oil of Tartar per Deliquium.

17. The reason of this Precipitation has in part been explicated at 8.9.10.
and 11. aforegoing; but to such as that may prove no satisfaction to, we say
that possibly the ^recipitation may be caused by other means; as, either from
the Sympathy of Acids one with another by which means another differing Acid
joining with the former, the former to lay fast hold of the latter, lets go its
hold of the Mercury, and so lets it fall down to the bottom.

18. Or else from the Antipathy of their Natures (for there are Acids which
will be destroyed one by another, as well as by Alcali's) the latter Acid
opposing the former, and weaking of it so much, as that it cannot be able to
suspend the Particles of the Matter dissolved, whereby mixing together they
make a kind of new body.

19. But it is certain that the quantity of water, not only weakens the A. F. or
Spirit of Nitre, but also gives the Salts the liberty of Motion and Action,
making them able to penetrate other Bodies: for though the Crystals of each
Salt are all of a different bigness and shape, yet they are either thicker or
slenderer, blunter or sharper according to the quantity of Water in which they
are dissolved and crystalliz'd; for being dissolved in a larger quantity of
Water the Crystals are much slenderer, finer, and sharper, than if dissolved in
a small quantity; for the quantity of Water making a more numerous division of
their Particles, it diminishes their quantity, and sharpens their Points,
whereby it renders them more sit to enter one in another, and to unite mutually
together.

20. This Precipitate (not being sublimed as at 14. above) ought to be given
only to Persons of a strong Constitution, a gr. iij. ad viij. or x. because
that notwithstanding all the Lotions; some Particles of the Salts will lie
still hidden in its Pores, which cause it to purge upwards and downwards.

21. But it is more frequently used externally for the Cure of Scurff, Tettars,
Ringworms, Herpes, Pustuls, Redness, and other Defedations of the Skin, being
mixed with Pomatums or Ointments to beautify the Face: it certainly whitens the
Face and Skin; but it ought to be used with caution, because Mercury is an
Enemy to the Native heat. Nerves, Bones, etc. and therefore may at long run
prove of ill consequence.

22. Now because of the ill Qualities which the A. F. or Spirit of Nitre gives
to the Mercury, you may prepare a white Precipitate thus. Sal-Armoniack in fine
powder viij. put it into a Glass Cucurbit, and affuse thereon River-water 32.
dissolve in a Sand heat, filter and dissolve therein, Corrosive Sublimate in
fine powder viij. without heat: this done, drop in Guttatim Ol. Tartari per
Deliquium iv. this uniting it self with the Acid part of the Salts which
ascended in Sublimation will force the Mercury out of its place, and cause it
to precipitate into a white Powder: but at the same time you must affuse on the
Precipitation a good quantity of fair Water filtred, both to weaken the
dissolvents and moisten the Salts: then the Precipitate being settled, decant
from it the clear Liquor, wash and edulcorate it, and dry it between two Papers
in the Shade, and keep it for use.

23. This Precipitate purges also like the former, both upwards and downwards:
but whereas the former is to be given ad gr. viij. or x. at most; this may be
given ad gr. xij. or xiv. because that the ill qualities of the Acid Salts of
the Sublimate being enervated by the action of the Sal-Armoniack and Tartar,
they cannot exert their force like those in A. F. or Spirit of Nitre in the
former.

24. Now here it is observable, that Oleum Salis Tartari makes an Orange tawny
Precipitate by A. F. but being cohobated upon the Dissolution of Sublimate in
Liquor of Sal-Armoniack it makes a perfectly white Precipitate: This
Precipitate ought to be given chiefly in Catharticks, as in Confectio Hamech,
etc. for the Cure of Veneral Diseases, King's Evil, Scurff, Leprosy, and all
other Deformities of the Skin, Gouts, Dropsies, and the like Distempers; but
outwardly in Pomatums as before directed.

25. Lastly, If you take of the Solution of Quicksilver q. v. and put it into
a Glass Mattress, affusing thereon 24. times its weight of fair water, all the
Liquor will become Milky; let it settle till it becomes clear, then filter it
and keep it for use: This Water may be given ab ss. ad j. in a Glass of
Decoction of Sarsa, Liquorice, or Broth: it Vomits gently, and provokes a
Salivation: and given in the Itch ad ss. it is said to cure it, Universals
being premised as due Purging, Vomiting, etc.

LXXIII. Mercurius Precipitatus correctus; Mercury precipitate corrected.
Bate.] Mercury purged by Salt and Vinegar ij. double A. F. viij. abstract the
A. F. in Sand, with Cohobation: the Precipitate being in powder, affuse thereon
Oil of Vitriol ij. digest and abstract the Oil: upon the Mercury affuse S. V.
digest three days and decant; affusing other S. V. which work, with fresh S. V.
repeat the third time, then dry it. Dose a gr. iij. ad x. It purges by Stool;
and is a most famous Remedy in the Cure of the French Pox.

Salmon.] 1. Schroder shows many ways of correcting Precipitate, as, First, By
boiling it in Spirit of Vinegar till it is dissolved; then precipitating with
S. V. or Oil of Tartar per Deliquium, washing, drying and keeping it for use.

2. Or thus, Precipitate white, red, yellow, edulcorate often with Rose Water;
then digest in a good quantity of Camphorated S. V. for twelve or fourteen
days, and abstract the S. V.

3. Or thus: Precipitate, wash it well in distilled Water, then let it be
gently reverberated and fixed with water of Eggs, often cohobated. To which add
as a fourth way, the Method prescribed by our Author.

4. By these ways the Emetick property of the Precipitate is much abated if not
taken away; but of them all, that of our Authors is thought to be the best:
that corrected with Camphorated S. V. is chiefly given in Fevers, and is good
against the Spotted Fever, Purples, Plague or Pestilence, and all sorts of
malign and contagious Diseases; in which cases it is given only, a gr. iij. ad
vj.

5. Precipitate (after the other ways of Correction, chiefly that of our
Author) may be given in a Inveterate Lues, as also in Quartan Agues,
King's Evil, Dropsies, Gouts, and other the most obdurate Diseases of the Humane
Body, proceeding from Obstructions: you may mix it either in Mithridate, or
Extractum Catholicum, Confectio Hamech, etc. a gr. iv. ad x.

6. Outwardly also it is applied to soften indurated Tumors as a Scirrhus,
Scrofula, etc. but chiefly in curing Veneral Tophs, Gums, and Nodes, Herps
miliaris, profound Scabs, Tettars, Ring-worms, etc. for Scabs, Herps, etc. Mix
it thus: Hogs-Lard, or Veal-Suet, washed with Rose Water ij. White Precipitate
jss. Saccharum Saturni j. mix and make an Ointment: in Tophs and indurated
Glandules, rub the part affected very well first with a hot Cloth, and then
apply the Ointment.

7. And then upon the Veneral Toph you may apply this Emplaister. Precipitate
not washed ij. Hogs-Lard washed in Rose Water iv. Beeswax j. Turpentine ss.
Olibanum in Powder and Mastick, A. ij. mix and make an Emplaister, to be
applied as aforesaid.

LXXIV. Mercurius praecipitatus fixus; Precipitate fixed.
Bate.] Purified Quicksilver iij. Sal Armoniack iss. Flowers of Sulphur ij.
mix and sublime; beat and mix the sublimate with the feces, and sublime again;
then augment the fire, that it may be red hot; what remains fixed in the bottom
is called a Panacea, or Alcohol. It moves all sorts of noxious Humors, and
expels them by Sweat. Dose ss. ad ss.

Salmon.] 1. The Prescript you have exactly in Schroder, Pharm. lib. 3. c. 15.
The Ingredients are so well to be mixed, till none of the Quicksilver appears
for otherwise the sublimation will be made but in part, and that is the reason
of a second sublimation, because it is impossible but some grains may escape
grinding at first.

2. The first Sublimate is therefore to be ground again with the Feces, and
then to be sublimed after the same manner as before; and at last the Fire is to
be increased, to make what will to ascend, so will that which ascends not be
fixed, and as Schroder says, is a great Secret.

3. In this Operation a part of the Mercury is only fixed, which part is fixed
by the Acid of the Sulphur in conjunction with the Acid part of the Sal
Armoniack, by help of a second sublimation, as Hofman thinks.

4. It expels preternatural Humidities, and malign Serosities in the Venereal
Disease, disposing running Ulcers to a healing; but says Hofman, it expels them
not without salivation, as Experience testifies. However, it is more gentle
than Turpethum Minerale, or any other salivating Precipitate.

LXXV. Mercurius Precipitatus Flavus; i. e. Turpethum Minerale; Yellow
Precipitate.
Bare.] The Dose is a gr. 5. ad 10. It has the same Virtues with Arcanum
Corallinum.

Salmon.] 1. How it is particularly to be done, you may see at large in our
Pharm. Land. lib. 3. cap. 7. sect. 43. as also another Prescript according to
the Colleges method, which you may see in the place cited.

2. But Lemery has a more exact way, which is this: Quicksilver revived from
Cinnabar iv. put it into a glass Retort, and affuse thereon rectified Oil of
Vitriol xvj. mix and dissolve, and distill off the humidity in sand, making the
fire so strong toward the end, that it may drive out some of the last spirits;
at bottom you will find a white mass; break the Retort, and take it, powder it
in a glass Mortar, (it will weigh about vss.) and affuse thereon warm Water, so
will it presently change into a yellow Precipitate or Powder, which edulcorate
by many repeated Ablutions, then dry it in the shade, and you will have iij.
then put it into a Glass, and keep it close stopped for use.

3. Le Mort uses the same Ingredients and Proportions, but he evaporates the
Humidity over a strong Fire, after dissolution, because that which is distilled
off is exceeding weak, the Mercury retaining the greatest part of the acid
Spirits, which are the matter that purge so vehemently, though many of them be
taken away by the Lotion.

4. He would have the Vessel to have a red-hot heat, but it ought to be short,
lest most of the Salts vanishing, the Mercury should become a gray powder.

5. And though Authors say, that the greater quantity which the Mercury drinks
up of the Oil, the greater will be its fixation; yet that is quantity
sufficient enough, which will dissolve and retain the Mercury; what is more
does but increase the labor and augment the price of the Medicament.

6. The Water which is decanted off in the edulcoration is not to be rejected,
because it contains dissolved in it some of the Mercury, through the mediation of
the Spirit adhering: This by some fixed Salt (as of Tartar) is precipitated of
an intense yellow, or an Orange-tawny color, nearly of the same nature with
the Turpethum Minerale, but more mild or gentle.

7. Beguinus uses Oil of Sulphur per Campanum, instead of Oil of Vitriol, but
his proportions and way of doing it are wholly the same with the former. And
this Turpethum Minerale, he says, is the best Precipitation which is prepared
from simple Mercury; and in this, I think, he is in the right.

8. That Oil of Sulphur is better for this Preparation than Oil of Vitriol, you
have the Suffrage of Crolliuc, who not only prescribes Oil of Sulphur, but
prefers it before all other corrosive Oils, and affirms, that it far more
powerfully precipitates and coagulates it than Oil of Vitriol, so that it will
endure a much stronger Fire. His method of making it is thus:

9. Quicksilver purified iv. rectified Oil of Sulphur per Campanum, q. s. mix
and dissolve, digesting two days in Sand, afterward by Retort; distill with a
gentle heat; the liquor which comes off cohobate and repeat it the third time;
the fourth time add a little more fresh Oil of Sulphur, in a new and well-luted
Retort; distill again, and about the end increase the Fire, that the Retort may
grow very hot, and so distill, that the Mercury may be precipitated or left at
bottom in a white mass: Break the Vessel with an Iron Ring, take out the
matter, grind it on a Marble very well, and with distilled Rainwater warm,
wash away the Acrimony in a Glass with a wide mouth; work it well for four
hours together, let it settle and decant: This washing so often repeat, till no
sharpness be perceived, and the Precipitate becomes a pure yellow powder; this
powder put into a Bolt-head, which tie over with a paper, and place it in a
pretty strong Sand-heat, to digest for eight days, in which time, if any of the
Mercury is not sufficiently dissolved and precipitated, it will spontaneously
sublime it self in the neck of the Glass, which afterward with a red hot Iron
Ring cut off; the mass at bottom take out, and burn off thrice from it Spirit
of Wine, then carefully put it up for use.

10. Now, a sign that the Preparation is well performed is, that if it be
strongly stirred with Gold, the Gold will not be made white at all thereby, (as
it is when it is touched with crude Mercury) the Precipitate is therefore
better, and may more securely be taken inwardly into the Body.

11. Nor is it needful that it be altogether fixed, for so it loses its purging
Virtue, nor will it operate then in Man's Body at all.

12. And though Oils of Vitriol or Sulphur be the strongest and most caustic
Acids of those Minerals, yet they are much weaker than Spirit of Nitre, and so
require a greater quantity of them, and a longer time to dissolve the Mercury
in, for the dissolution will hardly be dispatched in ten hours.

13. This Precipitate, as well as all others, may be revived into Quicksilver
again, by mixing with Lime, and distilling them, as in the Revivification of
Cinnabar, for the Alcali of the Lime destroys the Acids which disguise the
Quicksilver.

14. Mercury, says Crollius, is the Balsam of Nature, in which is an
incarnative virtue, whereby it wonderfully restores and purifies the
microcosmick body infected with the French Pox; for when the whole mass of
Blood is corrupted and tainted with the Seminaries of many Diseases, then these
Metallicks, rarefied like Fire, acquire such a penetrating force, that they
pass through the whole habit of the Body.

15. Schroder, Zwelfer, Marggrave, and Maets follow Crollius, in making it with
Oil of Sulphur; but Charras makes it with either Oil of Sulphur or Vitriol, and
distills as aforesaid, in which, he says, the first Water that comes away will
be almost insipid; but toward the end the acid Spirits will also come over in
part, the Mercury retaining a good part of the Spirits which dissolved it.

16. But whereas those who make it with Oil of Vitriol use only a double
quantity of it, if you use Oil of Sulphur instead thereof, you ought, says Le
Mort, to have a greater proportion: And Maets uses it in a triple, viz. to
Mercury j. Oil of Sulphur ij.

17. Haec massa si in crucibulo, igne aperto, fundatur, habebis substantiam
fixam, quam Poterius elaborat in substantiam auream, ex qua formari possunt
annuli, and ulterius in Mercurium fixum elaborari. Collect. Chym. cap. 258.
page 289.

18. The Virtues ascribed to this famous Medicine are many, we will deliver you
them from Crollius himself, though possibly the Author of this work has had as
large Experience thereof as any man living upon Earth. It is a Remedy (says he)
against Diseases from putrefaction of Humors, and in desperate Distempers there
is scarcely any thing that gives more speedy relief.

19. It expels all viscous Humors, helps Defluxions of the Brain, purifies the
Blood in the Veins, and the Marrow in the Bones; it is a Specific in the
Dropsy and Gout, given in a Cathartick Pill, and in the Pleurisy with a
Specific Vehicle, (given to Infants afflicted with Coughs and Shortness of
Breath, or fullness of the Praecordia, it is wonderfully profitable, the first
day being exhibited half a grain, the second and third days a grain, in some
pectoral Syrup.)

20. It is good against venereal Poisons and Scabs, all sorts of Fevers,
continual and intermitting, the French Pox, though inveterate, for it heals and
eradicates all venereal Ulcers, Gums, Tophs, Nodes, Warts, etc. by reiterating
the Dose; cures the Jaundice, and all sorts of running Sores.

21. Paracelsus, in curing the Lues Venerea, exhibited it in Electuary of Juice
of Roses: And Phoedro very happily removed Venereal Tumors, giving it with
Spirit of Tartar: Heuserus (who published Paracelsus's Works) affirms, that in
his most frequent exhibiting thereof, he never found any detriment to ensue,
unless sometimes in choleric Vomitings, where it excited sometimes pain or
heat in the Throat and Mouth, which presently by using a Gargarism or Terra
Sigillata was removed.

22. The Dose is a gr. ij. ad v. or vj. but now in our days bold Artists will
venture to give it to gr. viij. or xij. such great Doses ought not to be
adventured on, except to very strong persons. It is given mixed with Pil. Ruffi,
Pil. Rudii, Confectio Hamech, or purging Extracts, and it operates better being
given in Juice of Liquorice, than in Mithridate or Venice Treacle; Conserve or
Sugar of Roses are good Vehicles, or it may be swallowed made up into Pills
with white Bread, drinking a little Wine or Cordial Water after it.

LXXVI. Mercurius Praecipitatus griseus; Gray Precipitate.
Bate.] Turpethum Minerale, wash it in Rose Water, and dry it, then imbibe it
in rectified S. V. and add Camphir dissolved in a like quantity of the said
rectified S. V. from whence with a gentle fire abstract the Spirit S. A. Dose a
gr. iij. ad viij. etc. It purges downwards, or by Stool.

Salmon.] 1. That is, to i. of Turbeth Minerale washed in Rose Water, ^ried and
imbibed with rectified S. V. you must add Camphir j. dissolved in a sufficient
quantity of rectified S. V. and then with a very gentle Fire abstract the
Spirit. See the Officina Chymica.

2. It has all the virtues of Turbeth Mineral, but works chiefly downwards, for
which reason it makes not the Patient so sick, nor so much out of order, and
therefore may be given in the larger d^s^, as a gr. iv. ad x. according to Age
and Strength.

3. It cures the French Pox, and all the Symptoms attending it, as virulent
Gonorrhoea's, Gleets, Gums, Tophs, Nodes; and particularly it is a Specific
against Nocturnal Pains, being given in a little Mithridate, or Conserve of
Roses, at night going to bed, and sleeping upon it, repeating the dose for two
or three nights together, and then ceasing two or three nights, or purging with
some gentle Cathartick, to carry off the Recrements of the matter, and prevent
Salivation, after which it is to be taken in like manner for two or three
nights more, and the same method to be continued till about 10 or 12 doses are
taken.

4. It is an excellent thing also against the Scurvy, Dropsy, Gout, Jaundice,
Scabs, Itch, Lep^osy, Tetters, Ring-worms, Fevers, and all Diseases
whatsoever, proceeding from corruption and putrefaction of the Humors, but it
must be used with the Caution aforementioned, to avoid Salivation: In Agues
give it six hours before the coming of the Fit.

LXXVII. Mercurius Praecipitatus Incarnatus; Fleshcolour'd Precipitate.
Bate.] Mercury or Quicksilver i. which dissolve in A. F. ij. add to it boiling
Water iij. and precipitate with new made Urine, wash and dry S. A. It only
works by Stool, and has the same virtues with the Arcanum Corallinum. Dose gr.
vj. ad xij.

Salmon.] 1. The Urine ought to be the Urine of a sound man, which, as Hartman
says, must be so much as may be sufficient to moisten the Mercury, by which
means the Mercury will be precipitated Incarnate. This only works downwards,
says he, and may be given a gr. vj. ad xij.

2. But Charras advises, to put in the Urine so long till the Ebulition ceases:
The color, says he, proceeds from the union of the Spirit of Nitre with the
Salt of Urine, and the impression which that conjunction makes upon the Mercury.

3. And the unition of the Urine with the Spirit of Nitre renders the effects
of this Precipitate more gentle than that of Turbeth Mineral, whose effects
depend chiefly upon the last Spirits of Vitriol or Sulphur, which have
dissolved it, and are as it were concentrated with it, for which reason this
Precipitate purges only downwards.

4. It is an excellent thing against the French Pox, and all its numerous
Symptoms or Attendants, but is found to be a Specific against the Stone,
whether in the Reins or Bladder (for which I have proved it an excellent thing)
as also in the Gout, Dropsy, Jaundice, and Rheumatism.

5. It is a valuable Remedy, and as it may be given safer than many other
Precipitates, so also with more eminent and certain effects.

6. Now, by reason Urine contains an alcalious Salt dissolved, when dropped or
put into the dissolution of Mercury in A. F. or Spirit of Nitre, it breaks or
destroys the edges or points of the Acid, which held up the Mercury
imperceptible, and served like as Finns to make it swim in the dissolvant, so
that the Quicksilver having nothing to bear it up, it precipitates by its own
weight.

7. And in this all Alcalies agree, in enervating or destroying the power of
the Acid; yet nevertheless they always do it with some difference in their
action, which evidently appears in the different-colour'd Precipitates, which
can only be attributed to proceed from their several ways and manners of
working upon Acids, whereby they dispose and modifie the Particles of the
precipitated body, so as to be capable of breaking various ways the beams of
Light, and so by reflection to make as many appearances of color.

8. For corrosive Sublimate being dissolved in boiling fair Water, if you drop
into it Oil of Tartar per deliquium, you have a reddish or Orange-tawny
Precipitate; if Urine, another colored Powder; if Spirit of Sal Armoniack, the
Precipitate will be white; but if Limewater, the Precipitate will be yellow.

9. Now, in all these the Mercury and its Dissolvent is one and the same, and
all the Precipitants are Alcalies, yet you see different colors arise, which
can only be from the difference of the Alcali, and its different way of working
upon the Acid.

10. These Precipitates now are no longer Poisons, though they are produced
from corrosive Sublimate; for the Acid which made the Mercury poisonous, being
now enervated and destroyed, and the Mercury being thereby delivered, it
resumes its former innocent nature, and becomes sweet* and friendly to Nature.

11. If upon the Liquor of the Orange-tawny Precipitate you should affuse Oil
of Vitriol or Sulphur, the Acid, by contending and penetrating the Oleum
Tartari, would cause an Ebulition, whereby the Alcali would be destroyed, and
the Precipitate again dissolved, and the liquor becoming clear, would be a
Poison, as before.

12. But by affusion again of fresh Oil of Tartar, then Spirit of Sal Armoniack
upon it, you would have again new reddish and white Precipitates.

13. Lastly, If upon this Liquor and Precipitates you should affuse again more
Oils of Vitriol or Sulphur, (but in a larger quantity than before, because the
Acid has not only the Mercury to dissolve anew but also a greater quantity of
the Alcali to contend withal) you will find the whole to be clear again, and
resume its former poisonous nature.

LXXVIII. Mercurius Praecipitatus Laxativus; Laxative Precipitate.
Bate.] It is made of Mercury or Quicksilver, by putting to it Oil of Vitriol
or Sulphur, and digesting in a Sand-heat, till the Mercury is crystallized;
these Crystals are put into a Crucible, and made red-hot, for an hour, by the
help of a proper fire, then being cast into hot water, a yellow powder
precipitates: Decant the water, and take the powder, which wash and dry,
burning off from it. S. V. S. A. It purges (...), sursum and deorsum, upwards
and downward. Dose gr. iij. ad x. It is of wonderful force in rooting out and
destroying the French Pox, Gout, Yellow Jaundice, Dropsy, Scabs, etc.

Salmon.] 1. Hartman was the Author of it, and out of his Pract. Chym. page
mea, 8. b. we will give you it word for word, translation only excepted.

2. Quicksilver q. s. upon which affuse Oil of Sulphur per Campanum, so much as
to overtop the Mercury an inch; set them so long in a hot Ash-heat, till by the
heat the Mercury is coagulated, which will be in the space of thrre hours;
cover the Vessel with Paper, through which the volatile spirits may pass, then
cool the Vessel, and take out the matter, and if any of the Quicksilver happen
to remain in the bottom, separate it: The matter pulverize, and put it into a
Crucible, letting it stand in an open fire for an hour, till the whole is
red-hot, which done, remove the Crucible, and put the matter into warm water,
and it will become a very bright powder: Decant that water, and affuse more,
washing it and drying it; then digest it with S. V. fiften days; afterward
decant the S. V. and dry the Mercury upon hot Iron Plates.

3. It purges both by Vomit and Stool, and evacuates all malign and evil Humors
in the French Pox, Rheumatism, Scurvy, Gout, Dropsy and Jaundice, and removes
most Diseases proceeding from Obstructions of the Vilcera. Dose a gr. v, a d x,
or xij. if in strong Bodies.

4. Modus Utendi. Mithridate ss. or j. of this Precipitate a gr. iv. ad x. Oil
of Citrons or Limons gut. iij. mix for a Dose, to be given at night going to
Bed, and repeated for two or three nights, then intermitting it for three or
four days, it may be given in like manner again.

4. But if the Sick should be in danger of fluxing, (as some easy Bodies will
be) you must either take a purging Dose or two after every second or third
Dose, or else give it in a Cathartick after this manner: Confectio Hamech ss.
ad j. of this Precipitate gr. viij. Oil of Limons gut. iij. mix for a Dose. Or
thus: Pil. Cochiae ss. of this precipitate gr. vj. ad x. Oil of Oranges gut.
iij. mix for a dose.

LXXIX. Mercurius Praecipitatus per se; Mercury precipitated by it self.
Bate.] Mercury put it into a Glass with a broad bottom, high and very
close-neckt, place it exactly in Sand, and give fire by degrees, till the
Mercury is converted into a rubicund powder, which take and wash with S. V. It
is a work of many days, it wonderfully provokes Sweat, and at 6 or 7 times
taking perfectly eradicates the French Pox. It takes away all Fevers, kills
Worms, and in many causes violent Vomiting. Dose a gr. iij. ad vj. but the
Precipitate will be more effectual if it be made with an eighth part of Sol; as
hereafter is declared.

Salmon.] 1. This is a singular Preparation, and the best of all the
Precipitates, and therefore we shall be a little more exact in observing what
Authors have said concerning it. Crollius makes it thus: Take a Glass flat and
broad, (near a cubit in breadth) high, and very close-neck'd, having an Orifice
no bigger than a Needle may go into, turned in with a wide mouth, that the
Mercury may be poured into it: Into this Glass put purified Quicksilver, so
much as may every where cover the bottom, place it so exactly in Sand, that no
part of the Mercury, by the unequal placing of the Glass, be either higher or
lower; this done, decoct it at first with a gentle heat, then with a more
strong fire, till it becomes a most red powder like Cinnabar, which edulcorate
with Cordial Waters, or S.V.

2. This, says he, powerfully provokes Sweat, and being 6 or 7 times exhibited
in a Lues Venerea, it wholly roots out and exterminates the Disease; more
especially if other things necessary in this Cure be also duly performed, it
cures all sorts of Fevers, both continual and intermitting.

3. Schroder makes it exactly after the same manner, but says it is a work of
thirty days. Besides the former Virtues, he says, it kills Worms, but vomits
violently, and commends it more if it be made with an eighth part of Gold.

4. Rolfincius Chym. lib. 5 sect. 6. cap. 3. Prepares it in a like Vessel, and
almost after the same manner; in the space of eight days he coagulates it, then
breaks the Vessel, grinds the matter into a most subtle powder in a glass
Mortar, then puts it again into a glass Vessel, and digests in a sand-heat for
four or five days more, or till all things within grow black; he breaks the
Vessel again, and pulverizes the matter anem, putting it into a new Phial, and
makes a calcination with an intense degree of Fire, till the Mercury rises up
or shoots forth into a kind of Grove (as it were) of little Trees, or a company
of young Shoots and slender Sprigs growing together as out of the Ground, of an
Orange-tawny or red color, which by little and little fall down again. This,
says he, loosens the Belly, provokes Sweat, and oftentimes causes vomiting.

5. Le Febure makes it thus: A double Vessel, called by Chemists Infernus, or A
Hell, flat and broad in the bottom; put into it purified Quicksilver, i. e.
revived from Cinnabar iij. or iv. stop the upper part of it with a single
Paper, and place it in Sand equally in its poise, so as the Quicksilver may be
evenly spread upon the whole bottom of the Vessel, lying no thicker on one part
than on another, that the Fire may equally work on the whole: Make at first a
soft Fire, and increase it by degrees, till all the Q. S. be changed, calcined,
or precipitated into a red Powder, like Mineral-Cinnabar, very bright, shining
and sparkling to the Eye, then digest it the space of 21 days in Alcohol of S.
V. afterward, deflagrate from it also rectified S. V. seven times, so will the
decoction and fixation of it be perfected.

6. This, says he, is an universal Remedy against all Agues, and a true
Specific against the French Pox, which it radically cures, if given seven
times to the Patient, to provoke Sweating, for it is an infallible Sudorifick.
It kills also Worms in the Stomach, Guts, and Intestinum Rectum.

7. The Dose is a gr. ij. ad viij, in some Conserve, Confection, or Cordial
Extract; the Sick must keep his Bed when he uses it, and must be sure to be
well covered, patiently expecting the Diaphoresis, which will not fail to bring
along with it the desired effects.

8. Nor must the Artist himself grow weary in the preparation of this
Medicament, though the Operation be long and tedious, for he must take care to
govern and manage the Fire with Judgment and Discretion, otherwise he will be
often forced to begin his work anew, for a small fault in the Fire will cause
the Vessel to break.

9. This Operation is very tedious, by reason of the length of time in which it
is a doing, for it can scarcely be perfected under forty days; yea, sometimes
it may be 90, 100, or 120 days, before it may be accomplished, according as you
take care to prepare your Mercury well or ill, and according to your care and
assiduity in keeping and managing your Fire.

10. Now it is only Sulphur can rubifie Mercury, as evidently appears by its
reduction into Cinnabar, from which reason and the former operation of
calcining it per se, it is evident, that common Quicksilver has a Sulphur
external and separable from the Essence of Mercury. To this Experience we may
add the Testimonies of Geber, and many other of the Ancients, and learned in
this Art, who continually testify the same.

11. When it is resuscitated or regenerated out of Silver, or any other perfect
Metal, so as to be exquisitely cleansed from any foreign or poisonous matter,
and then according to Art precipitated to a redness, it becomes a Medicine not
to be despised, which provokes neither Stool nor Vomit unless it be given in an
unreasonable Dose.

12. The external Sulphur in Mercury (says Tachenius) is the cause of Vomit and
Salivation, and not the corrosive Spirits with which it is precipitated or
sublimated, which the very anointing with crude Quicksilver proves; wherein the
acid Sulphur of the Mercury, piercing the Skin, after the manner of other
Acids, joining with the inward occult Acid of the Body, absorbs the Alcaly of
the Ventricles, and by making the internal Acid of the Body more acid, and a
most strong Poison, it extinguishes the alcalious faculty, and then resolves,
as Causticks do, all the Aliments and Juices of the Body into a putrid
Recrement.

13. So this occult venomous acidity of the Sulphur of Mercury does primarily
hurt the Gums and Teeth, for all Sulphur (witness the Oleum Sulphuris per
Campanum) has an occult Acid: And as Mercury has an external Sulphur,
(containing in it an occult venomous Acid) so by virtue of that Sulphur it is
precipitaed per se (as before declared) by the assistance of a gentle and
constant fire.

14. For this reason it is that Tachenus would have Mercury regenerated out of
Silver, or other perfect Metals, that it may be freed from its external and
poisonous Sulphur; then, says he, wanting that Sulphur, as it can never be
precipiated per se, though decocted a whole year in the abovenamed
flat-bottom'd Vessel, with a proper Fire, yet will it move Sweat, and sweetly
perform its Operations, Reason and Experience confirming as much.

15. And being thus divided in its essential parts, ( viz. freed from its
poisonous Sulphur) it may be reconjoyn'd with new and perfect Sulphur, and then
it will become the subject of all Wonder. And if it be sublimed with Sulphur to
rubifie it, (as in the Preparation of Cinnabar) yet will it gain little or
nothing in weight: which is an Observation worth the considering.

16. It remains only that we show you Charras's way of performing the Operation
of the vulgar Precipitate per se, and so conclude this Section. Get an
Infernus, which is a Vessel of double Glass, the neck whereof must be long and
very much like a Funnel, and the bottom thereof large and very broad; put into
it Mercury revived from Cinnabar iv. set it in a Lamp-Fornace, in a sand-heat,
etc. then having filled a Lamp with Oil, and lighted three Cotton Wicks of a
fit bigness, and put them under the Sand Vessel; so order it that they may burn
without ceasing, and that the Oil may not fail for fifteen days, at the end
whereof make every Wick a third part bigger, and keep them lighted for fifteen
other days: After thirty days make every Wick bigger by one half, burning as
before for another month, or till the Q. S. becomes a red and shining powder.

17. Where note, that it is enough all the time to cover the top of the Vessel
with a single Paper, and to take care that the Oil be not wanting in the Lamps,
but that all the Wicks may burn equally, and continually casting their Flame at
an equal distance, to the bottom of the Sand-vessel: This work is tedious, but
that trouble not great, if you have a Vessel and Furnace proper, and that the
Vessel be set in an equal poise.

18. The Powder wash with Cordial Waters, or digest for some days in Alcohol of
Wine, then abstract the Spirit, and keep the Powder for use.

19. It is diaphoretick, and apt to provoke great Sweats, but often causes
vomiting withal; but it is one of the best Preparations of Mercury, for the
rooting out Venereal Distempers; and curing Agues; and it is a Specific for
killing Worms of all sorts, being given a gr. ij. ad viij. in some proper
Conserve or Sweating Electuary or Bolus.

LXXX. Mercurius Praecipitatus ruber; Red Precipitate.
Bate.] Dissolve Quicksilver i. in A. F. ij. abstract the A. F. from the
Mercury by distillation with three cohobations, till the Mercury becomes a red
powder. It has the virtues of the former.

Salmon.] 1. This is called Vigo's Precipitate, because he was the Author of
it; and he made it by dissolving Quicksilver in A F. and then evaporating to
dryness, the Fire being increased, till the bottom of the Vessel is made
red-hot, whereby is made a most red sparkling Powder, which is the vulgar red
Precipitate.

2. And of this is made that Medicament which is called The Prince's Powder, a
thing much famed of late years in London, thus: Of the former red Precipitate
i. grind it upon a Porphyry to a subtle Powder; add to it ij. of Oleum Tartari
per deliq. which digest together 24 hours, stirring it now and then; upon this
put tartarised S. V. to overtop it an inch, and deflagrate it, which repeat
twenty times, and it is done.

3. This is the true Recipe, as it came from the Prince's own Hand, and was
communicated to me by Sir Francis Blundel Baronet, of Kings-County in Ireland,
who purchased it of the said Prince with a considerable sum of Money. It is
given in the Yolk of an Egg or Conserve of Roses, Mithridate, etc. The Prince
gave it ss. ad j. which in my opinion is too great a dose, it may be given a
gr. iij. ad x, xij, xv, or xx. according to the age, strength, and malignity of
the Disease.

4. It is famous in curing the French Pox, and all the Symptoms attending it,
as also the Scurvy, Dropsy, Gout, Sciatica, and most Chronick Diseases which
afflict the extreme parts; and I have known it to be a Specific against the
Stone, Sand, Gravel, and all manner of Obstructions of the Reins and Bladder,
doing that in those cases which none of the vulgar Nephriticks and Diuretics
could possibly perform.

5. From the process of the Prince's Powder it appears, that it is nothing but
Common red Precipitate corrected with Oil of Tartar and Spirit of Wine, by
which the greatest part of the Acid remaining in the vulgar Precipitate is
absorbed or destroyed, and so thereby the Medicament made more mild and gentle.

6. And of this Opinion was Tachenius in his Clavis, where he says, If upon red
Precipitate you pour Alcali of Tartar, and leave it for an hour in a warm
place, the whole powder will become obscurely yellow, or of an Orange-tawny
color, because the Alcali has in part absorbed the Caustic Acid left by the
Aquafortis.

7. But the Virtues of the simple Red Precipitate without correction is
strongly and without almost any pain, to absume and eat up the thicker Sordes
of Ulcers, callous proud Flesh, Apostemes in the Fundament, and other like
Excrescencies; yea, it cures all sordid, putrid, mattery, callous Shingles,
sometimes alone, and sometimes in Emplasters or Unguents, as necessity requires.

8. Rolfincius Chym. lib. 5. sect. 6. cap. 2. makes it after the vulgar manner,
and says, that it is very rarely given inwardly; but if so exhibited, that it
works powerfully (...), both by Vomit and Stool, which after many Lotions in
Rose Water he gives a ss. ad j. which is a Dose in my opinion too large by two
thirds of it, unless corrected as abovesaid after the manner of the Princes
Powder. See my Pharm. Land. lib. 3. cap. 7. sect. 22.

9. Charras makes this vulgar Red Precipitate thus: Good Quicksilver, or
refined, A. F. or Spirit of Nitre A. put them into a glass Retort in a gentle
sand-heat to dissolve, then bury the Retort in Sand all over, fitting to it a
Receiver; increase the fire gradually, and continue it till the A. F. or Sp.
Nitri is almost all drawn off; letting all cool, cohobate the A. F. or S. Nitri
upon the Mercury in the Retort, and draw it off again as before: Cohobate this
three times and abstract forcing the fire at last more than ordinary to augment
the color of the Precipitate, which will be of a much fairer red than that
which is calcined at the end in a Crucible, where you lose of the weight of the
Mercury, and are endangered by the poisonous Vapors of the A. F. or Sp. Nitri,
etc. The shining red mass at bottom, if you intend to give it inwardly (says
he) must be powdered, and rectified S. V. is to be deflegmated from it, and so
kept in a glass Bottle close stopped for use.

10. He gives it inwardly to men of strong Constitutions ad gr. vij, or viij.
at most at a time; but its principal use is for outward applications, as well
in Pomatums and other Remedies to cure the defedations of the Skin, as to be
mixed with other Ointments and Balsams to consume proud Flesh and other
superfluities of malign and venereal Ulcers; and it is the usual Remedy which
Chyrurgions apply to Cankers and Warts upon the secret parts.

11. But here is to be noted, that if you intend to give it inwardly, you must
not use A. F. in the preparation thereof, but Spirit of Nitre, or an A. F. made
only of Nitre and Alum.

12. Maets and Marggrave both make it after the same manner, but without any
cohobation of the abstracted Spirit, and at last calcine it a little, (for if
the Fire should be continued too long, all the corrosive Spirits would be
forced from the Mercury, whereby some part of it would be revived, and the
other not revived, of a dirty, dull, red color, without any sparkling
brightness or shining:) then edulcorate it by washing it in Rainwater, and
burning off from it S. V. five or six times.

13. This Precipitate (says he) if it be corrected, (I suppose he means with
Oil of Tartar, as abovesaid) it is given for a Sudorifick in the French Pox,
Dropsy, Quartan-Ague, profound Scab and Leprosy, being mixed with
Venice-Treacle, Mithridate, Conserve of Roses, Confectio de Hyacintho, etc. but
if for purging in Extractum Catholicum, Extract of the Juice of Roses,
Confectio Hamech. Dose a gr. ij. ad v.

14. Marggrave says, it has a Cathoeretick force, and is used to take away
Carnosities or fleshly Excrescencies, which it does easily, and without pain;
for which reason it conduces to the healing of Fistula's, Pustuls, and other
external Diseases, if sprinkled upon any Emplaster and applied, or injected
with a Syring in Plantane-water: but then the Water ought to be made somewhat
thick with Honey of Roses or some proper Syrup, that the Powder may not
immediately sink, or separate it self from the Vehicle.

15. And being corrected he says, it is used by many as a Panacea for curing
the French Pox, given a gr. iv. ad vj. ad Summum.

16. According to Lemery it is thus. Quicksilver revived from Cinnabar iv.
Spirit of Nitre ivss. dissolve in a Glass Mattress with a short Neck and in a
Sand heat evaporate all the Humidity till a white Mass remains: then augment
the Fire to the third degree in which keep it, till it is turned Red, then
letting all cool, break the Glass and take your Precipitate, which will weigh
ivss.

17. Some mix it (says he) with burnt Alum, Aegyptiacum and the common
suppurative, for the external Uses abovementioned: and some give it inwardly,
ad gr. iv. to raise a Flux, but this says he, is dangerous unless rectified S.
V. be burnt two or three times off from it.

18. Now it is to be observed, that some think by two or three Cohobations of
the Sp. Nitre to increase its Redness or its Virtues, but Experience shows the
contrary, and that those Cohobations are of no use.

19. The white Mass remaining after evaporation of the Sp. Nitre, is a mixture
of the Mercury with much of the Acid Spirit; so that of iv. of Quicksilver, you
will have vss. of that white Matter, which is very Corrosive: but according as
it is calcined to make it red, the points and edges of the Spirit strike off
and vanish in the Air; for which reason the more you calcine it to increase its
redness, the less it weighs, and the less corrosive it is.

20. If you put this red Precipitate into an Earthen Pan deflagrate from it
well rectified S. V. and repeat this deflagration six times, you have Lemery's
Arcanum Coralinum: in this Operation the S. V. by burning makes some part of
the Acid Spirits to fly away, in place of which the Alcali of the S. V. joins
it self to the Mercury, and thereby renders it more sweet and fit to be taken
inwardly.

21. If you continue your red Precipitate for some hours over the Fire, it will
sublime of a red color; but this red Sublimate, is nothing near so corrosive
as the common white corrosive Sublimate. It cannot sublime before it is
calcined red, because there is too much of the Acid Spirit which fixes it; but
being freed from it in a great measure by Calcination, it has power to arise or
sublime with that which remains; And by reason the Acid has an aptness to fix,
it checks the Volatility of the Mercury, and makes it stop in the middle of the
Glass.

22. If upon common Red Precipitate you affuse volatile Spirit of Sal-Armoniack
it becomes of a gray color: so also if into the Solution of Quicksilver in Sp.
Nitre, you drop in the said Spirit of Sal-Armoniack you will have a gray
Precipitate; and if upon either of them you affuse a good quantity of fair
Water, you will have a milky Liquor, though none of the whitest.

23. If on common red Precipitate you affuse Spirit of Salt; it becomes
presently a delicate White; for the same thing must happen here, as when Spirit
of Salt is cast into a Solution of Q. S. in Spirit of Nitre; for tho red
Precipitate be a dry body, it is nothing but a Conjunction of Mercury with the
Nitrous Spirit.

24. But the immediate change of the color seems strange, that so red a
Substance should in a moment of time as it were become so exceeding white: this
without doubt must be attributed to the new situation of the Mercurial
Particles, whereby their Superficies reflect the Light in right Lines, or a
different Position from the former to our Eyes, thereby to give room for this
white Color.

25. Again, should another Acid Liquor, or any Alcali be affused thereon, it
would be again changed, and some other color would arise, or else it would
revive into Quicksilver; from which Experiments a kind of demonstration is
made, that Color is no real and substantial thing, but wholly depends on the
Modification of the Particles of the Mixed.

26. Lastly, if on common red Precipitate you affuse Oil of Vitriol, it will be
dissolved for the Spirit of Vitriol j'oyning with the Spirit of Nitre in the
Precipitate, an A. F. is made, which dissolves perfectly the Mercurial
Particles without any Ebullition or Effervescence: the reason is, because the
Mercury has already been rarefied by the Acid Spirit of Nitre, so that the
Spirit of Vitriol enters the Pores of the Mercury, and by Conjunction of the
Nitrious Spirit dissolves it without trouble. This Solution is clear, like
other dissolutions of Mercury, without any redness; and thereof may be made the
same Preparations as may be made of Quicksilver dissolved in Aqua fortis or
Spirit of Nitre.

LXXXI. Mercurius praecipitatus Solaris per se: Golden Precipitate, or
Precipitate with Gold.
Bate.] It is made of an Amalgama made of Quicksilver iv. and Gold purified
with Antimony ss. in a Glass Infernus, posited as before directed ( at Sect.
78.) which is often to be taken out and beaten in a Mortar S. A.

Salmon.] 1. Rolfincius calls this Preparation Radix aurea, and Precipitatus
ruber compositus; and makes it exactly in the same proportions, digesting the
Amalgama in a Phial, for the space of two Months in a gentle and continual Sand
heat: Sensim massa adsurgit in speciem fruticeti aurei, and quasi crescere
Videtur: Sensim rursum ad fundum Vergit; then being of a resplendent rubicund
color, he takes the Precipitate out, pouders it, and keeps it for use.

2. It is accounted by Zehnerus as a Panacea of great Virtues, purging alone
(...), both by Vomit and Stool, according as the Dose is increased: but in a
small Dose it is diaphoretick: to little Infants it is given, ad gr. j. to
Children from five to seven Years of age a gr. jss. ad ij. and so increasing
the Dose in proportion to the Age and Strength. See Our Pharm. Land. Lib. 3.
Cap. 7. Sect. 19.

3. Zwelfer Mantis. Spagyr. cap. 7. makes it thus. Purified Mercury, or Mercury
seven times sublimed from the stellified Regulus Martis, and filings of Luna
ij. fine Gold purged by Antimony iv, or v. make an Amalgama, as the manner is
by putting into a Crucible over proper fire the Mercury; into which when heated
let the Gold be cast red hot: this Amalgama oftentimes wash with Vinegar and
Salt, till no more blackness appears in grinding and washing it: to this
Amalgama thus washed, well cleansed and dried, add of the former rubicund
Precipitate made per se, ij. grind them together for a long time in a Glass
Mortar, that they may be well united, then put all into an Infernus as before
directed, or into a Philosophical Egg, which Seal hermetically, and digest or
decoct by degrees of fire till the whole is reduced to dryness, and the highest
Redness: Et hic demum Praecipitatus praestantissimus erit, sine ullo corrosivo
factus; solius naturae opus, and Medicina ad multorum morborum extirpationem
efficacissima: sapientibus pauca haec sufficerint: sub iis enim haud facile
obvia aut Vulgaria latent Naturae Arcana.

4. The thing thus made is indeed a good Medicine, as Zwelfer professes; but
this tedious Work of his is Labor in vain; for first, there is a Precipitation
of the Quicksilver per se, which whatever Authors may affirm, is a Work of 3 or
400 Days to do it well: Secondly, there is a second Precipitation or
Calcination, by mixing this prec. per se, with an Amalgama of Mercury and Sol;
which will then require as long time as if all the Mercury were amalgamated
with the Sol all at once; so that it is apparent that the first tedious Labor
is lost; since Mercury amalgamated with Gold, will be calcined into a Redness
in the tenth part of the time, that it can be done in, per se.

5. Charras make it thus. Purified Mercury j, fine Gold j, make an Amalgama,
etc. but you may, says he, add to the Mercury a quarter part of its weight of
cupellated Silver, and make an Amalgama of it: Or else amalgate together Gold
ss. Silver j. and Quicksilver iv. and so fix them together by a gentle Coction
as aforesaid.

6. Le Febure gets a Mattress flat or plain at bottom ( not making use of an
Infernus as in the precip. per se) which he stops in the mouth only with a
wooden Pin, which may be easily taken away to put down the Mercury, which shall
be sublimed into the neck of the Vessel: into this Vessel he puts an Amalgama
of pure Mercury p. viij, with fine Gold thrice purged from Antimony, p. j. Or
of Mercury p. iv, with fine Silver p. j. made into Leaves, or a subtle Calx,
for the easier Amalgamation; Or, an Amalgama of pure Mercury p. viij. with
Gold, p. j. Silver p. ij. melted with pure Regulus of Antimony p. vj. these he
digests or decocts till they become a fine red Precipitate.

7. The solar Precipitate is given a gr. j. ad vj. in some Conserve,
Confection, or Cordial Extract, the Patient keeping Bed when it is taken; it is
an excellent Remedy against the French Pox and all its Symptoms, and has all
the Virtues of the Precipitate per se exalted by means of the Gold, having this
effect more, as to be a Specific for strengthening and corroborating the Heart,
and to drive away all Weaknesses and Griefs from it.

8. The Lunar Precipitate is also specificated and destinated to the Head, and
to the cure of Diseases thereof, besides the general intention: Dose thereof a
gr. j. ad xij.

9. But neither the Solar, nor Lunar are to be compared in Strength and Virtue
to that which is made of a mixture of Sol, Luna, and Antimony; for that this is
a kind of Panacea, or universal Remedy, called by some Authors Aurum Medicum.

10. It is of good use for prevention of Diseases, especially where the Viscera
are loaded with impure Serosities and Tartarous Humors, proceeding from
Weakness, ill Digestion, and Superfluities of Nourishment: you may give gr. vj.
in the morning fasting, and the Patient being covered in Bed may sweat upon it;
after which they may eat a Biscuit dipped in Wine; then the Sweat being ended, the
Sick may rise but ought to keep the Chamber for that whole day.

11. Thus have you various Precipitates, or rather Calces of Mercury with the
more perfect Metals, wholly performed without addition of any Salts or Acid
Spirits: and as their Preparations are long and tedious; so are their
Operations high, and much more effectual than those other kinds of Precipitates
are, which are not fitted for such transcendent designations.

LXXXII. Mercurius Praecipitatus Viridis, green Precipitate.
Bate.] Mercury iv. Venus ss. dissolve them separately in A.F. and mix them:
afterward abstract the A. F. digest the Precipitate with Spirit of Vinegar,
then filter and dry S. A. It is a Specific in a virulent Gonorrhoea, which it
perfectly takes away and cures: but it ought daily to be used, till all the
Flux is stopped. Dose, gr. ij, iij, ad viij.

Salmon.] 1. See our Pharm. Land. Lib. 3. Cap. 7. Sect. 40. where you have the
Prescript in the same proportion; but you are advised to digest in the Spirit
of Vinegar in B. M. for 24 hours, and then to boil, that the purest part of the
Q. S. may be dissolved in the Vinegar.

2. Hartman upon Crollius has it thus. Purged Quicksilver iss. dissolve in A.
F. iij. dissolve also, Copper ss. in A.F. mix these Solutions together; and
draw off the A. F. in Sand: toward the end augment the fire more vehemently,
that the greatest part of the Spirits may be removed: what is left in the
bottom, dry, grind and digest with Spirit of Vinegar for twenty four hours or
six days, then boil it: the Vinegar thus impregnated, gently draw off in B. M.
and the Precipitate will remain in the bottom green.

3. It is a Specific in a virulent Gonorrhoea, though declining to the grand Pox
it self, and may be given, a gr. ij. ad viij. although the Gonorrhoea be seen
to cease, yet by exhibiting this Medicament it returns again* for which reason,
it must be reiterated, till all the Flux ceases, and is perfectly removed; for
this Medicine both moves the Gonorrhoea, and also takes it away: Hartman gives
it in Conserve of Roses.

4. Our Author (who follows Schroder) has Mercury iv. to Venus ss. which is 8
to 1. whereas Hartman has of Mercury iss. to Venus ss, which is but as 3 to 1.
doubtless the former Proportion is the safer and better, for too great a
quantity of the Venus will provoke intolerable Vomitings, so that the Medicine
will scarcely be safe.

5. Beguinus follows Hartman in the Quantities, in which he deserves reproof;
and digests six days, whereas his Commentator says two are sufficient, if the
Digestion is good: this Precipitate is not usually edulcorated, for which
reason it ought to be given with the more caution: it will do what it is
designed for; but at best, it is but a churlish Medicine, and therefore ought
to be given only to strong Bodies. Some call this Precipitate Lacerta Viridis,
the green Lizard.

LXXXIII. Mercurius Vitae Correctus, Mercurius Vite corrected.
Bate.] Digest Mercurius Vitae in a Phial, in a Sand heat, till it begins to
grow red: afterward abstract often from it S.V. S. A. It purges excellently
well by Stool, and carries forth all Impurities of the Body whatsoever. Dose,
gr. iv. ad vj.

Salmon.] 1. Regulus of Antimony purified iv. Corrosive Sublimate in powder lb
j. mix and put them into a Glass Retort, which place in a Sand heat, gentle at
first; lute to a Receiver, and a gummy Liquor or Butter will come forth, which
easily congeals and sticks to the Neck of the Retort, which stopping it, hold a
burning Coal near it, to melt it, that it may fall into the Receiver: when no
more comes forth, take away the Receiver, and substitute another half full of
Water, then increase the Fire, and there will drop out of Quicksilver about
xiij. which was in the Corrosive Sublimate: thus have you Butter of Antimony.

2. To make Mercurius Vitae. Take your Butter of Antimony depurated by
Rectification (as is usual) put it into an Earthen Pan with a Quart of warm
Water, so will a Precipitate presently fall as white as Snow, the Water having
weakened the Corrosive Spirits, which keept the reguline part of the Antimony in
dissolution, and constrained them to quit the Body: being precipitated, stir
the Water again, and let it settle, then pour off the Liquor by inclination
which reserve: The Powder wash, edulcorate and dry; this is Mercurius Vitae,
which some Authors call Powder of Algoroth, and is given a gr. j. ad iv. it
working violently, both upwards and downwards.

3. The Reserved Water contains in it all the Saline Spirits, which adhered to
the Antimony, and is of a pleasing Acidity, called by some Philosophical Spirit
of Vitriol it is used in Julaps for Fevers, rendering the same Tart, and
agreeable to the Stomach.

4. From iv. of Butter of Antimony you have 14. of Mercurius Vitae, after it is
well washed and dried; so that iv. of this Butter continues 18. of the Acid, in
which its Corrosion does consist.

5. It is a famous Medicine, and purges downwards, or by Stool, being corrected
according to the Prescript of our Author: it purges off all bad Humors of the
Body, chiefly those in the Viscera and Bowels; it is an excellent thing against
the Plague and all sorts of Pestilential Diseases, all Diseases of the Head and
Brain, as Head-Achs, Megrims, Lethargy, Vertigo, etc. the French pox, malignant
Ulcers, Fevers, Gouts, Sciatica's, Rheumatisms, Dropsies, Jaundice, and kills
Worms. Dose, a gr. iij. ad vj. in the morning fasting.

LXXXIV. Mercurius Vitae purgans, Mercurius Vite, Or Laxative Mineral.
Bate.] If you often grind Mercurius Vitae with common Salt, and afterward
wash it away again with Water, it will have only a purging Property, and work
downwards or by Stool. Dose, a gr. vj. ad xij.

Salmon.] 1. Notwithstanding all this, it will work upwards in some
Constitutions, and where there is a foulness of the Stomach; in such habits of
Body, a good quantity of Posset drink ought to be given with it, to make its
Operation the more easy.

2. Schroder corrects it after this manner. Sal-Nitre melted at the Fire, and
Mercurius Vitae, cast them in by degrees and stir them; after they are cold,
you will find the corrected Matter at the bottom like a Regulus, which sweeten
by washing or deflagration of S. V.

3. Or thus. Mercurius Vitae ss. Sal-Nitre melted at the Fire ij. cast them in
by degrees, then wash off the Salt: to this Powder dried add twice as much
common Salt: grind them together twelve hours, then wash it again; this is
Mineral Laxative, and is given a gr. vj. ad xij.

4. In this Operation, you ought to cast in but j. at a time, and cover the
Crucible presently, and so keep it till it leaves smoking, then cast in the
rest by degrees, etc.

5. Vntzer in his Anatomy of Mercury, has an excellent Mercurius Vitae made of
Gold, which purges downwards; it is made with Sal-Nitre, cast upon the Calx of
Sol, till it draws a Tincture, and then precipitated with Sal-Armoniack, or Oil
of Tartar.

6. Or thus. Oil of Mercurius Vitae, and Spirit of Nitre which prudently mix
together; digest them for some time, and afterward distill, so as to make a
Homagene Menstruum: Cohobate, digest, and distill so long till you find the
Mercurius Vitae gathered together about the bottom: the Menstruum thus
prepared, put into it Calx, or Leaves of Gold, so much as the Menstruum may
overtop it three Inches; digest till it is dissolved, or becomes a kind of
Tincture or Magistral Solution, and till the Gold appears like Clouds in the
bottom of the Glass: abstract the Menstruum by distillation, till the remainder
is like Oil: into which affuse a good quantity of Water, and the Mercurial Calx
of Gold, or Solar Mercurius Vitae will fall down: Or otherwise precipitate with
a Solution of Sal-Armoniack, or Oil of Tartar per deliq. and edulcorate by
washing. Untzer. Anat. Merc. Lib. 2. Cap. 14. Sect. 3.

7. It has the Virtues of the former, but is more cordial, and works mostly by
Stool, carrying off all noxious and peccant Humors without any disturbance: It
is also given by Infusion, six or seven grains being digested in Wine or other
Liquor iss. and so given in the Morning fasting: But Experience tells us you
may make the Infusion a gr. x. ad xx. without any danger.

8. It cures Dropsies, Gouts, Rheumatisms, Scurveys, Cachexea's, and other ill
Dispositions and Habits of Body, especially such as proceed from repletion or
fullness of Humors, etc.

9. But as to the common Mercurius Vitae, that it might be made more gentle,
and purge only by Stool, Maets has this Correction which is none of the worst.
Mercurius Vitae j. Sal-Mirabile of Glawber ij. or iij. put the Sal-Mirabile
into a Crucible, and when it flows, mix with it the Mercurius Vitae, stirring
them well with a wooden Stick, which done, pour all out, and with Rainwater
abstract all the Salt; so will you have a corrected Mercurius Vitae, divested
of the greatest part of its emetick force.

10. This is given in substance a gr. iij. ad vj. or viij. which extract of
Juice of Roses, Extractum Catholicum, or some such like Purge, in an inveterate
Lues Venerea, and in the most contumacious Obstructions, in which cases it is
given with good success.

11. Le Mort corrects it thus. Common Salt decripitated j. pure Nitre iss. melt
them together in a Crucible; then by degrees cast in Mercurius Vitae iss. make
them flow together for a quarter of an hour, then edulcorate by washing. Dose,
a gr. ij. ad x. in the Cases aforementioned, made up into the form of a Pill
with extract of Juice of Roses.

12. It purges gently without pain or trouble, cuts and attenuates tough Phlegm,
powerfully opens the most obdurate Obstructions, and is a famous thing against
Surfeits given in the beginning. If it purges not downwards, it many times
becomes diaphoretick, and causes Sweating.

13. An Infusion of Mercurius Vitae uncorrected. Mercurius Vitae ij. Whitewine
xx. let them stand in a warm digestion for twelve hours, often shaking the
Glass; then decant the clear Wine from the Feces, for the greater security
sake. Dose, a ss. ad iss. in the Morning fasting.

LXXXV, Panacea Aurea; The Golden Panacea, or All-heal.
Bate.] Crocus Metallorum and Calomelanas, A. mix and make a Powder. It is
excellent against the French Disease; moves Salivation, and purges (...), both
by Vomit and Stool.

Salmon.] 1. Crocus Metallorum is thus made. Choice Antimony lb j. purified
Nitre lb j. powder each apart, and mix them together, then make an Earthen Pot
red hot, amongst burning Coals, and put into it ij. or iij. of the mixture,
covering the Pot immediately with a Tile, so will it make a thundering noise,
sending forth much Smoke, which carefully avoid: the Fulmination being over,
put in more in like manner, and thus continue till your whole quantity is
spent, then increase the Fire till the Matter melts, which done, take the
Crucible from the Fire and leave it to cool, then break it, and you will have
in the bottom a Mass of a Liver color whilst whole, and of a Saffron color
when poudered, ( for which cause it is called Hepar Antimonii, or Crocus
Metallorum) and a white Feces, which take away, and keep if you please to
reduce any Calx of Metals into a Body.

2. This Hepar or Crocus being reduced into powder, you may by several Lotions
separate some Nitrous saline Particles from it, but many use it without washing
or edulcorating for ordinary uses* but for this Composition of our Authors it
ought to be freed from the Salts, for the Mercury sake.

3. The first Water of the washing will be very clear, yet it contains some of
the finest Particles of the Sulphur of Antimony, which by putting some Acid to
it will precipitate of a very subtle reddish Powder, which being separated,
edulcorated and dried is called the Golden Sulphur of Antimony, or Sulphur
Auratum, and has the same Virtues nearly with the Flores Antimonii.

4. Calomelanas is a sweet Sublimate of Mercury, or Mercurius dulcis, five or
six times sublimed, till it loses (as it were) its Cathartick or Purging Virtue.

5. This Calomelanas by being ground fine and intimately mixed with the Crocus
Metallorum, corrects it, and takes away much of its Emetick force, whereby it
makes the Crocus a kind of Panacea, and disperses and carries it upon its
Volatile Wings through the whole Universal Body, which otherwise might possibly
pass only through the Stomach and Guts.

6. The reason also why we choose the edulcorated Crocus is, because that though
the Saline Particles may correct the Emetick property of the Crocus in some
measure, yet being joined to the Salts in the Sublimate, they would augment the
Acid in the Mercury, and so endanger its being made Corrosive; whereas the
Salts alone contained in the Calomelanos, are enough without the other to
correct the Crocus, and render it more facile and pleasant in its Operation, at
least to make it more gentle, and not to be so violently Emetick.

7. It has all the Virtues of the Mercurius Vitae purgans aforegoing, but more
powerful to the Intentions, as being joined with Mercury; and therefore more
effectual in purging off the Feculencies of the Venereal Disease, King's Evil,
Dropsy, Gout, etc.

LXXXVI. Panacea Cathartica, The Purging Panacea, or All-heal.
Bate.] Mercurius Vitae (made of corrosive Sublimate p. ij. Antimony. p. j.)
iv. Quicksilver (proceeding in the Distillation of the Butter of Antimony) iij.
mix and sublime as in Mercurius dulcis. Dose, gr. v. ad viij. It is more
efficacious in the Cure of the French Pox than Mercurius dulcis, etc.

Salmon. 1. How the Mercurius Vitae is made we have shown in Sect. 82. 2. of
this Chapter aforegoing; other ways of doing the same we shall show in our
Officina Chymica, suddenly to be published.

2. Now this purified Quicksilver is obtained in the Distillation of the Butter
of Antimony, we have also declared in Sect. 1. and. 3.. 45. aforegoing of this
present Chapter, so that no more need be spoken of it here.

3. These two, viz. the Mercurius Vitae and the Quicksilver are to be ground
together in an Iron Mortar, till the Mercury appears not at all, but is with
the other Ingredient reduced into a subtle black Powder, or at least gray; put
this into a Phial, so as to fill it half; place this Glass in a Sand Furnace,
and give fire Gradatim, for some hours, at least 7 or 8, then every thing being
cold, break the Vessel, and gather the Sublimate, which keep for use.

4. The Mercurius Vitae in this sublimes but in part, so that the Medicament
consists partly of the Mercurius Vitae, and partly of the Mercury it self; and
this Sublimate is caused from the remaining Acids in the Merc. Vitae, for were
there not Acids enough to engage the Particles of the Quicksilver, it would fly
away all in Fumes, whereas here they supply the place of Salt and Vitriol,
whereby you have a sweet Sublimate having the Virtues of Mercurius dulcis
joined with the Virtues of the Merc. Vitae, and becomes by so much the better
Medicine.

5. That it cannot vomit, though it contains some Particles of the Merc. Vitae is
manifest, for that they receive a perfect correction from the Alcali of the
Quicksilver, the Acid of its Mercurial Sulphur, not being enough to fortify
the Emetick property, in opposition to the Cathartick.

LXXXVII. Panacea Hartmanni, Hartman' s Panacea, or All-heal.
Bate.] Combustible Sulphur of Antimony j. rectified Oil of Vitriol or Sulphur
iij. Regulus of Antimony j. digest warm for ten days, then distill by a Glass
Retort in Sand, cohobating there at least; augment the Fire toward the end,
and the Matter reverberate for the space of five hours: afterward take it
forth, wash it in Rose Water and dry it: take of this Powder j. Salt of Coral
ij. and mix them exactly S. A. It is instead of an universal Remedy: and is in
it self an undoubted Diaphoretick, having a power of purifying or cleansing the
Blood: and therefore in any curable Disease it performs the Work by sweating,
chiefly in the French Pox* and Defedations of the Skin. Dose, a gr. x. ad xx.

Salmon.] 1. How this Combustible of Red Sulphur of Antimony is to be made, we
will teach you from the same Heart. Cinnabar of Antimony in fine Powder q. v.
boil it in a very strong Lixivium of Harts-ease, or Calx-Vive in an Iron
Skillet for 3 or 4 hours: the Lixivium will be red by reason of the Sulphur,
but the Argent Vive will run in the bottom in Flux: the Lixivium tinged, by
inclination separate, and whilst hot filterate through brown Paper, and put it
again where it was for certain hours, and the Sulphur of the Antimony will
precipitate in form of a red Powder, which separated from the Lixivium must
afterward be edulcorated with fair water, and dried with a gentle heat.

2. Then of this Sulphur of Antimony, Regulus of Antimony, A. gr. v. Oil of
Sulphur j. or instead thereof Oil of Vitriol iij. digest for certain days in a
Glass Retort in a Sand-heat, then distill in Sand, cohobating three or four
times, increasing the Fire vehemently for the last twelve hours, and the whole
will remain fixed, which take out wash with Rose Water; and then add to every
Ounce of the same Salt of Coral ij. which mix and keep for use.

3. How extremely these Proportions differ from our Text, I cannot but observe;
there being but ana. gr. 5. of the Sulphur of Antimony and Regulus to iij. of
the Oil of Vitriol; which bare no proportion together, for which reason I am
apt to believe it to be a Mistake in the Printer, though it is according to the
most correct Latin Copy in Folio: that which confirms me the more in this
belief is the Prescript of Beguinus Tyrocin. Chym. Lib. 2. Cap. 20. which
exactly agrees with our Author and from whence I believe it was fetched, which
is infinitely more reasonable, and agreeable to the nature of the Prescription.

4. It wonderfully provokes Sweat says Hartman, chiefly in malignant and
epidemical Distempers, being given in proper Sudorifick Waters: It is also
sometimes given in Mithridate, and in Conserves; and in the Decoction of
Hartshorn, or other things of like nature.

LXXXVIII. Regulus Jovialis, Regulus of Tin.
Bate.] It is made of the Regulus of Antimony melted iv. by adding thereto
filings of Jupiter the same quantity, S. A. It opens all Obstructions, and is a
noble Remedy against the Suffocation of the Womb.

Salmon.] 1. The Preparation is easy and obvious, but Marggrave makes it in
differing proportions, thus. English Tin iij. Regulus of Antimony ij. melt the
Tin in a Crucible Red-fire-hot, then presently put into it the Powder of the
Regulus of Antimony, and they will presently be united flowing: then gently
pour forth the fluid Matter into another Crucible, so will it turn into
Regulus, which in Color will not be much differing from Silver.

2. Or thus from the same Marggrave. Regulus of Antimony in fine Powder ij. put
it into a Crucible Red-fire-hot, so will the Matter presently be in* a flux
like Water, then add English Tin, whole or in lumps (not filings) j. and it
will melt in a moment with the Regulus, and becomes one fluid Mass: pour it
forth flowing into a fusory Cone or clear Crucible, so will you have a Mass
very hard and white, which being polished will look like Silver, but being
beaten or hammered is found to be brittle, this take and keep for use.

3. It is of use for preparing a Butter, in order for making the Jovial Bezoar.
And amongst Mechanics it serves for making several Vessels and Utensils, as
Platters, Dishes, Porrengers, Sawcers, Plates, Sword-hilts, etc. and in Physic
it is given against all Obstructions of the Viscera, chiefly of the Womb.

4. One Secret communicated to me by an ancient Midwife I think fit to
disclose, viz. that it makes barren Women fruitful; and that she had given it
to some Scores upon the account, and with the desired success: her way of
giving it was thus.

5. Regulus of Tin in Powder a j. ad j. Flesh of Vipers in powder ss Mithridate
q. s. make it into a Bolus, which repeat every night for a Month. I upon
knowledge hereof, gave it to three Women successively, and it succeeded
according to their desire: It may do so in others for all that I know; this I
am certain of, it is a great opener of Obstructions of the Womb, and a
strengthener of it, which are the chief Causes either of Barrenness or
Miscarriage.

LXXXIX. Regulus Lunaris, Regulus, or Metal of Silver.
Bate.] It is made by adding of Regulus of Antimony melted viij. Luna j. S. A.
It is good against the Epilepsie, and to strengthen the Brain.

Salmon.] 1. Schroder makes it with Regulus of Antimony p. iv. or v. to Silver
p. j. let them be melted and poured out, as is usual into a Regulus to be
separated from the Scoria or Dross: melt the Dross again with Crude Antimony,
and when they run add filings of Iron, and melt it again till the Regulus
settle, and do thus the third time, or till no more Regulus appears.

2. Rolfincius Chym. Lib. 5. Sect. 9. Cap. 4. makes it by putting in the Luna
in small bits, but without assigning any proportions, and calls it Electrum
Lunare, from which Electrum (says he) or Regulus of Antimony prepared with
Luna, some think the Febrifugium antiquartanarium Riverii is made, which he in
his Appendix to the third Century of his Observations aenigmatically describes.

3. Therefore says Rolfincius: Of this Electrum, and of corrosive Sublimate, A.
lb ss. and distill from thence by Retort a Butter: precipitate it with
Fountain Water; the Liquor will grow milky or white, and by standing quiet and
still, a Powder will subside, or settle, which edulcorate by washing, and keep
for use.

4. But in this Preparation there is nothing answers to his Hercules, and his
12 Labors; and therefore seems not to be Genuine; the true Preparation we have
taught in a former Process of this Book, and so shall say no more of it here:
As to this, it purges (...), both by Vomit and Stool, after the manner of
Mercurius Vitae, but more gently, and may be given a gr. ij. ad iv. and in
strong Bodies to gr. vj. with Observations as in other Vomits.

5. It is a Specific Emetick against the Quartan Ague, as also the Epilesie,
and most Diseases of the Head and Brain proceeding from cold, moisture and
repletion of Humors.

6. But the simple Lunar Regulus of our Author is to be given daily every
Morning fasting, a gr. iv. ad viij. and increasing the Dose every Morning half
a Grain till it comes to j. or rather till it begins to vomit strongly; after
the use of it for some time, the Emetick property will, cease, the Medicament
will seem to become alterative, and the Patient will grow well.

7. It prevails against the Scurvy, and most Diseases proceeding from a
discrasie of the Blood and Humors; chiefly against Diseases of the Head and
Brain, and against Quartan Agues, and other Agues whether regular or irregular,
viz. whether simple, double, or tripple, etc.

XC. Cauterium Lunare* The Silver Caustic.
Bate.] Dissolve Luna p j. in A. F. p. iij. and evaporate to dryness,
afterward augment the Fire to a melting heat, and till the Fumes cease; then
presently power forth the Matter into a little Brass or Earthen Vessel of a
convenient bigness. It is a perpetual Caustic, if it be kept from the Air. It
takes away Warts by touching them therewith.

Salmon.] 1. See our Pharm. Land. Lib. 3. Cap. 2. Sect. 20. But Thibaut makes
it after this manner. Take A. F. j. refined Silver Filings ij. put them
together into a little Mattress, with a straight long neck, so big as that of it
may be empty: let it be Coated half way, and set it in a Round covered with
Sand in a circular Fire, giving a small heat till the Silver is dissolved; and
the dissolvant is evaporated to dryness, and the Matter remains black not
unlike a P^^nice store: then increase the Fire to a melting ^eat, and continue
it till the ^^^ling ceases, and no more Vapors arise, which sh^ws that the
Matter is in fusion; then without delay pour out the Matter into little Brass
or Iron Moulds (for if it cools in the Mar^ass it will be reduced into a white
Powder, which is the Calx of Luna, and may by the addition of Borax return to
its first Metalick nature) and keep the same for use.

2. Lemery takes Spirit of Nitre iij. to Silver j. and dissolves in a Vial in a
Sand heat, evaporating about of the moisture, then puts the rest as it is hot
into a good large Crucible over a gentle Fire, and lets it alone till the
boiling Matter sinks quietly to the bottom of the Crucible, then increasing the
Fire, till it becomes like Oil, pours it out into ^^^p^red Brass or Iron Moulds
a little ^iled and heated, in which it presently coagulates and bard^ns, after
which he takes the Matter and keeps it in a Glass close stopped for use.

3. Or thus according to Charras. Refined granulated Silver iv. put it into a
Glass Cucurbit, in a gentle Sand beat, and affuse thereon A. F. xij. digest
till the Silver is dissolved, and if you please, cover the Cucurbit with its
Head and abstract about half the A. F. or otherwise evaporate it, and let the
Sediment cool and Grystallize; which then put by piece meals into a good
Crucible upon a Culot in the midst of the fireplace in a small Fordace,
regulating the Fire that the Matter may not boil over; and continue it till the
dissolved Silver becomes as it were dry in the Crucible, and the red Vapors of
the A. F. cease to arise; at which time increase your fire to melt the Silver,
which after some few boilings will descend to the bottom of the Crucible, of a
Consistency like that of thick Oil: then take out the Crucible, and gently pour
out the melted Silver into proper Moulds (before hand heat and greased) in
which the Silver will coagulate into brittle Stones of a blackish color, which
being half cold, take them out of the Moulds, and put them up into Glasses,
etc. to preserve them for the Air.

4. This Caustic cauterizes the Flesh or Bones upon which it is applied,
provided you moisten the end of the Stone, or the part, upon which you would
have it operate. It is a gentle and pleasant Eschatotick, and consumes by
touching all Warts, proud Flesh, Cancers, Ulcers, and Red Spots, wetting them
first with Water, and then applying the Stone.

5. It eases the Pain of the Teeth, using it as has been said upon that part of
the Skin and Cartilage, that makes the hollow of the Ear.

6. The Crumbs of this Stone poudered, and incorporated with a Suppurative
consumes likewise proud and ill Flesh, and takes away Rottenness in Ulcers.

7. It serves likewise to dye the Hair black, if you put gr. ij. or iij. of it
into a Spoonful of Water distilled from the green Shells of Wall-nuts, and then
with a Brush-pencil to wash the Hair over with it two or three times, holding
mean-season a Comb between it and the Flesh or Skin, for otherwise it will not
fail to black the Skin, wherever it touches, because of the Vitriol which is
in the A. F.

8. If the Hair sometimes grows green, it is because there has been dissolved
in the A. F. Silver allayed with Copper instead of pure Cuppelated Silver.

9. This Stone may be made of Copper instead of Silver, but then it will not
keep so well, because the Copper being very porous does more easily suffer the
Air to enter it and dissolve it.

10. If you use fine Cupellated Silver, you will from j. of it have xiij. of
the Lapis Infernialis; but if you use Silver with allay j. of it will not yield
you above xj. The reason of the increase of weight is from the sharp Acids of
the Spirit of Nitre adhearing to the Silver; but the difference of the increase
comes from Cupellated Silver having finer Pores than the other, whereby it the
better retains the Acid, and so makes the Stones thereby the stronger.

11. This Strength or the Effects of the Stone proceeds from the lost Spirits
which remain in the Pores of the Silver, and are petrified with it, which work
more speedily or more slowly, and with less violence, according as they were
dissolved with a greater or less quantity of Moisture.

12. Lemery says this Stone is more Caustic than the Crystals of Silver,
though compounded of the same Ingredients, the reason of which he says is, that
in the Evaporation of the Spirit of Nitre, the sharpest part remains at last,
which gives the strength to the Infernal Stone; whereas in the Crystals (says
he) there is a much weaker Spirit, as being impregnated with watery parts.

13. But Charras says that the Crystals of Silver of which the Stones are made
are more Caustic than the stones themselves: the reason he gives for it, is
for that the simple dissolution of Silver in A. F. burns with more speed and
violence than the Stones or C^^stals themselves, as Experience teaches, for if
the least drop falls upon ones Hand, it will burn it immediately, and very
deep, if you do not presently wash it to weaken and carry off the Caustic
Spirits of the A. F. which says he is not to be wondered at, for that the A.F.
has nothing in it hardly but what is Caustic, and the Sales are not able to
act as they should but when they are dissolved.

14. Nor does this Lapis Infernal^^ burn at all, unless it be wet; and for that
reason the dissolution of the Silver in A. F. or S. N. which are Caustic in
all their parts, and able to act alone beyond the force of common Water, which
is used to excite the Action of this Caustic, and make it operate.

15. If you take Crystals of Luna, and melt them in a Crucible boiling the
Liquor till it comes to the consistence of Oil, and then cast it into the
Moulds, you will have also a Lapis Infernalis, like to this described by our
Author.

16. This Silver Caustic is nothing but Cupellated Silver, dissolved and
calcined Philosophically by A. F. etc. and then coagulated by the Evaporation
of the greatest part of the Humidity, and at last petrefied by the fusion of
the said coagulated Matter, which has retained so much of the A. F. as to make
the Luna into the consistence of a Stone.

17. The Mattress here used ought to be small, because we prepare not much of it
at a time, and the fire gentle that the Matter may not run over: its neck long
and straight (if the whole Operation be done in a Mattress) for the easier
pouring it into Moulds; it ought also to be of strong Glass, and coated on the
bottom half way, that a naked fire, drying up the Matter may not break the
Glass.

18. And though Silver may be dissolved in an equal quantity of A. F. yet double
or treble quantities are used, as well for making a greater quantity of the
Stone, as that it may be softer and less black: for the lesser and less black:
for the lesser the quantity of the A. F. the harder the Stone and the more
black, the Silver not being so perfectly calcined, nor containing so much of
the A. F.

19. In boiling of this Solution, it ought to be with a gentle Fire, because it
is apt to run over into the Fire; or else it ejects some drops or sprinklings
upon the hands of the Artist or his Clothes, which upon the Skin smarts
vehemently.

20. You must also often cast your Eye into the Crucicible, chiefly toward the
conclusion, for so soon as the Matter ceases boiling and appears like Oil, you
must immediately cast it into the Mould; for if it be longer in the Fire, the
strongest Spirits would evaporate, and the Stone be less Corrosive.

21. That this Caustic may be made either of Sp. Nitri or A. F. but by the
first it will be whitish, and less Caustic; and instead of blackning the Skin
and Teeth which it may touch, it will only make them look yellow; for that it
is the Vitriol with blacks in the A. F. but not other Corrosive or Acid can
corrode Silver, nor by consequence serve in this composition.

22. To make little Moulds of Lattin, you must hold it a little time over the
Fire, so will it be flexible, and not apt to break, then cut off a piece, and
toul it about a Stick as thick as a Quill, and three Inches long, and so tie it
close with small Wyar, turning up the bottom so as it may not go through, then
paste it with our Lute, and let it dry; and when you use it, take out the
Stick, and pour in the Matter, which will condense into petrefied Cyllinders.

23. To make this Caustic good and strong whether white, gray, or black, you
ought to use only Cupellated Silver, for by a mixtion of Copper it will be both
green and soft, and will easily melt of it self.

24. From hence we conclude, that it can never be made of Lead or Tin, which
are yet softer: nor yet of Iron, because it cannot be dissolved and brought
into a potable Liquor, by reason of its great dryness and earthyness: As for
Gold, though it may be made of that by dissolution in A. R. or Spirit of Salt,
acuated with decripitated Salt, you would only have your labor for your pains,
because refined Gold would be too dear. And as for the Marchassites or
Half-Metals, they are not fit for this Operation, because their dissolution
evaporated and reduced to a Calx, cannot keep the Consistency of a Stone, but
must remain a Powder.

XCI. Regulus Martis, Metal or settling of Iron, i. e. Martial Metal of
Antimony.
Bate.] It is made of Mars ij. mixed with Nitre, Tartar, and Antimony A. ivss.
and detonated S. A. It cures the French Pox, without any Flux at the Mouth, or
Spitting.

Salmon. 1. You may see another way of making this Regulus Martis in our Pharm.
Land. Lib. 3. Cap. 8. Sect. 66. with large Notes and Observations thereon: this
Regulus is nothing but Antimony perfectly opened by Nitre, and divested of its
poisonous qualities, by a long fusion, though not long enough to evaporate all
its purgative Sulphur; and its emetick Virtue is fixed by the addition of Mars.

2. It purges by Stool very well without provoking to vomit, if it be infused
in White Wind, or made into Cups, or Pills, which they call everlasting Pills:
you may infuse j. of the Powder in a Quart of Wine, Sack, Ale, etc. of which
you may give ab j. ad iv. in the morning fasting.

3. If you make it into Pills (which is not so good) one large Pill may serve
you for ever, taking it out of the Close-stool, and then making it clean for
another time; the Pill may be made in weight from j. ad ij. and in some Bodies
will work very well.

4. And if you powder 18 or 20. ounces of it, and tie it up loosly in a course
Linnen-Rag, and then let it infuse in lb iij. of some Sudorifick decoction of
the Woods, Roots, Barks, etc. it is said to cure the Pox without fluxing with
Mercurial Remedies: but indeed this Medicament contains a Philosophic Mercury
of greater Excellency than the Vulgar.

5. If you dissolve Regulus of Mars in Spirit of Sal-Gem, and macerate the
Solution, and distill it, and then inspissate, you will have a good purge, and a
Vomit which works gently: the Dose may be two or three Grains.

6. Le Febure from Beguinus makes this Martial Regulus thus. Ends of
Horse-Nails, or filings of Iron or Steel lb ss, very pure and clean, put them
into a large deep strong Crucible, place it in a Wind Furnace, upon a Culot,
which is a round bottom or Tile so called, cover it with a piece of Brick bury
it in Charcole mixed with kindled Coals, that they may kindle by degrees: the
Iron being clearly red-hot, drawing near to a white Glowing, add to it of
choice Antimony in Powder lb j. and cover it again with the Brick and Chals to
make the Fusion and Union of the two Matters; which done, throw into the
Crucible of good Nitre in gross Powder, a little warmed iv. that taking flame
with the Sulphur of the Antimony, it may make the Fusion the quicker and
clearer: this done, immediately as soon as the Ebulition is over take forth the
Crucible and pour the melted Matter into a Cone or Regulus Vessel bemeared with
Wax; upon the brims of which strike with a Hammer or Pestel, to cause the
Regulus the better to separate it self: but for want of such a Vessel, take
your Crucible out of the Fire, and striking softly upon the brims of it, let it
cool, and the Regulus will settle in the same.

7. Take the Regulus out of the Vessel, or Crucible, and therein you shall find
a seeming uniform Lump; but knock upon it about the middle, and the Regulus
which is in the bottom, will forsake the Dross which is (in this Operation)
uppermost, and is nothing else but the Martial Sulphur, and Terrestial
Impurieties of the Antimony, with some little remainings of the Nitre, which
also frame by themselves a kind of close compacted Lump, which every day
dissolves it self in the Air into a dry Powder, resembling dirty filings of
Iron.

8. The Regulus not being pure enough in the first melting, beat it therefore
into powder, and add to it iij. of Antimony in powder to hasten its fusion, and
put it in a new Crucible, and cause it again to flow in a Wind Furnace, and
being in fusion, cast into it of very dry Nitre ij. or iij. being warmed and in
gross Powder, upon which there will be yet again a small Detonation or
Ebulition, which being over, cast is again into the Iron Cone, knocking upon it
as before: and from this Regulus separate the blackish Impurities as before,
and you will find your Regulus twice as pure and white as the former: proceed
thus the third time, and you will find the Scoria more gray or whitish, which
is a sign that it begins to draw nearer to a state of Purity.

9. Proceed now to a fourth fusion but always with new Nitre dry and warm,
giving a very strong fire this last time, that the Nitre may be in a very good
fusion; then cast it quickly, and with swiftness stir the Casting Vessel, being
first well warmed, and turn it round, and you shall have a bright S^ellate or
starry Regulus of Antimony, to the very Center, white as Silver, and repleat
with a Solar Sulphur* for the Nitre which was on the top of it, is all yellow,
an infallible sign, (with the Star on the top of it) that it has attained to
its purity and perfection.

10. Charras makes it exactly according to Le Febure's Method now declared, and
add, that the Antimony used in this Preparation, affords in proportion to its
quantity, much more Regulus, than in that which is simply Antimonial; because
the Mars not only hinders the dissipation, which would otherwise happen of
several Particles of the Antimony, but also augments its quantity by joining
with it in its own pure parts in the Fusion; nor can the Nitre make so great
dissipation as in the simple Regulus, because it is here used later, and also
mixed by degrees in a small quantity.

11. But this is also true, that should you long continue to mix it, it might
at length consume all the Mars, and change all the Qualities of the Antimony,
rendering it Diaphoretick.

12. Rolfincius Chym. Lib. 5. Sect. 11. Cap. 1. says that the oftener the
Calcination is reiterated with Nitre, the more the Regulus decreases, and at
length is all turned into Scoria, and that the iteration of the Calcination to
the end the Star may appear, is done all in vain: this he says he knows by
experience; but we will bring Experience against Experience, and say that for
the three or four Iterations, the Regulus becomes apparently more bright and
pure; but after the fourth time, it may diminish not only in the quantity, but
in the Virtues also, and so we agree with him.

13. Marggrave makes the Regulus after Beguinus his Method, but only with one
single Calcination, and with a quarter part of the Nitre which he puts in, in
the first Calcination: but this Regulus he beats into powder, and melts it
again in a clean Crucible, which he performs with a very small Fire, so says
he, it comes forth more pure and bright, adding toward the end a small
proportion of Nitre.

14. Le Mort makes it with pieces of Steel p. iv. which being made red hot, he
adds to it. Antimony in small bits p. ix. melt them together, and fuses them
with a Powder prepared of Nitre and Tartar, j. letting them flow in the Fire
for an hour, then pours them forth, shaking or striking the Cone, and separates
the Regulus from the Scoria: this Regulus he again melts, and cast in by
degrees, about a sixth part of pure Nitre, for a farther separation of the
Scoria; then casting it into the Cone, he lets it stand till it is perfectly
cold, so obtains a stellified Regulus: this Regulus says he, may be done
without addition of Salts, but then it will not be so pure.

15. Lemery makes it exactly after Le Febure's Method with four Calcinations
adding fresh Antimony part the second time, but no Antimony the two last times,
but each time the same proportion of Nitre; observing the last time to melt it
well, before you cast the Nitre into it, that the Star may appear.

16. From Antimony xvj. and Iron viij. after the first purification you will
have x. of Regulus, and xiij. of Scoria: after the second purification ixss. of
Regulus: after the third purification viij. ij. do remain; and after the fourth
time you will have only vij. vj. of this Martial Regulus.

17. Now the Iron in its first fusion with the Antimony, turns almost all of it
into Scoria, or Dross, because it joins with the more impure Sulphur, so that
the Reguline or Metalline part being more weighty falls down to the bottom.

18. The Nitre is used only in order to open the Body of the Antimony, and
cause a more perfect fusion, the better to make a separation of the grosser
parts, and to carry off some of its offensive Sulphur by its Volatile parts; so
that the Scoria consists of Iron, Sulphur and fixed Nitre.

19. This Fusion is thrice repeated because some Particles of the Mars (which
easily joins with Antimony by reason of a gross Sulphur it contains) may leave
the Regulus and join with it.

20. The Star appearing in the Martial Regulus (though not in the simple Regulus)
is from the Antimony it self, which is apt to shoot into Needles, as they who
shall be pleased to make its Vitriol may easily prove; but before it is
purified from many of its sulphurous and impure parts, these Star-like Needles
cannot app^ar, unless confusedly: but being purified with Mars (which attracts
to its self most of its soft and impure Sulphurous parts, which hinder the
Stars appearance, and the Crystallization of the Antimony) the Particles of the
Crystaline substance of the Antimony remain and stick close together, which
being joined with the most pure parts of the Mars from that Star, by a natural
shooting or disposition of the same: and this Star appears in the purified
Regulus Martialis because it was naturally in the Antimony before, and not from
any thing which was in the Mars, the Iron only helping to purify it, expatiate
its Crystaline Particles, and harden it; for which reason the Martial Regulus
is found to be harder than the common or simple Regulus, though never so often
purified.

21. The Dose of this Martial Regulus, if it be given in its own substance in
powder is from gr. x. ad j. in some Conserve, or other proper Vehicle.

22. To make the Golden Diaphoretick Sulphur of Antimony. Scoria of Regulus
Martis, q. v. boil a quarter of an hour in fair Water, in a Brass or Iron
Vessel, so have you a dark yellow Lixivium: filter the Liquor into a Glass or
Stone Vessel (not a glazed Earthen one, lest the Salts should corrode the Lead)
and affuse thereon two or three Spoonfuls of Spirit of Vinegar, Nitre, Vitriol
or Sulphur (the stronger it is, the higher the Color of the Precipitate) so
will the Liquor coagulate the Curd being settled, decant the clear Liquor
(which keep to wash Bedsteds with to preserve them from Buggs) and on the Curd
affuse common Water, so will a Saffron colored Precipitate or Powder fall
down: decant this first water, and affuse more in great quantity, to sweeten
it, and take away its ill Smell, and Emetick quality; lastly, dry it between
two Papers leisurely in the Shade for use.

23. The Acid poured on the Lixivium causes 1. A coagulum, 2. Gives the dull
yellow color. 3. Causes it to stink abominably: for the Antimonial Sulphur is
dissolved by an Alcali in the Liquor, and therefore it will not let it go till
the Alcali is weakened by an Acid. And as to the color, Sulphur is naturally
yellow but the Acid enlivens and heightens the Color, so that being washed from
the Alcalious Salts, the Powder becomes of a fine light yellow. And Sulphur
being heat, always stinks, therefore being heated by the Action of the Acid and
re-action of its Dissolvant, it causes that extremely abominable smell.

24. That a great quantity of Water being poured upon the Coagulum, it
presently precipitates into a yellow Powder, of a much livelier color; for the
Water dissolves all the Salts of what kind soever, and thereby frees the
Antimonial Sulphur from all its ties and bonds; so that the Sulphur having
thrown off its Salts, it then appears of its own natural color.

25. This Golden Diaphoretick Sulphur, is nothing but a fixed Sulphur of
Antimony, drawn from the Scoria of Antimony, opened and melted by Nitre: for
the Volatile Sulphur of Antimony, is so much the more poisonous; as it is
Volatile; and that which is least Volatile is violently Emetick and Cathartick;
but this being once fixed it is only Diaphoretick and opening.

26. For a Demonstration that this Diaphoretick Sulphur is but a fixed Sulphur
of Antimony, do but let the Scoria lie two or three days upon the ground, and
there will rise of it self, without any Artifice, a kind of yellow Moss, which
is nothing but the true Sulphur of Antimony purified.

27. It is a powerful Diaphoretick and Diuretic, serving principally to
provoke Women's Monthly Terms, being given a gr. 20. ad 30. either alone or with
Saffron, Savin, or Sena, gr. x. infusing them twelve hours in White Wind, and
so continuing i^ for two or three days together. Where Note, that if this
Powder be not well washed and edulcorated, it may both provoke Vomiting and
Stools too: and therefore of that you must be careful.

XCII. Regulus Solari^, Solar Metal of Antimony.
Bate.] It is made of the Regulus of Antimony being melted iv. mixed with fine
Gold st. S. A. It is an Hysteric, and Deoppilative, or opener of Obstructions.

Salmon.] 1. Schroder makes it after this manner. Antimony iv. Gold j. melt
them together, and pour them out (as is usual) into a Regulus, to be separated
from the Scoria or Dross: melt the Scoria again with Crude Antimony, and when
they run, and silings of Mars, and melt it again till the Regulus settles; do
this the third time, or till no more Regulus is produced.

2. Also a Regulus or Golden Ceruse of Antimony is thus made. Regulus of
Antimony j. fine Gold j. Sal-Nitre iij. Calcine them without melting (in a
Crucible) so the Regulus will be a yellow Powder; the Gold losing something of
its weight: edulcorate the Powder, and if you please calcine again. This
poudered Golden Regulus excellently provokes Sweat.

3. Rolfincius Chym. Lib. 5. Sect. 11. Cap. 5. makes it more compound, and
calls it Electrum Majus: Thus, Martial Regulus of Antimony iij. melt it in a
Crucible, and then add of fine Sol ss. of Luna j. of Venus ij. of Jupiter iij.
and of Saturn iv. add them sensim and sensim, and that their Flux may be
promoted cast in of Nitre ij. then pour it forth into a Cone* and being cold
keep it for use.

4. The use of this Electrum Majus is to prepare therefrom with Corrosive
Sublimate a Butter, and from thence a Mercurius Vitae, and a Bezcar Minerale.
This Electrum calcined with an equal proportion of Nitre, and edulcorated with
fair Water, is given ad gr. iv. or v. either by it self, or with other things,
in Broth, or some other proper Liquor or Antidote.

5. Le Mort makes it thus. The best and purest Regulus of Antimony ss. Gold
purified with Antimony iij. mix and melt them together, according to the usual
Method.

6. The Dose is ad j. being first reduced into fine Powder, and then taken in
some proper Vehicle, as Conserve, Electuary, Syrup or the like, in the Morning
fasting, having a good quantity of Posset Drink or Broth, ready before hand, to
drink with it, in its working.

XCIII. Regulus Veneris, Metal or Settlings of Venus i. e. Venerial Metal of
Antimony.
Bate.] It is made of Venus, Tartar and Nitre, A. iv. Antimony viij. mixing and
detonating S. A. It opens Obstructions in the Rickets.

Salmon.] 1. There is little or no difference between this and the former
Reguli, as to the Methodus faciendi, you may either make it as our Author here
directs with Crude Antimony: or otherwise with the Regulus Antimonii, adding a
proportional quantity of Nitre, to facilitate the Fusion of the Venus, etc.

2. It is an excellent opener of Obstructions, not only of the Liver and
Spleen, but also of the Womb, and of all the other Viscera; and it has been
found by Experience to be good against the Green Sickness in Virgins, more
especially if it be prepared with the Martial Regulus, which has a Specific
property for that purpose.

3. It very much sweetens the Blood, and therefore dissolves the Coagulum
caused by the Acid, whence proceeds the Rickets in Children, the Green Sickness
in young Maids, and the King's Evil in elder Persons, with other Diseases of
like kind, proceeding from internal Obstructions, etc.

4. It is a Specific against Barrenness in both Sexes, for it not only opens
Obstructions of the Womb, cleansing and purifying it from all its feculencies,
but it also strengthens the Instruments of Generation in both Sexes, confirming
the Tone of the Spermatick Vessels, and enabling them to do their Duty, both to
the Generation of Seed, and Ejection of the same being generated, etc. Dose, a
gr. viij. ad xij. or xx. according to Age and Strength.

XCIV. Secundinae Preparatae, The Secundines or Afterbirth prepared.
Bate.] The Secundine of a Woman, or of a Sow, at its first bringing forth;
wash it is White Wind; dry it as speedily as may be, and reduce it into a fine
Powder, S. A. Dose is ad j. against the Falling Sickness and Suffocation of the
Womb: it also facilitates the Birth in time of Travel, etc.

Salmon.] 1. After it is washed in the White Wind, it will be best to cut it
into small pieces, for by that means it will the more easily dry, and be made
fit to reduce into Powder.

2. But that it might the more speedily be reduced, it will be best after the
washing it with Wine, and drying it with Cloths, to wash it in the best
rectified S. V. and then let it dry of its own accord, and being dried to dip
it in again, and let it dry again, and this work to reiterate four or five
times; for by this means the Fire, or Sulphur of the S. V. will more
effectually dry it in one Day, than by the other it will be dried in a Week;
and so it will be much more easily reduced to a Powder.

3. The Author has shown you its Virtues, for which it is excellent, but the
Dose is too small upon some occasions. It may be given a ij. ad ij. in some
proper Vehicle: But Note, the Afterburden of a Woman much exceeds, and is more
Specific than that of a Beast.

XCV. Sedativum Archaei, A Quieter of the Archaeus, or chief Vital and Animal
Powers.
Bate.] Flowers of Sal-Armoniack martiated from which draw a Tincture with S.
N. which abstract to a just Consistency S. A. It has the Virtues of the Flowers
of Sal-Armoniack martiated.

Salmon.] 1. How these martiated Flowers of Sal-Armoniack are to be made, see
Chap. 10. Sect. 4. following.

2. It is only a Tincture drawn from the martiated Flowers of Sal-Arm. and
therefore you may choose whether you will abstract any of the Spirit or no: if
you abstract all the Spirit, the remainder will be a solid Tincture: but if
half the Spirit, it will be a Syrup like Tincture.

3. But since it is impossible to abstract any of the Spirit, but that some of
the Volatile parts of the Medicine will come over with it; and since the
remainder is not to be given alone, but in some proper Vehiculum; it is in my
opinion better to keep the Tincture in its whole Body, without any abstraction,
for as much it is but doubling the Dose, and the work is done; whereby, much
labor and loss is saved.

4. It powerfully opens Obstructions of the Viscera, but chiefly of the Slpeen
and Womb, thereby removing Melancholy, and irregular Fancies thence proceeding;
and is profitable against Vapors, and Fits of the Mother, but more especially
is a Specific against the Green Sickness in Virgins, and the Rickets in
Children. Dose, a gr. x. ad j. or ss.

XCVI. Silices Preparati, Flints prepared.
Bate.] Flints white and pellucid gathered out of Rivers; heat them
red-fire-hot in a Crucible, and quench them in Fountain Water (in which
Sal-Armoniack has been dissolved) so long till they may be made into a Powder,
make a subtle Powder by grinding on a Marble, which make into Troches with
Rose Water, drying them well S. A. They are Diuretic, and used against the
Dropsy, Stone, stoppage of Urine, etc. Dose, gr. 10. ad 20. etc.

Salmon.] 1. Hartman upon Crollius says that Flints and other preparations of
such hard Stones may be taken inwardly with more safety and satisfaction, than
if unprepared, by breaking into pieces and grinding into Powder, to be taken
either alone, or mixed with other Medicaments.

2. And therefore Crollius prepares a Salt of Flints, after this manner. Powder
of Flints, Sulphur, A. q. v. Calcine three or four times in an open Fire, the
Crucible being covered; and after with a Fire over the whole Crucible: then
wash away the Sulphur and Feces, and being in fine Powder, mix it with an equal
quantity of purified Nitre, and calcine in a covered Crucible, in an open Fire,
till they flow: then abstract the Salt with hot Water, and on the edulcorated
Powder, affuse Oil of Turpentine drawn off from Horse-radish-roots: stir them
diligently for the first hour or two, l^st the Matter congeal, so will they be
resolved: afterward abstract the Menstrum by an Alembick, and a Salt will
re^^un in the bottom, which dulcifie well, always filtring and evaporating the
distilled Water. This Salt put upon a Marble in a cold moist Cellar will
resolve into Liquor.

3. This Liquor much exceeds the former prepared Powder of our Author, and may
be given in some drops, viz. a gut. 10. ad 15. in Broth, or Aqua Calcis, etc.
to all the purposes aforementioned.

4. But if upon this said Liquor you put good Alcohol of Wine; it will extract
or imbibe from the Liquor, its Tincture or Sulphur, and separate it from the
Salt under^ath, and remain supernating with the Alcohol; from which Tincture
you may if you so please abstract the Spirit to a due Consistency.

5. The Feces remaining in the bottom, after exaction of the Menstruum
aforementioned poured on, may be calcined again with new Sulphur, and used for
a farther Extraction of Salt in the former manner.

6. But Hartman has an ordinary preparation of Flints which he calls Diuretic,
which for the sakes of those who have not Conveniences to make the former
Preparation, and by reason it is short and easy to be done, we shall here
insert.

7. White River Flints, calcine them in the Fire, and quench them in rich Wine
which so often repeat, till they be wholly reduced into Powder.

8. The Powder you may use in Case and Place, and in the same Dose with that
prescribed by our Author: The Wine filter; one draught of which (for that it
contains* some part of the Salt of the Flint) being drank will presently expel
Urine: for Tartar within the Body stops the Urine, which is resolved and
expelled by Salts given inwardly. See Our Pharmacop. Land. Lib. 3. Cap. 12.
Sect. 45. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

XCVII. Sulphur Antimonii, Sulphur of Antimony.
Bate.] Salt of Tartar or Salt of Wormwood iv. melt it in a Crucible, and put
in Cochleatim, Crude Antimony in Powder j. let it flow for the space of a
quarter of an hour, and then your it out into a Brass Vessel: the Mass of a
Saffron color, edulcorate by many and often repeated ablutions. S. A. It
provokes Vomiting. Dose, a gr. 5. ad. 10. given with Cremor Tartari, it purges
by Stool.

Salmon.] 1. This is Sulphur of Antimony mixed with all the gross Body of the
Antimony, and is nothing near so good as the Sulphur Auratum; but it may do in
want of the other, and supply its place.

2. The Pills of Antimony going under the Name of Lockyer's Pills, are supposed
to be this Vulgar Sulphur of Antimony, ground small, and made up with Honey or
some such like Body, to which he ascribes almost innumerable Virtues.

3. But the better Arrists mak^ the Sulphur of Antimony, by extracting it from
the rest of its gross body: Schroder has it thus. Antimony, Tartar Ana. mix and
melt them at the Fire, then cast them into a Pot full of hot water; let them
stand a night, then decant the Liquor, and precipitate the Sulphur by boiling
or dropping in Spirit of Vinegar, or some other Acid.

4. The Sulphur of Amimony is commonly drawn forth with Spirit of Vinegar, or
by a strong Lixivium, such as this. Salt of Tartar, Quicklime, common Salt
calcined, Ana. make a Lixivium which filter. Or thus. Ashes of Bean-stalks,
Quicklime, Potashes, Ana. make a Lixivium. Or thus. Quicklime lb j. Water lb
xij. or xv. mix and digest, then decant the clear.

5. Sulphur from the Ore, of Crude Antimony. Vnmelted Antimony in fine Powder
lb iij. affuse on it a strong Lixivium of Limewater; digest six days; decant,
filter and by gentle boiling reduce it to a red Powder. It both purges and
vomits, being given a gr. ij. ad v.

6. Charras makes it from Cinnabar thus. Cinnabar of Antimony in fine Powder,
put it into a glazed Earthen Rot upon which affuse a strong Lixivium made of
Salt of Tartar, Quick lime, and Potashes: fill the Pot almost full of this
Lie; boil all for three or four hours, putting in from time to time, new Lie
into the Po^, as it wastes: then whilst the Liquor is bot filter it, and save
the revived Mercury, which will lie at the bottom; and if you please affuse on
the Liquor Spirit of Vinegar to haste^ ^^e Precipitation of the Sulp^ur; or
else letting the Liquor cool, the Sulphur of the Cinnabar which is the Sulphur
of the Antimony will precipitate to the bottom of its own accord* (...) being
precipitated wash it with Water several times, till it is perfectly
edulcorated, then dry it, and keep it in a Glass Bottle close stopped up for use.

7. This Sulphur is not to be taken for that, which is said to be one of the
principles of Antimony, which being united with its most pure parts, is as it
were inseparable from it. It is given a gr. ij. ad iv. or v. but it works
violently both upwards and downwards, expelling all bad humors, not much unlike
to the Sulphur Auratum drawn from the Feces of the Crocus. Metallorum, or the
Dross of the Regulus of Antimony.

XCVIII. Sulphur Antimonii Combustibile, The Combustible Sulphur of Antimony.
Bate.] Antimony dissolved in a proper Menstruum; and cast it into Water:
gather the Sulphur, and wash it with warm water: or if you so please, sublime
it per se S. A. Dose and Virtues are the same with the former.

Salmon.] 1. What this proper Menstruum is, our Author has not here told us;
but to make it susceptible to every mean understanding, we will give you it
from Zwelfer, Mantiss. Spagyr. Cap. 8. in the following Words.

2. Distill an A. F. from Nitre and Alum, Ana. mixing Bole with them: or
otherwise a sufficient quantity of calcined Alum, according to Art: to this A.
F. ad d a fourth part of common Salt, and dissolve it in the same, in a gentle
heat; so have you the Menstruum prepared.

3. New Antimony in fine Powder q. v. put it into a Glass Alembick, and affuse
thereon Guttatim and pederentim, the afore-prepared Aqua Regia, or Menstruum,
^^tting it dissolve at much as it can: The Solution presently decant and
filterate (for certain Reasons) to which immediately put a large quantity of
simple warm Water, so will the Sulphur be separated which carefully gather, and
edulcorate it by many repeated Ablutions with fair water, and then keep it for
use.

4. Or thus, from the same Author. Hungarian Antimony in Powder, or in place
thereof, the Regulus in Powder lb j. to which affuse Pedetentim, Oleum Tartari,
per deliquium, lb j. or more: mix and put them over a gentle Fire, and abstract
to dryness, so that the Mass may be of a Red color: reduce it to a subtle
Powder, and boil it in an Iron Drying Pan, or Iron Kettle, with a sufficient
quantity of a strong Lixivium, repeating it several times, till the Lixivium
appears very red: The tinged Lixivium precipitate with Spirit of Vinegar, so
will a red Powder fall to the bottom, which edulcorate by many Ablutions with
fair warm Water, and keep the Sulphur for use.

5. The aforegoing Sulphurs of Antimony are very Emetick, and therefore not
very safe for vulgar use; but Zwelfer, that he might make them more profitable
for practical use, fixes their Emetick properties after this manner. Sulphur of
Antimony q. v. affuse thereon dephlegmated Oil or Spirit of Vitriol so much as
may overtop it an Inch, digest some days, and abstract; repeating this
operation several times, so will you have a fixed Sulphur of Antimony, of great
Virtues, and which will only work downwards, being given a gr. iv. ad x.
increasing the Dose gradually, as the Body of the Sick can bear it.

6. From this fixed Sulphur of Antimony, with the Philosophical Spirit of
Vitriol or Spirit of Venus you may extract, a Tincture thus. Fixed Sulphur of
Antimony q. v. Philosophic Spirit of Vitriol, so much as to overtop it three
Inches: digest some days in a gentle B. M. then decant the tinged Spirit, which
abstract to the thickness of Honey: to this Mellaginous extract affuse
rectified S. V. so will you have a Rubicund Tincture: from which if you
abstract the S. V. again to a due Consistence, you will have the Essentia
Antimonii, of almost infinite worth in purifying the Blood, altering the
discrasie of the Juices and Humors, and resisting all sorts of Fevers and
Febritick Distempers whatsoever: Dose, a gr. iv. ad vj. or x. in some Cordial
Vehicle.

7. And from the before made Sulphur Antimonii not fixed, he makes a Balsamum
Antimonii, after this manner. Sulphur of Antimony aforesaid j. Salt of Tartar
a^ much: mix them well together in a Crucible over agentle Fire, put the
Mixture into a Glass Cucurbit, and affuse therein Spirit, i. e. Aetheri^ Oil of
Turpentine, so much (...) may overtop it about three Inches; digest in a gentle
Sand or As^ ^eat, till the Spirit of Turpentine is tinged of a Rubicund color,
which then decant, and keep for use.

8. This Balsam prevails wonderfully in Diseases of the Breast and Lungs, hears
Ulcers of the Lungs, and the Hurts of the other Viscera and internal parts; and
is excellent against Coughs, Colds, Asthma's, Wheezings, Spitting Blood, etc.
Dose, a gut. vj. ad x or xij.

9. Marggrave makes this Balsam of the Sulphur of Antimony thus. Pure Sulphur
of Antimony ss, common Oil of Turpentine ij. mix and digest in a Glass
Cucurbit, in the third degree of Fire for three hours, so that the Sulphur may
be dissolved with a great noise; and leave the Glass in the Sand to grow cold
gradually of its self: decant the Solution into a clean Pot, and affuse thereon
fair water q. s. boil for a quarter of an hour, with a Fire of Charcole without
flame (because the Matter is apt to take fire, and not to be quenched with any
water) all being coled decant the super-flowing Water and Oil; and in the
bottom you will find a Balsam of Sulphur, thick and black like Pitch, which you
may dissolve into a thinner Balsam by adding to it 4 or 5. times its weight of
some proper Aromatic Oil, as Oil of Anniseed, Fennelseed, or the like.

10. Or from this thick black Balsam, you may extract a Tincture with rectified
S. V. which you may keep and preserve for the same uses.

11. This Balsam of Marggraves is thought not to be inferior to any natural
Balsam, it comforts and restores the Native heat, and after an insensible
manner depurates the whole Mass of Blood, whereby it is found to be a Remedy
against the greatest Diseases, for that it is made of Antimony which is of a
Solar nature, sive Materia Solis. Dose, gr. iij, or iv.

12. Marggrave makes inflamable Sulphur of Antimony, according to the Process
delivered Sect. LVII. 40. of this Chapter aforegoing the former part of the
Process; so that no more need be said of it here; this Sulphur is said to have
a Diaphoretick and Sudorifick force, freeing the Blood from Impurities, and
preserving it from putrefaction, and the ancient Chemists had it in great
Estimation, for the cure of many supposed incurable Diseases, which it seems to
root out insensibly: and therefore it was reputed a Panacaea, of which see
Basil Valentine, Hartman, and others. And some Alchymists take the Tincture of
this Sulphur (for it has the color of Gold) for the Tincture of the
Philosophers.

13. Le Mort's fixed Sulphur of Antimony, by some called Panacea, or All-beal.
The true inflamable Sulphur of Antimony; purified Regulus of Antimony. Ana. j.
both being in fine Powder, put them into a Retort, and affuse thereon the best
rectified Oil of Sulphur per Camp. or Oil of Vitriol, perfectly freed from the
Phlegm, iij. digest them together for seven days: the eighth day augment the
Fire, fixing to a large Receiver, and abstract the Oil of Vitriol to dryness:
the abstracted Oil, cohobate, and reiterate the Cohobation six times: At last
add iss. of fresh or new Oil of Vitriol, and again abstract, making toward the
end a very strong fire, that the bottom of the Vessel may be nearly red-hot:
the Retort being cold, break it, and take out the Powder; and to calcine it in
a Crucible with a red-hot heat for three h^^rs, so will it be perfectly fixed;
from which if you please you may distill off aromatiz'd S. V. four times.

14. This Panacea purifies the Blood, and helps all curable Diseases by Sweat,
chiefly the Leprosy, Morphews, Herpes, Scurvy, French Pox, etc. Dose, gr. j.
ad. 8.

XCIX. Sulphur Auratum, The Golden Sulphur of Antimony.
Bate.] It is made of the Scoria of the Regulus of Antimony, being separated
from it, boiled in water and filtred, precipitating the Sulphur with Vinegar,
and washing it. Dose, gr.. ad xv. In some it vomits before it sweats; with
others it sweats, and then provokes stools: it wonderfully conduces to the cure
of Tertian and Quartan Agues, being given an hour before the Fit: it often
prevents the Infection and Contagion of the Plague, Smallpox, etc. being
given, and two or three times repeated, or otherwise it happily makes them to
come forth: it is profitable also against the French Pox.

Salmon.] 1. It is called Sulphur, but Sennertus lib. de consensu and dissensu.
Cap. 19. will scarcely allow it: Sulphur illud auratum non esse Sulphur, sed
calcem subtilem Antimonij, quae etiam in Antimonij facile reducitur, docet. But
it is without doubt a Sulphurous part of the Antimony dissolved by Alcalious
Salts, and precipitated by an Acid: Thus.

2. The Scoria or Dross of the Regulus of Antimony in fine Powder, boil it in
common Water in an Iron. Kettle or Earthen Pot half an hour, to make thereof a
Lixivium, this decant and filter through brown Paper into a Stone or Glass Vessel
(not an Earthen one glazed, lest the Salts should corrode the Lead) then affuse
thereon Vinegar, or its Spirit, or Spirit of Sulphur or Vitriol, or Nitre, or
some other Acid, so will the Liquor presently coagulate, which let stand for a
while, and the Coagulum or Curde will settle of a reddish yellowish color;
then decant the clear Liquor; or otherwise, filter the whole, and separate the
Precipitate, which dry and keep for use: but if you filter it not, you may put
the Coagulum into common Water, and the Sulphur Auratum will precipitate in a
Saffron-coloured Powder; being settled decant this first Water, and put on more
in great quantity, that you may at once sweeten the Powder, take away its ill
smell, and diminish its Emetick force: then decant the clear Water, and filter
the rest through a brown Paper, in which let it dry leisurely in the Shade, and
keep it in a Glass close stopped for use.

3. Lemery says that from fifteen Ounces of Scoria, you will have 12. ij. of
the Sulphur Auratum; which is Emetick, and may be given a gr. ij. ad vj. in
Broth or other like Vehicle; or otherwise in form of Pills.

4. To xvj. of Scoria you may put Water lb xvj. this Liquor will coagulate like
a Gelly when it is cold, by reason of the Salts and Sulphurs joining together;
the Scoria, being nothing but a mixture of the fixed parts of the Nitre and
Tartar, joined with the more impure part of the Sulphur of Antimony.

5. The Coagulum is caused by reason of weakening the force of the Alcalious
Salts (which held the Sulphur of the Antimony) through the help of an Acid, by
which means the Alcalies letting go their hold, the Sulphur precipitates; and
of a yellowish color, because it is the natural color of Sulphur, which here
is heightened and enlivened by the help of the Acid.

6. So soon as the Vinegar or any other Acid is poured on, it causes a most
abominable stinking Scent, from the ascending of some part of the Volatile
Sulphur* of which so much as the Acid seizes on, it fixes; and this is natural
to all Sulphurs being heat with Acids; and the hot Waters or Springs of the
Mineral Baths are not free there from, for that mostly, they stink very much
with Sulphur: the Precipitate which the Acid makes is in large quantity, and
much like a Coagulum or Curd.

7. Now this Sulphur Auratum is emetick, and not altogether pure, but is mixed
with much Salt and Terrestreities, which it yet retains in its precipitation;
and some suppose, that it is this Salt, which gives it this color by rarifying
its parts.

8. As to its Virtues and Operations it is much like to that of Crocus
Metallorum, and therefore ought to be given in the same Dose; though some
Chemists think it may be given in a larger, as to gr. x. or xij. or more: and
it is called Golden Sulphur, by reason of its color, it much resembling that
of Gold.

9. But doubtless the Golden Sulphur of Antimony of the Ancients was another
thing, viz. a fixed Sulphur, like that of Gold, which was subtle tinging
Sudorifick and internal: whereas this Sulphur is gross, without Metallic
Tincture, Emetick and External.

C. Sulphur Vitrioli, The Sulphur of Vitriol.
Bate.] It is made by dissolving Vitriol in warm Water, and affusing therein
Guttatim Oleum Tartari per deliquium, that the Sulphur of the Vitriol may be
precipitated, which edu^^^ ate and dry. It is good against Diseases of the
Lungs: it cleanses putrid Ulcers, and induces a Cicatrize; and is of very
excellent use against the Falling Sickness, Vertigo, and Chronick Diseases.
Dose, ad gr. 15.

Salmon.] 1. Le Febure makes it thus. Pure Vitriol q. v. dissolve it in Water
of May- Dew: digest the Solution seven days in B. Vaporoso: the eighth day
filter it, and draw off half the Menstruum by distillation in a boiling B. M.
take forth the Vessel, and whilst it is yet warm, affuse thereon Oil of Tartar
per deliquium, so will the Sulphur contained in the Liquor precipitate: let the
Liquor grow clear by degrees, and then decant it by inclination; afterward by
several Affusions of distilled Rainwater, edulcorate the remaining Sulphur,
which dry, and keep for use.

2. This says he is a good Remedy against disaffections of the Breast; and it
may be given a gr. ij. ad x. in some proper pectoral Syrup, Lohoch, Lozenge, or
Conserve, appropriated to the Disease: it is also successfully used to mundifie
and cicatrize sordid and evil Ulcers.

3. Hartman in his Notes on Crollius, has the Preparation of this Sulphur,
something differing from the former Prescripts; but it is only in the
Calcination of it, in the Sun or otherwise, before he dissolves it, which to me
seems to be labor in vain, because it is dissolved in a watery Menstruum
again* whereby that is recuperated which was before unadvisedly taken away;
besides in that Calcination some of the most Subtle and Volatile parts are
lost, which cannot be restored by any after Operation.

4. This is the same Preparation which Schroder calls Sulpher Vitriolidulce,
sweet Sulphur of Vitriol, which he says, is not only good for the Lungs but to
cleanse sordid Ulcers and heal them.

5. Sala opera. page 720. makes it thus. The best Vitriol dissolve it in Water,
and let its Earthy parts settle, decant the clear Liquor from the Residence,
and affuse thereon a strong Lixivium of Potashes, so will the Sulphur fall
down to the bottom: this do so long till the Liquor is deprived of all its
Sulphur: this Sulphur dry carefully and sublime it per se, casting away the
Feces; and adding to it a half part of Salt of Tartar distill by Retort a most
Rubicund Oil; to which afterward affuse a little Vinegar, and a redish Powder
will precipitate which wash from all its Acrimony: upon this Powder or Sulphur
affuse S. V. which circulate for eight days, and the desired Sulphur of the
Vitriol, will be separated to the Superficies of the Spirit, and swim on top
like an Aromatic Oil, which separate with a Tritorium, or separating Funnel.

6. It consumes all the depraved Humidities of the Body, cleanses the Womb,
makes fruitful the Seed, drys away the Water between the Skin and Flesh in a
Dropsy, resolves the Coagulum of the Blood, and lastly has the power of opening
Apostems. Dose, a gr. j. ad iv. or vj. in Bawm or Parsley-water etc. By the
continued use of this Medicine the Leprosy (says he) is most happily cured, yea
even the poisonous Elephantiasis it self.

CI. Sulphur Vitrioli Martiale, Martial Sulphur of Vitriol.
Bate.] Wash the martiated Flowers of Sal-Armoniack from all their saltness,
and calcine, S. A. It has the same Virtues with the former; besides which it
opens Obstructions: the Dose also is the same with the aforegoing.

Salmon.] 1. You may find the Recipe in Zwelfer Mantis. spagyr. Cap. 3. page
803. where he advises to take the yellow martial Flowers of Sal-Armoniack, q.
v. and to affuse thereon a sufficient quantity of fair Water, therewith to wash
them from all their saltness, which they have received from the Sal-Armoniack,
and this washing to be so often repeated till they are sweet, and a Rubicund
Powder remain, the true Offspring of Mars, and the very Essence of that
Mineral; the which carefully dry; and (if you shall so please) by little and
little or degrees, ver^ g^^^ly calcine, and so keep it for use.

2. It is an Anodyn, and profitable to ease the most acute pains; and by some
is very aptly mixed with Opiate Laudanums: it gives ease in the Cholick, and the
Gripings of the Guts, and alleviates all other pains: strengthening the Liver,
and opening the Obstructions of the Spleen. Dose, a gr. ^j. ad j.

3. You may give them thus. Of our Antidote ss. of this martial Sulphur, a gr.
(...) ad xvj. Camphir in powder gr. vj. Oil of Juniper Berries gut. iij. mix
for a Dose against the Cholick, and the Griping of the Guts, or Pains o^^^e
Gout. 4. Or thus Of this Martial Sulphur j. of our V^l^^^le Laudanum, gr. ij.
Extract of Saffron ss. mix for a Dose, against any vehe^^^^ pain i^ what part
of the ^^dy soever 5. Or thus Sy^^^ (...) Poppies ss. Treacle-water iij. of
this Martial Sulphur gr. ^5. Oil of Cinna^^^ gut. ij. shake them together, and
give them for a Dose in pains of the Spleen, etc.

CII. Sulphur Vitrioli Narcoticum, The Narcotick or Anodyn Sulphur of Vitriol.
Bate.] Vitriol p. ij. Mars p. j. digest in Spirit of Vinegar, and distill in
Sand to dryness: from the red Mass extract a Tincture, with Spirit of Vinegar,
filter and precipitate with Oil of Tartar: the Sulphur fallen down to the
bottom edulcorate, and dry. From this Anodyns are made, bearing the Name of
Laudanum. It stops Catarrhs, takes away Pains, etc. Dose, gr. ij. ad vj, etc.
at time of sleeping.

Salmon.] 1. Purified Vitriol lb ij. filings of Iron lb j. mix them together,
and put them into a Glass body, affuse on them Spirit of Vinegar, so much as to
overtop them two or three Inches: fix a head on the body and place it in a
Sand heat, fitting a Receiver thereto; give but a gentle fire at first, to make
all the Moisture rise, which increase gradatim, till the Sand is red-hot: when
all is cold, take out the Matter at bottom, powder it, and digest it in a
Mattress with fresh Spirit of Vinegar, so much as to overtop it three or four
Inches, in B. M. for three or four days: then will you find the Menstruum
colored, which decant, putting on again fresh Spirit of Vinegar, digesting a
new, and decanting as before, reiterating these same Operations, till your
Spirit will be tinged no more: mix all these decanted Tinctures together,
filter them; and then affuse thereon Oil of Tartar per deliquium, so much as
may precipitate all the Sulphur of the Vitriol to the bottom, which afterward
edulcorate with warm Water by several Ablutions, dry it, and keep it for use.
Thus Beguinus.

2. This lays he is a famous Anodynon, and to be preferred before many others,
and Paracelsus commends it in the highest degree, as a Medicament of great
worth: without doubt, it is an excellent thing, and a good Remedy for Diseases
of the Breast and Lungs, Coughs, Colds, Asthma's Obstructions of the Lungs,
Spitting of Blood, etc. Dose, a gr. v. ad xij. in any pectoral Syrup. Conserve,
Lohoch, or Confection.

3. That it will ease pains in some measure is true; but that it is a Narcotick
or Anodyn like to Opium, or as some will have it, to exceed Opium, or an Opiate
Laudanum is so false, that scarcely any thing can be falser; and this Assertion
my own large Experience has told me to be true; yet it is an excellent
Medicine, and not to be despised for those Diseases it is designed against, and
peradventure may exceed many others for Diseases of the Breast and Lungs, etc.

4. Hartman upon Crollius (who seems to be one of the first Publishers of this
Medicine, and from whom most of the others had it) makes it exactly after the
aforegoing manner, but with Hungarick Vitriol which is blew, or a Vitriol of
Copper: this Sulphur he says is Combustible Sulphur, which says he you may see
by putting it to the Fire; for it will presently take flame, and be thereby
wholly consumed like other Sulphur; but this is understood of the Powder, the
Spirit of Vinegar being abstracted to dryness, and then edulcorated, before the
Oil of Tartar is put into it.

5. For the Vinegar impregnated with this (...) Sulphur of Vitriol, being mixed
with a sufficient quantity of the Oil of Tartar guttatim, lets go its hold of
the Sulphur, whereby it precipitates, and is rendered fixed and Anodyn.

6. But Zwelfer has another peculiar way of making it, by dissolving the best
Hungarian Vitriol, or Vitriol of Mars in Water and filtering etc. the whole
Process at large you may see in our Pharm. Land. Lib. 3. Cap. 9. Sect. 1. with
some Notes upon it, so that we shall say no more of it here.

7. Rolfincius Chym. Lib. 5. Sect. 9. Cap. 8. exactly follows Hartman, making
first the inflamable Sulphur with Spirit of Vinegar; and from that the Anodyn
Sulphur by affusion of Oil of Tartar, as is above taught; which same Method
Schroder, Sala, Charras, and others pursue.

8. Le Febure makes it thus. Liege Vitriol lb vj, purified in a sufficient
quantity of Rainwater: this done, add to the Dissolution, filings of Iron or
Steel lb iss. put them into a glazed Earthen Pan, stir them together, and put
the Pan in the Sun, leaving it till it grows thicker by degrees, which stir
often, and evaporate to dryness: then beat it to powder, and add to it lb iss.
more of filings, sprinkling it with distilled Rainwater, till all be reduced
to a smooth uniform Pap, which stir often, and dry again by evaporation in the
Sun; and thus proceed to the seventh time, until the Matter becomes a very high
red Tincture: then being evaporated to dryness, put it into a large Mattress,
and affuse thereon Spirit of Vinegar so much as to overtop it four Inches:
digest in a Sand heat, stirring or shaking it often, and continuing the
digestion, till the Spirit is tinged of a fresh red color: decant this
Tincture, and affuse fresh Spirit of Vinegar, digesting, stirring, decanting,
and affusing fresh Spirit, till it will extract no more Tincture; mix all these
Tinctures and filterate them, and divide the Liquor into two equal parts. The
one half put into a Glass Cucurbit, and in an Ash or Sand heat, abstract all
the Menstruum by distillation in a gradual heat to dryness: what is left at
bottom edulcorate with distilled Rainwater, till the Water comes off
tasteless: then dry it between two Papers in a gentle heat, so have you the
combustible or inflamable Sulphur of Vitriol, mixed with that of Mars, which
will easily take flame, and be consumed like common Brimstone, yielding a
Purple flame.

9. This Sulphur of Vitriol may be used instead of Flos Sulpuris, being much
more efficacious and virtuous in all Diseases of the Breast and Lungs, as
Coughs, Colds, Asthma's, Catarrhs, Shortness of Breath, Wheasings, Spitting of
Blood, Ulcers and Obstructions of the Lungs, etc. being given a gr. iv. ad x.
or xij. in Lozenges with flowers of Benjamin; or in some proper Syrup,
Conserve, Lohoch, Bolus, or Electuary, etc.

10. Of the other half he makes the Fixed and Narcotick Sulphur of Vitriol
thus. Being filterated as aforesaid, he puts it into a Cucurbit in B. M. and
draws off one half or two thirds of the Menstruum, then precipitates the
remainder with Oleum Tartari per deliquium affusing it guttatim, or drop by
drop, till the precipitation ceases, or no more will fall: lets the Matter
settle in the bottom of the Cucurbit for some time, then decanting the clear
Liquor from it, he edulcorates the precipitated Matter by many ablutions; then
drys it according to Art: this redish Powder he puts into a Mattress or
Philosophical Egg, and in an equal heat digests or ripens it for the space of
forty days, till it becomes of a fair, high red color, which is the fixed
Anodyn Sulphur of Vitriol.

11. This Sulphur is said to be a true Preserver and Restorer of Health, and
confirmer of the Vital Functions, being given once in five or six days as a
preservative, and every other day as a Curative; for it sends its Solar beams
through the whole Body, expelling from it all Impurities whatever, either by
Urine or Sweat, or an insensible Transpiration, and easing all manner of pains
whatsoever: Dose, a gr. ij. ad viij. or x. in Confectio de Hyacintho, or some
other proper Vehicle fasting, drinking after it a small Glass of generous Wine,
or some Cordial Water.

12. Out of this fixed Sulphur of Vitriol you may make a Tincture. Of this
fixed Sulphur of Vitriol iv. ripned as before directed, put it into a Pelican,
upon which affuse Tartariz'd Spirit of Vitriol, best rectified S. V. Ana. vj.
united together first by distillation in B. M. lute exactly the Junctures;
digest and circulate in a vaporous B. till you see the Liquor become Bloodred:
then remove the Fire, and decant the pure clear Tincture into a small Cucurbit,
and there from abstract a half or third part of the Menstruum, keeping the
remaining Tincture as a most precious Jewel.

13. It is a famous easer of Pains, strengthner and restorer of the Tone of the
parts weakened, driving away naturally and insensibly, all hurtful and corrupted
Humors, which may provoke or irritate the Archaeus: it opens Obstructions of
the Lungs, Womb, Spleen, and other Viscera, provokes Appetite, strengthens the
Stomach, and excites Venery, strengthening the Matrix, and all the Instruments
and Vessels of Generation, rectifying, strengthening and increasing the Seed,
and making it prolifick and fruitful in both Sexes: it provokes Urine given in
Arsmart or Onion-water, expelling the Dropsy by Urine, and with all it is
prevalent against Vapors from the Spleen, Fits of the Mother, and most other
Distempers of the Womb. Dose, a gut. j. ad vj. in Broth, Wine, or some proper
Cordial water.

14. Schroder and some others have also a Purging Sulphur of Vitriol, which is
made after this manner. Vitriol of Liege well depurated lb ij. mix it well with
pure clear filings of Iron or Steel vj. put all into a great Mattress, and
affuse upon it Acid-water of Vitriol, so much as to overtop it four Inches:
digest in B. M. for four days, stirring or shaking the Vessel five or six times
a day: this done, filter the Liquor, and abstract one half of it by
distillation in Ashes; then affuse on the remainder, Oleum Tartari per
deliquium, guttatim, ij. to every pound of the Matter, so will the Sulphur
precipitate; which (decanting from it the clear Liquor) take, dry, and keep for
use.

15. It is said to be a mild and gentle purge, good for such as have any
stoppage or oppression of the Breast and Lungs, as a Cough, Asthma, Wheasing,
Phthisick, or incline toward a Consumption or hectic Fever. Dose, a gr. ij.
ad vj. in conserve of the Roots of Elecampane, or other good Pectoral.

16. This Sulphur says Le Febure, if it be put into a Mattress, sealed up
hermetically, and digested in a slow heat for the space of forty days, in
Virtue will be doubled, or be of double strength, and the Dose may be less by
the half.

CIII. Sulphur Auri, seu Aurum potabile; The Sulphur of Gold, or Potable Gold.
Bate.] Purge Sol twice with Antimony, then calcine first with Mercury and
Sulphur: Secondly, with Sea Salt melted: Thirdly, with Salt of Tartar, then
extract with the Sulphur of Saturn, S. A. It is accounted an Universal Remedy
against all Diseases whatsoever. It is Sudorifick and Alexipharmick after an
admirable manner. Dose, gr. vij. or viij. in generous Wine.

Salmon.] 1. This is the Reputed Aurum Potabile of our Countryman Dr. Anthony,
Published by Schroder, as you may see in our Pharm. Land. Lib. 3. Cap. 1. Sect.
11. Joh. Daniel Horstius in his Pharmacopoeia, has published another Recipe
under the Name of Dr. Anthony, which you may also see in our Doron Medicum,
Lib. 2. Cap. 11. Sect. 4. but neither of these ^re the true.

2. The right and genuine Preparation you may see in our aforesaid Doron. Lib.
2. Cap. 11. Sect. 3. out of Papers under Dr. Anthony's own Hand, as in the
place cited we have declared, where you have the Process at large, and in his
own words Verbatim.

3. But to give you all the satisfaction we can in this matter, we shall do our
endeavor in this place, 1. To explicate the Text of our Author. 2. To recount
to you the several Aurum Pototabiles which are extant by several Men. 3. And to
add some others to the number, which are not to be found collected in any of
our former Books.

4. First, You are to take pure Sol; it is made pure by animmersive Calcination
thus: Dissolve the Gold in Aqua Regia, so will the Impurities settle; decant
the Solution and precipitate it; then melt the Gold and it will be pure.

5. Secondly, Purge it with Antimony thus: Make a Regulus of Gold as you do in
Antimony, put it into a Crucible, place it in a Furnace in a circular Fire, and
use Bellows till the Antimony be blowed off, and nothing remain but pure Gold;
which work twice repeat.

6. Or thus from Charras. Put Gold q. v. or p. j. into a sound strong Crucible,
placed upon a Culot in the midst of the Hearth place, in a Wind Furnace, and
having kindled a good Coal-fire, make it red-hot: then cast in Gradatim
Antimony in Powder p. iv. which melting presently causes the Gold to melt: keep
the mixture in fusion, till you see no more sparkles fly out, by which you may
be certain, that the Antimony has consumed all the Heterogen or Foreign
Substances mixed with the Gold; at which time having heated an Iron Cornute,
and greaz'd it within, cast the melted Matter into it, and knocking the Cornute
the Gold will descend to the bottom: letting it cool, separate all the Scoria,
and pour it again into the Iron Cornute heated and greased, so will you have a
Gold very pure, and of an excellent color: This Work according to the Text of
our Author i^ to be twice repeated.

7. Lemery does it much after the same manner, and in the same proportions, but
taking the Crucible out of the Fire knocks it that the Regulus may settle, and
when cold, breaks it, and separates the Scortia on the top from the Gold: this
Regulus of Sol he weighs, and melts again in a Crucible over a strong fire, and
when it is melted casts into it by little and little three times its weight of
Salt Nitre, then continues a good strong Fire, that the Matter may remain in
fusion, till the fumes are all gone, and it appears clear, then casts it into a
Cornute, or else leaves it in the Crucible to cool, (knocking the Crucible
while it is cooling for the separation of the Regulus or Gold (from the Scoria)
which then will be perfectly pur^.

8. This purification of Gold by means of Antimony is better than any other,
forasmuch, as nothing but Gold is able to make resistance against the Mouth of
this devouring Dragon; which devours with that violence that it sometimes
swallows up and consumes some part of the Sol. it self; but never leaves it in
any other Metal.

9. It is also to be put upon a Culot or Tile, for fear, lest the Air coming in
by the Ash-hole, should cool the bottom of the Crucible or Melting-pot: then
the Antimony being put into the red-hot Gold, it presently melts, and by reason
of the Sulphur of the Antimony the force of the Fire is increased; so that the
porous and unfixed Matter mixed with the Gold, uniting with the Antimony, one
part of it evaporates away in Smoke, and the other remains in the Scoria.

10. The Nitre is put into the second melting of the Regulus, to absorb or
receive all the Antimony that may yet remain, whereby you have a well purified
Regulus, even Gold of 24 Carats fine (a Carat being the 24th part of an Ounce.)

11. Thirdly, the calcining the Gold with Mercury and Sulpher. This is by
Amalgamation. Plates of Gold p. j. Quicksilver p. vj. mix or amalgamate at the
Fire, till they begin to smoke, and cast them into Water, that the Mixture may
be all alike: then grind it with twice as much Sulphur, and calcine is with a
gentle Fire, till the Mercury and Sulphur exhale without melting; and the Calx
of Gold be like the color of a Marrigold. Thus Schroder.

12. But Hartman says it is better, that after Amalgation, you abstract the
Mercury by Retort, till they will no longer mingle, before you calcine with
Sulphur.

13. Beguinus separates after amalgamation, the superfluous Mercury through
Leather, mixes the remaining Mass with twice as much common Salt decripitated,
and reverberated (in a luted Crucible, having only a hole at top) without
melting the Gold, being thus calcined and dulcified, he amalgamates it with
more Mercury, strains again the superfluous through Leather, and the remaining
Matter calcines with twice as much Sulphur Vive, adding S. V. and burning it
with the Sulphur, whereby the Gold is much attenuated, and made spungy.

14. Lemery takes very thin Plates of the former Regulus of Gold, which he
heats in a Crucible red-hot in a large Fire; then puts upon it eight times it
weights of Quicksilver revived from Cinnabar, stirs the Matter with a small
Iron Rod, and when it begins to fume, casts the Mixture into an Earthen Pan of
Water, in which it coagulates; then washe^ it several times to take away the
blackness: the Mercury not united he separates by straining through Linen
Cloth, the Matter remains being Gold with about thrice its weight of Mercury:
put this Amalgama into a Crucible over a gentle Fire, so will the Mercury
evapora^^ into Air, and (...) the Cal^ of Gold as (...), in a (...) and
^^^alpable Powder.

15. This ^malgama says Ch^rr^^, being flung into a Dish of Water (...) if it
bewa^^^ and rubbed in the Water to free it from all the Dros^ and Uncl^^^ness,
the A^^^^gama will be gentle, (...) and of an un^^^ous appearance: Then having
freed it from the superfluous Quick silver (...) straining be evaporates the
remaining* Mercury* in a Crucible, over a gentle Fire as aforesaid: then
amalgamates the Gold again with new Quicksilver, reiterating the same Operation
three times.

16. After this be mixes and bur^ gently over the Gold, si^ times o^^ after
another its double ^eight in Flowers of Sulphur, as well to open it the better
as to carry off all the Particles of the Mercury that (...).

17. By this means you have a Calx of Gold, the Particles of which will be
perfectly divided, which are to be wash^, and reserved for the farther uses
here referred to in our Text.

18. From this Calx of Gold, you may have Flowers of Gold thus. Of this Calx,
of Gold washed, p. j. Flower of Sal-Armoniack in sub i^ Powder. p. iij. mix and
put them into* an Adequate blind Alembick, and sublime them together in a
Sand-heat with a moderate Fire; so will the Gold ascend in Flowers with the
Sal-Armoniack; edulcorate the Flowers by many Ablutions, and keep them for our
present use, or any other, occasion which Art may require.

19. Fourthly, The Calcination of the former Calx of Gold with Sea Salt. This
Operation we shall give you from Angelus Sala, Opera Meduo Chymica. page 686.
Sea Salt but (he says Sal Gem) and make it flow in a Fire of Charcole* often
stirring it* this distill afterward with Rainwater to dryness; and grind this
Salt upon a Marble with the former Calx of Gold, moistning it now and then with
the distilled Rainwater, so long till the Calx appear^ very pure* put all into
a Glass Mattress, pouring in Water and washing it, till no Saltness remain, or
till the Water comes off fresh: then in a reverberatory Furnace, reverberate or
calcine this Solar. Calx* for a whole day, that it may be made very subtle.

20. But Schroder advises the said Calx of Gold to be laid S. S. S. with the
said melted Salt, and to be calein'd in a reverberating Fire, but so gentle as
not to melt the Gold.

21. Fifthly, To calcine the Gold with Salt of Tartar. The last mentioned Calx
of Gold p. j. pure Salt of Tartar p. iij lay them S.S.S. in a calcining Vessel
or Crucible, and in a gentle Reverberatory calcine again for seven days, but
with this caution that the heat be not so great as to melt your Gold, (for then
all your labor is lost) the Gold being then very light, and soft like the
finest Flower, take it forth, and free it from the Salt of Tartar by many
Ablutions in distilled Rainwater, then carefully dry it, and keep it for
making Aurum Potabile with. Where Note, That Basil reverberates with Flowers of
Tartar; but doubtless the Salt is bet^e

22. Sixthly. To make the Sulphur of Lead. Crystaline Saccharum Saturni lb j.
dissolve it seven times in the best Spirit of Vinegar, and evaporate as many
times: then in a cold Cellar let it melt per deliquium, this Liquor put into a
Retort in a Reverberatory Furnace upon the cover of an Earthen Pot turned up
side down, an Inch thickness of Sand, being between it and the bottom of the
Retort: fit to the Neck a large Receiver, luting the Juncture well, and with a
gradual Fire, carefully distill, and continus the distillation till you see red
heavy drops fall down, and the Recipient grows clear of it self, which will be
in about 24 hours, then put out the Fire, and in the Recipient you will have
four several Liquors, viz. a volatile, subtle and inflamable Spirit: a yellow
Oil, which is the Sulphur of Lead intended by our Author: a Phlegm, and a red
Oil.

23. Put all into a clean Retort, and make a Rectification in B. M. or Ashes,
changing the Recipient to receive the said Liquors; so have you first the
Volatile and Aetherial Spirit, coming over without any Veins therein, in the
neck of the Retort: which being come over, change the Receiver, and you have
secondly, the yellow Oil or Sulphur with oblique and winding Veins: when this
sign disappears change the Receiver again, and you have, thirdly the Phlegm, in
straight and direct Veins; and fourthly, the red Oil remaining at bottom.

24. Seve^^bly, To com^^^ the designed Aur^^ Po^^^^ Of the former pre^^red Cu^^
of Gold p. j. of this S^^p^^r of Lead p. iij. mix them, and (...) the Mixture
into a Glass P^^al or Egg, which seal up hermetically, and ^^gest in a gentle
Sand (...) 40 days, so will you have (...) Aurum Potabile as red as Blood,
which is the Particles of the Sulphur of Gold dissolved and extracted into the
Menstruum.

25. This is a great and famous Arcanum, and a secret Remedy against all
Di^^^es of the Heart and strain, being given a gut. j. ad viij. in the Spirit
of Lilly Co^^ally, or in a Glass of generous Canary. It provokes Sweat gently,
and as Nature requires, resists Poison, restores in Consumptions, c^^es the
Plague, and all sorts of malign, burning, contagious and epidemick Fevers; and
in a special manner prevails against Epilepsies, Apoplexies, Vertigo's
L^^^rgies, Pal^ies, Megrims, Leprosies, Scabs, Itch, Ulcers, F^^^ula's, and
other inveterate and almost incurable Distempers: it is good against sainting
and swooning Fits. chearing the Heart, and reviving the Spirits to a Miracle.

26. Thus have we given you this elaborate Process of our Text at large,
explicating plainly and clearly, every particular thereof; But such as dislike
it, for the rediousness thereof, may have recourse to other Prescripts of Aurum
Potabile, such as are taught in our Pharm. Land. and Doron Medicum, which are
the following, viz. 1. Aurum Potabile made with Volatile Salt of Urine. 2. With
S. V. accuated with Flowers of common Salt, or Sal-Gem. 3. With rectified Oil
of Antimony. 4. With Oil of common Salt, or Sulphur and S. V. 5. With Spirit of
Salt of Tartar of Clossaeus. 6. That of Quercetan. 7. That of Billichius: 8.
That of Grulingius. 9. That of Mynsicht. 10. The Tinctura Auri of Clossaeus.
11. The Tincture of Basil Valentine. 12. Tinctura Rubini Anri. 13.
Quintescentia Auri Fabri. 14. Oleum Solis, or Oil of Gold; all which you may
see in our said Pharm. Land. Lib. 3. Cap. 1. Sect. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16,
21, 23, 25, and 26.

27. To the former fourteen you may add the four following, 15. The true Aurum
Potabile of Dr. Anthony. 16. Dr. Anthony 's Prescript according in Horstius.
17. Essentia Auri. 18. Liquor Aureus, sea Oleum salis; the Preparations of
which see in our Doron Medicum, Lib. 2. Cap. 5. Sect. 36. and Cap. 11. Sect. 2,
3, and 4.

28. Besides all these here mentioned, there are several other Aurum Potabiles,
and Tinctures of Gold to be found in Authors; which we cannot here have leisure
to describe, but shall rather refer you for the same, to our Officina Chymica,
now in the Press.

29. But to gratify the Ingenious, we will here give you an* Aurum Potabile,
not inferior to any Preparation I have yet seen* which was communicated to me,
by a worthy and ingenious Gentleman, profoundly skilled in Chemical Learning,
and an indefatigable Searcher into the most mysterious Secrets of Nature.

30. It is made with the following Sal-Mirabile. The best and perfectly
deflegmated Oil of Vitriol, common Salt, A. lb j. mix them together Paulatim;
put the Salt into a Cucurbit guttatim put on the Oil: this done, distill in a
Retort to dryness, so in the bottom you will have a fixed Salt: this Salt
dissolve in fair Water, and set it to Crystallize, so will you have
Sal-Mirabile: this being dried in the Sunbeams, or a very gentle heat (so as
it may not melt, for then the work of Crystallization must be performed again)
will come to a fine white Powder.

31. To make with this Salt the Aurum Potabile. Take of this Powder vij. fine
Sol in Leaves or Filings, j. mix them, and in a Coated Glass Retort put them
over a gentle Fire, at first, which increase gradatim, even to a red-hot heat;
so will the Salt dissolve the Sol, and open its Body: this opened Sol dissolve
in rectified S. V. so will you have a Tincture as red as Blood, which is Aurum
Potabile. Dose, a gut. 10. ad 30. in some Cordial Water, or a Glass of generous
Canary.

32. Of this opened Sol, to make Vitriol of Gold. Dissolve this opened Body of
Sol in fair Water, and it will be a glorious Green; this being put into a cool
Cellar will shoot into long green Crystals.

33. Where Note, That the first vij. Ounces of the Sal-Mirabile will not
dissolve all the Ounce of Gold, and therefore to what remains of the
undissolved Sol, put vij. more of the aforesaid Salt in Powder, which melt and
dissolve together as aforesaid; after which dissolve again in fair Water and
Crystallize or Vitriolize as before.

34. And to the remaining Sol, yet undissolved, ad vij. more of the same Salt
in powder, and proceed in all respects as in the former Operation, dissolving
and vitriolizing; so will you have of j. of fine Gold 24. Ounces of its
Vitriol, which will dissolve in Wine or Spirit of Wine, and become an Aurum.
Potabile of almost infinite Virtues.

35. Being thus exalted with S. V. rectified, it is a Remedy fit to give relief
in all great, dangerous and acute Diseases, which may seize upon the Heart or
Brain or any of the Vital parts or Juices; for it preserves the Na^^ral heat
and Radical moisture, restores it when decayed or diminished, chearing the
Heart and recreating the Vi^al and Animal Spirits, adding vigor, and acuity,
stirring up the Latent or almost obliterated ferment of Life, and preserving
the Tone of all the Parts.

38. It never causes or inclines to vomit, but on the contrary* in^^^tely
strengthens the Stomach, and power^^^ly provokes sweating, cures the most
desperate or malignant Diseases, purifying the Blood, and amending the Humors
disposed to corruption, causing the Impurities to transpire, through even the very
solid parts of the Body. It is a Secret also against the Plague or Pestilence,
Spotted Fever, or any other contagious Disease.

CIV. Terra Vitrioli dulcis, sweet Earth of Vitriol.
Bate.] It is made of the O^ put Mortuum of the Oil of Vitriol, calcined to
Redness, and edulcorated by many washings, till the red Earth be freed from all
its saltness. It is of great force against Dysenteries, Haemorrhagies, etc.
Dose, ss. ad ss. etc.

Salmon.] 1. Here is to be noted, that the Water or Washings of the Caput Mort.
contain the Salt of Vitriol, which you may obtain pure by filtration and
evaporation or crystallization, and is a good vomiting Gilla, given, a ss. ad
ij. in Wine or Fennel-water, and vomits easily, and sometimes purges and
sweats, as Hartman and Schroder say.

2. But some Authors, as Schroder seem to make this Terra Vitrioli; by a bare
dissolution of crude Vitriol in Water, letting the Oaker or Earth to settle,
which other Authors cause to be washed several times and then dried.

3. Le Febure calls it the Metallic Earth, or Oaker of Vitriol, and makes it
thus. Vitriol q. v. dissolve it in distilled Rainwater q. s. this dissolution
put into a great Mattress, and put it in a gentle heat for four or six days; so
will all the Earth or Oaker of the Vitriol fall to the bottom: separate the
Water by inclination (of which you may make a purified Vitriol) and wash the
Earth and dry it for use.

4. Angelus Sala says, it has a constringing and drying power with it, for
which reason it is used in drying and cicatrizing Emplasters and Ointments, and
other like Applications used for the diversion of Humors.

5. Minsicht. page 97. makes it of green Vitriol calcined to redness (which is
Colcotha^) then poudred, and edulcorated by many Ablutions in distilled
Rainwater, till the Earth be freed from all its Acrimony and saltness, which
he then drys, and keeps for use.

6. Marggrave also makes it of the Caput Mortuum, left in the distillation of
the Spirit and Oil of Vitriol, by boiling it in pure Water, and then letting it
remain to settle: then he decants the clear Water (which he filters and
reserves for making Salt of Vitriol of, which being given add j. works both
upwards and downwards:) and the remaining Earth, he washes again several times,
till the Water comes off insipid, then drys it and keeps it for use.

7. It is, says he, a most egregious astringent and dryer, and admirably stops
Haemorrhages or Bleedings in any part, whether inward or outward: for outward
uses it may be mixed with Turpentine (of any kind) and the white of an Egg, and
so applied. Chemists also use it in sublimation to make the Sulphur of Venus,
for that it contains in it self Copper, if the Vitriol was made from that Metal.

8 Others dissolve this Earth in Spirit of common Salt, and so have a golden
colored Tincture; of great Virtues; but the Humidity being abstracted to
dryness, there is left a white Salt or Powder, which being melted turns into
Copper: By which it is manifest that the Earth of Vitriol, whether from the
Crude, or from the Colcothar, is of a Metallic Nature.

CV. Hepar Sulphuris, Liver of Sulphur.
Bate.] It is made of the Flowers of Sulphur being melted. iv. adding to it the
most pure Salt of Tartar iss. and mixing them well with a Spatula; being
removed from the Fire and cooled, the Mass is kept for use. It serves for
making the Tincture and Syrup of Sulphur.

Salmon.] 1. How the Tincture of Sulphur is made with it, you may see Cap. VII.
Sect. 59. aforegoing: how the Syrup is to be made from it, see Cap. XVI. S. 38.
following.

2. Le Febure makes this Hepar Sulphuris thus. Of the best Sulphur in fine
Powder iv. Salt of Tartar very dry, as much: mix them together, and put it into
a glazed Earthen Dish, over a gentle Fire; and stir it continually with a
wooden Slice, till all be reduced to a Mass, which is called the Liver of
Sulphur.

3. And from this Hepar, or Liver, he makes a Vulnetary Balsam of Sulphur,
thus. The former Hepar in fine Powder, put it into a Mattress; and add to it
Aloes succotrina j. fine Myrrh ss. English Saffron ij, all in fine Powder: put
upon it yellow Oil of Turpentine p. j. red Oil of Turpentine (which some call
its Balsam) p. ij. so much of this mixed Menstrum, as to overtop the
Ingredients four Inches: digest in an Ash-heat, increasing the Fire by degrees,
till the Matter begins to simper (but have a care it takes not Fire or runs
over, lest it sets the House on fire) and the Ingredients are dissolved and
their Tinctures extracted: then remove it from the Fire strain the Balsam
through a Cotton or Flannel-bag, and keep it for use.

4. This Balsam he warrants as a Remedy that shall never fail those who know
how skillfully to use it. in the Cure of Wounds, Ulcers, and Contusions: for it
is one of the most excellent Balsams (says he) which Art (...) forward out
applications, whereof the skilful Physician and Chyrurgion who value their
Reputations, and their Art must make use: and of this Balsam you ought to make
the Emplastrum Diasulphuris if you would have it obtain the Virtues and Effects
which are attributed thereto.

5. And from this Hepar Zwelfer Mantiss. Spagyr. Cap. 10. Page 857. makes a
Pectoral Balsam with Chemical Oils of Juniper, Aniseeds, or Citrons, etc. after
the former manner: This he dedicates to Diseases of the Breast and Lungs, as
Shortness of Breath, difficulty of Breathing, spitting of purulent Matter, and
the Phthisick: outwardly also it cleanses external Ulcers, conserves them from
Putrefaction, and immediately conglutinates and heals them. And this is that
very Balsam (says he) Circumforanei and Agyrtae, Mountebanks and Quacksalvers
have ascribed no less than six hundred several Virtues and Effects to.

CVI. Lac Aluminis, Milk of Alum.
Bate.] It is made of the Water of Whites of Eggs iv. Alum in fine Powder j.
Spirit of Wine lb ij. mixed altogether in a Glass Vessel, and strongly shaked
together, till it becomes like Milk. It is a Secret against the Gonorrhoea,
Flux of the Whites, overflowing of the Courses, etc. Dose, two or three
Spoonfuls thrice a day: Being taken ad ij. an hour before the Fit of a Tertian,
it often cures it.

Salmon] 1. It is a pretty neat Medicine, and easily made, and has admirable
effects in the Cases mentioned by our Author, seldom or never failing; but the
Body ought before hand to be cleansed of its Feculencies, by the exhibition of
Universals, lest in striving to mend one hole you make two.

2. Le Febure has a kind of Liquid Magistery of Alum, which answers this Milk
of our Author very well, but is much more troublesome to make, and is done
thus. Purified and Crystalliz'd Alum put it into a Glass Cucurbit, and moisten
it with distilled Rainwater (putting it in a cold place) till it be all
resolved into Liquor, which filterate and distill in Ashes to dryness: dissolve
again the remaining Alum with distilled Rainwater, into a Liquor, and distill
again to dryness; and continue this Operation, till the whole Body of the Alum
is converted into a Liquor, and comes over the helm.

3. This says he, is one of the noblest and surest Stypticks and Astringents
which is to be found in the whole Art of Physic; not inferior to Preparations
of Mars or Vitriol, or Bole, or any other thing, whether for inward or outward
application.

4. The Dose is a gut. iv. ad xij. (yea ad xx.) in immoderate Fluxes,
Gonorrhoea's, or heat of Urine, the venerous Taint being removed by the
Exhibition of Universals, as I before hinted.

5. But that it may be made into a Milk, in conformity to the Prescript of our
Author, you may add an equal quantity of rectified S. V. or more as you see
occasion by which addition, it will be double in Virtue and Efficacy of
operating.

6. It may also be mixed with Epulotical-waters, by which means it, will
speedily and successfully heal Ulcers and running Sores, and advance their
Cicatrization and Reunion of the Solution of Continuity.

CVII. Lac Benzoini, Milk of Benjamin.
Bate.] Spirit of Benjamin j. Hyssop or Scabious-water xij. mix them S. A. It
is Antiasthmatick and Pectoral.

Salmon.] 1. Thibaut makes it thus. Benjamin and Storax, A. ij. being an fine
Powder put them into a Mattress; affuse thereon so much S. V. as to overtop them
four or five Inches: digest in a cool place two or three days so will you have
a Ruby-like Tincture, which keep in a Glass Vial for use.

2. To one Spoonful of this Tincture, put a Pint of fair Water, (or rather
Damask Rose Water) and you will have a Snow-white Milk, the Tincture mixing
with the Water without precipitation.

3. Here is to be noted, That the Gums (having but little Earthy substance)
almost totally and easily dissolve in the S. V. without heat: and that the
Spirit (when the Tincture is mixed with Water) by being weakened, lets go its
hold of the Gums, by which reason, they mix with and whiten the Water.

4. The use of this Virginal Milk is to clear and whiten the Skin, and is
excellent against all manner of Pimples, Pustuls, Redness, Inflammations,
Erysipelas's, and other Deformities of the Skin, by washing therewith, as
directed.

5. Lemery makes the Tincture with Pouders of Benjamin and Storax as the
former; but he differs in the proportion, adding but a sixth part of Storax
(which he says is added to the Tincture to increase the delicacy of its smell:)
Benjamin vj. Storax j. being in Powder put them into a Mattress, upon which
affuse S. V. lb j. stop the Vessel close, and digest in Horse-dung for 14 days,
then decant the Tincture, filter it, and keep it for use: You may add to it
gut. x. or xij. of Balsam of Peru, to give it a better Sent.

6. Being put into Water as aforesaid, it becomes white like Milk, which takes
away Spots in the Face, and whitens the Skin admirably: you may put a Spoonful
of it into thirty two Spoonfuls of Water and so use it.

7. Le Febure makes it thus. Of the best Benjamin in fine Powder ij. affuse
thereon Alcohol of Wine rectified upon Salt of Tartar, (because if the least
Phlegm be mixed with it, it hurts the preparation) vj. digest in B. M. to the
dissolution of the Rosin; which contains a very pure and sulphurous Volatile
Salt.

8. To make a right use of this Tincture, apply it at Bedtime upon all places
where you find need, as upon all Pimples, Pustules, breaking out, Inflammations,
etc. and the next day wash it off with Barley-water, made into Milk with some
drops of this Tincture.

9. But to prevent such defects of the Skin (where they are absent) you need
only convert this Spirit or Tincture into a Milk by adding twenty or thirty
times the quantity of Damask Rose Water to it, and then to wash therewith
Morning and Evening, as with other washes.

10. Le Mort makes it thus. Essence of Benjamin j. Water of white Lillies, or
any Odorif^rous Water, as of Damask Roses, or Orange Flowers ij mix them, and
keep it for use. It cures, says he, Scurff, Morphew, Freckles, Lentils, and
other external Diseases of the Skin; more especially if to every Ounce of the
Essence (which is made of the Flowers of Benjamin) j. of Camphire be added.

11. It is good against Inflammations of the Eyes, take away an Erysipelas, and
other breakings out of the Skin, a Linen Cloth dipped in the same, being for
some time applied.

CVIII. Lac Mercurij, Milk of Mercury.
Bate.] It is made of Corrosive Mercury sublimate vj. bruised small and stirred
in a Tin Basin, or Dish with Fumitory-water xij. till it becomes like Milk. S.
A. See the Virtues in the Aqua Mercurialis.

Salmon.] 1. Dr. Willis seems to be the Author of this Medicine, whose
preparation you may see more at large in our Doron Medicum, Lib. 3. Cap. 1.
Sect. 3. to which you are referred.

2. It is a famous thing against all c^taneous Defedations, and exceeds most
other Mercurial washes in use; it perfectly cures the most rebellious Herps,
Tettars or Ring-worms, though of never so long standing, and particularly is said
to kill Worms in the Face.

3. But in my Opinion these kinds of Mercurial Washes, are not to be used too
familiarly, or for a long continuance, lest the Particles of the Mercury,
insinuating themselves into the Pores, should prejudice the Nervous Juice and
Bones, and so create Pains, Aches, Rottenness, or a Virulency never to be taken
away.

CIX. Lac Scammonij, Milk of Scammony.

Bate.] Scammony in fine Powder vj. put it into a cold Mortar; and affuse
thereon by little and little Aqua Cinnamomi hordeata viij. stirring them
together well as you put in the Liquor: the Liquor will grow milky, which
separate (from the Pitch like substance of the Scammony) and keep it for use.
It is also called Liquor Acuens. Dose, one Spoonful: it purges sweetly and
pleasantly.

Salmon.] 1. You must choose the most resinous Scammony; which is clear and pure
from any Foreign mixture which is to be reduced into a subtle Powder, by
grinding in a Mortar.

2. Any other proper Water may do, as well as that named in the Prescript, as
Aqua Lactis alexiteria, with the addition of a little Spirit of Angelica,
Cinnamon, Saffron, or the like; because that as Scammony contains many resinous
Particles, there might be a proportional quantity of Spirit to open the Body
thereof; and it is indeed so much the better done if the Menstruum be a little
Spirituous withal; though it is true, Scammony will yield a great quantity of its
Juice in simple Water alone.

3. It is an excellent brisk, nimble Purge, especially for such as cannot
swallow Pills: it works safely, easily, and in a short time after it is taken;
but the Patient ought to take Broth or Posset Drink after it, as with other
Purges, and beware of taking cold.

4. It may be given from one Spoonful to two, according to Age and Strength,
and difficulty of the Body to be wrought upon: It expels Watery and Tartarous
Humors, from the Blood, and whole habit of the Body, and therefore is of
singular use against the Scurvy, Dropsy, Jaundice, Gout, King's Evil, and all
Obstructions whatsoever in any part of the Body.

CX. Lapis Medicamentosus, The Medicinal Stone.
Bate.] White Vitriol iv. Sal-Armoniack ss, Alum, Ceruse, Bole Armoniack, A. j.
mix and make a Powder, which boil with Vinegar, q. s. to the Consistency of a
hard Stone, S. A. The Virtues of this Stone are manifold: it drys up Ulcers and
Defluxions; heals Wounds and inveterate Sores; cures an Erysipelas, the Scab,
or Leprofie, Tettar, etc. The manner of using it is thus. Dissolve of this
Stone j. in Rainwater lb j. then filter: with which wash the part affected,
and apply over it a Cloth wet in the same.

Salmon.] 1. Lemery makes it thus. Colcothar, or Caput Mort. of Vitriol ij.
Litharge, Alum, fine Bole, A. iv. all being in fine Powder, mix them, and put
them into a glazed Pot, upon which affuse good Vinegar, so much as to overtop
the Ingredients two Inches: cover the Vessel and leave it in digestion two
days, then add it to Nitre viij. Sal-Armoniack ij. and over a gentle heat
evaporate all the Humidity, and calcine the Mass that remains about half an
hour, in a strong Fire, and keep it for use.

2. Where Note, The Vinegar is added for the incorporating the Materials
together, and create a ferment, after which the Nitre and Sal-Armoniack easily
mix with the other things: and the Calcination at the end is done, to carry off
some parts of the Acid, and increase the Astringency, to fix the Stone, and
make it the better to keep.

3. It is certainly one of the best Remedies in the World to cure a Gonorrhoea
by Injection, Universals being before hand premised j. of it, and dissolve it
in Smith's-water, Rose Water, or Plantane-water viij. mix, and then make an
Injection into ^he Yard, with a proper. Yard Syring, three or four times a day;
the Patient being sure to make water just before the use of it, if he has
occasion, and not after it, in some considerable time.

4. It is also a singular thing to clear the Eyes at any time, especially in
the Smallpox, gr. viij. of it being dissolved in Rose Water iv. and the Eyes
washed therewith: and being applied outwardly in a Wound, it stops bleeding,
and nearly answers all the Effects of the Styptick-water.

5. The Original of these Artifical Stones seems to be taken from Crollius,
whose Composition differs from both the former, and is as follows Green Vitriol
lb j. White Vitriol lb ss. Alum lb iss. Sal-Anatron, common Salt, A. iij. Salts
of Tartar, Wormwood, Mugwort, Succory, Arsmart, Plantane, A. ss. put them into
a glazed Pot, on which affuse a little Vinegar of Roses, over a gentle Fire,
often stirring them; when the Mixture begins to grows thick, add Venetian
Ceruse lb ss. fine Bole iv. mix all well by stirring, till by the force of fire
they are brought to the hardness of a Stone, which by breaking the Vessel take
out.

6. To this he assigns wonderful Virtues, as curing all Ulcers in the external
Parts of the Body, stopping Defluxions of Rheum, drying up of Ulcers, healing
of Wounds, stopping Fluxes in the Eyes, and taking away their pain and redness,
helping Ophthalmies, as also Erysipelas, Scabs, Tettars, Cancers in the Breasts
of Women, Cancers in the Mouth, Ulcers of the Gums, Noli me Tangere, Ulcers of
the Throat, Fistula's, and the Scurvy, eases old Aches or Pains, Sores and
Fistula's of the Fundament, etc. applied as directed.

CXI. Lapis Salutis, The Stone of Health, or Healing-stone.
Bate.] Sal-Arm. j. Alum. fine Bole, A. ij. green Vitriol vj. Nitre iij. Ceruse
ij. mix and make a Powder; Vinegar q. s. mix all together, and boil them with a
gentle Fire, till they become a hard Stone; it has the same Virtues with the
former.

Salmon.] 1. This is originally taken from Hartman upon Crollius, who prepares
it in the following proportions. Vitriol lb ij. Nitre lb ss Alum, Ceruse, fine
Bole, A. iv. Sal-Armoniack ij. all being in fine Powder, mix them: first grind
the Ceruse and Bole on a Marble, and pour on the Vinegar so much as to overtop
them two Inches, in a convenient large Pot: boil them gently; and continue the
boiling till all becomes of the hardness of (...) Stone.

2. Or thus according to Greiff from the same Hartman. Ceruse vj: Alum iv. fine
Bole iij. Hungarian Vitriol ij. White Vitriol, Tartar, Borax, Sal-Arm. Mastick,
Frankincense, A. j. all being in fine Powder, mix them, and put them into a
large glazed Earthen Vessel, adding strong Vinegar q. s. boil all over a gentle
Fire to the Consistency of a Stone.

3. The Virtues and Uses of this Stone (take you which Composition you please)
are the same with the former: it is called Lapis Salutis, or the Healing-stone,
because it is profitably used in Chyrurgery, as a Medicine for external
Application.

4. You may take j. of it, and dissolve it in Rain or Rose Water; then
decanting it from the Feces, and filtering of it, the clear Water is to be
applied with Cloths, or as need requires to the places affected.

CXII. Liquamen Silicum, Oil or Liquor of Flints.
Bate.] Calcined Flints p. iij. Salt of Tartar calcined with Nitre iv. mix them
exactly; and put them by degrees into a red hot Crucible, urging the Fire S. A.
afterward expose the Mass to the Air, that it ^^y melt per deliquium, S. A. It
cuts Tartarous Mucilage, resolves the Stone, and powerfully opens Obstructions.
Dose, gut. 20. ad 30. in some fit Liquor.

Salmon.] 1. Schroder says it may be given to a j. but he has a Cream or Oil of
Flints described in the second part of Glauber's Fornaces Page Mea. 44. If you
keep it long in a Cellar it lets fall a Settling to the bottom, and sends an
Oil to the top; which must be so long evacuating from the Jelly, as any Liquor
will ascend: and then be sweerned: this Oil or Cream, Clossaus says may easily
be dissolved in any Liquor.

2. In the place cited Glauber takes four times as much Salt of Tartar, as of
calcined Flints, which extremely differs from this of our Author, the exact
Prescript you have in our Polygraphices, Lib. 3. Cap. 29. Sect. 57. conformable
to Glauber's Mind.

3. In the making of it, he shows how to get a powerful Spirit out of the Salt
of Tartar, of wonderful Virtues and Effects, of which it is not our business
here to speak, that being designed for the Officina Chymica, next to come forth
after this work.

4. But the remainder after that Spirit is extracted, is the thing of which our
Experiment is to be made; What looks (says he) transparent like Glass is
nothing else but the most fixed part of the Salt of Tartar and Flints, which
joining themselves in the Heat, turn thus to a soluble Glass, in which lies a
great Heat and Fire.

5. As long as it is kept from the Air it cannot be perceived in it; but if you
pour Water upon it, then its secret heat will discover it self.

6. If you reduce it to a fine Powder, in a hot Mortar, and lay it in a moist
Air, it will dissolve into a thick and fat Oil, leaving some Feces behind.

7. This fat Liquor or Oil of Flints, Sand, or Crystal, may not only be used
inwardly, and outwardly of it self, but also serves to prepare Metals and
Minerals into good. Medicines, or to change them into better by the Chemical
Art.

8. Many great Secrets are hid in this contemptible Flint, which the unlearned
will hardly believe. The great Paracelsus maintains that a despicable Flint.
cast at a Cow, is many times more worth than the Cow it self; not only because
that Gold may be melted out of it, but because the other inferior Metals may be
so purified thereby, as to become like the best Gold and Silver in all trials.

9. This Liquor of Flints is of that Virtue in respect of Metals, that it makes
them exceeding fair, (not by the common way of Cook-maids scowring them,) but
by being dissolved therein by the Chemical Art, and then either after the wet
or dry way, to be digested in it for a due time, which Paracelsus terms the
going into the Mother's Womb, and being ^^rn again: and if this be rightly
done, then the Mother will bring forth a pure Child.

10. All Metals are generated in Sand or Stone, and therefore they may be well
called the Mother of Metals, and the purer the Mother is, the purer and sounder
will the Child be: and among all Stones, none are sound purer than the Peble,
Flints, Crystal or Sand, which are all of one Nature, and therefore the Flint,
Peble or Sand is found to be the fittest Bath to wash the Metal with all.

11. But this Bath, is not the Philosophers secret Menstruum, for that is more
friendly to Gold, by reason of its affinity with it; but this more, easily
dissolves other Metals than Gold; therefore neither can it be Bernhard's
Fountain, but must only be taken to be a particular cleanser of Metals.

12. As to the kind of Flints or Pebles which you ought to take for this work
they should not be white, but a fair yellow, green, or blew, which possibly may
contain Gold either fixed or volatile.

13. Then having from them made the said Soluble, Glass, and reduced it to
fine. Powder, you may there from make a Tincture thus. Put* this Powder into a
Belt-head. and affuse thereon rectified S. V. (it needs to be perfectly
deflegmated, or pure and fine) digest in a gentle heat till it becomes red,
often shaking the Glass, that the Spirit may the better work upon it; then
decant it and affuse fresh Spirit, which work repeat so long till the S. V.
will be no more tinged. Put all these Tinctures together, and in B. M. abstract
the S. V. so will the Tincture of Flints remain in the bottom like a red Juice*
which take and keep for use.

14. This Tincture if it be made out of Gold-Flints, Pebles or Sand, is none of
the least Medicines; for it powerfully resists all soluble Tartarous
Coagulations, in the Hands, Knees. Feet, Reins, or Bladder: and though for want
of such as hold or contain Gold, it be extracted out of the common white Peble
or Flint, yet will it act its part however, though not full out so well as the
former.

15. This Tincture will yet be more powerful, if first Gold has been dissolved
in the Liquamen of Pebles, before the Extraction: Nor let any think, that this
Tincture comes from the Salt of Tartar, because that will also tinge S. V. for
there is a great difference between this Tincture, and that of the Salt of
Tartar.

16. For the Tinct. Salis Tartari is no true Tincture, but only the purest part
of the Salt dissolved in the Spirit, as you may prove by abstraction, wherein
you will have, First, a clear Spirit of Wine: Secondly, an unsavory Phlegm:
Lastly, a white common Salt of Tartar remaining behind.

17. Whereas this Tincture of Flints or Pebles is clear of another nature; for
if you abstract the S. V. from it, which comes over colorless, yet there
remains a deep tinctured Salt, whose color is lasting in the strongest Fire,
and therefore may be accounted for a genuine or true Tincture.

18. The Liquamen Silicum does precipitate all Metals which are dissolved by
Corrosives, but not as Salt of Tartar does; for the Precicipitate will be much
heavier hereby, than if it had been done with Ol. Tartari, because the
Particles of the Flint do mix themselves therewith.

19. Ex. gr. Fine Sol q. v. dissolve in A. R. q. s. then precipitate with the
Liquor Silicum, till all the Gold falls down in a yellow Powder, and the
Solution becomes white and clear: decant the Liquor and edulcorate the
Precipitate by many ablutions with fair Water and dry it (as Aurum Fulminans,
but you need not fear its fulminating in the drying, as it uses to do, when
precipitated with Salt of Tartar, or Spirit of Urine) so will you have a yellow
Calx, as heavy again as the Gold, before Solution, the cause of which is the
Particles of the Flint or Peble precipitating therewith.

20. This edulcorated yellow Calx put into a Crucible on a fire of live Coals,
till it begins to be red-hot, but not long, so will it become a most fair
Purple, very pleasant to behold: if it stands longer, the Purple color will
vanish, and it will be of a brown Brick color, for which reason you must not
let it remain too long.

21. This purple Gold powder may be given a j. ad ss. in any fit Vehicle, in
all Diseases where sweating is needful, for it provokes Sweat, comforts the
Heart, and is said to expel Stone and Gravel from both Reins and Bladder: and
to cure even the Plague it self.

22. From this purple Calx of Gold, you may extract a Tincture with this our
Liquamen Silicum, thus. Purple, Calx of Sol, p. j. Liquaminis Silicum, p. iij.
mix them in a good large Crucible (lest in run over) and evaporate over a
gentle heat to dryness, and increase the fire till the Crucible is red-hot
(keeping it covered, that no Coals, Dust, or Ashes may fall into it) then still
increase the fire in a Wind Furnace, till the Matter melts and flows like
Water, keeping it so long melted till it be like a transparent fair Ruby, which
will be in an hours time, or thereabouts. Then being cold reduce it into
Powder, and with S. V. extract a Blood-like Tincture, which will be much more
powerful than the former Tincture.

23. The remaining Calx, you may melt with Lead and reduce into white Gold,
which being melted with Antimony will recover its yellow color again.

24. And as this Liquor of Flints is the Medium of opening the Body of Gold. in
order to the extracting of its Tincture, so also will it do in all the other
Metals and Minerals, for which reason it is needless to describe them by
themselves, all the Processes of them, being demonstrated in this One of Gold.

25. By the help of this Liquor of Flints, you may also make the Golden,
Silver, and Steel Trees of the Philosophers as is taught in our Polygraphice,
Lib. 3. Cap. 29. Sect. 54, 55, 56. as also other profitable things in Alchymie,
fair Pigments for Paintings, out of Metals which will abide in all Elements;
and to frame all sorts of transparent hard Stones out of Crystal, which in
Beauty may be as fair or fairer than the Natural, Enamels, and such like.

26. Lemery instead of a five-fold proportion of Salt of Tartar, uses a
six-fold of Tartar to one of calcined Flints: Calcined Flints in fine powder
iv. Salt of Tarter xxiv. mix and put them into a large Crucible in a wind
Furnace, making a fire by little and little, and then gently increafing it to
the last degree, in which keep it for five hours, the Matter being in Fusion,
till it grows Diaphanous like Glass, which you may know by putting a Spatula
into it: cast it forth into an Iron Mortar, and it will presently congeal into
a hard Mass, which Powder while hot: take one half it, and set it in a Cellar
in a Glass Pan' and it will dissolve into a clear Liquor, which filter, and
keep for use.

27. This Liquor is said to be diuretic given a gut. vj. ad xxvj. in some fit
Vehicle: and being mixed in equal parts, with some Acid corrosive Spirit, they
will presently become a Stone: and from this Phenomenon the Generation of
Stones in Animal Bodies may be explicated, seeing Acids and Alcalies do often
meet within us; and for this reason some Authors give a Caution against the use
of this Remedy inwardly, as also the Tincture therefrom; though they conceed,
that they may sometimes dissolve some Sulphurous Obstructions, and so thereby
provoke Urine.

28. This Liquamen Silicum has obtained mightily among some Men, insomuch that
they give it no less than the name of Alcahest: but it is indeed use to extract
the Sulphurs of many Metals and Minerals.

29. Upon the mixing of it with an Acid, an Ebulition is made, and a stronger
Coagulation, than upon the mixing the Oil of Tartar with an Acid; the reason of
which is because this Alcali contains more Earth than the Salt of Tartar does,
whence the cause of the Lapidiscent property-appears plainly enough.

30. Upon the other half of the Powder, put into a hot dry Mattress, affuse the
best rectified S. V. so much as to overtop it four Inches, stop the Mattress
with another, whose Neck may be received into that which contains the Matter,
lute the Juncture with a wet Bladder, and digest in a gentle Sand heat for two
or three days, so as the S. V. may simper, so will you have a very red
Tincture, which decant, putting in fresh S. V. to the remainder, repeating,
etc. these Tinctures mix, and in B. Vap. abstract two thirds of the Spirit, and
keep the remaining Tincture for use.

31. This Tincture is esteemed an excellent Medicine to cure the Scurvy, open
Obstructions, and root out Hypochondriack Diseases, being given a gut. 10. ad.
30. in some fit Vehicle.

32. Lastly, From the melting of the Calx per Deliquium, it appears. that the
Calx of the Flint is so intimarely incorporated with, and into the Salt of
Tartar by Calcination, that it may truly enough be said to be converted into a
Salt.

CXIII. Liquamen Sulphuris, Liquor of Sulphur.
Bate.] Flowers of Sulphur, white Sugar Candy, A. j. mix and make a Powder:
then take four Eggs boiled hard, stit them in the middle, and take forth the
Yolks, in place of which put this Mixture, which join close together by tying
them; then hang them over Coals, and the Liquor will sweat forth, which keep
for use. It is a famous Pectoral, prevailing against Asthma's, Coughs,
Phthisicks, Pleurisies, etc. Dose, gut. 20, 30. etc.

Salmon.] 1. This supplies the Use of the Balsam and Tincture of Sulphur, and
is to be esteemed by reason of its Efficacy and Virtue: for as Sulphur is of it
self incorruptible, and preserves dead Bodies, from Putrefaction; so also it
hinders the Corruption and Decay of living Bodies, and restores the Defects of
the Radical Balsam of Life, when once it is altered.

2. Wherefore we commend to all, the Preparations of Sulphur, because it
supplies with Medicaments, less subject to fail in their Operations, than many
other things.

3. For this is certain, that whatever the most excellent Remedies have of
Virtue, Power and Efficacy, they receive it from the Beams and Vigor of the
internal Sulphur which they have in themselves, whether they be extracted from
Vegetables, Minerals, or Animals.

4. And for this reason it is, we recommend the Conservation of Volatile and
Sulphurous Salts and Substances, for that the are the last covering or
clothing of the Light and Spirit of the Mixed, from whence proceed all the
chief Actions of natural Bodies.

5. The Sugar Candy being an essential Salt, it has a power in it self, by help
of the Moisture in the Whites of Eggs, to dissolve, extract or draw forth the
Efficacy of the Sulphur; and though it is not the greatest Medicine that can be
made of Sulphur, yet it is a very good one, and safe to be used; and much more
pleasant than the vulgar Balsam of Sulphur made with Chemical Oils, for which
reason it is to be commended, and esteemed.

6. This Liquamen participates of a Vitriolick Nature, for it is chiefly the
Saline parts of it which dissolve, and are eliquiated by the dissolution of the
Sugar; and this is evident, because there seems to be no difference between the
Salt of the Caput Mortuum of Sulphur, being extracted out of it after
Calcination with Rainwater, and the Salt of Vitriol.

7. Therefore says Le Febure, The Salt of Vitriol may always be lawfully
substituted, and without any scruple, in the place of that of Sulphur, because
they spring from the same Original, and have the same Virtue, which is to
cleanse and strengthen the Breast, Stomach and Lungs, open their Obstructions,
and eradicate from them all Seminaries of Worms and Corruption.

CXIV. Liquor Cephalalgicus, Liquor against the Headache.
Bate.] Camphire ij. dissolve it in rectified S. V. ij. which with a sufficient
quantity of Oil or Spirit of Damask Roses (Rhodostagmatis) being put into a
Dish, is mixed over a gentle fire, sprinkling in also Nutmegs in powder j.
Zedoary ss. Applied to the Forehead, it gives ease in the Headache.

Salmon.] 1. What the Author means by his Rhodostagma is uncertain, it being a
word of a various, dubious, and uncertain Signification, and besides a Word not
usually to be met with in Medical Authors, being a a Greek compound, signifying
a Liquor drawn from Roses; but whether it be Rose Water, Spirit or Oil of Roses
who can tell?

2. But considering the Intention, and with what it was to be mixed, viz. the
Alcohol of Wine and Camphire; and by reason the Spirit was rectified and an
Alcohol, it was not reasonable to suppose, that Rose Water (which is only the
Phlegm of Roses) could be intended, for then an ordinary Spirit of Wine might
have sufficed; nor in respect to the Camphire, because Aqueous Bodies are apt
to cause that Gum or Rosin, to coagulate again.

3. You may pour it gently upon the pained part, and then rub it with your
Hand, it will sink in as fast almost as you lay it on; besides which the
Patient is to snuff some of it up the Nostrils: if it be well used, it will
take away the pain in three or four Minutes time: you may use it cold, without
heating, nor need it be used near any fire.

4. If the Pain should return again presently, you must then immediately take
the same course again, I can assure you upon my own Experience, that at two or
three times using, sometimes at once, it takes away (in a few Minutes) the pain
so perfectly, as that it no more returns at that time, or from that present
Cause.

5. Inwardly taken to the quantity of half a Spoonful or more in a Glass of
Sack, it not only prevails against Megrims, Headaches, Vertigoes, Lethargies,
Palsies, Convulsions, Apoplexies, and other cold and moist Diseases of the Head
and Brain; but also is a most powerful and instant Remedy against the Colic,
Gripings of the Bowels, Hysteric Passions and the like.

6. Outwardly bathed on places pained with the Gout, and Pains and Aches from a
cold Cause, it gives great comfort, and in a short time relief.

CXV. Liquor Limacum, Liquor of Snails.
Bate.] It is made of Red Snails cut in pieces and Salt, A. put into
Hippocrates his Sleeve, and hung up in a Cellar, that the Liquor may fall from
them, which is kept for use. Being bathed upon the place or applied, it eases
the Pains of the Gout. It cures Warts. It also prevails against an Atrophia of
the Limbs, they being bathed with it warm, and well covered with toozed Wool.
A certain Woman by giving some Drops hereof in a Draught of Beer, was wont to
cure the Chin-Cough, or Suffocative cough in Children.

Salmon.] 1. It is a singular Arthritick, Universals being before premised;
otherwise Topics unskilfully applied though they may give ease, as to the part,
yet are apt to drive the Disease into the Stomach, which sometimes proves the
Death of the Patient.

2. It abates Inflammations (being cautiously used for fear of a Gangreen) and
takes away Pains and Aches from a hot Cause.

3. Whatever it may do for a Cough I have no Experience of; but this I know,
that three or four Spoonfuls of it being given at a time in the Morning
fasting, it will kill Worms and expel them out of the Body.

CXVI. Oleum Talchi per Deliquium, Oil of Talck by melting or dissolving.
Bate.] Powder of Talck Tartar calcined with Nitre, Ana. mix them S. S. S. and
cement them in a Crucible close stopped or covered for six hours, so as the
Crucible may be red-hot: Take the Matter forth and edulcorate. Extract with
Spirit of Vinegar, filterate and coagulate: then edulcorate and put the Matter
in a Cellar to melt. It is said to be a famous Cosmetick, and that it will take
away Spots, Lentils, and Freckles from the Face and Skin.

Salmon.] 1. Clossaeus calcines the Talck with double its weight of Salt of
Tartar: and without doubt it will be best to set it to melt per Deliquium;
separating that which melts not, and calcining as before, melting, separating
and calcining again, till the whole Body of the Talck will run per deliquium as
at first: then putting all the Liquors together, abstract the Humidity to
dryness, wash and edulcorate; then extract with Spirit of Vinegar, and proceed
as in the Prescript.

2. There are many other ways of calcining the Talck, (upon which work being
well done, the stress of the Operation almost lies) which you may see in our
Pharm. Land. Lib. 3. Cap. 13. Sect. 102. to which I shall now refer you.

3. But Hartman has an Oil of Talck made by Distillation, which is thought to
be more valuable for all the Purposes aforementioned, and other Vices of the
Skin; thus Venetian Talck cleave it into slices, or rub it into fine powder;
then put it into a Phial, and affuse thereon Spirit of Vinegar made of Canary;
stop it close and digest in Horse dung or an equivolent heat for a Month,
adding every day new distilled Vinegar to the former, till the Vinegar be
Mucilaginious: then put it into a Coated Glass Retort, fixing a large Receiver,
and luting the Juncture; distill with a naked Fire, first there comes forth the
Vinegar, then a white Oil, which separate, and keep for use.

4. Before you use this latter by distillation, or that prescribed by our
Author, you ought to cleanse the Skin very well by washing it first with warm
Water, and sweet scented Wash-balls* rubing the Face dry with a Cloth, and then
washing it again with warm Water in which Wheat Bran has been boiled, so will
the Skin be prepared.

5. This being done, then first wash with the Vinegar, after which anoint with
Hartman's Oil by distillation; if the Face be first washed from all Impurity,
this one anointing may hold for a Month without fading. This Cosmetick if
rightly prepared, is worth above Five Pounds an Ounce.

CXVII. Oleum Viridis Aeris, Oil of Verdigrise.
Bate.] Verdigrise ij. Nitre iij. mix and put them into a little Earthen Dish
or Pan, and fire it with a live Coal, till the Deflagration ceases: then
dissolve it per deliquium in a Cellar. It is Caustic, cures Venereal Pustules,
and takes a way Warts.

Salmon.] 1. Clossaeus was the Author of the Recipe, and he advises to take
double the quantity of Nitre, that there is of the Verdigrise; so that
according to his Rule, there ought to be iv. of Nitre to the ij. of Verdigrise.

2. It ought to be gently laid on and with caution, lest it eat too deep, or do
mischief: but thus you may apply it safe enough: Basilicon minus, of this Oil
of Verdigrise, Ana. mix them; and anoint therewith.

3. Or thus. Pure Golden colored Palm Oil, Ointment of Cowslips, A. j. of this
Oil of Verdigrise ij. mix them and anoint therewith.

4. But Pocky Warts you may anoint therewith simple of it self without
Mixtures, for being with any other Matter, it will so weaken the Oil, that it
will scarcely perform what you desire, to wit, the removing of the Warts.

CXVIII. Plumbum album, and Cerussa, White Lead, and Ceruse.
Bate.] Make Plates of Lead and hang them over Vinegar, so that the Vapors from
the Vin^gar may environ or go round it: so will the Lead by little and little
convert into Ceruse.

Salmon.] 1. Lead says Lemery is converted into Ceruse or white Lead, by the
help of Vinegar, whose Vapors it imbibes, by which means it is converted into a
white Rust, which being gathered is made into little Cakes: this is called
white Lead; but if into one great Lump, it is called Ceruse; so that you may
see there is no difference in the things, but in the Terms, and Form of making
up.

2. Charras reduces the Lead (after purification) into thin Plates, and then
hangs them up over the Vapors of Vinegar put into a proper Vessel over a
moderate Fire: so will a white Substance grow upon the Lead, which he separates
and gathers together, and this is that says he, which they call Ceruse.

3. It is of a drying Property, and is used by Nurses to dry up galling and
scaldings of Urine, in Infants, being reduced into Powder, and strewed thereon
with a Puff: It is also mixed with Unguents, and Plasters where drying is
required: it unites with Oils and fat Substances in boiling, and gives them a
solid Consistency, and there from, several Emplasters receive their Body and
hardness.

4. Saccharum Saturni, or Salt of Saturn is made out of several Preparations of
Saturn, as burnt Lead, Litharge Minium, or Red Lead; but it is most plentifully
and easily made out of White Lead or Ceruse, because being more open, it is
easier to dissolve than the other Preparations of Lead, by reason of the
Vinegar, with which it is already impregnated, so that almost the whole Body of
the Ceruse will convert into Salt; whereas in the other Preparations it is done
with much more difficulty.

5. Here is also to be nored, that this White Lead or Ceruse may be prepared by
the Vapors of any other Acid, as A. F. Spirit of Ni^re, etc. as well as by
those of Vinegar, forasmuch, as all Acids whatsoever corrode and rust it.

CXIX. Pilulae Vomitoriae, Vomiting Pills.
Bate.] Gilla Theophrasti in fine Powder j. fresh Butter new made j. or q. s.
beat them well together into a Mass for Pills. Dose, iv. or v. Scruples.

Salmon.] 1. I dislike the Name more than I do the Medicine, for it is rather a
kind of Pap, than Pill, and might with more reason have been called Pulticula
Vomitoria, or Bolus Emeticus which it much more resembles than a Pill, for
which reason I transferred it out of the Classis of Pills to this place.

2. It cleanses the Stomach admirably, evacuating by Vomit tough Phlegmatic
Humors, which have long offended it; and it is of singular use being given in a
Surfeit, especially being exhited upon the beginning of the Disease.

3. You may give it a j. ad ij. but you must regulate the Dose according to the
Age, Strength, and Condition of the Sick, making also a provision of
Possetdrink before hand to take with it.

4. What this Gilla Theophrasti is, and how to make it. See Sect. LXV. of this
Chapter aforegoing.

CXX. Sapo Tartareus, Tartarean Soap, or Soap of Salt of Tartar.
Bate.] Salt of Tartar (made of Tartar and Nitre in equal parts, S. A.) iv. Oil
of Turpentine viij. Let them stand together (in a large Vessel) in a cold and
moist place for some Months; that is to say, so long till the Salt has indeed
drank or sucked up a triple quantity of the Oil (daily and often in the interim
stirring it well with a ^estel, and adding more Oil as often as there is need)
till the whole comes into one Mass like to Soap, and attains a homogene
thickness unseparable. It is designed for the Preparation of Pilulae Pacificae,
and Matthew's Pills.

Salmon.] 1. Those are the chief Intentions for which it it prepared: but it
may be given inwardly to j. or ss. dissolved in any proper Liquor against the
Stone, Gravel, Heat and Sharpness of Urine, or for any Obstruction of the
Reins, Ureters and Bladder from a Tartarous Matter.

2. It is also a famous thing being applied outwardly against the Gout, or any
other Ach or Pain, for it gives ease to a Miracle more especially if to j. of
Soap, ij, of Camphire be added.

3. Lastly, Although the Prescript only orders it to be made with Oil of
Turpentine, yet it may as well be made with Oil of Juniperberries, and many
other Chemical Oils, and so become more homogene, pleasant, and effectual to
the Purposes you intend it: but this ought to be done according to the
Intention and Design of the Physician.

AN APPENDIX Added by the TRANSLATOR.
CXXI. GVttae Goddardianae, seu Arcanum Goddardianum, Goddard 's Drops.

Salmon.] 1. Humane Bones, put them into a Retort, and join thereto a large
Receiver, which lute well; and distill first with a gentle Fire, then with a
stronger increasing the fire Gradatim; so will you have in the Recipient a
Phlegm, Spirit, Oil, and Volatile Salt: shake the Receiver to loosen the
Volatile Salt from the sides, then close your Receiver, and set it in the Earth
to digest for three Months; after that digest it in a gentle Heat for fourteen
days, then separate the Oil which keep for use.

2. The Author of this Recipe, was not that Goddard, many of whose Recipes and
Prescripts, are scattered up and down in several places of this Book, but the
Famous W -- Goddard, a great Philosopher and Physician, who deserved well of
the World in his day and time, and who has even in this Remedy left himself an
Immortal Name.

3. And this is the true Medicine which was purchased of the Doctor by K.
Charles the Second, so much famed through the whole Kingdom, and for which he
gave him (as it is reported) fifteen hundred Pounds Sterling.

4. They that please may make it according to the Prescript; but in my Opinion
(for it is possible a Dwarf standing upon a Giant's Shoulders may see farther
than the Giant) it would be a better way, first to rectify the Oil from the
Phlegm, then to grind the Volatile Salt with the Oil, and so by a long digestion
to join them together, S. A.

5. You may make it of all the Bones of the Humane Body together, or if it be
for a particular Intention, as for the Gout in any Limb, then of the Bones of
those parts; but if for Diseases of the Head, then of Skulls only, and you
ought to choose those Bones which have lain a long time a drying, for that they
will have lost most of their Phlegm, and for the same reason will yield their
Volatile Salt and Oil the more plentifully.

6. These drops are of an ill and fetid Smell, but being made of Skulls are an
excellent thing against the Falling Sickness, as also against the Apoplexy,
Lethargy, Vertigo, Megrim, Head-Achs, Carus, Palsies, Convulsions, and most
other Diseases of the Head, Brain and Nerves; they cure the Vapors in Women,
and Fits of the Mother, and remove the Obstructions and Pains of the Spleen.
Dose, a gut. vj. ad xij. or xvj. and in extremity to gut. xx. in any proper
Vehicle.

7. But if you would take away their evil Scent and Elixirate them, add to
every Ounce of them Spirit of Nitre rectified so much as may dissolve the Oil,
which done mix it with four times the weight of the whole of Alcohol of S. V.
and digest them together for a Month, so you will have a Medicine beyond all
comparison, ten times exceeding the other in Worth and Efficacy.

8. for it will not only be pleasant in Smell even to a Fragrancy, and retain
all the before enumerated Virtues, but as it will be much more sharp, volatile
and subtle, so will it also ten times more powerfully open Obstructions, and
become even a Restorer of Nature, and add Vigor and Strength to the whole
Humane Frame.

9. But in this last way, you must give it in a larger Dose, as a gut. xx. ad
60. in a Glass of Canary, in the Morning fasting, a little before Dinner, and
last at night going to Bed.

10. But before we leave this Subject, let me give you this following Note,
That the Bones being reduced into powder by beating in a Mortar, and then
prepared with Spirit of Nitre rectified; and that Dissolution mixed with double
the quantity of the best Tartariz'd Spirit of Wine makes a Medicine much
pleasanter both in Smell and Taste, and preferrable before all the other
Preparations both for Virtues and Efficacy, as I by a long Series of
Experiments can truly tell. Dose, a gut. 20. ad 60. in a Glass of Wine, as in
the former.

CHAP. X. Of SALTS.
I. Crystallum Minerale, Crystal Mineral.
Bate.] SAl-Prunellae, dissolve it in Water, filter and crystallize, S. A. If
you add an equal quantity of white Sugar, before the Crystallizing, it will be
Crystallum Minerale Saccharatum. It resists Putrefaction, quenches Thirst, and
abates the Heat in Fevers, cuts Tartarous humors, resolves coagulated Blood,
eases Pains, etc.

Salmon.] 1. Lemery makes it out of Nitre thus. Purified Nitre xxxij. put it
into a Crucible: when it is melted, cast thereon Flowers of Sulphur j. a
Spoonful at a time; so will it presently flame, and the more Volatile parts of
the Nitre will fly away: when the flame is over, the Matter will be in a clear
Fusion, then pour it forth into a clean Brass Basin, a little warmed, which
shake about to spread the Matter while it is cooling: this is Sal-Prunellae.

2. If you desire to have it very pure, dissolve it again in a sufficient
quantity of Water, then filterate the dissolution, and set it to Crystallize,
so have you Crystal Mineral; by which it appears that Crystal Mineral, is only
Sal-Prunellae purified.

3. Other Authors put j. of Sulphur poudred fine to 12 or 16 Ounces of Nitre:
and that also is the Proportion used by Beguinus and Charras.

4. Le Febure makes it of Lapis or Sal-Prunellae, which he dissolves in
distilled Water of wild Endive, Borage, or Bugloss, and filters it through a
Funnel of brown Paper filled with Province or Damask Roses, moistened before
with a little Spirit of Vitriol, or Sulphur or Salt: and then sets it to
Crystallize again; so says he, you have a Mineral Crystal pleasant in Taste,
Color, and Virtue, and endowed with admirable Properties.

5. It is a true Anodyn and an excellent quencher of Thirst, and allays the
Preternatural heat of all putrid and malignant Fevers, burning Fevers called
Febres Prun^llae: it not only cools, but works by Urine, and is profitable in
Quinsies, Pleurisies, Gonorrhoe's, and other Diseases that proceed from Heat
and Obstruction, as heat and scalding of the Urine, stoppage in the Reins and
Bladder, by Sand, Gravel, Stones, Slime, or any Tartarous Matter.

6. Dose is ss. ad j. in Ale or Wine, or some Decoction well sweetened with
Sugar, and it may be repeated once or twice a day, at night going to Bed, and
in the Morning fasting.

7. It is a general Remedy, and may be specificated, by the addition of several
Salts, being united and incorporated with it, as Salts of Saturn, Mars, Pearls,
Coral, etc. so may you have a Cordial, Hepatick, Spleenetick, or Stomatick
Crystal Mineral, according to the Faculty and Virtue of the Salt which you have
joined and coagulated with it.

8. The Germans having colored it red with Roses, melt it and cast it in
Molds, having the shape of a Sloe, that the external Form may have some
relation to the Name.

9. This Preparation of Nitre with Sulphur, Lemery mightily dislikes, because
he thinks it is thereby deprived of the more opening Spirits, carried away by
the Sulphur, and so instead of being made more opening and forceable, it loses
its better part: and says he, this is one of the abuses which insensibly has
gained upon Men, diminishing very much the Benefits that might be received from
Chemical Physic, for want of a serious Examination of the constituent Parts of
Natural things.

10. And therefore he advises rather to the use of simple purified Saltpeter;
or Nitre, or which has been purified from its fixed Salt three or four several
times, for that by much Experience, he knows it will better answer the
Intentions it is used for than that prepared with Sulphur.

11. It is sometimes adulterated with Roch Alum, mixing it during the Fusion,
which (if the Nitre be impure,) purifies it, by causing a thick Scum to
separate to the sides of the Crucible, whereby the Crystal becomes much the
whiter: this is discovered by its glittering more than the other, the Alum
giving it the Color; but it is nothing so virtuous and effectual, except in
stopping a Gonorrhoea.

12. Crystal Mineral (says Charras) is opening, diuretic, and proper to cut
Viscous and Tartarous humors: and it is mixed among Purgatives as a Vehicle,
and in diverse Menstruums to assist in the Extractions of the Tinctures of mixed
Bodies, and to heighten the Color.

II. Flores Salis, Flowers of Salt.
Bate.] They are made by augmenting the Fire, after distillation of the Oil of
Salt and subliming: the Flowers sticking in the neck of the Retort, are to be
gathered. They are Alexitericks, or resisters of Poison. Dose, ad j.

Salmon.] 1. Schroder says, that as in distilling of Amber, Flowers arise
called Volatile Salt, which sticks to the sides and neck of the Retort; so in
distilling of the Spirit or Oil of Salt, the Flowers ascend by the violence of
the Fire.

2. You may also make Flowers of Salt, if in rectifying of the Spirit and Oil
of Salt, you sublime the remainder with a stronger Fire.

3. If also you distill with Alum, the Caput Mortuum exposed a while to the Air,
and distilled again, will afford more Oil and Flowers; and this may be done
often.

4. Some sublime with Sal-Armoniack; but then you can never get the pure and
simple Flowers, but a compound only, of differing Virtues.

5. The simple pure Flowers of Salt, are not only resisters of Poison, but they
are of great use in cutting tough gross Phlegm; and to keep the Humors from
putrefaction.

III. Flores Salis Armoniaci, Flowers of Sal-Armoniack.
Bate.] They are made from Salt melted, and Sal-Armoniack, Ana. and subliming;
according to Art.

Salmon.] 1. Sal-Armoniack in fine Powder, common Salt, A. lb j. put them into
a Goard, covered with its Head, and place the same in a Sand Furnace; give a
gentle fire at first, increasing it by little and little, till you see the
Sal-Armoniack ascend in the head like Meal; then continue the fire in the same
degree for five or six hours: after which let the Vessels cool, and gather what
is ascended into the head, and mix it with new Salt, and sublime as before;
repeat this thrice, and you will have Flowers well purifyed.

2. Some are content with the simple Sublimation with common Salt, (as our
Author here) but because the opening force of the Iron is much accuated by the
Sal-Armoniack, it is better to use the Preparation with Iron, which follows in
the next Section.

3. Modus utendi. Waters of Parsley, Arsmart, Ana iij. Onion water jss. of
these Flowers gr. 10. ad 20. mix for a Dose, to be given in Obstructions of the
Reins and Bladder, and to provoke Urine. Or thus. Onion-water, Juice of
Parsley, A. iv. Syrrup of Winter Cherries iij. of this Salt gr. 15. mix for a
Dose, for the same purpose.

4. Treacle-water j. Mixtura Simplex iij. Carduus-water iv. of these Flowers
gr. 20. mix for a Dose, to provoke Sweat, against the Plague, or any malign and
pestilential Distemper. Aquae Bezoaticae j. Carduus and Angelica-waters A. ij.
Syrup of Citron-peels ss. Bezoar mineral, of these Flowers, A. gr. 15. mix
them, to be given in the same Cases.

5. Lemery makes them exactly after the same manner, but whereas our Author
takes melted Salt; he only orders it to be decripitated: these Flowers says he,
have the same Virtues with Sal-Armoniack, but are given in a little less Dose,
as a gr. iv. ad xv.

6. The common Salt decripitated is added, to the end that the Sal-Armoniack
may be made more Volatile, by checking some part of its fixed Salt; and for that
reason they become more active than the unsublimed Sal-Armoniack, though they are
both compounded of the same Salts, the Flowers having less of the fixed Salt in
them, than that which is not sublimed.

IV. Flores Salis Armoniaci Martiati, Flowers of Sal-Armoniack martiated.
Bate.] They are made from Mars and Sal-Armoniack Ana. sublimed; exposing the
Caput Mortuum to the Air, and mixing it with the half quantity of
Sal-Armoniack; drying and subliming, S. A. They perfectly take away the
Crudities of the Ventricle, given with Wormwood-wine, or Decoction of
Sassafras, by provoking Sweat. It is very prevalent also in the Cure of
Quartans.

Salmon.] 1. Schroder makes them thus. Sal-Arm. in powder, filings of Steel,
Ana. mix them well and sublime from Sand, so the Feces will be left at bottom,
and the Sal-Armoniack ascend pure, impregnated with some of the Steel or Iron.

2. But if you sublime them with filings of Iron or Steel, the Iron will be
corroded by the Salt, and it will sublime but little: but if you sublime them
with a Gad of Iron; then all the Salt will ascend in Flowers of a yellowish red
color.

3. Then he takes of this Sal-Armoniack, and common Salt melted, Ana. mixes and
sublimes them seven times, always casting away the Caput Mortuum, and adding as
much common Salt melted.

4. By this means the Steel or Iron is wonderfully accuated, and the Flowers of
the Sal-Arm. admirably fortified by virtue of the Steel, so that they will be
of ten times the efficacy of the former simple Flowers.

5. And therefore these Flowers (though more plentiful) are accounted much better
than those of Sal-Arm. purified only by Crystallization, and are more
successful against Quartans, fully removing the Crudities and Weaknesses of the
Stomach: they open Obstructions powerfully, and are therefore prevalent against
the Scurvy, Dropsy, Jaundice, and Greensickness in Virgins; perfectly removing
Cathectick Distempers.

6. The Dose is, a gr. 5. ad 10. or 1^. and I have sometimes successfully given
them to j. in Wormwood-wine or some proper and specific Decoction: you may
exhibit them twice a day.

V. Flores Vitrioli; Flowers of Vitriol.
Bate.] Sublime common Salt melted, and Vitriol, Ana. S. A. They serve to
cleanse putrid Ulcers, to incarnate them, and to induce the cicatrize, or heal
them.

Salmon.] 1. Most Authors which teach the Sublimation of Vitriol, do it either
from the Earth of the Vitriol, or from the Sulphur of it, and that too, not
with common Salt, but with Sal-Armoniack: this indeed makes it ascend better
and easier; but when all is done, that with common Salt (in my Opinion) is best
for the Intentions our Author prescribes it for.

2. From the Earth of Vitriol Schroder makes it thus. Oaker Earth of Vitriol
from whence the Salt is drawn, Sal-Arm. Ana. mix and sublime with a gradual
fire, till it smoaks no more: The Sublimate wash or edulcorate with war^^
Water, digesting in B. M. twenty four hours, so will a fine Powder subside,
which yet sweeten by many washings. Sala says it cleanses and cures Wounds.

3. From the Sulphur of Vitriol, Le Febure makes it thus. Sulphur of Vitriol,
Sal-Arm. Ana. mix and sublime in Sand in a Cucurbit somewhat low, covered with
a Still head; give first a gentle fire, and increase it by degrees, till the
Fumes or Vapors cease; then edulcorate as before.

4. From crude Vitriol according to our Author, you must do it thus. Crude
Vitriol in powder, Sea Salt decripitated, Ana. mix them well together, and put
the mixture into an Earthen Cucurbit, and place it in a Sand heat, fitting to
it a head; give a gentle fire at first, and increase it by little and little so
long as any Fumes will arise; then increase the fire to the highest degree of
heat, which continue for ten or twelve hours, after which let the Vessels cool;
and gather the Flowers, which mix with new Salt and sublime as before; gather
the Flowers, and keep it for use.

5. It is a good Medicine to cleanse any old, rotten Sore, or Ulcer, and to
take away the ill Properties of putrid Ulcers which hinders the healing; and is
of good use in a Herpes miliaris; for it so alters the ferment of the part in a
short time, as to induce a speedy Cure.

VI. Nitrum Antimoniatum, antimoniated Nitre.
Bate.] Nitre melted in a Crucible, p. iij. Put in paulatim, or by little and
little the Glass of Antimony made per^se, p. j. these being mixed or united,
pour the Mixture forth; powder it, and with Water wash away the Salt or Nitre,
filter, and crystallize S. A. Dose, gr. 5, 6* 7, etc. in malign Fevers,
Dropsy, French Pox, etc.

Salmon.] 1. The Powder is white, and the true Antimonium Diaphoreticum; but
the Water is Rolfincius his Aqua Anodyna egregia, which says he being
concreeted into Crystals is called Nitrum Anodynum; and Sal Anodynum; and by
Schroder, Lapis Prunellae Antimonialis.

2. This Anodyn Salt impregnated with many Atoms of the Ens primum of Metals,
cools the Blood; and taken inwardly and used as a Gargarism in a Quinsey and
internal Inflammations of the Face, is of singular effect: it prevails against
Pleurisies, expels Urine, and thrusts forth serous Humors by sweat; it also
gently loosens the Belly, and therefore it is used to be mixed with the Broth
or Posserdrink, toward the end of the working of a Purge.

3. The Dose in substance is to gr. vj. it is given inwardly in vehement Pains;
and outwardly used in Epithems upon the like occasions.

4. This Salt, Lemery calls a fixed Nitre, and says he, it works much like
Sal-Polychrestum: but in making it, you must put the Mixture into the Crucible,
Spoonful after Spoonful, that the Calcination may be done the better; which
when it is ended, and reduced to Powder, the Matter is washed to separate the
Salt.

5. In making of this Medicine the Nitre ought to be pure, for thereby, it will
the better penetrate the Body of the Antimony, and extract some of its
essential Qualities, which that it may the more effectually do, it is kept upon
the fire for about half an hour after the Flagration and Projection, even till
all the Smoke be va^ished.

6. Le Febure says in the Preparation of Antimony Diaphoretick* that it is not
without Reason that he ordered the first Water wherein the fired Nitre was
dissolved, to be set apart; because the nature of this Salt is altered by the
Sulphur of the Antimony, and is become of the Condition and Nature of the
Alcalious and Lixivial Salt, whose Quality and Essence is subtle penetrating
and igneous rather than corrosive.

7. Charras says you may dissolve these Crystals drawn from the first Lotion of
Antimony Diaphoretick in some proper Liquor, and give it a gr. 5* ad (...) 5.
or 20. for the some Diseases as you give Diaphoretick Antimony.

8. The exact Recipe of our Author, was taken from Zwelfer, M^ntisse Spagyrice,
Cap. 11. Pagina mea, 1863. But there he gives you the equal liberty of making
it either of the Vitrum Antimonij or of the Flores in the same proportion; and
this he says gently purges both upwards and downwards.

9. The same Zwelfer, has another Nitrum Antimoniatum (...) which be prepares
after this manner. White Flowers of Antimony well prepared j. Cremor Tartari
ij. mix them, and boil them in an Earthen Pot, or an Iron Kettle or Drying Pan,
with a sufficicent quantity of fair Water, which decant; affusing fresh Water,
and boiling, repeating this work so often, till the whole Virtue and Efficacy
be extracted out of the Flowers, which filter through brown Paper, and in the
filtred Liquor dissolve pure Nitre iv. then gently abstract the superfluous
Humidity, to a Salt, or otherwise pedetentim let it be Crystallized.

10. This is without doubt more powerful than the sormer, and has more of an
active or purging Quality in it, for it cleanses the Stomach and Bowels both
upwards and downwards, but not with any harshness or vehemence. It is given a
j. ad ss. yea ad j. dissolved in some grateful Vehicle. Le Mort. gives it
against Quotidian and Tertian Agues, the Yellow Jaundice, and Effervescency of
the Blood.

VII. Nitrum Cachecticum, The Cachectick Nitre, or Salt against Cachexies.
Bate.] Vitriol of Mars p. iij. Arcanum duplicatum, p. v. Nitre, p. vij. mix
them, and calcine in a Sand-heat to redness, S. A. It restores mightily a
depraved Appetite, prevails against Cachexies, Fevers, Scurvy, Stone, Catarrhs,
French Pox, Convulsions or Contractions, Palsies, etc. it induces Sleep,
provokes Sweat, and in some, it gently moves the Belly Dose, a gr. vj. ad xx.

Salmon.] 1. What the Sal-Duplicatum is, (which also is called Arcanum Duplex)
we shall refer you to what we have before discoursed on that subject in Cap. 9.
Sect. 16. aforegoing of this Book.

2. But that we might give you it according to the Mind of Zwelfer the Author
thereof, we shall here give you Prescript of the Arcanum Duplicatum from him.
Salt of the Caput Mort. of Vitriol exposed for some Weeks in the open Air, ij.
Salt extracted out of the Caput Mort. of Nitre, iij. mix them, and put them
into a Glass Cucurbit, and in Sand, increasing the heat gradually, till the
bottom of the Cucurbit is red-hot, calcine for a day or two, then taking it
forth, grind it upon a Porphyre, and keep it for use.

3. And with this preparation it is, that he makes his Nitrum Cachecticum
Chalybeatum, in the same manner as our Author, and exactly in the same
proportions: but at last he so much increases the Fire, as to melt the
Ingredients into a Mass: then being cold, he breaks the Glass, and has a
Rubicund Stone, which he keeps use.

4. It Is without doubt an excellent thing for the Diseases mentioned by our
Author; and admirable against Melancholy, Pains and Obstructions of the Spleen,
the Stone, and all Tartarous Diseases in any part of the Body, Fevers, Agues,
etc. and gives many other Benefits by an insensible Transpiration or Sweat,
which it does without trouble: in some it vomits gently; in others it purges,
but these Operations are but seldom.

5. The Dose is a gr. x. ad ss. in some proper Liquor, as in an infusion of
Steel in White Wind for two or three Months. Of the said Infusion ss. of this
Salt j. Borrage-water iij. Syrup of Citron-peels iij. mix for a Dose, to be
given at night going to Bed.

VIII. Nitrum Catharticum, Cathartick or purging Nitre.
Bate.] Heat or melt Nitre in a Crucible, and put in by turns or times live
Coals, that it may be inflamed and burn: continue this till the Flagration is
over: that which remains dissolve in Spirit of Vinegar, filter and coagulate;
and repeat this work three times with fresh Spirit of Vinegar: then dissolve in
S. V. and evaporate to dryness. It is called also Foliated Earth of Nitre: It
removes the Obstructions of the Mesentery and Spleen, and gently purges. Dose,
j. ad ss.

Salmon.] 1. It is taken exactly from Schroder, who says it is used with
Extract of Rubarb and Sena, to increase their Virtues, and exhibits it in Syrup
of the opening Roots.

2. Marggrave says it is made as the foliated Salt of Tartar, only with this
difference, that for Salt of Tartar, here is taken Nitre fixed with live Coals
by flagration. Or the Liquor of the Alcahest Glawber evaporated to dryness; on
which is affused Spirit of Vinegar, and then abstracted by distillation, which
is so often to be repeated, till the Spirit comes off acid; and lastly after
the same manners the Alcohol of S. V. is affused and drawn off from it.

3. But Zwelfer to make it more absolutely, Cathartick or purging, compounds it
after this manner. Choice Sena, Roots of Asurum, A. vj. Mechbocan iv. black
Hellebar vj. Cremor Tartari ij. cut and boil, by several times repeating the
Water, till the whole Virtue is extracted; strain and clarify with Whites of
Eggs; and then dissolve therein purified Nitre lb ij. and abstract the Humidity
to a Pellicle, and set it to Crystallize.

4. Being given ad ss. or more, it loosens the Belly, penetrates the Body,
opens Obstructions of the Viscera, cools and Refrigerates, taking away
preternatural heat.

IX. Nitrum Corallatum, Corallated Nitre.
Bate.] Nitre p. iij. Salt of Coral, p. j. dissolve them apart in Rose Water,
and filter: then mix them together and coagulate S. A. It is profitable against
Fevers, and restores lost Strength. Dose, ad j.

Salmon.] 1. How the Sal-Coralliorum is to be made we shall show in Sect.
XXVII. following of this Chapter: that being understood, there is no difficulty
in making this Medicament; for Nitre is such a saline substance, as being
dissoluble in any kind of Liquor, whether Waters, Decoctions, Juyces, Wines or
Cyders is apt to receive into it self any other liquifiable Body, and to
essentificate its self with them.

2. This corallated Salt is indeed an excellent thing against Fevers of what
kind soever, chiefly against all sorts of burning Fevers: it is also
restorative especially in hectic Fevers; and if I may give Credit to an old
Practiser, who had much used it, that it is excellent even in a Marasmos it
self; and that he had sometimes cured a Marasmos with it.

3. However that this is truth I will not affirm, since most Physicians account
Marasmos an incurable Disease: but that it is prevalent against Hecticks, I
know by my own Experience, and a singular thing in their restoration; and truly
of good use in any Pining whatsoever, principally where there is any
preternatural heat abounding.

4. It may be given a ss. ad. ss. in any specific Vehicle, as the Gellies of
Hartshorn, and Flesh of living Creatures accuated with the Juice of Sevile
Oranges, or other things grateful to the Stomach, but always avoiding things
ungrateful to the same.

X. Nitrum Fixatum, Fixed Nitre.
Bate.] Dissolve Sal-Prunellae in Fountain Water, filter and coagulate S. A.
See Crystal Mineral.

Salmon.] 1. This is nothing but Crystal Mineral, or Sal-Prunellae purified by
dissolving it, and Crystallizing it again; and therefore has the same Virtues
with Crystal Mineral at Sect. I. of this Chapter: But this is not the true
fixed Nitre, however our Author is pleased to dignifie it with that Title; yet
that you may not be left in the dark, we will now give you the Sense of others
upon it.

2. It Is true that Sennertus, Hartman, Quercetan, Beguinus, Schroder, and some
few more call Crystal Mineral, fixed Nitre; because much of the Volatility
thereof is consumed by the Flagration thereof with an eighth part of Sulphur:
but Glauber and his Followers have another thing. Schroder pretends to fix it
with Quicklime thus. Nitre in powder lb iij. Quicklime lb iv. cement them five
or six hours, then extract the Sal-Nitre by pouring on hot Water, filterating
and inspissating.

3. He also Essays the Fixation with S. V. thus Nitre, add Spirit of Wine,
distill it by degrees; then increase the fire to make it run; do this five
times, always affusing on it fresh Spirit. But neither of these are the thing
which we intend.

4. Glauber's Method (which is the true) is thus. Pure Nitre lb vj. melt it in
an Iron Pot in the open Fire; cast in continually by small Parcels
Charcole-dust, or beaten into small bits which will presently take fire, and by
the action of its Fire and Sulphur, consume the Humidity which the Salt of the
Earth had coagulated and united to it self in its Crystallizing: continue this
putting in of Sea-Coal-dust, until you find it will kindle no more, and that
the remainder of the Nitre begins to thicken and turn to a bluish green
color; then cease, and take the Salt out of the Pot, put it into a warm
Mortar, and if you will preserve any of it in form, put it as it is hot and dry
into a Bottle, keeping it close stopped, with a stopple dipped in melted Wax.

5. This is true fixed Nitre, much altered from its first nature, for it is no
more Volatile, and apt to be turned into Crystals, but contrariwise turns
(being exposed to the Air) into a Liquor which is subtle and penetrating,
having an Urinous and Lixivial taste, like unto Salt of Tartar, but more biting
and penetrating.

6. Glauber was the Inventer of this Liquor, who has given us the description
thereof under the Name of Alcahest, which he says will draw the Tinctures of
all natural Bodies, whether Mineral, Vegetable, or Animal.

7. Now to speak the real truth, this Liquor has something which is very
considerable in it, being capable of extracting the Sulphurs of Metals,
provided they had been well opened before: those of Minerals do easily yield
unto it, from whence it may be concluded that it takes into it in an instant,
the Sulphurs and Volatile Salts of Animals and Vegetables.

8. Thus you see by this Vegetable Sulphur of Coals the Nature of the Nitre is
changed from that of an Acid, into that of an Alcali, whose Taste is Urinous
and Lixivial: this Salt is capable of fertilizing the worst Earth, if the Seeds
to be put in it be prepared with a Liquor made of this Salt; for it so
nourishes and invigorates the Gessom or Gem of the Seed, that it makes it
multiply to an admirable number: for the Sperm of the Seed finds in this saline
Liquor, that which is Analogus to its principle, and does greedily attract it
in, and embrace it, for which reason being thus doubly fortified as it were, it
brings forth more vigorous and numerous Stalks, abounding with a greater plenty
of Fruit or Seed, than otherwise could be expected.

9. Lemery advises to take Nitre xvj. and to put it into a strong large
Crucible, and to throw into it a Spoonful of Coals grossly poudred, from whence
a flame and detonation will arise, which being over to cast in more, and to
continue this Operation till the Deflagration ceases, or the Matter will flame
no longer, but remains fixed in the bottom of the Crucible; this he pouders,
dissolves in Water, filters, and evaporates to dryness in an Earthen Pan, in a
Sand-heat, so is there a very white fixed Salt, which he keeps in a Vial close
stopped for use.

10. In this Operation the Crucible ought not to be above half full of Nitre,
because the Detonation is so violent, that the Matter would be driven out of
the Crucible; and it ought to be very strong, otherwise it will break in the
Operation: and this detonation with Coals is much more violent than that which
is made with Sulphur, because the Sulphur of the Coals is more rarefied than
common Brimstone.

11. The Taste of this Salt is like that of Salt of Tartar, and differs not
much from it in Virtue: it opens Obstructions of the Reins, Ureters, and
Bladder, provokes Urine, and sometimes Stools, being given a gr. xvj. ad ss. It
may be used to assist in drawing forth the Tincture of Sena; and a red Tincture
may also be drawn from it with Alcohol of Wine, as from Salt of Tarter.

12. If you use common Nitre, to xvj. thereof you will use but iijss. of Coals,
and you will have xij. of purified fixed Salt: but if you use purified Nitre,
you will use vij. of Coals, and will have but iij. of purified Salt: the reason
of this difference proceeds from the Nitres fineness, as containing more
Volatile parts, which requires more Coals to make them vanish, and having less
of the fixed part, so that there must needs remain less of the fixed Salt.

13. Now this Liquor or Alcahest of Glauber being prepared with Common Nitre,
and kept a Year or more, looses most of its Activity as an Alcali, so that it
will not cause any ebullition with Acids, as formerly; the reason is for that
the remaining Acid in the Nitre, closing up the Pores of the Salt, does because
it is greater than the Alcali; destroy the Alcali, which kept the Pores open.

14. But if refined Nitre be used, where much Coals are used in fixing it, the
Alcali will there so predominate, and be so powerful, that the Acid not being
able to regain its strength, and get the dominion, the said Alcahest will keep
its Power and Virtue for ever.

15. From what has been said, it appears that this Salt is an Alcali, being a
Mixture of the Salt of the Coals, (which is a vegetable Alcali,) and fixed
Nitre: these two Salts are so firmly united in the Calcination, that they make
a porous Salt, not much unlike to the fixed Alcalious Salt of Plants.

16. It is also observable, that Nitre alone in a Crucible, will never flame,
tho the Fire be never so strong: but when any Matter, having Sulphur in it (as
Charcoal) comes to be mixed with it; then the Volatile parts of the Nitre, join
with the Sulphur, and cause that great flame.

17. So that it seems, Nitre is not inflamable of it self, or apt to catch
fire, because that as soon as ever the Coals are burnt out, the flame goes out
and appears no more, till more Coals be put in; for which reason, Coals are to
be put in, so long as there are Volatile parts in the Nitre, to inflame the
Sulphur: when the Volatile parts of the Nitre are wholly spent, the Datonation
will wholly cease, and the Coals burn only as when they are alone.

18. Yet it appears not that there is any Alcalious Salt in Nitre, whatever
some will have; for that, by no Artifice any such Salt can be extracted out of
it, without something be added to it, but only an Acid, which seems to be its
Root and Essence.

19. Charras makes it after the same manner with Coals, then dissolves in
Water, filters, and coagulates, and keeps it in a Glass close stopped for use.
This fixed Nitre before dissolution will be a little gray colored, now to make
it white, you must calcine it in a great Fire, stirring it in the Crucible all
the while with a Spatula, continuing it red-hot for above an hour, so will it
be very white; then dissolve in Water, filter and evaporate, so will the Salt
be exceeding white.

20. This Salt having lost in this Calcination almost all its Acid, cannot be
crystalliz'd, as you do Crystal Mineral (which retains most of its Acid and
Volatile parts) but you may restore it to that Condition, by affusing Spirit of
Nitre upon its filtred dissolution, till the Ebullition ceases, and then
evaporating, it will shoot as is usual, with Crystals like those which the
Nitre had, before it was calcined.

21. Some make of this Salt, a Foliated Earth of Nitre, thus. Of fixed Nitre lb
j. Spirit of Vinegar lb ij. mix, dissolve and digest for twenty four hours;
abstract the Spirit to dryness: add fresh Spirit of Vinegar, and digest and
distill again, repeating this Operation, till the Vinegar comes off with the
same sharpness it went on: then dry it perfectly, and affuse thereon Alcohol of
S. V. dissolve and digest for four days, filter, and in a Glass Cucurbit,
covered with it head, abstract to dryness in a moderate Sand-heat, so will you
have at bottom a scaly Earth, like Talck, melting in the Heat like Wax; and
dissoluble in all kinds of Liquors, containing the fixed Nitre, impregnated
with the Acid of the Vinegar.

22. This Salt in the bottom of the Cucurbit, Le Febure calcines (in the same
Cucurbit) in a Sand-heat, giving it a good fire, to cleanse it from all its
remaining Impurities, till it be white, resembling Chalk, of a good and
pleasant Taste; but others calcine it not.

23. It is accounted one of the best Remedies, among all Chemical Preparations,
opening all Obstructions of the Viscera, purging gently without prejudice, and
not hurting the digestive Faculty of the Stomach, expelling the Faeculencies of
the Humors and Body by Stool, Urine, and Sweat.

24. It corrects the Malignity and Corrosion of all other Purgatives, and is
said to increase their Strength in a double proportion; and is indeed one of
the most Sovereign Medicaments that can be used in any Chronical and Rebellious
Distemper. Dose, a j. ad ij. in Tincture or Infusion of Rhubarb and Sena.

XI. Nitrum Hermaphroditicum, The Hermaphroditick, or Duplicated Nitre.
Bate.] Pure Nitre, and pure Salt of Tartar, Ana. dissolve them in Red
Rose Water, filter, and crystallize, S. A. It is a most powerful thing to cut
and deterge gross and tartarous Humors, and to open the Passages obstructed,
expel the Stone in the Reins, provoke Urine, etc. above all, it is most
excellent in putrid and malign Fevers. Dose, a gr. 20. ad 30.

Salmon.] 1. Minsicht is the Author of this Recipe, who in his Thesaurus, Sect.
1. Page mea 18. calls it Tartarus Nitratus, but limits not the kind of
Rose Water.

2. Besides the Virtues ascribed to it by our Author, he says, it is good
against a Hungarick Fever, which is a kind of Sweating sickness; it also
resists Putrefaction, and is prevalent against the Inflammation of the Throat,
quam Prunellam vocant, giving therein immediate Relief, and expels Tartarous
Impurities from the Bladder.

3. Rolfincius Chym. Lib. 5. Sect. 1. Art. 2. Cap. 9. prepares it not with
simple Nitre, but with Sal-Prunellae, dissolving in warm Rose Water, filtering,
and boiling till a Crust or Cuticle appears, then setting it in a cold place to
crystallize. The Dose of which he makes to be a j ad ss. or j. in some fit
Vehicle.

XII. Nitrum Joviatum, i. e. Jupiter Nitratus. Nitre with Tin, or Jupiter
nitrated.
Bate.] It is made of the Caput Mortuum after distillation in making the
Flowers of Jupiter, by boiling it in fair Water, filtering, and exhaling to
dryness, S. A. The Virtues and Dose are the same with the Jupiter
Diaphoreticus, at Sect. LXVI. a foregoing of the last Chapter.

Salmon.] 1. This is only Nitre impregnated with some of the Sulphur of
Jupiter, at least with some of the Particles of Tin, which were too heavy, and
would not rise in the Sublimation, but remain in the Caput Mortuum; where through
the Power of the Salt, the Jupiter is in some measure opened, and in minute
Particles joined with the Particles of the Salt.

2. This union of the Salt with some of the Tin is so firm, that a dissolution
in Water will not separate the one perfectly from the other, but they continue
joined as one body.

3. It is a good Sudorifick, and of good use against Wind, Vapors, Fits of the
Mother, and other Distempers of the Womb, as also against the Venereal Disease,
Gout, malign Fevers, etc. Dose, a gr. iv. ad xij. or more.

XIII. Nitrum Nitratum, Sal-Nitre impregnated with Spirit of Nitre.
Bate.] Rectified Spirit Nitre p. iv. purified Nitre p. vj. mix, and distill to
dryness, with a threefold Cohobation, increasing the Fire afterward, S. A.
Dose, ss.

Salmon.] 1. More explicitly thus. Purified Nitre, Flowers of Sulphur, Ana.
put them into a good large Retort; affuse thereon distilled Urine, or Spirit of
Urine, thrice the weight of the Nitre, place it in a Sand Furnace, so that the
Sand be not higher than the Matter, but that of the Retort be free from it: fit
to it a great Receiver, not luting of it, because the Spirit comes forth with
such violence, that if there be no vent the Vessels would break: distill first
with a very gentle fire, which increase gradatim, but not too hastily, for as
soon as the Nitre and Sulphur begin to melt, they will flame, and drive forth
their Spirits with an Impetuesity in Red Fumes into the Receiver, which being
all come forth, let the Vessels cool, break the Retort, and in the bottom you
will have a fixed Salt of a bitterish Taste; which put into a little Earthen
Gourd, and affuse thereon the Spirit contained in the Receiver, to unite to its
proper Body; cover the Gourd with a fit Vessel, and digest in hot Sand for
three or four hours, so will the Salt be dissolved in its proper Spirit: filter
the Solution, and evaporate gently to dryness, so will you have a Salt as white
as Snow, and of a pleasing Acid taste, which keep in a Glass close stopped for
use.

2. I inserted this Method for the sake of Country Gentlemen, who cannot at
every turn in the Country, have choice Spirit of Nitre, because by this way, it
is very easily made, and in good quantity, and better than is usually sold;
this Spirit may either be put upon its own Caput Mortuum, according to the
Recipe; or upon fresh Nitre not distilled, according to the Text of our Author:
but such as live in London (where Spirit of Nitre is easy to be had) need not
put themselves to this trouble, but directly follow the Batean Text without
more ado.

3. It is an excellent Remedy against continual and intermitting Fevers, for
which reason, it is called by some Sal-Antifebrile: it admirably opens all
Obstructions of the Viscera, and powerfully resists Putrefaction. It Is to be
given in the beginning of the Fit in some proper Liquor, a ss. ad ss.

4. Thibaut makes it thus. Fine Nitre viij. Sulphur or its Flowers iv. fire
this Mixtion by degrees in an Earthen Cup set in a stone Pan, in which is a
Quart of Spirit of Urine, covering the Pot with a Bell: then take the Feces of
the calcined Sulphur, which powder and mix with Spirit of Urine impregnated
with the Spirits of Nitre and Sulphur: digest twelve hours in this stone Pot to
dissolve, filter the dissolution, and evaporate in a short neckt Mattress in a
circulary Fire, till it has a white scum, diminish the Fire and evaporate, till
it ceases boiling, (having a Care that the too much boiling does not break your
Vessel) put this Matter while warm, into a whit Ware Dish, and it will congeal
like Crystal Mineral. To mould it in shape, you must melt it, and then pour it
into a Vial, or melt it in the Vial, and then break your Vial by cold Water,
taking away all the Glass by the point of a Knife.

5. It Is says he, a powerful Diuretic and Cooler, it resists Corruption,
drives forth Gravel out of the Reins and Bladder, cures Fevers and softens
Metals.

6. Schroder makes it thus. Nitre q. v. digest it in Spirit of Nitre to
dissolve: abstract a Phlegm: add more Spirit, digest, and distill, till it comes
forth as sharp as it went in, so will it be sufficiently impregnated, put the
Liquor remaining in the Retort into a Cellar to crystallize, which dissolve in
Water, filter, and crystallize, again. It expels Tartarous Matter by Sweat,
Stool, and Urine.

7. Le Mort makes it thus.

Pure Nitre ij. Spirit of Nitre iij. mix and digest them together for some
hours; then putting them on the Fire, evaporate all the Humidity; so will a
most white Salt remain in the bottom, which keep for use.

8. Muykens the Commentator or Reviser, in his Notes upon the same, says you
may take instead of the Spirit of Nitre, either Oil of Sulphur or Oil Vitriol:
but then it willbe Nitrum Sulphuratum or Vitriolatum.

9. This Nitrum Nitratum, answers the Ends of Sal Prunellae, but is a much
stronger and better Medicine: and is used only internally in all sorts of
burning Fevers, as also against the Plague, Scurvy, and all manner of
infectious and contagious Diseases.

10. Now here is to be noted, that all sorts of Marine Salts may in the same
manner be impregnated with their own proper Spirits, whereby they become not
only more palatable, but also more virtuous and excellent: so common Salt
prepared after the same manner, makes not only a better Pickle, but also
becomes a Preservative against the Scurvy, Putrefaction, Plague, and all sorts
of malign and contagious Diseases: and as it serves to pickle Flesh, Fish, and
Vegetables, so j. of this will do more than lb j. of the common Salt, making
the things preserved in it more grateful to the Stomach: but if you use it for
a Pickle, then there will be no need of evaporating away the Humidity.

11. The best Wine Vinegar lb j. Spirit of Salt j. Salt ij. mix and dissolve:
into which put small unripe Cucumbers: they will be pickled in two days, and
keep a long time, never corrupting.

XIV. Nitrum Perlatum, Nitre pearled.
Bate.] It is made after the same manner as the Nitre corallated, with Salt of
Pearls and Nitre. It is a most egregious Cordial, and takes away or mitigates
the febrile Heat. Dose, ad j.

Salmon.] 1. This is taken from Zwelfer, who has it thus. Sal-Prunellae, or
pure Nitre iij. soluble Magistery of Orient Pearls j. dissolve each by it self
in Damask Rose Water; join the two Solutions together, then put them into a
Glass Alembick, and abstract to the Consistence of a Salt.

2. Schroder makes it thus. Fine Nitre iij. dissolve it in Spirit of Vinegar:
Salt of Pearls (so dissolved ij.) mix the Dissolutions, and coagulate by
Evaporation, and set it in a cool place to evaporate.

3. The soluble Magistery is thus made. Pearls q. v. dissolve them in Spirit of
Vinegar, or Spirit of Nitre, (adding, if with the last some Water) precipitate
with Oil of Sulphur, sweeten, and digest well with S. V. so have you a
Magistery will melt in your Mouth like* Butter. Or thus. Dissolve Pearls in a
Spirit not without some Phlegm (made of common Salt, Alum, Ana. lb j. made into
Balls with Potters Clay lb iij.) affusing the Spirit by degrees: decant the
Solution add Rose Water if you please, filter and precipitate with Oil of
Sulphur, or Spirit of Vitriol, sweetened with Cordial-water.

4. Schroder's Salt of Pearl is thus made. Whole Pearls, q. v. put them into
Spirit of Vinegar, or Spirit of Salt, or of Vitriol, or of Guajacum, or in
Juice of Barberries, or of Limmons or Citrons; dissolve, filter, and
inspissate: If you use Spirit of Vitriol or Salt, they ought to be circulated
before hand with S. V. to make them lose something of their Acrimony: but if in
Juices, as of Citrons, etc. digest them in the Juice four Inches above, till
they are dissolved, then add Spirit of May Dew, and decant the Solution: add
new Juice of Citrons depurated, digest, and add more distilled May Dew, or
Bawm-water, and decant, this so often repeat till the Pearls are all dissolved,
a few Feces only remaining, and then inspissate with a gentle Fire to dryness.

5. This Pearled Nitre is good in all hot Diseases, and in burning Fevers,
where there is much weakness and debility of Nature; for it is an excellent
cooling Cordial, resisting Putrefaction, Poison, Plague, and the most
contagious Diseases; it chears the Heart, revives the Spirits, and refreshes in
the greatest Agonies. Dose, a ss. ad ss. in a fit Vehicle.

XV. Nitrum Saturnisatum, Nitre Saturnised, or with Lead.
Bate.] Salt of Saturn, Nitre, Ana. dissolve in Spirit of Vinegar, and
crystallize, S. A. It is profitable against Asthma's, or for Asthmatick People.
Dose, gr. v, vj, or vij.

Salmon.] 1. It will be best to dissolve each a part in the Spirit of Vinegar;
and then to join the Solutions; after which, you may abstract to a Cuticle, and
set it to Crystallize; or evaporate to dryness.

2. It is an excellent Anodyn and Cooler, refrigerating the overheated Spirits
and Humors: But it is accounted a Specific against most Diseases of the Breast
and Lungs, as Asthma's, Shortness of Breath, Difficulty of Breathing,
Wheasings, Stoppages of the Lungs, Pleurisies, Quinsies, and other like
Diseases of those parts.

3. Outwardly applied, being dissolved in a proper Liquor, it is an excellent
thing against the Gout, and all sorts of Pains in the Joints, alleviating the
Pain, and drawing forth the Humor through the Pores by opening them.

4. The Liquor fit for this purpose is thus made. Spirit of Wine, Spirit of May
Dew, Ana. lb j. Oil of Sulphur j. mix and digest them together for ten days;
then dissolve therein, to every j. of the Liquor, j. of this Salt: with which
bath the part afflicted; and lay over it Cloths dipped in the same.

XVI. Nitrum Sulphuratum, Sulphurated Nitre.
Bate.] Spirit of Sulphur iv. fine Nitre iv. mix and distill to dryness,
cohobating thrice, and at length increasing the Fire, till the Vessel is
red-hot. It has the Virtues of Sal-Primellae.

Salmon.] 1. Our Text teaches you to cohobate, or to use again the Spirit
distilled off; but some Authors think it would be good to use fresh Spirit each
time, else I fear you will scarcely have the the Spirit come as Acid off, as it
went on, which it ought to do, and then you have a good Medicine indeed; but by
this latter way, your Salt will be much the dearer.

2. At last the Vessel is made red-hot because all the superfluous Spirit (as
Le Mort calls it) it may be taken away, by which means your Salt will be the
dryer, whiter, and purer.

3. It is highly aperitive, stomatick and nephritick, refists Putrefaction in
the highest degree, and therefore is said to be a singular thing to preserve
from the Infection of the Plague, or any other infectious Disease; it quenches
thirst, cools the heat of Fevers how violent soever, and provokes Urine. It is
good against the Putrefaction of the Teeth, cleanses them, and takes away the
stinking of the Mouth. Dose, a gr. iij. ad j. in Canary, or other proper
Vehicle.

XVII. Nitrum Vitriolatum, Nitre vitriolated.
Bate.] It is prepared from Nitre, p ij. Oil of Vitriol, p.j. being distilled
to dryness, and cohobated, as in Nitre sulphurated. See the Arcanum Duplex.

Salmon.] 1. The Arcanum Duplex see Chap. IX. Sect. XVI. aforegoing, from which
this apparently differs, though it has much the same Virtues with that: but that
is prepared from the Caput Mortuum of double Aqua Fortis, made of Nitre and
Alum, say some, but of Nitre and Vitriol say others, as Schroder: whereas this
is prepared from pure simple Nitre it self, by addition of Oil of Vitriol.

2. You may see the Preparation of it at large in Horstius his Pharm. Lib. 17.
Page 457. but it is a Recipe of Mynsicht's, in Thesaur. Sect. 1. Page 29. where
you will find the Proportions differing from these in our Text, viz. Prepared
Nitre. p. j. rectified Oil or Spirit of Vitriol p. ij. (which is four times as
much as is prescribed by our Author) mix and distill by Retort with degrees of
fire, first gentle, then with a stronger fire, till the Retort grows red-hot,
and no more Spirit will ascend; so will a Snow white Powder remain at bottom.
To this he advises to put as much more fresh Spirit or Oil of Vitriol, enough
for its perfect dissolution, then to filter, and evaporate away the Humidity to
one half, after which he sets it in a cold place to shoot into Crystals, which
he drys and keeps for use.

3. This is Nitre vitriolated, which Chemists call Spiritus Vitrioli
Coagulatus, whose Virtues we will give you from the same Mynsieht.

4. It has says he, the same Virtues and Operations with Spirit of Vitriol,
saving, that this more cools, and is more diuretic than that, and has a
greater power in tinging or coloring any thing: but its chief Virtues consist
in i^ciding, dissipating, mundi^^ng drying, resisting Putrefaction, and
quenching Thirst.

5. For these Reasons it is said to be most powerful against all malign Fevers,
pestilential, putrid, hungarick, epidemick, which are caused from a
sulphurous, astral, and venen Influence upon the Bodies of Humane kind.

6. It has a Bezoartick property which often times moves both Urine and Swear,
thereby expelling all inward hot, noxious Vapors; it purges and restores a
troubled Stomach, helps the Concoction, and excites the Appetite; and takes
away the Cause of a putrid and stinking Breath, kills Worms bred of Crudities
and putrid Humors.

7. It is also good in Hepatick Distempers, which some think to be the Causes
of Rubies and Pustules in the Face; and for such as are apt to be troubled with
a Diarrhaea, it is a most excellent Remedy.

8. It prevails against the Quinsie, pestilential Diseases Pleurisy, Tumor of
the Spleen, a putrid or virulent Gonorrhoea, the Flux of the Whites in Women,
the Scurvy, and other like Diseases, for which it is said to be an excellent
Remedy.

9. Dose, a gr. iv. ad 10. in some proper Conserve, Electuary, Syrup, Julep or
Liquor: in cold Diseases let it be given in Wine; but in burning Fevers in pure
Water, or Barley-water: against a Diarrhaea, and to comfort the Liver, as also
against a Gonorrhaea, and Flux of the Womb, mix it with Conserve of red Roses,
of which the sick may take Morning and Night to the quantity of a Chestnut.

10. But all such as are obnoxious to Contractions and Convulsions of the
Nerves, have an exceeding dry Head, and a wasted and dried Body; such also who
have a very thin and debile Stomach, and a straitness of the Orifice of the
Ventricle, Women and Virgins afflicted with a suppression of their Courses, are
all to abstain from the use of this Medicament.

XVIII. Sal Absinthij Crystallinum, Crystallized Salt of Wormwood.
Bate.] It is made by dissolving Salt of Wormwood in Water, by filtering,
crystallizing and drying it. S. A.

Salmon.] 1. Our Author here intends the fixed or elementary Salt made by
incineration, elixiviation, filteration and evaporation; which by reiterated
Dissolutions, etc. will become pure and crystalline, as it is said.

2. But that the Crystals might be the more firm and durable, Oil of Sulphur
ought to be added to the Lixivium, then they will shoot sooner, fairer, and
better: this may do in some Cases, but where the pure Alcaly is desired, all
Acid substances must be avoided.

3. But the Crystalline Volatile and Essential Salt is thus made. Wormwood
while it is fresh and full of Juice before seeding, q. v. bruise it in a
Wooden, Stone or Iron Mortar, add to it a great quantity of fair Water, and
boil to the Consumption of the half part; strain, pressing it out strongly, and
after boil it to the thickness of new Honey: then put it into a Glass or glazed
Vessel, and set it in a cold place for nine or ten days or more, and it will
shoot into a Crystalline Salt, (which decanting the Liquor) gather, dry, and
keep for use.

4. But in making thi^ Essential Salt, if you pou^ the Juice a little
inspissate^ upon fresh Herbs, and the^ digest, decoct, and strain as before,
you will have a larger quantity of Salt than otherwise.

5. This Salt if not pure enough according to your Mind, dissolve again in
Wormwood-water, filter and evaporate; and then crystallize, so will it be very
pure and clear, which dry and keep for use.

6. The fixed or elementary Salt, incides, opens, absterges, and attenuates, and
is stomachick: It brings forth (says Le Mort) the Stone by Urine, and provokes
Sweat as all other alcalious Salts do: it prevails against Fevers (especially
intermitting) of what kind soever, and is given a gr. vj. ad j. in some
sudorifick Vehicle.

7. But the fixed Salt being crystallized with Oil of Sulphur, it seems to be
more powerful against Tartarous Diseases, and a greater Stomatick, resists
Corruption and Putrefaction, and the Infection of the Plague. Dose, the same
with the former.

8. In making the Essential Salt, after you have gotten all the Crystals you
can, the remaining Liquor you may evaporate to the consistency of an Extract,
and keep it under the Title of the inspissate Juice of Wormwood.

9. This essential Salt cleanses admirably, and is an egregious Stomatick and
Sudorifick: it kills and expels Worms, opens and removes Obstructions, and
allays or quiets the Effervescency of Choler. Dose, a gr. vj. ad j. or more.

10. The extract or inspissate Juice is stomatick, and removes Obstructions of
the Spleen and Mesentery, and kills Worms in the Stomach, being inwardly taken,
and outwardly applied about the Navel and Stomach. Dose, ss. ad j.

XIX. Sal Aceti Essentiale, Essential Salt of Vinegar.
Bate.] Boil the Caput Mortuum of the Spirit of Vinegar in Water, filter and
crystallize, S. A. it is sudorifick, and resists Putrefaction. Dose, a gr. v.
ad 10. in any proper Vehicle.

Salmon.] 1. Abstract Vinegar to the consistence of Honey, then set it to
crystallize: these Crystals you may purify by dissolving them in the Phlegm of
the Vinegar, evaporating, and crystallizing again.

2. Marggrave does it in a Glass Retort, and then abstracts but to the
consistency of a Syrup or new Honey; lest it should contract an Empyreuma: but
distilling the Spirit of Vinegar in a low Cucurbit in B. M. he distills to
dryness: a quarter part of what is distilled is Phlegm of Vinegar, which ought
to be taken by it self; the other there parts is Spirit of Vinegar.

3. The Feces at bottom, whether like Syrup or dry, contain the Salt and Oil of
Vinegar, or its fixed and gross Sulphur, which may each by themselves be
separated, if the Feces be dissolved in pure Water; then presently the Water
being thoroughly mixed with the Sulphur or Oily parts is decanted red into
another Vessel, and the Sal Aceti will remain in the bottom like Sand; which is
the essential Salt of the Vinegar, and is nothing but Crude Tartar, which by
the fair Water is purified and edulcorated.

4. Some affusing the Phlegm of the Vinegar upon the Feces, digest twenty four
hours then filter, strain, and evaporate in a Glass Vessel to the consistency
of a Syrup, and call it Elixir Aceti: it is stomatick, attenuates, and excites
the Appetite.

5. The Spirit of Vinegar, cools, drys, and astringes; attemperates and
thickens thin fermenting Humors; and on the contrary again opens and incides
crass and viscous Humors, attenuates, provokes Sweat and Urine, and preserves
from Putrefaction. Dose, a ij. ad iv. It prevails against the Plague and all
contagious Diseases, Pleurisies and internal Inflammations.

6. It is a noble and egregious Menstruum in Chemistry for dissolving Stones,
Shells, Coral, Pearl, and Metals, as Venus, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, and for
making Mineral and Metalick Tinctures and Extractions.

XX. Sal Aceti fixum, The fixed Salt of Vinegar.
Bate.] Calcine the Caput Mortuum left after the distillation of the Spirit of
Vinegar, dissolve it in Water, filter and cuagulate, S. A. It does the same
thing as the former.

Salmon.] 1. Marggrave takes Vinegar lb iv. evapor ates it in a gentle B. M. lb
ij. or lb j. the rest be puts into a Glass Retort, and distills in Sand till the
Liquor seems oily or thick; so have you first a weaker Spirit of Vinegar, which
if you please you may take by it self: then continues the distillation longer
till only lb ss. or thereabouts remains in the Retort, so will you have a
stronger Spirit.

2. That which remains in the Retort is to be dried, and calcined, then
dissolved in fair Water, filtred, evaporated, and coagulated to dryness, so
have you an Alcalious fixed Salt of Tartar, and having the same Virtues.

3. But whereas our Author says it does the same thing as the former; we are
not altogether of the same Opinion, because the one is an Essential, and Acid
Salt, the other is a fixed, elemental and alcalious Salt; so that, so much as an
Acid and an Alcalie differ one from another; so much do these two Salts differ
in their Natures, Qualities, Properties and Operations.

4. It Is true, that both are openers and dissolvers in their kind, but it is,
when they meet with proper Bodies or Subjects to work upon: so the Essential
and Acid Salt will dissolve testaceous and fixed alcalious Bodies, as Pearl,
Crabs Eyes Crabs Claws, etc. and the like substances in Man's Body: and the
fixed alcalious Salt, will dissolve other acid Bodies, if in quantity it is able
to over power them.

5. The former are good for such as are Ahstmatick, and have Tertian and
Quartan Agues: the latter for such as have the Stone in Reins or Bladder, or
the Gout, or other Diseases proceeding from an acid and viscous Tartar, etc.

XXI. Sal Alcali, Sweet or Alcalious Salt.
Bate.] Quicklime lb j. Ashes of Wood lb ss. Tartar, Nitre, A. j. boil in
Water, filter, and coagulate to dryness.

Salmon.] 1. This is exactly from Schroder, but there are several other ways of
making of this Salt, which seem to be better: Theophrastus takes Quicklime, and
Bean Ashes, and makes a Lixivium and coagulates.

2. The Venetians take Quicklime lb j. Oak or Beech Ashes lb ij. Sandiver,
Vitriol calcined, Tartar, A. ij. of which they make a Lixivium, and then a Salt.

3. Marggrave makes it only of Potashes, by elixivation, filtration,
evaporation, and reverberation, till the Salt flows in the Crucible like Water:
then being cooled he dissolves it again in fair Water, and filters through
Paper, then evaporates in a Glass body till the Cuticula emerges, and then sets
it for a Night in a cold place, so a most white Salt will concreet, which is
vulgarly called Sal Alcali, or Sal Alcalisatum, that is a Salt fixed or
reverberated.

4. All Alcalies powerfully attenuate, open, resolve, melt Humors, and
effervesce with Acids, not only to attemperate them, but also totally to
destroy them; from whence they conduce to the cure of almost infinite Diseases,
viz. of all such, as proceed from and are generated of an Acid ferment, as
phlegmatic Diseases, Scurvy, Epilepsia, etc. Dose, ss. ad j.

5. But all these things are properly spoken only of Marggrave's Sal Alcali,
not of Schroders, which is the Text of our Author: the use of which Schroder
says, is only Chemical, and serves to separate Gold from Copper, if it be cast
on when it runs: as also, to make Silver run easy and melt.

XXII. Sal-Aluminis, Salt of Alum.
Bate.] Boil burnt Alum in Water, filter and coagulate, S. A. It is Sudorifick
and a Febrifuge. Dose, gr. v. ad x.

Salmon.] 1. Or rather you may take the Caput Mortuum of the Spirit of Alum, at
Chap. II. Sect. II. 3. and 6. aforegoing of this Book, and so proceed to
dissolution, filtration, and coagulation, as directed in our Text.

2. But there is another kind of Salt of Alum, which is crystalline, and
according to Charras is thus made. Burnt Alum, or the Caput Mort. now
mentioned, put it into a Glass Cucurbit in a Sand-heat, and affuse thereon as
much good Vinegar, as is requisite to dissolve it, filter the dissolution, and
evaporate in the same heat, till a Cuticle covers it, then let it cool and set
to crystallize, which Crystals dry and keep for use.

3. These are given upon occasion, in some proper purging Liquor, a gr. xij. ad
xx. or xxiv. twice a Week for the Cure of Tertian Agues, a little before the
Fit. Schroder says they move Sweat, and cure the Scurvy being given once or
twice a week to sweat with, and cure Tertians being given often before the Fit.

XXIII. Sal-Armoniacum fixatum, Fixed Sal-Armoniack.
Bate.] Mix Sal-Armoniack with half the quantity of Quicklime, and giving a
most strong fire, with the help of Bellows melt it, which afterward wash with
water, S. A. Its chief use is for making a Liquor of it: it is Sudorifick,
resists Putrefaction, and opens Obstructions. Dose, gr. v. ad x. etc.

Salmon.] 1. Charras makes it thus. Sal-Arm. Quicklime, Ana. mix them, put them
into a Crucible upon the Iron square in the midst of a Wind Furnace, where it
may be at length forced into fusion: then it is taken and dissolved in Water,
after which it is filtered and coagulated: so have you fixed Sal-Armon. this
being put on a Glass Plate in a cool moist Cellar dissolve by little and little
into a Liquor, fit to dissolve Gold or Silver.

2. It is the nature of two Volatiles to fix one another; and thus the Volatile
Salt of the Quicklime hastily joining with the Volatile Salt of the Sal Armon.
and in the Calcination and Fusion, invading one another Properties fix one
another, though in the doing this, before the intimate Mixtion can be made, some
part of the Volatile Salts must be lost.

3. But Lemery has an other kind of fixed Sal Armon. which he makes after this
manner. Sal-Armoniack, Salt of Tartar, Ana. viij. both being in powder, mix
them and immediately put them into a Glass body, and sprinkle it with iij. of
Rainwater fix on it a Head and Receiver, luting well the Junctures with a wet
Bladder: distill in Sand, first with a gentle fire, to warm the Vessel gradatim,
and to distill the Spirit drop by drop: when no more will come over; take away
the Receiver, stop up the neck, and increase the Fire to the third degree, for
the space of about two hours, so the white Volatile Sal Armoniack will sublime,
which will stick about the bottom of the head like Meal: and at the bottom of
the Cucurbit a good quantity of white fixed Salt.

4. The Spirit has the same Virtues and Operations of the common Spirit of Sal
Armoniack; and thereof you will have vijss. of the Volatile Salt, you will have
about jss. and of the fixed Salt nere ixss.

5. This fixed Salt dissolve in a sufficient quantity of Water, filter, and
evaporate to dryness, so will it be very white and pure.

6. This Salt is esteemed by Physicians as Sylvius, a Sal Febrifugum. an
excellent Remedy for intermitting Fevers, and all sorts of preternatural Hearts
whatsoever; being given a ss. ad ss. in Centory-water, or some other proper
Vehicle.

7. This Febrifugous Salt is nothing but a mixture of Salt of Tartar, with the
Acid part of the Sal-Armon. which makes it to work much by Urine, but seldom
Sweat, because that being fixed it penetrates more easily than rarifies, for
which reason it opens Obstructions, which are the rooted or original Causes of
all Fevers.

8. In performing this Operation, you might use instead of the Salt of Tartar,
the fixed Salt of Nitre, Salt of Potashes, or any other Alcali that you please:
the Volatile Salt does proceed from some part of the Sal Armon. which the Salt
of Tartar had not sufficiently opened and seized upon: this when the Fire
begins to heat the Matter rises up into the head, in a delicate Crystalline
form, but the moist Vapors coming upon it, dissolves it into Spirit, but the
moisture being spent, what Salt afterward arises keeps in a dry form.

9. This Spirit then is a dissolution of the Volatile Salt in Water; in which
if there be not Phlegm or Water enough, the Volatile Salt will lie at bottom
undissolv'd; this may all be turned into Spirit, by only adding more Water;
thus the Pores of the Water are filled with the Volatile Salt: but if there be
more Water than the Volatile parts require, the Spirit is then weak, and must
be given in a larger Dose.

10. If equal quantities of this Spirit and Spirit of Wine be mixed together,
there will be a Coagulum, as thick as Butter, which may be cut with a Knife;
this proceeds from the Sulphurous part of the S. V. which uniting with the
Saline parts of the Sal-Armon. they filling the Ramous parts of the said
Sulphur of the Wine, immediately fix it, and stop their Motion, from whence
proceeds their Coagulation: to which it is possible that the Acid in the S. V.
joining with the Volatile Alcali in the Spirit of Sal Armon. may much
contribute.

XXIV. Sal Armoniacum Volatile, i. e. Febrifugum Salis, Volatile Sal-Armoniack,
or Febrifuge of Salt.
Bate.] It is made of Sal Armoniack and Salt of Tartar, Ana. by subliming, S.
A. It may be also sublimed (by the order of the Physician,) with a third part
of Castor, or Amber. It takes away the Crudities of the Ventricle. Dose* a gr.
iij. ad x. It is a S^dorifick, and a Specific in the Gout.

Salmon.] 1. This Preparation is nothing but the same with Lemery's in the last
Section; by which it appears that both a fixed and a volatile Sal-Armoniack may
be made by one and the same Operation; that is the Volatile, which after the
Mixtion of this Quicklime or Salt of Tartar ascends and sticks to the head: and
that is the fixed Salt which after the Distillation and Sublimation is ended,
remains at bottom of the Cucurbit, having had a reverberatory or melting Heat.

2. How to make it with Quicklime, we have showed from the same Lemery, in
Chap. II. Sect. XXIV. 14. and 18. of this Book aforegoing, so that it is
needless here to repeat it again: but this is observable, that out of viij. of
Sal-Armon. and 24. of Quicklime with the addition of iv. of Water, you will
have of Spirit v. vj. and the Caput Mort. in the bottom will be thirty Ounces;
so that abating the xxiv. of Quicklime, you will have just vj. of fixed Salt.

3. This fixed Salt is to be gotten out of the Caput Mortuum by elixiviation in
Water, filteration, and evaporation to dryness, etc. according to the usual
Method.

4. In Sect. III. of this Chapter, we have shown you how to make the Flowers of
Sal Armoniack, by which comparing the Discourse, with that in this and the
former Section you may apparently see the difference between Flowers and
Volatile Salt: the Flowers being the whole body of the Sal-Armoniack, to wit,
its Acid and Alcalious parts, sublimed together, and so are in truth no more
but a purified Sal-Armoniack: whereas the Volatile Sal-Armoniack is only the
Volatile parts sublimed alone, (in Salt or Spirit) the Acid and fixed part
remaining behind at bottom of the Sublimatory.

5. This Volatile Salt, is a famous thing for opening all Obstructions of the
Viscera, and to remedy Diseases of the Head, Brain, and Nervous parts, being
excellent against Vertigo's. Apoplexies, Epilepsies, Megrims inveterate
Head-Achs, Lethargies, fainting and swooning Fits, Palsies, Convulsions, and
other like Diseases of the nervous System and Womb.

6. It is a famous Specific against all Diseases of the Breast and Lungs, opens
their Stoppages, and helps Coughs, Colds, Wheasings, Asthma's Shortness of
Breath, Phthisicks, and restores in Consumptions: besides which, it resists
Corruption and Putrefaction of the Humors, and all malign, infectious or
contagious Diseases, as putrid Fevers, Measles, Smallpox, spotted Fever,
Plague, and all sorts of Pestilential Distempers, expelling the Poison and
Virulency of the Distemper either by Sweat or Urine, or both. Dose, a gr. iv.
ad xvj. or j. in some proper Sudorifick or pectoral Vehicle.

XXV. Sal-Armoniacum Volatile Oleosum; Volatile Oily Sal-Armoniack.
Bate.] Cloves ij. Spirit of Wine viij. Spirit of Sal Armon iv. digest them
together to be united according to Art. Dose, a gr. x. ad xv. etc. In Diseases
of the Head, Stomach, Spleen, Womb, etc. as also in the Cholick and Palpitation
of the Heart, it is a most powerful Remedy.

Salmon.] 1. This Process is plain and easy so that it needs no Explication,
but there are several kinds of them, the chief of which, and such as are of
more vulgar use, we shall here insert.

2. Sal Volatile Oleosum in Forma sicca, seu Essentia Vegetabilium. Pure Salt
of Tartar iv. of the Oil of any Vegetable j. Volatile Salt of Urine, or of
Horse-hoofs, Cows-horns, Hartshorn, or Hair, or of Flesh, ij. the Volatile
Salt being made into fine Powder, mix it well with the Oil; then add the Salt
of Tartar, which speedily put into a Sublimatory, and sublime with a gentle
Fire so will the Volatile Salt ascend impregnated with the Essence of the
Vegetable.

3. In this Operation, you must be careful that the Salt of Tartar may not
imbibe any moisture from the Air, because it will be apt to hurt the Operation:
for which reason, it will be better to put the Salt of Tartar (reduced into
fine Powder in a very hot Iron Mortar with a hot Pestle) first into the
Sublimatory, to which affuse the Oil, and then add the Volatile Salt, letting
them digest together three or four days without fire, and then subliming as
aforesaid.

4. The Virtues of this kind of Oily Salt, are in part taken from the Subjects
of which it is made: suppose of Oil of Savin, Volatile Salt of Hartshorn, and
Salt of Tartar; it is then opening, diuretic, and a provoker of the Menses,
etc. Dose, a gr. vj. ad xvj. Plus-minusve pro ratione Patientis.

5. Sal Volatile Aromaticum and Oleosum. Cinnamon iv. Nutmegs ij Cloves j.
Aniseeds, Cardamoms. Saffron, A. j. being all in gross Powder, add pure Salt of
Tartar, iij. Sal Armon. jss. common S. V. viij. digest for one night, and
distill in the morning with a gentle fire; so the most subtle part of the S. V.
will asce^d, impregnated with the aromatic Essences united with the Volatile
Sal Armoniack, as also a Volatile Sal Armoniack in a dry form, adhearing to the
sides of the Alembick and Receiver.

6. Or thus. The Aromatic Tincture, or Aromatic Spirit of Wine, prepared as
aforesaid j. most pure Spirit of Sal Armoniack a j. ad ij. mix and digest
twenty four hours, then distill with a gentle fire: so will the most subtle part
of the S. V. join, and ascend with the Spirit of Sal Armoniack.

7. Or thus. Flowers of Sal Armoniack, and affuse thereon Alcohol of S. V. so
much as to overtop them your Inches: digest eight days till the S. V. is
impregnated: decant the clear, and with this Menstruum extract Oily aromatic
Tinctures without distillation, which will be noble Medicines, and of almost
infinite Uses.

8. The Virtues of these Volatile Salts, Oily Aromatic Tinctures are to be
drawn from the Ingredients of which they are made; according to which they may
be Cephalic, Neurotick, Stomatick, Pectoral, Nephritick or Hysteric; and by
reason of the Volatile Salts will potently cut tough Phlegm, dispel Tartarous
Humors, open Obstructions, provoke the Terms in Women, resist the hysteric
Passions, remove Lethargies, Vertigo's and Apoplexies, ease the Palpitation of
the Heart, and allay a Suffocative, ferment of the Stomach, etc. being given a
gut. vj. ad 30. Plus minus.

9. Sal Volatile Oleosum and Aromaticum extemporaneum. Alcohol of S. V. iv.
Sal-Tartari ss. Oil of Mint gut. xx. Oils of Orange-Peels, gut. 16. of Cloves,
of Rosemary, of Nutmegs distilled, Ana. gut. viij. of Juniper gut. x. mix the
Oils with the Salt, then affuse the S. V. shaking them well together, lastly
add Spirit of Sal Armoniack ij. and it will grow Milky: digest them together
for some hours, often shaking the Glass, and at length it will grow clear;
which decant from the Feces, and keep for use.

10. It is a famous Cephalic, Neurotick, Stomatick, Cardiack and Uterine, good
against Vertigo's, Lethargies Apoplexies vehement Head-Achs, sickness at
Stomach, Palpitation of the Heart, Faintings, Swoonings and hysteric Fits.
Dose, a gut. 15. ad 30.

11. Sal Volatile Oleosum Uterinum Extemporaneum. Chemical Oils of Rue gut. xx.
of Savin, gut. 26. of Lavender, Rosemary, Time, Juniper, Mace distilled, A.
gus. 8. mix the Oils with the Salt of Tartar as aforesaid, and then with S.V.
rectified and Spirit of Sal Armon. in the same Proportions as before, so will
you have a Specific against all Obstructions and Affects of the Womb: it will
provoke the Terms immediately, and as it were to a Miracle, besides it is
excellent against Palsies, Lameness, Pains and Aches.

12. Sal Volatile Oleosum Cephalicum extemporaneum. Chym. Oils of Mint, of
Marjoram, of Time, of Oranges, of Rosemary, of Lavender, A. gut. viij. of
Cloves gut. xvj. mix them with Salt of Tartar v. then with Alcohol of S. V. v.
and with Spirit of Sal Armoniack ij. as before.

13. Sal Volatile Oleosum Febrile and stomachicum extemporaneum. Chym. Oils of
Cloves, Mint, A. gut. xvj. of Wormwood, Juniper, Caraways, Fennel, Oranges, A
gut. viij. Camphire ss. mix them with Salt of Tartar in fine Powder vj. and
then with Alcohol of S. V. vj. Spirit of Sal Armoniack ij. as before.

14. Sal Volatile Aromaticum, made by digestion only. Biting Cinnamon iv.
Cloves, Cardamoms the less, Cubebs, Coriander-seeds, Florentine Orice, A. ij.
the yellow of Citron-peels, of China Oranges, A. j. all being cut and well
bruised, add to them pure Salt of Tartar calcined Blew ss. and immediately
affuse thereon Alcohol of S. V. so much as to overtop the Ingredients four or
five Inches: digest in a cool place a week, and the Tincture will be extracted:
decant the clear, and add to it a third part of Spirit of Sal Armoniack, and
keep it for use.

15. Sal Volatile Aromaticum, made by distillation. The same quantities of all
the aforesaid Simples, and affuse thereon S. V. xx. Salt of Tartar, Sal
Armoniack, A. vj. best Damask Rose Water iv. Lavender-water ij. mix and digest
three days, then distill in B. M. with a moderate fire, till about xij. are come
forth, which keep for use.

16. Sal Volatile Oleosum quod Odorem Urinosum non habet. Roots of Angelica,
Masterwort, Butterbur, Valerian, A. ss. Roots of round Cyperus, of Galangal the
less, Cardamoms, Cubebs, Amomum, A. iij. Cloves, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, A. v.
Lavender, Marjoram, Mint, Rosemary, A. M. ss. Benjamin, Styrax Calamita,
Labdanum, A. ij. Lignum Rhodium, yellow Sanders, A. ss. Seeds of Anise and
Fennel, A. vj. all being grossly poudered and mixed, affuse thereon common S. V.
lb vj. Plus minus: Spirit of Nitre vj. digest for three days (but the longer
the better) then distill off about two thirds: to the abstracted Spirit, add
Sassafras shavings j. Coriander-seeds ij. yellow of Citron and Orange Peels, A.
iij. Lavender, M. ij. Spirit of Nitre j. mix and digest for a day, and distill
off again the one half, to this distilled Spirit add Spirit of Sal Armon. a
half part, digest again for a day, and then add Oils of Ginnamon, of Cloves, of
Oranges, of Mint, A. gut. viij. of Juniper, gut. vj. mix, digest, and in B. M.
distill to dryness, keeping what is drawn off for use.

17. It opens Obstructions of the Viscera, strengthens the Stomach, and
facilitates the Circulation of the Blood and other Juices, helps the Cachexia
in Women, provokes the Sweat, and corrects all noxious Humors of what kind
soever; but as to its more specific Virtues, they are to be deduced from the
Chemical Oils which go to its Composition. Dose, a gut. viij. ad xxx. or more.

18. Sal Volatile Oleosum Le Mortianum. Marjoram, Mint, Sage, Time, A. M. j.
Seeds of Lovage, Cardamoms, Daucus, Amomum, Anise, Caraways. A. ij. Cubebs,
Roots of Galangal the less, sweet Costus, round Cyperus, Florentine Orrice, A.
ss. Cloves, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, A. jss. Salt of Tartar ss. being grossly bruised,
mix them together, and affuse thereon 100. of S. V. digest three Weeks in a
warm place, then distill off two thirds. To the distilled Spirit add, yellow of
Citrons iv. of Oranges ij. Sassafras ij. digested first in S. V. x. for the
same time: these two, viz. the former Spirit; and this latter Tincture, being
joined, draw off the Spirit again in B. M. to dryness. To the whole quantity of
this Spirit, add a half part of Spirit of Sal Armon. Chemical Oil of Cloves,
gut. x. of Mint, gut. xx. of Orange-peels, gut. xxx. of Rosemary, Mace
distilled, A. gut. viij. of Juniper, gut. xij. Salt of Tartar calcined Blew,
and made into fine Powder in a hot Mortar iij. put all together into a Glass
sufficiently large, digest for four days (but 8 or 10 would be better) then
separate the clear from the Feces, keeping it for use, under the Title of Sal
Volatile Oleosum subtilissimum.

19. It is a most egregious Antifebrile and Stomatick, opening all Obstructions
of the Viscera, recreating the Spirits through the whole Body, and promoting
the Circulation of the Blood: it is as a Panacea in all sorts of Diseases, and
cures Fevers by sweating. Dose, a gut. iv. ad xx.

20. Sal Volatile Oleosum aliud. What specific Herbs, Roots, Barks, Seeds,
Flowers, or Woods you please; Spirit of Wine so much as they may swim in it:
digest them together the longer the better, but adding to every Pound of Spirit
of Wine, Spirit of Nitre ss. distill afterward the one half: and to the
distilled Spirit add what Chemical Oils you please, so much as the Spirit can
possibly imbibe: then add Spirit of Sal Arm. a half part, and digest them
together, or distill them drawing off two third parts, which keep for use.

21. Sal Volatile Oleosum nobilissimum, of an excellent smell and taste. Biting
Cinnamon iv. yellow of Citrons-peels vj. Benjamin, Styrax Calamita, Rhodium, A.
vj. Cloves, Mace, Cardamoms, Cubebs, Cyperus-roots, Florentine Orrice, A. ss.
Musk, gr. iv. S. V. lb viij, digest to^ether for eight days, then distill off
one half: to which add Spirit of Nitre ij. and put it upon the former Magma,
adding Sassafras, Coriander-seed, A. j. digest again for two days; then with a
very gentle fire distill off two thirds of the Humidity or Spirit, to which add.
Oils of Cinnamon, of Cloves, of Oranges, Ana. so much as the Spirit will swalow
up, or dissolve Spirit of Sal: Armoniack, a third part of the whole Spirit, mix
them, shaking them well together, digest for one or two days, and keep it for
use.

22. This wonderfully recreates the Vital and Animal Spirits, exhiberates the
natural Powers, strengthens the whole Body; fortifies the Stomach, and removes
its Debility, and promotes the Circulation of the Blood, which directly tends
to the Prolongation of Life. Dose, a gut. iv. ad xx. or more, in a Glass of
Wine. Here note, that the older this Medicament is, the more grateful and
pleasant it will be, both in its taste and smell.

23. Sal Volatile Oleosum extemporaneum. Aquae Vitae Matthioli, q. v. or in
place thereof, if it be not in a readiness common Spirit of Wine, half the
quantity of the other: Sal Alcali q. v. Oils of Cloves, Mint, Ana. q. v. Oils
of Rosemary, Oranges, and Mace distilled, A. half the quantity of the Cloves:
of these Oils put in so much as the Spirit will dissolve: or rather first mix
them with the Sal Alcali, and then with the S.V. to which put of Spirit of Sal
Armoniack, the third part of the quantity of the S. V. or a sixth part of the
quantity of the Aq. Vitae: digest them together for the space of twenty four
hours, so will all the Phlegm be separated from the Spirit.

24. In a word, all Volatile Oily Salts, made after these Methods, resist
Putrefaction, cure Fevers, and the Suffocation of the Womb, and have the same
Virtues, which the Oils composing them have.

25. Sal Volatile Oleosum Antivenereum. S.V. lb x. Sassafras Chips or Shavings
lb ij. digest in a warm place for forty days, and in B. M. draw off only the
pure Spirit without any Phlegm: with this Spirit extract a Tincture from Gum
Guajaci, and the extract of Guajacum make by the help of common Water: This
done, Sal Alcali, Oil of Lignum Guajacum rectified, Oil of Sassafras, A. gut.
40. raspings of China-root iij. Antimony so prepared for the extraction of its
Tincture vj. Meroury precipitated with Salt of Tartar ss. of the former
prepared Spirit or Tincture 40. of the best Spirit of Sal Armoniack 40. digest
them together for four days, then decant the clear from the thick, and keep it
for use. Dose, a gut. x. ad xxx.

26. Sal Volatile Oleosum vulgar. Volatile Sal Armoniack j. Nutmegs, Cinnamon,
A. jss. best Saffron ij. Chemical Oils of Lavender, Cloves, Nutmegs, Amber,
Marjoram, A. gut. xx. Calx Vive, or rather Salt of Potashes ij. Spirit of
Wine, Spirit of Sal Armoniack, Ana. viij. mix and digest for three days shaking
it often: then being quiet for some time, decant the clear and keep it for use.

XXVI. Sal Chalybis, Salt of Steel.
Bate.] Crocus Martis made with A. R. extract the Salt with Water, filter and
crystallize, S. A. It has the Power of inciding and opening Obstructions, both
of the Bowels and Womb. Dose, a gr. j. ad v. and more.

Salmon.] 1. Beguinus, Lib. 2. Cap. 15. makes his Crocus after this manner.
Filings of Mars j. which dissolve in A.F. viij. ( but other Authors say iv.) or
in as much good Spirit of Nitre in a Glass Gourd; put the Spirit in paulatim,
or by little and little, by reason of the great Ebulition which arises: when
this is done, put an Alembick or Head upon the Gourd, and draw off all the
Humidity, which will be as insipid as Water, by reason that the Steel retains
all the Acid Spirits: at the bottom of the Glass you will have jss. of a
Rubicund Crocus, which put into a Crucible, upon a moderate fire, so as to make
it red for three hours.

2. This is the Aperitive Crocus Martis, which according to Zwelfer may be
prepared also with Oils or Spirits of Vitriol, or Sulphur, or Salt, with Spirit
of Nitre, or Vinegar, or any other proper Acid: but, says he, this opening
Crocus is made with a very gentle Calcination: The Crocus being made, you may
easily make the Salt by the ordinary Method of Extraction with fair Water,
filtering, and crystallizing.

3. Our Author in his Text, exactly follows Schroder, but he orders it to be
often dissolved and coagulated, that the Salt may be sweetish: Where note, that
in the first dissolution of the Steel in A. R. if you cannot filter it, because
it corrodes the Paper, you must mix the greater quantity of Water with it, that
it may not be so sharp, and it will filter the better.

4. Gregorius Horstius in his Epistle to his Observations says, that this Salt
will cut and open the worst Obstructions of the Bowels and Womb, and may be
given, a gr. iv. ad viij. it cures the Cachexia and Green Sickness in Virgins.

5. Authors seem to make a difference between the Vitriol of Mars, and the Salt
of Mars, though they are both but Salts of Mars, and both do one and the same
thing: but there is this difference in the Preparation, that the Vitriolum
Martis is made with the Oil or Spirit of Vitriol or Sulphur, with the addition
of some Water; whereas the Sal Martis is made only with Spirit of Vinegar.

6. Riverius his Vitriolum or Sal Martis is thus made. Oil of Vitriol or
Sulphur lb ss. S. V. lb j. mix them in a new clean Iron Drying Pan, cover it
with a sheet of white Paper, and digest fifteen days so will there be a white
Salt like gathering, which set in the Sun and dry it thoroughly, stirring it
sometimes with an Iron Spatula; in the Winter dry it in a gentle Sand-heat, and
keep it in a Glass close stopped for use.

7. This he commends as an admirable thing against the most contumacious
Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, Womb, or the other Viscera: and it is said
to be a perfect Cure for Hypochondriack Melancholy, above all other
Medicaments. Dose, a ss. ad j. in Wine or other Liquor.

8. Crollius makes a Salt of Iron by cementing Calx of Iron with Sulphur, and
then extracting it with hot Water, filtering, and crystallizing according to
the usual Method.

9. Schroder has a purging Salt of Iron, which he makes after this manner.
Filings of Iron, Sal Armoniack, A. grind them gently on a Marble, put them into
an Earthen Still, and sublime, first with a gentle fire, then with a stronger,
increasing the fire by degrees: let it cool, and break the Vessel, and keep the
upper part that is white, to make a new Sublimation with fresh filings: keep
also the middle yellow part, which is the Diaphoretick Flowers of Iron: then
take out the Caput Mortuum, in the bottom, and extract with Water a common
Salt, which purify by Solution, Filtration, and Coagulation, keeping it in a
Glass close stopped for use.

10. Being mixed in any proper Laxative or Syrup of Violets, a ss. ad j. it
purges gently, and admirably opens all sorts of Obstructions of the Viscera:
but this it does in my opinion much better, if the middle yellow Flowers be
mixed with it.

11. Le Febure's Vitriolum Martis. Filings put them into a Glass Cucurbit, and
Gradatim affuse Spirit or Oil of Vitriol, with most of its Phlegm, stir both
together with an Iron Spatula, and put on so much of the Spirit, as that the
Matter may be well satiated therewith; then affuse thereon Rainwater almost
boiling hot, so much as may overtop the Filings the height of four Inches:
digest in a gentle Sand-heat for 24 hours, then filter the warm Liquor, and
evaporate to one half, and set it to crystallize, which the next Morning you
will find of a bright green round about the Vessel: take these Crystals or
Vitriol, put them between two Papers, and dry them in a slow and gentle heat:
upon the remaining Filings put more Spirit of Vitriol and warm Water, which in
like manner digest, decant, filterate, and crystallize, till the whole body of
the Iron is converted into Vitriol or Salt, a little Earthy sedement only
remaining.

12. Of xij. of Filings you will have 48. of Vitriol, by which you may
perceive, that it is nothing but Mars dissolved and resuming its Vitriolick
Idea or Character, as being a Body which was once Vitriol: and this Vitriol
much surpasses in Excellency the common Vitriol out of which the Spirit used in
this Work has been distilled; for the recorporified Spirits have a greater
Sphere of Activity, and do much more powerfully work than the Substances purely
and merely natural; this Vitriol has more efficacy, and acts with much more
quickness than the apperitive Crocus, in all the Diseases it is applicable to,
but the Dose is much less, beginning with gr. 3. and so increasing gradually
till you come to gr. 10. or 20. either in some Bolus, Wine or Broth.

13. But here is one Note worthy of Observation, the Remedies extracted from
Mars must be long continued and taken, increasing their Dose a Grain, or more
every day, till it begins to cause a nauseousness in the Stomach, and then to
diminish it to what the Stomach can well receive, and so continuing it; for
that it appears, Nature then is bringing forth its desired effects, without any
force or violence.

14. You ought also to observe that such as use Steel Remedies should be purged
every fourth or fifth day, in case it does not so provoke Nature as is desired;
and every other day, the Bowels ought to be opened by a solutive Clyster, or a
Clyster made of new Urine.

15. Wherefore every fourth or fifth day take this gentle Purge. Veal or
Chicken Broth viij. vitriolated Tartar j. choice Sena ij. infuse twelve hours,
strain, and give it for a Dose. This carries off, and expels out of the Body,
those Recrements which this great Remedy has made fit for Evacuation.

16. Le Febure's Salt of Mars, which Schroder and others call the sweet Salt of
Mars. Filings lb ss. put them into a Stone Dish or Pan, sprinkle them with good
Spirit of Vinegar, till they become a Paste, which gently dry: grind it on a
Marble, and moisten in like manner again with the same Spirit; then dry again,
grind and moisten again, which work so often repeat till you discern by the
Taste the Mass to be of a sweetish savor or relish: then put this Powder into
a Cucurbit, and affuse thereon Phlegm of Vinegar, so much as may overtop it six
Inches; cause the Liquor to boil, so will it extract the Salt, always observing
to put in new Phlegm of Vinegar, as you see the other evaporates away: the Menst
being sufficiently impregnated decant it, and being cold filterate it, and in
B. M. abstract two or three parts, and in a cool place, set it to shoot into
Crystals: separate the supernating Liquor, evaporate again and crystallize,
which work so often repeat till it will yield no more: then dry them, and put
them into a circulary Vessel, affusing thereon Alcohol of S. V. so much as may
overtop them three Inches: lute it close up, and digest in B. V. with a very
gentle heat for seven days: then unlute the Vessel and abstract the S. V. and
at bottom you will have a very pure and pleasant Salt of Mars.

17. It is famous in opening and removing of Obstructions, chiefly in weak and
tender Bodies; and is good generally, against all Melancholic Affections, and
Diseases of the Reins and Bladder; but is particularly a Specific for the Cure
of Dropsies, opens Obstructions of the Womb, and cure Fits of the Mother. Dose,
a gr. iv, ad 20. in Broth, Decoction, or Wine.

18. Beguinus makes his Vitriol of Mars, with Oil of Vitriol or Sulphur,
putting to j. of the unrectified Oil, ij. of Water, which he puts upon j. of
Filings, and then performs the Operation in all respects as at Sect. XI.
aforegoing.

19. Others make the Vitriol thus. Filings lb j. put them into a large Mattress;
and affuse thereon of the best corrosive Oil of Vitriol lb iij. mixed with
Rainwater lb9. putting on the Liquor by degrees: digest in a Sand-heat for two
or three days, in which time most of the Filings will be dissolved (which would
not be without the addition of the Water, which hinders the Oil of Vitriol from
being sucked up, and congealed by the Filings of the Steel;) and the dissolution
will be green, then filter, and crystallize as before directed.

20. With this Vitriol Artificial Mineral Waters may be made, either strong or
weak, according to the Intention of the Physician: but for the most part j. of
this Vitriol serves for two Quarts of Water.

21. Some in making the Salt of Mars at Sect XVI. above, repeat the Operation
of moistening the Filings with Spirit of Vinegar, drying and grinding, at least
a dozen times, the better to open the Body of the Steel, and then if the
Filings were at first but lb ss. (putting them into a Gourd in B. M.) they
affuse thereon lb xij. of distilled Vinegar, and continue it in the heat till a
third part of the Menstruum is consumed; then being cold, they decant the
Solution, and affuse new Menstruum to the Steel, etc. repeating this Operation
thrice: mix the Solutions, filter, evaporate, and crystallize, etc.

22. This Salt has a great use in Physic, for the Acids with which it is
prepared, carry it into the most remote and difficult places of the Body: and
the Acids themselves (which being alone might do mischief) being as it were
fettered and corrected by the Alcali of the Steel or Iron, act not with their
wonted or natural Violence.

23. Thibaut makes his Salt or Vitriol of Mars thus. Of the opening Crocus in
fine Powder lb vj. put it into an Iron Kettle, and affuse thereon fair Water lb
xij boil, continually stirring it for two hours with an Iron Spatula, till the
Water be half boiled away, then filter whilst warm, afterward evaporate and
crystallize, as before directed.

24. These Crystals are of a transparent green color, because that Mars is
made out of a Vitriolick Earth, as afore-hinted, which does contain nothing but
pure Vitriol, which by the violence of the Fire is changed into a Metalick
body, this being opened again by dissolvants resumes its ancient color.

25. They ought to be kept in a Glass close stopped, because the Air will soon
change their color, and cover them with a kind of white Meal, which will
change their transparency and greenness.

26. These Crystals of Mars are nothing but Particles of the Body of Mars,
intimately joined with an Acid Salt, and extracted out of the opening Calx of
Mars, by the sweetest of all dissolvants, which is common Water, by boiling,
and then evaporated and crystalliz'd.

27. Charras makes two kinds of the Salt of Mars, the first is exactly
agreeable with that of Le Febure at Sect. XVI. above, so that no more need be
said of it here: his other is the same with that of Riverius at Sect. VI.
aforegoing, with whom Lemery exactly agrees; but they differ from him, in the
Proportions of the S. V. and Oil of Vitriol: for whereas Riverius doubles the
Proportions of S. V. to the Oil; they both, make them equal.

28. This Salt says Charras is much beyond that made with Spirit of Vinegar,
and is a singular Example of the Change of the Liquid Forms of the Spirits of
Wine and Vitriol into a solid, by the common Union with the Particles of Iron:
and is given a ss. ad ss. as one of the best Remedies which can be drawn from
Mars, and which may be truly called the Soul of that mixed.

29. In making this Salt a Drying Pan (which ought to be new) is most proper
because of its flatness: and if you use iv. of S. V. and iv. of Oil of Vitriol,
you will have x. of the Salt of Mars: which proportion Experience has convinced
us of, is more agreeable with Reason, than that of Riverius.

30. This Salt also is more agreeable with the Stomach, than that made with
Vinegar, and is indeed more subtle and efficacious, for that nothing but the
more soluble parts of the Iron, incorporates with the Menstruum, to make a Salt
of: It is also preferrable before the Vitriol of Mars made with the Oils of
Vitriol or Sulphur: and if it be put into a cold moist place, upon a Plate of
Glass, it will melt per Deliquium, which is Liquor vel Liquamen Martis, by some
(but improperly) called Oil of Mars.

31. Charras makes his Vitriolum Martis exactly according to Le Febure, so also
does Lemery, but with limited proportions of the Ingredients thus:

32. Clean filings of Iron lb j. put them into a large Mattress, and affuse
thereon fair warm Water lb iv. and of good Oil or Spirit of Vitriol lb ij. stir
them mell together, and set the Mattress in a gentle Sand-heat, and digest
twenty four hours, in which time the purest part of the Mars will be dissolved,
decant the clear Liquor, casting away the Earthy parts which remain at bottom;
filterate and evaporate in a Glass Cucurbit, to a Pellicle, over a Sand-heat,
then set it in a cool place to crystallize, so will you have green Crystals:
decant the Liquor, evaporate again to a Pellicle, and crystallize as before,
which work repeat till you have got all the Crystals, then dry them, and keep
them in a Bottle close stopped for use.

33. Where note, That if Water should not be added, there would want moisture
to separate the pure parts of the Mars from the Impure, so that the Oil of
Vitriol would not be able to dissolve the Mars, but only to incorporate with
it: now in the dissolution of the Liquor it heats and boils considerably,
because the Acidity of the Vitriol does violently penetrate the body of the
Mars, making a separation of its parts.

34. This Vitriol being calcined in a Crucible in an open fire, till it is
reduced to a very fine red Powder, makes a very beautiful Crocus Martis which
is properly that part of the Steel which the Spirit of Vitriol has dissolved:
this Lemery will have to be used like an Aperitive Crocus.

35. This Vitriol of Mars, may also be distilled by a Retort in the same manner
as ordinary Vitriol; and the Spirit drawn from it, is said to have the same
Virtues with ordinary Spirit of Vitriol (but some question, whether full out so
strong) and may be made use of for the dissolution of Iron; after which you
have the Caput Mortuum at bottom, which is the true Crocus Martis.

XXVII. Sal Coralliorum, Salt of Coral.
Bate.] It is drawn forth from the Ashes after the common manner: Or thus.
Dissolve Coral in Spirit of Vinegar filter and exhale S. A. Dose, a ss. ad j.

Salmon.] 1. The Calx or Ashes is made by a gentle reverberating Fire, with a
heat of the second degree (according to Quercetan) lest by the force of a
violent fire the Tincture or Color should exhale: but if you would have the
Salt of Coral, you must calcine it with a strong reverberatory Fire to Ashes
(which is done in about three days time) then after the usual way you must make
a Lixivium, and from thence a Salt.

2. Or thus, Coral, calcine it two days in a Potter's Furnace till white; then
dissolve it in Spirit of Vinegar, by digestion in a gentle Sand-heat for eight
days, so will you have a red Solution, abstract the Menstruum with a gentle
fire to dryness; dissolve this Salt often in May Dew, filtring and coagulating,
which keep for use.

3. Reduce Coral into an impalpable Pouter by grinding upon a Porphyry Stone,
put it into a Glass Mattress, and affuse thereon Spirit of Vinegar, so much as
to overtop it four Inches, so will there be a great Effervescency, which being
over, digest in a gentle Sand-heat for two or three days, often shaking the
Mattress, leave the Coral to settle at bottom and decant the clear Liquor;
pouring on so much more Spirit of Vinegar on the remainder, digesting as
before, and decanting; this work continue till all the Coral is in a manner
dissolved: then the Dissolutions being mixed together, put them into a Glass
Cucurbit, and in a Sand-heat evaporate all the Moisture, so will a Salt of
Coral remain at bottom, which keep in a Vial close stopped for use.

4. This is the way by which Crollius, Beguinus, Schroder, Rolfincius, Lemery,
and most others make this Salt, but it may be made with other Menstruums, as
Schroder witnesses, with Spirits of Vitriol, or Sulphur, or Salt, or by the
Spirit of Guajacum, which then it is said to purge the Blood excellently in the
French Pox, as also with the Juices of Limons, Citrons, and Barberries. But
Thibaut makes it with Spirit of Sulphur, as before we have taught with Spirit
of Vinegar.

5. It is Cordial, revives and chears the Spirits, strengthens Nature, restores
in Consumptions, and takes away the Preternatural heat of Fevers and Hecticks;
it is given also to quench thirst with success, and to open Obstructions, which
it does by virtue of the conjoined Acid Salt: it purifies the Mass of Blood,
and expels Melancholy.

XXVIII. Sal Margaritarum, Salt of Pearls.
Bate.] It is to be prepared as Salt of Coral.

Salmon.] 1. It is made exactly as the Salt of Coral; but Pearls heed no
poudering, for they dissolve whole, by mere digestion in distilled Vinegar: it
is made also with Juice of Limons, and with all the other things with which
Salt of Coral may be made.

2. It is also made with Juice of Citrons thus. Pearls bruise them, and affuse
thereon Juice of Citrons purified by digestion, so much as may overtop them
four Inches: digest till they are dissolved: then add distilled May Dew, or
Bawm water, and decant the Solution: add fresh Juice of Citrons depurated,
digest, and add more distilled May Dew, or Bawm-water, and decant; this work
repeat till the Pearl are nearly all dissolved, a few Feces only remaining;
join the Solutions, and inspissate with a gentle fire, to dryness.

3. But Crollius seems most to approve of its Preparation with Spirit of
Vinegar, which Hartman assents to, as being a proper Menstruum, and herein says
he, (Crollius) is not besides the Mark; yet the use of other Juices for this
purpose is not to be contemned.

4. When the Evaporation is made, in Salt of both Pearl and Coral, etc. the
flegmy or watery parts only go forth, the Acids stay behind, being joined to
the Particles of the Coral or Pearl, and so make a kind of Salt.

5. This Salt, should it be put into a Retort and distilled in Sand, would only
yield a kind of styptick Liquor, without any considerable Acidity, which
plainly enough demonstrates, that the Acids are in a great measure destroyed,
and come not forth of the Alcali with that Strength, Life, and Form or Figure,
with which they went in.

6. We will give you the Virtues of this Salt of Pearls from Crollius. It is
(says he) a most noble Cordial, not much inferior to Aurum Potabile, in
Temperature and Operation; as in helping Contractures, Resolution of the
Nerves, Convulsions, Phrensies: it keeps the Body sound; and if hurt restores
it to its pristin state of Health, amends Women's Milk, and corrects and
increases the Seed of either Sex.

7. It comforts the Brain, Memory and Heart; is a Prophylactick against the
Vertigo and Apoplexy; drying up and consuming all the depraved Humors in the
Body from whence all kinds of Gout and Fevers are wont to proceed; it is good
against a Consumption, and the withredness of Age, renewing, increasing and
confirming the radical Humidity, by which it preserves from extreme debility in
Age.

8. It is admirable against the Stone, and preserves from the Gout, if daily
taken for some time: it preserves from the Palsy, taken in Wine; and is a
Confortative in the Dropsy, Universals being premised: it alleviates the
Venereal Evil; and is a singular Medicament against the Epilepsie, being taken
Morning and Evening for six Weeks together.

9. It strengthens the Child in the Womb; is good against Trembling and
Palpitation of the Heart, and Swoonings; being given in Cinnamon Water: it
fortifies the Vital principal, and the Internal nature through the whole Body.
Dose, a ss. ad j. If it will do the half of all this, it is a wonderful
Medicine.

10. But Paracelsus attributes great Virtues to the Salt of Pearl, and some
other of its Preparations: and (says he) though the Process be simple yet believe
my Experience, for Pearls have a wonderful Operation, not from Art but Nature:
The Virtue lodged in the gross Substance, cannot work but like a dead Body; but
Resolution being made the Body is revived, and they become an excellent
Cordial, resisting Poison, Putrefaction and the Pestilence, cheer the Spirits
and strengthen the Balsam of Life, so that the greatest Agonies are removed
thereby.

XXIX. Sal Oculorum Cancri; Salt of Crabs Eyes.
Bate.] It is made and prepared as Salts of Corals and Pearls.

Salmon.] 1. As to the Process of making the Salt nothing more need be said
than what has been said in those of Coral and Pearl.

2. As to its Virtues it is (besides being Cord.) an excellent traumatick and
vulnerary and being given in traumatick Potions, disposes Ulcers and Fistula's
to a speedy healing, carrying off part of the Morbifick Cause by Urine.

3. Of the Traumatick decoction vj. of our Aqua Bezoartica ss. of this Salt of
Crabs Eyes ss. mix for a draught to be given three times a day.

XXX. Sal Corte Cervi Succinatum, Ambred Salt of Hartshorn.
Bate.] It is made by subliming Hartshorn with half the quantity of Amber S.
A. Dose, gr. ss. ad j.

Salmon.] 1. This is an odd Medicament, and to be found in very few Authors
(except in Hippocrates and Galen, as they found out in them the Circulation of
the Blood, in spite of what our immortal Harvey could do) but Hofman seems to
hint at it in his Comment upon Schroder, Messiis medico Spagyrica, pagina mea,
599. where speaking of the Liquor or Spirit of Hartshorn, Cum sale Volatili
rectificatissimus, he says, Ex hoc praeparatur etiam C. C. Succinatum,
Cinamomisatum, Citratum, etc.

2. And Etmuller, Opera medica, Tom. 2. Page 286. has been so unlucky too as to
give us some notice of it, in these Words, Huic etiam Liquor Cornu Cervi
succinatus in omnibus supradictis affectibus (nempe Apoplexia, Epilepsia,
Lethargo, and Vertigine, and in specie Catarrhis) est Mirabilis.

3. It is made, says he, of these three things, viz. of the Spirit of
Hartshorn, of the Volatile Salt of Hartshorn, and of the Volatile Salt of
Amber, mixed together, digested and distilled.

4. It is a most famous thing against the Falling Sickness in Infants and
Children, as also in Catarrhs, and all Rheumatick Diseases, Defluxions from the
Head upon the Uvula and Tonsils, particularly in a Coryza, which is a Defluxion
of sharp, salt, and thickened Humors into the Mouth, Lungs and Nostrils, from
the Entricles of the Brain, as some think by the Nerves of Smelling.

5. Now this Volatile Salt may be made either in a liquid or in a solid and dry
form: in a liquid form, you may follow the Prescript of Etmuller aforegoing:
but if in a solid form, then you may make it, after the Text of our Author: or
according to this following Prescript: Pure Volatile Salt of Hartshorn,
Volatile Salt of Amber, Ana. mix them together, put them into a Glass Mattress
or Vesica, affixing thereon a blind Head and Sublime, S. A.

6. To conclude this Section, we will here give you Tillingius his
Antepilepticum Cervinum, which you may find in his Prodomos Chym. page 508. The
simple Powder made of young Harts-horns (i. e. ex Typhis) vj. Volatile Salt of
Hartshorn, Volatile Salt of Amber, A. ss. white Sugar Candy in fine Powder ij.
Chemical Oils of Coriander, Marjoram, and Lavender, A. j. mix and make a Powder
for the Falling Sickness, which keep in a Glass close stopped with Cork waxed
over. Dose, a j. ad ij.

XXXI. Sal Decripitatum, Decripitated or calcined Salt.
Bate.] It is made by calcining it in a covered Crucible, till the Salt has
done crackling.

Salmon.] 1. Some advise to put the Salt into an Earthen-Pot covering it, and
then to put fire round about it (called Ignis rotae) that it may be red fire
hot, so will the Salt crackle, and be reduced to powder: then to continue the
fire till the noise ceases.

2. Lemery heats an unglaz'd Pot or Crucible red hot, and puts into it a
Spoonful or two of Sea Salt, and then covers the Vessel, till the crackling is
over, and the Salt falls into Powder; which done he puts in more Salt, and
continues the same Operation as long as need requires: the noise being over,
and the P^^ taken out of the Fire and cool^^* ^e takes the Salt and keeps it in
a Glass bottle close stopped for use that the Air may not enter in to moisten it
a new.

3. The reason of the crackling in the Fire is an inward Humidity, which being
rarefied by the heat of fire, and finding the Pores of the Salt very close shut
up, it breaks through them with a kind of Impetuosity and Violence, and so
causes that crackling noise.

4. The use of this Salt is either Medicinal or, Mechanical: its Medicinal use
is, that being put very hot into bags, and laid behind the neck, it will open
the Pores, and facilitate a Perspiration of the too much abounding Humidity, of
the Brain: and if a little Salt of Tartar be mixed with it, it will be made the
more active.

5. Its Mechanical use is for Refiners, who Regalize their Aqua fortis
therewith, to make it able to dissolve Gold, thus, Of this Salt decripitated lb
j. put it into a Retort and affuse thereon good A. F. or Spirit of Nitre lb ij.
then draw off the Spirit in a Sand-heat, and keep it for use: But some only
dissolve the Salt in the A. F. etc. without distillation, which they esteem the
stronger Preparation.

6. Here is to be noted, that when you have occasion to make use of
decripitated Salt, it will be best to use that which is newly done, lest it
should be again moistened with any new attractions of Air.

XXXII. Sal Diureticum, A Diuretic Salt* Or Sale provoking Urine.
Bate.] Dissolve the Caput Mortuum of Volatile Sal Armoniack in fair warm
Water; filter and coagulate, S.A. It is profitable in intermitting Fevers.
Dose, ss. ad ss. and prevails very much against the Jaundice, Scurvy, Dropsy,
and all kinds of Obstructions.

Salmon.] 1. The Caput Mortuum here mentioned and intended, is that which is
left from that Volatile Sal Armoniack which is made of equal parts of Sal
Armoniack and Salt of Tartar.

2. Its chief use is in Obstructions of the Reins, Ureters and Bladder, and to
expel Sand, Gravel, or any Tartarous matter filling those parts: it is good
also to open Obstructions of the other Viscera, and is profitable, against
Cachexies, Dropsies, Yellow Jaundice, Scurvy, Gout, and Rheumatick Distempers.

3. Outwardly used, being dissolved in Water, and any part pained with the
Gout, being washed with it, and Cloths wet in the same being applied, it gives
immediate Relief: but the Wash ought to be used as hot as conveniently it can
be endured, and to be continued for a quarter of an hour at least, and that
twice a day.

4. But in this case, before the external use of it, it will be necessary to
purge and cleanse the Body very well by Universals, that as much as may be, the
morbifick Cause of the Disease may be mostly carried off, lest by repercussion
the Humor should ascend upwards, and cause Stomach and Heart-sickness.

XXXIII. Sal Febrifugum, The febrifuge Salt, or Salt against Fevers.
Bate.] It is drawn forth out of Oister-shells, being first made very clean,
and then calcined to whiteness; by dissolving in Water, filtering, and
coagulating, S. A. Dose, ad j. before the coming of the Fit.

Salmon.] 1. Some take the lower Shell only; and of that, the limy white part;
whilst others take the Oriential part only, which look like or resemble,
Oriental Pearl: Others make choice of the upper Shell and reject the Nether,
and of them choose such, as (being made very clean) are most Oriental, and in a
manner transparent.

2. But if I may deliver my Opinion, the Matter of both Shells (being first
purely cleansed) may do, and the whole Substance of them both, but if a Choice
is to be made, this is certain, that the upper Shell and that part which is
most Oriental, and most resembles Oriental Pearl, is that which ought chiefly
to be taken for this work.

3. The Calcination ought to be very gentle, and not with a violent fire,
because of a Volatile Salt which they contain, which though it is volatile, is
not so volatile as to be made to fly with a small heat, yet will in no wise
sustain an intense strong heat, or a fire of long reverberation.

4. The gentler the Calcinatory heat is, the greater quantity of Salt you will
have; the greater the Heat, the lesser the quantity of Salt, for by that means
the volatile being made totally to evanish, you will only have the fixed Salt
remaining, whereas otherwise, a considerable quantity of the Volatile will be
joined with the fixed, whereby a Salt of a middle nature being composed, the
quantity will be proportionably augmented.

5. This Salt is indeed a singular Antifebririck, being composed of a double
Alcali, to wit a volatile and a fixed, both which absorb the Acid Humors, of
which Fevers are mostly generated.

6. And therefore this Salt has immediately an intimate mixtion with the Blood
and other Juices; whereby, being carried all over the whole Humane; Frame, it
certainly and presently performs that in a small Dose, which a Cart-load of
some other Medicines would do nothing at all in. You may give it in the Juice
of the lesser Centory. See our Doron. Medic. Lib. 2. Cap. 10. Sect. 16.

XXXIV. Sal Jovis, Salt of Jupiter or Tin.
Bate.] It is made by dissolving the Magistery of Jupiter by digestion in
Spirit of Vinegar, filterating, and coagulating. It is a present Remedy against
the Suffocation of the Womb, or Fits of the Mother, which it helps after a
miraculous manner, being both inwardly taken, and outwardly applied. Dose, gr.
2, 3, 4, etc. repeating it.

Salmon.] 1. The Magistery of Tin some make thus. Filings of pure Tin iij.
Spirit of Nitre jx. put them into a Mattress upon a Sand-heat; decant the
Solution into a great glazed Earthen Pan, full of pure Water^ which by its
quantity may weaken the Spirit of Nitre, and make it forsake the Tin which it
had dissolved, so will it precipitate to the bottom of a very white Powder,
which edulcorate by many Ablutions, and dry it between Papers in the Shade:
It Is a very fair white, and is used for Pomatums for the Face.

2. Lemery makes the Magistery thus. Flowers of Tin, dissolve them in a
sufficient quantity of Water, filter, and precipitate, by dropping thereon drop
by drop, Spirit of Sal Armoniack, or Oil of Tartar per Deliquium, so will you
have a very white Magistery, which being edulcorated by many Ablutions in fair
warm Water, becomes a most admirable and delicate White which serves for a
Fucus, being mixed with Pomatums, and of this our Author's Salt of Tin is made.

3. Some make the Salt of Tin thus. Flowers of Tin dried, put them into a
Mattress, and affuse thereon Spirit of Vinegar, so much as may overtop them
Inches: digest in a Sand-heat for three days, then decant the Solution by
inclination: affuse to the remainder new Spirit of Vinegar, q. s. digesting and
decanting as before, which work repeat with fresh Spirit of Vinegar so often
till all the Flowers are dissolved: mix all the Solutions, filter; and with a
gentle heat evaporate to dryness so will you have remaining at bottom the Salt
of Jupiter or Tin, which you must free from the Acidity of the Vinegar by the
help of S. V. thus.

4. Put the Salt into a little Glass Gourd, pouring thereon good S. V. so much
as to overtop it two Inches: fit an Alembick to the Gourd, and a little
Receiver, and with a very gentle fire abstract the Spirit, which work repeat
five or six times always with new or fresh Spirit, so will the Spirit carry off
with it, a great part of the Acid Salt of the Vinegar, and you will have a Salt
of Jupiter free from all Acrimony, and endued with very great Venues, which may
be given a gr. iij. ad vj. as Crollius and others, but some Authors say it may
be given ad gr. 20.

5. Crollius makes it thus. Ashes of Tin, prepared in an open fire, without
sophistication from it, not with Water (as by vulgar Descriptions is vainly
taught) but with Spirit of Vinegar, extract a Salt, which afterward by
filtering, and with a most gentle heat in B. M. separate from the Salt, seven
times edulcorate it with Rain water, which afterward resolve per Deliquium
into a Liquor.

6. This says he, is a Secret, and most efficacious against the Suffocation of
the Womb, the Navel being bathed therewith hot; as soon as the Matrix perceives
the heat, it is presently settled in its own place, nor does it afterward any
more easily remove: and it may be given inwardly in Mugwort-water in the
Morning fasting for several days together, or in some other Hysterick-water.

7. This Liquor of the Salt of Tin is (says Crollius) otherwise profitable for
the French Disease, all fetid Ulcers, Fistula's, Cancer, Wolf Noli me Tangere,
and other grievous Diseases: it cures them given from one drop to two or three,
at most, the Dose being repeated: in those of ripe Age it vehemently and
largely, moves the Belly.

8. Beguinus dissolves English Tin in A. F. (made of Nitre and Alum) from which
he has a Calx as white as Snow, this he sublimes into Flowers as we have taught
in the former Chapter, and from those Flowers with Spirit of Wine Vinegar, by a
total dissolution of the Matter he makes a Salt according to the Method in 3
aforegoing, this Salt he dissolves in good Spirit of Wine, digests and decants,
and affuses fresh Spirit, till the whole Salt is resolved, then in B. M. he
abstracts two thirds of the Spirit, and sets it in a cool place to Crystallize,
which being separated from the Liquor, he puts them upon a Marble, and in a
cold moist place resolves them per Deliquium: And this is Crollius his Liquamen
Jovis, which he says will cure malign Cancers, inwardly used, and outwardly
applied, in the quantity of three drops, as at 7. aforegoing.

9. Etmuller makes a Crystalline Salt after this manner. Mineral of Tin in fine
Powder lb j. affuse thereon the best Spirit or Oil of Vitriol seven times
rectified lb j. digest for some time in B. M. then affuse thereon common Water
lb ij. being well mixed together, whilst hot filter, and set it to Crystallize:
the Crystals edulcorate with Water, and reduce into Powder.

10. This, says he, is given a gr. j. ad ij. against the Dropsy, Scurvy, and
desperate Fistula's, as also Uterine Affections: outwardly it is applied, being
mixed with Honey of Roses: It purges or carries off the Water in Hydropick
Persons gently by Stool. This he had from Fr. Hofman out of whom we have
supplied the Proportion of the Oil or Spirit of Vitriol, which is wanting in
Et???mullor.

11. Le Febure says its Salt and Magistery are made the same way as those of
Saturn, but in order to the well making of the Salt, the Calx of Jupiter must
be reverberated, taking it as it is already prepared for Potters to use: this
reverberation must be continued for at at least two days, that its body may be
sufficiently opened, as is fitting, otherwise very little Salt will be obtained.

12. The true Magistery and Salt says he, are specifical Remedies, and singular
against the Suffocation of the Womb, or Fits of the Mother, which are
wonderfully allayed by it, whether inwardly administered or outwardly applied:
they are also admirable Topics against putrid, stinking, hollow and fistulous
Ulcers, as also against Wolfs, malign Cancers, and cancerous Ulcers.

13. But after the use of these Remedies to Womenkind, you must beware of
purging them, lest you irrerate the Womb, and be forced to begin your work
again; for after it is once quieted and laid asleep by the irradiating Virtue
of Mineral Sulphurs (in which a potential and mighty Anodyn power is lodged) it
is not prudent to disturb it again by Emetick or Cathartick Medicaments, but
rather Diaphoretick and Diuretic Cleansers are to be chosen.

14. Charras also in like manner makes it of the Lime, or reverberated Calx of
the Metal, and so does Zwelfer; but that certainly is best which is made of the
Flores Joviales, as is taught at Sect. 3. above, and though Authors say, that
Salt of Tin differs nothing in making from Salt of Lead, yet there are several
difficulties in the making of the one, which are not in the making of the other.

15. For it is impossible to dissolve the Calx of Tin, though very well
reverberated in Spirit of Vinegar, which nevertheless dissolves the Calx of
Lead easily enough; it is true, the most Corrosive Aci^^, such as A. F. Spirit
of ^^^e* Vitriol, etc. dissolve it; but in respect, that a great quantity of
them is necessary for a very small proportion of Tin; the Remedies drawn from
it by means of those Corrosives must needs be very injurious: but if you reduce
Tin into Flowwers by Sublimation, then it will be so opened that the Spirit of
Vinegar will easily penetrate and dissolve it.

16. Lemery makes it thus. Calx of Tin lb ij. put it into a Mattress, on which
affuse Spirit of Vinegar, so much as to overtop it four Inches: digest three
days, and decant the Solution, affusing fresh Spirit digesting and decanting,
and continuing this work till all or most part of the Calx is dissolved: filter
the Solution, and abstract in a Sand-heat three quarters of the Humidity, and
set the remainder in a cool Cellar to crystallize, decant the Liquor from the
Crystals, evaporate and crystallize again; which Operation continue till you
have got all your Salt of Tin, which dry in the Sun, and keep close stopped in a
Vial: or otherwise, you may at once evaporate to dryness, and the Salt will
remain at bottom, as good as the former.

17. Where note, That if the Calx of Tin be not well calcined, and disposest of
some quantity of its Sulphur, the Acidity of the Vinegar will never be able to
dissolve it, because it would be presently dulled, and all its Points broken,
by the ^^sisting Sulphur, and so (...) out of a capacity of acting^^ besides,
that an Acid may be able to dissolve a Body it is requisite that the Pores
(...) that Body be fitly disposed, and not obstructed or filled with any
heterogeneous Matter, or clammy Sulphur, th^^ the Motion and Action (...) the
Acid being preserv^^ for some time it may mak^ its way perfectly through See
Doron Modicum. Lib. 2. Cap. 10. Sect. 17.

XXXV. Sal Lithargyrites, Salt of Litharge.
Bate.] It is drawn out of the Litharge with Spirit of Vinegar, after the same
manner as in making a Saccharum Saturni; then the Solution is decanted,
filtred, and coagulated, S. A. If the Solution is precipitated with Oil of
Tartar per Deliquium, it is called the Magistery; It is given inwardly in
Diarrhaea's Dysenteries, and other Diseases proceeding from hurt of the Tone of
the Parts and Weakness. The Bowels being hurt or ulcerated it heals and
consolidates them; and cools the fermenting or boiling Blood. Dose, ss. with
some Sudorifick Treacle or Anodyn.

Salmon.] 1. In our Doron Medicum, Lib. 2. Cap. 10. Sect. 1. we have given an
ample Description of the whole Process, with a Rationale upon the same, so that
referring the Reader to that, no more need be said of it here.

2. But this is observable, that if you design to Crystallize the Salt, it will
be best done in a Tin Vessel or Basin, because Tin has in it a mighty
coagulating Spirit, which causes all the Matter which you fit to shoot into
Crystals in this Liquor, sooner to assume a Crystalline form, than it would do
in another Vessel, as those who shall be pleased to try the Experiments may
find.

3. Many Authors will have this Salt to be cold, because say they, Lead is
terrestious, and of a cold Nature; also Vinegar an Ingredient in its
Preparation is cold, and yet they attribute to it effects, which are only
produceable by heat, and say a Spirit may be drawn from it, which is of an
active, subtle, and penetrative Virtue, Sudorifick, and which drives away by
Sweat the Malignity of Venene, Pestilential and Veneral Diseases, which
Qualities and Effects are opposites in Nature.

4. But Lead truly is a Metal which has much Sulphur or Fire in it, and is
called Aurum Leprosum, and though very unripe and earthy, yet is repleat with the
two noblests Metals, indivisibly mixed in its original Chaos, or first
undigested Matter, which communicates to it much Virtue.

5. Moreover its internal Fire is excited and stirred up, by the activity of
the external Fire, which concocts and digests all its immaturities or
unripenss, driving away its Imparities, exalting its more pure internal
Sulphurs, and bringing to perfection the Seeds of that purity which lay hidden
and dormant in it: all which things being considered makes me think, that this
Salt is rather of a hot nature, and has some Specific Virtues in it, not to be
found in marry other Medicines.

6. Some Authors say it is a good Remedy against all sorts of Agues, whether
continual or intermitting, and a Specific in Diseases of the Spleen, as also
Vapors arising from it; it is also given against Diseases of the Breast and
Lungs, being dissolved in Scabious-water, and mixed with an equal quantity of
purified Nitre, and then crystallized: those Crystals are good against Coughs,
Colds, Asthma's or Shortness of Breath, and Stoppages of the Breast and Lungs:
and thereof you may give a gr. iv. ad xxx. in proper Liquor.

7. This sweet Balsamic Salt for Saturn, is no less excellent for external
Diseases, for it obtunds or kills all corrosive, harsh and biting Salts or
Humors which cause pain in Wounds, Ulcers and Fistula's, whereby the Grief and
Inflammation of the part is excited, and from which flow all other Accidents.

8. It resolves and mollifies all hard and scirrhous Tumors, and some say it
cures Cancers and cancerous Ulcers, destroying the malign Acrimony which feeds
them: it takes away the lividity, and ill color of Bruises and Contusions, and
hinders extravasated Blood from producing ill Accidents.

9. It is an unequalled Remedy against Itching, Inflammations, and other
Diseases of the Eyes, being used as a Collyrium in Eyewaters, Salves,
Liniments, Ointments and Balsams, and so applied to the affect according as the
prudent Physician shall direct.

XXXVI. Sal Martis Catharticus, Purging Salt of Mars.
Bate.] Dissolve the Caput Mortuum of the Flowers of Sal Armoniack martiated in
Warm-water; filter, and coagulate. Dose, ad gr. xij. it purges gently, and is
diuretic.

Salmon.] 1. We will give you the whole Process from Schroder. Sal Armoniack,
Filings of Iron, Ana. grind them gently on a Marble, then put them into an
Earthen Still, and sublime them, first with a gentle fire, then with a
stronger, increasing the fire by degrees: after which, let it cool, break the
Vessel, and keep the upper part which is white for a new Sublimation, with new
filings of Iron: the middle yellow Flowers are diaphoretick Flowers of Mars:
then take out the Caput Mortuum in the bottom, and with Water extract the Salt,
which purify by Solution and Coagulation, which keep in the Glass close stopped
for use.

2. This Salt purges gently being given from half a Scruple, ad j. in any
proper Vehicle: Of thus, Of this Salt j. Gum Guajici in fine Powder ss. ad j.
Syrup of Roses solutive j. mix for a Dose: It purges Rheumatisms admirably, and
possibly beyond most other things in the World.

3. It is good against Tertians and Quartans, as also against the most
inveterate Rheumatisms (being used as last directed) and in particular against
the Gout in any part of the Body: It opens Obstructions of the Reins and Womb,
cleanses those parts from their Feculencies, and is very effectual to remove a
sterile Disposition in Women-kind, and cure the Green Sickness in Virgins. Kill
Worms in Children, and restore them, if overrun with the Rickets.

4. It is a Remedy also against the Cachexy, and opens Obstructions in the
Liver, Spleen, Stomach, Pancreas, and Mesentery; but the use of it must be
continued for some time, as is usual in other Remedies extracted from Mars; and
the Dose must likewise be increased by little and little, as you find the
Stomach can bear it; and it may be used wherever there is occasion for any
aperitive Preparations of Mars.

Sal Perlarum, Salt of Pearls. See the Preparation in Sect. XVIII. of Sal
Margaritarum aforegoing.

XXXVII. Sal Philosophorum, The Philosopher Salt, or Salt of the Wise.
Bate.] Common Salt decripitated, Sal Gem. A. jss. Galangal, Mace, Cubebs, A.
ss. mix and make a powder S. A. It facilitates the Concoction of the Stomach,
and consumes Crudities. Dose, a gr. iv. ad xij. in the Morning fasting.

Salmon.] 1. The way of decripitating of common Salt we have explicated at
large in Sect. 31. aforegoing: the rest of the Process or Composition is so
plain that it needs no farther Elucidation.

2. Being given in a Glass of fair Water in a Morning fasting, a ss. ad ss. or
ij. or more, according to the Age of the Person, it kills Worms in them, and
expels them: if it be given in a very large Dose, it will be apt to cause
Vomiting, but then it cleanses the Stomach admirably: otherwise given in a mean
or moderate Dose it only corroborates it, and causes Appetite.

3 By using it for some time it is found to open Obstructions, strengthen the
Viscera, and provoke the Terms in Women: but this it more effectually does, if
it be given with martial Aperitives, and other proper Emmenagogicks.

XXXVIII. Sal Polychrestum, Salt of many Virtues.
Bate.] It is made of Nitre and Sulphur exactly mixed in an equal proportion, by
detonation, solution in Water, filtration, and coagulation, S. A. It purges
serous Humors by Stool, and sometimes by Urine: Dose, j. ad iij. dissolved in a
quart of fair Water, that it may be made like a Mineral Spring Water.

Salmon.] 1. Fine or purified Nitre, Sulphur Ana. lb j. reduce them together
into Powder; then take a good strong Earthen Pot with a flat bottom, and which
is able to resist the fire; set it in a Wind Furnace with Coals round about it,
which kindle gradatim to presperve the Pot; when the Pot is red-hot, put in
about ij. of the Mixture, and stir it: the Matter will flame, and the Volatile
parts of the Nitre will exhale with part of the Sulphur: when the Flame ceases,
put in ij. more, stirring the same continually. This work repeat till all your
Mixture is spent, then calcine it, stirring it six hours more, during which,
the Matter must be always red-hot without melting, which would retain the
Empyreuma of the Sulphur, and the Salt would be greyish; but with these
cautions, your Salt will be of a Rose color, without Smell, and of a bitterish
Taste.

2. Thus done, it may be used without any more preparation; but if you desire
it yet purer, dissolve it in a good quantity of warm Water, filter it, and
evaporate gently, till it has a Pellicula upon it, then set it in a Cellar to
shoot into Crystals, at the bottom and sides of the Vessel, whose Figure will
be cubical, much like that of common Salt.

3. It is used chiefly against Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, Pancreas, and
Mesentery, dissolves the viscous Matter which afflicts them, and purges gently
downwards, being given a ij. ad vj. you may dissolve it over might in
Spring Water and give it the next morning.

4. But if the Sick are affected in their Nerves, or have an exceeding weakness
of the Stomach, they ought wholly to abstain from all sorts of the Preparations
of Nitre, as Sal Prunellae, or Crystal Mineral, and this Sal Polychrestum,
which are not to be put into other Compositions but only to sharpen them,
temper their heat, and make them more penetrating, in which cases, their Doses
must be much less: for Example sake, to Sen^ ij. or iij. you may put of Crystal
Mineral ss. or ij. and of this Sal Polychrestum j. or iv.

5. It is called Polychrestum, from the Greek Word (...) ad multa utilis, as
being profitable against many Diseases; because it not only cures many
Distempers, but also operates to the same Intentions many ways, for that it
purges by Stool and Urine too, and in some measure opens the Pores, causing
after those Operations a gentle Sweat.

6. Being dissolved in any Menstruum, it makes it the more powerful to extract
the Verrues of any Cathartick, and to draw forth its Purgative force, as in the
Example of Sena aforegoing. But whereas some give it to vj. as aforesaid, to
purge strongly, I must confess I never do it to so large a Dose, by reason of
the trouble it gives the Stomach in palling through it; yet that ill Property is
much abated if not taken away by mixing a good quantity of double refined Sugar
with it, or giving it in a Vehicle well sweetened with Sugar.

7. It ought not to be used by any means till it is made very white by
Solution, Filtration and Crystallization; for if any gross portion of Sulphur
remains in it, it is apt to cause, nauseousness of the Stomach, Vertigo's, and
stupefaction of the Nerves.

8. From xvj. of fine Nitre, and as much good Sulphur, you will have at last
but iijsi. of pure Sal Polychrestum: whereas, if you use the common Nitre,
instead of the purified, you will have v, of Salt as white as the other; which
difference of weight proceeds from the common or unpurified Nitres having more
fixed Salt, than the fine or purified Saltpeter.

9. Charras makes it exactly after the former manner, but in a large Crucible
set upon a Trevet in a Wind Furnace, then at last continues the fire for two or
three hours, and letting it cool, he dissolves in Water, filters, evaporates
and crystallizes as aforesaid.

10. The Dissipation of the Acid and Spirituous parts of the Nitre, during its
calcination with the Sulphur, is the reason that the Crystals lose the Form,
which those of Nitre had before: not could you have it in Crystals, had not the
fixed Salt retained some part of the Acid of the Sulphur, during its Calcination
with it.

11. Now because this Salt contains only the fixed part of the Nitre, joined
with some part of the Acid of the Sulphur, it acts not, but like Salt of
Tartar, or some other fixed Salt.

12. And though it is sometimes given a ij. ad v. or vj. in a Quart or three
Pints of Water, or in some Prisan, to be drank at several draughts, as you
drink Mineral waters, for the cutting and loosening of gross Humors, afterward
to be expelled by the ordinary ways, yet in my Opinion, it is much better to be
used* with proper Catharticks as is before hinted.

13. If to lb j. of Sal Polychrestum, you add Sal Armoniack iv. incorporating
them, and crystallizing them together, you will have a Compositum much more
deserving the Name of Polychrestum than that of which we have all along been
speaking: for as the simple Sal Polychrest. Works with much Acrimony, and not
with any delectation to the Bowels; so the latter being by the reciprocal
Mixtion dulcified, operates in every respect with much more gentleness; and
more easily penetrates the parts of the Body, which require its help and
assistance, especially the Arteries, Veins and Urinary Vessels, leaving no
Impressions of sharpness in any place behind it.

14. Lemery makes the simple Sal Polychrestum in all respects as does Charras
at 9. aforegoing but calcines it afterward for four or five hours; then
pouring it forth into a Copper Vessel, he afterward pouders it, dissolves,
filterates, and crystallizes as before directed.

15. If the Salt be not yet so white as it should be, it is because it retains
some Particles of the Sulphur in it: therefore it ought to be calcined in a
Crucible in a strong fire, stirring it continually with a Spatula three or four
hours until it becomes purely white, then repeating the dissolution in Water,
filtration and evaporation, as aforesaid till it becomes exceeding pure.

16. Marggrave makes it also after the same manner as at 1. and 9. and says it
is a most admirable deobstructive, prevailing against intermitting Fevers or
Agues if given in the ordinary drink of the Sick; but he prescribes but j. at a
time in Drink, or pure Water.

XXXIX. Sal seu Saccharum Saturni; Salt or Sugar of Saturn.
Salmon.] 1. Lemery makes it thus, Ceruse lb iij. or iv. powder it finely and
put it into a large Earthen or Glass Vessel: affuse thereon Spirit of Vinegar,
so much as to overtop it four Inches: digest in a gentle Sand heat for three
days, shaking the Matter often: let it settle, and decant the clear Tincture;
upon the remainder affuse new Spirit of Vinegar, digesting and proceeding as
before, thus continuing the affusion of new Spirit, till you have dissolved
about the one half of the Ceruse. Mix all these Tinctures together in an
Earthen or Glass Vessel: evaporate with a gentle Sand-heat about two thirds of
the Moisture, or till a Pellicle comes over it, and then set it in a cool
Cellar to crystallize: decant the Liquor from the Crystals or Salt, evaporate
again to a Pellicle, and set it to crystallize again, thus continuing till you
have obtained all your Salt, which dry in the Sun or otherwise, and keep it in
a Glass for use.

2. The College makes it with Minium or Red-Lead, as you may see in our Pharm.
Land. Lib. 3. Cap. 6. Sect. 3. others as Zwelfer and Marggrave make it with the
greyish Calx of Lead after the same manner. Beguinus makes it of Minium; so
also Crollius, and Rolfincius, which two latter make it also of Ceruse: but
Zwelfer in his Mantissa Hermetica pagina mea 458. says, that it is not made
only of the Calx of Lead, but also from Plates and granulated Lead, as well as
from Ceruse* Litharge, and Minium: notwithstanding (says he) it is made more
pure* from one than from another, and by the help of Spirit of Vinegar, or some
other acid Liquor drawn forth, according to the Method before directed. But
Thibaut and Maets make it of Litharge only: Le Febure makes it of a Mixture of
equal parts of Minium and Litharge: Schroder out of the Calx of Lead, or
Red-Lead: Le Mort and Charras (as Lemery) out of the Ceruse.

3. Thus you may see, Quot homines tot capita, and every Man thinks his own way
best; but he that has tried all of them can best tell: for my part I should
rather choose Ceruse or White-Lead, than my of the other, for the Preparation
thereof; for it appears to me to be more open, and easier to dissolve than the
rest, by reason of the Vinegar with which it is already-impregnated: and this
seems to me to be reasonable, because I can with more ease make a greater
quantity of Sal or Saccharum out of that, than I can out of any of the other;
yea with a very little labor more than ordinary, the whole body of the Lead
will turn to a Saccharum, whereas the other Preparations of Lead, yield it
slowly, and with much difficulty, nor can be totally dissolved without a vast
labor.

4. If you would have the Sal or Saccharum very white, you must dissolve it
again in equal quantities of Spirit of Vinegar, and common Water, then filter
and crystallize again, as before; which purification you may repeat three or
four times, as you see need requires it.

5. This Salt is called Saccharum or Sugar, by reason of its sweetness, which
proceeds from the sulphurous Particles of the Lead, joined with the Salt of the
Vinegar, whence results that delightful taste, which so admirably affects the
Nerves of the Tongue in tasting it.

6. This is not to be supposed to be a true Salt of Lead, but only a
dissolution of its Substance by* Acids, which so closely unite with it, as to
give it the form of a Salt: for if by distillation, you abstract the Humidity
of the dissolution, you will find nothing but an insipid Phlegm to come off,
deprived of all its Acidity, which shows that the acid Salt is actually joined
with the Particles of the Lead.

7. The Ebullition in the making of it from Ceruse arises from the violent
Penetration of the Acids, which with violence separate the Plumbouse Particles;
but if they be affused on any other Preparation of Lead, the Ebullition is very
much stronger; because when the Acid meets with a Body not so open as Ceruse
is, it must use a greater power to enter into it, and so consequently raise a
greater Effervescency.

8. But in all these Ebullitions or Effervescencies (as well as in many others)
the least degree of heat is not perceived, but rather (as some think) the Cold
is much increated.

9. Vinegar impregnated with this Salt, being ground with Oil of Roses, or some
other Oil, in a Mortar, makes an Ointment called Nutritum, or Butter of Saturn,
which is good for Burnings, Scaldings, Tettars, Ring-worms, and other
Defedations of the Skin.

10. This Salt of Saturn powerfully absorbs Acids, and therefore it is said to
be good for Diarrhaea's, Dysenteries, and Lienteriaes, as also Fluxes of the
Haemorrhoides and Menses, which are all caused by sharp and corrosive Salts
falling into the Vessels, or upon those parts.

11. And indeed it is good for any Disease proceeding from sharp Humors,
because it blunts or dulls their Points, and asswages them, taking away their
keenness.

12. Taken inwardly it is said to be very good for the Quinsey and Pleurisy,
and the aforenamed Diseases at 10. above, because they mostly proceed from a
Saline, or acid Serosity, which falling too abundantly upon any of those parts,
raises a fermentation which dilutes the Fibers of the Muscles, causing
Inflammation of the Throat, etc. as is seen in a Quinsey, etc. or a corrosion of
the Tunicles and Membranes of the Vessels Dose, a gr. ij. ad iv. or vj. in Wine
or Water; and in Plantain-water for Gargles.

13. Mixed with Water, it makes that Preparation called Lac Virginis, or Virgins
Milk, and is used in that manner, or mixed with Pomatums against Inflammations,
Burnings, Scaldings, Tettars. Ring-worms, Herpes, and other Diseases of the
Skin.

14. If Sal Saturni be mixed with Sal Tartari and put into a Crucible over a
melting Fire, the Acid of the Spirit of Vinegar will quit the Lead, and unite
with the Salt of Tartar, whereby the Salt is reduced to what it was before, to
wit, Ceruse or Calx.

15. Some who are afraid of the Coldness of this Salt, and the Acrimony of the
Spirit of Vinegar, impregnate it with the Heat and Sulphur of S. V. well
rectified, so much as to overtop it four Inches, digesting it three or four
days, then abstracting the S. V. drying die Salt and keeping it for use.

16. Taken inwardly, it not only takes away Inflammations and Heats of Fevers,
but abates Lusts and Venereal Desires; it dissolves also hard and scirrhous
Tumors, absorbs the Acidities of Cancerous Humors, and dissipates Contusions,
stops Fluxes of all sorts, and is prevalent against the Gonorrhoea in Men, and
the Whites in Women.

17. It may be also used in an Injection for a Gonorrhoea, etc. as also for
Ulcers of the Bladder, Womb, and their Passages; and is excelent in Gargarisms
for most Diseases of the Mouth, and Throat, etc. which are caused by fixed or
volatile Salts; these are mortified, by the Acid of the Vinegar, ^ssisted by
the cold Quality of the Lead.

18. And this is so much the more reasonable to believe, because we find by
Experience that Sal Prunellae, Spirits of Salt, Sulphur and Vitriol, and all
sorts of Acids, even simple Vinegar it self, are very good for these kind of
Diseases, which are irritated by the use of all other Salts of what kind
soever, whether fixed or volatile.

19. Made into a Collyrium with some proper Water or common Spirit of Wine, it
stops Fluxes of Humors into the Eyes, cools Inflammations in them, and dissolves
Pearls, and consumes the Pin and Web, or Films, at the beginning; a Scruple or
two, being dissolved in five Ounces of common S. V. or Brandy, or in as much
Celandine-water, augmenting the quantity of the Salt-as you see occasion.

20. Crollius says, that Saccharum Saturni makes all sublimate, and corrosive
Mercuries sweet, and unhurtful; therefore in corrosive Ulcers, which arise from
venene and malign Salts it is an excellent Medicament. And as in Vegetables
common Sugar tempers and corrects their Acrimony and Bitterness; so this Sugar
of Saturn mitigates and amends Minerals, and Mercurial Arsenicks, both in the
greater and lesser World.

21. It is says he, good against Putrefaction, sore Mouths, malign, corroding
and cancerous Ulcers, Tettars, Ring-worms, red Pimples in the Face, inflamed
Tumors, and such other like Saturnian Evils: It cleanses old Ulcers, Apostems,
and running Sores, and is a singular Arcanum against an Erysipelas, and such
like, by dissolving it in Plantane or Nightshade Water, and washing therewith,
Linen Cloths dipped in the same being also laid thereon.

22. Mixed with Oil of Camomil and applied, it discusses Tumors: mixed with Oil
of Turpentine it cures all Ulcers, Wounds, and contracted Members, being
constantly for some time anointed therewith.

23. It prevails against Cancers and Fistula's, all sorts of Ulcers in Women's
Breasts, and all Aches and Pains in the Members, being outwardly applied; and
takes away all Inflammations to a Miracle. It may be mixed with Emplaisters,
Ointments, Balsams and Oils, or be dissolved per se in appropriated Waters and
applied.

24. It gives ease in the Cholick, some Grains of it being given in White Wind,
and in all internal Inflammations and Heats, it is of extraordinary use. It
prevails against Quartan Agues, as also against disaffections of the Spleen,
and Pains of the Hypochonders: Spirit of Wine may be affused thereon, which
will extract its Virtue; this essentificated Spirit may be given instead of the
Salt or Saccharum against all the Diseases aforementioned.

XL. Sal Spongiae Volatile, Volatile Salt of Sponges.
Bate.] It is made by distillation in a Retort, and rectifying the Salt S. A.
From the Caput Mortuum, with warm Water, a dissolution is made of the fixed
Salt, and it is drawn forth. It is good to break the Stone in the Reins and
Bladder. It is powerful also to discuss Struma's or Swellings of the King's
Evil. Dose, gr. 5. ad 12.

Salmon.] 1. How this Volatile Salt of Sponges is particularly to be made, we
have showed at large, where we have taught the Distillation of the Spirit, in
Cap. 2. Sect. XXXIII. 1. aforegoing.

2. In the Distillation thereof, part of the Volatile Salt will arise and stick
to the top and neck of the Retort, and part of it will mix and be dissolved in
the Spirit; you may rectify each apart if you so please, or dissolve all the
Salt, in the Spirit and rectify them together from the Oleaginous Particles*
as we have in many places taught in our Seplasium, lately emitted into the
World.

3. This Volatile Salt and Spirit of Sponges is said to be one of the greatest
Specificks in Nature* for the Cure of the King's Evil being daily given Morning
and Night, a ss. ad gr. xvj. in any proper Vehicle, Universals being also
premised.

4. That the Volatile Salt is truly thus effectual, may be deduced from the
vulgar use of the simple Powder of Sponges, (being just so much calcined or
scorched, as to be reduced to such a Form or Consistence) which Experience has
confirmed to be an absolute cure for all kinds of Struma's or Scrophula's
whatsoever, being given to a Dram or more, Morning and Evening, with due
purging: but this, by reason of the great quantity, many, especially Children
cannot be brought to take, for which reason, we rather commend the use of the
Votatile Salt aforesaid, as being less nauseous by reason of its quantity, and
more effectual by reason of its quality.

5. From the Caput Mortuum as it is left in the bottom of the Retort, you will
get but little fixed Salt, without a new and open Calcination, and therefore it
is necessary to calcine it again in a Crucible till it is white, after which
you may draw forth the said fixed Salt after the vulgar Method.

6. This fixed Salt is of the Nature of other fixed Alcalies, as Salt of Tartar,
Salt of Oister-Shells, and such like, and may be given in the same Cases, a gr.
xij. ad xxiv. or ss. in Arsmart, Parsley, or Onion-water against, Obstructions
in the Reins and Ureters, Stone and Gravel in those parts, and to absorb Acid
Humors, which are the Causes of many pernicious Diseases.

XLI. Sal Sulphnris, Salt of Sulphur or Brimstone.
Bate.] Dissolve the Caput Mortuum of the Spirit of Sulphur in Water, filter
and coagulate, S. A. It is a powerful Remedy against Worms, and the breeding of
Worms. Dose, a gr. 5. ad 10.

Salmon.] 1. Hartman makes it of the Caput Mortuum of Oil of Sulphur made per
Campanum; but Schroder of the Caput Mortuum of the Oil of Sulphur made by
Retort, thus:

2. A Retort that has a Pipe in the hinder part, place it in a Furnace, and fit
a Receiver with Water in it, without luting; when it is hot, cast in pieces of
Sulphur now and then, shutting the Pipe after every time; the Spirit or Oil
separate from the Water in B. M. and rectify it; This Spirit (says Schroder)
is only Spirit of Vitriol, and has the same Virtues; but if you give no vent in
making it, you will labor in vain, and have only a milky Liquor for a Spirit,
without any acidity; from the Feces remaining (after the common manner) make a
Salt.

3. Le Febure says, there remains in the bottom of the Dishes which have been
used in the burning of Sulphur for making its Oil or Spirit, a kind of Feces,
or blackish Caput Mortuum, light, spongy, and as it were in Leaves or Beds,
which must be calcined and reverberated in a Crucible, till it become of a
whitish Gray; afterward with distilled Rainwater or Ros or Dew of Vitriol, a
Lie or Lixivium is to be made, which filterate, and evaporate slowly in Ashes,
either to a Pellicle or to dryness, so will you have the Salt, which will be
but little.

4. Wherefore (says he) that of Vitriol may lawfully be substituted in the
place thereof, viz. in place of that of Sulphur, without any scruple or
question, because they spring from the same Original, and have the same
Virtues, which is to cleanse and strengthen the Stomach, and root from it all
Seminaries of Worms, and the Crude corrupt Matter from which they breed,
expelling the same.

5. Lemery makes it another way, and says that Salt of Sulphur is a Sal
Polychrestum, impregnated with Spirit of Sulphur: Thus. Sal Polychrestum iv.
put it into an Earthen Pan, or Glass Vessel, and affuse thereon Oil of Sulphur
ij. set the Vessel in Sand, and evaporate in a gentle Sand-heat to dryness, so
will there be remaining iv. vj. of a pleasant acid Salt, very agreeable to the
Taste, which keep in a Bottle close stopped for use.

6. This Salt (which is improperly called Salt of Sulphur, it being nothing but
Sal Polychrestum impregnated with an Acid Spirit) is of excellent use in
Tertians, and continual Fevers, and on all occasions where there is need of
quieting the turbulency and effervescency of the Humors (for that Acids
generally fix the Volatile Salts and Sulphurs, which most commonly are the
principal Cause of such Diseases:) it opens all Obstructions, and works by
Urine, and sometimes by Stool.

7. The Dose of it is from ss. ad ss. or ij. in Broth, or other specific
Vehicle; or it may be dissolved a j. ad ij. in a Quart of pure fair Water, to
be given as a Drink to quench thirst, and abate the Preternatural heat in
Fevers.

8. Many large descriptions have been made of Salt of Sulphur* which being
truly examined do all come to the same thing as this, and is called by many
Authors Sal Febrifugum. But the true Salt of Sulphur, is only a little of the
Vitriolick Substance, which remains in the Earth of the Sulphur (as is declared
above by Le Febure) after that the Spirit and Flowers have been separated from
it; and ought to be separated from the said Earth by El^^iviation, as other
fixed Salts are

9. The Union of Acid Spirits with Acid Salts is very different from that of
Acid Spirits with alca^ous Salts, for the Acid Spirits not being able to open
the Bodies of the Acid Salts, they lose nothing of their strength and acidity,
but remain the same; whereas, being mixed with Alcalies, they make such a
penetration, that they immediately lose their whole strength, and become
insipid.

10. For this Reason, when Oil of Sulphur is affused on Sal Polychrestum, or
Nitre, there is no Ebullition or Effervescency, they being both Acid Salts: And
therefore also Salt of Sulphur (thus made) is very acid, whereas Tartar
Vitriolate is but a little acid, although proportionally, there is double the
quantity of the Aid Spirit or Oil, for making the latter, or Tartar Vitriolate,
which is usually taken for making the former.

11. Charras has several Preparations of Salt of Sulphur: His first is exactly
the same with the aforementioned of L^nery: His second is thus made. Nitre in
powder lb j put it into a large Retort, and affuse therein rectified Oil of
Sulphur, enough to entirely dissolve the Nitre, and having fitted and luted to
the Retort a very large Receiver, distill in a Sand-heat; first with a gentle
Fire, which augment by degrees to the highest, the better to force what is to
be got out of the Nitre; so will you have a good Spirit of Nitre, very proper
for all sorts of uses, while the Spirit of Sulphur strictly unites with the
fixed Salt of the Nitre, and makes therewith but one Body, which will be found
in a lump in the Retort when broken, of a very white color, and of a pleasing
acidity in Taste, having the same Virtues with that of Lemery before described.

12. In this Operation, you obtain the Spirit of Nitre, which would else
vanish, when the Salt is calcined with Sulphur in a Pot or Crucible: and the
Consideration of the Spirit of Nitre leaving the Mixture, makes me believe that
the Salt which remains in the Retort, is of very safe and innocent use, and
therefore not to be feared in its Effects, since there remains nothing of the
Nitre but its fixed part. which is not only of its self an excellent Remedy,
but by reason of its union with the Spirit or Oil of Sulphur, becomes
infinitely more grateful to the Stomach, and much more efficacious in opening
Obstructions* and allaying the Preternatural heat of violent burning, malign,
or pestilential Fevers.

13. Charras his third and last Preparation of the Salt of Sulphur. Volatile
Salt of Urine very pure and white lb j. put it into a large and high Cucurbit,
and affuse thereon so much well rectified Oil of Sulphur, till the Ebullition
ceases; then in a gentle Sandheat evaporate the Humidity till a film or scum
comes over it, and set it to crystallize, separating the Crystals; or else
continue the Evaporation to dryness.

14. This Volatile Salt of Urine, though fixed for a time by the Oil of Sulphur,
loses not its first Nature, but may show its effects, if the Acid of the
Sulphur, (which has fixed it) shall meet in the Stomach with some other Salt or
Substance, with which it can unite; for then the Volatile Salt of Urine is
restored to its pristine Nature and Quality: and therefore this compounded
Salt, may be thought nothing inferior to the former, but much more proper to
purify the Mass of Blood, and to expel by Sweat or insensible Transpiration,
sharp and malign Humors, which are the Roots and Causes of almost an infinite
number of Diseases. Dose, a ss. ad ss. and sometimes ad j. in some proper
Vehicle.

15. The same thing may be done in like manner with Volatile Sal Armoniack, and
the Salt resulting, will have all the same Virtues and Effects, with the former
made or compounded with the Salt of Urine, as has been even now declared.

XLII. Sal Tartari; Salt of Tartar.
Bate.] It is made of calcined Tartar, after the same manner as all other Salts
which are extracted from Ashes. It may also be prepared by Elixiviation from
the Caput Mortuum remaining after the distillation of the Spirit of Tartar,
being yet longer calcined, even to whiteness. Or it is made from crude Tartar
and Nitre, Ana. made into a Powder and calcined in a Crucible, S. A. It is one
of the best Remedies against Ulcers, Serpigines, Scall'd-Heads, Scabs, etc.
being internally given, as well as externally applied.

Salmon.] 1. The last way of making this Salt with equal parts of Nitre, we
have sufficiently explicated in our Pharm. Land. Lib. 3. Cap. 11. Sect. 99: so
that no more need be spoke of it here: but this we have to say in relation to
this Preparation, that it is not so genuine and good as is that which is made
of Tartar alone; for refine and purify the Nitre as well as it is possible,
there will be a fixed part remaining, which will unite it self with the Salt of
Tartar, and by its acidity much diminish the Virtues of the true Salt.

2. The other two ways whether from the Caput Mortuum, or from simple calcined
Tartar, are but one and the same, for they are both of them but the Ashes of
the Tartar, save the one of them is calcined in an open and naked fire, the
other in a close Glass or Stone body: thus.

3. The black Caput Mortuum remaining after the distillation of the Oil and
Spirit of Tartar, Calcine it in a Reverberatory Furnace, in a flat open Pot
till it becomes white; let it cool, and pour upon it hot Water in an Earthen
Vessel, so much as may overtop it six Inches and stir it from time to time for
some hours, so will the Salt dissolve in the Water, which decant, adding more
hot Water to the remainder, which repeat so often till all the Salt is
extracted: mix and filter all your Solutions, and evaporate the Humidity till
the Salt becomes dry, and white as Snow in the bottom of the Vessel, which keep
in a Glass well stopped (else the Salt will dissolve into Liquor) for use.

4. This Salt is very diuretic, as all other fixed Salts and Alcalies of
Vegetables are; and therefore is given with success against Obstructions of the
Viscera, Diseases of the Reins, Bladder, Dropsies, and all sorts of Diseases
proceeding from Obstructions and watery Humors, being given a gr. x. ad xxx. in
any proper or specific Vehicle.

5. If this Sale is laid upon a Marble or Plate of Glass in a Cellar, or put
into a Flannel Bag, and placed in some moist place, it will resolve per
Deliquium into an Oil or Liquor, which may be used instead of the Salt, being
no other than the Salt dissolved, but its Dose must be increased a ss. ad j. or
ij. as the Prudence of the Physician shall direct.

6. How the Spirit and Oil of Tartar are made, from whence this Caput Mortuum
is to be had, we shall at large explicate (through God's Assistance) in our
Officina Chymica: however out of forty eight Ounces of Crude Tartar you will
have four Ounces of Phlegm, eight Ounces of Spirit, three ounces of Oil, and
thirty two ounces of Caput Mortuum, out of which you will by the former Method
have twelve Ounces of Salt, and no more; and this Salt is of great use in the
drawing forth the Tinctures of Vegetables.

7. But should you desire only the Salt, without the other Substances, you need
only bruise it, wrap it up in Paper, which wet well in Water, and calcine it
till it turns into a white Mass after which you may draw forth the Salt by
Elixiviation, as is before directed.

8. Out of every four Ounces of Crude red Tartar, once Ounce of pure Salt may
be got, and from the same quantity of white Tartar, somewhat more: but it is no
ways better than the former.

9. The Ancients will have Salt of Tartar to be fixed, being prepared according
to the common way, with a violent Fire: but doubtless this Salt of it self is
not so, but naturally very volatile, and would continue so, did not the
Volatile Acid Salt (which makes one part of its Composition) fix it, by making
a strict Union with it, during its Calcination.

10. But notwithstanding this alteration, it is not so unalterable in its
Property, but that you may restore to the greatest part of this Salt, its first
volatility, if you free it from its Chains, by separating, or augmenting the
Acid, so that it may ma^ter it; or if you prevent its Union with it.

11. Yet their Conjunction is not without a singular advantage, because that by
fixing the volatile Salt, it hinders its dissipation, and is made serviceable
for several other uses, which being only Volatile it would not be applicable to.

12. In making this Salt of calcined Tartar, Lemery only affuses hot Water,
letting it stand for some hours, stirring it now and then; whereas Charras
boils it in the Water, as thinking it a more effectual way of dissolving the
Salt in the Water: without doubt both ways may do, but the latter is the more
speedy, and not inferior to the other, since the boiling, is certain to extract
all the Salt, nor can dissolve any Particles of the Tartar, except the Saline.

13. Some calcine the Sale of Tartar with Sulphur, to hinder it from dissolving
so easily by the Air, or to preserve it in its beauty and dryness; Thus. They
mix three Ounces of the Salt with one Ounce of Sulphur in Powder, causing it to
burn and consume over a good Charcole fire, then elixiviate, filter, and
evaporate the Humidity to a Pellicle, in a Glass Cucurbit over a Sand-heat, and
set it to crystallize, separating the Crystals, etc.

14. But this says Lemery is no good Practice, because the Acid of the Sulphur
destroys some part of the Alcali; and this happens because the Pores of the
Salt by being thus calcined, are not so open as they were, whereby the Air
cannot so easily penetrate them.

15. The aptness of Alcalious Salts to dissolve in the Air, is natural to them,
not can it be taken from them, but by destroying their Nature; for having had
in their Calcination as much of the Acid as was requisite for their fixation,
but not to fill up all the Cavities or Pores which the force and violence of
the Fire had left there, they have their Pores open, and subject to any
penetration, especially that of the Air, when exposed to it: But when they meet
with an Acid more powerful, such as that arising from the Sulphur, mixed and
calcined with them in their last Calcination they fill themselves so much, that
having no more vacuities, the Acid of the Air cannot break the strict Union
which is between them, and so preserves the Salt from such a facile dissolution.

16. The same thing is to be understood of the addition of Nitre in the
Calcination of Tartar, because the Volatile, parts of the Nitre being sublimed,
or made to fly away, the fixed do remain, which by their Acidity do diminish the
Virtue of the Salt of Tartar, as we have already hinted at 1. aforegoing.

17. But there is a Crystalline Salt of Tartar, prepared with equal parts of
Salt of Tartar and Nitre together well purified, dissolved in Rosewater heated,
filtred, coagulated and crystalliz'd after the ordinary manner, which some call
Sal Tartari Nitratum, very proper to open the Liver, Spleen, Reins, Ureters,
and Womb, as also to assuage Inflammations of the Mouth and Throat given a ss.
ad ss. in some proper Vehicle.

18. And though Salt of Tartar be of a good whiteness after the first
Purification; yet if you do calcine eighteen Ounces of it, then dissolve and
filtrate as before directed, you will have yet abundance of Earthy substance,
which being dried would weigh a complete Ounce.

19. But I think it not the best way for to expose this, or any other Vegetable
alcalious Salt to such vehement and frequent Calcinations; for it cannot be
done without a notable Diminution of some of their best parts, and among the
rest, of the spirituous Sulphur: as is observable in the dissipation of the
Scent and Savor of the Plant, which happens always to Salts thus calcined,
which otherwise were they not so exposed to the violence of the Fire, would
preserve a good part of them.

20. Hence it appears that there is great reason, to preserve the essential
Salts of Vegetables, which may be drawn from Plants with a moderate and gentle
Fire, before those that undergo such violent Calcinations.

21. Alcalious Salts are aperitive, dissolving viscous, mucilaginous and
tartarous Humors, which cause Obstructions in almost all parts of the Body: And
Salt of Tartar as the chief of them, does it with advantage: It corrects Sena,
and keeps it from griping, rarifying and altering its viscous Substance, and
causing it to work quicker: it dissolves and expels viscous Phlegm lodging in
the Stomach and Bowels, which because of its Acidity causes Gripings, Cholicks,
and the like.

22. This Salt in the chief Exemplar of all Vegetable fixed Salts, none being
more used in either the one or the other Pharmacy, not only used in opening and
purging Medicines to mortify the Acids, which excite Fermentations in our
Bodies; but also in extractions, dissolutions and precipitations of several
Substances, especially of Minerals.

23. Outwardly also, it is of singular use in lotions against the Gout, and to
take away Scars and Blemishes in the Face, and as a Specific in all Diseases
of the Skin proceeding from Acids.

24. The Oil of Tartar per Deliquium is made of the Salt as at 5. aforegoing:
but if you would make it quickly, you may dissolve it in Rainwater q. s.
filtred, which may be used in all the Cases of the Oil.

25. If Salt of Tartar be dissolved in distilled Waters from fresh green
Plants, (immediately after they are distilled) they will turn green; and the
greener the Plant was from which the Water was distilled, the greener will it
make the Water.

26. The Reason is, because the Alcali of the Salt does stir up and make appear
the latent or hidden little parts of the Plant, which rose with the Water in
distillation: But if you would have this appearance, you must be sure that the
Water is but newly distilled, and done not in B. M. or a gentle heat, but with
a strong and violent Fire.

27. Tincture of the Salt of Tartar. Fine Salt of Tartar lb ij. put it into a
Crucible, and in a great Fire of Fusion, melt it, covering it with a Tyle, and
put Coals round it; blow about it so as to make a greater heat than for the
melting of Gold, which degree of heat continue about six hours, or until the
Salt is of a red Marble color, which you may know by putting the end of a
Spatula into the Crucible, and looking upon it: then taking the Crucible out,
turn it upside down into a very hot Iron Mortar, in which it will presently
coagulate; powder it immediately, and put it into a Mattress warmed beforehand,
upon which affuse Tartarised S.V. so much as may overtop it four or five
Inches: stop the Mattress with another, making a double Vessel: lute the
Junctures close with a wet Bladder, digesting in a very gentle Sand-heat, so as
the S. V. may boil (as it were) for eight or ten hours, and become impregnated
with a red Tincture: let the Vessels cool, and decant the Tincture and keep it
for use, in a Glass close stopped. To the remaining Salt affuse fresh S. V. and
operate as before so long as it will yield any Tincture. Thus Lemery.

28. This Tincture is a famous Aperitive, and one of the greatest Sweetner of
the Humors or Juices that is in nature; it purifies the Blood, acuates the
Spirits, and resists Putrefaction and Malignity in the highest measure;
prevailing against the Scurvy, Surfeits, Measles, Smallpox, and all sorts of
malign and pestilential Fevers, being given a gut. 10. ad 30.40. or 60. in any
fit Vehicle.

29. In the making of this Tincture some things are observable; As first, That
the Crucible be placed upon a Culot or Tyle, lest the Wind which comes through
the Ashhole, or else where should cool the bottom, and hinder the Fusion.

30. That although some Authors say, it is sufficient to calcine the Salt of
Tartar two hours in a violent Fire, or till it becomes bluish, yet that will
yield little or no Tincture, or but a very faint one; whereas it should be red
like Wine; and that it will be, if it be kept beforehand a good while melted in
the Crucible.

31. That as the Tincture grows old, it loses its red color, and becomes of a
pale Amber or Sack color, by reason that the more subtle part of the S. V. is
lost, through often opening of it, and other accidents, so that the Spirit
remaining has not strength enough to keep the Salt of Tarta^^n its exalted
state.

32. That for this reason, you must be very careful to use S. V. perfectly
deflegmated; for if any Phlegm be left in it, it will never turn red.

33. That the Salt of Tartar being thus melted and poudred, if you add to ever
Pound of it, lb ij. of Bone-Ashes in powder, that thereby the Particles of the
Salt may be separated one from another, you will have a much deeper Tincture,
and a much greater quantity, for fresh S. V. may be continually affused upon
the Salt, at least ten or a dozen times or more, whereas twice is as much as it
will bear the other way.

34. Some think that this Tincture proceeds from a Sulphur contained in the
Salt, but that is a mistake, for it is only an exaltation of some Particles of
the Salt in the S. V. and this is evident, not only by the diminution of the
weight of the Salt, (which I have several times proved) but likewise by
distillation, for no Tincture will rise, but only a color less S. V. leaving
the small quantity of Salt (which the Spirit had sucked up into it self) at
bottom, of its usual whitness: from what has been said, it appears that the
whole body or quantity of Salt of Tartar, will by degrees be converted to
Tincture.

35. Lastly, That Salt of Tartar having been a while melted in a Crucible, if
live Charcoals be cast into it, it will flame as easily as Nitre or Saltpeter;
which proceeds from the attenuated Particles of the Salt, being made fit to be
exalted with the Sulphur of the Coals: and from this Observation some light is
given to the making of Artificial Saltpeter.

XLIII. Sal Tartari Volatile, Volatile Salt of Tartar.
Bate.] Pure Salt of Tartar iv. Alcohol of Wine viij. distill in Sand, thrice
cohobating, so will the Salt stick to the sides of the Alembick. It is a famous
Diuretic and Aperitive, purifies the Blood, and resists Malignity. Dose, a gr.
10. ad 20. and more.

Salmon.] 1. In our Doron Medicum, Lib. 2. Cap. 10. Sect. 20. we have given you
five other several ways of preparing this Volatile Salt of Tartar; the fourth
of which is Lemery's Method, so that referring you thither, we need say no more
of it here, only make some short Observations concerning the same.

2. It is my Opinion (from an Experiment which I accidentally made) that Salt
of Tartar is naturally Volatile, and so that no great Study or Labor need be
used to change its Nature; and Volatile it will be, if you hinder the Acid of
the Tartar from fixing it, or otherwise separate them when united and fixed
together.

3. The Ancients and many of the Moderns in searching after this volatile Salt,
generally met with ill success, or wholly mist their end, because they
understood not the aptness which volatile and fixed Salts have to join with
Acids; nor the indissolubility of their union when joined together, and
therefore they determined that (because they understood not the way) there was
no such thing in nature.

4. And though the Acid and Volatile Salts, naturally found in Tartar, are not to
be separated but with much difficulty, and are always inclined to unite
themselves as strictly together as is possible, especially in Calcination which
(dissipates the Watery parts, which sensibly kept them divided, and) manifestly
closes up the Earthy parts, serving as a means to their Union, leaving a
sufficiency of the Acid to maintain that Union (notwithstanding the large
diminution of the Acid in that Operation;) yet this seeming invincible
Difficulty, this Gordian-knot, this almost indissoluble Unity, Nature it self
has lead us by the hand to surmount and overcome.

5. For since it is the Acid which fixes the Volatile part, and keeps it in its
Chains, if you would brake its Bands, and deliver the Prisoner, you must
surmount that Acid, by the addition of some new Acid, which may unite it self
with that fixed Salt.

6. For the Salt of Tartar having lost in Calcination much of the Acid parts
which stopped it, and there being only so much left to preserve the quality of
the fixed: the most fixed part of this Salt, being hungry, and as it were, half
starved for want of Acid enough, it comes to pass, that swiftly uniting it self
to this new Acid, whose Particles are ready to fill all the Vacancies which the
violence and action of the Fire had made empty, by this Union it relinquishes
the Volatile parts, and they resume their natural Liberty and Volatility, which
is evident by its Smell, and all the other signs, essential to Volatile Salts.

7. And this is clear in the Volatile Salts of Animals, which have been fixed
by Acids, where we have recourse to fixed Salts, which are only able to force
the Acid Salts to abandon the Volatile, to unite themselves to them* whereby,
the Volatile being disengaged it appears with all the Qualities and
Dispositions proper to it.

8. Lemery makes this volatile Salt of Tartar of Lees of Wine, because, says
he, they are incomparably more fermented than the Tartar, which is found in the
sides of Vessels, and therefore it is no wonder if its Salt is more volatile.

9. But this Salt of Lees, seems to be all Acid, notwithstanding that some
affirm that they abound in an Alcalious volatile Salt and a sulphurous Spirit,
containing but a very little Acid.

10. To which we answer, That if so, it must follow, that the more the Lees
ferment, the more they must lose of their Acidity* because the Alcaly would
absorb or destroy it; the contrary of which we every day see, for they by so
much, glow the more sour; as the Vinegar-makers can experimentally tell you,
who use Lees to make them ferment with that Wine, which they would speedily
turn to Vinegar: and this Tartar does all dissolve in the Wine, and turns into
Vinegar, for very little or no Lees, or other Tartar is to be found in those
Vessels in which the Vinegar is made, though there was some naturally before, or
other Tartar had been added to it.

11. Out of what has been said, it plainly appears, that the Volatile Salt in
the Lees, is a Volatile Acid, and is the same, that makes the Acid Spirit of
Vinegar, (being more volatile than many other Acids) to volatilize with its
Phlegm in the distillation.

12. But the Salt of Tartar drawn by Retort (after Lemery's Method) does rise
more easily, than the Spirit of Vinegar, which comes to pass from its being
volatiliz'd by the violent heat of the Fire.

13. Against what has been said, some may object, that Lees are sometimes added
to Wines grown ropy, to make them good again, without sowering them in the
least, or making them grow hard: which is true, because the first Fermentation
was imperfect, as appears by the ropiness of the Liquor; for had it been
sufficiently fermented, it would never have grown ropy: this ropyness or
gummyness, contains manifestly a great quantity of Oil (which by Retort may be
drawn from it:) The Salt of the Lees then, conjoyning with those Oily Particles
of the Liquor, does rarifie and exalt them into that Substance of which Spirit
of Wine is made; and so long as the Saline Particles of the Lees, shall find
Oily Particles to act upon, the Wine will not grow sour, but refine, and grow
better: but being added, after a perfect Fermentation, wherein those Oily
Particles are all dissolved, it changes the Liquor into a sowerness, and makes
it become Vinegar, as at 10. aforegoing is proved.

14. This Salt is sublimed in a Bolt-head, that the Phlegm which is too heavy to
rise easily so high may not mix with it: but it is difficult to keep this Salt
dry, because it easily grows moist and dissolves into a Liquor; for which
reason it is much better to draw it in a Spirit, for thereby less of the
Volatile parts would be lost being detained by the Phlegm.

15. The reason of its aptness to dissolve and melt per Deliquium, proceeds
from the more Essential parts being volatiliz'd, there remaining much of the
fixed Acid Salt in the Earth or Feces.

16. From whence it appears, that though in the Lees it was a Volatile Acid Salt,
(as we said at 11. above:) Yet after distillation in a Retort, it becomes an
Alcali by the means of the Fire, as other Volatile Salts do; there being no
probability that it could be of this nature either in the Plant or in the Lees

17. But if you had rather have the Salt in a dry Form, than in a spirit or
liquid Form, mix the Spirit or Liquor with a sufficient quantity of Bone-Ashes
finely poudred, and make thereof a Paste, which make into little Balls or
Pellets, put them into a Bolt-head, and fit to it a blind Head, so will the
Salt sublime very pure, white, and dry, which keep in Glasses close stopped for
use.

18. Out of the Feces left in the Retort (being after calcined in an open Fire)
you may extract a fixed Alcalious Salt, as out of common calcined Tartar, but it
will be in a vastly less quantity, from whence it appears, that the greatest
part of the Salt of the Lees is truly volatiliz'd, which is the thing proposed
to be done.

19. This Volatile Salt is of excellent use, to absorb Acids in the Body, of
what kind, or how malign soever, and to cause Sweat, purifying the Blood and
other Juices by perspiration: for by their volatility they penetrate
momentarily all parts, enliven the Animal Spirits, and open Obstructions to a
wonder if prudently given: having much the same effects, as volatile Salt of
Beans, and other like substances, and is indeed a singular Specific against
most Diseases of the Head and Brain, proceeding from Cold Moisture, and
Obstructions. Dose, a gr. vj. ad xvj. in some proper Vehicle.

20. From what has been said it appears, that a very volatile and alcalious
Spirit may be drawn from the Lees of Wine; which possibly may be that very
Spirit which Paracelsus and Van Helmont do speak so much of, and has caused
many Authors to affirm that Tartar does contain a most volatile and admirable
Spirit.

21. Marggrave makes a volatile Salt of Tartar after this manner. White Crude
Tartar, Crude Antimony, Nitre, A. lb j. Calx Vive lb jss. beat them all apart,
sift, and mix them, put it Cochleatim into an Earthen tubulated Retort in an
open Fire, affixing a very large Receiver, and in the Receiver you shall have a
Golden colored Liquor, which being rectified in a Cucurbit, goes forth or
ascends in a volatile Salt.

22. But his Commentator Muykens makes it after this manner. Rhenish Tartar lb
v. powder it grossly, moisten it with common Water, and keep it in a moist
place, till it begins to putrefie, and the Tartar grow black; put it then into
a Vessel which stop close, and digest in Horsedung, for its further Exaltation,
adding a little quantity of Spirit of Wine, to make a Precipitation, which
continue so long till it does yield a spirituous Saline Odor: Put this Earth
like Tartar into a Coated Glass Retort, and distill first with a gentle fire, so
long as any Phlegm will arise; then increase the Fire to a stronger beat, and at
length augment it to the highest degree, so will you have a Spirit and Oil,
which separate per Tritorium, and mix with the Volatile Salt sticking to the
sides of the Receiver, and with the fixed Salt to be extracted from the Feces,
and distill again, after the same manner as you distill Volatile Salts, so will
you have a most penetrating Volatile Salt of Tartar, which keep in a Glass
close stopped for use.

23. This Volatile Salt is that which is said to bear away the Palm from all
other Volatile Salts, having all their Virtues, but much more powerful in its
Operations and Effects: and it is one of chiefest of Chemical Arcanum's
supplying (in the Opinion of Helmont and some others) the place of the
Alcahest, being able to resolve radically simple Bodies for extraction of their
Essences, and to penetrate into the most remote parts of the Body. Dose, a gr.
vj. ad xij. or more.

XLIV. Sal Viperarum Volatilis, Volatile Salt of Vipers.
Bate.] It is made of dried Vipers by Retort, as you make the Volatile Salt of
Hartshorn, from the Caput Mo^tuum, a fixed Salt is drawn or extracted, after
the common manner. It is a Medicament of a most penetrative force, resisting
Putrefaction, opening Obstructions, taking away Fevers, and prevailing against
Melan^holy, Gout, Stone in the Reins and Bladder. Dose, gr. vj. ad x.

Salmon.] 1. The way how this is performed we have taught in our Seplasium,
Lib. 7. Cap. 61. Sect. 6. from Charr^s; where, and in the three following
Sections of the same Chapter, you have several Notes and Remarks worthy
Observation: and in Cap. 2. Sect. 39. 1, 2, and 3 of this Book aforegoing, from
Lemery, to which for the particular Exemplification of the Process we refer you.

2. Here is to be noted That in the first distillation the Phlegm comes before
the other Principles; but in the rectification the Volatile Salt and Spirit
rifes first, because it is at liberty, and leaves the Phlegm behind.

3. The Vessel for Sublimation must be very high, that the Volatile Salt may
arise without any Phlegm; for ^f the Vessel be low or short, the Phlegm will rise
with the Volatile Salt liquifie it, and turn it into Spirit.

4. A Bolt-head, or a long Body with its Head, may serve for this Operation,
because the Phlegm being too heavy cannot ascend so high and therefore the
Volatile Salt in its flight, leaves it, and sublimes alone, which is after to
be rectified and made more pure.

5. To do this, you must mix it with the distilled Spirit, and repeat the
Sublimation as before. But because this Salt always carries along with it, some
few Particles of the fetid Oil, it quickly loses its whitness, and turns
yellowish.

6. To remedy this, when you have put it into the Bottle, affuse thereon S. V.
tartarized, so much as to overtop it an Inch, stop it up close shake them well
together, and digest for a week or ten days, so will the Salt grow white, and
be preserved from dissolving, and the S. V. will suck up all the fetid Oil
which gives the Empyreuma to the Salt, and become reddish or Amber-coloured.

7. But in this Operation, care must be taken, that the S. V. be perfectly
deflegmated; for if the least Phlegm should remain in it, a part of the Salt
would dissolve therein to fill it: after it is thus washed in S. V. you may
sublime it again, and then it will be very dry, white and fair.

8. There is another way of rectifying the Volatile Salt, which is by mixing it
with four or five times as much Bone-Ashes, or Horns burnt white, putting the
Mixture into a Glass or Earthen body, and then fitting to it a blind Head,
luting well the Juncture, and then with a gentle fire subliming in Sand, the
Volatile Salt will arise very white, and stick to the head almost like hoar
Frost.

9. This Salt is hereby purified from most, if not all its fetid Oil, which
remains at bottom in the Bone-Ashes, and hereby becomes whiter than it was, and
pleasanter to the Palate: which yet by another rectification from Bones, will
be still more pure and desirable, the Empyreuma in a manner totally vanishing.

10. This Volatile Salt, if it be dissolved in a little distilled Rainwater,
will crystallize like Sugar Candy, and then will be easier to keep than before.

11. This Salt, and indeed all others drawn from Animals, are of almost
infinite Virtues, and may be esteemed even as the Pillars of true Pharmacy, for
they penetrate to the places farthest removed from the first digestion, even to
the most remote parts of the Body, and dissolve all viscous and tartarous
Matters, open all Obstructions, cure all Fevers, principally Quartans, preserve
from the Plague, and strongly resist all Putrefaction.

12. It prevails not only against all continual and intermitting Fevers, but
are good against the Palsy, Falling Sickness, Leprofie, King's Evil, Rickets,
French Pox, Elephantiasis, bitings of Serpents, Vipers, Rattle-snakes, and of
any other venomous Beast, cures Fits of the Mother, expels Poison, and
preserves from all malign, infectious, and pestilential Diseases; and possibly
may be one of the greatest Remedies in the World for the Cure of Hecticks,
Phthisis, and Consumptions, etc. Dose, a gr. vj. ad xvj.

XLV. Sal Urine Volatile, Volatile Salt of Urine.
Bate.] It is made of fermented Urine distilled by Retort S. A. From the Caput
Mortuum a fixed Salt is drawn, according to the common Method. It is a famous
Anodyn, and takes away Pains, being mixed with some proper Liquor, and the place
afflicted bathed therewith. Inwardly given it opens tartarous Obstructions of
the Viscera and Mensentery; for which reason it is said to be of admirable use
against the Scurvy, Cachexia, yellow and black Jaundice, etc. It breaks the
Stone in the Reins and Bladder, and eases Pains thencearising. Dose, gr. 15. ad
30*

Salmon.] 1. How this is to be made we have taught in our Pharm. Land. Lib. 2.
Cap. 1. Sect. 12. and 14. as also in our Doron Medicum Lib. 1. Cap. 25. Sect.
128. and 129. and Lib. 2. Cap. 2. Sect. 22. which latter it exactly according
to Lemery's Method. There are other Methods of making it, which you may see at
large in our Seplasium, Lib. 7. Cap. 63. Sect. 8. ad 15. and in Sect. 18. a
compound Volatile Spirit and Salt of Urine and Tartar from Maets, which is a
thing of good use.

2. Others, as Le Mort and Charras make it thus: Fresh Urine, evaporate it in
B. M. to the thickness of Honey, put it into a Glass Mattress or Vesica fitted
with its Head and Receiver luting the Joints, and distill with a gradual
Sand-heat, that the Matter may not rise and run over, first you have the
Volatile Spirit; after that, the Volatile Salt arises, which sticks to the
Head; then a little stinking Oil, which tricles over into the Recipient, with
the Volatile Salt which it dissolves: the Vessels being cooled, the Oil and
Volatile Salt are to be taken and separated from the fetid Oil, by putting into
the Receiver so much warm Water, as is needful to dissolve the Volatile Salt
which was congealed: filter the Solution through Paper, so will the Oil be left
behind: the filtred Liquor put into a large Bolt-head, with a long Neck, and
fit to it a large Head round and flat, with a Receiver, luting the Joints, and
distill in a very gentle Sand-heat, so will the Volatile Salt be separated (even
by the least heat) and sublime into the head of the Still like Snow, white and
pure, leaving whatever is insipid or stinking behind it in the bottom, as not
being able to rise because of the height of the Vessel and weakness of the
Heat: this Volatile Salt gather and keep in a Glass close stopped for use.

3. This subtle Salt is of great Virtue and Power, whether inwardly used or
outwardly applied, in the Cure of Diseases: it opens all Obstructions, and is
of singular use in all Melancholic Dieases to break and dissolve Stones and
Gravel, whether in Reins or Bladder and to expel them by Urine. Dose, a gr. vj.
ad xx. in some fit Vehicle.

4. Outwardly applied it prevails admirably against the Gout, or any external
Pain being dissolved in Aqua Vitae (in which a little Phlegm is left, for a pure
rectified Spirit will not dissolve it) and it is said to be confirmed by
experience, as an excellent dissolver of Nodes, Tophs Gums.

5. This Volatile Salt of Urine (says Charras) powerfully mortifies Acids,
which usually raise the Fermentations in our Bodies, and are the Causes of
several Diseases: it is very much esteemed in all Diseases of the Liver,
Spleen, and Mesentery, to purify the Mass of Blood, and cure the Scurvy
Cachexia, Jaundice and Hypochondriack Melancholy: it is prescribed with good
Success in Lethargies Apoplexies, Epilepsies, and Convulsions; as also in
Suffocations of the Womb and difficulty of making Water. Dose, a gr. 10. ad 20.
or 30. in White Wind or some other proper Liquor.

6. A Compound Volatile Saline Spirit of Urine and Tartar is thus made,
according to Maets. Recent Urine lb iv. Salt of Tartar made with Nitre lb j.
mix and digest in a Glass close stopped in Horse dung for three Months; so will
the Volatile Salt of the Urine join it self by Putrefaction with the igneous
Spirit of the Tartar; after which with a gentle fire draw forth the Volatile
saline Spirit, which will be indeed of an Aqueous Consistence, but extremely
fiery and saline.

7. This serves principally for drawing forth or extracting the Tinctures from
the Calces of Metals and Minerals, and opening the several Bodies, to which it
is applied: From the Crocus of Sol it extracts a yellow Tincture, which by
distillation is freed from the Menstruum, leaving the Tincture behind in the
form and thickness of Oil: this being mixed with Alcohol of S V. q. s. and
digested for some time unites it self with the Spirit, and becomes an Aurum
Potabile of great Virtue, which is gives a gut. vj. ad xvj.

8. After the same manner you may extract a Tincture from the Crocus of Mars,
of admirable Virtues, which may be given a gut. vj, ad xxvj. And from the
Crocus Veneris, a Tincture of Venus, which is a Specific against the
Epilepsie: Thus. Crocus of Venus (made with Nitre) calcined till it is of a
blood-red Color, made into a subtle Powder j. of choice Nitre xij. mix and
calcine in a strong Crucible with degrees of heat in a naked Fire, till the
Venus with the Nitre is turned into subvirid or bluish green Scorias: on this
affuse the aforesaid Menstruum, and extract a Rubicund Tincture, which
separate, adding fresh Menstruum, and digesting as before, which so often
repeat till the whole Tincture of the Venus is extracted: mix these several
Tinctures, and by distillation abstract to the thickness of Oil; on which
affuse the Alcohol of S. V. digesting in a warm Sand heat, so will the Tincture
of the Venus unite it self with the S. V. (as before in that of Gold) and
become potable Venus. Dose, a gut. vj. ad x.

XLVI. Tartarum Antimoniatum, Tartar antimoniated, or Tartar prepared with
Antimony,
Bate.] Cream of Tartar, p. vj. Flowers of Antimony, p. j. mix and boil in
Water, filter and exhale to dryness. It is Ecphractick, or Opening and
Cleansing, Diuretic, Diaphoretick, and a Febrifuge. It loosens the Belly, and
moves Vomiting, Dose, j. ss, etc.

Salmon.] 1. This is taken from Zwelfer, Mantiss. Spagyric. Cap. 12. pagina mea
870. who orders the Repetition of the boiling with fresh Water, till all the
Cremor is dissolved, and will pass by filtration through brown Paper, which then
with a very gentle heat is to be evaporated to dryness.

2. How the Flowers of Antimony are to be made we have showed at large in Cap.
9. Sect. 57. of this Book aforegoing: of these Flowers there are several sorts,
as the white, yellow, and red, of which the white Flowers are only to be chosen
for this purpose.

3. It purges gently upwards and downwards, and prevails against continual
Fevers, and intermitting Tertians, and other chronick and radicated Diseases:
Dose, a ss. ad j. Plus minus, in any proper Vehicle.

XLVII. Tartarum Chalybiatum, Chalyblated Tartar.
Bate.] Tartar washed lb j. Mars ij. Water lb viij. boil them a moment or two,
then strain immediately through Hippocrates his Sleeve, stirring the Liquor till
it is cold, so a powder will settle at bottom of a greenish Color, which dry.
Or thus. Cremor Tartari iv. Vitriol of Mars ij. boil in a small quantity of
Water, filter, and evaporate to dryness. It is very profitable against Chronick
Diseases, viz. Obstructions of the Spleen, Quartans, Yellow Jaundice, Cachexia,
Hypochondriack Melancholy, etc. Dose, j. ad j.

Salmon.] 1. Zwelfer in the place above cited prepares it after this manner.
Vitriol of Mars prepared with Spirit of Vitriol or Sulphur ss. expressed and
depurated Juice of Endive, or Juice of Wood Sorel, q. s. mix and dissolve: in
this dissolution mix and incorporate Cremor Tartari iij. by a gentle boiling,
which (if you please you may filter whilst hot, and then) evaporate to dryness.

2. This, says he, is powerful in removing Obstructions of the Hypochonders,
and to provoke the Terms: it opens the Bowels and makes the Belly soluble: and
is indeed one of the best of Remedies against the Greensickness in Virgins, and
the Rickets and King's Evil in Children. It kills Worms, says Le Mort, and
expels Pituitous, and other like viscous Humors.

3. The same Le Mort makes it according to the latter Method of our Text; but
he advises, that the Ebullition should not be long, but only a walm or two,
(stirring it with a wooden Spatula) for if it be too long boiled, it becomes of
an ungrateful Taste, and will be apt to move Vomiting.

4. But the first was which proposed in our Text, is exactly conformable to Le
Febure, which makes a Powder of a greenish Color, and shining when dry: This,
says he, is incomparably more Aperitive than purified Tartar, because it has in
it the Vitriol of Mars, which the Sharpness of the Tartar has drawn forth, as
the greenish Color does evince.

5. Lem^ry makes it almost after Le Febure's and oar Author's first way, save
that he uses Rust of Iron instead of crude Filings of Iron, and iij. instead of
ij. which he boils for half an hour, or there abouts, till the Tartar it all
dissolved, then he strains the Liquor through a Cloth, but very hot; for if it
were a little cool, the Tartar would coagulate in the Cloth, and none of it
would pass.

6. When you exhibit this Chalybeat Tartar, you must make it just boil in the
Liquor you give it in, for otherwise it will not dissolve; and you ought to
give it as hot as they can take it, for fear it should coagulate at the bottom
of the Cup.

7. By reason of this inconveniency, he has a soluble Chalybeat Tartar, thus
made. Crystals of Tartar in powder viij. Salt of Tartar iv. put them into a
glazed Earthen Pot, and affuse thereon Water ^ iij. boil gently for half an
hour, cool, filter, and evaporate to dryness, so will you have were xij. of
white Salt, to which put forty eight Ounces of Lemery 's Tincture of Mars (see
it Cap. 7. Sect. XXVI. of this Book) mix and digest for a little time in a
Sand-heat, then with a gentle fire evaporate the Liquor, till a black Powder
remains, (which will be about twenty four Ounces) which keep in a Glass close
stopped for use.

8. This has all the Virtues of the Tincture of Tartar, which see in its proper
place, and is especially good in Nephritick Cholicks, and difficulty of Urine,
being given a ss. ad ^ ss. or ij. in Broth, or some specific Vehicle, or else
made into Lozenges.

9. And it is much more convenient for use than the other Preparations, because
it not only dissolves and mixes in any cold Liquor, but is also more virtuous
and effectual, for that the Tincture of Mars is though to contain only the more
Essential and Saline parts of the Tartar.

10. Charras has the two ways of our Author, besides which, he has a third
which is after this manner. Cremor Tartari in fine Powder iv. Vitriol of Mars
ij. reduce them into a Paste, with some Cordial-water ij. then drying all,
powder it finely, and add to it some few drops of Oil of Cinnamon or Cloves,
and keep it in a Glass close stopped for use. It is endued with all the former
Virtues, bu^ is not to be used, till after Vniversals. or general Remedies, of
a Cathartick Virtue have been first administered.

XLVIII. Tartarum Eme^icum, Emetick, or Vomiting Tartar.
Bate.] Liver of Antimony, Cremor Tartari, Ana. p. aeq. mix Mint-water, filter,
and evaporate to dryness. It operates much more gently and safely than Crocus
Metallorum. Dose, gr. iij. ad xij.

Salmon.] 1. How this Emetick Tartar is to be made according to Mynsicht, Le
Febure and some others we have shown in our Doron Medicum, Lib. 2. Cap. 10.
Sect. 7. and 18. with some Notes and Observations upon the same.

2. That of Mynsicht is made wit a peculiar Crocus Metallorum, viz. made with
equal parts of Antimony, Nitre, and Salt of Wormwood, putting the Mixture into
a good Crucible, till it is half full, and covering it with another Crucible of
the same bigness, having a little hole in the bottom, and the Juncture well
luted and dried; it is then placed upon a Culot or Tyle in the midst of a
Fireplace of a proper Fornance: then having kindled a fire about it, it is
left till the Substances, detonate and melt: after which the Crucible is taken
from the Fire, and being cold, that containing the Matter is broken, and you will
find at the bottom the Hepar Antimonij, the Color and Powder of which is more
red, than the other sorts of Preparations, and covered with Salts.

3. This Hepar, is called by some Magnesia Opalina, because it is of the Shape
and Color of Marchasite, and very much like to that of the Opal: and most
believe it to be the true Crocus Metalior. Rulandi.

4. It is certain that this is one of the truest and most excellent
Preparations of Antimony that can be prepared, as well to make the Emotick
Wine, as to give in Powder, a gr. vj. ad 10. 20. 30. or 40. Grains (as some
Authors allow) in some Conserve, Bolus, Egg, or roasted Apple, or otherwise;
and likewise to make thereof this our present Emetick Tartar, as in the place
cited we have at large taught.

5. How Lemery makes it, see in our Seplafium, Lib. 2. Cap. 10. Sect. 15. and
16. where you have the Virtues, Use, and Dose at large. He makes it with Spirit
of Urine, or Volatile Spirit of Sal Armoniack: if with the first, there happens
a small Ebullution, which proceeds from the Cremor Tartari, meeting with the
Volatile and Alcalious Salt of Urine, the Acid of the Tartar peircing the Salt
of Urine, and dividing its parts, thereby giving vent to the Igneous Particles
contained in it, which now being freed, break forth in great haste.

6. But if it be prepared with the latter, there will then be no sensible
Ebullition* because the Salt of that Spirit is not so open an Alcali, as is the
Salt of the Spirit of Urine, but retains some Impressions of the Acid Salt of
the Ar^^^^ack; so that the points of the Acid of the Tartar (not freed from its
Earth) are too unactive, gross or blunt to insinuate themselves into the Pores
of this Salt, to separate its parts, etc. From whence, it may rationally be
deduced, that this Medicament is much better to be made with the former, than
with the latter.

7. In this Operation also, you may either evaporate to dryness, or exhaling
about two thirds of the Liquor, you may set it to crystallize, after the usual
manner, but those Crystals will be in no kind, better than the former: yet
however, if you like Crystals better, it will be best to do it in an Earthen
flat-bottom'd Vessel, that the Crystals may shoot the better.

8. Marggrave makes it thus. Glass of Antimony, or Crocus Metallorum in fine
Powder j. Crude Nitre in Powder ij. mix, and in a Crucible make the detonation:
the Matter remaining Powder finely again, and add thereto pure Salt of Tartar
j. fair Water ix. mix them, and in an Iron Vessel, boil to a total Consumption
of the Water: the Mass remaining Powder, and extract the Salt with boiling
Water, which filter: the Powder remaining in the Paper is Vitrum Antimonij,
which dry and save: the filtred Liquor put into a Glass body, and evaporate to
dryness, which keep in a Glass close stopped for use.

9. It purges both upwards and downwards, but chiefly bilious or choleric
Homors, and is to be given a gr. ij. ad iv. vel vj. but in the first Impression
of the Collectanea Chymica, the Dose is a gr. 10. ad 20. which is truly too
large in my Opinion: there can be no danger in giving a Dose too little,
whereas very ill consequents may be upon giving a Dose, though never so little
too large.

XLIX. Tartarum Laxativum, Laxative or Loosening Tartar.
Bate.] Cremor Tartari viij. Salt of Tartar iv. Fountain Water lb iij. boil
them in a gentle fire for half an hour, which being cold, filter and evaporate
to dryness, that you may have a white Salt. Dose, a ss. ad j.

Salmon.] 1. You may see the Method or Way of doing it more at large in our
doing it more at large in our Seplasium, Lib. 2. Cap. 10. Sect. 8. where note,
That this Preparation is nothing but such a Mixtion of the Cream of Tartar,
with the Salt of Tartar, in such Proportions, that it may dissolve in cold
Liquors, which the Cream would not do alone: and the Cream being an Acid,
insinuates it self into the Pores of the Alcalious Salt, and sweetens it.

2. If Salt of Tartar be put into the Dissolution of the Cremor Tartari in
boiling Water, there will be an Effervescency; but if they be mixed cold, there
will be none; the reason is, because the Acid Salts of the Cremor being
involved in other Principles, have but little power to enter and open the
Alcali, unless actuated and fortified by the help of Fire.

3. In the Cremor of Essential Salt of Tartar, the Acid Salt is proportionably
mixed and united with the Volatile Salt: But says Charras, this Union may be
broken, by dissolving this Essential Salt in Water, and mixing it with the
Alcalious Salt of Tartar, for by that means the Acid being overcome by the
other Salts, and not being able to close with so great a quantity, which it
could neither stop not contain, resumes its dissolutive Nature, so that they
become together, all of them dissoluble in Water.

4. This Preparation is of principal use to cut and digest thick and viscous
Humuors, and to prepare them for Excretion; and is successfully used in all
manner of Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and other Viscera; the use of
which may be continued for several days as need requires, and may be given a
ss. ad st. in any fit Vehicle.

L. Tartarum Vitriolatum Antimoniale, Antimonial Vitriolated Tartar.
Bate.] It is made by adding paulatim to antimoniated Tartar (at Sect. 46. a
foregoing) Oil of Vitriol, q. s. and drying it, then dissolving in Water,
filtring, and exhaling to dryness. It is a Febrifuge, and prevails against the
Yellow Jaundice, and Cachexia, and is digestive, given a gr. 15. ad 30. etc.

Salmon.] 1. It is taken from Zwelfer Mantiss. Spagyric. Cap. 12. page mea 874.
which because it seems to be more clear in the Author, we will give you Word
for Word, Translation only excepted.

2. Take white Flowers of Antimony ij. Cremor Tartari iv. boil them in Water,
q. s. repeating it several times, till the whole Virtue is drawn forth: first
strain, and then filter hot through brown Paper; with which mix or dissolve
Salt of Tartar lb j. This, by a gentle heat evaporate way to dryness, or to its
former Consistency of a Salt. Again to this Liquor thus impreg^^ted with the
Essence of Antimony, put in leisurely, and by drops Spirit or Oil of Vitriol or
Sulphur, q. s. till the Salt is sufficiently saturated: Let this saline Matter
be dried, and then dissolved again in simple Water, filtred, and by a gentle
Evaporation of the Aquosity in a Glass Body or Vessel, be reduced to the
Consistency of a Salt, which keep for use.

3. It is indeed an excellent thing in chronick or long continuing Diseases as
Hypochondriack Melancholy, tedious Tertian and Quartan Agues, and other
Diseases arising from such like Causes, as tartarous and rebellious Humors in
the Viscera, Obstructions of all kinds, etc.

4. It ought to be given in the Morning fasting, with a good supply of
Posset Drink, by which means it will work easier, pleasanter, and more nimbly:
but else for want of that to repleat the Stomach, it may cause the Patient to
strain too much, and so do mischief; which otherwise observing these Directions
is safe enough, and an excellent Medicine of extraordinary use.

LI. Tartarum Vitriolum Emetico-purgans, A Vomiting purging Vitriolated Tartar.
Bate.] Salt of Tartar melted viij. Glass of Antimony j. mix them well in a
Crucible, which then pour forth, dissolve in Water, filter, and dry with a
Sand-heat, instilling by degrees Oil of Vitriol, q. s. and drying it again. It
has the same Virtues with the former, and purges (...), upwards and downwards.
Dose, gr. iij. ad viij. etc.

Salmon.] 1. It is taken from Zwelfer in the place above cited, from whom we
shall also deliver you the Process in like manner as we did in the former.

2. Salt of Tartar lb j. melt it in a Crucible over the Fire, into which
forthwith put by little and little Glass of Antimony ( prepared without any
addition ij.) and being melted and well mixed together, by stirring them up and
down with an Iron Rod, immediately pour them fourth: when cold, beat it in a
Mortar to fine Powder. dissolve it in fair Water, filter, and by a gentle heat
evaporate the Humidity to dryness, and its former Consistency of a Salt: into
which instill leisurely, and by degrees Oil or Spirit of Vitriol or Sulphur, q.
s. so much and so long till no more Ebullition or Effervescency appears: Let
this vitriolated saline Mass be dried, which then again dissolve in fair common
Water, filter, and gently evaporate so much of the Humidity that it may
crystallize, or otherwise, at once evaporate it away to dryness, which keep for
use.

3. It works both upwards and downwards gently, but chiefly by Stool, for as
much as the Antimony is doubly corrected, first by the Salt of Tartar, and then
by the Oil of Vitriol; and it is given in all the Cases, and for all the same
Purposes for which the former is exhibited;

4. And by the Authority of our Text is not to be given in much above the
quarter part of the former Dose, viz, a gr. iij. ad viij. Yet Zwelfer says it
may be given a gr. x. ad xx. which I suppose is to be understood in strong
Constitutions, and contumacious Diseases.

LII. Vitriolum Camphoratum, Camphorated Vitriol.
Bate.] Vitriol calcined vj. Camphire (dissolved in S. V.) j. mix, and by a
gentle fire abstract the Spirit, S. A.

Salmon.] 1. As to the Calcination of the Vitriol, it is my Opinion, it ought
to be Philosophically done, which is performed two ways; First, By a solar
Calcination with the Sunbeams, as Antimony is calcined, the full way of doing
of which you will have in our Officina Chymica, now in the Press, and in a
short time to be published: Secondly, By the following Method of Le Febure.

2. Vitriol purified by digestion, dry it between two Papers in a very slow
heat, till it turns of it self to a dry Powder, which put into one or more
Matrasses, with a flat bottom, the thickness of a Shilling or Half Crown,
observing well this Note, else you will come short of your design: Seal up the
Vessels hermetically, and put them in Ashes as deep as the Matter is high, and
half an Inch more; then give it a fire, which ought not to exceed the heat of
the Sun in Summer, and continue the same without interruption for forty days,
and the Vitriol will turn by degrees from a white into a yellowish Color, and
from a yellow to a red, which will come to the height of Blood reduced to
Powder; then remove the fire, break the Vessel, and keep this Philosophic
Vitriol as an excellent thing both for inward and outward Uses.

3. This is the Vitriol which is to be Camphorated according to the
Prescription of our Text, which then becomes a most admirable Remedy against
all Fluxes of Blood whatsoever, whether inward or outward.

4. It also possesses in it self the true Soul and Tincture of the mixed, which
may be extracted with the Alcohol of S. V. if you have Patience enough to
attend the Operation; and thereof you have a famous Remedy for Wounds and
Punctures of the Nerves, and indeed to cure an hundred other Diseases, if a
wise Physician has it in handling.

5. Take of this Camphorated Vitriol, q. v. Alcohol of Wine, or rather Tincture
of Salt of Tartar, so much as may overtop it two Inches, digest in a very
gentle heat, till the Menstruum is well tinged, which decant and affuse more
fresh Spirit, digesting and docanting as before, and continuing this Work till
the Menstruum will not extract any more either Sapor or Color: mix and filter
all these Tinctures, and by an Alembick in B. M. abstract, about the one half,
or two thirds of the Spirit, leaving the thicker Tincture behind.

6. This is said to be a present Remedy against the Stone, Epilepsie, Megrim,
to cleanse and heal internal Ulcers, stop bleeding in any part, and to purify
the Blood. Dose, a gut. 10. ad 20. in any proper Vehicle.

7. But there are some which profess to bring it to a higher degree of
Perfection, by mixing it with burnt Alum, or Alum extremely calcined, and then
distilling the Liquor by Retort, which will be both red and sweet, and having
the afore-enumerated Virtues, but to be given in a smaller Dose.

LIII. Vitriolum Lunae, Vitriol of Silver.
Bate.] It is made of Silver dissolved in Spirit of Nitre, coagulating and
crystallizing, S. A. It is called also Crystallum Lunare, and Magisterium
Lunae. Dose, gr. ij. ad vj. It is profitable against the Dropsy, and Diseases
of the Head, as the Falling Sickness, Megrim, etc. It purges gently, and
sometimes it moves Vomit. Of this Vitriol, mixed with Crumbs of White-bread, the
Pilulae Lunares are wont to be made.

Salmon.] 1. We have explicated the Process at large after Lemery's Method in
our Doron Medicum, Lib. 2. Cap. 10. Sect. 3. and according to Charras in Lib.
1. Cap. 25. Sect. 148. of the same work, so that no more from them need be said
here.

2. Beguinus makes it after this manner. Leaf Silver j. put it into a Cucurbit,
and affuse thereon Spirit of Nitre, q. s. or so much as may overtop it one
Inch: cover it with a blind head, and digest in B. Vaporoso for twenty four
hours; then with a gentle heat abstract the more Volatile Spirit of Nitre, till
no more will come over: then the Vessel being cooled affuse more fresh Spirit
of Nitre, digesting and distilling as before, which Work continue till the Luna
is augmented in weight three or four Drams, by the addition of the more fixed
parts of the Spirit of Nitre: then drive forth all the Phlegm by a boiling B.
Vaporosum: after which the Vessel being exactly closed digest it in B. Vap. for
thirty days, in which space of time the Luna will be changed into a white
viscous Water, which placed in a cold place will congeal into a greenish blew
Vitriol.

3. Now here is to be noted, That when the Silver is all of it dissolved, the
Liquor will become clear and transparent, but yet a little bluish, which
proceeds from the small quantity of Copper which is mixed with it; for if the
Silver had been perfectly freed from the Copper, it would not have the least
Eye of blew in it, but be perfectly free from blewness or greeness like Spirit
of Nitre: but because there is scarcely any Silver to be found so perfectly
pure and free from Copper, therefore it is, the Solution is as seldom
colorless, but for the most part tinged more or less with an Eye of Blew.

4. Others make it thus. Fine Leaf Silver j, A. F. iij. put them together into
a Mattress in a Sand beat, where leave them till the Silver is dissolved: pour
the warm Solution into a little Gourd, warmed a little before* lest the heat of
the Solution break it: leave it to cool some hours, and the Liquor will turn
almost all into Crystals: the remaining Liquor evaporate half away in a
Sand-heat, and put it again in a cool place to crystallize: the yet remaining
Liquor put into an Earthen Pan, into which put some Water and a piece of
Copper, so will all the Silver contained in the Liquor fall down in Powder,
which you may wash and dry, and melt with a little Nitre and Tartar, in a
Crucible, to restore it to its first Body again. The Crystals dry by a gentle
fire, and keep them in a Glass close stopped for use.

5. These Crystals, Salt, or Vitriol of Luna are of a very bitter Taste, and
apt to black the Skin, with an enduring Black, not to be removed, till the Skin
wears off: they purge very easily, and are given a gr. iij. ad vj. some say gr.
viij. in some specific Vehicle, for such as can away with their bitterness:
but for such as cannot bare that, it may be made up into Pills with Crumbs of
White-bread, (which are called Pilulae Lunares, see our Pharm. Land. Lib. 3.
Cap. 2. Sect. 18.) and so given at Night going to Bed.

6. It is a Specific for all Diseasrs of Head and Brain, as inveterate
Head-Achs, Megrims, Apoplexies, Lethargies, Vertigo's, Epilepsies, Palsies,
etc. And is a famous thing against Dropsies, and to purge the Brain from
superfluous Humors.

7. But by reason of the Acrimony left by the Spirit of Nitre, or A. F. in
these Crystals, I think it not so safe to give gr. 8. or gr. 10. as some
Authors allow, for their Effects will be too violent, and their Qualities too
caustic to be given in so great a Dose: You may give a gr. j. ad iij, or iv.
or in very strong Bodies to gr. vj. as our Author has limited, which seems to
be the utmost Dose: for in some Constitutions, a Dose of gr. iv. will work
above an hundred times, yet without making the Body much the weaker for it.

8. Mae^ts from Angelus Sala, having made the Crystals according to the vulgar
Method at 4. above, dissolves them de Nova in May Dew, or distilled Rainwater
(digesting for twenty four Hours, that the Feces, if any be, may subside) then
filters, and evaporates to a Cuticle, and then sets it to concreet into
Crystals again, which he drys and keeps for use.

9. These Crystals are much more freed from the Acid of the Spirit of Nitre or
A. F. than the other; and if to the Solution, you add an equal part to the
Crystals of fine Nitre, it will yet much more infringe the corrosive Quality of
the remaining Acid Spirits, and become a Specific Antihydropick, beyond any
other Medicament yet known.

10. Where note, That you ought to have the finest Silver, and perfectly free
from any Mixture of Venus with it, if possible; for otherwise it will excite
violent Vomitings.

11. And because the Vitriol of Lunae works strongly in the Eduction of watery
Humors in the Dropsy, you ought to corroborate the Viscera, in the intervals
of Exhibition with Essence, Spirit or Water of Juniper Berries, or strong
Cinnamon Water, Angelica-water, the greater Composition, or Aqua Mirabilis,
adding some few drops of Spirit of Salt to them.

LIVE. Vitriolum Martis, Vitriol of Mars or Iron.
Bate.] Alcohol of Wine iv. Oil of Vitriol ij. keep them together in an Iron
Vessel for twelve or fifteen hours, or to dryness. Dose, a gr. ij. ad vj. to
open Obstructions.

Salmon.] 1. This is exactly Riverius his Sal Martis, of which we have already
spoken something at Sect. XXV. 6. and 27, 28, 29, and 30. aforegoing of this
Chapter.

2. But out of what has been there said, it appears that it will be best to
prepare this Vitriol with equal parts of the Alcohol of Wine and Oil of
Vitriol, forasmuch, as out of those equal Proportions a larger quantity of Salt
does emerge.

3. This Vitriol of Mars is an admirable Remedy for all Diseases which proceed
from Stoppages, is good against a Cachexia and Leucophlegmatica, and the
Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, Pancreas, Mesentery, and Womb.

4. But the Use of it (Universals being always first premised) ought to be
continued for some time, as in the use of other Medicaments extracted from
Mars; and the Dose likewise, must be inereased in thecontinuance, and that by
little and little, till the Stomach seems to be displeased with it, and
therefore may be given a gr. iij. ad xij. in some Conserve, Bolus, or Broth, or
other specific Liquor.

5. A new Drying Pan is more proper to make it in than any other Vessel,
because of its flatness, whereby the Liquor may the more spread it self about,
and incorporate it self with the Particles of the Iron.

6. This Vitriol or Sal^, is of greater Virtue than any of the aperitive
Crocus's, not only because it is acuated with the Oil of Vitriol, but because
its piercing Particles, being the more soluble parts of the Iron, are separated
from the more gross and terrene, which will always carry a Stypticity in their
nature, and be a Remora to the more Aperitive principles; for which reason it
is always given in less Dose than the Aperitive Crocus, and with much greater
and more certain Effects: but if the Dose be too large, it sometimes causes a
Nauseousness, as all sorts of Vitriol do.

7. The Spirit of Wine in the making of it serves to modarate the too great
violence of the Oil of Vitriol, and to make it more subtle and penetrative, and
stimulates it, only to extract the more soluble Particles of the Iron, to unite
with the Oil, and make a Salt.

8. Fill the Drying Pan an Inch or better deep with the Menstruum, and leave it
there about two days without stirring it, so will you find all the Liquor
incorporated with the Particles of the Mars, and turned into a Salt, which you
must dry, then separate from the Pan, and keep in a Vial close stopped for use.

9. From xij. of the Menstruum (being made of equal Proportions) you will have
xv. of the Salt of Mars: which Salt being put upon a Plate of Glass or glazed
Tyle, in a cold place will dissolve per Deliquium into a Liquor, which some did
improperly call Oil of Mars.

The Two following Preparations are added by the Translator.

LV. Sal Antimonij, Zwelferi, Salt of Antimony from Zwelfer.
Salmon.] 1. It is made of that Mass which remains in the Retort after the
distillation of the Butter of Antimony, and that by help of Spirit of Vinegar,
a little acuated with Spirit of Nitre; and this by so much the more easily and
speedily, if the said Mass be made into fine Powder, and first, twice or thrice
calcined with Sulphur, after the manner of the Calcination of Chalybs with
Sulphur for the Preparation of its Vitriol, by mixing an Ounce and half of
Sulphur at a time, with lb j. of the Antimonial Mass: Then extracting with
Spirit of Vinegar. the Salt will be drawn forth, and by abstracting with the
Spirit there from, the saline Matter will remain at bottom of a yellowish
Color, which you are to dissolve aagain in simple fair Water, filter, and
evaporate to a Cuticle, and lastly in a cool moist place set it to crystallize,
which diligently gather, dry, and keep in a Glass close stopped for use.

2. They purge gently, and are given to Infants against Worms, which they
effectually kill and bring forth; they also prevail against the Dropsy,
continual, malign, and pestilential Fevers; and are famous for purifying the
whole Mass of Blood, restoring the Sick miraculously to their pristine Health.

3. Zwelfer ( Mantiss. Spagyr. Cap. 8. page 838.) has another Salt of Antimony
purging, made from the Vitrum (after the Extraction of a purging Tincture from
it) after this manner. The purging Tincture. Glass of Antimony (made without
any addition) q. v. put it into a small Cucurbit, and affuse thereon so much
dephlegmated Oil of Vitriol, as may overtop it about two Inches: digest in a
gentle Ash-heat for some days, till the Oil is imbued of a black Color, which
gently separate and keep for use.

4. This Tincture purges pleasantly being given a gut. v. ad x. it purifies the
Blood, and brings forth superfluous and tartarous Humors, kills Worms, and
conduces to the Cure of Gouts and Rheumatisms.

5. From the Glass remaining after the extraction of the aforesaid Tincture a
Sal Antimonij is thus made. The said remaining Glass, and add to it a fourth
part of Sulphur beaten small, and calcine it with a gentle Fire in an Earthen
Pan, continually stirring it with an Iron Spatula or Rod, till the Sulphur is
wholly burnt up: beat the remaing Mass into powder, and again with a fourth
part of Sulphur calcine it as before, which Calcination three or four times
repeat: then from this Glass thus calcined; with Spirit of Vinegar, q.s. and by
many affusions of fresh Spirit, extract the Salt: abstract the Spirit of
Vinegar to dryness, and the Salt will remain at bottom, which dissolve in
simple Water, filter and crystallize as aforesaid.

6. It has all the Virtues of the former Salt, purges gently, and may be given
both to Infants, and Women with Child with all security imaginable. Dose, a gr.
v. ad x. in any proper Vehicle.

7. Le Febure makes the Salt much after the same manner, Of the Glass after the
Extraction of the Tincture, but he mingles the Vitrum with its equal weight of
Sulphur in Powder, and then calcines gently (as in calcining Antimony to make
the Glass thereof) stirring well the Matters till all the Sulphur is consumed:
this fire he makes not too intense, lest the Matter should melt, and so return
to Antimony again: thus once calcined, he grinds it on a Porphyry to an
Alcohol, puts it into a Mattress, and affuses thereon Spirit of Vinegar so much
as to overtop it four Inches, digests in Sand for eight days, decants the
Menstruum, and affuses new, this continuing till all the Salt is extracted,
these Extractions he mixes, filters, and abstracts the Spirit to a Pellicle,
and crystallizes as afore-directed, or otherwise evaporates to dryness:
afterward dissolves the Salt in Phlegm of Vinegar, filters, evaporates, and
thus continues till it is pure and white; lastly digests it in Alcohol of S. V.
for fifteen days, and abstracting the Spirit, keeps the Salt in a Glass close
stopped for use.

8. The same Le Febure has another way of making this Salt, which is thus. The
black Matter after extraction of the Tincture from the Vitrum aforementioned,
dry it in an Earthen Dish, and without any other previous Calcination put it
into a Mattress, upon which affuse subtle Spirit of Vinegar; digest together for
many days in a gentle heat, to make an Extraction of the Salt; filter,
evaporate to dryness, dissolve again and depurate, as in the former
Preparation; then digest with Alcohole of S. V. for fifteen days, after which
abstract the Spirit to dryness, so have you a noble Salt, not much inferior to
Salt of Gold.

9. The Virtues of both these Salts are one and the same, they purify and
cleanse the Blood, and purge the Body from all the Filth, Putrefaction and
superfluous Humors, cure the Leprosy and French Pox, and after a wonderful
manner make the Gout to vanish: they digest and evacuate as it were insensibly,
and cause inward Abscesses or Apostems, to break or discuss.

10. They have all the Virtues mentioned at 2. above, besides which, they are
said to cure all inward and outward Ulcers, and to expel and drive away all
sorts of Fevers and Agues, chiefly Quartans, and such as proceed from Malignity
and Putrefaction. Dose, a gr. j. ad iv. in Canary, Malemsie, Mead or Metheglin,
or other proper Liquor.

LVI. Sal Vitrioli Compositum, Compound Salt of Vitriol.
Salmon.] 1. Common Vitreol, or instead of that, Vitriol of Mars, dissolve in
distilled Rainwater, digest in a Mattress for some time, after filter this
Liquor precipitate with Oil of Tartar per Deliquium, or Oil of Potashes,
decant the clear Liquor from the Feces which dry; these are the sweet Sulphur
of Vitriol. The Liquor evaporate to a Pellicle, and crystallize, or otherwise
abstract to dryness, keeping the Salt remaining at bottom, in a Glass close
stopped for use.

2. Thus you see the clear Liquor decanted after Precipitation contains in it
the most pure Acid and Salt part of the Vitriol, united with the fixed Salt part
of the Tartar or Potashes, of which this most excellent Salt is made.

3. And by this Operation the Terrestial parts concealed in the Salt of Tartar,
precipitate with the Earthy parts of the Vitriol; so that by Conjunction of the
Acid part of the Vitriol, with the fixed Salt of Tartar, you have a Crystalline
Salt, composed of two Salts, the Effects of which are very much different from
the Effects of the common simple Salts of Vitriol.

4. For they are emetick, whereas this works generally by Stool, and rarely
provokes Vomiting; it is commended as an admirable thing against intermitting
Fevers or Agues, especially when there is a necessity to purge Melancholy.

5. For the Lixiviate Salts correcting the emetick Quality of the Vitriol,
which lay in its too pungent Acidity, renders this Salt in a condition only to
operate by Stool or Urine: and it may with much safety be given from ss. ad j.
in any proper or specific Vehicle.

CHAP. XI. Of LIQVORS.
I. Caudela Amygdalina, The Almond Caudle.
Bate.] OF the best Ale a Quart: Springwater a Pint; biting Cinnamon j. boil to
the Consumption of a third part: strain, and add thereto Jordan Almonds
cleansed (but not blanched) and bruised No 60. boil a little, and strain
through a Sieve: add, of the best Loaf Sugar ij. and make a Caudle. It is good
for Women in Childbed, who are troubled with a Diarrhaea or Looseness.

Salmon.] 1. If you add to it Canary or White Wind iv. or vj. it will be so
much the better, and comfort the Stomach and Bowels more.

2. If the Woman has been much weakened, and the Flux of long continuance, you
had better add to it iij. of strong Cinnamon Water, leaving out the Wine; for
Spirit of Wine, and all sorts of vinous Spirits, not only comfort the Bowels,
but in a special manner cure a Diarrhaea, or any Flux of the Bowels.

3. It may be taken vj. or more at a time, three or four times a day, or as
often as the sick desires it.

II. Caudela Nenupharina, The Water-Lilly Caudle.
Bate.] Roots of Water Lillies j. Ising-glass, raspings of Hartshorn, Ivory,
White-Sanders, A. ij. Bistort-root ss. Dates No 4. Rice two Spoonfuls: Ale half
a Pint; boil to the Consumption of a third part, strain, and add the Yolk and
White of one Egg, and white Sugar, q. s. It is for two Doses: It prevents
Abortion, eases the Pain of the Back, and is of good use in a Gonorrhoea, and
the Whites in Women. It is of extraordinary use, and to be given twice a day.

Salmon.] 1. If you add to it Catechu jss. Nutmegs j. Roch-Alum ss. it will be
so much the more powerful to all the Intentions for which it is designed; and
not in the least more unpleasant.

2. In case of a Gonorrhoea or the Whites, you ought to add Saccharum Saturni
gr. viij. strong Cinnamon Water iij. and then it will do wonders.

3. It is to be given twice a day, viz. the one half in the Morning fasting,
the other half at Night going to Bed: and if there be great Weakness in the
Genital parts, you may give the Patient gr. ij. of our Volatile Laudanum, to be
taken immediately before it at Night going to Bed.

III. Emulsio de Avellanis, Emulsion of Hasle-Nuts, or Filberts.
Bare.] Filberts or Hasle-Nuts, No 40. Hemp Seed, Seeds of Melons and
Musk-melons, A. j. Seeds of Purslane vj. sweet Almonds blanched No viij. bruise
them all and add simple Milk-water lb ijss. red Rose Water iv. Sugar Candy ij.
mix and strain out by Expression. Dose, Half a Pint twice a day, with the
Powder of a Deers Pizzle j. against Sharpness of Urine, Gonorrhoea, etc.

Salmon.] 1. Instead of red Rose Water, in my Opinion it is better to put as
much Parsley or Arsmart-water, because those Waters are confirmed by Experience
to be Specificks in giving ease to Heat, Sharpness and Stoppage of Urine.

2. But if the Pain be excited from the Sharpness of the Matter in a
Gonorrhoea, it will be absolutely necessary to add to each Dose j. of Sal
Prunellae, and so to give it, till all the Pain and Sharpness is gone.

3. After that, to stop the Gonorrhoea (universals being premised) you may add
to each Dose Antimonium Diaphoreticum j. Roch-Alum ss. Saccharum Saturni, gr.
iij. and exhibiting it Morning and Evening according to use, it will not fail
to answer expectation.

IV. Emulsio Cathartica, A Purging Emulsion.
Bate.] Carthamus seeds j. best Manna iij. Sweet Almonds blanched ij.
Barley-water, or Epsom-water lb ij. mix and make an Emulsion, S. A.

Salmon.] 1. It is not only Cathartick, but sometimes also emetick, purging and
evacuating gross, viscous and tartarous Humors, chiefly from the Breast and
Lungs, and therefore is said to be good against Asthma's Wheazings, Hoarseness,
and Stuffings of the Lungs.

2. But by reason the Carthamus-Seeds are apt to cause Vomiting, you would do
well to correct them by the addition of Mace ss. Cloves j. Ginger, gr. xv. for
by these the Windiness will be much abated.

3. This quantity here in the Prescript may serve for three Doses in young
People, and such as are weak and tender: in stronger, and such as are 12, 14,
or 16. Years of Age it may be given at two Doses, that is in two days: but in
very strong and rustic Bodies, it may be all drunk in one day, and then it
will work very well.

V. Emulsio Expulsiva, An expulsive Emulsion.
Bate.] Seeds of Citrons hull'd ss. bruise them and add distilled Waters of
Citrons, Medesweet, Scordium Compound, A. iij. white Sugar j. make an Emulsion,
S. A. Give three Spoonfuls at a time every hour, against the Malignity of the
Smallpox, etc. to expel it.

Salmon.] 1. It seems to be too cold, to be so ordinarily given in the
Smallpox, Measles, etc. you would do well to add to it Tincture of equal parts
of Saffron and Cochinele in rectified. S. V. ss. by which means it will not be
only more Cordial, but more Sudorifick, expelling the Disease through the Pores
of the Skin, etc.

2. At night going to Bed you may give it thus: Of this Emulsion four
Spoonfuls: Of our Guttae Vitae, gut. 30. mix for a Dose, for the Patient to
rest upon.

3. The next Morning give it thus. Of this Emulsion four Spoonfuls: of Sylvius
his Anticolick Spirit, gut. 30. mix for a Dose in the intermediate parts of the
day you may give it as directed with the Tincture of Saffron, etc.

VI. Emulsio Creatacea, Emulsion of white Chalk.
Bate.] Whtie Chalk in fine powder iij. Barley-water lb iij. boil to lb ij.
being cold add of the four greater cold Seeds, A. ij. sweet Almonds, No viij.
Caraways ss. make an Emulsion: then add Chalk finely poudred iij. Saccharum
perlatum j. or Diacodium jss. according as need may require.

Salmon.] 1. It is cooling, and abates the heat of Fevers: and by reason of its
alcalious Nature will absorb Acidities in the Stomach and Intestines, thereby
taking away Heart-burnings, Gripings, and other like Distempers of those parts.

2. If at last to the whole quantity of the Emulsion you add ij. of strong
Cinnamon Water to take away its Crudity it will be better and more grateful to
the Stomach, nor in the least hurt its Alcalious Property, because it is an.
Alcali it self.

3. It may be given often in the daytime three, four or five Spoonfuls at a
time; but if given at night for rest, it ought to be either prepared with the
Diacodium, or Diacodium ij. or iij. ought then to be added to it.

VII. Emulsio Dactylorum, Emulsion of Dates.
Bate.] of Dates stoned, No 15. Ale lb ijss. boil them together: then beat the
Dates with sweet Almonds No 24. mix all with the Ale and Express. adding
Sugar Candy and Nutmegs, of each a sufficient quantity. Dose, vj. thrice a day
for forty or fifty days, to prevent Abortion ease the Pains of the Back, help a
Gonorrhoea, cure a Consumption, Cough, Wasting, etc.

Salmon.] 1. It is very good in the Diseases named: but if made with equal
parts of Raisons of the Sun, and drank as a constant drink for some Months, it
cures an inveterate Gout beyond all imagination.

2. It also prevails against Hoarsness, Wheasing, Shortness of Breath, and all
other Stoppages of the Lungs which proceeds from viscous and tartarous Humors.

3. If it be given against a Gonorrhoea or the Whites in Women, universals
ought to be premised: and then the Emulsion it self prepared with the addition
of vj. of white Poppy-seed.

VIII. Emulsio Peoniata, Emulsion of Peony-seeds.
Bate.] Peony-seeds huld j. bruise them, and add distilled Waters of Rue, black
Cherries, of Peony compound, A. vj. make an Emulsion, adding Saccharum perlatum
iss You may give three Spoonfuls of it in the Morning fasting, and as much at
bedtime; some Specific Electuary being given beforehand, against the
Falling Sickness, Vertigo, Megrim, etc.

Salmon.] 1. This Medicament is intended against Distempers of the Head, as is
the Epilepsie, and other Diseases akin to it, proceeding from Cold, Moisture,
and too great a plenty of thick Humors.

2. But it ought to be preceeded with some other Specific, whether Powder,
Electuary, Spirit, or Oil; of which you may see variety in my Pharmacopoeia
Londinenfis, Doron Medicum, Synopsis Medicinae, Jatrica, Parateremata,
Seplasium, and this present Pharmacopoeia Bateana so that no more need be said
thereof.

3. But as preparatory to all this, a proper Emetick ought to be two or three
time beforehand given, that part of the Morbifick cause, which may lodge in
the Stomach, and other adjacent Bowels, may be evacuated, after which the
Specific Electuary, etc. may be exhibited with this Emulsion.

4. Though our Author prescribes it to be given but twice a day, Experience has
confirmed to me, that it ought to be taken thrice a day at least, viz. Morning,
Noon, and Night.

5. If it be given to Men, you ought to perfume it with Musk and Ambergrise,
because they are Specificks in the Epilepsie, adding to the whole quantity when
made, gr. xij. of either or both those Ingredients in subtle Powder: but then
you must be sure always to shake the Glass well before you pour forth the Dose.

IX. Jusculum Galli, Cock-Broth.
Bate.] An old Cock well wearied with running, till, he falls down; then kill
him pull off his Feathers, embowel him, and stuff the Body with proper
Ingredients: then boil him in Fountain Water, q. s. for five or six hours, till
the Flesh is ready to fall from the Bones, and strain out for use. It is
nutritive, and restores in Consumptions, Hecticks, etc.

Salmon.] 1. The Ingredients with which the Body ought to be stufft are left to
discretion of the Physician, which are to be ordered according to the
Constitution and Disposition of the Patient.

2. But the most usual Composition is this following. Savory, Hyssop, Parsley,
Bawm, Borrage, Bugloss, A. M. j. Time, Sweet-marjoram, A. M. ss. Onions iv.
Limon-peels ss. mix and chop all small, with which stuff the Body of the Cock,
after which boil him as is directed.

3. Being boiled and strained out make it savory with Salt, and squeeze in
Juice of Limon, so much as may make it grateful to the Palate; for by the means
of the Limon, the Broth will better agree with the Stomach, and the Patient
will be induced much the longer to continue the use of it, whereas otherwise
without it, the Stomach would soon loath it.

4. It is an excellent thing not only to restore in Consumptions, but to
strengthen such as are weak and faint, and such as are decayed with Age, or are
emaciated and weakened through hard Labor, Watchings, or Grief of Spirit.

5. It wonderfully strengthens a weak Back, easing the Pain thereof, and helps
such as have constant Runnings and Weaknesses upon them, corroborating the
weakened Parts: and therefore is commended in continued Gonorrhoea's, Gleets,
Whites in Women, continual running Fistula's, etc.

6. The Patient may drink it freely and liberally, two or three Quarts a day,
with Buiscuit, or without it: but the quantity is to be proportioned according
as his Stomach will bear it; however observe this as a general Rule, That all
things given as Diets, Restoratives, or Alteratives, to alter or change an ill
Habit of Body ought to be given in very large quantities or proportions,
oftentimes taken in a day, and to be continued for a long time, otherwise they
profit little or nothing.

X. Lac Ammoniaci, Milk of Gum Ammoniacum.
Bate.] Pure Gum Ammoniacum iij. dissolve it in cold Hyssop-water vj. in a cold
Mortar, S. A. It is given often a Spoonful at a time in difficulty of Breathing.

Salmon.] 1. It is accounted a Specific in Diseases of the Lungs, thickens
thin and sharp Rheums, and takes off the roughness of Aspera Arteria, for which
reason, it is good against Coughs, Hoarseness, Wheasings, etc.

2. It opens Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and all the Bowels, and
therefore is given with success against Cachexies, Dropsy, Jaundice, Gout, and
Scurvy, but particularly against Diseases of the Womb, which proceed from
Obstruction of the Courses, and other parts adjacent.

3. It ought to be given (after general Remedies, and) in the Morning fasting,
in White or Rhenish Wine, or some other proper Liquor.

XI. Mixtura Anticolica, A Mixture against the Cholick.
Bate.] The best Manna ij. Cremor Tartari, Sperma Ceti, A. ij. mix them. It is
given as an approved Remedy against the Cholick, in a draught of Chicken Broth.

Salmon.] 1. It purges away salt and sharp Humors which cause Gripings,
mollifies the Aspera Arteria, open Obstructions of the Lungs, and other Bowels,
purges Choler and watery Humors, and keeps the Belly soluble, being an
excellent thing for such as are apt to be costive.

2. The constant use of it for some time helps to cure Scall'd Heads in
Children, and take away other rebellious Breakings out: Besides it is one of
the famed Remedies of the World against the Stone in Reins or Bladder, or any
Obstruction of Urine.

3. Some Authors affirm Manna to be flatulent, and therefore in my Opinion if
you add Cardamoms j. Cloves, Ginger, A. ss. all in fine Powder to the two
Doses, you will do well; or instead of them Oil of Cinnamon or Cloves, or
Juniper Berries gut. iv. which is better.

XII, Potio Alba, The white Potion.
Bate.] Turpentine ss. distilled Oil of Nutmegs, gut. j, White Wind iv. Yolk of
one Egg: Syrup of Marshmallows j. mix and make a draught, S. A. It purges well
(...), upwards and downwards and is given against a Gonorrhoea.

Salmon.] 1. It ought to be Venice or Strasburg Turpentine; for the common is
too course and foul, and the Cypress and Chio, of too thick a Body, so that it
does not easily dissolve.

2. The quantity of White Wind is too little by one half at least; you cannot
well make up the Medicine with less than 8 or 10 Ounces of the Liquor: or
instead of White Wind you may use any other Specific Vehicle.

3. It is a Specific against the Gonorrhoea in Men, and the Whites in Women,
or any wasting or pain in the Back, or other weakness which accompanies such
like Distempers.

4. It prevails also against the Cholick, Pain and Sharpness or Heat of Urine,
and is really a good thing against the Stone, Gravel, Sand, or any tartarous
Matter obstructing those parts: in which cases you may make it with Parsley,
Arsmart, or Onion-water, or with Rhenish-wine.

XIII. Potio Febrifuga, A Potion against Fevers.
Bate.] Salt of Wormwood ij. Spirit of Sulphur j. Cichory-water iv. mix them.
It is given before the Paroxism or Fit, sweating upon it.

Salmon.] 1. Before these saline Antifebriticks are given, Universals ought to
be premised to carry off the the chief of the Morbifick Matter lying in the
Stomach, Bowels and first Passages, and these ought to be either Emeticks or
Catharticks, or both.

2. My reason for this is, because these immediately enter into the Blood, and
forthwith cause an alteration in the Sanguinous Juice and other Humors: Now
being apt to dissolve all Matters or Substances they meet with whether
Morbifick or other, and to mix with them, they carry that diseasie Matter into
the Blood with them, and so make the latter end of that Person worse than the
beginning.

3. For thereby the whole Mass of Blood, and other Juices of the Body are
contaminated at once, and that mischief is done, which by a long course of
Medicines cannot be easily retrieved again, which by due Evacuations at first,
would be infallibly prevented: and this is the general failure of those who use
these Medicines without Skill, Judgment, and due Precaution.

XIV. Potio Hydropica, A Potion against the Dropsy.
Bate.] Generous Whitewine iv. Syrup of Buckthorn ij. Sal Prunellae j. mix and
make a Potion. Mayhern.

Salmon.] 1. If Sena j. be beforehand infused in the White Wind, it will work
much better in all Hydropical Cases, for Sena acuates and stirs up the Virtues
of ^he Buckthorn admirably beyond any other thing.

2. The quantity of the White Wind is two little; you ^o^ht to take vj. of it
to make the Composition, adding ij. of bruised Liquorice, because this
Ingredient always makes Catharticks work without pain.

3. It opens Obstructions of the Bowels, and carries off those Humors which
cause Gripings, illness at Stomoch, Faintings, etc. and it is of singular use
against the King's Evil, Tettars, Ring-worms, and all sorts of breakings out
proceeding from salt and sharp Humors.

XV. Potia Pleuritica, A Potion against the Pleurisy.
Bate.] Juice expressed from Horse-dung, by mixing with it White Wind, A. ij.
Syrup of Corn-poppies j. Powder of Olibanum ss. distilled Oil of Nutmegs, gut.
iij. mix and make a Potion; to be taken three or four times a day after
Blood-letting.

Salmon.] 1. There ought to be vj. of the White Wind, for thereby the Juice of
the Horse-dung will be the better extracted, and it will serve instead of a
Vehicle to take the Medicine in; for otherwise you mu^^ give it in some other
fit Liquor.

2. Or you may make a compound Menstruum thus. White Wind, Onion-water, Water
of Winter-Cherries or Poppies, A. ij. mix them, to extract the Juice out of two
Ounces of Horse-dung: which ought also to be Stone-Horse-dung, and newly made.

3. It is not only an excellent thing against the Pleurisy: but also approved
against the Cholick and Gripings of the Guts, Stitches in the Sides, and Stone
or Gravel in Reins or Bladder, and all sorts of Stoppages of Urine whatsoever.

XVI. Ptisana Cathartica, A Cathartick or Purging Ptisan.
Bate.] Choice Sena freed from Stalks, Husks, Cods; Liquorice, Coriander-seeds,
A. j. boiling Fountain Water vj. or viij. make an Infusion by digesting
threehours: then strain out the clear. It is an admirable Medicament because of
its delicate Operation: it seldom fails to move the Belly five or six times.

Salmon.] 1. There ought to be of the three first Ingredients ss. and if the
Medicine is to be given to a strong Body less than a j. of Sena will not do;
and sometimes in Bodies very hard to work upon, I have made an Infusion of ij.
of Sena for one single Dose.

2. It is a general Purger, and is said to purge all sorts of Humors (chiefly
that which is uppermost) and that in all sorts of Persons.

3. Let it be given in the Morning fasting, and if the Dose works not in three
hours, let it be repeated again, for in such cases it is without danger.

4. Note, The Digestion ought to be made in a gentle heat, so as to keep the
Liquor scalding hot, and to be continued for three or four hours at least.

XVII. Serum Aluminatum. Whey made with Alum, or Alumed Whey.
Bate.] Alum iij. Milk lb iv. boil a little that a Whey may be made; add Sugar
iv. clarify with the Whites of Eggs, S. A. If you would have it emetick, boil
the iij. of Alum in viij. of Milk, making the Serum as before. It is to be
exhibited before the Febrile Paroxism.

Salmon.] 1. The Alum ought to be Roch-Alum: the Milk new made, and which has
not stood long, if hot from the Cow so much the better: The Whey ought to be
clarified before the going in of the Sugar, if you use trebble refined Loaf
Sugar; but if a coarser sort of Sugar, then after.

2. If made with the greater quantity of Milk it vomits not, for it is all to
be taken at times, but before the coming of the Fit, and its effects are much
like that of the Cortex, being very styptick.

3. But in my Opinion, the lesser quantity ought to be given twice or thrice,
some hours before as many Fits of the Ague, because it powerfully provokes
Vomiting, and admirably carries off the offending Matter; after which you may
with more safety and certainty give the Medicine in the larger Dose, and with
as good Effects as you can desire.

XVIII. Serum Hepaticum, A Whey for the Liver.
Bate.] Fumitory, Succory, Endive, A. M. iij. Liverwort, M. ij. Agrimony,
Sorrel, Hart's-tongue, Borrage, Bugloss, A. M. j. Caraway-seeds j. being
bruised, put upon them, Whey (made the common way from Milk) lb iij. strain out
by Expression, and sweeten with white Sugar iij. clarifying it, S. A. Dose, a
Pint at a time twice a day.

Salmon.] 1. Here is sixteen Handfuls of the Herbs to lb iij. of the Whey,
which is too little if used only to wash out the Juice: it ought indeed to be
nearly the double quantity; which when the Juice of the Herbs is expressed out
with it, is to be clarified with the Whites of Eggs by boiling.

2. Being clarified you ought to sweeten it with double or trebble refined Loaf
Sugar jx. (for iij. to the half quantity will not make it sweet enough.)

3. It opens Obstructions of the Liver, cools and strengthens it, and allays
violent heats, and the preternatural Fermentations of the Blood and Humors; and
therefore is good to be given to Children and young People in the Spring time;
and helps such as have the Rickets.

4. It is also a singular Antiscorbutick, and good for such as are troubled
with Botches, Boils, Itchings, and other Breakings out, in a hot Constitution
of Body. Dose, a Pint three or four times a day.

XIX. Serum Scorbuticum. A Whey against the Scurvy.
Bate.] Leaves of Succory and Sorrel, A. M. xij. Fir-tops, Scurvy Grass,
Watercresses, A. M. iv. Coriander-seeds j. being bruised, add to them the
Juice of Oranges iv. Common Whey of Milk lb iv. white Sugar ij. clarify S. A.
Dose, a Pint twice a day.

Salmon.] 1. Here is thirty eight Handfuls of the Herbs to two Quarts of Whey,
which is nothing near enough to wash out the Juice; less than five Quarts of
Whey will not do, to do it as it should be done.

2. The Juice of Oranges (which are to be Sevil) also is too little for that
proportion of Herbs xvj. is the least quantity that you can put in, which I
would avise to have added after the Juice is extracted or washed out with the
Whey.

3. The Juice of the Herbs being extracted out with the Whey, and the Juice of
the Oranges added, clarify the whole with the Whites of three or four Eggs;
and afterward while warm dulcifie it with trebble refined Loaf Sugar jx. or x.
and keep it for use.

4. You may take a Pint of it at a time in the Morning fasting: a Pint an hour
or something better before Dinner: a Pint about four or five in the Afternoon:
and a Pint at Night going to Bed: if the Patient refuses it in so large a
quantity, let it be given only Morning, Noon, and Night, about three quarters
of a Pint at a time, or according to the Age. Condition and Circumstances of
the Patient.

XX. Serum de Sedo, Whey of Housleek.
Bate.] Juice of common Housleek lb j. Milk lb ij. boil them together, and make
a Whey, S. A. Dose, a Pint or a Quart in a day. Its chief use is in Choleric
Fevers, to quench Thirst, repress the Heat, etc.

Salmon.] 1. If to the Whey when made you add Juice of Sevil Oranges ij. and
double refined Sugar iss. it will be pleasanter, and more fit for the occasion.

2. Besides the Uses mentioned by our Author, it may be given in all sorts of
burning and malignant Fevers; but before the use of it in the beginning of the
Disease, I should advise an Emetick to be once or twice given.

3. It is said to kill Worms, and being used for some time (without the Juice
of Oranges) to stop hot Fluxes, cool the Reins, and stay the Whites in Women.

XXI. Serum Sinapinum, Mustard Seed Whey.
Bate.] Milk lb ij. heat it, and add Mustard new made, three Spoonfuls, so as
to make a clear Whey, which strain out for one Dose, or time. It is a singular
thing against a Cough, Asthma, etc. Let it be drank at Bedtime warm, and so
likewise in the Morning fasting for three or four days.

Salmon.] 1. The Medicine is of thin parts, and a good opener of Obstructions,
and therefore may very well be good against Asthma's, Wheasings, Hoarseness,
and Shortness of Breath.

2. It purges by Urine, and opens Obstructions of the Reins and Bladder; and
being continued for twenty days or more, is said to prevail against a Dropsy.

3. Outwardly used, it allays Inflammations, and by bathing with it hot, gives
ease in the most vehement Pains of the Gout, more especially, if you dissolve
in it ij. of Salt of Tartar, applying Cloths wet in the same, over the part
afflicted.

CHAP. XII. Of WINES.
I. Succi Scorbutici, Wine of the Antiscorbutick Juices.
Bate.] OF the Juices of both sorts of Scurvy Grass, Brook-lime, Watercresses,
A. xvj. Juice of Oranges xx. white Sugar xij. mix them, and pass them often
through Hippocrates his Sleeve, till the whole becomes of a Rubicund clearness,
like to Red or Claret Wine. It may be kept long, if reposed in Glass Bottles,
and will be of a very grateful Taste. Dose, a Spoonful at a time in every
draught of Ale: or iv. of it at a time, twice a day.

Salmon.] 1. It will not become clear and rubicund till it has past a
Fermentation, and then it needs only to settle, and to be drawn off the Feces
into Bottles, and it will be a kind of Wine of the Juices of those Plants.

2. It is possible it might ferment without the Sugar, but the Fermentation
will be better and sooner absolved, if the Sugar be put into the Juices at
first: after fermentation, upon the bottling of the Wine, you ought to put a
small Knives point full of double refined Sugar, and a Clove slit in twon, into
each Bottle.

3. It is prevalent not only against the Scurvy, but all such as are akin to
it, which proceed from an acid, viscous and tartarous Matter, obstructing the
Bowels, or any of their Passages, as Catarrhs, Rheumatisms, Gouts, Scorbutic
Cholicks, etc.

II. Vinum Arthriticum, A Wine against the Gout.
Bate.] Sarsaparilla, Guajacum, A. j. Viscus Quercinus vj. dried Leaves of
Germander, Ground Pine, Sage, A. iij. Cowslip-flowers, Flowers of Rosemary, of
Lilly convally, A. ss. Hypericon vj. White Wind lb x. infuse all three days,
then strain out. Dose, ij. twice a day for thirty or forty days together, after
the use of the Wine in the next Section.

Salmon.] 1. If you add to the Composition Burdock-roots bruised ij. Goutwort,
Roots of Master-wort bruised, A. j. Herb frankincense ss. it will certainly be
so much the better.

2. If to the White Wind lb x. you add Spirit of Wine lb j. the Menstruum will
not only be the more able to draw forth the Virtue of the Ingredients; but the
Wine it self will afterward keep longer and better.

3. It prevails not only against the Gout, but also against Rheumatisms, and
other Pains and Weaknesses of the Limbs and Joints: It is also good against
Catarrhs, and all cold and moist Diseases of the Head, Brain, and Nerves,
Universals being premised for some time, or the use of the following Wine.

III. Vinum Arthriticum purgans, A Purging Gout-wine.
Bate.] China, Sarsaparilla. A. ij. Polypody iij. Rhubarb, Sena, A. j. Hoglice
vj. Cloves j. White Wind lb vj. Infuse S. A. and strain. Dose, iv. daily for
eight days, Spring and Fall.

Salmon] 1. This is a good thing as it is, but to make it more effectual to all
intententions you ought to add these following things: Jalap, Turbeth,
Hermodacts, Scammony, A. vj. all being in gross Powder.

2. You ought also to augment the quantity of the Menstruum, thus: White Wind
lb jx. Spirit of Wine lb j. for by the addition of the Spirit, the Menstruum
will be both acuated the better to extract the Virtues of the Ingredients; and
when made, it will keep the longer.

3. Thus prepared it will be a specific Cathartick against the Gout, and
Rheumatism or Running-Gout; and withal, it will purge all Humors from all parts
of the Body, and prevail against most Chronick diseases, as the Green Sickness
in Virgins, universal Obstructions Dropsies, Jaundice, French Pox, etc.

4. You may if you please give it thus. Of th^^ Wine iij. or iiiss. Syrup (...)
Roses purging j. mix for Dose, to be given in the Morning fasting, for several
days together.

IV. Vinum Chalybeatum, Steeled Wine.
Bate.] Crude Mars viij. Roots of Eryngo, Elecampane, A. j ss. yellow Sanders
j. raspings of Ivory, red Coral in Powder, A. vj. Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon,
Ginger, A. iij. Ceterach or Spleenwort, Flowers of Rosemary, of Broom
Epithymum, A. pug. ij. White Wind lb vj. digest all in B. M. for eight days,
often shaking it: being settled, filter and keep it for use. Dose, three
Spoonfuls to six, etc. every Morning for twenty, thirty, etc. days, against the
Green Sickness, Droposie, Jaundice, Ob^tructions of the Terms, Quartan Agues,
etc.

Salmon.] 1. That is, take Horse Shooe-nails, Hob-nails, or the like old Iron;
but you need not be confined to the quantity, for you may put in a Pound or
two, or more of them as you please your self.

2. I disapprove of the Ivory and red Coral; for being fixed Al^^lies they will
destroy the Acid of the Wine which is the principal Instrument for drawing
forth the internal Property of the Mars; do but once destroy that, and the
Medicament will not be a quarter so good.

3. It is better to be made cold than in any digestion; for a hot digestion
will turn the Wine wholly into Vinegar, and as it is without being made
Vinegar, it has Acid enough to do the work withal: if you do it in a cold
digestion, it ought to stand eight Weeks at least; and if eight Months it will
be so much the more effectual shaking the Bottle once a day: after the first
Month add to the Composition Spirit of Wine lbj. by which after the Body of the
Mars has been opened by the former digestion, it will be now acuated more
powerfully to extract the Tincture.

V. Vinum E^phracticum, A Wine opening Obstructions.
Bate.] Live Earthworms, having a red Circle on their Necks, No 24. bruise them
in a Marble Mortar with Currants cleansed iv. adding Rhenish-wine lb iij
Crystal Mineral (dissolved in the Wine) ss. strain, and make it very limpid
and pure, by often passing it through Hippocrates his Sleeve. Dose iij. thrice
a day, with Aqua Cinnamomi hordeata j. It is a noble Diuretic.

Salmon.] 1. It is a nasty unpleasing Medicine, and doubtful whether it has the
Virtues ascribed to it, farther than what is given to it by the Wine and
Crystal Mineral.

2. In my Opinion, it is better to make the Wine exactly without the Worms,
adding to it Horse-raddishroot scraped or bruised j ss. and then drying the
Worms gently. to reduce them into powder, of which j. may be taken at a time in
the Morning fasting, drinking two or three Ounces, or more of the Wine either
alone, or mixed with a Glass of Ale.

3. Made after this Method, it is really deobstructive, and purges by Urine
very well, prevailing against Stone, Gravel, and other tartarous Matters
obstructing the Passages of the Urine, as also against Stoppages of the
Stomach, Liver, Spleen, Womb, etc.

VI. Vinum Hippocraticum; Artificial Wine, or Hippocras.
Bate.] Cloves, Ginger, A. j. Cinnamon, Nutmegs, A. ij. bruise them, and add
Spanish Wine or Canary lb xij. white Sugar lb iij ss. mix with new Milk lb ij
ss. let them stand twenty four hours, then strain: to which add one Limon thin
sliced, and two tender sprigs of Rosemary; often passing it through Hippocrates
his Sleeve, till it becomes clear. Dose, iij. vel iv. in Languors or Faintings.

Salmon.] 1. You may see several other Prescripts of Hippocras in our Doron
Medicum, Lib. 1. Cap. 24. Sect. 40. and 41. and Lib. 2. Cap. 15. Sect. 4. and
5. which you may at your own leisure view, and compare with this.

2. If you add white Pepper ss. it will make the Composition more grateful to
the Stomach. And for such as love Perfumes, you may add also Musk-seed ss.
which digest with the other things.

3. It is a singular Cordial, good against fainting and swooning Fits, and for
such as have a cold and weak Stomach, or are troubled with Belchings, Gripings,
Wind, and the like.

VII. Vinum Hydropicum, A Wine against the Dropsy.
Bate.] Our blett Flower-de-luce Roots j. Elecampane, Squills prepared, A. ss.
Horehound, M. j. Bark of the Roots of Elder and dwarf Elder, A. j. Sena jss.
Agrick ij. Ginger j. White Wind lb iv. infuse all and strain according to Art.
Or thus. Ashes of Broom and Juniper, A. j. Rhenish-wine lb iij. mix and make a
Lixivium, to which add, of our blew Flower-de-luce Roots j ss. inner Bark of
the Roots of Elder and dwarf Elder, A. j. Bark of Amaradulcis ss. Rhubarb ij.
Mechoacan ss. Sena j. Caraways-seeds vj. Bark of Sassafras, and Winters
Cinnamon, A. iv. infuse warm for a night, strain and add white Sugar iv. Damask
Rose-Leaves, M. ij. let them stand a little while, and strain again. Dose, iij.
etc. every Morning for some days.

Salmon.] 1. I should like the Composition much better thus. Blew
Flower-de-luce Roots, Sena, A. ij. inner Bark of the Roots of Elder and dwarf
Elder A. j ss. Turbeth, Mechoacan, A. j. Jallap ss. Juniper Berries iij. White
or Rhenish Wine lb vij. Spirit of Wine lb iss. mix, digest four or five days,
strain, and sweeten with Syrup of Damask Roses lbj. mix well, and keep it for
use.

2. I add the Spirit of Wine in this Composition, that the Menstruum may have
the greater power to draw forth the resinous parts of the Turbeth, Mechoacan
and Jallap, which the simple Wine of it self would scarcely be able to do.

3. It is singular against the Dropsy, and all sorts of watery Humors
wheresoever scattered through the whole Body, which it evacuates, very gently,
and yet performs its work almost to a Miracle: it is good also against the
Scurvy, King's Evil, and other inveterate and rebellious Diseases.

VIII. Vinum Scelotyrbicum, Wine against the Scurvy.
Bate.] Sorrel, Brooklime, and Watercresses, Garden Scurvy Grass, A. M. iij.
Roots of Elecampane, of our blew Flower-de-luce, Horse-Raddish, A. iss. Seeds
of Scurvy Grass j. White Wind lb iv. digest all for two days, then strain out.
The Title shows the Virtues.

Salmon.] 1. You may add to the Recipe Garden Cresses, Rocket, A. M. j. Roots
of Masterwort, Winter Cinnamon, A. iss. whereby the Medicine will be made the
more Stomatick.

2. And to the Menstruum it will be necessary to add Spirit of Wine vj. or
viij. to acuate it, and make it more powerful for Extraction.

3. It is singular good against the Scurvy, Dropsy, Jaundice, and Gout: it
warms the Stomach, and alters a cold Habit of Body, destroying the Root of that
Matter which breeds viscous and tarous Humors. It provokes Urine and the Terms,
and expels Sand, Gravel, and Stones out of the Reins, Ureters, and Bladder.
Dose, iij. or iv. twice a day, either alone, or in a Glass of Ale.

IX. Vinum Viperinum, Viper Wine.
Bate.] Live Female Vipers, gathered in the Spring time, No vj. best Spanish
wine, or Canary lb vj. digest them (the Vessel being stopped) without heat for
six Months, then strain out for use. Some make it by digesting the Vipers
excoriated (and casting away the Bowels, Heads and Tails) in the Wine before
namod for some days. It is a most celebrated thing against the Lepra Grecorum,
or Leprosy, the Elephantiasus, Barreness Plague etc. and prolongs Life. Dose,
iij. or iv. twice a day for some considerable time.

Salmon.] 1. The way of making it is explicated more at large in our Doron
Medicum, Lib. 1. Cap. 24. Sect. 39. with its Virtues and Uses, to which you are
referred.

2. In weak and consumptive Habits of Body; you may exhibit it thus. Of this
Wine iiiss. Confectio Alkermes j. Tincture of Cinnamon ss. or in place thereof
Oil of Cinnamon, gut. j. or ij. mix for a Dose, to be given first in the
Morning fasting, and last at Night going to bed.

3. Or thus, in an extreme Consumption, or an Impotency. Of this Wine iij. Salt
of Ox-flesh, gr. vj. Milk-water iv. mix for a Dose, to be given Morning and
Evening.

CHAP. XIII. Of VINEGARS.
I. Acetum Mellis; Vinegar of Honey.
Bate.] Honey lbj. of the best Vinegar lb iij. distill in Sand, and rectify.
Besides it other Uses, it is said to dissolve Stones without any preceding
Calcination.

Salmon.] 1. But there is a simple Vinegar made of Honey without distillation,
which according to Le Febure, is thus. Honey lb j. depurated Rainwater lb
viij. boil to the Consumption of one half, scumming it well: when it is cooled,
put into it a Nodule containing the following things, Seeds of Sumach grossly
beaten lbj. leave the Cask in a warm Room, if it be Winter, or expose it to the
heat of the Sun, if it be Summer, till the Liquor has done fermenting or
working, so will it by degrees, slowly turn into good Vinegar; which may be
distilled as the former for the same Uses.

2. It is an excellent Menstruum for the dissolving of Pebble-stones, and all
other things, though not calcined before; and this is that Vinegar which
Quercetan calls in his Writings, Philosophical Vinegar; and in the same
Writings he often intends Honey, under the appellation of Dew or Heavenly Manna.

3. This simple Vinegar Le Mort makes after this manner. Honey lbj. common
Water lb x. boil them to a Consumption of a fourth part; being cooled, add
sour Leven of Bread, q. s. viz. about the bigness of half a small Egg; let
them ferment together in the Sun, (or for want of it in some other warm place,
or a very gentle Sand-heat:) the Fermentation being absolved, add the follow
things. Fresh or dry Rape, or the Pressings of Grapes lb iiss. sour Leven of
Bread iss. or ij. Roots of Pyrethrum, and Ginger, or long Pepper ij. mix all
these things together in one Mass, and put them in the middle of the Rape: then
to facilitate the Work, let two like Vessels be furnished with this Mixture: to
these in one Vessel affuse the Liquor, macerating together for twenty four
hours; then pour the Liquor into the other Vessel having the Species in it; and
digest as before for twenty four hours; then pour off the Liquor again into the
first Vessel, the Materials therein being grown hot, and repeat this work so
long, till you find it acid enough.

4. Where Note, 1. That to accelerate this Operation, you may moisten the
Ingredients, with a little Wine-Vinegar, and digest them together, till they
grow hot of themselves, and then affuse thereon the Liquor: and this Commixtion
being placed in a warm place, or the Sun, not absolutely close covered, nor yet
absolutely open, and so kept for a while becomes Vinegar of its own accord.

5. If this Work be done in a Vessel which has had beforehand S. V. in it; or
if a little S. V. be added to it, your Vinegar will be the stronger, and the
Work will the sooner be done. 6. That every fourteen days you ought to renew
your Bag of Species; and ever twenty four hours to shift the Liquor of one
Vessel into another, that it may grow hot or warm, so that having the one
Vessel full, the other will always alternately be empty. 4. From the Vinegar of
Honey thus made, you may make the distilled Vinegar of Honey of our Author.

II. Acetum Pestilentiale, Vinegar against the Plague.
Bate] Roots of Angelica, Zedoary, A. j. Juniper Berries ij. Rue, M. iij. best
Wine Vinegar lb iij. mix, digest, and strain. It is used for a Fume; and to
wa^h and gargle the Mouths and Throats of such as are assaulted with the Plague.

Salmon.] 1. If Camphire ij. fine Powder of Bay Berries, and Winters Cinnamon,
A. ss. Spirit of Wine viij. be added; the Medicine will be much more spiritous
and effectual to the Purposes intended.

2. For preservation, let it be smelt to, or drawn up the Nostrils every
Morning; thrice a day let the Mouth be washed therewith; and every Morning
fasting let one or two Spoonfuls of it be taken in a Glass of Sack; or in two
Spoonfuls of our Syrupus Nephriticus which is also a Specific against the
Plague.

3. For Cure, it is to be given in all that the Sick drinks, making the drink
pleasantly sharp; and if it be Broth, give it therewith, to a grateful Acidity.

III. Oxysaccharum Emeticum. A sugared Vomiting Vinegar.
Bate.] Glass of Antimony in fine Powder j. of the best Vinegar lb j. digest in
B.M. (often stirring it) for twenty four hours: strain out filter, and add the
best white Sugar viij. boil to a Syrup. Dose, ad j. or more.

Salmon.] 1. You may put in a Quart of Vinegar, (which ought to be of
White Wind) at a time, often stirring or shaking of the Bottle in which it is
put: and it is best to let the Vinegar stand upon the Powder all the time, till
you have spent the quantity, pouring it off, only as you have occasion to use
it.

2. Of this Vinegar you may give ad vj. or more, sweetning it with some proper
Syrup, or dissolving ij. or iij. of double refined Sugar in it, and so giving
it in the Morning fasting.

3. It is a famed thing against all sorts of Agues, whether Quotidian, Tertian,
or Quartan, and seldom fails to cure them, if given by a skilful Hand: it ought
not to be given in the Fit, but on the day the Fit is not, or otherwise so many
hours before the coming of the Fit, as that the working of it may be fully
over; and to be repeated two, three, or four times as need shall be: after
which you ought to exhibit the Cortex in Powder, a j. ad ij. every day for
twelve or fourteen days together, not purging after it.

4. It is good also against weakness and illness of the Stomach pain of the
Stomach, Soorbutick Cholick, indigestion and want of Appetite, evacuating both
upwards and downwards all those tenacious, viscous and tartarous Humors in the
Ventricle and Bowels, which are the Cause of almost infinite Diseases.

5. When this quantity of Vinegar is spent, you may affuse the like quantity
again, repeating the same almost ad infinitum, so vastly diffussive is the
wonderful and admirable Power and Virtues of this Mineral.

Added by the Translator.

IV. Acetum Terebinthinatum, vel Radicatum Crollij, Radicate Vinegar of
Crollius.
Salmon.] 1. Of Turpentine lb ij. or iij. Spirit of Wine Vinegar lb ij. mix and
distill according to Art in Sand, at first with a gentle heat, until the Vinegar
with the Spirit of Turpentine become forth; afterward increase the Fire, and a
yellow Oil will come forth and a sharp red Water; when the red Oil begins to
come forth, then cease the Work: Separate the Spirit of Turpentine and Oil from
the Vinegar, by a separatory, and rectify the Vinegar, alone by it self.

2. This distilled Spirit of Turpentine being often rectified may be kept, and
afterward joined with most strong Vinegar, or Spirit of Vinegar, and used for
the like Operations of dissolving as the former; but the former is accounted
the stronger and better.

3. Hartman makes it thus. Turpentine, White Wind Vinegar, A. lb iij. put them
into a Retort, and distill in Ashes or Sand, till the red Oil arises, then
change the Receiver, separate the Oil of Turpentine from the Vinegar, and
rectify the Vinegar alone with Ginger: but a little before this, he advises to
distill in Ashes making a Cohobation; by which in three times, the Vinegar will
be made sweet, and not at all tart; yet of great force in dissolving all sorts
of precious Stones.

4. Spirit of Vinegar may also be made radicate, and more strong if it be
distilled a new upon Sal Armoniack according to Marggrave.

5. The Uses of the Terebinthinated or radicate Vinegar (which should always be
ready prepared in good quantities) is for the dissolution of all sorts of
Stones, chiefly precious Stones, of which Crollius and Hartman make much
mention. And it is used by Paracelsus against Diseases of the Stone, by giving
it in a proper or specific Vehicle.

V. Acetum Radicatum Hartmanni^ Harman 's Radicate Vinegar.
Salmon.] 1. Of the best Honey p. j. River-water p. viij. boil till half be
consumed; set it to ferment as Mead or Metheglin: then put this into a fit
Vessel, and by a hole on the top, hang a Linen Bag of Rocket-seed of a
convenient quantity, and leave it in a hot place, or set it in the Sun, that it
may be hot, so will it be converted into sharp Vinegar.

2. From this either alone, or mixed with an equal quantity of Turpentine distill
a very sharp or radicate Spirit, according to the former Method.

3. This in like manner, as the other will dissolve Flints, and other Stones
also, without any preceding Calcination; and is also profitable for many other
uses.

4. Where note, That if it has power to dissolve such hard Substances without
Calcination; it has much more power to do the same, if they have passed such a
preparatory Operation of the Fire.

CHAP. XIV. Of INFVSIONS.
I. Rosa Solis, The Infusion of Ros Solis.
Bate.] FResh Rosa Solis, or Sun-dew, M. iv. Nutmegs, Aniseeds, Coriander, Red
Roses dried, A. ss. Galangal, Ginger, Cloves, A. ij. Liquorice j. Cardamoms,
Zedoary, Grains of Paradise, Calamus, Aromaticus, A. ss. yellow Sanders j. red
Sanders, Cinnamon, A. vj. best Aqua Vitae lb vj. infuse for some days, then
strain through Hippocrates his Sleeve, and add of the best white Sugar xij. It is
good against a Phthisis or Consumption of the Lungs, a Tabes or Pining, etc. It
comforts the Heart, Liver, and Ventricle; eases the Pain of the Head, and is a
preservative from the Plague, etc. Dose, ij, iij, etc.

Salmon.] 1. The Nutmegs ought to be grated; the other Spices, Seeds, Roots and
Woods, to be reduced into a gross Powder, and then all put into the Aqua Vitae.

2. The digestion ought to be in a very gentle Sand-heat, for at least fourteen
or twenty days; a much shorter time will not be sufficient to draw forth the
Virtue of the Ingredients.

3. If the Aq. Vitae be accuated with Oil of Sulphur iij. or iv. It will make
it the more powerful to do the work of Extraction, and it will be done in a
great deal less time.

4. It is a singular Cordial, good against fainting and swooning Fits,
palpitation of the Heart, Vapors, Wind, illness of the Spleen, Pain and Griping
of the Guts, sickness at Heart and Stomach, and other Diseases of like kind.

5. There is another Composition of this Medicament in other Proportions which
you may see in our Pharmacopoeia Londinensis, Lib. 4. Cap. 1. Sect 36. and two
others in our Doron Medicum, Lib. 1. Cap. 24. Sect. 16. and 17. in which places
you have their various Virtues and Uses.

II. Infusio Aperiens, The opening Infusion.
Bate.] Flowers of Elder, Tops of Broom, A. pug. iij. The lesser Centory, pug.
ij. Tops of common Wormwood, Camomil Flowers, A. pug. j. Waters of Pennyroyal,
of Hyssop, of Mint, of Raddishes compound, A. iv. infuse all warm for two
hours; strain out, and add Tincture of Saffron ss. Syrup of the Juice of
Oranges iss. mix them. Dose, six Spoonfuls twice a day.

Salmon.] 1. This is no mighty Arcanum, and so much the worse, because the
Menstruum is so weak: If you accuate it with Sal Prunellae or Salt of Tartar
ij. or iij. it will not only be more powerful for Extraction but the Infusion,
will be much a greater aperitive in its Operation.

2. It opens Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, Hypochonders, Womb and Reins;
is a good Stomatick, and prevails against the Scurvy Dropsy, Jaundice, Gout
and Rheumatism.

3. You may take it for eight or ten days or more three times a day, viz. in
the Morning fasting, an hour before Dinner; and last at Night going to Bed.
Dose, six Spoonfuls to twelve or more.

III. Infusio Arthritica, The Gout Infusion.
Bate.] Rosemary-flowers lb j. Votatile Sal Armoniack j. Alcohol of S. V. lb
vj. digest in a Mattress, Bolt head or Glass Bottle well stopped, in Horse-dung,
for forty days: then set it in the Sun for twenty days, and express out. It is
applied in the declination of the Gout: It wonderfully extracts or draws forth
the Cold, thick and flatulent Humors in the Joints, and strengthens them.

Salmon.] 1. If you add Camphire iij. you will make the Medicament much the
better for the Intention, and it will become a Specific in that Disease, being
bathed upon the part two or three times a day.

2. But besides the outward use of it, it ought to be used inwardly twice or
thrice a day, giving about half a Spoonful of it at a time in a Glass of Ale or
Canary.

3. I have known it cure also the Cholick and Griping of the Guts to a Miracle,
and that almost in a moment, even while I have stood by my Patient and seen it
administered, and that after many Weeks trial of many other things, and when all
others had failed; nor do I know scarcely any other thing in the World better
against a Rheumatism.

4. In the making of it, it will be best to have a double Vessel well luted in
the Juncture, for otherwise you will very difficultly keep it in any heat
without breaking: And without a double Vessel, you must be obliged to make the
digestion in a cold place.

IV. Infusio Benedicta, The blessed Infusion.
Bate.] Roots of Polypody of the Oak, Turbeth, the best Sena, A. vj. Caraways
j. White Wind lb xij. the Vessel being stopped close, macerate them upon warm
Ashes for twenty four hours, strain, and to the Colature add of the best Manna,
Syrup of Roses with Agarick, Sugar, A. lb. j. then clarify with whites of
Eggs, S. A. It brings forth Choler, Phlegm and Melancholy, from the Head,
Stomach, and other parts, after an admirable manner, and that without any
trouble. Dose, iv. ad vj.

Salmon.] 1. You ought to add S. V. lb j. to the Menstruum, else it will
scarcely be strong enough to extract the Resinous parts of the Turbeth, in
which the chief purging Property lies.

2. It is a general Purger, and purges well, if given in a Dose large enough:
It carries off Scorbutic Humors, and is an excellent thing against Dropsies,
Gouts, Rheumatisms, King's Evil, inveterate Head-Achs, Obstructions of the
Womb, hurts of the Nerves, Palsies, Convulsions, etc.

3. It may be given in the Morning fasting to vj. or more, according to the
Age, Strength, and Habit of the Body.

V. Infusio Cachectica, An Infusion against the Cachexia, or evil Habit of Body.
Bate.] Fresh Roots of Elecampane cut thin vj. Currants cut or chopped small
viij. white Sugar vj. White wine lb iij. digest them cold for forty eight
hours, and then strain. Dose, iv. twice a day in a Cachexia, Green Sickness,
Dyspnaea, or difficulty of Breathing.

Salmon.] 1. It will do well if you add to the Composition, Raisons of the Sun
stoned viij. which will make it much more pectoral.

2. It prevails against all sorts of Coughs, Colds, Wheazings, Hoarseness,
Shortness of Breath, loss of Voice, Ulcers of the Lungs, Spitting Blood, and
other Distempers of those parts.

3. You may with all the safety imaginable give from vj. ad viij. at a time,
twice a day, and in an extreme Cough you may take two or three Ounces of it, as
often as the Cough troubles you.

VI. Infusio Icterica, An Infusion against the Yellow Jaundice.
Bate.] Fresh Goosedung vj. Celandine M. ij. White Wind, simple
Celandine-water, A. lb j. infuse warm for vj. hours; then add white Sugar ij.
dissolve and strain often through Hippocrates his Sleeve. Dose, iiij. twice a day.

Salmon.] 1. I should advise to add Hempseed bruised, Turmerick sliced, A. vj.
Salt of Tartar or Potashes iij. Saffron j. by which the Infusion will be made
the more effectual.

2. Thus composed, it is a Specific against the Yellow Jaundice, and by reason
of the fixed Salt will carry off much of the Morbifick cause by Urine: if
afterward the Patient be made to sweat ten or twenty Nights, by exhibiting my
Volatile Laudanum, the Disease vanishes to a wonder; for often sweating is
truly essential to the Cure.

3. You may (if prepared with the addition here prescribed) give it safely
enough, ad vj. and that twice a day: it opens Obstructions, and provokes Urine
powerfully.

VII. Infusio Ireata, Infusion of Flower-de-luce Roots.
Bate.] Of our blew Flower-de-luce Roots, fresh gathered, and thin sliced,
Raisons stoned and cut small, white Sugar, A. vj. Whitewine, new Ale, A. lb
iij. digest three days, then strain out. It is given a draught at a time
Morning and Evening against the Scurvy, Dropsy etc.

Salmon.] 1. It is a singular thing against the Cachexia, as well as Scurvy and
Dropsy; and carries-off thick, viscous, and tartarous Humors which breed the
Stone and Gout to a wonder: and being used for sometime it prevails against a
Rheumatism.

2. You had best to digest in a cool place (not in any actual heat) for fear of
making it sour, which it is apt to be: and for that reason, you must continue
the Digestion for at least four or five days: but in this you must be regulated
in part by the Season of the Year; for if done in the Winter, it requires a
longer time of digestion than if done in the Summer.

3. The Dose generally given, is a Pint at a time, but you ought to regulate
it, according to the Age and Strength of the Patient: to Children, and such as
are weak you may give half a Pint Plus-minus.

VIII. Infusio Sancta, An Infusion of Guajacum.
Bate.] Guajacum ix. Salt of Tartar iv. Liquorice iv. Fountain Water lb xx. mix
and digest warm for six days; then strain out. It is a noble Alexipharmick; it
purifies the Blood, takes away Obstructions and Putrefaction, and admirably
preserves Health: it prevails much also against the Scurvy, Dropsy, Fevers,
French Pox, Gout, and other Diseases proceeding from Tarrarous Humors. Dose,
vj. four times a day.

Salmon.] 1. It drys up watery Humors in the Dropsy; but was chiefly designed
as a Diet against the French Pox, and all the Symptomata belonging to the same.

2. But it ought not to be used in thin, hot, dry, and tabid Constitutions, for
in such (my own Experience has confirmed it to me) it does much more hurt than
good.

3. It is an Alcali, and absorbs the Acid Humor after a singular manner, and
therefore is of singular use in all such Diseases proceeding from Acidities.

4. If any object that the Spirit of Guajacum is Acid, and therefore this
cannot be true; to that we answer; that there are differing Acids in Nature,
and such as are opposite to one another, and will destroy one another, as they
who are acquainted with Chemical Precipitations can tell; besides the stronger
Acid overcomes and destroys the weaker: but in this Infusion there is no such
thing, for if any Acidity be in it, it is yet latent, and not stirred up, or
put into act; And that the contrary is manifest from this, for if the Chips
after the Infusion be distilled in a Retort, you would have still the full
quantity of Acid Spirit from them, and in the same Proportion, as if no
previous Infusion had been made.

An Appendix to this Chapter, Concerning DRINKS.

IX. Cerevisia Butleri, Dr. Butler's Ale.
Bate.] Betony, Sage, Agrimony, Garden Scurvy Grass, Roman Wormwood, A. M.
iij. Roots of Elecampane, of Horse-raddish, A. iv. mix and put them into a Bag,
with a Stone in its bottom, which hang in four Gallons of new Ale. It is a
Cephalic, Stomatick, Hepatick, Splenetick, Pulmonick, Diuretic, etc. It
rectifies the Blood, makes sixth and crude Humors Volatile; attenuates and
expels the tartarous Matter, in the Breast and Lungs, as also in the Reins:
prevails against the Cachexia, Dropsy, Scurvy, Hypochondriack Melancholy, etc.
It may be used as common Drink, but at least drank three times a day.

Salmon.] 1. It is used by some as a Panpharmacom, but what Diseases it will
absolutely cure I think is scarcely determined: this is certain, it is a great
opener and purifier of the Blood, by putting the Juices of the Body into a
Fermentation.

2. It is also certain, that much good cannot be expected from it, except it be
assiduously used, and that for some considerable time, for by such a constant
use of it, it makes great changes and alterations in the Body.

3. When you begin the use of it, it will be necessary once a Week to take some
proper Purge, that there may be an Excretion of the Morbifick Matter, which by
the Virtue of this Drink is seggregated.

X. Cerevisia Catapsoras, Drink against Scabs, Itch, and Breakings out in the
the Skin.
Bate.] Sena vj. Mechoacan iij. Liquorice iss. Ca aways j. Roots of sharp
pointed Dock lb iss. Polypodie, Madder, A. lb ss. Scabious, Agrimony, A. M.
iij. Crude Antimony in gross Powder lbj. mix and make a Bag, for five or six
Gallons of Ale. It purges the Blood, and is admirably good against the Itch,
Scabs, and other Defedations of the Skin, which it cures. It is given a Pint at
a time, (Plus-minus) twice a day for some days.

Salmon.] 1. It opens the Body powerfully, and purges singularly well; but the
use of it must be continued for about thirty days, else it will scarcely have
the desired Effect.

2. You must vary the Dose according to the Age and Strength of the Patient:
for in some Constitutions a Pint hereof will give at least twenty Stools or
more, whilst in others it will not give above three or four.

3. In this Case it will be good to begin with a lesser Dose at first, and as
you find that works to either increase or diminish it; and so continually
altering the quantity, till you find what will exactly fit that Constitution.

4. If the Body is very foul, it will be necessary to give a Vomit as
preparatory to the use of this; after which you will find this to do its work
much more kindly you affectually: In this case you may use the Apozem at Sect.
1. Chap. 15. following.

XI. Cerevisia Embryonum A drink to strengthen the Child in the Womb, and
prevent Abortion.
Bate.] Raspings of Lignum Cotoneum lbj. white Sanders Ivory, A. iv. Oak Most
ij. Roots of Tormentil iss. Bistort j. Nutmegs, Coriander-seed, A. vj. Raisons
lb iss. mix and put them into a Bag. which hang in six Gallons of new Ale. Let
it be drank as ordinary drink; it prevents Abortion, strengthens the weak
Foetus, and confirms the Ligaments of the Womb.

Salmon.] 1. In using of this, where there is great danger of Abortion, it will
be good to put into each draught of Drink, as often as you drink it, half a
Spoonful or better of the Tincture of Carechis, for this alone Medicament does
in this Case more than any other yet known in the World.

2. And thus used, it strengthens a weak Back, prevails against Pains, Gripings
of the Bowels, stops the Terms in Women, or any other Flux of Blood, by
restraining its unnatural Fermentation.

3. It stops Fluxes of the Bowels of all sorts Diarrhaea's, Dysenteria's, and
Lienteria's, and is good against the Hepatick Flux, also pissing of Blood, and
strengthens such as are weak and inclinable to a Consumption.

XII. Cerevisia Hydropica. A Drink against the Dropsy.
Bate.] Hore-hound, Hart's-tongue, Liverwort, Wormwood, Sorrel, A. a full
Handful: cut them, and put them into Barley-Paste, baking them in an Oven; then
break the Paste with the Herbs into bits; add Salt of Wormwood ij. put all into
a Bag, which hang in four Gallons of new Ale. Let it be drank as common drink:
for so it has cured many of the Dropsy.

Salmon.] 1. I wonder what ij. of Salt of Wormwood can do with four Gallons of
Ale: an Ounce is as little as can be put in.

2. If to the Composition you add Broom Tops M. iss. Inner Bark of Roots of
Elder iv. blew Flower-de-luce Roots sliced ij. Mustard Seed j. the Preparation
will be so much the more effectual.

3. If thus prepared, it may be drank three or four times a day, half a Pint or
more at a time; and being continued for one whole Month, you will see a famous
alteration in order to the Cure of the Disease, whether Cachexia, Dropsy,
Jaundice, Gout, or King's Evil.

XIII. Cerevisia Jovialis, Drink with Filings of Jupiter, or Tin.
Bate.] Filings of Tin lb j. white Sanders, raspings of Ivory, A. iij. Raisons
lbj. Roman Wormwood, Hart's-tongue, Paul's Bettony, Agrimony, A. M. ij. yellow of
Orange-peels ij. mix and make a Bag for four Gallons of new Ale, for ordinary
drink. It has a peculiar Property in curing Diseases of the Womb; it is also
Hepatick, and Splenetick.

Salmon.] 1. The Filings of Tin had best be put up into a Bag by themselves,
which Bag may be put up into the other Bag with the rest of the Ingredients, by
which means the Tin will be saved and serve again, as often as you shall have
occasion to use it.

2. It is said to be a Specific in opening Obstructions of Liver, Spleen, and
Womb, but in my Opinion it would be much more powerful if you added to the
Composition, old Horse-Nails lb ij. which may be digested in a small quantity
of Ale beforehand for a Month, and then that Ale, Nails and all to be put into
the former.

3. Thus prepared it will be an excellent thing against the Green Sickness in
Virgins, the Rickets in Children, the King's Evil in elder Persons, the Gout in
Men, and the Stoppage of the Terms in Women; The Patient drinking a good
draught of it Morning, Noon, and Night.

XIV. Cerevisia Oxydorica, A Drink to quicken the Eyesight.
Bate.] Rue, Sage, Vervain, Eyebright, A. M. j. live Hog-lice or Sows, No 400.
sweet Fennel-seed j. Raisons stoned lb ss. put them all into a Bag for four
Gallons of new Ale. It is to be taken as ordinary Drink for dimness of Sight.
Tern.

Salmon.] 1. The Ingredients of this Composition are good, but the Principal
which ought to have been in, are wanting: if you would have it truly effectual
to the Purpose intended you ought to add these things: Rosemary-flowers fresh
gathered M. j. fresh Lavender-flowers M. ss. Spicknard iij. yellow of Limon and
Orange-peels, A. j.

2. At time of drinking it, put into every draught twenty drops of Spirit of
Sal Armoniack.

3. And let the use of it be continued for three or four whole Months, or
longer, (for a lesser time will do but little good) and outwardly let the
Eyelids be bathed with the Queen of Hungary's Water; or wash the Eyes
themselves three or four times a day with our Aqua Regulata, or Eye-water, mixed
with an equal quantity of Spirit of Wine.

XV. Cerevisia Scorbutica, A Drink against the Scurvy.
Bate.] Sea Scurvy grass a little dried lbj. Brook-lime, Watercresses, A. M.
iij. Red Sage, M, ij. Cloves iij. Nutmegs vj. bruise them, and put them into a
Bag for five Gallons of new Ale, with bits of old Iron vj. in the bottom of it,
which use as common Drink.

Salmon.] 1. I understand not why the Scurvy Grass should be at all dried; for
being full of subtle and volatile Particles, I am confident, that some of its
choicest parts by that means must be dissipated.

2. I am also of Opinion, that the Juice of four or five choice Sevil Oranges
ought to be put in, not only because of their acute Property, and that they are
Specificks against the Scurvy, but, because thereby the Fermentation, will the
better and more completely be absolved.

3. You may either take it as common drink, or drink it at formal and set
times, as a Pint in the Morning fasting: A Pint an hour before Dinner: and a
Pint last at Night going to Bed; Universals being used in the Intervals of
taking it, as once a Week.

XVI. Cerevisia Scrophularia, A Drink against the King's Evil.
Bate.] Sarsaparilla vj. Lignum Sanctum viij. Bark of the Wallnut-Tree, Roots
of Scrophularia, Sassafras, A. ij. Herb Robert, M. iij. Raisons stoned; living
Millepedes, A. lb j, mix and make a Bay for four Gallons of new Ale. Its chief
use is against the King's Evil, the Ficus and Hemorrhoides in Ano, cancerous
and other like malign and eating Ulcers, malign Scabs, etc. by taking this
drink as common Drink, and purging once a Week with some appropriated
Medicament.

Salmon.] 1. Whether by Scrophularia is meant Pilewort or Figwort is uncertain,
for that in some Authors, they are both called by that name, from their being
approved Specificks against the Scrophula, but I am apt to believe, that what
our Author here intends is Figwort, because that though Pilewort is sometimes
so called, yet it has not usually that Appellation, but rather is known by the
name of Cheledonium minus.

2. In the Composition I would add Bark of Guajacum ij. bruised, (for nothing
seems to be more effectual in the Vegetable Kingdom against that Disease)
Antimony in Powder, tied up in a Rag lbj. (and so put into the Bag with the
other Ingredients, by which means the same quantity will serve oftentimes
again:) of our Hercules in Powder vj. tied up in a Rag in like manner.

3. The Specific or appropriated Purge which we would advise to in this case
is our Pilulae Panchymagogae, than which I know nothing better in the World.

XVII. Cerevisia Vernalis, A Drink for the Spring time.
Bate.] Leaves of Sena v. Roots of Polypody of the Oak vj. Monks Rhubarb, Roots
of the sharp pointed Dock, A. x. Currants lbj. Liquorice, sweet Fennel-seeds A.
iss. raspings of Sassafras ij. Red Sage, Agrimony, Watercresses, Sea
Scurcy-grass, A. M. ij. mix and make a Bag for five Gallons of new Ale. It has
the same Virtues with the Cerevisia Catapsoras, at Sect. 10. above.

Salmon.] 1. For the Virtues of it, we also refer you to the aforementioned
place: but in the Composition to put in here (as well as there) Crude Antimony
in Powder lbj. by the addition of which the Medicament will be made much more
effectual.

2. In the use of this Medicament it will be necessary also, to prepare the
Body by Universals, as, 1. By Vomiting once or twice with Tartarum Emeticum, or
some such like. 2. By Purging, either with our Family Pills, or Pilulae
Panchymagogae, which ought to be taken once a Week, so long as this Drink is
used.

3. That it be used Spring and Fall, by reason of the Inveteracy of those
Diseases, and the rebelliousness of those Humors, against which it is prepared,
and for which it is designed to be administered: because at those Seasons of the
Year, the Seminaries of those Distempers seem always to bud again afresh.

CHAP. XV. Of DECOCTIONS.
I. Apozema potenter Expectorans; An Apozem or Decoction compound powerfully
expectorating.
Bate.] OF the pectoral Decoction. lb j. Syrup of Scabiout compound, Oxymel of
Squils, A. ij. Water of Wallnuts compound jss. Infusion of Crocus Metallorum j.
mix them. Three or four Spoonfuls of it are given every Morning, so as it may
cause Vomiting three times.

Salmon.] 1. The Decoctum Pectorale here intended is that in our Pharmacopoeia
Lendinensis, Lib. 4. Cap. 14. Sect. 4. The Syrup of Scabious compound, and the
Oxymel; of Squills, those in the Book cited, Lib. 4. Cap. 16. Sect. 50. and 84.
The Wallnut-water, that in Lib. 4. Cap. 1. Sect. 29. of the same, from
Platerus, which alone of it self is a good Vomit.

2. The Infusion of Crocus Metallorum, is the Vinum Benedictum in our said
Dispensatory, Lib. 4. Cap. 12. Sect. 7. where you may see its Composition,
Virtues and Uses at large.

3. This Apozem being thus compounded, serves to differing intentions, and is
very powerful in evacuating tought, viscous and tartarous Humors out of the
Breast and Lungs, and other the adjacent Bowels: It cures Agues, chiefly
Tertians and Quartans, cleanses and strengthens the Stomach, takes away the
pain thereof, and cures the Cholick to admiration.

II. Decoctum album, The white Decoction.
Bate.] Powder of Hayts-horn calcined ij. Fountain Water lb iij. mix and boil
to the half: then strain it immediately through a thin Linen Cloth, with gentle
pressing: to this milky Liquor add Syrup of the Juice of Oranges iij. or q. s.
mix them: It is of extraordinary use for quenching Thirst in Fevers, etc.

Salmon.] 1. It is excellent to abate the heat in all forts of Fevers, burning
and malignant; but in my Opinion, it will be more effectual if it be sweetened
with Syrup of Limons.

2. It rectifies a weak and disorderly Stomach, and takes away nauseousness and
vomiting.

3. And it may be used as a general Vehicle in all sorts of Fevers, and to give
most Antifebriticks in: It is a Specific in the Plague, Spotted Fever,
Measles, Smallpox, etc.

III. Decoctum Amarum, The bitter Potion or Drink.
Bate.] Tops of Centory the less, Agrimony, Camomil-flowers, A. M. ss. Seeds of
Carduus, Citrons, A. jss. Marygold-flowers, p. ij. Roots of Gentian ij. Sena
vj. Rhubarb j. White Wind, Fountain Water, A. lb j. mix and boil to the half,
and strain out for three or four Doses.

Salmon.] 1. It is to be taken in the Morning fasting to cleanse and rectify
the Stomach and Bowels, restore their Tone, and to cause a good Appetite and
Digestion.

2. It prevails against Worms in Children, the Green Sickness in Virgins, and
Obstruction of the Courses in Women: and indeed opens all other Obstructions of
the Viscera, after an admirable manner, if taken for eight or ten Mornings
together.

3. It is good against the Dropsy, Gout, Scurvy, Cholick, Stoppages of the
Lungs by tartarous Matter, the Yellow and Black Jaundice, King's Evil, Rickets
in Children, and other stubborn and rebellious Diseases, though of long standing,
etc.

IV. Decoctum Amarum alterans, The bitter Potion only alterative.
Bate.] It is the same with the former, the Purgatives only being omitted.

Salmon.] 1. It has the former Virtues, and opens as much, but cannot carry off
the Recrements of the Blood and Humors.

2. It is only to be used to weak People, who cannot endure purging, and where
purging is not required; but then it ought to be used much longer.

3. You may give it ab iv. ad viij. either alone by it self, or in a Glass of
White or Rhenish Wine in the Morning fasting, and if need requires, as much at
Night going to Bed.

V. Decoctum Ambrosianum, The Syrup or Decoction of Ambrose.
Bate.] Grains of Panick bruised viij. Fountain Water lb vj. boil. to the
Consumption of a third part adding at the end White Wind xij. after it is a
little cooled strain it often through Hippocrates his Sleeve, till it becomes
limpid and pure. It is also called Syrupus Ambrosianus. It is given in time of
sweating, half a Pint at a time. It is noble Diaphoretick, used in the Dropsy,
Gout, Rheumatism, or running Gout, malign Fevers, etc.

Salmon.] 1. One Author will have it to be Gromwell-seed; whilst others will
have it to be Panick; but most are of the Opinion it should be the Indian
Millet, to which I assent.

2. Weckerus in his Antidotary, Lib. 2. Sect. 2. p. 492. orders it to be boiled
till it cracks or is broken: of this Decoction he takes ij. adding to it good
White Wind ij. and so gives it to the Patient hot, covering them well down.

3. It is said to provoke Sweat after a wonderful manner, and to be good
against Fevers, chiefly Tertians, being given in the declination of the Fit,
Pharm. Land. Lib. 1. Cap. 7. Sect. 94. Page 149.

VI. Decoctum Analepticum* The restorative Decoction.
Bate.] River Crabs bruised, No vij. White Wind* Fountain Water, A. xij. boil
to the half, strain out, and sweeten with Sugar Candy, q. s. It is given to
three Spoonfuls against hectic Fevers often in the day.

Salmon.] 1. That it is a good Restorative I know: but if you would have it
absolutely effectual against Hecticks, you ought to add to the Composition
Crystal Minerale ij.

2. Then you may adminster it thus. Of this Decoction iss. Milk-water iij.
Spanish-wine j. Volatile Salt of Ox-flesh, gr. vj. mix for a Dose to be given
three times a day.

3. Or thus. Milk-water iij. of this Decoction iss. Spirit of Cinnamon ij.
Volatile Salt of Hogs-blood, gr. vj. mix them for a Dose, to be given as
before. This restores in all sorts of Consumptions.

VII. Decoctum Antimoniale, An Antimonial Decoction.
Bate.] Lentish Wood, Misseltoe of the Oak, A. vj. Betony, M. j. Sassafras
rasped j. Crude Antimony grossly bruised, and tied up in a Rag, ij.
Spring Water, q. s. boil till it comes to lb ij: then strain. Dose. vj. in the
Morning warm, for purifying the Blood, etc. It is good against Catarrhs, Scabs,
and all sorts of Defilements; and frees the Body from all sorts of noxious
Humors.

Salmon.] 1. It is a good Purifier of the Blood, and may serve in place of the
vulgar Diets used against the French Disease.

2. It is prevalent against all sorts of Fevers, whether continual or
intermitting; but would be more powerful if in every Dose you dissolved at time
of taking, gr. 1^. or 20. of Crystal Mi^eral.

3. The quantity of Antimony is too little; it ought to be iv. at least; and if
Guajacum ss. and its Bark ij. were added, the Recipe would be never the worse.

VIII. Decoctum Antiphthisicum, Decoction against an Ulcer of the Lungs.
Bate.] River Crabs No xij. Elecampane-root, Roots of Florentine Orrice,
Comfrey, A. j. Liquorice ss. Ladies Mantle, Ground Ivy, Yarrow, Ribwort,
Veronica, spotted Lungwort, the greater Housleek, A. M. ij. Conserve of Red
Roses vj. Fountain Water, q. s. boil to lb vj. strain, clarify with the Whites
of Eggs, and add Spirit of Sulphur, q.s.

Salmon.] 1. It is not only good against a Consumption of the Lungs, but all
other Consumptions whatsoever; and all inward Obstructions of the Bowels or
other parts, which are the conjoined cause of a Consumption.

2. You may use it thus. Milk-water iv. of this Decoction iij. Volatile Salt of
Hogs-flesh, gr. vj. mix for a Dose, to be given two or three times a day.

3. The Spirit (by which is intended the Oil) of Sulphur is to be put in only
to a grateful Acidity.

IX. Decoctum Astacorum, Decoction of Crevises, or Craw-fish.
Bate.] River Craw-fish, No 20. Roots of round Birth-wort ss. Comfrey-roots j.
Sanicle, Ladies Mantle, Bugle, Agrimony, Ground Ivy, Betony, A. M. j.
Fountain Water lb vj. White Wind lb ij. mix and boil all to the Consumption of
a third part: add Syrup of Limons, and Spirit of Sulphur, q. s. mix them. It is
invented for Wounds of the Thorax or Breast, etc. Dose, vj. twice a day, four
hours before eating: Dress also the Wound twice a day with Cloths dipped therein;
It is a wonderful thing in all deplorable Cases.

Salmon.] 1. You must put in the Syrup of Limons, and Oil of Sulphur to a
grateful Acidity: but more of the former than of the latter, because it
sweetens withal.

2. It is an excellent Wound-drink, and is of good use against all rebellious
Ulcers and Fistula's, which have been of long standing.

3. It opens Obstructions of the Lungs, and heals Ulcers there, and therefore
is of good use in the curing Consumptions, of what kind soever, give it as the
former.

X. Decoctum Digitalis, Decoction of Fox-glove.
Bate.] Leaves of Fox-glove new gathered iv. or M. ij. Zant Curants cleansed by
washing ij. bruise them, and add Ale lb ij. boil all to one half, and express
out strongly: It is used for a Vomit in the Epilepsie.

Salmon.] 1. It may be a good thing in the Epilepsie for all that I know, but I
have had no experience of it: I must confess I have a better Opinion of
Antimonials in that case, because they do the work more briefly, and more
effectually.

2. For this Reason sake, I should advise it to be used with the addition of
gr. ij. or iij. of Mynsicht's Emetick Tartar in each Dose.

3. The Dose of the Decoction simple as it is here prescribed, is viij. more or
less, according to Age and Strength, to which you may add gr. j. ij. or iij. of
an Antimonial as before directed, as necessity requires.

XI. Decoctum Diureticum, Augenij, A Diuretic Decoction.
Bate.] Roots of Smallage, Parsley. A. M. j. of Madder ss. Lavender,
Maidenhair, Dodder, Agrimony, red Cicers or Chick-peese, A. M. ss. Roots of
Asarabacca j. Calamus Aromaticus ss. Seeds of Anise, Smallage, Parsley, Daucus,
Caraways, Faenugreek, A. j. Seeds of Melons, Cucumbers, A. iij. Fountain Water
lb vj. boil all to the Consumption of lb ij. strain, and sweeten with Sugar, q.
s. It is given in difficulty of making water, vj. for a Dose.

Salmon.] 1. It provokes Urine powerfully; but it will be much more effectual,
if at time of taking it, you add to the Dose, gr. xij. ad xx. of pure Salt of
Tartar.

2. If Winter Cherries j. Juniper Berries ss. be added to the Composition, it
will yet be much more effectual.

3. And at last to make the Medicine complete, being boiled and strained, you
ought to every lb ss. ad S.V. j.

XII. Decoctum Dysentericum, A Decoction against the Bloody Flux.
Bate.] The under Crust of three Loaves of wheaten Bread: boil them in
Fountain Water lb vj. ad lbj. in which infuse for two hours Cloves bruised ij.
strain, and add Claret Wine lbj. white Sugar, q. s.

Salmon.] 1. It is not only good against Bloody-fluxes, but all other Fluxes of
the Bowels, but more especially if to each Dose of it you add j. of strong
Cinnamon Water.

2. Utendi modus. Of this Decoction vj. strong Cinnamon Water j. Tincture of
Catechu ss. mix for a D^se to be given twice a day.

3. If the Flux be violent, and of long continuance, you must add to the former
things of our Gutte Vitae j.

XIII. Decoctum Ictericum, A Decoction against the Yellow Jaundice.
Bate.] Goose-dung, Ivory rasped, A. j. Swallows-dung with the whole Nest,
Hart's-tongue, Flowers of Hypericon. A. M. ij. Saffron s^. White Wind,
Fountain Water, A. lb ij. boil to the one half, strain, and add white Sugar, q.
s. and clarify with Whites of Eggs; Dose, v. those things being done before,
which ought to be done.

Salmon.] 1. It is an approved thing by manifold Experience against the Yellow
Jaundice; but would be more effectual if Hempseed bruised j. were added to the
Composition.

2. Modus Utendi. Of this Decoction iv. or v. Tincture of Turmerick ss.
Volalatile Sal Armoniack Salt of Tartar, A. gr. vij. mix for a Dose to give in
the Morning fasting.

3. At Night going to Bed give the Patient gr. iij. or iv. of my Volatile
Laudanum, to sweat with all for thirty or forty Nights together.

XIV. Decoctum Limacum, Decoction of Snails.
Bate.] Garden-Snails freed from their Shells and cleansed, No xij. New Red
Cows Milk lb ij. boil to the one half: strain, and add Rosewater j. Sugar Candy
ss. mix for a draught, to be taken every Morning for the whole Month of May.

Salmon.] 1. It is designed for the Cure of Consumptions of the Lungs,
Pinnings, Hecticks, and the like.

2. Give it thus. Of this Gelly of Snails, q. v. strong Cinnamon Water (but
this, in a Hectic must be omitted) j. Volatile Salt of Ox-flesh, gr. viij. mix
for a Dose.

3. If there be a violent Flux of the Bowels withal, give, gr. iij. or iv. of
my Volatile Laudanum every Night going to Bed.

XV. Decoctum ad morsum Canis rabidi, A Decoction against the Biting of a Mad
Dog.
Bate.] Rue vj. Garlic, London Treacle, A. iv. filing of Jupiter iv. clear Ale
lb iv. boil to the Consumption of the half, and digest a while. Let the sick
take of the strained Decoction six Spoonfuls twice a day for nine days
together; and apply the Magma to the place affected.

Salmon.] 1. Modus Utendi. Of this decoction five or six Spoonfuls or more:
Powder of the Liver of a mad Dog j. ad ss. mix, and give it in the Morning
fasting, and last at Night going to Bed.

2. Or thus. Of this Decoction, q. v. Volatile Salt of the whole mad Dog, gr.
vij. mix, and give it as the former; this has never been known to fail.

3. This Volatile Salt is made from the whole Animal, being killed, then cut
into thin bits, all the Flesh and Skin, and thoroughly dried, and at last
distilled by Retort as we have taught in our Seplasium, Lib. 7. Cap. 60. Sect.
24. and Cap. 61. Sect. 6. of the same.

XVI. Decoctum Pacificum, A Decoction easing Pain.
Bate.] Salt of Tartar made with Nitre viij. fresh Flowers of Corn-Poppy,
Juniper Berries, Roots of black Hellebor, A. viij. Aqua Benedicta simple lb
viij. boil with a gentle fire, (the Vessel being close covered or well closed)
for twenty four hours: which being cooled strain out, through Hippocrates his
Sleeve. Let three Spoonfuls of it be given at Bedtime, and five Spoonfuls
every Morning, in a little White Wind, sweetened with Sugar.

Salmon.] 1. This is Matthews his Receipt which he published in his Unlearned
Alchymist many Years ago: but you have a more exact Process thereof in our
Pharm. Land. 1. Lib. 4. Cap. 11. Sect. 23. which is more effectual to the
purposes intended.

2. It eases all manner of Pains after an admirable manner, and prevails
against Rheumatisms, and Pains of the Stone and Gout.

3. It is singular also against Fevers, and Surfeits; as also the Gripings of
the Guts and Cholick, and may safely be given to Infants in small Dose. See the
Aqua Benedicta, Cap. 1. Sect. 7. of this Book.

XVII. Decoctio Polychresta, A Decoction of many Virtues.
Bate.] Roots of Polypody of the Oak iij. of Cichory ij. Roots of Monks Rhubarb
vj. Sena ij. sweet Fennel-seeds, Liquorice, A. j. Raisons stoned iv.
Fountain Water, q. s. infuse and boil four hours; then strain. To lb iiss. of
the strained Liquor add depurated Juice of Sea Scurvy Grass viij. red Sugar,
Manna, A. iij. mix, and clarify with Whites of Eggs. Dose, iv. ad viij. early
every Morning, for purifying the Blood.

Salmon] 1. It is a good general Purger, yet with all purges but gently; and is
of excellent use for such as cannot swallow Pills, Bolus's, Pouders, etc.

2. It is singular against the Scurvy, and all its Symptoms, as also against
all Diseases which proceed from salt, sharp, acid, or tartarous Humors, as the
Dropsy, Jaundice, Rheumatism, Stone, Gout, etc.

3. Modus Utendi. Of this Decoction vj. black Cherry or Milk-water iv. Salt of
Scurvy Grass j. mix for a Dose.

XVIII. Decoctum Preservatorium, A preservative Decoction.
Bate.] Malaga-wine lb iij. Rue, M. j. black Pepper bruised, Ginger, A. ij.
Nutmegs j. boil to the Consumption of the third part: strain and add
Venice-Treacle ij. Mithridate j. strong Angelica-wa- iv. mix them. Dose, one
Spoonful as a Preservative from the Plague; and three Spoonfuls at a time for
the cure thereof.

Salmon.] 1. Modus Utendi. R. Of this Decoction ss. or more: Spiritus Aperiens,
gut. 20. Carduus-water ij. mix, for a Preservative Dose.

2. R. Of this Decoction ij. Aquae Bezoarticae nost. ijss. Spirtius Aperiens,
gut. 20. mix for a curative Dose.

3. Or thus. Of this Decoction iss. Aquae Mirabilis ij. Salis Tartari
Vitriolati, gr. viij. ad xij. mix, for the purpose last mentioned.

XIX. Decoctum ad Rach^tidem, A Decoction for the Rickets in Children.
Bate.] Roots of Polypodie of the Oak, of Smallage, of Fennel, A. j. Liquorice,
Aniseed, A. ss. Hart's-tongue, Maidenhair, Dodder, Betony, Celandine, Tamarisk,
A. M. j. blew Currants iij. Barley-water lb iv. boil to one half and strain.
Two, three, or four Spoonfuls thereof are given at a time, twice or thrice a
day; in the mean time purging once a Week with Syrup. de Cichorio cum Rhab.

Salmon.] 1. Utendi Modus. Of this Decoction, q. s. Tincture of Antimony, gut.
12. Volatile Salt of Urine, gr. ij. or iij. mix, for a Dose in the Morning
fasting.

2. Or thus. Of this Decoction, q. s. Rob of Raisons ss. Spirit of Man's Blood
or of Sal Armon. gut. 10. mix, for a Dose.

XX. Decoctum Rubiae Tinctorum, Decoction of Madder.
Bate.] Roots of Madder ij. Aniseeds, Liquorice, A. ss. Fountain Water lb iv.
boil to one half and strain. Dose, 4 twice a day, for twenty days: It is a most
powerful Cure for redness of the Face, Pustules, etc.

Salmon.] 1. Of this Decoction iv. Tincture of Antimony, gut. 20. mix, for a
Dose to be given Morning and Evening.

2. Of this Decoction iv. Tincture of Mars, Tincture of Coral, A. gut. 20.
Volatile Salt of Urine, gr. iij. mix, for a Dose.

3. Or thus. Of this Tincture iv. Tincture of Oxgalls, gut. 40. Powder of
Vipers, gr. 20. mix, for a Dose to be given twice a day.

XXI. Decoctum Rubicundum, The Red Decoction.
Bate.] Hartshorn calcined j. Cochinele whole ss. Fountain Water, q. s. boil
to lb iss. strain, add Cinnamon Barley-water iss. best white Sugar, q. s. It is
a draught often given in the Measles, Smallpox, etc.

Salmon.] 1. Though I would not have the Cochinele reduced to a subtle Powder,
yet I know by Experience, it is necessary that it should be bruised.

2. It may be ordinarily given both day and night to quench Thirst: but once at
night particularly thus: Of this Decoction vj. Gutae Vinae nost. gut. 20. mix,
for a Dose.

3. The next Morning give it thus: R. Of this Decoction iv. or vj. Spiritus
Anticolicus nost. gut. 20. mix, for a Dose: in the intermediate times give it
alone.

XXII. * Decoctum Reguli, A Decoction of the Metal of Antimony.
Bate.] It is made by boilling the Regulus of Antimony, or a Cup made of the
same, weighing lb ss. Plus minus, in White Wind lb iss. to the Consumption of a
third part. It is used for a Vomit.

Salmon.] 1. If it was boiled in Water it would do nothing, but it is the Acid
of the Wine, which extracts the Emetick property of the Regulus.

2. It cleanses the Stomach admirably of Acid, viscous and tartarous Humors,
and is a Specific in the Epilepsie, Apoplexy, Lethargy, Vertigo, Megrim,
Palsy, and other Diseases of the Head and Brain.

3. The whole quantity may be given to a strong Man, otherwise you must
proportion the Dose to the Age and Strength of the Patient.

XXIII. * Decoctum Rhabarbari, Decoction of Rhubarb.
Bate.] Rhubarb ij. Currants bruised iv. Roots of Sorrel iij. sweet
Fennel-seeds j. Fountain Water lb iij. boil all to lb ij. strain, and add white
Sugar j. clarify, S. A. Dose, 4. thrice a day, in a Rheumatism, etc.

Salmon.] 1. It opens Obstructions of Liver, Spleen, and other Bowels, carries
off the Recrements of the first and second Concoctions, and strengthens the
Tone of the Stomach, and other parts.

2. It may be given, ad vj. at a time, and that four times a day, either a^one
or mixed with Milk-water, of other fit Vehicle.

XXIV. * Decoctum Scorbuticum, A Decoction against the Scurvy.
Bate.] Cones of the Fir Tree, No iv. cut each of them into four parts: to
which add Leaves of green Wheat ij. White Wind lb iij. boil to lb ij. strain,
and being cold* put to it Spirit of Scurvy Grass ss. Syrup of Oranges, and
Syrup. de Pomis alterans, A. iss. mix them. Dose, 4. twice or thrice a day.

Salmon.] 1. It is an odd kind of Medicine, than which I am sure there are are
many better: As for the Liquor of the green Wheat, I see not what a mighty
power it has as a Remedy in this case.

2. However to make it more effectual, after the Decoction is made and strained
it will be better, if you augment the Spirit of Scurvy Grass ad iss. and
leaving out the Syrupus de Pomis alterus, increase the Syrup of Oranges add iv.
or something more.

XXV. * Decoctum ad Sitim, A Decoction to quench Thirst.
Bate.] Sorrel, M. ij. Fountain Water, q. s. boil to lb j. strain, and add the
Juice of twelve Limons: Rhenish-Wine lb ij. white Sugar iv. vel q. s. so as it
may be made very grateful. It may be drank at pleasure.

Salmon.] 1. It abates the heat of burning Fevers, and quenches Thirst
admirably; but in my Opinion, might be drank more freely, if it was less sour.

2. It cuts tough Phlegm, and opens Obstructions of the Lungs, causing a free
breathing.

3. It may be used where no Fevers is present, for it excites the Appetite, and
causes a good Digestion: but if the Stomach seems to be too cold it will be
good to add a little of our Aqua Bezoartica to it, or some such like.

XVI. Decoctum ad Strumas, A Decoction against the King's Evil.
Bate.] Herb Robert, Brook-lime, A. M. iij. dead Nettles, M. vj. Liquorice,
Aniseeds, A. j. Raisons iv. Sena iij. Catharmus ij. Agarick vj. Fountain Water
lb viij. infuse and boil to lb iv. Dose, 4. four times a day: and besides in
the Interim (the purging Simples being omitted) it may be drank as ordinary
drink: outwardly to the place affected apply Vnguentum Digitalis.

Salmon.] 1. It is not only good against the King's Evil, but also against
Catarrhs, Rheumatisms, Gouts, and the Sciatica, and other like Pains in any
part of the Body.

2. It purges well, and carries off the Morbifick cause of rebellious Diseases
almost to a Miracle.

3. If you add Juniper Berries iss. well bruised to the Composition, they will
strangely augment the Virtue of the Medicament.

XXVII. Decoctum Traumaticum, A Wound Drink, or Drink for wounded People.
Bate.] Tops of Hypericon, Paul's Betony, both sorts, Periwinkle, Agrimony, A*
M. ij. Roots of China, Comfrey, white Sanders, Nephritick-wood, A. j. Dates
cut, No 30. Liquorice ss. infuse all for twelve hours in Limewater, q. s.
Strain to lb iv. thereof add Syrup of Mouse-Eare, Syrup of the Juice of
Fluellin, A. ij. mix and keep it in a cold place. Dose, iv. Horis Medicis.

Salmon.] 1. You may drink it vj. at a time in the Morning fasting: as much an
hour before Dinner: the like at five in the Afternoon: and vj. last going to
Bed.

2. But if you would have it to have a certain Operation, you ought to add to
every Dose, of Aqua Mirabilis (or some such like spirituous Cordial-water) j.
and then it will do wonders, and be almost of tenfold Virtue to what it was
before.

3. There are but few, who truly understand the great Virtues of S. V. in the
healing of Wounds and Ulcers, whether inward or outward; but such as do, know
what I say to be true.

XXVIII. * Decoctum ad Tussim, A Decoction against a Cough.
Bate.] Leaves of Hounds-tongue, M. iv. Hyssop, Maidenhair, Coltsfoot, A. M.
j. Aniseed, Liquorice, A. vj. Barley-water lb vj. boil to lb iv. strain, and
sweeten with Sugar Candy, q. s. Dose, iv. three or four times a day.

Salmon.] 1. Modus Utendi. Of this Decoction iv. Tincture of Catechu ss. Spirit
of Opium iij. mix, for a Dose to be taken as need shall require.

2. At Night going to Bed give it thus. Of this Decoction iv. Tincture of
Catechu iss. Guttae Vitae nost. gut. 30. mix them for a Dose.

3. Outwardly bathing very hot with it, it eases pains of the Gout.

XXIX. * Decoctum Vlmi, A Decoction of Elm-bark.
Bate.] The inner Bark of the Elm-tree new gathered iv. Fountain Water lb iij.
boil to one half; to the Rubicund strained Liquor (which will be like
Claret Wine) add Syrup of Rasp-berries, and Syrup of Mulberries, A. iss. mix
them for a most excellent Gargarism. It is good against the Roughness and
Soreness of the Tongue, the Thrush, all affects of the Mouth from Heat, and
Ulcers of what kind soever: being drank as common Drink, mixed with a little
White Wind, it has cured the Leprosy, and Elephantiasis. It causes a very
stinking kind of Sweat.

Salmon.] 1. It Is without doubt an excellent thing for all Distempers of the
Mouth and Throat, but may sometimes be advanced in Virtue for those Purposes by
adding a little Claret Wine to it.

2. If inwardly taken against a Leprosy, etc. you ought to give with it
Morning and Night ss. or ij. of Powder of Vipers, by which means it will become
a Specific in that case.

3. Mixed also with a proportional quantity of Spirit of Opium, and Salt of
Vipers, it becomes a famous Sudorifick.

CHAP. XVI. Of SYRVPS.
I. * Diatessaron Potabile, The Julep of four Things.
Bate.] SPirit of French Wine, or French Brandy iv. Juice of Limons ij. Syrup
of Violets v. fair Water xij. mix and make a Julep, of a grateful Taste: To be
drank before the Febrile Paroxysm.

Salmon.] 1. This is in truth but a kind of small Punch, but good enough to be
given in Fevers, and it will quench Thirst to admiration.

2. But it will the better perform that Work, if it has a larger proportion of
Spirits added to it, and then it may be drank the more freely and largely, and
with the less danger.

3. If you would make a pleasant and grateful sort of Punch, you must compose
it with the following quantities. Fair Water a Quart: choiee and pure Lime
Juice, almost half a Pint: double refined Sugar, three quarters of a Pound: mix
and perfectly dissolve the Sugar: then add of French Brandy a full Pint; and if
you so please one Nutmeg grated.

4. It makes merry and cheerful, strengthens the Stomach, revives the Spirits,
fortifies the Heart, stops Vomiting to a wonder, and quenches Thirst beyond all
imagination: nor is any Wine so grateful to the Pallet as this, if made
according to this way, and with these proportions.

II. Julapium Antiscorbuticum, A Julep against the Scurvy.
Bate.] Chalybiated Wine lb ss. Tinctura Sacra iij. Spirit of Scurvy Grass v.
Spirit of Lavender Compound ss. Tartar Vitriolate j. Syrup of Scurvy Grass iss.
mix them. Let it be given ten Spoonfuls at a time every Morning.

Salmon.] 1. How the Chalybiated Wine is made, see. Chap. 4. Sect. 12.
aforegoing.

2. It is indeed a singular Remedy against the Scurvy, opens all manner of
Obstructions of the Viscera, alters the Habit of the Body, absorbs Acids, and
sweetens the Juices.

3. To young Children and Infants you must give less; and if they be of a hot
Constitution, you may omit the Syrup of Scurvy Grass, and sweeten it with Syrup
of Plantane, or our Syrupus Nephriticus.

III. Julapium Asthmaticum, A Julep against the Asthma.
Bate.] Live Sows or Hog-lice, No 400. bruise them, and add Hyssop-water vj.
Magistral-water of Snails iss. Sugar Candy iij. mix, dissolve, and express
strongly. It is given two Spoonfuls at a time, in iij. of pectoral Decoction
warm, every fourth hour.

Salmon.] 1. If you would have it truly effectual to the purpose, you ought to
add to every Dose as it is given Spirit of Sal Armoniack, gut. 20.

2. It opens Obstructions of the Lungs powerfully, and dissolves that tartarous
or viscous Humor which causes Asthma's, Hoarseness, Wheasings, and other
Distempers of those parts.

3. If there be a Cough withal you must then necessarily give an Opiate, such
as is our Volatile Laudanum, every Night duly going to Bed.

IV. * Julapium Cretaceum, The White or Chalky Julep.
Bate.] The purest and whitest Chalk in fine Powder j. double refined Sugar
iss. distilled Oil of Nutmegs, gut. iij. Water lb ij. mix them well, S. A.
Dose, iij. at a time often, (...), in the most vehement Cardialgia, or sickness
at Heart.

Salmon.] 1. It cures all Pains and Sicknesses at Heart caused through
Acidities, Heart-burnings, etc. which it immediately eases; and this is as an
Alcali, by absorbing the Acid.

2. But as it is a fixed Alcali, so it only performs the Work in the first
Digestions; for Acidities and Diseases caused there from, in the Blood and
Humors are only to be cured by Volatile Alcalies.

V. * Julapium Fragorum. Julep of Straw-berries.
Bate.] Ripe Strawberries lb iss. Water lb j. White Wind lb ss. white Sugar,
Syrup of Limons, A. iss. digest cold for three hours, then strain. It cools the
Heat of Fevers, etc.

Salmon.] 1. It is a good Cooler, and quenches Thirst well: but if it be given
in a violent burning Fever, it will be good to drop into it some few drops of
Spirit of Sulphur, by which means it will cool more effectually.

2. Thus used with Spirit of Sulphur, or Salt of Tartar vitriolate, it is good
against the Plague, and all other malign and contagious Diseases.

VI. * Julapium Hystericum Camphoratum, A Camphorated Julep against Fits of the
Mother.
Bate.] Fire Camphire ij. and often extinguish it in Fountain-wa er lb j. to
the total Consumption of the Camphire, then strain. Dose, four or five
Spoonfuls often in the Paroxysm.

Salmon.] 1. It is good to be given out of the Fit to prevent the coming of the
Fit, as well as in the time of the Fit, but both ways it will be good to
dissolve therein in Volatile Salt of Hartshorn, gr. iv. ad viij.

2. Or for want of the Volatile Salt of Hartshorn, dissolve therein Sal
Prunellae, gr. x. or xij. for this Salt has a specific Virtue in repressing
these kinds of Fits.

XVII. * Julapium Hystericum Farinaceum, The Meally Julep against Fits of the
Mother.
Bate.] Fine Wheat Flower ij. white Sugar ss. fair Water viij. stir or shake
them well in a Glass Vial, to make a white Julep. It may be given to four
Spoonfuls, often in the Fit.

Salmon.] 1. It cools, and is more pleasant than fair Water; but will be more
effectual with a few grains of Sal Prunellae added to it.

2. If also you make it of Purslane or Lettice-waters instead of the simple
Fountain Water, it will yet be more for the occasion; The Waters also distilled
from Citruls and Cucumbers, are very good in this Case.

VIII. * Julapium Hystericum Faetidum, The Faetide Julep against Fits of the
Mother.
Bate.] The best Asa fetida iss. black Cherry-water vj. mix and dissolve
without Heat, in a cold Mortar, that the Liquor may be Milky, S. A. give a
Spoonful of it in the beginning of the Paroxysm, and repeat it after the end
thereof.

Salmon.] 1. Take of this Liquor half a Spoonful or more; Powers of Hearts horn,
gut. 10. add. 20. mix for a Dose, to be given at the beginning of the Fit, and
also at the end thereof.

2. But for such as cannot away with the Powers of Hartshorn, instead of so
many Drops of them, add half the number of Grains of the Volatile Salt of
Hartshorn.

IX. * Julapium Hystericum Mithridaticum, The Mithridate Julep against Fits of
the Mother.
Bate.] Bryony-water compound vj. Mithridate ij. Tincture of Castor ij. Syrups
of black Cherries; and of Elder-berries, A. iss. mix S. A. Dose, one or two
Spoonfuls in the time of the Fit, or Fainting.

Salmon.] 1. You may often repeat it: and before the coming of the Fit the Sick
may take it to four Spoonfuls or more to prevent its access.

2. In this case whatever the Specific is which may be given, it will be good
to purge beforehand with some proper Hysteric Purge, for by that means these
kinds of Juleps will be of much more effect.

3. For this is certain, that the more the Morbifick cause is carried off, the
better is the success of Specific of every kind.

X. * Julapium Hystericum Moschatum, The Musked Julep against Fits of the
Mother.
Bate.] R. Orange Flower-water vj. Musk ss. Sanguis Draconis j. mix for two
Doses in the Paroxysm.

Salmon.] 1. This Recipe is taken from Riverius his Praxis, who mightily
commends it even from Experience it self against Hysteric Fits, and cites the
Authority of Solenander for it, Prax. Med. Lib. 15. Cap. 6. pagina mea. 383.

2. I have tried it several times, sometimes with extraordinary success; but
sometimes without; so that it seems to me, to succeed according as it agrees or
disagrees to the natural Habit of the Body.

XI. * Julapium Idaeum, Julep of Rasp-berries.
Bate.] Fresh Rasp berries lb j. white Sugar ij. fair Water lb iss. keep them
together in a cold place for three hours, and strain out. The Sick may drink of
it at pleasure to quench Thirst and extinguish any febrile Heat.

Salmon.] 1. It is better to be made with the distilled Water of Wood Sorrel,
Purslane, or Cucumbers.

2. Its cooling Property may be strengthened by adding to it, a few Grains of
Sal Prunellae, whose Effects will be to carry off the Disease by Urine.

XII. * Julapium Perlatum, The Pearled Julep.
Bate.] Waters of Citrons, Borrage, Bawm, black Cherries, A. iij. Spirit of
black Cherries, or Spirit of Citrons j. double refined Sugar vj. Pearls
prepared jss. stir them well, S. A. give five or six Spoonfuls at a time in any
Fainting.

Salmon.] 1. The Spirit of black Cherries is made of the Juice of black
Cherries fermented, almost to acidity, and then the Spirit drawn off in an
Alembick, in a very gentle B. M.

2. It is a good Cordial, and absorbs Acids by virtue of its fixed volatile
Alcali which it contains; and thereby revives the fainting and drooping Spirits.

XIII. * Julapium Purpureum, The Purple Julep.
Bate.] Syrup of Violets iij. Spirit of Vitriol, gut. 30. Barley-water, or fair
Water lb ij. mix, S. A. It is very good to quench Thirst in burning Fevers.

Salmon.] 1. You ought to take that which is usually called Oil of Vitriol,
otherwise so many drops of the phlegmatic Spirit will not be enough: you may
also do the same with Spirit or Oil of Sulphur.

2. It is one of the best things to abate the violent Heat of burning Fevers,
that is; and it carries off much of the Morbifick Matter by Urine.

XIV. * Julapium ad Rachitidem, A Julep against the Rickets.
Bate.] Water of Hart's-tongue distilled with two Cohobations iv. Confectio
Alkermes j. Syrup of Clove-gilliflowers ij. Spirit of Sulphur, gut. vj. Leaves
of Gold, No ij. mix and make a pleasing Julep. Dose, two Spoonfuls twice a day.
The Ladies say it is of wonderful force.

Salmon.] 1. It is a pleasing thing, but what power it has to do what is
desired I know not: however it may be used as a Vehicle, to convey such things
as are Specific against the Disease named.

2. But if you would make it truly effectual to the purpose intended, you ought
to add to every Dose thereof gr. j. or ij. of Volatile Salt of Vipers.

XV. * Julapium Tartarisatum, A Tartarised Julep.
Bate.] White Tartar in fine Powder j. Salt of Tartar ss. White Wind lb iijss
mix them. Dose. iv. twice a day for eight days, for the cure of the Jaundice.

Salmon.] 1. It Is from the fixed Salt, that it is said to cure the Jaundice, and
performs the same thing here, which (according to Sylvius de le Boe) the fixed
Alcali does in Castle-Soap.

2. But then, if it was made with an Emulsion of Hemp Seed in White Wind, it
might possibly be more powerful to the Intention.

3. The Crude Tartar is added to take away the loathsome or urinous Taste of
the fixed Salt.

XVI. * Julapium Vitae, The Vital Julep, or Julep of Life.
Bate.] Yolks of new laid Eggs, No ij. white Sugar ss. Oil of Cinnamon, gut.
iij. White Wind or Canary vj. mix them very well, S. A. It gives great Relief
in fainting and swooning Fits, and where there is an extraordinary debility or
weakness; as also to such as are at the point of Death.

Salmon.] 1. It is indeed a good Cordial Julep, and of excellent use to
strengthen Women who are apt to miscarry; and to cause Conception in such, who
are thought to be barren.

2. It also cures Consumptions in old or young, being used as ordinary Food in
the Daytime, and Morning and Evening being taken with the addition of gr. iv.
of the Volatile Salt of Vipers, or of Ox-flesh.

XVII. Syrupus Allelujae, Syrup of Wood Sorrel.
Bate.] Juice of Wood Sorrel lb ijss. Red Rose Water lb ss. trebble refined
Sugar lb jss. mix and digest in B. M. so long till the Feces cease to subside.

Salmon.] 1. It is a cooling Cordial, and may be given in the height of any
burning or malignant or pestilential Fever; as also to quench Thirst, and help
the Roughness of the Throat and Windpipe.

2. It is given either as a Vehicle to convey other Medicaments in; or as a
draught to quench Thirst, and allay the vehement Heat.

3. For this latter give it thus. Milk-water or black Cherry-water vj. or vij.
of this Syrup jss. or ij. mix for a draught.

XVIII. Syrupus Antiscorbuticus, Syrup against the Scurvy.
Bate.] Fresh and tender Pine-tops, Sea Scurvy Grass, Brook-lime,
Watercresses, A. p. aeq. bruise them, and express their Juice, of which take
lb iij. Juice of Oranges vj. mix and clarify well with Whites of Eggs: then
add double or trebble refined Sugar lb ij. and boil to the consistency of a
Syrup, S. A. being cooled add thereto Spirit of Scurvy Grass ij.

Salmon.] 1. The Title shows the Virtues for which it is an excellent thing; it
opens Obstructions of the Viscera to a Miracle, and purifies the Blood.

2. The Patient may take of it four Spoonfuls in a little Ale or Mead, in the
Morning fasting; as much an Hour before Dinner; and the like quantity last at
Night going to Bed.

3. If Juice of Plantane an equal quantity be added to it, twill be so much the
better, for Plantane (I have found by experience) is a Specific against the
Scurvy.

XIX. * Syrupus Balsamicus, The Balsamic Syrup.
Bate.] Balsam of Tolu ij. Coltsfoot-flower-water xij. boil in a circulatory
Glass well luted in a Sand-heat for three hours: strain, and being cold add
thereto trebble refined Sugar xx. and make a Syrup without heat. After the same
manner you may make the Syrup of Benjamine, and Syrup of Styrax.

Salmon.] 1. You had better make it of the Tincture after this manner. Of the
Tincture in Cap. 7. Sect. 62. aforegoing viij. Syrup of double refined Sugar
made with Spirit of Wine xij. mix them.

2. It has the Virtues of the Tincture, being a famous thing against
Rheumatisms and wandering Pains.

3. It may be thus given. Of this Syrup ij. or iij. Aquae lactis Alexiteriae
iij. or iv. Syrup of Red Poppies ss. mix for a Dose, to sweat upon.

XX. * Syrupus Benedictus, The Blessed Syrup.
Bate.] Of the Infusio Benedicta, in (Chap. 14. Sect. 4. aforegoing) xij. white
Sugar iv. mix, and exhale in B. M. to the consistency of a Syrup, S. A. Dose, a
Spoonful or two, etc. for Infants.

Salmon.] 1. It is a good Purge to be given in the Scurvy, Dropsy, Gout,
King's Evil, or Rheumatism, twice a Week.

2 R. Of this Syrup; Syrup of Damask Roses, A. one Spoonful, to be given a
Child: But to a Man thus: Of this Syrup jss. Syrup of Buckthorn, of Damask
Roses, A. ss. mix for a Dose, to be given in the Morning fasting.

XXI. * Syrupus Cardiacus Auratus, The Golden Cordial Syrup.
Bate.] Celandine-water compound lb j. the best white Sugar lb ij. dissolve in
a gentle heat, and add Syrup of the Juice of Kermes, Syrup of Coral compound,
A. ij. Leaves of Gold, No 20. mix S. A.

Salmon.] 1. It is a great Cordial, good against all malign and pestilential
Diseases, Measles, Smallpox, etc.

2. It prevails mightily against fainting and swooning Fits, palpitation of the
Heart, Consumptions, Sickness at Stomach, etc.

3. Give it thus. Aq. Lactis alexiter. or black Cherry-water iv. of this Syrup
j. Oil of Cinnamon, gut. ij. Tincture of Saffron j. mix for a Dose.

XXII. * Syrupus Chalybeatus, The Chalybeat or Steeled Syrup.
Bate.] Sal of Mars ij. dissolve it in Gentian-water compound j. to which add
Syrupus de Pomis alterans ix. mix, S. A. Dose, ss. ad iss. etc.

Salmon.] 1. You had better make it of Lemery's tartarizated Tincture of Mars,
which you may see at large Cap. 7. Sect. 26. aforegoing.

2. Of this Tartarized Tincture x. of the Syrups of Juice of Scurvy Grass and
Centory, A. viij. mix them in a gentle B. M.

3. It cures the Rickets in Children, and the Green Sickness in Virgins, and
prevails against Obstructions of the Viscera, Gouts, Dropsies, Rheumatisms:
Dose, of this latter Preparation two, three, or four Spoonfuls at Night going
to Bed.

XXIII. * Syrupus Chalybeatus alius, Another Chalybeated or Steeled Syrup.
Bate.] Vinum Chalybeatum (in Chap. 12. Sect. 4. aforegoing) well filtred lb
ij. the best white Sugar lb j. mix and exhale with a gentle Fire to the
consistency of a Syrup. Dose, the same with the former.

Salmon.] 1. It has the Virtues of the former, and in my Opinion is something
pleasanter to be taken, by reason of the Wine.

2. It may be given ab ij. ad iij. according to the age of the Sick and
strength of the Disease, at Night going to Bed: but if in the Morning, let it
be fasting, and good exercise after it.

XXIV. * Syrupus Chalybeatus Corallatus, The Corallate Syrup of Steel.
Bate.] Raspings of Red Sanders iv. Raspings of white Sanders, Cinnamon, Red
Coral, A. j. the best Red or Claret Wine lb iss. the Vessel being stopped, digest
in a Sand heat for twenty four hours; then strain out the clear, to which add
white Sugar trebble refined lb j. and make a Syrup, S. A. to which add the Salt
of Mars calcined to Redness (dissolved in Quince-water) ss. mix them. It
wonderfully astringes and strengthens, and is of mighty use against all sorts
of Fluxes, chiefly the Hepatick. Dose, ss. ad j.

Salmon.] 1. It is without doubt a good thing to strengthen the Stomach and
other Viscera, being given after due purging in the Dropsy, and other like
Diseases, which require often and strong Purging.

2. You may give it Morning and Evening from ss. ad ij. in some proper Vehicle,
adding Tinct. of Catechu j.

XXV. * Syrupus de Croco, Syrup of Saffron.
Bate.] The best English Saffron ij. Tears dropping from the Heads of the
Turkey or Egyptian Poppies, dried upon an Iron Plate, and poudred ss. Spirit of
Vitriol, gut. 30. Water distilled from the whole Citron viij. digest in B. M.
so as the Tincture may be extracted, which carefully filter: Then, Trebble
refined Sugar xviij. Water of the whole Citron vj. boil (and despumate) to the
thickness of a Syrup, to which add the afore-made Tincture, making the Syrup of
a due consistency without boiling. Dose, j. ad iij. and more.

Salmon.] 1. These Tears of Poppies, expressed with so much Circumlocution, are
nothing but the vulgar Turkey Opium, which is to be dried on an Iron Plate, so
as be reduced to Powder.

2. It is an Anodyn Cordial good to ease Pains, cause Sleep, provoke Sweat,
stop Fluxes, being given in any proper Vehicle.

XXVI. Syrupus ad Fissuras, A Syrup against Clefts or Chaps of the Skin.
Bate.] Gum Arabic ij. Sugar Candy ss. Red Rose Water ij. mix and boil into a
liquid Syrup. It is the best of Remedies against Clefts or Chaps in Women's
Breasts.

Salmon.] 1. Inwardly given it is profitable against Fluxes of all kinds,
because it much abates the Acrimony of the Humor.

2. It is also good against Catarr^s, Coughs, Colds, Hoarsness, Shortness of
Breath, Ulcers of the Lungs; see it in our Seplasium, Lib. 9. Cap. 6. Sect. 6.

3. Give it with a Liquorice-stick, and in Ulcers of the Lungs, mixed with a
little Tincture of Cinnamon.

XXVII. Syrupus Haemoptoicus, Syrup against Spitting of Blood.
Bate.] Juices of Ground Joy, of Plantane, of Agrimony, of Housleek, of
Purslane, all depurated, to lb ss. Sugar of Roses double quantity, mix and make
a Syrup, S. A. Dose, ij. mixed with Milk-water vj. every Morning, and the same
quantity at Bedtime in iv. of Red or Corn Poppy-water.

Salmon.] 1. You may give it according to the Direction, adding to each Dose
Tincture of Catechu ij. which is a Specific in this case.

2. If the Flux be inveterate and vehement, and not easy to be stopped, it ought
to be repeated in Milk-water at Noon; and at Bed time gr. j. or ij. of our
Volatile Laudanum ought to be added to it.

XXVIII. * Syrupus Jovialis, Syrup made with Tin.
Bate.] Filings of Tin vj. of Mars ij. Fountain Water lb vj. infuse all for
forty hours; then add Tamarisk M. ij. Bark of Caper-roots jss. Raisons iv.
Aniseeds j. boil to the Consumption of lb iv. strain, and add white Sugar lb j.
clarify, and boil to the Consistency of a Syrup. Dose, j. every Morning with
Magistral-water of Earthworms ij. It prevails mightily against Hypochondriack
Melancholy, Cachexia, Green Sickness, Yellow Jaundice, etc.

Salmon.] 1. I know not what good the Filings of Tin or Mars can do in this
Preparation nor what Virtue so simple a Menstruum as Fountain Water is, can
extract from them without the help of an Acid, such as is that of Vinegar, or
Crude Tartar.

2. In my Opinion, it would be much better to make the Syrup by it self without
the Filings* adding a little Vinegar or Juice of Limons thereto; and then
afterward to add thereto Salt of Tin iij. Salt of Mars jss. by which means it
will be made much more powerful and effectual to the Purposes intended.

3. You may then give it a iv. ad vj. in the Water aforenamed, or other proper
Vehicle.

XXIX. * Syrupus Limacum, Syrup of Snails.
Bate.] Garden Snails, gathered before the Rising of the Sun, freed from their
Shells and cut in pieces lb j. Sugar Candy in fine Powder lb ss. mix them, and
put them into Hippocrates his Sleeve in a Cellar, that the Liquor may drop
through in a Syrup. It may also be made of the Snails perforated with the
Shells and Sugar Candy. Dose, j, Spoonful every hour, in Ulcers of the Lungs,
Consumptions, etc.

Salmon.] 1. The best way of Administration of it is thus. Milk-water ij.
choice Canary j. of this Syrup j, Spoonful: Volatile Salt of Hogs-flesh gr. j,
mix for a Dose, to be given to Children.

2. But for Men thus, Milk-water iij. choice Canary jss. of this Syrup iss.
Volatile Salt of Ox-flesh gr. iij. mix for a Dose, to be given in like manner.

XXX. * Syrupus Lumbricorum, Syrup of Earthworms.
Bate.] New gathered Earthworms, and well cleansed lb j. put them into a Glass
with a narrow mouth well stopped; wrap up the whole Glass, in Paste made of
Wheat Flour and Water, which bake in an Oven with House-wives Bread: then
strain out the Liquor, to which add trebble refined Sugar, q. s. and make a
Syrup. Dose, j. at a time in some Chalybeat Vehicle.

Salmon.] 1. Its design is against Epileptick, and Apoplectick Fits, and other
Distempers of the Head, Brain, and Womb, and is said to be a Specific against
Rheumatisms.

2. The way of using it is thus. Chalybeat Wine, Milk-water, black Cherry-water
A. ij. of this Syrup j. Salt of Man's or Beasts Skulls, or of Ox-flesh, gr. ij.
ad iv. mix for a Dose, to be given at Bedtime.

XXXI. * Syrupus de Myrrha, Syrup of Myrrh.
Bate.] Of the best Myrrh v. Saffron iv. Hyssop, Coltsfoot, A. M. iij.
Maidenhair M. j. Cotton-seed j. Raisons stoned iij. White Wind lb jss. boil to
one half: strain and add white Sugar viij. and bring it to the consistency of a
Syrup, S. A. It is Pectoral, Asthmatick, Aperitive and Emmenagogick, or
provoking the Terms, etc. Dose, ab j. ad ij. etc.

Salmon.] 1. You may make it of the Tincture drawn from the Myrrh with common
Spirit of Wine, if you so please; which in some Cases (as in Ulcers of the
Lungs, Ruptures of the Vessels, etc.) will be more effectual.

2. You may use it thus. Milk-water, black Cherry-water, A. ijss. Water
distilled from Hogs-flesh ij. of this Syrup jss. Tincture of Catechu ij. ad iv.
mix for a Dose.

XXXII. Syrupus Peponicus, Syrup of Pepons, Pompions, or Melons.
Bate.] The Flesh of ripe fresh Pompions or Melons lb ijss. cut it very small,
to which add trebble refined Sugar in fine Powder lb j. lay them S. S. S. in a
glazed Pot: put upon the top of the Mixture a Weight of one or two Pounds (for
some hours) and make a Syrup in a cold place, S. A. Dose, three Spoonfuls twice
a day, with Pulvis Haly j. against Phthisicks, Consumptions, etc.

Salmon.] 1. Whether the common Melon or the Musk-melon is intended is scarcely
determinable, for the Latin Name will indifferently serve for both; but they
being much of a Nature, you may take which you like best; however the common
great Pumkin or Melon is most styptick, and therefore the most fit for this
occasion.

2. You may exhibit it thus. Milk-water, Poppy-water, A. ij. of this Syrup jss.
Tincture of Catechu iij. Volatile Salt of Hogs-flesh gr. ij. mix for a Dose. Or
you may put in the Pulvis Haly (as in the Prescript) upon ocsion.

XXXIII. * Syrupus de Peto, Syrup of Tobacco.
Bate.] Juice of English Tobacco lb iv. Oxymel simple iv. Hydromel lb j. mix
and digest four days, that it may be well defecated: decant the clear, and
digest again till the Matter is freed from all its Impurities: then add white
Sugar lb ij. and boil into a Syrup, S. A. Dose, half a Spoonful to two
Spoonfuls for several days: it prevails admirably against the Epilepsie, Cough,
Asthma, Suffocative Catarrh, Phthisick, Pain of the Stomach, restoration of
decayed Sight, etc.

Salmon.] 1. It is an Emetick, and therefore is to be taken with caution; but
the longer it is digested the better it will be, and the more divested of its
vomiting Property.

2. It is Quercetan's Prescription, which you may see in our Pharm. Land. Lib.
4. Cap. 16. Sect. 91. It opens all sorts of Obstructions, expectorates Phlegm,
is good against Catarrhs, King's Evil, Agues, and Rheumatisms, and carries off
the Recrements of Diseases by Stool, being often taken.

XXXIV. * Syrupus de Rapis, Syrup of Turnips.
Bate.] Turnips pared and cut into thin slices lb iij. trebble refined Sugar in
fine Powder lb j. lay them S. S. S. in an Earthen Vessel; let them stand
together in the Vessel, (with a Weight put upon them) for twelve hours then
strain out. It alleviates the Acrimony of Choler, and helps the roughness of
the Aspera Arteria, and Bronchia of the Lungs.

Salmon.] 1. It is designed for a Pectoral, and it is a good one; and is said to
be of extraordinary use in curing Consumptions of all sorts.

2. Some make it thus. Turnips full grown, and new gathered q. v. bake them in
an Oven with House-wives Bread, then press forth the Juice, to every Pound of
which (depurated with Whites of Eggs) add lb j. of trebble refined Sugar, which
melt and mix in B. M.

XXXV. Syrupus Sambucinus Compositus, Syrup of Elder Compound.
Bate.] Ripe Elder-berries freed from their Stalks lb ij. Currants cleansed and
cut lb j. dried Flowers of Borrage, Bugloss, Violets, Red Roses, A. ss. Red or
Claret Wine lb ij. boil all in a little Still: strain out, and to the clear
Liquor add the equal quantity of trebble refined Sugar, and boil into a Syrup
S. A. Micklethw. It is Alexipharmick, Cardiack, and Uterine; provokes Sweating,
etc.

Salmon.] 1. Being constantly taken for sometime, it prevails against the
Scurvy, Dropsy, and Gout, and helps all dissaffections of the Heart and Womb.

2. You may use it thus. Aq. Bryoniae compositae ss. Water of Juniper Berries
iij. of this Syrup ij. mix for a Dose. Or thus. Aq. Lactis alexiteriae iij. of
this Syrup ij. Syrup of Juice of Citrons j. Tincture of Saffron j. mix for a
Cordial against Fainting, Swooning, and Palpitation.

XXXVI. * Syrupus de Scammonio, Syrup of Scammony.
Bate.] Diagredium vj. Raisons stoned, white Sugar, A. viij. S. V. lb ij. boil
with a gentle fire, simpering it away to the Consumption of one half, then
strain out for a purging Syrup. Dose, ss. ad jss.

Salmon.] 1. It purges all Humors, chiefly such as are cold, slimy, and watery,
and may be given safely even to Children who abound with superfluity of Evil
Humors.

2. New Ale which has not done working iv. of this Syrup j. Plus-minus: mix for
a Dose, to be given in the Morning fasting. It is singular against the Gout,
Dropsy, Scurvy, Jaundice, King's Evil, and other like rebellious Diseases; but
it ought to be several times taken in a Course.

XXXVII. Syrupus Sydereus, Syrup of Mars or Iron.
Bate.] Tincture of Mars or Iron (which see in its place) carefully filtred lb
ij. trebble refined Sugar lb j. mix and exhale in B M. to the consistency of a
Syrup, S. A. It is much more effectual than the Chalybeat Syrup in
Obstructions, etc. Dose, ij. ad vj, etc.

Salmon.] 1. See the Tincture of Iron, Cap. 7. Sect. 17. aforegoing: this our
Author affirms is much better than the Chalybeat Syrup at Sect. 22. above:
which is made of the Salt of Mars.

2. It opens all manner of Obstructions, sweetens the Mass of Blood, cures the
Green Sickness in Virgins; and most Diseases of the Womb in Women-kind,
provoking the Terms, etc.

XXXVIII Syrupus de Sulphur, Syrup of Sulphur.
Bate.] The Hepar Sulphuris ij. Spanish Wine lb j. mix and digest three days,
then decant the tinged Wine and filter it. Coltsfoot-water lb j. trebble
refined Sugar lb iij. boil to a thick Consistency despumating it, to which add
the former Tincture, and make a Syrup of a due substance, S. A. It is a
singular thing against Asthma's, Coughs, Phthisicks, Plague, etc. Dose, ss. ad
j.

Salmon.] 1. How the Hepar Sulphuris is made see in Cap. 9. Sect. 105.
aforegoing of this Book: where you have the various ways of making it, with its
several Virtues and Uses.

2. It heals and drys up Ulcers in the Lungs and Parts adjacent, prevails
against Catarrhs, and Rheums though never so violent, and is of good use to stop
a violent Salivation.

XXXIX. Syrupus Tolutanus Magistralis, A Magistral Syrup of Balsam of Tolu.
Bate.] Balsam of Tolu, Balm of Mecha, or Gillead, or for want thereof Balsamum
Capivi, Styrax Calamita, choice Benjamine, Olibanum, Mastich, Myrrh, Ammoniacum
in Grains, Taccamahaca, Gum Elemi, Chio Turpentine, Roots of Florentine Orrice,
A. ss. Aquae Bechicae lb jss. boil in a circulatory Vessel well closed in a
Sand-heat, for some hours; strain out, and add trebble refined Sugar q. ss.
making a very white Syrup, S. A. It is Pectoral, Antiasthmatick, Antiphthisick,
etc. Dose, ss. ad j, etc.

Salmon.] 1. How the Aqua Bechica is to be made see in Cap. 1. Sect. 6. where
you have its Virtues and Uses; it being chiefly designed for the Composition of
this Syrup.

2. The Ingredients of this Composition are chiefly Gums, but of such differing
Natures, that they will not easily unite, (or not pleasantly) in the Operation:
some of them the Bechick-water will almost dissolve as the Myrrh; out of others
it will only extract a Tincture, as the Balsams, etc. some it will make into a
kind of white Liquor as the Ammoniacum: and some it will hardly touch at all,
as the Benjamine, Olibanum, etc. so that upon the whole, it seems not to be
composed (whoever was the Author of it) with much Art.

3. Modus Utendi. Milk-water, or Ptisan iv. of this Syrup j. Tincture of
Catechu ss. mix for a Dose at Night going to Bed: but if in a violent Cough it
be often taken in the day time, let the Tincture of Catechu be only ij.

XL. Syrupus Vermifugus, A Syrup to kill Worms.
Bate.] Leaves of Bears-foot new gathered ij: Worm-seed jss. fresh Bryony-roots
ss. Roman Wormwood M. ij. fair Water q. (...) mix and boil to lb j. strain,
and add trebble refined Sugar lb j. and then boil again, S. A. Dose, one
Spoonful twice a day.

Salmon.] 1. It will really kill Worms, but it is so violent and dangerous,
that it ought only to be given to strong Constitutions. I am an Eyewitness of
the Tragedies that have been perpetrated with it, several to my knowledge
having lost their Lives by taking it; of such a malign Nature is this
Helleboraster or Bears-foot; though I must confess, that those miscarriages, that
have happened in the use thereof, I am fully persuaded were caused from the
over-dosing the Patient therewith.

2. It is much better to give it in too small a Dose than in too large, and
augment it gradually as you see the Patient can bear it; but to be sure that it
may do no hurt, the better way will be to let it quite alone.

XLI Julapium aperiens minus Compositum, The opening Julep, the less
Composition.
Waters of Cinnamon, Wormwood the greater Composition, Scurvy Grass compound,
Syrup of Ammoniacum, A. lb jss. Water of bitter Almonds lb x. mix, and add Sal
Martis vj. dissolved in triple its weight of Elder Flower-water, and cleared
from the Residence.

Salmon.] 1. It is cordial and opening; and being constantly taken for some
time removes obdurate Obstructions; but then it would be good to take some
proper Purge, once a Week to carry off the Recrements of the Disease.

2. It provokes the Terms, opens Stoppages of the Womb, and is good against the
Green Sickness in Virgins, Weakness of Stomach, Loss of Appetite, etc. Dose,
iij. ad vj. Morning and Night.

XLII. Julapium Aperiens magis Compositum, The opening Julep the greater
Composition.
To the abovenamed things in the former Composition, add, common Wormwood,
Camomile-flowers, A x. Nutmegs, Saffron, A. vj. Castoreum ss.

Salmon.] 1. By the addition of these Ingredients the Julep is made the more
Cordial, Stomatick, and Hysteric; and in some kind they will assist the
Aperitive faculty.

2. It is more powerful than the former, prevails against the same Diseases,
and may be given in the same Dose and Manner: Besides, this is singularly good
against most Diseases of the Head and Brain.

3. The Preparation of the Salt of Mars: See in Cap. 10. Sect. 54. of this Book
aforegoing, and in several other places of the same.

XLIII. Syrupus Antepidemicus, A Syrup against Epidemical Diseases.
Fresh Roots of Butterbur lb j. fresh Scordium vj. Rue ij. infuse them for
three days in Juice of green Wallnuts lb iv. in a gentle heat: strain from the
Residence, and to the clear add trebble refined Sugar, the double weight, and
make a Syrup.

Salmon.] 1. It is good against the Measles, Smallpox, spotted and malign
Fevers, Plague, and all other Epidemical distempers, strengthening the Stomach,
and driving the Infection from the Heart and Vitals.

2. In the Measles and Smallpox give it thus. Aq. Lactis Alexiteriae iij. or
iv. Aq. Mirabilis, Theriacalis, A. ss. of this Syrup ij. mix, and give it
Morning and Night.

3. In the Plague give it thus. Choice Canary vj. of this Syrup ij. Oil of
Sulphur, gut. q. s. to give it a grateful Acidity: mix, and give it every
Morning fasting as a Dose for Prevention.

4. But for Cure, thus: Carduus-water iv. of our Aqua Bezoartica j. of this
Syrup ijss. Oil of Sulphur, gut. viij. mix for a Dose to sweat upon.

XLIV. Syrupus Antihydropicus, i. e. Jalapii, Syrup against the Dropsy, or
Syrup of Jallap.
Salmon.] 1. Jallap in fine Powder iv. S. V. rectified lb ijss. mix and digest
in a very gentle heat, and extract a Tincture: in this Tincture dissolve
trebble refined Sugar lb ij. and keep it for use.

2 It purges Wind, Water and Phlegm from the Viscera, and extreme Parts; and is
therefore of good use in curing Dropsies, Gouts, King's Evil, and other like
rebellious Diseases.

3. You may give it thus. Barley-water, Ptisan, Ana. ij. Syrup of Damask Roses
vj. of this Syrup j. mix for a Dose, to be given in the Morning fasting.

XLV. Syrupus Aurantiorum, Syrup of Oranges.
Orange-flower-water one part: trebble refined Sugar two parts: mix and make a
Syrup.

Salmon.] 1. It is a Cephalic and Cordial, and mostly used either to dulcifie,
and as it were aromatize other Medicaments, as Spirits, and Waters Chymically
prepared, such as are Rosa Solis, and such like.

2. Or it is used as a Vehicle to convey Cephalic, Cardiack, and Uterine
Medicaments in; as also to mix with sweet Perfumes, as Tinctures of Musk and
Ambergrise. See our Seplasium, Lib. 8. Cap. 8. Sect. 1.

XLVI Syrupus Benzoini, Syrup of Benjamine.
Salmon.] 1. Tincture of Benjamine (as we have taught the making of it in Cap.
7. Sect. 63. of this Book aforegoing) lb ij. trebble refined Sugar in fine
Powder, q. s. put them into a Circulatory Vessel, and in a gentle Sand-heat
dissolve, digesting till they are perfectly united.

2. It is an excellent Sudorifick, (as consisting of the most essential part of
the Benjamine) and of very pure and subtle parts, whereby it subtilizes bad
Humors, and expels them through the Pores of the Skin.

3. It is also pectoral, and cuts and loosens Tartarous phlegm, and thick
viscous Humors in the Breast and Lungs, being given in Prisan, or some pectoral
Decoction, made of Figs, Raisons, Liquorice, etc. for so it cures inveterate
Coughs. Asthma's, Hoarseness, Difficulty of Breathing, Cholicks, etc. Dose, ss.

XLVII. Syruput Capivij, vel de Tolu, Syrup of the Balsam Copayba, or Balsam of
Tolu.
Salmon.] 1. Tincture of Balsam Capivij. or Tincture of the Balsam de Tolu (the
Preparations of which we have taught, Cap. 7. Sect. 61, 62. of this Book
aforegoing) lb j. Syrupus Volatilis lb iss. (the making of which, see in our
Phylaxa Medicinae, Lib. 1. Cap. 61. Sect. 6.) mix and digest them together.

2. The Syrupus Capivij is an excellent Antivenerial, and a Specific in curing
of a Gonorrhoea, whether simple or virulent, Universals being premised; it
provokes Sweat, and cures most Diseases which are to be cured by sweating.
Dose, vj. in a proper Vehicle.

3. The Syrupus de Tolu, has also the same Virtues, being indeed a Specific
against the French Pox, as also against the Gonorrhoea, or any Relics of the
foul Disease: It prevails also against Rheumatisms, Scurvy, Dropsy and Gout,
running and wandering Pains in any part of the Body, and heals any Canker or
Ulcer in the Mouth though never so rebellious. Dose, ss. add j. in any
Antivenerial Vehicle.

XLVIII. Syrupus Contemperans, i. e. Mastiches, Syrup contemperating, or Syrup
of Mastich.
Salmon.] 1. Tincture of Mastich, (which see Cap. 7. Sect. 83. aforegoing)
Syrupus Volatilis Ana. mix and digest them together for a Syrup.

2. it is Cephalic, Neurotick, and Stomatick, good against Vertigo's,
Lethargies, Megrims, Apoplexies, Epilepsies, Palsies, Convulsions; strengthens
and fortifies the Stomach, stops Vomiting, and restores the Tone of the Viscera.

3. It stops Fluxes of the Bowels of all sorts, stops bleeding and spitting of
Blood, Catarrhs, is good against Coughs, Colds, Hoarseness, Asthma's, etc. and
represses the Acrimony of sharp Humors.

4. Dose, a j. ad iv. in any proper Vehicle. Aq. Lactis Alexiteria, or black
Cherry-water iv. ad vj. of this Syrup j. ad iv. mix for a Dose to be given at
Night going to Bed, and in the Morning fasting.

XLIX. Syrupus Exonerans, i. e. Scammonij, The purging Syrup, or Syrup of
Scammony.
Salmon.] 1. Lac Scammonij, (which Preparation see Cap. 9. Sect. 109.
aforegoing) lb ij. and with an equal quantity of trebble refined Sugar, make it
into a Syrup by melting in a Bath.

2. Or thus. Lac Scammonij lb ij. Syrupus Sacchari lb iij. (which see in our
Phylaxa Medicinae, Lib. 1. Cap. 61. Sect. 5.) mix, and digest them together
into a Syrup.

3. Here is to be noted, That though this Syrup might be made with the Tincture
extracted with S. V. yet it would not be near so good nor so strong, because
that the Cathartick Virtue not lying wholly in the Resinous parts of the mixed,
but partly in the Resinous parts, partly in the Watery parts the Spirit would
only touch what lies in Resin, letting what lies in the Watery parts alone;
whereas the Lac Scammonij, being made with a mixed Menstruum extracts equally
the Cathartick Particles of both parts, which being assumed in this
Composition, renders the Preparation much more preferrable.

4. It is a most delicate Purge, carrying off all sorts of Humors very sweetly
and pleasantly, and may serve very well for such as cannot swallow Pills: it
works safely and easily, and in a short time after it is taken, but Broth ought
to be taken after it, as after other Purges.

5. It is prevalent against the Scurvy, Dropsy, Jaundice, Gout, King's Evil,
and Rheumatism, opens all sorts of Obstructions, and exonerates the Body of all
sorts of Watery and Tartarous humors. Dose, of either from two Spoonfuls to
four or five in the Morning fasting.

L. Syrupus Faetidus, i.e. Asae Faetidae, The ill-scented Syrup, or Syrup of
Asa fetida.
Salmon.] 1. Tincture of Asa fetida (see it Cap. 7. Sect. 60. aforegoing) lb
ij. trebble refined Sugar lb iij. in fine Powder: melt them into a Syrup in the
heat of a Bath.

2. It is a Specific against the Falling Sickness, Fits of the Mother, and
other Diseases of the Head, Brain, Nerves, and Womb.

3. It is good also against Vapors, rising of the Lights, (as it is called)
Obstructions of the Spleen, and other Diseases of the Bowels. Dose, ss. add j.
in any proper Vehicle.

LI. Syrupus Guajaci compositus, Syrup of Guajacum compound.
Guajacum iv. Nutmegs ss. Sassafras ij. white Sugar lb iv. dissolved in Aqua
Guajaci lb ij. boil gently, and despumate.

Salmon.] 1. This can be no strong Syrup of the Guajacum, unless by the Aqua
Guajaci is meant the Acid Spirit of Guajacum; for that possibly may draw a
Tincture out of the Wood, and the other Ingredients.

2. But out of the Raspings of the Guajacum and Sassafras, and gross Powder of
the Nutmegs, you may with Tartarized S. V. draw a famous Tincture, which with
its equal weight of trebble refined Sugar in fine Powder, you may by the gentle
heat of a Balneo in a Circulatory Vessel melt into a Syrup of singular use.

3. It sweetens and purifies the Blood, is Sudorifick, and a good thing against
the French Pox, virulent Gonorrhoea, and other Symptoms attending that Disease.

4. It may be daily taken by the Sick in all their drink, or if they think that
too much, only Morning, Noon, and Night. Dose, ss. ad j. or more.

5. This Syrup may also be made of the Tincture of the Cortex, at Cap. 7. Sect.
18. adding the other Ingredients in this Prescript, melting it into a Syrup
with its equal weight of trebble refined Sugar.

LII. Syrupus Hystericus, i.e. Galbani, The hysteric Syrup, or Syrup of
Galbanum.
Salmon.] 1. Tincture of Galbanum (at Cap. 7. Sect. 79. aforegoing) trebble
refined Sugar, A. lb ij. mix, and melt (in the heat of a Bath into a Syrup.)

2. It opens Obstructions, and is a Specific against Diseases of the Womb, as
Vapors, hysteric Fits, Hypochondriack Melancholy, Obstructions, Pains, and
Scirrha's of the Spleen, etc. having all the Virtues of the Tincture
aforementioned.

3. Dose, a j. ad ij. or more, in some proper Hysteric Vehicle, (due purging
having been premised) to be given first in the Morning fasting, and last at
Night going to Bed.

LIII. Syrupus Hypnoticus Pectoralis, A sleeping Pectoral Syrup.
White Sugar lb iv. Orange-flower-water xvj. Damask Rose Water viij. mix and
melt them into a Syrup: to which add Nutmegs, Saffron, A. ij. liquid Laudanum,
q. s. or so much that one Ounce of the Syrup may contain, gr. j. of of pure
Opium; mix them, and boil a little, to cause the Scum to arise. Or thus. With
Water of Elder-flowers and Damask Roses, A. lb j. and the addition of j. of
Castor, complete the Syrup.

Salmon.] 1. It eases all manner of Pains, provokes a gentle Sweat, and causes
pleasant Sleep: it gives ease in all inveterate and violent Coughs and Colds,
stops Catarrhs, and Rheums, Bloody-fluxes, and Fluxes of all sorts, whether of
the Belly or Womb; and is of singular use against Defluxions upon the Joints,
Gouts, and all sorts of Rheumatick Pains in any part of the Body.

2. It is to be given at Night going to B^d in some pectoral Decoction, ab ss.
ad ij. according to the Age, and Constitution of the Sick, and Nature or
Violence of the Sickness.

LIVE. Syrupus Hypnoticus Balsamicus, A Balsamic sleeping Syrup.
It is made of the pectoral Balsamic Syrup ( at Sect. 58. following) by the
addition of liquid Laudanum, so much that one Ounce of the Syrup may contain
gr. j. of Opium.

Salmon.] 1. It has all the Virtues of the former, but is more Pectoral and
Balsamic, and therefore a greater Healer, being of extraordinary use in a
Phthisis or Ulcer of the Lungs, and cures a virulent Gonorrhoea, easing the
Pain, taking away the Sharpness of Urine, and healing the Ulcer.

2. It is to be taken chiefly at Night going to Bed, a ss. ad ij. or iij. as
the Physician shall direct, and in some proper Balsamic Vehicle. If the
Disease be vehement or inveterate, it may sometimes be taken twice a day.

LV. Syrupus Jovis, i. e. Ammoniaci, Syrup of Tin, or Syrup of Gum Ammoniacum.
Salmon.] 1. Lac Ammoniaci, double refined Sugar, A. mix, and melt them into a
Syrup in the heat of a Bath.

2. How the Lac Ammoniaci is made you may see in Cap. 11. Sect. 10. of this
Book aforegoing, being a Specific in Diseases of the Lungs.

3. This Syrup opens Obstructions of the Lungs and Womb, and is good against
thin salt and sharp Rheums, Coughs, Wheasings, Hoarseness, Disaffections of the
Spleen and Bowels, Cachexia's, Scurvey, Dropsy, Jaundice, Gout, etc.

4. Dose, two or three Spoonfuls at a time in the Morning fasting in a Glass of
White or Rhenish Wine, or some deobstructive Liquor.

LVI. Syrupus Martis, Syrup of Mars.
Sal Martis j. dissolve it in Water of bitter Almonds iij. add to it Syrup of
Elder-flowers lb vj. mix them; then add again Gum Ammoniacum vj. tops of
Wormwood, Camomil-flowers, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Saffron, A. iij. Castor jss. boil
gently taking off the Scum.

Salmon.] 1. It is intended against Women's Diseases, chiefly Obstructions of
the Womb, and Diseases proceeding there from, as the Greensickness in Virgins,
Cachexia's, Dropsies, Gouts, Scurvy, Jaundice, and other obdurate and
rebellious Distempers.

2. It sweetens the Mass of Blood, abates the Acrimony of Humors, and is a
singular thing against the King's Evil in old or young, Pains of the Spleen,
Hypochondriack Melancholy, and other Diseases of like kind.

3. Dose, two or three Spoonfuls or more in a Glass of steeled Wine at Night
going to Bed, Universals being first premised.

LVII. Syrupus Odoratus minor, i. e. Benzoini and Styracis, The lesser
sweetscented Syrup, or Syrup of Benjamine and Storax.
Salmon.] 1. Tinctures of Benjamine and Storax, A. lbj. double refined Sugar in
fine Powder lb ij. or rather Syrupus Volatilis lb iv. mix and make a Syrup in
B. M. or the heat of a Bath.

2. How the Tinctures of Benjamine and Storax are to be made you may see Cap.
7. Sect. 63. and 97. of this Book aforegoing: the making of the Syrupus
Volatilis you may see in our Phylaxa Medicinae, Lib. 1. Cap. 61. Sect. 5. to
which we refer you.

3. It is an excellent well scented Syrup, and a great Cephalic and Pectoral,
good for most Diseases of the Head, Brain, Breast and Lungs: it dissolves
Tartarous and Viscous Humors lodging in those parts, discusses Wind, helps
Difficulty of Breathing, and is therefore good against Coughs, Colds, Catarrhs,
Rheumatisms, Wheasings, Hoarseness, and Shortness of Breath.

4. It prevails against Pains of the Cholick, Wind, Vapors, and Obstructions of
the Womb; helps the Memory, quickens the Senses, and is singular good against
Palsies, Convulsions, Cramps, and Weakness of the Bowels. Dose, a ij. ad iv. or
v.

LVIII. Syrupus Pectoralis Balsamicus, The Balsamic Pectoral. Syrup.
Myrrh, Benjamine, Storax, Taccamahacca, Mastich, Ammoniacum, Chio Turpentine,
Olibanum, Gum Elemi, Balsam of Tolu, Balsam Capivij, A. ij. Saffron ss.
Liquorice vj. Aq. Pectoralis lb iv. white Sugar lb viij. To those things which
are to be dissolved in Water, let the rest be added, and well mixed, boiling
gently that the Syrup may be despumated.

Salmon.] 1. It is a Composition of Heterogeneous bodies, which can never
handsomely mix together, nor make a pleasant Composition; because some of them
are Aqueous bodies, and only to be dissolved in a watery Menstruum; others
Sulphurous bodies, and to be dissolved only in a sulphurous or spirituous
Menstruum; these Dissolutions will never mix perfectly or well together, but
curdle, and make an unpleasant Mixture: and yet if you will make a Syrup of all
these things, there is no better way but by those differing Solutions, with
which you must mix the Sugar, melting them together into a Syrup in. B. M. or
the heat of a Bath.

2. It is pectoral good against Ulcers of the Lungs, inward Bruises, spitting
Blood, a Gonorrhoea in Men, and the Whites in Women, as also Pains and
Weaknesses of the Back, Reins and Womb, etc.

3. Dose, two or three Spoonfuls or more Morning and Night, in some specific
Pectoral or Comfortative and Anodyn Vehicle.

LIX. Syrupus Pectoralis simplex, The simple Pectoral Syrup.
It is made of the Aqua Pectoralis, Elder-flower-water, Damask Rose Water, and
Sugar, S. A*

Salmon.] 1. How this pectoral Water is to be made see Cap. 1. Sect. 68.
aforegoing of this Book, for that is the Water intended in this Composition,
and not that at Sect. 45. of the same Chapter.

2. The Title shows the Virtues, its principal intention and design, being
against Diseases of the Breast and Lungs, as Coughs, Colds, Hoarseness,
Wheating, shortness of Breath, difficulty of Breathing, soreness of the Breast
and Stomach, etc.

3. Modus Vtendi. Milk-water iv. of this Syrup j. ad ij. Spirit of Opium ij. or
iij. mix for a Dose, to be given Morning and Night, or as often as need
requires.

LX. Syrupus Rosarum Damascenarum, Syrup of Damask Roses.
It is made of the distilled Water p. j. trebble refined Sugar g. ij. melting
them into a Syrup in B. M.

Salmon.] 1. It is a pretty cooling Syrup, and used chiefly as a Vehicle to
convey other Medicaments in, as also to make cooling Cordial Juleps of; and to
dulcifie any delicate fine Spirit, or strong Water, which you would have carry
a fine Flavor with it.

2. A cooling Antifebritick Potion. Milk-water iv. of this Syrup ij. Sal
Primellae in fine Powder ss. mix for a Dose, to take off the violent heat of a
Fever.

3. A Cordial Potion. Aq. lact. alexiteriae, or black Cherry-water iv. of this
Syrup ij. of our Aqua Bezoartica j. Spirit of Cinnamon, of Angelica, A. iij.
mix for a Cordial draught against fainting and swooning Fits, sickness at
Heart, etc.

LXI. Syrupus Rosarum rubrarum, Syrup of Red Roses.
It is made of the distilled Water p. j. trebble refined Sugar p. ij. melting
them into a Syrup in B. M.

Salmon.] 1. It is intended for refrigerating, cordial and strengthening Juleps,
and to be used as a Vehicle to convey other Medicines in.

2. Dropped into the Eyes four or five times a day, it is of good use to clear
the sight, and take off Clouds, Mists, Blood-shot, etc.

3. It is many times also mixed with Gargarisms, Washes and Injections, instead
of Honey of Roses to palliate, cleanse and heal old Sores, running Ulcers,
Fistula's, etc.

LXII. Syrupus Rosarum Odoratus, Sweet or Perfumed Syrup of Roses.
It is made of the former of the two last, by adding Musk and Ambergrise.

Salmon.] 1. The best way will be to perfume it by adding to every Pound of the
Syrup forty Drops more or less, of the Tinctures of the Perfumes, and not the
Perfumes themselves in substance.

2. It has the Virtues of the simple Syrup, but much more Cephalic, Neurotick,
and Cordial, though not fit for Women which are apt to be troubled with hysteric
Diseases. See Cap. 7. Sect. 84. aforegoing.

LXIII. Syrupus Sambuci florum, Syrup of Elder-flowers.
It is made of the distilled Water p. j. with trebble refined Sugar p ij.
melting them into a Syrup in B. M.

Salmon.] 1. It is intended for making of hepatick Juleps, and for a Vehicle to
convey ecphractick or opening Medicines in.

2. Black Cherry, and Orange-flower-water, A. ij. of this Syrup j. Lac
Ammoniaci ss. Tincture of Asa fetida j. mix them for a Dose, against hysteric
Fits.

LXIV. Syrupus Sapientum, i. e. Myrrhae, The Wise-Man's Syrup, or Syrup of
Myrrh.
Salmon.] 1. It is made of the Tincture of Myrrh either simple or compound, the
Preparations of which you may see Cap. 7. Sect. 30. and 85. adding to the
Tincture p. j. Syrupus Volatilis p. ij. mixing and digesting till they are
united.

2. It is good against all malign and pestilential Diseases whether used as a
preventive or curative Remedy, strengthening and fortifying the Stomach and
restoring natural heat.

3. It is a famous Cephalic, Neurotick and Hysteric, opens Obstructions,
provokes the Terms; and facilitates the delivery of Women in Labor, brings
away both Birth and Afterbirth.

4. It is good against Cholicks, Vapors, hysteric Fits, Head-achs, Megrim,
Vertigo, Lethargy, Apoplexy, Palsy, and other cold and moist Diseases of the
Head, Brain, Nerves, and Womb.

5. It is also used in Mixtures, Washes, or Injections to hinder Inflammations,
Gangreens, or Mortifications, restore the almost extinguished heat, and to
digest, cleanse, and heal old Ulcers, running Sores, Fistula's, and to
strengthen parts weakened by the fluxion of Humors.

6. Dose, inwardly, a iij. ad vj. or j. in any proper Vehicle, at Night going
to Bed, and in the Morning fasting, or in the time of a Paroxysm, etc.

LXV. Syrupus Terebinthinae compositus, Syrup of Turpentine compound.
Turpentine xiij. Mastich j. Nutmegs ss. Syrup of Roses lb vj. mix, and boil
gently that it may be despumated.

Salmon.] 1. Or you may make it thus. Tincture of Turpentine xiij. Tincture of
Mastich j. Tincture of Nutmegs ij. Syrupus Volatilis lb ij. mix by shaking and
digest till they are united.

2. Either of these Syrups cleanse the Reins, Ureters, and Bladder of any
tartarous, viscous, or other heterogene Matter which obstructs or offends them,
provokes Urine, helps the Disury and Ischuria, and expels Sand, Gravel, Stones,
etc. out of those parts.

3. In a Clyster it gives ease in the Cholick, is good in Diarrhoea's,
Dysenteria's, and Lienteria's, healing the Excoriation of the Bowels, and
comforting them.

4. Taken inwardly by the Mouth, it expels Wind, sweetens the Blood, and all
the Juices of the Body destroying the unnatural Acidity which affects them,
being one of the best things in the World against the Scurvy.

5. The Syrup made the first way may be given ab j. ad iij. in any proper
Vehicle, as Parsley, Arsmart, or Onion Water. The latter Syrup as being hotter
is to be given only a ij. ad vj. in a Glass of White or Rhenish Wine, or other
fit Vehicle.

LXVI. Syrupus ad Tussim, i. e. Olibani, Syrup against Coughs, or Syrup of
Olibanum.
Salmon.] 1. Tincture of Olibanum lb j. ( the making of which see Cap. 7. Sect.
78. or you may make a simple Extraction with S. V.) Syrupus Volatilis lb jss.
mix shake digest and unite them.

2. It is used for easing of Coughs, stopping of Catarrhs, and to strengthen
the Head, Brain, Nerves, Breast and Lungs much weakened with too great a flux of
Humors: It cures also Fluxes of the Bowels.

3. It may be given any time of the Day, but chiefly Morning and Night, or when
the Cough is very troublesome a ij. ad iij. in a Glass of Ale or Milk-water.

4. At Night going to Bed, using it for a Cough, take it thus. Poppy-water,
Milk-water, A. ij. of this Syrup ss. Liquid Laudanum gut. xvj. Tincture of
Catechu. ij. mix for a Dose; it will not fail of the desired Effects.

LXVII. Syrupus Vterinus, i.e. Carannae, The Womb Syrup, or Syrup of Gum
Caranna.
Salmon.] 1. Tincture of Caranna lb j. ( the making of which see Cap. 7. Sect.
67.) double refined Sugar in fine Powder lb j. or Syrupus Volatilis. lb j. mix,
shake digest, and make a Syrup.

2. It is dedicated to the Womb, being good for most Diseases afflicting it; as
Vapors, Fits of the Mother, Whites, Reds, and Weakness thereof, which is
commonly the cause of manifold Miscarriages in Women-kind.

3. It is Cephalic, Neurotick, Hysteric, and Arthritick, good against cold
and moist Diseases of the Head and Brain, Rheumatisms, Defluxions, wandering
Pains, Gouts, Fluxes of Humors upon the Eyes, Nose, Palate, etc.

4. Dose, a ij. ad iv. in any proper Hysteric or Cephalic Water, or
Decoction, etc.

CHAP. XVII. Of QVIDDONIES.
I. * Clissus Portulacae, Quiddonie of Purslane.
Bate.] JVice of Purslane depurated lb viij. white Sugar lb j. clarify, and
boil to the consistency of Honey.

Salmon.] 1. It is moistning and refrigerating, and excellent to cool a hot
Stomach; it cools the hot Fit in Agues; it attemperates the Blood, and cools
the Liver, Spleen, Reins, and Womb, of which in some measure the Leaf has the
Signature.

2. It stops Choleric Fluxes, Catarrhs, the Flux of the Terms in Women, and
the Gonorrhoea in Men, eases Pains proceeding from a hot Cause, induces Sleep,
and helps the Phrenzie.

3. It allays the heat of Lust, so much, that the too great use thereof, is
said to extinguish the natural Seed; and also abates the heat of Urine. Dose,
j. ad ij. in some proper Vehicle at Bedtime.

II. Clissus Argentinae, Quiddony of wild Tansie.
Bate.] After the same manner is made the Quiddony of wild Tansie, or
Silver-weed.

Salmon.] 1. It is astringent, stops Catarrhs, and all Fluxes of the Bowels or
Womb, and strengthens the Tone of all the inward parts.

2. Mixed with a little Vinegar, Honey, and Alum, and some Rose Water, so as to
be used as a Gargle, it cleanses and heals Ulcers in the Mouth, heals sore
Gums, eases the Toothache, fastens loose Teeth, and reduces the Uvula or
Palate of the Mouth, as it is vulgarly called to its natural state.

3. It heals old running Sores in the Legs or elsewhere, Ruptures, inward
Wounds and Ulcers in the secrets Parts, closes the Lips of green Wounds, abates
Heat and Inflammations, and stops a Flux of Blood in any part. Dose, j. ad ij.

III. Clissus Betonicae, Quiddony of Betony.
Bate.] After the same manner is made the Quiddony of Betony.

Salmon.] 1. It is a good Cephalic and Neurotick, and is said to be a singular
thing in curing the Headache, Meg^im, Vertigo, Epilepsie, Palsy, Lethargy,
Convulsions, and other Diseases thereof, from Cold and Moisture.

2. It is prevalent against the Gout, Dropsy, and Scurvy; and being taken two
or three times a day, it prevails against Coughs, Colds, Catarrhs, Asthma's,
Hoarseness, Wheasings, Phthisis, and other Diseases of the Breast and Lungs.

3. It is a singular Remedy against Quartan Agues, and drys up superfluous
Humors falling into the Eyes: it opens Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen,
cures Stitches in the Sides and Gripings in the Bowels, provokes the Terms, and
causes speedy delivery; and is admirable against Spitting or Pissing of Blood.
Dose, vj. ad jss.

IV. Clissus Farfarae, Quiddony of Coltsfoot.
Bate.] After the same manner also is made the Quiddony of Colts foot.

Salmon.] 1. It is cooling and drying, stops Catarrhs, and all Fluxes of Rheum
to any part; and is one of the most admirable Pectorals yet known, prevailing
against Coughs, Colds, Wheasing, Hoarseness, Shortness of Breath, and heals a
Phthisis, or Ulcer in the Lungs.

2. Taken ab jss. ad iij. at a time, it prevails against the hot Fits of Agues;
quenches Thirst, and stops Fluxes: Cloths being wet therein and applied, it is
said to give ease in the Piles, and cure them.

V. Clissus Hederae terrestris, Quiddony of Ale-hoof or Ground Ivy.
Bate.] In the same manner likewise is made the Quiddony of Ale-hoof or
Ground Ivy.

Salmon.] 1. It is a famed Bechick, accounted a Specific against the Cough,
Distempers of the Breast and Lungs, and dryness of the Aspera Arteria.

2. Put into the Eyes four or five times a day it is good against the Pin and
Web, Films, watering and redness of the Eyes and dimness of Sight.

3. It is a good Traumatick and Vulnerary, helps Ulcers of the Lungs, opens
Obstructions of Liver, Spleen, and Gall, is good against the Yellow Jaundice,
and provokes Urine.

4. Made into a Gargarism with Honey and Juice of Limons, it is good for Ulcers
of the Mouth and Throat; and also to wash foul Ulcers of the privy parts. Dose,
ad iij.

VI. Clissus Prunellae, Quiddony of Self-heal.
Bate.] And after the like Method the Quiddony of Self-heal.

Salmon.] 1. It is an excellent Traumatick, or Vulnerary, whether for inward or
outward Wounds; and in outward Cases it is found by Experience to heal the sore
Nipples of Nurses.

2. If taken inwardly from j. ad iij. it heals Vessels broken within, and is
prevalent against Bruises, whether by falls or otherwise.

3. Being made into a Lotion thus; Decoction of Bugle lb j. White Wind lb ss.
of this Quiddony vj. Salt of Vitriol, Roch Alum in Powder, A. j. mix them: It
is good to wash outward Ulcers with, and to inject into Fistula's, in order to
their speedy healing. Dose, inwardly from j. ad iij.

VII. Clissus Agrimoniae, Quiddony of Agrimony.
Bate.] It is made in all respects as the Quiddony of Purslane.

Salmon.] 1. It is a singular Hepatick, and after a singular manner opens
Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, strengthening the same, and therefore is
good against all sorts of Fluxes of the Bowels, Weakness and Excoriations of
those parts.

2. It restores in Consuptions, is good against the Distempers of the Reins,
prevails against inward Bruises, and helps such as spit, or piss Blood.

3. It has been experienced good against the Rickets in Children, causing them
to out grow their weak Habit of Body, being daily given them, Morning, Noon,
and Night, for some Weeks. Dose, j. ad iij. in some sit Vehiculum.

VIII. * Gelatina Corun Cervi, Gelly of Hartshorn.
Bate.] Raspings of Hartshorn vj. fair Water lb vj. infuse warm, and boil with
a gentle fire (in a close Vessel) for three or four hours, that the Raspings
may become Gelly: strain, and add Juice of Limons j. trebble refined Sugar ij.
It is restorative in Consumptions, etc.

Salmon.] 1. It is a singular use in all other Weaknesses of the Body whatever,
and in every case where the Body is emaciated by a long and vehement Sickness,
though no proper Consumption.

2. It is of approved use in Ulcers of the Lungs, Phthisis, and corrosion of
the Bowels, whether by sharp Humors, or the Acrimony of violent Medicines.

3. It is an Alcali (notwithstanding the addition of the Juice of Limons) and
absorbs the Acid humor in what part of the Body soever, and by long Experience
has been found of extraordinary use against the Scurvy. Dose, j. ad iv. Plus
minus.

IX. * Gelatina Corroborans, The strengthening.
Bate.] Four Sheeps-feet; two Calves-feet; Raspings of Ivory, Roots of
Satyrion, A. ij. Sea-horse-Pizle j. Raspings of Hartshorn x. Ladies Mantle,
Daisies, A. M. ij. fair Water lb x. mix and boil to lb iij. strain, and add
white Sugar Candy iij. being cold separate the Fat and the Feces, S. A. keeping
the Gelly for use. Give a draught of it in the Morning fasting with Powder of a
Harts-Pizle j some adstringent Pills being premised.

Salmon] 1. It is said to cure Consumptions and a Phthisis, or Ulcer of the
Lungs; as also to be prevalent in a Hectic, and as some say in a Marasmos.

2. It is good against Weaknesses and Wastings in the Back, the Whites in Women
and a Gonorrhoea in Men, Universals being premised.

3. It strengthens much, such as labor under universal Weaknesses and a
Scorbutic discracy, by absorbing the morbifick Acid which causes those
disorders.

X. * Gelatina Ichthyocollae, Gelly of Ising-glass.
Bate.] The whitest and best Ising-glass, cut it into bits, and bruise it ij.
fair Water lb ij. boil to lb j. S. A. strain, and add new Milk lb j. white
Sugar Candy j. Dose, a Pint at a time twice a day, for stopping the Whites in
Women and a Gonorrhoea in Men, etc.

Salmon.] 1. It is of singular use to restore in Consumptions, and all sorts of
Weaknesses whatsoever, by reason of the volatile Animal Salt which it contains,
and which is indeed in all Gellies.

2. If it be used for a Gonorrhoea, or the Whites, etc. Universals ought to be
premised, that the Body may be cleansed as much as may be, and the Morbifick
matter in part carried off, to the end the Humor may be in some measure
diverted; for which purpose our Pillulae Panchymagogae, or Mirabiles are
excellent.

3. Then you may give this Gelly thus. Of this Gelly iv. or vj. Antimony
diaphoretick j. Roch Alum in fine Powder, gr. x. white Vitriol in fine Powder,
gr. iv. white Rosin in fine Powder ss. mix for a Dose to be given twice or
thrice a day. If assiduously used it will not sail of doing the work,
especially if a proper Injection be used.

XI. * Miva Borraginis, Pulp of Borrage.
Bate.] Boil Borrage-Roots to a softness: beat them in a Mortar, and pass them
through a Sieve: of this Pulp take lb j. trebble refined Sugar lb j. mix or boil
to the consistency of a Marmalade or Pulp, S. A.

Salmon.] 1. It is cordial, and singular good to expel Sadness and Melancholy,
and is of good use in Pestilential times, and against malign and pestilential
Diseases.

2. It is said to restore in Consumptions; but is chiefly used as a Vehiculum
for the Conveyance of other Medicines into the Body. Dose, ij.

XII. * Miva Consolidae, Pulp of Comfrey.
Bate.] It is made of the Pulp of the Root and Sugar, Ana, as the former;
adding to every lb j. thereof, Nutmegs vj. It is of use against Spitting of
Blood, Ruptures, etc.

Salmon.] 1. It is cooling, drying, and binding, very good for Weaknesses of
the Back, Running of the Reins in Men, and Whites in Women.

2. It stops all Fluxes of Blood, whether by the Mouth, as Spitting of Blood;
by the Fundament, as bloody Fluxes, and the hepatick Flux; by the Yard, as
pissing blood; and by the Womb, as the Flux of the Terms.

3. It heals all inward Wounds, also Ulcers of the Lungs, and is effectual for
the consolidating and curing of Ruptures.

4. Outwardly, being applied it closes together the lips of Wounds, stays the
bleeding of the Hemorrhoides or Piles, cools Inflammations; and gives ease in
Pains of the Gout. Dose, j. ad iij. Morning and Evening.

XIII. * Miva Dialthaeae, Pulp of Marshmallow-roots.
Bate.] It is made of the Pulp of the Root and Sugar, ut supra adding to every
Pound thereof, Nutmegs j.

Salmon.] 1. It is good to heal the Excoriations of the Bowels, Reins, Bladder
and Yard, opening the straight Passages, and making them slippery, thereby
giving ease in Pains of the Stone, and removing the Stoppages of Urine, and
Heat thereof.

2. It is good also against Diseases of the Breast and Lungs, as Coughs, Colds,
Hoarseness, Wheasing, Asthma, Pleurisy, etc. And for that called the
Chin-Cough in Children.

3. In a Clyster it helps Gripings in the Belly, and Pains in the Reins and
Bladder; and applied in a Cataplasm, it helps swellings in Women's Breasts, as
also in the Throat, mollifies hard Tumors, and allays Inflammations, helping
Burnings or Scaldings, and the Bitings of Men or Dogs. Dose, inwardly, j. ad
iij.

XIV. * Miva Satyrij, Pulp of Satyrion.
Bate.] It is made in all respects as the last, with addition of the like
quantity of Nutmeg. It stirs up Venery, etc.

Salmon.] 1. In making of this Medicament you are to choose the full Roots, not
the lank ones, which are said to have an opposite Virtue; this is understood,
if you take the Orchis, or Dogsstones: but according to the Opinion of
Parkinson, our Tulip, is the true Satyrion of the Ancients, and for all that I
know, he may be in the right.

2. This nourishes such as are in Hecticks, restores in Consumptions, stops
Fluxes, increases Seed, stimulates Nature, and provokes to the Act of
Generation. Dose, j. ad iij.

XV. * Mucilago Nephritica, A Mucilage or Gelly for the Reins.
Bate.] Gum Tragacanth jss. Gum Arabic iij. Cherry-tree Gum ss. Red Rosewater
xx. Plantane and Purslain waters, A. lb jss. digest cold for forty eight hours,
strain, and add white Sugarcandy iv. which mix and dissolve. Dose, iv. twice a
day, in a draught of Milk-water, a Scruple of Balsam of Peru made up into Pills
with Liquorice Powder, being given beforehand.

Salmon.] 1. It is a slippery thing, and cleanses and smooths the Passages from
the Reins by its slipperyness: but in my Opinion, Parsley, or Arsmart, or
Pellitory-waters, had been much more proper than Rose, Plantane, or Purslain
waters, for this occasion, because they carry with them a singular Diuretic
force, but with much gentleness, and seem to be Specificks appropriated to the
Reins.

2. You may give it in a draught of Milk-water in which fix, eight, or ten
Grains of Salt of Tartar is dissolved: It will indeed be so much the more
effectual.

CHAP. XVIII. Of LOHOCHS.
I. * Linctus Benedictus, The Blessed Lambative, or that made with Vinum
Benedictum.
Bate.]. VEnice Soap, Vinum Benedictum, A. ij. Lohoch Sanum ij. Syrups of
Jujubes, of Coltsfoot, of Maidenhair, A. j. mix them S. A. It is called the
Powerful Linctus. One Spoonful may be given every fourth hour; it powerfully
causes Expectoration.

Salmon.] 1. It causes a Nauseousness, but is scarcely strong enough to give a
Vomit, unless in very weak Stomachs; and this Nauseousness, causes a great
watering in the Mouth, by which much slimy Matter is spit forth.

2. It is good against Catarrhs and Rheums, opens Obstructions of the Lungs,
and makes an expectoration of that Matter which causes Coughs, Wheasings,
Hoarseness, Asthma's, and the like.

3. And being taken to two, three, or four Spoonfuls, it evacuates some of the
Morbifick cause of a Pleurisy, giving relief immediately upon the Operation.

II. * Linctus Expectorans, The Expectorating Lambative, or Throat Medicine.
Bate.] Castile Soap ijss. Oil of sweet Almonds, Syrup of Violets, A. ijss.
white Sugar, q. s. mix them S. A. Or thus. Lohoch Domesticus iij. Castile Soap
j. mix them. These do the same with the former.

Salmon.] 1. This only causes a watering of the Mouth, but no vomiting, though
taken in a good quantity; it by its substance moistens and loosens the Matter,
and so causes it to be spit up.

2. They that cannot take it alone, may mix it with four or five times the
quantity of Carduus-water, and so take it, in all the Cases the other is
prescribed for.

III. Linctus Haemoptoicus, A Lambative against Spitting of Blood.
Bate.] Lapis Hematites, Gum Arabic, white Amber, A. ij. white Starch ss.
Liquorice j. Whites of Eggs, q. s. mix and make a Linctus. Let it be lickt from
the end of a Liquoricestick.

Salmon.] 1. If to the Composition you add Catechu, in fine Powder ij.
Herbane-seeds ss. Opium ss. all in fine Powder, they will add much to the
Virtue of the Medicine, and do more in one day, than the other things will do
in three.

2. Thus compounded, it is not only good against Spitting of Blood which it
stops to a wounder, but it eases a Cough, helps Wheasing, Hoarseness, and a
Salt sharp Catarrh, and stops all Fluxes of the Bowels of what kind soever.

IV. * Linctus Synanchicus, A Lambative for the Quinsey.
Bate.] Pulp of the Conserve of red Roses ij. Rob of Elder-berries j. Honey of
Roses jss. Dogs-turd in fine Powder vj. mix them S. A. A Spoonful at a time is
often given in a Quinsie.

Salmon.] 1. It ought to be given or repeated every hour, or hour and half at
farthest, till the Distemper seems to be alleviated, or decline.

2. And if the Inflammation may be dissipated without Apostemation, it will be
good to add to every Ounce of it Sal Prunellae gr. xij. Flowers of Sulphur gr.
x. by which it will become much more effectual to the purpose intended.

V. * Lohoch Album, The white Lohoch.
Bate.] It is made of Oil of sweet Almonds new drawn, and Sugar penides, Ana.
so exactly mixed as they may make one homogene Mass of a very white Color. It
is not possible to be done without the Art of the Apothecary.

Salmon.] 1. It is good against Hoarseness; Wheasings, Stoppages of the Lungs,
and vehement Coughs, and other Distempers of the Thorax.

2. The Patient may take a Spoonful of it every hour and half, till relief is
found; then it may be given only Morning and Night two, three, or four
Spoonfuls at a time: It loosens the Phlegm, and tough viscous Humors, and causes
Expectoration.

VI. * Lohoch Domesticum, The Family Lohoch.
Bate.] Oil of sweet Almonds new drawn iv. Syrups of Jujubes, and of
Maidenhair, A. ij. white Sugar ij. mix them exactly in a Marble Mortar, S. A.
It may be made much better, and the Ingredients more inseparable (if the
Apothecary is not wanting in his Art) without the addition of the Sugar. It
helps Expectoration.

Salmon.] 1. This has all the Virtues of the former, but is more pectoral and
healing, and is indeed good against a Phthisis, or Ulcer of the Lungs, and
prevails against violent Coughs and Asthma's.

2. Take it as the former, a Spoonful every hour, till relief comes, and then
only Morning, Noon, and Night two or three Spoonfuls Plus-minus, till a Cure
succeeds: It is also of use to make the Linctus Expectorans, as Sect. 2.
aforegoing.

CHAP. XIX. Of PRESERVES.
I. * Alkakengi Conditum, Preserved Winter Cherries.
Bate.] Fresh Winter Cherries vj. bruise them, and affuse thereon Milk-water lb
jss. express the Juice, and clarify it with Whites of Eggs: add fresh Winter
Cherries but whole; and with Nutmeg iij. Trochisci Gordonij ij. Eryngo Roots
candied ij. boil gently to tenderness: then take the Berries out, and boil the
Liquor with Sugar, q. s. into a Syrup, in which preserve the before boiled
Berries. It is Nephritick, Diuretic, and Lithontriptick.

Salmon.] 1. It dissolves tartarous Matter as well in the Lungs, as in any
other parts, opens Obstructions of the Viscera, provokes Urine, and is used
against Stone and Gravel, whether in the Reins or Bladder.

2. This Condite is also of good use to prevent the Gout, because it dissolves
and expels the Humors which cause it. The Syrup may be thus used; Choice Mead
vj. or viij. of this Syrup j. ad ij. mix them for a Draught to be drank thrice
a day.

II. * Allium Conditum, Preserved Garlic.
Bate.] Cloves of Garlic cleansed lb j. Water, q s. boil a little; which Water
cast away: then boil in Hyssop-water, q. s. to a through softness: make the
Liquor into a Syrup with double refined Sugar lb j. by boiling: about the end
add the Garlic, with Ambergrise, gr. xxiv. Musk. gr. iv. tied up in a Rag:
Spirit of Clary ij. It is of use in the Wind Cholick, Cough Asthma, Stone,
Gout, etc.

Salmon.] 1. It is good also against all sorts of Epidemical or Infectious
diseases, as Plague or Pestilence, spotted or malign Fevers, and is used as a
Prophylactick, as well as a Curative.

2. It is a famous thing against Wheasings, Hoarsness, and loss of Voice, for
it makes slippery the tenacious or tough Matter obstructing the Lungs and
Aspera Arteria, and causes Expectoration. Dose, j. three or four times a day,
chiefly in the Morning fasting, an hour before Dinner, and last at Night going
to Bed.

III. * Conserva Aurantiorum, Conserve of Oranges.
Bate.] The yellow of Orange-Peels new cut off, and out small lb ss. beat them
well with white Sugar lb j. in a Marble Mortar, so as to become a Conserve, S.
A. It is used in the Cholick, Griping of the Guts, etc.

Salmon.] 1. It is a most admirable Stomatick, strengthening the Tone of the
Stomach above most other ordinary things, it expels Wind, causes a good
Appetite, and a firm Digestion.

2. You may take it ab ss. ad ij. in the Morning fasting, before Dinner, and
last at Night going to Bed. drinking after it a Glass of Wormwood-wine, or ss.
of Our Aqua Bezoartica.

IV. * Conserva Hepatica Corallitana, The Coral like Hepatick Conserve.
Bate.] Ripe Hips of the wild Roses or Bryar, perfectly freed from their Seeds
and Skins, q. v. keep them in a close Vessel for six days, then add Red or
Claret Wine, q. s. boil to softness, and pass the Pulp through a Sieve; to which
add its equal weight of trebble refined Sugar; and to every Pound of the Matter
red Rose Water jss. boil them in B. M. to the Consistence of a Pulp. It is good
against bloody Urine, Stone, etc. It has a Diuretic force, powerfully cools
the Liver, and is good against the Scurvy.

Salmon.] 1. You may give an Ounce of it at a time more or less, Morning and
Evening, but it will be more powerful in stopping Fluxes of Blood, whether by
the Mouth, Yard, or Womb, if to every Dose of the Conserve you add j. of
Catechu in fine Powder.

2. Otherwise as a Diuretic, you may give it thus. Of this Conserve j. Powder
of Winter Cherries ss. ad j. Sal Prunellae gr. 10. mix them. It provokes Urine
powerfully cools the Liver and Reins, and cleanses the Ureters and Bladder from
all sorts of herogeneous Substances which offend them.

V. Conserva Nicotianae, Conserve of Tobacco.
Bate.] Green Leaves of Tobacco lb ij. Styrax Calamita ij. Cinnamon j. Sugar
vj. the best Manna lb jss. beat them altogether into a Mass, and insolate for
forty eight days. It prevails wonderfully against the Asthma, a suffocative
Catarrh. Dose, ss. every fourth hour.

Salmon.] 1. It is indeed good against all Obstructions of the Breast and Lungs,
but not a Medicament to be given to every Constitution; for though in some strong
Bodies, it will do admirably well, yet in others again, it is apt to cause
Convulsions.

2. Applied outwardly to the place afflicted with the Gout, it gives relief;
and by continuing it, and renewing it once a day, in short time a Cure; more
especially if the Patient can be brought to take it inwardly.

VI. * Juniperi Baccae Candefactae, Juniper-berry Comfits.
Bate.] They are made by sprinkling choice Juniper Berries lb j. with Mallaga
Sack; then strewing over them trebble refined Sugar in fine Powder iv. through
a Sieve, and drying them with a gentle heat, S. A. They are Sudorifick,
Hysteric, Nephritick, etc.

Salmon.] 1. They remove Stoppages in the Reins, Ureters and Bladder, provoke
Urine, and are good against Sand, Gravel and Stone, taking away pain and
sharpness in making Urine.

2. How Sudorifick they are, I cannot tell, unless eaten in a large quantity;
but this I know, they expel Wind admirably, and are a powerful Anticolick; and
an Antidote against malign, infectious and epidemick Diseases; as also the
Scurvy in a cold and moist habit of Body.

VII. * Passulae Laxativae, Laxative or purging Raisons.
Bate.] * The best Alexandrian Sena j. Ginger, Cinnamon, A. j. S. V. lb ss.
digest warm for six hours: strain, and add thereto white Sugar j. Raisons
greater or lesser cleansed iv. boil with a gentle fire till the Fruit is soft,
and let them be conserved together. Or thus. With a gentle fire, (the Bunches
being taken out of the Syrup) let them be dried, strewing over them refined
Sugar, q. s.

Salmon.] 1. They gently purge the Bowels, expel Wind, and carry off sharp
Humors, which cause the Cholick, and Griping of the Guts, Fluxes, bloody
Fluxes, etc.

2. You may take from ss. ad j. or more at a time, according as you find your
Body easy or hard to work upon.

VIII. Pruna Laxativa, Laxativ^ or purging Prunes.
Bate.] They are prepared after the same manner as the former.

Salmon.] 1. These have the Virtues of the former, and may be taken in the same
manner and Dose, against the same Diseases.

2. They are of use also for such whose Bodies are hot and dry, and apt to be
costive.

CHAP. XX. Of SVGARS.
I. * Cardiacum Coeleste, The heavenly Cordial or Cardiack.
Bate.] White Sugar xvj. (trebble refined) Borrage-water iv. boil almost to a
consistency, then (boiling) add fresh Borrage-flowers, freed from their black
spots vj. and continue boiling till the Flowers are crisp or dried, remove it
from the fire, and mix therewith Leaves of Gold, No xvj. Ambergrise, gr. 24. It
is a most elegant Cardiack, recreating the Vital and Animal Spirits, and is
profitable against all affections arising from Atrabilis: In Hypochondriack
Melancholy it has no second.

Salmon.] 1. It is not only a Cardiack, but is good against Diseases of the
Breast and Lungs, as Colds, Coughs, Asthma's, tickling Rheums, Wheasings,
Hoarseness, etc.

2. There is no Dose to be limited in the use thereof, but it may (in the
before enumerated Diseases) be held constantly in the Mouth, and suffered to
dissolve at leisure.

II. * Elaeosaccharum Cardiacum, The sugared Oily Cardiack.
Bate.] Chemical Oil of Nutmegs iij. Oil of Cinnamon j. trebble refined Sugar
xviij. mix and make a Powder, S. A. It is proper for the sweetning of Juleps,
etc.

Salmon.] 1. It is a good Cephalic, Neurotick, Cardiack, and Stomatick, of
good use against all cold and moist Diseases of the Head and Brain, as
Lethargies, Carus, Vertigo, Headache, Megrim, Apoplexy, Palsy, Convulsion, etc.

2. It strengthens the Vital and Animal Spirits, comforts the Heart, and is
good against Palpitation, Fainting, Swooning, Sickness at Stomach, and a good
Preservative against all malign, epidemical, infectious and pestilential
Diseases. Dose, ij. ad iv.

III. * Elaeosaccharum Carminativum, The Sugared Oily Carminative, or Wind
breaker.
Bate.] It is made of the Chemical Oil of Camomile, gut. xxiv. trebble refined
Sugar xij. mixing them.

Salmon.] 1. It is a famous Anticolick, and gives ease in those Pains to a
wonder; it is also an excellent thing against the Stone and Gravel, whether in
Reins or Bladder, helps the Strangury and stoppage of Urine, and takes away the
Heat and Scalding thereof: Some give it against Agues.

2. You may give it from ss. ad jss. or ij. in any Specific or proper Julep:
and in Diseases of the Reins it may be given dissolved in Parsley, Arsmart, or
Onion-water.

IV. * Elaeosaccharum Foeniculi, The sugared Oil of Fennel.
Bate.] It is made of the Chemical Oil of sweet Fennel-seed, gut. 40. trebble
refined Sugar xij. mixing them together.

Salmon.] 1. There is scarcely a better thing in the World against the Cholick,
and Gripings of the Guts, especially in newborn Children, for, and in which
case I commend it as a Jewel, to sweeten their Milk and Pap with all.

2. It is also a Pectoral, and opens all sorts of Obstructions in the Breast and
Lungs, being specifically good against Colds, Coughs, Asthma's, Wheasing,
Hoarseness, etc. Dose, to a Man ab ss. ad j. either alone, or to sweeten any
Specific Julep or Liquor.

V. * Elaeosaccharum Nucistae, The sugared Oil of Nutmegs.
Bate.] It is made of the Chemical Oil of Nutmegs j. trebble refined Sugar xij.
mixing them. It is often given j. at a time against Wind oppressing the Stomach.

Salmon.] 1. It is a singular Cephalic, Neurotick, Stomatick, Cardiack and
Hysteric, and good not only against Vapors and Wind afflicting those parts,
but also against all cold and moist Diseases of the same.

2. It is a Specific against the Headache, Pain of the Stomach, the Cholick,
and disaffections of the Womb, for which purposes it is not to be slighted.
Dose, j. ad ij. in any Cordial Julep, etc.

VI. * Elaeosaccharum Sassafras, The sugared Oil of Sassafras.
Bate.] It is made of the Chemical Oil of Sassafras ij. trebble refined Sugar
vj. mixing them.

Salmon.] 1. It is said to be good against the French Disease; but its a
Specific against Distempers of the Head, Nerves, Stomach and Womb, and
dissolves the tartarous Mucilage in the Bowels which breeds the Stone and Gout.

2. It warms and comforts a cold Stomach, causes a good Appetite and Digestion,
expels Wind, and gives ease in the Cholick. Dose, j. ad ij. in any specific
Julep.

VII. * Saccharum Ambaratum, Sugar with Ambargrise.
Bate.] Trebble refined Sugar in fine Powder lb j. vel q. v. put it into a Tin
Vessel, and add thereto little pieces or bits of Ambargrise, to the quantity of
j. or q. v. putting them into the middle of the Sugar, the Vessel being close
stopped, let them stand together perpetually in a warm place in or near the
Chimney-Corner; so the Ambergrise will communicate with its fragrancy, its
whole Virtue to the Sugar, without any detriment to the Amber, or any loss
thereof.

Salmon.] 1. It recreates the Vital and Animal Spirits, and is good against
Diseases of the Head, Brain, and Heart; and therefore is of excellent use to
dulcifie or sweeten any Cordial Julep.

2. Being often eaten, or held in the Mouth, to dissolve, it causes a sweet
Breath, and is good against Coughs, Colds, Asthma's, Wheasings, Hoarseness, and
other Diseases of the Breast and Lungs, etc.

VIII. * Saccharum Caryophyllatum, Sugar cloved.
Bate.] Garden Clovegilliflowers poudered vj. Cloves in fine Powder j. trebble
refined Sugar (dissolved in Damask Rose Water) xij. mix, boil, and pour them
forth upon a Marble, S. A. It is a wonderful Cardiack, Cephalic and Stomatick,
prevails against the Vertigo, Crudities of the Ventricle, etc.

Salmon.] 1. It is good against all cold and moist Diseases of those parts,
chiefly the Palsy, as also the Lethargy, and other sleepy Diseases: it
recreates the Animal Spirits, and dissipates Vapors.

2. It discusses Wind, and prevails against the Cholick, Sickness at Stomach,
Indigestion, etc. Dose, j. ad ij. in any Specific or proper Julep.

IX. * Saccharum Eboratum, Sugar with Ivory.
Bate.] Ivory jss. Crabs Eyes, Pearl prepared, A. j. Oil of Cinnamon, gut. vj.
trebble refined Sugar (dissolved in red Rose Water) xvj. mix and boil, S. A.

Salmon.] 1. It is a fixed Alcali, and therefore good to absorb Acidities in the
Stomach and Bowels: It helps Heart-burnings, and is of singular use against the
vehement pain of the Stomach.

2. But it is mostly used as a Cordial against Consumptions, and as such it may
be given three or four times a day, or oftener ss. ad j. either alone, or in
any proper Vehicle.

X. Saccharum Persicorum, Sugar of Peach-flowers.
Bate.] It is made of the Powder of Peach-flowers ij. Sugar boiled in
Rose Water lb j. S. A. It is used to kill Worms in Children, and to loosen the
Belly.

Salmon.] 1. It is but a gentle Laxative; and therefore if you would have it to
purge the Bowels as it ought to do, you ought to add to every Dose thereof
Scammony in fine Powder, gr. v. ad viij. and so it will be more effectual in
killing Worms.

2. It is used with singular advantage against the Griping of the Guts, which
is so common in the West Indies, and in this case I think it will be best to
take it with the Scammony. Dose, of the Sugar j. ad ij. adding the Scammony,
gr. v, ad viij. as aforementioned.

XI. * Saccharum Sambucinum, Sugar of Elder-flowers.
Bate.] It is made of the Flowers ij. trebble refined Sugar (dissolved in
Elder-flowerwater) lb j. S. A. It is good against Wind in the Stomach, Cholick,
Stone, etc. and loosens the Belly.

Salmon.] 1. It is indeed Anticolick, but given against the Stone, it ought to
be dissolved or mixed with Parsley, Arsmart, or Onion-water, and gr. xx. of the
Powder of Winter Cherries to be added to it.

2. If it be given as a Laxative you ought to add to every Dose thereof
Scammony in fine Powder, gr. iv. ad viij. Of this Sugar j. ad ij. Scammony gr.
iv. ad viij. mix for a Dose.

XII. * Saccharum Tormentillae, Sugar of Tormentil.
Bate.] Tormentil-Roots in Powder jss. Cinnamon ss. Sugar (dissolved in
Cinnamon Water) lb j. boil and pour forth, S. A. It is of singular use to
prevent Abortion or Miscarriage, and comfort the Foetus in the Womb.

Salmon.] 1. If you add to it Catechu in fine Powder j. the Medicament will be
ten times more effectual to the Intentions, for this Ingredient is a Specific
against Abortion, and to strengthen the Womb.

2. You may give it from ss. ad j. either alone by it self, or mixed with any
other Specific Vehicle; and it ought to be given twice a day, viz. Morning and
Night.

CHAP. XXI. Of POVDERS.
I. * Pulvis Aethiopicus, The black Powder.
Bate.] LIve Toads, No 30. or 40. burn them in a new Pot to black Cinders or
Ashes, and make a fine Powder. Dose, ss. or more in the Smallpox, etc. and is
a certain help for such as are ready to die: some also commend it as a
wonderful thing for the Cure of the Dropsy.

Salmon.] 1. You may give it a ss. ad j. against malignant Diseases, in some
proper Sudorifick, and Alexipharmick Vehicle, at Night going to Bed.

2. It prevails also against Cancers, being given for some time inwardly, and
outwardly applied to the Ulcer: it absorbs the Corrosive Acid, and destroys the
Malignity.

II. * Pulvis albus, The white Powder.
Bate.] Bezoar Animale, white Amber, red Coral, Pearls, A. j. Crabs Eyes, Crabs
Claws, A. ij. mix and make a subtle Powder. It exceeds in Virtue the Powder of
Crabs Claws compound.

Salmon.] 1. It is usually given in the Measles, Smallpox, and all sorts of
malign and pestilential Diseases, a ss. ad j.

2. It is Sudorifick and Alexipharmick, stops Fluxes and kills Worms; for which
purposes it is accounted an excellent thing.

3. The Bezoar Animale here intended is not that which is prepared of the Flesh
of Vipers, but that made of Hartshorn calcined, the which you may see Cap. 9.
Sect. 29. aforegoing.

III. * Pulvis Anticardialgicus, A Powder against a Pain at Stomach, and
swooning Fits.
Bate.] The purest and whitest Chalk vj. Crabs Eyes, Crabs Claws, A. jss.
trebble refined Sugar ss. Chemical Oil of Nutmegs, gut. vj. mix and make a
Powder: adding thereto fine Bole vj. Dose j. in a large draught of cold Water.

Salmon.] 1. It is a Specific against Pains at Stomach, though never so extreme,
yea though they cause swooning, it always giving present relief, and in a short
time perfect Cure.

2. Let the Patient that begins to take it for that purpose, take it Morning
fasting, and at Night going to Bed, for fourteen or sixteen days at least,
taking a gentle Purge once in six days to carry it off.

3. It performs the Cure by absorbing the Acid, which is the cause of the
Disease: but as it is only a fixed Alcali, can only alter the Juices in the
first Passages.

IV. Pulvis Anticolicus, A Powder against the Cholick.
Bate.] The whitest Chalk in fine Powder lb j. moisten it with Juices of Rue
and Camomile, till it becomes like a Pulp; dry it with a gentle heat, and
powder it fine again, repeat this Work with fresh Juices to the fourth time,
reducing it at last into a very subtle Powder. Dose, j. ad j. every fourth hour.

Salmon.] 1. It is not only an Anticolick, by absorbing the Acid, and opening
the Obstructions, which are the causes of the Pain from the Wind, being put up
in too narrow a place; but it is also an Antifebritick, and resists all malign
Fevers of what kind soever.

2. It may be given either made up into a Bolus with Confectio Alkermes, or
mixed with some proper Syrup, and so exhibited.

V. Pulvis Antipyreticus, i. e. Tertianarius, A Powder against Fevers, chiefly
Tertians.
Bate.] Lapis Manati ij. Sanguis Draconis j. mix and make a subtle Powder. It
seldom sails of curing Agues in the Springtime. Dose, j. an hour before the
Fit, drinking after it this Julep at three times. Red Rose Water iij. Juice of
Oranges vj. white Sugar ss. mix and dissolve.

Salmon.] 1. The Lapis Manati, is a white hard Bone (hard like a Stone) taken
out of the Head of the Manatea or Sea Cow, sometimes like a Tooth, and
resembling the whitest Ivory, but much harder. See our Seplasium, Lib. 7. Cap.
28. where you have its Virtues and several Preparations.

2. It is a fixed Alcali, and something Styptick, and therefore a proper
Specific against Agues and Fevers; for which it is of singular use, as also
against all inveterate Pains of the Stomach and Bowels, Cholicks, etc.

VI. Pulvis Arthriticus Turneri, Turner 's Gout Powder.
Bate.] Turbeth, Hermodactils, Sena, Scammony, dwarf Elder-seeds, Ana. mix and
make a Powder. Dose, j, ad j. etc.

Salmon.] 1. It is an excellent Purge, and purges tartarous and watery Humors
from the Head, Joints, and most remote parts.

2. It is not only good against the Gout, but also the Dropsy, carrying off
the Water to a miracle, but it will be more effectual if to the Composition you
add Cambogia, a sixth part of the whole Composition.

2. You may mix it with the Pap of an Apple, or Syrup of Roses solutive, and
give it in the Morning fasting, with Observations as in other Purges.

VII. * Pulvis Asthmaticus, A Powder against the Asthma, or Difficulty of
Breathing.
Bate.] Carthamus-seeds, Aron-Roots, Carduus Bened. Sena, A. ij. Aniseed ss.
long Pepper j. Diagrydium ss. mix, and make a Powder. Dose, j. twice a day,
continuing it for six days.

Salmon.] 1. If Salt of Tartar ss. be added, it will be much more powerful to
the Intention and Cause the easier Dissolution of the tartarous Phlegm.

2. Let it be given in the Morning fasting in Syrup of Roses Solutive: and
after the Operation is over, let the Sick take in all their Drink, 15 or 20
drops of Spirit of Sal Armoniack.

VIII. * Pulvis Basilicus, The Royal Powder.
Bate.] Diagrydium, Ceruse of Antimony, Cremor Tartari, Mercurius dulcis, Ana.
mix and make a Powder. It has the same Virtues with Pulvis Cornachini. Dose, j.
ad j.

Salmon.] 1. It is good against the Scurvy, Dropsy, and Gout, and carries off
tartarous Humors, in what part of the Body soever, and is said to do Wonders in
many Diseases supposed almost incurable.

2. It kills Worms in Children, cleanses a vicious Stomach, and evacuates the
Recrements of the Bowels, conserving their Tone.

3. And being used according to Art, for sometime, it stops Fluxes of what kind
soever, restoring Health and Strength. It may be taken every other Morning for
some time.

IX. Pulvis ad Calculum, A Powder against the Stone.
Bate.] Flowers of Carduus Stellatus j. Roots and Seeds of Parsley, A. iij. let
them be dried apart, and poudred, then mixed together. Dose, ij. in White Wind,
or Broth. Mayhern.

Salmon.] 1. It expels Wind, and is good against the Cholick; but would be much
more powerful to the Intention, if to the Composition there were added iv. of
Winter-Cherries in fine Powder.

2. The best way of giving it will be to mix it with Syrup of the Juice of
Parsley, and so take it ss. ad j. Morning and Night.

X. * Pulvis Cantianus, The Countess of Kent's Powder.
Bate.] The black tips of Crabs Claws, taken in June, which reduce into a fine
Flower, Contrayerva, A. ij. Pearl, Coral red and white, Crabs Eyes (all
levigated upon a Marble with Juice of Limons, and dried) A. j. white Amber,
Crystal, (ground into a subtle Powder with Rose Water and dried) A. j.
Hartshorn calcined to the highest whiteness, (and levigated with Juice of
Citrons, duly acuated with Spirit of Vitriol, and dried) j. Occidental Bezoar,
Terra Lemnia, A. ss. fixed Ceruse of Antimony ij. Ambergrise jss. Musk ss. mix
all well together, and with Gelly of Vipers, Skins and Hartshorn, made with
Carduus-water, and lightly tinged with Saffron, q. s. make Balls of various
Magnitudes, drying them carefully. If to the aforegoing Composition you add
Mexico Cochinele in fine Powder ss. it is called Pulvis Cantianus Ruber. But if
you add the Pulvis Aethiopicus ( at Sect. 1. aforegoing) it is called Pulvis
Cantianus Niger. It is of egregious use against all contagious Diseases,
Plague, Smallpox, etc. Dose, ss. ad ss.

Salmon.] 1. Here is a great deal of labor and pains to little purpose; for
though the Powder when it is done is an excellent thing, yet a much more
excellent Medicament might be made with a quarter of the trouble.

2. It is usually given against all malign and infectious Diseases, as Measles,
Smallpox, Burning, purple and spotted Fevers, Pestilence, etc. and may be
exhibited every four or six hours in those cases, a ss. ad j. without any
danger.

3. This following may supply the place of it. Crabs Eyes, Pearl, white Amber
in fine Powder, A. j. whitest Chalk, Cinnabar of Antimony, common Cinnabar,
Bezoar Minerale, Cochinele, Viper Powder, Oriental Bezoar, A. ij. Contrayerva,
Zedoary, Cloves, A. vj. Saffron iij. Ambergrise ij. Musk j. all the Ingredients
being in fine Powder, with Gelly of Hartshorn, q. s. make it into a Mass for
Balls; whose Virtues and Dose is as the former.

XI. * Pulvis Cardiacus Corallatus, The corallated Cordial Powder.
Bate.] Red Coral prepared, trebbled refined Sugar, A. iij, Oil of Cinnamon,
gut. vj. mix them.

Salmon.] 1. It is a singular Cordial, and good against the Cardialgia, or
Sickness at Heart, and Pain at Stomach, absorbing the sharp Humors which cause
them.

2. It is good against fainting and swooning Fits, Weakness, and Debility of
the Ventricle. Dose, ss. ad j. in any Cordial and Stomatick Vehicle.

XII. * Pulvis Cardiacus Eboratus, The Ivory Cordial Powder.
Bate.] Magistery of Ivory, Cinnamon, A. ij. trebble refined Sugar iij. mix and
make a Powder.

Salmon.] 1. The Virtues are the same with the former, save that this is more
astringent, by reason of the body of the Cinnamon, and therefore the better to
restore the Tone of the Stomach and Bowels.

2. You may give it mixed with a little Confectio Alkermes, or Syrup of the
Juice, a ss. ad j. or more bis in die.

XIII. * Pulvis Cardiacus Perlatus, The Pearled Cordial.
Bate.] Powder of China-roots iij. Pearls prepared ij. white Starch, or the
finest wheaten Flower viij. trebble refined Sugar vj. bake them in an Oven in
an Earthen Vessel; then make them into a Powder again de novo. Being put into
all sorts of Food, Broth, Caudles, etc. it wonderfully restores in Consumptions.

Salmon.] 1. It seems to be a fixed Alcali, and therefore absorbs the Acid,
which sharpens, alters, or destroys the Nutriment received.

2. It may be given, a ij. ad iv. in Barley, or Oatmeal, Cream, in Gellies, or
in Sack Posset, or other proper nutritive Vehicles, and that Morning and Night.

3. If to the Composition, Powder of Vipers Flesh, ij. be added, the Medicament
will be much the better.

XIV. Pulvis Cardiacus Rubeus, The red Cordial Powder.
Bate.] Pure white Chalk viij. Crabs Eyes ij. fine Bole j. Nutmegs ss. mix and
make a Powder. Dose, ij. at a time in a Cardialgia.

Salmon.] 1. It cures the most inveterate and cruel Pain at Stomach after an
admirable manner, and that when all other things prove ineffectual.

2. Give it as often as the Pain returns, at least thrice a day, in any proper
Vehicle, as Barley Cream, and the like; and continue it for ten or twelve days.

XV. * Pulvis ad Casum, A Powder against inward bruises by falls.
Bate.] Terra Sigillata, Sanguis, Draconis, Mumiae, A. j. Sperma Ceti ss.
Rhubarb iij. mix and make a Powder. Dose, j. at a time after bleeding.

Salmon.] 1. If you would have it made effectual to all intentions and purposes
against inward Bleedings, you ought to add to the Composition these things:
Catechu j. Henbane-seeds ss. Roch-Alum iij. white Vitriol ij.

2. And after this addition, you may give it in the aforesaid Dose, Morning and
Night, in some proper Vehicle: if the Flux of Blood be vehement, it must be the
the sooner repeated.

XVI. * Pulvis Cibarius, A Powder for the Table.
Bate.] Tops of Eyebright iij. Fennel-seeds, Cinnamon, Mace, A. j. make a
Powder, to which add refined Salt viij. mix them. It is to be used with all
your Food: It admirably sharpens and preserves the Sight, and prevails against
Suffusions of the Eyes, darkness, hurts of the Memory, etc.

Salmon.] 1. What the Specific Virtue of Eyebright is, I cannot yet tell; I
have used much of it but without any observable advantage: My Opinion is, that
the same Proportion of Time, or Rosemary would be much more effectual to the
intention.

2. Instead of our common refined Salt, Sal Gem in subtle Powder is rather to
be chosen; because there is a subtle and volatile Spirit contained in it, not
yet diminished by boiling,

XVII. * Pulvis Cinnabaris Compositus, Powder of Cinnabar compound.
Bate.] Native Cinnabar ij. white Amber j. Roots of Male Peony, red Coral, A.
x. mix and make a a Powder, S. A. Dose, ss. every Morning. Against the
Epilepsie, it is given j. ad ss. etc.

Salmon.] 1. This Powder is said to be a Specific for curing the Falling
Sickness; but differs something from that of Crato, which you may see in our
Pharm. Land. Lib. 4. Cap. 21. Sect. 91.

2. But out of both, with a little addition, you may prepare one more powerful
than either thus. Native Cinnabar ij. white Amber, Peacocks Dung, Roots of Male
Peony, A. j. Pearls, and Coral prepared, volatile Salt of Man's Skull, A. ss.
Misleto of the Oak, Saffron, A. iij. Crystals of Luna iijss. Leaves of Gold No
90. mix and make a Powder, which give every Morning in the former Dose keep it
in a Glass close stopped.

XVIII. * Pulvis Cornachini, The Warwick Powder.
Bate.] Diagrydium Sulphuratum x. Antimony Diaphoretick vj. Cremor Tartari
ijss. mix and make a Powder. It is good almost against all Diseases (where
purging is required) being commended in their Cure. Dose, ss. ij. etc.

Salmon.] 1. We have many Notes and Observations upon this Medicine in our
Pharm. Land. Lib. 4. Cap. 21. Sect. 38. where it is called by the Name of the
Earl of Warwick's Powder, but it seems that Cornachinus was the Author thereof,
who wrote a whole Book of the Virtues and Uses of it, which Original printed
Book is scarcely to be got; but Hartman for the Excellency thereof, took the
pains to copy it over, and has inserted it word for word, in his Opera Medica,
printed at Frankford, Anno 1684. Pagina mea, 144.

2. But Zwelfer in his Pharmacopoeia, page mea. 574. has two several
Preparations thereof, both which you have in our London Dispensatory, the place
cited; but by reason we have been there short in explicating his latter
Process, you shall have it here.

3. Antimonial Tartar vitriolated j. Rosin of Scammony, reduced to powder with
sweet Almonds ss. Cremor Tartari vj. mix and make a Powder.

4. How the Antimonial Tartar vitriolated is to be made we shall show you from
the same Zwelfer. White Flowers of Antimony ij. Cremor Tartari iv. boil them in
a sufficient quantity of fair Water, repeating it several times, till all the
Virtue is drawn forth; strain all the Liquors, and filter them hot, through brown
Paper; in which dissolve Salt of Tartar lb j. after which gently exhale the
Humidity, till the Matter comes to the dryness of a Salt: To this Salt thus
impregnated with the Essence of Antimony, put in leisurely, and by drops, i. e.
Oil of Vitriol or Sulphur q. s. for the Saturation of the Salt; dry it
thoroughly again, and dissolve in Water, filter, and gently evaporate in a
glazed Vessel to dryness, to be kept for the former use.

5. The Pulvis Cornachini, made with this Preparation, is a most excellent
thing against the Scurvy, Dropsy, Gout, Sciatica, Jaundice, Hypochondriack
Melancholy, King's Evil, old Ulcers, Fistula's, and all sorts of Chronick
Diseases, more especially in tedious and long continuing Tertian and Quartan
Agues. Dose is ss. ad ss. for the carrying forth of heavy and vicious Humors,
which it sometimes does as well by Vomit as Stool.

6. It opens all sorts of Obstructions, provokes the Terms, helps the hardness
of the Spleen, and is good against the Stone and Gravel in the Reins and
Bladder.

XIX. * Pulvis Coronatus, The much to be esteemed Powder.
Bate.] Epithymum ss. Agarick, Lapis Lazuli prepared, A. ij. Scammony j.
Cloves, No 20. mix and make a Powder. Dose, ad iv. It is much commended for the
Cure of melancholy Madness.

Salmon.] 1. It purges Melancholy after a singular manner, but works somewhat
roughly by reason of the Lapis Lazuli, yet may be given safely enough.

2. It effects not what it is designed for presently, but must be given for
some considerable time; and in the intervals of the taking of it, if the
Patient cannot rest, some proper Opiate must be exhibited.

XX. * Pulvis Crinalis, The Hair Powder.
Bate.] Roots of long Cypress, Calamus Aromaticus, Red Roses, A. jss. Benjamine
j. Xyloaloes vj. red Coral, Amber, A. ss. Bean-meal iv. Flower of Orrice-roots
viij. mix and make a subtle Powder; to which add Musk, C^vet, A. gr. v. Its
chief use is for to cause Hair to grow, and to strengthen and confirm its
Roots, (being strewed upon the Head.) It also recreates and comforts the Brain
and Memory.

Salmon.] 1. It drys the Hair, and makes it clean, but the effects it has upon
the Brain and Memory, is rather from its scent, than its substance.

2. You will add to the Virtues of it, if Flower of Winter's Cinnamon,
Bayberries, A. ij. be added to it.

XXI. * Pulvis Cucuphalis, The Powder for a Cap, or Quilt for the Head.
Bate.] Black Pepper, Marjoram, Amber, A. iij. Nutmegs, Mace, A. j. mix and
make a Powder for a Quilt for the Head: It is of singular use against old Pains
of the Head, proceeding from a cold Cause, drys up Catarrhs, etc.

Salmon.] 1. You ought to add, fine Powder of Winter's Cinnamon iv. Powder of
Cloves ij. by which means it will become more effectual.

. 2. And in applying it let the Head be shaved, and then well rubbed Morning
and Night with the Powers of Amber, and let the Powers of Amber be sprinkled
also upon the Quilt.

XXII. Pulvis Epidemicus aureus, The Golden Antidote or Epidemick Powder.
Bate.] White Sugar Candy iv. Balsam of Sulphur jss. Saffron gr. vj. mix and
make a Powder. Dose, j. in a draught of Wine Posset Drink, in the Morning
fasting, and at Bedtime.

Salmon.] 1. This Medicine will look of a glorious golden color, if the Balsam
be well made, otherwise but of a very dirty hue: which that it may be neatly
done, it is necessary that the Balsam be brought to its thickness with a very
gentle heat, etc.

2. This being mixed with a little pure, sweet, new made Butter, made in April,
May, or June, will make a famous Pectoral Balsam, of a pure golden color, and
not unpleasant, which will do wonders in Diseases of the Breast, Lungs, and
Bowels.

XXIII. * Pulvis Epilepticus, A Powder against the Falling Sickness.
Bate.] Roots of white Dittany, Miselto of the Oak, Contrayerva, Virginia
Snakeroot, Roots of Male Peony (gathered in a proper time) Seeds of Male Peony,
Magistery of Hartshorn, and of Elks-hoofs, A. ij. Roots of wild Valerian j.
red Coral, Man's Skull, A. iij. Lapis Hyacinth, j. Occidental Bezoar jss.
Oriental Bezoar j. mix and make a fine Powder, S. A. add Musk, gr. v. Leaves of
Gold, No 30. and mix them.

Salmon.] 1. It is not only good against the Falling Sickness, but most cold
and moist Diseases of the Head, Brain and Nerves, and is an exceeding good
Stomatick.

2. It also prevails against all sorts of malign and pestilential Fevers,
casting forth the Poison by sweat; and cures the Bitings of mad Dogs, Serpents,
and other venomous Creatures.

3. Dose, ss. ad j. vel jss. in any proper Vehicle Morning and Night for many
days, more especially three or four days before and after the Change and Full
of the Moon.

XXIV. * Pulvis Febrifugus certus; A sure Powder against Agues.
Bate.] Virginea Snakeroot ij. Contrayerva, Gentian. Zedoary, Seeds of Citrons,
Carduus Ben. Occidental Bezoar, A. j. Specific Vegetable, i. e. Cortex
Peruvianus iv. mix and make a Powder. Dose, j. every fourth hour between the
Fits, in a Glass of Wine, etc.

Salmon.] 1. Before the giving of this Powder it is necessary that the Body be
prepared by Universals, that the morbifick Matter lying in the first passages
may be evacuated; for which purpose the Emetick Tartar of Mynsicht is to be
exhibited once or twice (if the strength of the Sick will bear it) to gr. iv.
v. or vj. and after that a proper Infusion of Sena, to cleanse the Bowels.

2. This done you may exhibit the Powder according to the Direction in the
Recipe, and you Will find it as certain in its Effects as any Medicine can be
in the World; I never to my knowledge gave it in an Ague where it mist the
Cure, or did not perform it according to expectation.

3. But this you must note, that as it is of absolute necessity to evacuate and
cleanse beforehand; so it is as pernicious to purge after, for purging undoes
what the Styptick had before done, and gives room for the return of the Fits
again.

4. Moreover you must be sure to continue the use of if for sometime after the
Fits have left the Patient, lest by a too early leaving it off, you seem to do
the work but by halves, and the Fits renew with a greater force.

5. Lastly, You must avoid it as Poison in all continent or continual Fevers,
whether non-putrid, putrid, malign, or pestilential, for if it be given in
those cases, it locks up the Putrefaction, Malignity and Poison within the
Body, and so having no place to vanish at, immediately recurres to the Center,
assaults the vital Spirits, and seizes upon the Heart, overcoming the whole
Economy of the Humane Frame, to the certain Destruction of the Patient; the
which Tragedy as it has been often managed by some of our Collegiate Quacks, my
own Eyes have been too many times Witnesses of.

XXV. * Pulvis Griseus, The gray Powder.
Bate.] Crabs Eyes, Sage, A. ij. white Chalk j. Nutmegs j. mix and make a
Powder. It is an admirable thing agianst a Diarrhoea or Looseness, Palpitation
of the Heart, Acidity of the Blood, Stone, etc. Dose, j. ad j.

Salmon.] 1. It is powerful against a Cardialgia, or Pain at Stomach, though
never so vehement, which it remedies by absorbing the Acid which causes it.

2. You may give it j. at a time, Morning and Evening, or at the time when the
pain is, or in a Heart-burning in a little Barley Cream, etc.

XXVI. * Pulvis Hemoptoicus, A Powder against Spitting of Blood.
Bate.] Fine Bole jss. white Starch iij. Sugar of Roses ss. Oil of Aniseeds,
gut. ij. mix and make a Powder. Dose, jss. thrice a day or oftener; in a
spitting of Blood, there is nothing equal to it.

Salmon.] 1. That it may be made more effectual, you ought to add to it
Catechu, Jesuits Bark both in fine Powder, A. j. and if white Henbane-seeds
iv. be also added, it will yet be more powerful to the Intention, but then the
Dose need not to exceed j.

2. But if you would have it more prevalent to all intentions and purposes of
that kind, viz. not only to stop all Fluxes of Blood, but also all Fluxes of
the Bowels, it will be necessary to add to the Composition Opium in fine Powder
ij. so will it be effectual above any other Medicine yet known, of what kind so
ever, and may then be given twice a day ad j. in any Specific Vehicle.

XXVII. Pulvis Hermodactylorum compositus, Powder of Hermodacts compound.
Bate.] Man's Bones calcined. Hermodacts, Turbeth, Scammony, Sena, white Sugar,
A. p. ae. mix and make a Powder. It effectually attracts and expels soft tough
Phlegm, and other viscous Humors from the very Joints. It cures the Gout in the
Feet and Hands, and Pains in any other Joint, proceeding from the same Humors.
Dose, j.

Salmon.] 1. It purges well, but with some small gripings, which the Sena given
in the gross substance occasions, and therefore to prevent that, it would be
good to add to the Composition a seventh part of the Powder of Liquorice.

2. It is good against the Scurvy, Dropsy, Jaundice, and King's Evil, and may
be given every third or fourth day, according to the condition and strength of
the Patient.

XXVIII. * Pulvis Hystericus, A Powder against Fits of the Mother.
Bate.] The inward Skin of a Capon's Gizard iv. the yellow of Orange-peels j.
mix and make a Powder. Dose, j. in the Fit, and every fourth hour: it is one of
the best of Remedies.

Salmon.] 1. You may give it a ij. ad iv. upon the approach of the Fit, in some
Antihysterick-water or Conserve.

2. But used as a preventive, and to cure the Disease, it ought to be given
Morning and Night for a whole Month together. It is good against Vapors, expels
Wind, eases the Cholick, etc.

XXIV. * Pulvis Ictericus, A Powder against the Yellow Jaundice.
Bate.] Goose-dung gathered in the Springtime, dried in the Sun, and finely
poudered ij. the best Saffron j. white Sugar Candy ij. mix and make a Powder.
Dose, ij. twice a day in Rhenish Wine for six days together. Or thus. Roots of
Turmerick, white Tartar, Mars prepared, A. ss. Earthworms, choice Rhubarb, A.
ij. mix and make a Powder. Dose, j. in a little Glass of White Wind.

Salmon.] 1. I have seen excellent Effects of the first Composition, and have
heard the latter commended, but never tried it my self.

2. An Acquaintance of mine, a Learned Physician, usually makes both the
Compositions into one, and assures me that he never yet found it once to fail.

XXX. * Pulvis Lateralis, A Powder for a Pain in the Side.
Bate.] Acorns hulled vj. Nutmegs j. white Sugar ij. mix and make a Powder,
which is also called Pulvis Iliacus and Colicus. Dose, j. at a time, twice or
thrice a day, against the Iliack Passion, Cholick, Pain, Stitches in the Side,
Wind, Pains of the Gout, etc.

Salmon] 1. It is accounted a Specific against Stitches in the Side; but if
you add to it Camphire ij. Thebian Opium in fine Powder j. the Composition will
be much the better.

2. You may with this addition give it to a Dram every Night going to Bed; and
if the Distemper be vehement every Morning and Night, etc.

XXXI. * Pulvis Liliaceus, The Lilly Powder.
Bate.] Dried Roots of white Lillies ijss. Ceruse of Antimony iij. Nutmegs,
Venice Turpentine (boiled to hardness) A. ij. Sugar of Roses j. mix and make a
Powder, S. A. Dose, ad iss. twice a day with Syrup of Water Lillies, against
Sharpness of Urine in the French Pox, etc.

Salmon.] 1. It is not only good to stop the Heat and Sharpness of Urine, but
(being used after Universals) to stop a Gonorrhoea in Men and the Whites in
Women, as also Fluxes of the Bowels.

2. If the Disease be vehement, it may be given three or four times a day,
adding to each Dose white Vitriol, gr. iv. Roch Alum, gr. vj.

XXXII. Pulvis Martialis compositus, Powder of Mars compound.
Bate.] Mars prepared vj. Cassia Lignea, Nutmegs, A. ss. Cloves, Mace, A. ij.
white Sugar i. mix and make a Powder. It is a powerful Remedy against the
Cachexia, in Maids, Women, or Men, whether they be young or old. Dose, j. ad ij.

Salmon.] 1. You may prepare Mars by laying the Filings thin spread upon Pewter
or Earthen Plates in Dew for many days and nights till they are wholly turned
to Rust, which may then be poudered for this Work.

2. Or thus: Dissolve Salt of Wormwood, Scurvy Grass or Tartar in
Centory-water, with which moisten Filings of Iron, and dry them, repeating this
work ten times or oftener, and then make them into a fine Powder.

3. Or thus. Pure Filings of Mars, white Tartar in fine Powder, Ana.
Carduus-water, q. s. mix and make a Mass like an Electuary; put it into an
Earthen-pan, and bake it in an Oven with a gentle heart; powder it fine, and
with more Carduus-water make a Paste again, which dry in an Oven as before,
repeating this work four or five times, till the whole body of the Mars is
prepared.

XXXIII. Pulvis Odoratus, The sweet Powder.
Bate.] Meal of Orrice-roots xiv. Lignum Rhodium ij. sweet Marjoram iij. Cloves
j. Limon-Peels v. Cypress-roots j. Calamus Aromaticus vj. Damask Roses iv. Red
Roses ij. Benjamine, Styrax calamita, A. j. Labdanum ss. mix and make a gross
Powder. It is used to be scattered among Cloths to preserve them from Moaths.
If all these Ingredients be put into very strong Beer, and distilled in a
common Rose Water still (hanging in the Receiver Musk, gr. vj. tied up in a
fine Bag) you will have a most Odoriferous water, of singular use.

Salmon.] 1. The Powder being put into a Quilt, and applied to the Head, is
said to comfort the Brain and Animal Spirits.

2. The Water being drawn up the Nostrils recreates all the Animal Functions,
revives the Spirits, chears the Heart and strengthens Nature; but much more if
taken inwardly ad ss. upon any Fainting and Swooning.

3. But you must be cautious, that you never give it to such as are troubled
with Vapors, or Rising of the Mother, or are apt to have hysteric Fits,
because it is thought to induce them.

XXXIV. * Pulvis Ophthalmicus, The Eye Powder.
Bate.] Tops of Eyebright iij. common Fennel-seeds ij. Seeds of Rue ss. Mace
ij. trebble refined Sugar vj. mix and make a Powder, S. A. Dose, one Spoonful
thrice a day: See the Virtues of the Pulvis Cibarius.

Salmon.] 1. The Composition is good, but it would be much better, if thereto
you added Rosemary-flowers gathered in their prime iij.

2. It may be taken in Rosemary-water, drinking immediately after it Hungary
Water ij. in a Glass of White Wind.

XXXV. * Pulvis Oxytocius, The Birth Powder.
Bate.] Saffron, Cassia Lignea, Myrrh, white Amber, A. ij. Chrysocolla j. mix
and make a fine Powder. Dose, iv. in Mugwort or Savin-water; it is a most
powerful Medicament to accelerate the Birth, provoke the Terms, etc.

Salmon.] 1. The Medicament is proper for the intention, but it is a much
better to be given in White or Rhenish Wine; but if not in Wine, rather use
Onion-water, or Water of the biting Arsmart.

2. If the first Dose does not the feat, you ought to repeat it at a due
distance of time, and that to the third Dose, if necessity requires it.

XXXVI. * Pulvis Pannonicus rubeus, The Red Hungarian Powder.
Bate.] Fine Bole prepared with Rose Water and Vinegar iij. Terra Lemnia ij.
Emeralds, Ruby, Sapphir, Jacynth, Bone of a Stag's Heart, red Coral, A. ss.
white Coral vj. Spodium, Pearls, A. v. Cinnamon, red Sanders, Seeds of Sorrel,
A. ij. Cloves, Saffron, A. j. Citron-Peels white Sanders, A. iss. Ivory iij.
mix and make a subtle Powder; to which add Leaves of Gold, No 50. mix them. It
is of great Power in curing malign, contagious, and pestilential Fevers. Dose,
j. ad j.

Salmon.] 1. In some Compositions there is Vnicorns-horn added, but that which
supplies the place thereof in all Apothecaries and Druggists Shops, is the Horn
of a great Fish, found in Groynland, which the Islanders call Narwall; whose
Horn is white, hard, heavy, twisted, hollow within for some space, and from one
to two Else long, which serves him as a defense against other Fish, and to kill
great Whales.

2. The Horns of this great Fish, were formerly very rare, and the Fish it self
very little known: but the late constant fishing in those Seas have made them
more frequent and common in England, Holland, Denmark, Germany, and other
places.

3. This Powder is used in malignant Fevers, and against all Epidemick
Distempers, and all sorts of Poisons. It prevails wonderfully against the
Smallpox, for it expels the malignity, and strengthens the noble Parts.

4. It is generally given in some Cordial-water, sweetened with Syrup of
Cleve-gilliflowers, Limons, or Granates, and taken fasting in the Morning, and
last at Night going to Bed.

5. You may make it into Tablets if you mix of this Powder jss. with trebble
refined Sugar xij. (dissolved in Damask Rose Water) and then boiled up to the
consistency of a solid Electuary.

XXXVII. * Pulvis Pectoralis, The Pectoral Powder.
Bate.] The white parts of Benjamine jss. Sulphur vive iij. Aniseeds j. Sugar
of Roses ij. mix and make a Powder. Dose, ad jss. twice a day in soft boiled
Egg.

Salmon.] 1. It is an excellent thing indeed against Coughs, Colds, Asthma's,
Wheasing, Hoarseness, and other Distempers of the Breast and Lungs, proceeding
from Tartarous humors, etc.

2. If the Cough be vehement it may be given thrice a day, and that in Syrup of
Hyssop or Liquorice.

XXXVIII. * Pulvis Pepticus, The digestive Pouper.

Bate.] The yellow of Orange-peels candied, and chopped small iv. Coriander
Comfitz iv. Seeds of Anise, Caraways, and Fennel, A. ij. Aromaticum Rosatum ss.
Salt of Wormwood j. Mint in Powder ij. Sugar Candy the weight of them all: mix
and make a gross Powder. Dose, j. after every Meal.

Salmon.] 1. What the Aromaticum Rosatum is, and how it is made, see in our
Pharm. Land. Lib. 4. Cap. 21. Sect. 2. where you have its Virtues and Uses.

2. It strengthens the Stomach, warms it, and causes a good Digestion,
expelling Wind, and preventing Crudities; and with all causes a sweet Breath.

XXXIX. Pulvis Pleres-Archonticon, The great Restorative Powder.
Bate.] Cinnamon, Cloves, Xyloaloes, Galangal, Nutmegs, Ginger, red Roses,
Indian Spicknard, Schaenanth (the some omit) Spodium, Cyprus, Violets, A. j.
Mace and Liquorice, Mastich, Styrax calamita, Basil, Marjoram, Costmary, Pepper
long and white, Cardamoms, Myrttle-berries, Citron-peels, A. gr. 36. Pearl,
Behen white and red, red Coral tosted Silk, A. gr. 18. Camphire, gr, iv. mix
and make a subtle Powder; with this Powder ss. and trebble refined Sugar viij.
dissolved in Mint-water) Stomatick Tablets may be made, by boiling them to a
due consistency.

Salmon.] 1. It Is said to resist Melancholy, cheer the Heart, and restore in
Consumption: it is Cephalic, Neurotick, Stomatick and Cardiack.

2. It expels Wind, corrects sharp Humors in the Bowels, gives ease in the
Cholick, and prevails against Apoplexies, Epilepsies, Palsies, Convulsions, and
all other cold and moist Diseases of the Nerves.

3. It is good against the Vertigo and Lethargy, restores a decayed Memory,
quickens all the Senses, and and chears the Spirits natural Vital and Animal,
etc. Dose, ad j. or more, Morning and Night.

XL. * Pulvis Pleuriticus, A Powder against the Pleurisy.
Bate.] Flowers of Sulphur ij. Boars Tooth, Jaw of a Pike, A. j. Com
Poppyflowers ss. mix and make a Powder. Dose, j. it is said to be a stupendous
Antipleuritick given with Sugar of Roses.

Salmon.] 1. These Ingredients are all fixed Alcalies, which absorb the Acid
which causes a Coagulum in the Blood, and so far as it takes away that Acidity,
it takes away the Cause of that Disease.

2. It may be given Morning and Night in Syrup of Corn Poppies, or other proper
Vehicle which the Sick best likes.

XLI. * Pulvis Purpureus, The purple Powder.

Bate.] Hartshorn calcined, white Amber, red Coral, Pearl prepared, A. j.
Crabs Eyes, Crabs Claws, A. ij. Saffron ss. Cochinele ij. mix and make a
Powder; add thereto Gelly of Hartshorn rasped Ivory, made with Aniseed-water,
q. s. and make therewith little Balls, S. A. Dose, j. ad ij. against the
Measles, Smallpox, etc.

Salmon.] 1. It is good also against the Purples, Spotted Fever and the Plague.
or any contagious or pestilential Disease, Poison, the biting of mad Dogs, or
any other venomous Creature, etc.

2. Give it every Morning fasting, and every Night going to Bed in a little
Syrup of Citrons-peels, or other proper Vehicle.

XLII. * Pulvis ad Rachitidem, A Powder against the Rickets in Children.

Bate.] Powder of the Roots of Osmund royal iv. Sugar ij. mix them. Sprinkle a
little thereof upon all their thin or liquid Food, so as they may take ij. or
iij. of it in a day.

Salmon.] 1. Or you may give it (as you give Spice or grated Ginger in drink)
in a Decoction of Liverwort, Figs, Raisons of the Sun and Currants, which by
reason of the pleasantness of the Vehicle, the Child will scarcely refuse.

2. It will be best to give it j. in the Morning fasting: j. an hour before
Dinnertime; and j. at time of sleep, and to continue it for sive or six Weeks
together.

XLIII. Pulvis sine Pari, A Powder without Equal.
Bate.] Auripigment, Verdigrise, A. ij. Burnt Alom j. Colcothar ss. mix and
make a Powder. Sprinkle this a little upon any place ulcerated, and apply over
it Vnguentum de Minio, spread upon Cloth, letting it lie till the Eschar will
fall off its own accord, or may be easily separated. And let the Sick take in
the mean time a Decoction made with Guajacum, Liquorice and Raisons, as their
common drink.

Salmon.] 1. It is very sharp and painful, and therefore must be used with
great caution; it is not for a Novice to meddle with it, lest ill accidents
follow which he knows not how to help.

2. You ought to consider the place, and to beware that it touches not any
naked Nerve, lest it induces Convulsions, and other mischiefs not thought of,
nor easily removed.

XLIV. * Pulvis Solearis, A Powder for the Feet.
Bate.] Cumin iij. Cloves j. Salt decripitated iv. mix, and make a Powder. It
may be quilted in Socks, and applied to the Soles of the Feet of such as are
troubled with the Gout.

Salmon.] You may add whatsoever has a strong and attractive Virtue; such as
Rochet-seed, Mustard Seed, Stavesacre, and the like.

2. If it draws much Humidity, you must change twice a day, but while the
Application keeps dry it may be worn: Powder of Burdock Leaves is good in this
case.

XLV. * Pulvis Sternutatorius, A Sneezing Powder.
Bate.] Marjoram, Rosemary, Betony, Flowers of Lilly Convally, A. iij. Nutmegs
ij. Volatile Sal Armoniack j. mix and make a Powder. It is good against Pains
of the Head, Lethargies, Gouts, etc.

Salmon.] 1. Unless you keep the Powder in a Glass close stopped, the Volatile
Sal Armoniack will quickly lose it self, which it will yet do, by often opening
it.

2. It is designed to purge the Head and Brain of gross phlegmatic Humors which
offend it; but it will be much more effectual if thereto be added sweet-scented
Tobacco ss. in fine Powder.

XLVL. * Pulvis Stomachicus, A Stomach Powder.
Bate.] The inward Skins of Capons Gizards iv. Nutmegs, Mace, Seeds of
Coriander Anise. Fennel, A. iij. Mint j. Liquorice ij. Sugar of Roses ij. mix
and make a Powder. It is good against the Pains pf the Stomach, etc. Dose, a j.
ad ij.

Salmon.] 1. It is not only good against Pains of the Stomach, Gripings of the
Bowels, Cholick, Wind, and the like; but a Specific against hysteric Vapors,
Fits of the Mother, and other Distempers of the Womb.

2. In this latter case it may be given every fourth hour, in any proper
hysteric Water.

XLVII. * Pulvis ad Strumas, A Powder against the King's Evil.
Bate.] Sponge Stone iij. Sal Gem ij. Tartar vitriolate j. mix and make a
Powder. Dose, ij. twice a day, for twelve days together.

Salmon.] 1. If you take the Sponge it self, and dry it so as it may be beaten
into Powder, which is a kind of roasting, scorching, or half calcining it, it
may do as well, as the Sponge Stone it self.

2. It is said to be a Specific in the Cure of the King's Evil in what part of
the Body and how inveterate soever, exceeding all other Medicines for that
purpose in the World.

3. But it must be taken for a longer time than our Author prescribes, at least
for six or seven Weeks together: and if there be any Ulcers, let it be strewed
upon them, etc.

XLVIII. Pulvis Sympatheticus, The Sympathetick Powder of Sir Kenelm Digby.
Bare.] It is made by calcining Roman Vitriol with the Sunbeams, through the
help of a Burning-glass, and then poudering it. See the Virtues of the
Vnguentum Sympatheticum.

Salmon]. 1. It is best to be done by a concave Reflecting-glass; one of a Foot
Diameter will do admirably well; but the larger it is, so much the better, and
the sooner it performs the Operation.

2. Dissolve a little of it in fair warm Water ( ij. to half a Pint) and dip a
bloody Cloth (taken from any Wound) in it, keeping them in a very gentle and
temperate heat, and washing the Wound with warm Urine, keeping it clean and
warm; and it will quickly be healed without any other Remedy.

3. After the same manner it cures Ulcers, if a Cloth or Rag (bedaubed with the
Pus or Sanies of the Ulcer) be dipped and kept in as before, etc.

XLIX. * Pulvis Vermifugue, A Powder killing Worms.
Bate.] Hartshorn, Rhubarb, Coraline, Wormseed, Ana. p. ae. mix and make a
Powder. Dose, j. ad ss. continually for three days, about the New and Full Moon.

Salmon.] 1. Whether the Hartshorn ought to be calcined or not is dubious: if
it be not calcined, it will be somewhat troublesome to be reduced to Powder;
the best way will be to calcine it Philosophically, as we have taught in our
Seplasium, Lib. 7. Cap. 13. Sect. 9. to which you are referred.

2. Though some may think it best to give the Powder about the New and Full Moon,
yet Experience has told me, that where there is Worms, it will do at any time.
Dose, a j. ad ij. v^l j. in elder People.

L. * Pulvis Vvularis, Powder for the Uvula, commonly called the Palate.

Bate.] Balaustians, Roots of Bistort and Tormentil, A. ss. Alum ij. mix and
make a Powder. Let it be put upon the Uvula and Palate with your Finger, or
with Lint, often in a day.

Salmon.] 1. It is designed against a Soreness, Swelling or Tumor, Lassitude or
Weakness of the Uvula, which Country People call the falling down of the
Palate, for which it is an excellent thing.

2. It also heals Ulcers in the Throat, Mouth and Gums, Cankers, and other like
Distempers of those parts.

LI. * Ranarum Hepata, Livers of Frogs.
Bate.] They are prepared by drying them upon Colewort Leaves in a closed
Vessel, and then poudring them, S. A. Dose, ss. against the Epilepsie, Quartan
Ague, etc.

Salmon.] 1. This Powder is a Specific against the Falling Sickness, and other
Diseases of the Head and Brain, and as some say, has a Virtue against Quartan
Agues, but of that I know nothing by Experience.

2. If they be dried and prepared with the Galls adjoining, the Medicine will
be stronger and better; and may then be given Morning and Evening, a j. ad ij.
in any fit Vehicle.

LII. * Testes Equi preparati, Testicles of a Horse prepared.
Bate.] They are taken from a living Horse, cut in pieces and washed with White
Wine, speedily dried, and reduced into Powder. Dose, j. at a time twice a day,
against the Epilepsie, Stone, pain in the Yard, pissing of purulent Matter,
Cholick, Fits of the Mother, Barrenness in Women, dead Child, difficult Labor,
Suppression of the Loches, etc. Dose, ad j.

Salmon.] 1. Let it be given in any Fit as the necessity requires, in some
proper and specific Vehicle; but otherwise, (the necessity not being present)
only Morning and Evening in a Glass of White Wind, or some Antepileptick-water.

2. It is singular good against Convulsion, Vapors, Wind, and other Distempers
of the Bowels given in Juniper-water.

LIII. * Testes Apri preparati, Testicles of a Boar prepared.
Bate.] After the same manner are prepared the Testicles of a Boar, or wild
Boar.

Salmon.] 1. They have all the Virtues of the former, and in my Opinion are
somewhat the more powerful Medicine.

2. Against Fits of the Mother give them thus. Of this Powder, powder of
Castoreum, A. j. Filings of Ox-horns, and of Elks hoofs, A. gr. 10, mix for a
Dose.

LIVE. * Tragea Granorum Acts, Powder of Elder-berries.
Bate.] Juice of ripe Elder-berries, q. v. Rie-meal or Flower, q. s. so as to
make it into a Paste: of which form small Loaves, which bake in an Oven as hard
as Bisquit: these powder, and with fresh Juice of Berries make it into Paste
again, and as before bake it, and repeat this work the third time; after which
reduce all into a subtle Powder, to every Ounce of which add Nutmeg in Powder
j. Dose, j. in the Yolk of an Egg, against the Bloody Flux, immoderate Flux of
the Courses, etc.

Salmon.] 1. Quercetan is the Author of it (as it is in his Pharmacopoeia, page
mea. 426.) from whom Schroder has borrowed it, who says it is a Specific
Arcanum against the Bloody Flux.

2. If it be thus compounded it is better. Of this Powder iv. Catechu in powder
ij. Opium in fine powder, gr. v. mix them for five Doses, to be given at Night
going to Bed: It prevails against Catarrhs, and all sorts of Fluxes whatsoever.

Added by the Translator.

LV. Pulvis and Sulphur Antimonii, Powder and Sulphur of Antimony, commonly
called Russel's Powder.
Salmon.] 1. Choice Antimony reduced into gross Powder, put it into a Crucible,
and melt it making it red-hot; then pour it from aloft into a large Vessel full
of Water, so will the Powder of the Antimony settle to the bottom, of a dirty
reddish color; and the separated Sulphur (of a kind of yellowish or Orange
tawney color) swim on top, which gather a part and keep for use.

2. The first, or that which sinks to the bottom is called the greater Species:
The latter, or Sulphur which swims on top is called the lesser Species: The
former works more gently, and may be given a j. ad j. it causing Vomiting in
some, and in some not, but is commonly given, till it ceases working. The
latter is given a gr. vj. ad xij. and so increased Grain by Grain to twenty,
according as the Age and Strength will permit.

3. In some it works violently (yet safely) in others very gently, and it is
given (as the former) so long till it will not work at all.

4. It is esteemed by some as a Catholicon, or Universal Remedy against all
Diseases, and is said to operate or work according as Nature designs and the
Disease requires.

5. In some it vomits only, others it purges only; and some it both vomits and
purges; in others it does neither, but provokes an admirable Diaphoresis;
according as it meets with the Morbifick Matter, sending it forth that way,
which Nature is disposed to.

6. It is given against Sickness at Stomach, Wind, Gripings of the the Bowels,
Cholick, Scurvy, Dropsy, Gout, Jaundice, King's Evil, Epilepsie, Apoplexy,
Vertigo, Megrim, Headache, Convulsions, Palsies, and all other Diseases coming
from a cold and moist Cause, or proceeding from tartarous Humors in what part
of the Body soever.

7. The two Pouders seem to be both of one nature, but the former is the
gentler, and therefore given to the weaker Constitutions; the latter, to such
as are of a more strong and robust Nature: At first they are given in the
Morning only, but when the Body becomes a little habituated to their use, they
may then be given Morning and Evening without any danger.

CHAP. XXII. Of ELECTVARIES.
I. Catharticum Caesareum, The Royal Cathartick.
Bate.] PVlp of green (...) Ginger ij. Rosin of Scammony j. confectio Alkermes
ss. Powder of red Roses, Cremor Tartari, A. ij. Oil of Cinnamon, gut. xx.
Spiritus Vitrioli, gut. xvj. Syrup of green Ginger, q. s. mix and make an
Electuary. It is a profitable and pleasant Purge, in all cold Dis-affections,
evacuating without any trouble or disturbance: it recreates the Mind, provokes
the Appetite, and is helpful against a stinking Breath, whether from Mouth or
Nose. It rectifies the Blood, dissipates Wind, and wonderfully prevails against
an excruciating Colic. Dose, j. ad ij.

Salmon.] 1. You may give it in the Morning fasting, with Observations as in
other Purges; it operates very pleasantly and sweetly; but if the Body be very
hard to work upon, let it be given at Night going to Bed.

2. It carries off the tartarous Matter which breeds the Gout; and therefore is
good for gouty Persons to take five or six times every Spring and Fall.

II. * Electuarium Album, The white Electuary.
Bate.] Ceruse of Antimony iv. trebble refined Sugar xij. mix and make a
Powder; to which add Syrup of Eryngo-roots iv. vel q. s. so as to make a very
white Electuary. Dose, ij. or iij. twice a day, increasing the quantity daily
to vj. at a time. It purifies the Blood, and is given against the Cachexia,
Dropsy, Jaundice, Scurvy, and French Pox, etc.

Salmon.] 1. It is strengthening, restorative in Consumptions, and good for a
weak Back.

2. Taking it for some considerable time, it absorbs all the Acidities in the
Blood and Humors, and dissolves the Coagulum, thereby destroying that which is
the Cause of Boils, Botches Scabs, Itch, Tettars, Ring-worms, etc.

III, * Electuarium Asthmaticum, An Electuary against Difficulty of Breathing.
Bate] Flowers of Sulphur iij. Cinnamon j. Ginger iv. Saffron ij. Musk gr. vj.
clarified Honey vj. vel q. s. mix and make an Electuary. Dose, iij. twice a day.

Salmon.] 1. If you add to the Composition powder of Elecampane j. the
Medicament will be much more effectual, augmenting also proportionably the
quantity of the Honey.

2. You may give it alone* and drink after it this. Syrup of Elecampane-roots
ij. Milk-water iij. mix for a Draught.

IV. * Electuarium Caryophyllatum, Electuary of Clove-Gilliflowers.
Bate.] Conserve of Clove Gilliflowers iv. Conserve of red Roses vj. Syrup of
Citron-peels ij. beat all well together, and pass it through a Sieve, and add
thereto Aromaticum Rosatum iij. Cloves cut iij. Ambergrise ss. mix and make an
Electuary. It is of excellent use against loathing of Meat, Pain of the
Stomach, etc. Dose, j. ad ij. etc.

Salmon.] 1. In my Opinion, the Medicament would be much the better if the
Cloves were added in a gross kind of Powder.

2. You may give it in the Morning fasting, and last at Night going to Bed; and
if occasion require, presently after Dinner.

V. * Electuarium Castitatis, An Electuary to cause Chastity.
Bate.] Seeds of Agnus Castus, Henbane, A. j. Camphire ij. Liquorice iv. mix
and make a Powder: add thereto Conserve of Water-lilly-Flowers iij. Syrup of
Water Lillies, q. s. mix and make an Electuary. Dose, ij. or iij. twice a day,
drinking after it Chalybeated Whey; anointing also in the mean while the Reins
and Testicles with Oil of Henbane-seed by expression.

Salmon.] 1. There is nothing upon Earth induces Chastity like Opium, and
Preparations from Saturn, and therefore if you would make it effectual to all
Intentions, you ought to add to the Composition, Saccharum Saturni iv. Opium in
Powder ij.

2. And then you may give it a jss. ad iij. but it ought only to be given at
Night going to Bed.

VI. * Electuarium Chalybeatum, Electuary of Mars prepared.
Bate.] Mars prepared j. Mars purified ss. Pulp of Currants xij. Oil of
Cinnamon or Cloves, gut. 40. mix them, S. A. It is profitably given against the
Green Sickness, Dropsy, etc.

Salmon.] 1. The Dose is from ss. ad j. but it ought to be given at Night going
to Bed, that the Sick may lie warm, and if possible sweat upon it.

2. Otherwise, if it be given in the Morning fasting the Sick ought to labor
stoutly upon it, so as to be brought into a breathing Sweat; or to take a walk
of three or four Miles to heat them; for thereby the Operation will be made
much more excellent, and the Patient receive the greater good by it.

VII. * Electuarium Diarrhodi, Electuary of the Species Diarrhodon abbatis.
Bate.] The Species Diarrhodon abbatis iv. Conserve or Quiddony of Berberries
iij. white Sugar iij. dissolved in Strawberry-water; mix and make an Electuary.
Dose, iij. twice a day, drink after it a draught of Horsleek Whey.

Salmon.] 1. It is a cooling Electuary, and good for such as are in a hectic
Fever, especially if taken according to the Direction.

2. It also prevails against burning Fevers, and hot Distempers of the Stomach
and Liver: it abates violent Heats, strengthens the Ventricle, is pectoral and
carminative.

VIII. Electuarium Ducis Sabaudiae, Electuary of the Duke of Savoy.
Bate.] Sarsaparilla iij. Seeds of dwarf Elder vj. Seeds of Hypericon, Leaves
of Germander, Ground Pine, A. iij. Angelica-root iij. round Birthworth-root vj.
Cinnamon ijss. Cloves iv. Saffron ij. mix and make a subtle Powder, and with
tripple quantity of clarified Honey make an Electuary. Dose, iij. every day for
a whole Year. It is accounted the best Remedy for curing the Gout.

Salmon.] 1. Let it be taken j. in the Morning fasting: j. an hour before
Dinner; and j. at Night going to Bed.

2. You may either take it alone, and drink a Glass of Mead after it; or you
may take it in a Glass of Germander and Ground Pinewine, etc.

IX. * Electuarium Epilepticum, An Electuary against the Falling Sickness.
Bate.] White Dung of a Peacock, dried, Male Peony Roots, A. ij. Roots of
Valerian j. Peony-seed hull'd iij. Caraways ss. mix and make a Powder; to which
add Honey of Rosemary-flowers, q. s. mix them. Dose, ij. etc.

Salmon.] 1. It is designed as a Remedy against the Falling Sickness; but it
would be more powerful to the Intention if these things be added to it,
volatile Salt of Man's Skull, native Cinna^abar, A. ij. Miselto of the Oak j*

2. It may then be given, a i. ad ij. Morning and Evening for sixty days
together, drinking after it a Glass of Rosemary-wine.

X. * Electuarium Juniperinum, Electuary of Juniper Berries.
Bate.] Full ripe jucy Juniper Berries bruised lb j. infuse them in fair Water
lb ij. for three hours, strain out by pressing, and add of trebble refined
Sugar lb j. boil to the consistency of a thick Syrup: then add Electuary of
Sassa^ras iv. Calamus Aromaticu^ in Powder jss. Mace j. Saffron ij. mix them,
S. A. It is Diuretic, Stomatick, etc.

Salmon.] 1. It provokes Urine powerfully, and removes Obstructions of the
Reins, Ureters and Bladder, bringing away tartarous Humors, Sand, Gravel and
Stones if small.

2. If thereto you add Powder of Winter-cherries iij. Powder of Millepedes j.
it will be much more powerful to the Intention. Dose, ij. Morning and Night in
Juniper-wine.

XI. * Electuarium Lithontripticon, An Electuary against the Stone.
Bate.] Venice Turpentine j. Yolks of Eggs, No ij. mix them very well, and add
thereto, Burdock-seeds, Gromwell-seed, both in Powder, A. j. Winter-cherries
iij Lapis Judaicus vj. Syrupus de Althaea, q. s. mix them. Dose, ij. twice a
day (such things being premised as ought to be given beforehand) drinking
after it Water of Haws compound iv. mixed with Sir. de Althaea j.

Salmon.] 1. The quantity of the Winter-cherries is much too little, j. is the
smallest quantity ought to be put into the Composition; to which you may also
add Powder of Sows or Hog-lice, vj.

2. It is really a good thing against all manner of Obstructions in the Reins,
Ureters, or Bladder, whether proceeding from thick and tartarous Humors, Sand,
Gravel, or Stones, and has scarcely a second to it known. Dose, jss. ad iij.
twice or thrice a day, as you see need requires.

XII. Electuarium Macis, Electuary of Mace.
Bate.] Mace infused twenty four hours in Vinegar of Roses and dried j. Seeds
of Citrons, of Carduus, Lignum Vitae, A. jss. make of all a very fine Powder;
to which add the Species Liberant. j. condited Citron-peels j. Theriaca
Andnomachi iij. Conserves of Borrage and Woodsorrel, A. ij. Syrup of
Woodsorrel, q. s. mix and make an Electuary. Its use is in the Plague and
malign Diseases.

Salmon.] 1. What the Species Confectionis Liberantis is, you may see in our
Pharm. Land. Lib. 4. Cap. 21. Sect. 27. The Theriaca Andromachi or Venice
Treacle see also, Lib. 4. Cap. 22. Sect. 25. of the afore-cited Book.

2. It is given in the Measles and Smallpox with very good success. Dose, ss.
ad ij. according to Age and Necessity; and given in the Morning fasting ad j.
It is a good Preservative in pestilential times.

XIII. Electuarium Orvietanum, The Antidote against Poison.
Bate.] Roots of white Dittany, of Bistort, of Tormentil, of Masterwort, of
Gentian, of Carline Thistle, of both sorts of Birthwort, of Cinkfoil, of
Zedoary, of Valerian the greater, of Contrayerva, of Elecampane, Virginea
Snake-root, Leaves of Carduus Ben. of Devils bi^* of Meadow-sweet, of Rue,
S^vin, Pennyroyal, Scordium* Hypericon, Citron-peels, Orange-peels, Cinnamon,
Ba^-berries, Juniper Berries, Toad^-flesh, Ana ij. Vipers-flesh i^ best Saffron
ss. make all in^^ a Powder, to which add Extract of Juniper Berries mad^ with
White Wind, and evap^^rated to the thickness of H^ney, q. s. so as to make
(...) Confection: To which add the Elaeosaccharum of Rue, of A^^ber, of Cloves,
of Juniper A. ij. mix them, S. ^ then add to every Pound of the Confect Venice
Treacle, M^thridate, A. ij. mix agai^^^ This was communicated ^^me by Sir
Robert Talbor. (...) is a most powerful Remed^^ against the Plague, and (...)
malign Fevers. Dose, ^ ad ij.

Salmon.] 1. There are several Compositions of this Antidote: In our Pharm.
Land. Lib. 4. Cap. 22. Sect. 63. we have given you one according to the Italian
form, from Schroder.

2. In our Doron, Medic. Lib. 2. Cap. 22. Sect. 5. we ^ave given you another
from Charras, according as it is made at Paris, and this is accounted the true
Recipe.

3. Our Author here gives you one different from both them (but in my Opinion)
much superior to them for Virtues and Goodness, and not more difficult to make;
this Estimation I put upon it because of the addition of the Elaeosaccharum's,
which vastly add to the value and worth of the Medicament.

4. It is good against all sorts of Poisons, Smallpox, Measles, purple and
spotted Fever, Plague, and other epidemick and malign Diseases; it is
Cephalic, Neurotick, Stomatick, Cardiack, Uterine and Nephritick, prevailing
against cold and moist Diseases of those parts, Cholick, Wind in the Stomach,
etc.

5. It operates much as Mthridate does, and may be given a ss. ad. ij. either
as a Bolus, or dissolved in some proper Vehicle.

XIV. Electuarium Oxydoricum, An Electuary to sharpen the Eyesight.
Bate.] Juices of Rue and Celandine, A. iv. of the best Honey lb. j. boil and
despumate to a due consistency, then add Pouders of the tops of Eyebright (the
black Sprigs) ij. sweet Fennel-seeds vj. Cinnamon, Culebs, Cloves, Mace, black
Pepper, A. j. mix and make an Electuary, S. A. It is an admirable Remedy to
sharper the Eyesight. Dose, iij. twice a day.

Salmon.] 1. It is of as good use being externally used and put into the Eye
Morning and Evening in some small quantity; but then it will be best to leave
the black Pepper out, because of its exceeding hear.

2. Before the putting of it into the Eyes, it will be good towash them with
Aqua Regulata, or some other proper Eye-water; and this will be necessary to be
done, if you only follow the internal use thereof.

XV. * Electuarium Paralytecum, An Electuary against the Palsy.
Bate.] Mustard Seed dried and poudred v. Cressseeds ij. Syrup of the Juice of
Sage lb. j. vel q. s mix and make an Electuary. Dose, ss. every day for some
Months. It is esteemed as one of the best Remedies.

Salmon.] 1. If you add to the Composition, Volatile Salt of Ox-flesh ss. or
rather to each Dose, as it is taken gr. vj. or vij. it will be much more
powerful to the Intention.

2. While this is a taking for sometime, it will be necessary to use Topics;
for which purpose we commend the Oil of Amber to be anointed withal upon the
Paralytick parts, and that twice a day; bathing it in for half an hour at a
time, before a good Fire, and continuing the use thereof for fourteen or twenty
days at least, or as you shall see need require: If these Directions be
followed, you will hardly fail of the Cure of a Palsy, especially if it be
recent.

XVI. * Electuarium Pectorale, A Pectoral Electuary.
Bate.] Pulp of Raisons stoned, Pulp of the Conserve of Red Roses, Syrup of
Maidenhair, A. iv. Sugar Candy in fine Powder iij. Species Diatragacanthi
frigidi ss. Spirit of Sulphur, gut, 25. mix and make an Electuary.

Salmon.] 1. You may in our Pharm. Land. Lib. 4. Cap. 22. Sect. 21. see the way
of making the Species Diatragacanthi frigidi. I must confess I mightily dislike
this way of Decompounding of Medicines: It I was to make a Compound for my
Life, it should only be of simple Ingredients.

2. It is good against Coughs, Colds, Stoppages of the Lungs, Wheasings,
Hoarseness, Asthma's, etc. being taken from ij. ad. ss. at a time, and
leisurely swallowed down the Throat, as often in the day as need requires.

XVII. * Electuarium Piperinum, Electuary of Pepper.
Bate.] Long Peper cut very small jss. Rue in ine Powder ss. Sal Gem v.
Theriaca Januenisis xij. mix them. It is a very excellent thing (after many
other things have been used in vain) against the Cholick, Pain of the Stomach,
etc.

Salmon.] 1. If the Pain of the Stomach proceeds from Wind, as the Cholick (for
the most part does) it may do much good, as also if it proceeds from cold and
moisture: but if it proceeds from an Acid humor, you must have recourse to
other Remedies, as fixed and volatile Alcali's, etc.

2. You may give it a j. ad ij. or more twice a day, viz. Morning and Night,
either alone by it self, or in some proper Vehicle.

3. If Camphire in fine Powder ij. be added, it will add to the Verture of the
Medicine, and be more excellent against Pains of the Cholick.

XVIII. Electuarium Vermifugum, An Electuary for the Worms.
Bate.] Leaves of Bears-foot in Powder ij. clarified Honey vj. mix and make an
Electuary, S. A. It is a most certain Remedy for killing and bringing forth
Worms. Dose, iv. ad ij.

Salmon.] 1. This is a Medicine I wholly dislike; for the Infusion I have known
to be fatal in several; but probably this may be less. dangerous, because that
in drying the Leaves to a Powder many of its sharp, volatile and hurtful
Particles will be lost by exhalation.

2. If you do adventure upon it do it cautiously, giving a small Dose, as a ij.
ad j. at first, and so increase it gradatim: I am very confident, that if it
does not kill the Patient, it will certainly kill the Worms; but it for the
most part proves Emetick.

XIX. Electuarium Antepidemicum, An Electuary against the Plague.
Roots of Contrayerva iij. of Valerian, of Masterwort, Zedoary, A. jss. Seeds
of Angelica hull'd, Dittany of Creet, Myrrh, A: j. Virginea Snake^root ss.
Saffron iij. Opium ij. ( for so much as j. of the Electuary may contain gr. ij.
of Opium:) Pulp of Juniper Berries (extracted with Malaga Wine) xij. Malaga
Wine, q. s. to dissolve the Myrrh and Opium (...) Syrupus Antepidemicus, q. s.
mix and make an Electuary.

Salmon.] 1. It is not only good against the Plague, but all other malign and
epidemical Diseases, which it overcomes by putting the Patient into a very
gentle Sweat.

2. Your best way of giving it will be to dissolve a j. ad ij. (according to
age, and malignity of the Disease) in some proper Plague-water, and so give it
to the Patient (being in Bed) covering him down warm, and causing him to sweat
some hours upon it.

3. If it be given by way of prevention, take j. of it upon a Knives point in
the Morning fasting, and drink after it a Glass of Sack.

CHAP. XXIII. Of PILLS.
1. * Ciceri Tartara, Pills of Tartar.
Bate.] THE best Chio Turpentine ij. Crystals of Tartar j. Species Diaireos
simp. Nitre prepared, A. ij. mix and make a Mass of Pills. They are given twice
a day ss. at a time for some Months, as a preventive against the Gour. See
Mynsicht.

Salmon.] 1. How the Species Diaireos Simplices are made, see in our Pharm.
Land. Lib. 4. Cap. 21. Sect. 10. with their Virtues and Uses.

2. They are not only good against the Gout, but all Diseases proceeding from
Tartar or Tartarous Humors, as Obstructions in the Reins, Ureters, or Bladder,
from Slime, Sand, Gravel, or Stones, etc. Dose, j. twice a day in some proper
Vehicle.

II. * Pilulae Aethiopicae, The Black Pills.
Bate.] Aethiops Minerale ij. Ceruse of Antimony j. Gum Guajaci ss. Extract of
Sarsa compound, q. s. so as to make a Mass for Pills. Dose, ad ij. twice a day,
continually for forty or fifty days together, against the Dropsy, Scurvy,
French Pox, etc.

Salmon.] sect 1. How the Aethiops Minerale is made, see Cap. 9. Sect. 21. of
this Book aforegoing: the Compound extract of Sarsa is made as is taught Cap.
8. Sect. 17. and Cap. 1. Sect. 52. of this first Book.

2. It purges very gently, and is good against all Symptoms proceeding from
Veneral Infection, as also the Relics of the Venereal Disease.

III. * Pilulae de Ammoniaco Magistrales, Magistral Pills of Ammoniacum.
Bate.] Gum Ammoniacum prepared with Vinegar ij. fine Alos jss. Myrrh, Mastich,
Benjamine, A. ss. Saffron, Salt of Wormwood, A. ij. Syrup of Wormwood, q. s.
mix and make a Mass: They purge all tartarous and faeculent Humors, and prevail
much against all sorts of Defluxions, Cachexia's, Obstructions of the Spleen,
and remove the Hardness and Scirrhus thereof, cure inveterate Quartan Agues,
etc. Dose, j. ad ss. etc.

Salmon.] 1. You will do well to separate the Resinous part of the Aloes (which
is of no worth in this case) by extracting it with Water or Juice of Roses or
Violets, etc. whereby the griping Property will be removed, etc.

2. I should like it much better, if instead of the Myrrh, Mastich and Benjamin
you added in their places Resinous Scammony ss. Gum Guajaci j. and so make them
up.

3. By means of this alteration, the Pills will not only be more powerful to
the Purposes intended, but also be a singular Specific against the Gout.

IV. * Pilulae Angelicae, The Angelick Pills.
Bate.] Sena cleansed vj. Rhubarb, Myrrh, Agarick, A. iij. Benjamine jss.
Saffron ij. Flowers of Violets, Borrage, A. M. j. of the depurated Juice of
Cichory lb. jss. clarified Juices of Fumitory, of Borrage, A. lb. ijss. digest
in B. M. for forty eight hours, and express out: add thereto fine Aloes 12.
exhale to the consistency of a Mass for Pills; adding Balsam of Peru ij.
Chemical Oil of* Nutmegs, gut. 20. Salt of Wormwood ij. mix them. It evacuates
very gently, and is of great use for corroboration or strengthening all the more
Noble Vessels, and for correction of vicious Humors. Dose, ss. and more.

Salmon.] 1. There are several sorts of the Angelick Pills, as those of Angelus
Sala, and those of Gralingius, the Compositions of which you see in our Pharm.
Land. Lib. 4. Cap. 23. Sect. 47.86. But this of our Author differs from them
both.

2. Being made according to this Prescript, it is a perfect Extract, which
given whilst recent, works briskly and well, yet with a great deal of
gentleness and sweetness; but if in be old, it works more slowly and dull; but
then it is a singular good Stomatick, and Strengthner of the Bowels.

V. * Pilulae Anticolicae, Pills against the Cholick.
Bate.] Powder of Rue, Sal Gem, Ana. Honey, q. s. so as to make a Mass for
Pills. Dose, ss. at Bedtime, and in the Morning fasting for four days in ever)
Month. It is an approved Medicine for the Cure of the Cholick.

Salmon.] 1. If the Disease be vehement let it be given four times a day, viz.
besides the former times at ten or eleven in the Morning, and at four in the
Afternoon.

2. And after it let the Sick take this Draught: Aquae lactis alexiteriae iv.
Spirit of Opium ij. ad iv, Tincturae Stomatich. gut. 20. mix them.

VI. Pilulae Antimoniales, Antimonial Pills.
Bate.] Glass of Antimony (prepared with Spirit of Vitriol and whitned) in
subtle Powder ss. Sugar Candy iij. Wheat Flour iv. Saffron j. boil in fair
Water to a thickness like Paste (bewaring that you burn them not) of which make
Pills. These Pills are accounted as a true Cure for Fevers or Agues. Dose, ss.
ad j. in the beginning of the cold Fit.

Salmon.] 1. If the Vitrum Antimonij be rightly prepared, it will work in some
Constitutions in half a Grain, in others in a Grain; in some in gr. jss. and in
the strongest in gr. ij. in some also it will work both upwards and downwards;
but chiefly downwards, by reason of its correction with the Spirit of Vitriol.

2. From this Calculation you may safely enough give these Pills from ss. ad j.
and in strong Constitutions to ss. but I fear, if you give them ad j. you will
outrun the Constable, unless you meet with a very hard and robustick Habit of
Body.

VII. * Pilulae Antipodagricae, Pills against the Gout.

Bate.] Chosen Castor in fine Ponder ss. white Amber, Germander, Ground Pine,
A. vj. Salt of Amber, Ceruse of Antimony, Balsam of Tolu, Opopanax, A. j. Roots
of Butterbur, iij. Chio Turpentine ij. Terebinthinated Balsam of Sulphur, q. s.
mix and make a Mass for Pills. Dose, ss. twice a day, for two or three Months
together, drinking in the mean while as common Drink, A Decoction of the Roots
of Butterbur, Sarsa, China, with Raisons of the Sun, etc.

Salmon.] 1. What Specific Virtue the Castor has against the Gout, I cannot
well tell; but if in the place thereof, as much Volatile Salt of the Flesh of
any Animal be added, I am sure you will not be deceived of the desired Effects.

2. It will then be not only a Specific against the Gout, but also against
Slime, Sand, Gravel or Stone, whether in Reins or Bladder; and a famous
restorer in Consumptions.

VIII. * Pilulae Balsamicae, The Balsamic Pills.

Bate.] Extractum Eustachij v. Troches Alhandae j. Saffron j. Crude Mercury
strained through Leather j. Venice Turpentine, q. s. mix and make a Mass, S. A.
They are excellent against the French Pox, Leprosy, Gout, etc.

Salmon.] 1. These are made in spite of the Pills of Chalmetous Enchirid.
Chirurgic. Lib. 5. Cap. 7. Page 338. which are accounted an infallible Remedy
for the French Pox, and all its Symptoms.

2. They are thus made. Rhubarb in fine Powder x. Scammony iij. Quick silver
strained through Cloth) ij. vj. which kill with Syrup or Juice of Limon, adding
to the said Syrup or Juice Wheat-slower ij, Musk j. mix and make a Mass of
Pills, so big as five of them may weigh a Dram.

3. Of these Pills he gives one at a time, in the Morning, and lets them fast
six hours after it, which he continues for thirty days together, without the
use of any other Medicament, whether Cathartick, or Topic, etc.

4. But whether the Author intended x. or x. of the Rhubarb, is something
doubtful; and possibly there might be a Mistake of the Printer: If not, a Pill
of ten Grains (which will not contain above one Grain of the Mercury) is an
inconsiderable Dose for such a Cure, and certainly can do but little in order
to it.

5. But it may be the Author might mean j. for a Dose, for so he may be
understood, as well as one Pill, his Words are, Sumat quotidie unam; now
whether this Vnam signifies Drachmam unam, or Pilulam unam, must ^^e left to
the Prudence of the Physician to judge of.

6. For my part, (if the Printer has made no fault) I am of Opinion, it ought
to be understood Drachmam unam, and not Pilulam: but if there be a mistake, and
it ought to be of the Rhubarb but x. as Bonetus in his Mercurius compatil. page
451. seems to inculcate, and correct the Copy, then it is most probable that
Pilulam unam is intended.

7. Having thus discanted upon the Pills of Chalmeteus, which seems to be the
Pattern, we now come to speak to these of our Author, which we think do very
much transcend the other, the Mercury being joined with brisker and nimbler
Purgers.

8. They are not only prevalent against the Diseases named in our Text, but one
of the greatest Specificks in the World against Pains, Aches, and Lameness in
any part of the Body, as also a Rheumatism, though never so vehement and extreme.

9. I have cured several of Rheumatisms with them, after many Years affliction,
and when all other Medicines had proved ineffectual; upon the use of these
Pills for some certain time, they had ease, and after a while longer were
perfectly cured to admiration, as if the Disease had been removed by
Enchantment.

10. Make the Mass into small Pills, so as eight or ten may make a Scruple,
which is a Dose, to be given every Night going to Bed, for twenty or thirty
days together, as the Age of the Patient, Strength of the Body, and Nature of
the Distemper, may in Prudence require.

11. But if you give them not every day, but with Intervals, as of two or three
days between, then you may safely enough increase the Dose, a j. ad ij. or j.

IX. * Pilulae Costitatis, Pills inducing Chastity.
Bate.] Powder of Water-lilly-roots ss. Salt of Saturn ij. bone of the
Cuttle-fish vj. Camphire jx. Syrup of Water Lillies, q. s. mix and make a Mass.
Dose, ss. twice a day for some days. It prevails admirably against a
Gonorrhoea, Priapism, etc. Universals being premised in their Cure.

Salmon.] 1. If it be intended purely for Chastity's sake, I know of no use of
the Bone of the Cuttle-fish nor Camphire, the latter (if any thing may be
learnt by Experience) being rather provocative; than otherwise.

2. And therefore instead of those two Ingredients I should rather add Extract
of Opium so much as each Dose may contain, gr. j. thereof. But in case of a
Gonorrhoea, the Whites, Weakness of the Back, etc. you may make them as
prescribed in the Text, with the addition of the Opium, etc.

X. * Pilulae Catarrhales, Pills against Catarrhs.
Bate.] Extract of Liquorice j. Rhodaloes ss. Pilulae de Cynoglosso ij. mix
them. Dose, j. ad ij. in Catarrhs, Coughs, etc. at Bedtime, for four or five
days.

Salmon.] 1. They are excellent good in stopping any violent Defluxion of
Rheum, whether down the Throat upon the Lungs, or any other part whatsoever;
and this they do by an universal thickning of the Humor, through the whole Body
at once.

2. Let the Pills be swallowed first, and then give after them this Draught.
Black Cherry-water, Poppy-water, A. jss. Lettice-water, Aqua Mirabilis, A. vj.
Syrup of Limons j. mix them: Give it and let the Sick compose themselves to
Sleep.

XI. * Pilulae Crapulariae, Pills for a Surfeit.
Bate.] Diagrydium, Species Hiera, A. vj. fine Aloes jss. Oil of Cloves ss. S.
V. q. s. mix and make a Mass, S: A. Dose, j. going to Bed after Surfeiting or
Drunkenness.

Salmon.] 1. If you make them up with S. V. they will scarcely work at all, nor
(if they be old) give so much as one Stool: your better way therefore is to
make them up with some proper Syrup or Water.

2. They evacuate the Stomach, cleanse the Bowels, and carry off the Recrements
of Humors heaped up together, and make the Body lightsome and pleasant.

XII. * Pilulae Cretaceae, Chalk Pills.
Bate.] Pure white Chalk white Sanders, Nutmegs, Ana. p. ae. with Chio
Turpentine, q. s. make a Mass of Pills. They are good against the Flux of the
Whites, etc. Dose, ad j. twice a day, drinking after them Posset Drink, boiled
with Comfrey or Consound Leaves in it.

Salmon.] 1. They are good against a Gonorrhoea, Whites, Gleets, Weepings, etc.
being taken according to direction: but they will perform much more if Catechu
j. Extract of Opium, gr. iv. be added.

2. They also cure a Cardialgia or Pain of the Stomach to admiration, if
regularly taken for some convenient time.

XIII. Pilulae de Creta Palmarij, Palmarius his Pills of Chalk.
Bate.] Fine Aloes j. pure white Chalk, white Amber, Myrrh, Gentian, white
Dittany-roots, A. j. Mithridate iv. Turpentine washed ij. Syrup of
Marshmallows, q. s. mix and make a Mass for Pills. Some add Calomelanos ss. or
vj. with the addition of the Calomelanos they are given ad ij. or j. at
Bedtime, every night for fifteen days. There is nothing equal to them for the
Cure of a Gonorrhoea; they are also equally powerful against the Whites in
Women.

Salmon.] 1. They are strengthening Pills, corroborate weak Backs, and stop
Catarrhs being skilfully given, viz. Universals being beforehand premised.

2. With the Calomelanos, they are excellent against tartarous Humors and
Obstructions, more especially stoppages of the Reins, Ureters, and Bladder.

3. If in the first Case for strengthening, and stopping a Gonorrhoea, etc. to
every Dose gr. j. of Opium be added, it will be so much the more powerful.

XIV. * Pilulae Hydropicae, Pills for the Dropsy.
Bate.] Rosin of Jallap, Scammony, Rhubarb, Cambogia, Calomelanos, A. ss.
Ammoniacum (prepared with the Juice of our blew Flower-de-luce) iij. Tartar
vitriolate ij. Mastich j. Saffron j. Spirit of Turpentine, gut. 40. with Syrup
of Buckthorn, q. s. make a Mass. Dose, ij. or more in strong People.

Salmon.] 1. They work briskly and strongly, and may be given in the Morning
fasting, twice a Week, with Observations as in other Purges.

2. But because that such melting Purges much weaken the Bowels, it is
necessary in the Intervals to exhibit Strengthners, sometimes a Dose of
Laudanum at ^^ight going to Bed, at other times a Dose of Tinctura Martis,
which things admirably fortify the Viscera.

3. Otherwise the Water will be in danger of increasing faster on one hand
through weakness of the Bowels, then it will be possible to be carried off with
these Pills on the other; so that the Vital indication seems to be absolutlely
necessary.

XV. * Pilulae Hystericae, Pill for the Womb, or Pills against Fits of the
Mother.
Bate.] Seeds of Agnus Castus j. Rue, Asa fetida, Camphire, A. ij. Castor ss.
Oil of Amber, gut. 40. Syrup of Mugwort, q. s. mix and make a Mass. Dose, ss.
ad gr. 15. every second or third hour, in the time of the Hysteric Fit, as
also over and above, every Night at Bedtime out of the Fit.

Salmon.] 1. The Dose is well enough at time of the Fit; but for the Evening
Dose, you may augment it to ss. or ij.

2. If to the Composition volatile Salt of Hartshorn jss. be added it will be
much more effectual; but it ought to be added just at time of Exhibition.

XVI. Pilulae Lithrontripticae, Pills against the Stone, or Stone-breaking
Pills.
Bate.] Seeds of Broom, of Burdock, Lapis Judaicus, A. j. Chio Turpentine iij.
mix and make a Mass for Pills. Dose, ij. ad j. for twenty or thirty days, etc.

Salmon.] 1. If you cannot get the Lapis Judaicus, our English Spar-stone,
(which is plentiful enough in those Countries where there are Leaden mines) may
supply the place, and is a Specific in this case, proved by many Experiments,
and in my Opinion much exceeds the Lapis Judaicus.

2. Were I to make this Medicament, I should certainly add Winter-cherries in
fine Powder j. which possibly may be worth all the rest of the Medicine; and
upon strong Obstructions, Powder of Sows or Hogs-lice ss. but this we submit to
the Judgment of the Physician.

XVII. * Pilulae Marocostinae, Pills of Herb Mastich and Costus.
Bate.] G^m Ammoniacum (dissolved in four Ounces of Vinegar of Squils) vj. fine
Aloes ( dissolved in Damask Rose Water lb ij. Juice of Limons lb j.) lb j.
Agarick ( mixed with Cinnamon Water ij. Juices of Smallage, Fennel and Wormwood,
A. iij. by beating together) vj. the best Rhubarb ( beaten with Cinnamon Water
vj. Juices of Succory, Burnet and Fumitory, A. viij.) iij. best Saffron ss.
Costus vj. true Herb mastich ss. Wood of Aloes ij. all prepared with Juice of
Citrons iv. Damask Rose Water, q. s. mix every thing well; then add of the
Waters of Peony, Cowslips, Borrage, Bettony, Carduus, Agrimony, Gout Ivy,
Centory the less, Rosemary, black Cherries, A. lb j. vel q. s. digest in B. M.
for three days, strain out, and exhale in B. M. to a due consistency. These
Pills cut, and by degrees expel Tartarous Mucilage collected in the Stomach
Mesentery, Liver and Spleen: They strengthen the Head, and all the Viscera, and
prevail against most Diseases of those parts, arising from such like Causes.
Dose, j. ad j.

Salmon.] 1. The Invention is from Mindererus, whose true Composition you have
in our Pharm. Land. lib. 4. ^ap. 23. Sect. 76. But this thus corrected by our
Author ^s much the better Medicine, and more to be valued.

2. If the Body be hard to work upon, let the Dose be given at Night going to
bed: Otherwise in easy Constitutions, give it in the Morning fasting; and if
it works not vehemently, but very gently, it may be given for two or three days
together.

XVIII. * Pilulae Masticatoriae, Spitting Pills.
Bate.] Seeds of Mustard, Staves-acre, Pellitory of Spain, A. ss. Mastich vj.
mix and make a Powder: add Honey, Wax, ana q. s. mix again and make a Mass. See
Masticatoria.

Salmon.] 1. These are Pills to be chewed in the Mouth, to provoke spitting,
whereby the Head and Brain, and all the parts adjacent are purged and cleansed
of their Recrements.

2. They draw Rheum out of the Teeth and Gums, and thereby ease the Toothach,
help difficulty of Hearing, and are good against Vertigoes, Headaches,
Lethargies, Palsies, and other cold and moist Diseases of the Head and Brain.

3. The Masticatoria, directed to in our Text, (whose Virtues these Pills
contain) you may see Lib. 2. Cap. 9. Sect. 12. following of this Work.

XIX. * Pilulae Matthaei, alias Starkii, Matthews his Pills, but more truly
Starkies Pills.
Bate.] The best Thebian Opium cleansed from all its filth ij. subtle Pouders
of Liquorice, of white Hellebore, of black Hellebore, A. ij. Soap of Salt of
Tartar and Oil of Turpentine (which see in its place) vj. mix them well, adding
Oil of Turpentine q. s. so as to make a mass of Pills; which as often let be
moistened with Oil of Turpentine, as the said mass shall grow dry. Where note,
that some reject the black Hellebor. They are admirably Diuretic,
Diaphoretick, Sudorifick, Lithontriptick, Nephretick, Hydropick, Bechicik,
Anodyne, and Paregorgick; and are given with happy Success in all sorts of
Agues, chiefly Tertians and Quartans. They are profitably given in all sorts of
Catarrhs, pains of the Stomach, of the Head, and of the Teeth; as also against
Coughs, Surfeits, Gouts, Diarrhoea's, Dysenteria's, internal Ulcers and
Apostems, etc. Dose ss. ad j. drinking after it a draught of some proper Liquor.

Salmon.] 1. Some (in making this Pill) leave out the white Hellebor, and put
in only the black; and some (very profitably in my Judgment) leave them both
out, as Starky himself (who was the Original Author of the Medicine) had
resolved long before he dyed.

2. It is best to be given at Night going to bed, in any case wherein the
Vulgar Laudana could be profitable: And it seems to be a Specific against the
Pleurisy, Colic, and Stone, whether in the Reins or Bladder.

XX. * Pilulae Melanagogae, Pills Purging Melancholy.
Bate.] Strings of the true black Hellebor ij. pulp of Colothynthis iij. boil
them in the stegm of Vitriol lb v. to the consumption of half, press out the
remaining Liquor, and with a gentle fire evaporate to the thickness of Honey:
then add Rosin of Scammony j. so as to make a mass for Pills. Dose ss. ad j.
etc.

Salmon.] 1. In some Constitutions they will work upwards, but in most
downwards: If the Body be hard to work upon, and it be warm Weather, it will be
best to give them at Night; but to easy dispositions, in the Morning fasting.

2. They Purge Melancholy admirably well, and therefore are good for such as
are Mad or Distracted, or are apt to fall into a Melancholy Madness.

XXI. * Pilulae Pacificae, Pills making easy.
Bate.] Choice Opium dried upon Plates of Iron, and poudred ij. the white part
of Benjamin ij. Saffron, Nutmegs, A. iij. Chemical Oils of Dill and Nutmegs, A.
j. Sapo of Salt of Tartar and Oil of Turpentine q. s. mix and make a Mass S. A.
They are equal in Virtues to Matthews his Pills.

Salmon.] 1. They are altogether of the Nature of Matthews his Pills, and
operate as they, and are given in all cases where Sweating, and easing of Pain
are required.

2. They are given in Pleurisies, stitches of the Side, Colic, Stone, Gout,
and other like Diseases, in which they quiet the Archeus, and give Nature
respite, so that she may gather up her Forces to contend with the afflicting
Malady.

3. They are prevalent also against Coughs, Colds, Catarrhs, Fluxes of the
Bowels and Womb, Bleedings, of what kind soever.

XXII. Pilulae Pavii, Pavy his Pills.
Bate.] Species Hiera Simplex ss. Galbanum (prepared with Tincture of Castor)
ij. Mars prepared iij. Diacurcuma, (but some have Diacinnamomum) iv. Syrup of
Stechas q. s. mix and make a Mass of Pills, of such a bigness as j, may make
21. Dose No. 10. or 20. Morning and Evening for 40 days against Hypochondriack
Melancholy.

Salmon.] 1. The Diacurcuma is the same Medicament with Diacrocuma, if you will
believe the Augustane Dispensatory; the Composition of which you may find in
our London Dispensatory, Lib. 4. Cap. 22. Sect. 27. and the Diacinnamomum in
Lib. 4. Cap. 21. Sect. 84. of the same Book.

2. They Purge all Humors, but chiefly Melancholy, and are good to Purge with
in those Diseases which are said to proceed from that cause; but for the length
of the time of using them, let your Discretion guide you.

3. If the body be not easy to work upon, let them be taken at Night going to
bed, taking after them a Glass of Vinum Chalybeatum: Otherwise let them be
taken in the Morning, and the Wine only at Night.

XXIII. * Pilulae de Pice, Pills of Pitch, or Tar.
Bate.] Liquorice Powder j. Florentine Orrice-root iij. Tar, Balsam of Peru, A.
ss. vel q. s. so as to make it up into a Mass of Pills. They are most
efficacious against the Phthisick, Cough, and for the Excretion of purulent
Humors, in the Breast and Lungs, which are difficult to be cast forth by
Coughing or raising. Dose ss. twice a day, drinking after them a draught of the
Pectoral Decoction.

Salmon.] 1. I should better like them if instead of the Tar, as much Balsam of
Tolu, or Chili, or Capivii were added; and Flowers of Sulphur iij. it might
then prove so effectual a Medicine, as scarcely to be exceeded.

2. They may be taken from ss. ad j. without any danger; but the Dose ought to
be regulated according to the Age of the Patient, and Vehemence or Remisness of
the Distemper afflicting.

XXIV. * Pilulae Restringentes, Astringent or binding Pills.
Bate.] Fine Bole, red Coral, Mastich, A. iiss. bone of the Cuttle-fish jiss.
Gum Guajaci ss. Crocus martis restringens iijss. Cypress Turpentine jss. Syrup
of Water Lillies q. s. make a mass of Pills. Dose ss. or ij. twice a day for
the stopping of a Gonorrhoea.

Salmon.] 1. I would have added to the Composition, Catechu, Cortex peruanus,
A. ij. white Henbane-seeds j. Opium in fine powder ij.

2. Then you may give it ad ss. or ij. once a day, viz. at Night going to bed:
but leaving out the Opium, it may be given in the Dose prescribed twice a day,
without any ill convenience.

3. It Cures not only a Gonorrhoea in Men, and the Whites in Women, but helps
pains and weaknesses in the back, and stops all Fluxes of what kind soever, and
preva ils against a Diabetes, and involuntary passing away of the Urine.

XXV. * Pilulae de sagapeno, Pills of Sagapenum.
Bate.] Clear Sagapenum ss. Troches Alhandal, Agarick, A. ijss. Diagredium ij.
Sal Gem. ss. Chemical Oil of Fennel-seeds j. Syrupus de Eupatorio q. s. mix and
make a mass of Pills. They are profitable against the Iliack Passion, Colic,
etc. given ad ss. They are admirable also against Quartan Agues. Dose ss. in
the beginning of the Fit, continuing it for some days.

Salmon.] 1. There is scarcely a better Remedy against that Disease which in
the West Indies they call the Dry Cholick: They Purge Tartarous Humors, not
only from the Bowels, but the Joints, and therefore are good against the Gout
and Rheumatism.

2. After twice or thrice purging with them as they are here prescribed, it
will be best then to add to each Dose gr. jss. or ij. of Extract of Opium, and
so give the Dose over Night; so will the Patient rest with a World of quietness
and pleasure, or sweetness, and the next day in the Afternoon have three or
four Stools, without any kind of Griping, which will carry off the Morbifick
matter of the Disease almost to a wonder; and by that you have taken them six
or seven times, will give me hearty Thanks for these my Directions.

XXVI. * Pilulae Sinapinae, Pills of Mustard Seed.
Bate.] Mustard Seed in Powder iij. Liquorice ij. Syrup of Maidenhair q. s.
make a mass of Pilulae Hypoglossidae, often to be held in the Mouth. They
prevail mightily against the Cough, Asthma, etc.

Salmon.] 1. Pilulae Hypoglossidae, are Pills which take away the Asperity of
the Laryax, and they attract and draw forth the Humors offending those parts
after a singular manner.

2. You may hold them in the Mouth without chewing till they dissolve, and mix
with the Spittle, and then you may spit them forth, and renew the Matter, till
they have expectorated enough.

3. But some hold them in the Mouth till they dissolve, and so swallow them
down leisurely; both ways they give relief.

XXVII. Pilulae Styracinae, Pills of Storax.
Bate.] Storax Calamita ij. Flowers of Sulphur j. white of Benjamin ij. mix and
make a Mass for Pills. They are very profitable for such as are troubled with
Asthma's, Dyspnoea's, Suffocative Catarrhs, etc. Dose j. ad j. once or twice a
day. Prujean.

Salmon.] 1. You may give them Morning and Evening, drinking after them a Glass
of Metheglin. Or this: Aquae lactis Alexiteriae iv. Syrup of Hyssop j. Oil of
sweet Fennel-seeds, gut. ij. mix them for a draught.

2. Outwardly anoint the Stomach Morning and Evening with this: Oil of Nutmegs
by Expression j. Chemical Oil of Rosemary ss. mix them.

XXVIII. Pilulae Tartareae Bontii, Bontius his Pills of Tartar.
Bate.] The best Aloes iij. Gum Ammoniacum jss. (depurated with Vinegar of
Squills) Tartar Vitriolate ss. mix them. They are of such Estimation among the
Dutch, that they think it a sin to make them common. Dose j. to ss.

Salmon.] 1. They are good against Tartarous Diseases, and Purge Salt, Gross,
and Tartarous Humors from the very profound parts, are good against*
Hypochondriack Melancholy and Madness, Quartan Agues, Scabs, Itch, etc. They
open Obstructions of Liver, Spleen, Mesentery, etc. and cut Viscous Slime,
chiefly that which is gathered in the Stomach, purging it out.

2. You may give from j. ad j. in the Morning fasting, and ss. before Supper,
or to ss. after a light Supper.

3. It is also to be noted, that some add to the Composition Extract of Rhubarb
ss. and then they more respect the Liver, and Purge Choler from the Bowels.

XXIX. Pilulae Vaticanae, The Vatican Pills.
Bate.] Calamus Aromaticus, Aniseeds, Ginger, Mastich, Cinnamon, lesser
Cardamoms, Zedeary, Mace, Nutmegs, Cloves, Saffron, Cubebs, Xylo Aloes, Cassia
Lignea, Turbeth, Manna, Sena, all the Myrobalans, A. j. Carduus ben. Scordium,
A. ss. best Rhubarb j. fine Aloes ij. iv. Syrup of Roses sclutive, Syrup of
Violets, A. q. s. mix and make a mass of Pills S. A. They are Cephalic and
Stomatick, and empty all the stuffed Bowels, purging and strengthening them,
expelling whatsoever noxious Humors offend them, the right way, and helping
the Economy of all the Nourishing parts.

Salmon.] 1. Here Is a great Cry, and a little Wool, as the Devil said, when he
shore his Hogs: A Farraginous heap of Correctors for a little Rhubarb and
Aloes, which being compounded, alone correct themselves. But it is a Quack
Medicine, made to amuse Ignorants.

2. You may more briefly make it thus. Extract of fine Aloes (made with fair
Water) iij. Rhubarb in Powder jss. Scammony, Turbeth, Extract of Sena, Pulp of
all the Myrobalans, A. iv. Mastich ij. Syrup of Roses solutive q. s. mix and
make a mass of Pills, adding thereto Oil of Cloves iij. Dose a j. ad ss.

XXX. Pilulae Vermifugae, Pills killing Worms.
Bate.] Pil. Ruffi ss. Chemical Oil of Savin, or Tansie gut. 24. mix them. Dose
ad ss. or gr. xij. made up into 10 Pills. Let them be taken continually for
three Nights about the New or Full Moon, in Syrup of Limons.

Salmon.] 1. If you add to the Composition the Levigated Powder of Calomelanos
ss. it will be yet much more effectual to the intention: And then you may give
it in the same Dose.

2. Or if you like the Aethiops Minerale better, you may add of that ad j. and
then you may increase the Dose ad gr. xvj. or more, as you see occasion.

XXXI. * Scammonium Cydoniatum, Scammony prepared with Juice of Quinces.
Bate.] Scammony in fine Powder ij. depurated Juice of Quinces lb j. digest 24
hours: add Aqua Vitae q. s. digest again, and evaporate to the consistence of
an Extract, S. A. Dose j. ad gr. 25, etc.

Salmon.] 1. This is but a kind of Diagrydium, the heat of the Scammony being
corrected by virtue of the Acidity of the Juice of Quinces.

2. It Purges excellently all sorts of Humors, and is of singular use against
the Colic, Gout, Stone, Rheumatism, Dropsy, Jaundice, and King's Evil, if
given for some considerable time according to Art.

XXXII. * Scammonium Limoniatum, Scammony prepared with the Juice of Limons.
Bate.] Scammony in Powder j. Juice of Limons lb j. digest, strain, and distill
to the consistency of an Extract, S. A. The Dose is the same with the former.

Salmon.] 1. This is one of Quercetan's ways of making Diagrydium: His other
way is with Phlegm of Vitriol impregnated with its Spirit; because in these
kinds of Acids lies (according to his Opinion) the true Preparation of such
things as are too hot.

2. The Virtues, Use, and Dose, are the same with the former, but the Medicine
works more mildly and gently, because that Acids destroy in some measure, at
least diminish the Cathartick powers of Purgers.

XXXIII. * Scammonium Rosatum, Scammony prepared with the Juice of Roses.
Bate.] Scammony in fine Powder iij. depurated Juice of Damask Roses lb iij.
Spirit or Oil of Sulphur iij. which mix with the Juice, and then the Juice with
the Powder: digest and evaporate to the consistency of Pills, and add Chemical
Oil of sweet Marjoram j. The Dose is the same with the former.

Salmon.] 1. This is as good a Medicine as either of the former; and it would
do the same thing if the iij. of the Oil of Sulphur were mixed (according to
Hartman's Method) with lb iij. of fair Water, adding a few drops of some
Chemical Oil to give it a flaver.

2. It Purges gently a gr. 15. ad 25. and is commended as a singular thing
against the Scurvy, Dropsy, Gout, Jaundice, and Rheumatism.

CHAP. XXIV. Of TROCHES and TABLETS.
I. * Bolus Alexiteria, seu Cardiaca, A Cordial Bole, or Troches resisting
Poison.
Bate.] ANgelica, Baum, Scordium, Burnet, Scabious, A. M. ij. Dragons, M. j.
Flowers of Marigolds, Clove-gillyflowers, A. M. iij. Wood of Aloes ss. Berries
of Kermes jss. Cochinele ij. White Wind lb ij. vel q. s. digest warm for 24
hours; then express out, and with fine Bole in fine Powder viij. make a kind of
Pulp, or Pudding like substance, which dry in the Sun. This work repeat five
times with the said Infusion, and at last form them into Troches S. A. Dose j.
ad j. in Malign Diseases.

Salmon.] 1. I should rather choose to make it with the Juices of the eight
first Ingredients than with their Infusion in White Wind; for thereby the
Medicine would be both stronger and better.

2. It may be given Morning and Evening as a preventive against the Infection
of the Plague, or the Contagion of other Malign Diseases; but curatively, when
the Sick is in Bed, and well covered down in order to Sweating, drinking after
it a small draught of some proper Sudorifick Antidote, etc.

II. * Tabulae Absinthiacae, Tablets of Wormwood.
Bate.] Treble refined Sugar lb j. Wormwood-water q. s. boil them S. A.
dropping in Chemical Oil of Wormwood gut. 60. and then pour it forth upon a
Marble Plate or Tile. They are Stomatick, Hepatick, Splenetick, etc.

Salmon.] 1. They strengthen a weak Stomach almost to a Miracle, warm and
comfort it, cause Appetite and a good Digestion, and corroborate all the other
Viscera.

2. You may eat them as Sweetmeats, or hold them in your Mouth till they melt
down; but I should rather choose to dissolve ij. iij. or iv. in a Glass of Ale
or Wine, and so take them in a Morning fasting, or as need requires,

III. * Tabulae Amygdaloides, Tablets of the Almondlike parts of Benjamin.
Bate.] The white parts of the best Benjamin j. Flowers of Sulphur ij. Root of
Florentine Orrice jss. Sanguis Draconis j. white Sugar xij. Mucilage of Gum
Tragacanth, extracted in Rose Water, q. s. mix and make Tablets or Troches, S.
A. They are very powerful against the Asthma, Cough, Phthisick. etc.

Salmon.] 1. Dose ad j. You may beat them into Powder, and mix the same with
any proper Syrup or Pectoral Water, and so take it Morning and Night, or in
case of a Cough, as often as the Cough afflicts.

2. They heal inward Ulcers of the Bowels, stop Fluxes of the Belly, and dry up
Catarrhs.

IV. * Tabulae de Angelica, Tablets of Angelica.
Bate.] Fresh Angelica-Roots, boiled to a softness, and passed through a Sieve
jss. treble refined Sugar xij. Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth, q. s. mix and make
pure white Tablets. They are Bezoardick, Cardiack, Traumatick, Emmenagogick,
etc.

Salmon.] 1. They are good against the Contagion of Infectious Times, and may
be taken Morning, Noon, and Night, by way of prevention.

2. Dose j. ad ij. and indeed they may be taken rather as a Sweet-meat, than as
a Medicine.

V. * Tabulae Antimoniales, Antimonial Tablets.
Bate.] Ceruse of Antimony (made from the Regulus) vj. treble refined Sugar
xij. with Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth, make small Tablets weighing each a
Scruple, S. A. The Virtues are the same with the Electuarium Album.

Salmon.] 1. They are good to purify and cleanse the Blood, and sweeten all
the Juices of the Body by absorbing their Acidities; and therefore are good
against the Cachexia, Dropsy, Jaundice, Scurvy, and such Diseases which
proceed from a discrasie of the Blood, etc.

2. You may take them Morning and Night a ss. ad j. eating them either alone,
or reducing them into Powder, by mixing them with some proper Syrup, or other
Vehicle.

VI. * Tabulae Antisynanchicae, Tablets against the Quinsey.
Bate.] Flowers of Sulphur j. Goose-dung in fine Powder iij. Sanguis Draconis
ij. Oil of Aniseeds gut. vj. treble refined Sugar viij. with Mucilage of Gum
Tragacanth q s. mix and make Tablets. They are good against the Ulcers of the
Mouth, Thrushes, etc.

Salmon.] 1. Dissolve and mix them with a little Honey, and apply the Mixture
to the part affected; inwardly, by smearing it upon the place, and outwardly,
in a Quinsey, by applying it in manner of a Cataplasm.

2. Or you may dissolve, and mix with some proper Water, and often to Gargle
with in a Quinsey, or other Tumors, Swellings, Ulcers, and Sores of the Throat
and Tonsils.

VII. * Tabulae de Aurantiis, Orange Tablets.
Bate.] The yellow of Orange, Limon, and Citron-peels candied, A. j. Confects
of Aniseeds and Ginger, A. iij. Galingal ss. Cloves No. xij. preserved Nutmegs
No. ij. Aromaticum Rosatum iv. sweet Almonds blanched, Eringo-wood candied, A.
j. Pine-nuts, Pistaches, A. No. x. Musk, Civet, Ana. gr. iv. Ambergrise j.
treble refined Sugar lb jss. Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth made in Rose Water, q.
s. mix and make a Paste, which form into Tablet S. A. They are Antiscorbutick,
Cardiack, Carminative, etc.

Salmon.] 1. What the Aromaticum Rosatum is, see in our Pharm. Land. Lib. 4.
Cap. 21. Sect. 2. the rest of the things almost, are Sweetmeats.

2. You may take it as often in a day as you please to gratify your Palate and
Stomach: It chears the Spirits, and makes a Sweet Breath.

VIII. * Tabulae Burgesianae, Burgess his Tablets.
Bate.] Green Liquorice lb j. Decoction of Raisins, Scabious, and Violets, lb
vj. Infuse for three days, and boil to the half: press out, and evaporate to
the thickness of Honey; to which add white Sugar candy in Powder xij. Gum
Tragacanth in Powder ij. Oil of Aniseeds gut. xx. Ambergrise gr. iij. beat them
well together, and make a Mass, of which form Tablets or Rouls, S. A. They are
Bechicik, Cardiack, etc.

Salmon.] 1. They are Pectoral and Opening, good against Obstructions of the
Lungs, Coughs, Asthma's, Wind, Gripings of the Bowels, Cholick, etc.

2. They may be held in the Mouth, and suffered to dissolve at leisure; but
being often or long used, will of fend the Stomach.

IX. * Tabulae Cardialgicae, Tablets against Pain of the Stomach.
Bate.] White Chalk ij. Crab's-eyes j. Nutmegs j. white Sugar xij. Mucilage of
Quince-seeds q. s. mix and make Tablets. The Title shows their Virtues.

Salmon.] 1. You may eat j. or ij. or more at a time, as you eat Sugar-plumbs,
and they will (by reason they are made of a fixed Alcali) absorb the Acid Humor
which is the cause of those intolerable gnawing Pains at Stomach.

2. This is made for such as cannot take the Medicine without Sugar; but to
speak Truth, the Alcalies alone are much more effectual.

X. * Tabulae Carminativae, Tablets breaking Wind.
Bate.] Powder of common Daucus-seeds j. treble refined Sugar (dissolved in
Decoction of common Daucus seeds) xij. boil, and pour forth, S. A. Otherwise
thus: Cardamoms grossly poudred j. yellow of Orange-peels cut small ijss. treble
refined Sugar xvj, (dissolved in Rose Water two parts, Time-water one part)
boil, and pour four, S. A. It is a most Excellent Remedy against Wind.

Salmon.] 1. They Remedy the Cholick, expel Wind, and are good against stoppage
of Urine, and the Stone.

2. You may hold them in your Mouth till dissolved, or otherwise eat them like
Sweetmeats.

XI. Tabulae Catharticae, Purging Tablets.
Bate.] Diagrydium jss. Cream of Tartar vj. Oil of Cloves gut. vj. treble
refined Sugar iv. Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth made with Rose Water q. s. make
Tablets, S. A.

Salmon.] 1. You may give from v. ad x. according to Age and Strength, against
the Scurvy, Dropsy, Jaundice, Gout, Rheumatism, and other-like stubborn and
inveterate Diseases.

2. Let it be given in the Morning fasting, with Observations as in other
Purges. It works safely, gently, and without griping.

XII. * Tabulae Dialthaeae, Tablets of Marshmallows.
Bate.] Powder of the Roots of Marshmallows ij. Liquorice j. Flowers of
Sulphur vj. Gum Tragacanth ij. treble refined Sugar xij. Aqua Pectoralis q. s.
mix and make Tablets S. A.

Salmon.] 1. What the Aqua Pectoralis is, you may see Chap. 1. Sect. 45.
aforegoing of this Book.

2. It is intended to open Obstructions of the Lungs, and the Passages of the
Urine. It is good against Coughs, Colds, Catarrhs, Wheesing, Hoarseness, and
other Distempers of the Breast and Lungs.

3. Dissolved in Parsley or Onion-water, or Water of the biting Arsmart, and
drunk, it helps against the Stone, Sand, Gravel, or any stoppage of the Urine,
and eases the pains of making Water. Dose j. pro vice.

XIII. * Tabulae Diambrae, Tablets of Ambergrise.
Bate.] Species Diambrae ss. treble refined Sugar viij. Cinnamon Water q. s.
boil them according to Art. They are Cardiack, Cephalic, Stomatick, etc.

Salmon.] 1. What the Species Diambrae are, see Pharm. Land. Lib. 4. Cap. 21.
Sect. 14. with their Virtues and Uses.

2. The intention of this Prescript of our Author is to comfort and strengthen
the Head, Brain, Nerves, Heart, Stomach, and all the Principal Bowels.

3. They are good against Megrims, Headache, Vertigoes, Lethargies, Apoplexies,
Convulsions, Palsies, Sickness at Heart, Fainting, and Swooning Fits. Dose j.
Morning and Evening, or at any time of Fainting.

XIV. * Tabulae Diatragacanthi, Tablets of Gum Tragacanth.
Bate.] Species Diatragacanthi frigidi (newly made) ss. Musk, Ambergrise, A.
gr. j. Civet gr. ij. treble refined Sugar xij. Damask-Ros-water q. s. beat them
together into a Mass, and make pure white Tablets.

Salmon.] 1. What the Species Diatragacanthi are, see out Pharm. Land. Lib. 4.
Cap. 21. Sect. 21. with their Virtues and Uses.

2. These Tablets are much more pleasant than the Species, and therefore fitter
for the more delicate Stomachs.

3. They are Pectoral, and good against Coughs, Colds, Asthmas, Consumptions,
Catarrhs, Preternatural Heats, and Ulcers of the Lungs. They cause a clear
Voice, and a sweet Breath. Let them be held in the Mouth, and suffered to
distill down at leisure.

XV. * Tabulae Divinae, Tablets of a most Excellent Virtue.
Bate.] Lac or Milk of Sulphur vive ij. white Sugar vj. Mucilage of
Quince-seeds q. s. mix and make Tablets each containing a Dram. They are an
Arcanum in the Cure of the Haemorrhoides; and prevail against Scabs, Asthmas,
etc. Dose No. iij. or iv. twice or thrice a day.

Salmon.] 1. They are a Specific against Coughs, Catarrhs, Colds, Hoarseness,
Wheesings, shortness of Breath, difficulty of Breathing, and other Distempers
of the Breast and Lungs.

2. They heal also Ulcers of the Mouth and Throat, and dry up salt sharp
Humors, in what part of the Body soever.

XVI. * Tabulae Embryonum, Tablets to strengthen the Foetus in the Womb.
Bate.] Pouders of Bistort-Roots, Ivory, Red Coral, Coriander-seed prepared, A.
ss. white Amber, Crystal, Berries of Kermes, A. and ij. white Sugar xvj.
Quince-water, q. s. boil them S. A. adding Oil of Cinnamon gut. vj. then pour
it forth. They are of great Virtue in preventing Abortion, and strengthening the
Child in the womb, etc.

Salmon.] 1. You may give of them a iij. ad vj. twice a day, viz. Morning and
Night, for eight or ten days together: they strengthen the Womb, and
corroborate the Foetus contained.

2. If the Woman has often miscarried, and is apt to fall into that Weakness
upon small occasions, you will do well to add to the Composition, Catechu vj.
white Henbane-seeds ij. and then the Medicament will be without comparison.

XVII. Tabulae Emeticae, Vomiting Tablets.
Bate.] Stibium, or Glass of Antimony in subtle Powder ss. treble refined Sugar
iv. Oil of Aniseeds gut. 5. Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth q. s. mix and make
Tablets. Dose gr. 16. ad 40.

Salmon.] 1. I like not this Medicine, nor may it be safely given to weak
Constitutions: to very robust Bodies you may venture to give it a gr. 15. ad
30. but you had best to be sure of their Strength beforehand.

2. But to make a Medicine of the same Virtue and Operation, and to work with a
great deal more safety, you may do thus. Tartar Emetick of Mynsicht ss. treble
refined Sugar iv. Rose Water q. s. boil to a consistency, adding Oil of Cloves
gut. vj. then pour them forth.

3. Of these you may give from gr. 16. ad 40. or 48. in strong Constitutions,
which will give 3, 4, 6, or 8 Vomits, and sometimes more, but with safety
enough, if the Sick be persuaded to drink largely of Broth or Posset Drink.

4. When you would have it give over working, give Broth well seasoned with
Salt, or mixed with a little Cremor Tartari, and as hot as it is possible to be
got down the Throat, and the Vomiting will immediately cease, and take its
course downwards.

XVIII. Tabulae Farfareae, Tablets of Coltsfoot.
Bate.] Leaves of Coltsfoot gathered in a serene Air (cleansed from their
Mucosity with a moist Cloth, and sprinkled with Spanish Wine, and dried) in
fine Powder ss. Powder of Liquorice ss. white Sugar Candy in fine Powder xij.
Gum Tragacanth (dissolved in Pectoral Decoction) q. s. mix and make Tablets or
Treches, S. A. They are an Efficacious Pectoral Medicament, prevalent against
the Cough, etc.

Salmon.] 1. What the Decoctum Pectorale is, see in our Pharmacopoeia
Londinensis, Lib. 4. Cap. 14. Sect. 4. which is the thing intended here under
that Name.

2. They are good against most Diseases of the Breast and Lungs, chiefly Coughs,
Wheesings, Hoarseness, difficulty of Breathing, shortness of Breath, and
Obstructions in those parts, etc.

XIX. * Tabulae Foeniculinae, Tablets of Oil of Fennel-seed.
Bate.] Treble refined Sugar lb j. Fennel-water q. s. boil, S. A. dropping in
Chemical Oil of Fennel-seeds gut. 50. S. A. They are prevalent against the
Cholick, Wind, etc.

Salmon.] 1. It is a pleasant sort of Medicine for such as can away with the
taste of the Fennel-seeds, which in some sort strengthens the Stomach, as well
as discusses Wind; it is good for Children, and to ease them of the Gripes that
are newborn, to which some Children are very obnoxious.

2. Elder People may also take them with singular Advantage against the
Cholick, Pain and Sickness at Stomach, from vj. ad jss. at time of the Fit;
otherwise by way of prevention, only Morning and Night.

XX. * Tabulae Griseae, Tablets of Ambergrise.
Bate.] Ambergrise i. Musk gr. vj. Alom gr. ij. white Sugar Candy in Powder
xij. Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth (extracted in Mint-water) q. s. mix and make
Tablets. They comfort the Brain and Heart, and wonderfully revive the Spirits,
Natural, Vital, and Animal. Dose j. or ij. three or four times a day.

Salmon.] 1. Being held often in the Mouth, and suffered to distill down at
leisure, they cause a sweet Breath, and cheer the Heart.

2. They are also prevalent against Palpitation of the Heart, Sickness at
Stomach and Fainting or Swooning Fits.

XXI. * Tabulae Haemoptoicae, Tablets against spitting Blood.
Bate.] Terra Lemnia iij. fine Bole ij. Lapis Hae matitis, Magistery of Ivory,
A. iv. Bistort-Roots, Henbane-seeds, fresh Limon-peel cut very small, A. j.
white Poppy-seeds ss. Sugar of Roses viij. Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth q. s. mix
and make Tablets. The Title shows their Virtues: Let them be taken often in a
day.

Salmon.] 1. You must take white Henbane-seeds, and if you increase them to ij.
it will be so much the better.

2. To make it more effectual, you ought to add Catechu iij. increasing in
proportion the quantity of the Sugar of Roses, which ought also to be of Red
Roses.

3. They may be taken often in the daytime; but it will be necessary at Night
going to Bed to take gr. ij. or iij. plus minus, of our Volatile Laudanum.

XXII. * Tabulae Helenii, Tablets of Elecampane.
Bate.] Pulp of fresh-gathered Elecampane-Roots, made by boiling, jss. treble
refined Sugar lb j. Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth, extracted in Hyssop-water, q.
s. mix and make Tablets. They are very profitable against Coughs, Asthma's, etc.

Salmon.] 1. You may take them often in the Day or Night, more especially when
a Fit of Coughing is present; they give ease upon the Spot, and in short time
Cure.

2. But that their Effects might be more certain, it is my Opinion, that these
Tablets should be taken in the daytime, and gr. ij. iij. or iv. of my Volatile
Laudanum at Night going to bed, drinking after them a Draught of Milk-water.

XXIII. * Tabulae Infantum, Tablets for Infants or Children.
Bate.] Resin of Jallap j. Mercurius dulcis in fine Powder vj. trebble refined
Sugar iij. mucilage of Gum Tragacanth, q. s. mix and make Tablets, each
weighing half a Dram. They are commended for killing Worms, two, three or four
of them being taken in a Morning.

Salmon.] 1. If the Child be very young you ought not to give above one or two
of them at a time; two containing of the Rosin of Jallap, gr. ij. and of the
Mercurius dulcis, gr. xij. which is a Dose large enough for any Child of 3, 4,
5, or 6, Years old.

2. You ought so often to repeat it till the Worms come away, or the Child
grows well, which after 5, 6, or 7, Doses you will see.

XXIV. * Tabulae Lenthales.
Bate.] Green Liquorice viij. Aniseeds iv. Caraways j. Waters of Coltsfoot,
Hyssop, Horehound, A. lb j. infuse them in B. M. for three days, then express
out strongly, and exhale to the thickness of Honey; adding Cherry-tree Gum, Gum
Arabic, A. ij. Gum Tragacanth ss. infused for two days in Damask Rose Water lb
ss. then add trebble refined Sugar lb ij. Musk Ambergrise, A. gr. vj. Powder of
Liquorice ss. beat all well together into a Mass, of which form Tablets, or
Rouls, S. A. They are a pleasant kind of Pectoral.

Salmon.] 1. Here is more cost than worship in this Medicine; but besides being
Pectoral being often and long used, they cause a sweet Breath.

2. If Choice Catechu in fine Powder ij. be added, the Medicine will be five
times the better to all the Intentions it is proposed for.

XXV. * Tabulae de Pipere, Tablets of Pepper.
Bate.] Cinnamon ss. Ginger ij. black Pepper ij. Calamus Aromaticus, Mace,
Nutmegs, A. ij. gr. v. Cubebs, lesser Cardamoms, A. gr. 15. Cloves, Galangal,
yellow of Orange-peels new cut, A. ss. yellow of Citron-peels fresh cut j. cut
altogether grossly, and add blanthed sweet Almonds v. Citron-peel candied j.
white Sugar (dissolved in Mint-water) lb j. boil and pour forth, S. A. They are
Cephalic, Stomatick, Carminative, etc.

Salmon.] 1. These comfort a cold and moist Head, Brain and Stomach, strengthen
the Nerves, and are good against Vertigo's, Lethargies, Apoplexies, Palsies,
Indigestion, and want of Appetite.

2. They expel Wind admirably, give ease in the Cholick, and comfort the Bowels
after any violent Flux. You may give them from ss. ad j. at a time, especially
at Night going to bed, or in the Morning fasting.

XXVI. * Tabulae Prunellae, Tablets of Sal Prunellae.
Bate.] Sal Prunellae ss. trebble refined Sugar vj. mucilage of Gum Tragacanth,
q. s. mix and make Tablets. They are held often in the Mouth to quench Thirst
in Fevers.

Salmon.] 1. Or you may give them at set times, as Morning and Evening; iij. at
a time, and if you please you may dissolve them in iij. or iv. of black
Cherry-water or Milk-water simple or alexiterick.

2. They are good also against scalding of Urine, or heat and pain in making
Water, they provoke Urine and remove the Stoppages of the Water: but in these
cases, they ought to be given in Parsley, Hydropiper, or Onion-water, etc.

XXVII. * Tabulae Rosaceae, Rose Tablets.
Bate.] Red Roses exangulated vj. Gum Arabic, Gum Tragacanth, A. ss. trebble
refined Sugar xvj. Rose Water, q. s. mix and make a Paste, of which make
Tablets, or Rouls, S. A. you may add thereto some few drops of Oil of Nutmegs.
They are profitable against Catarrhs, inveterate Coughs, etc.

Salmon.] 1. The Roses must be reduced to a fine Powder; and the Gums dissolved
in the Rose Water, and then the Paste made Secundum Artem.

2. If I was to use them my self, I would have Catechu in fine Powder vj. added
to the Composition; it much advances the worth of the Medicine, and makes it
almost infallible.

3. If the Catarrh be fierce and inveterate you must also add Flowers of
Sulphur iv. augmenting in proportion to these additions, the quantity of Sugar.

XXVIII. * Tabulae Saponaceae, Soapy Tablets.
Bate.] The best Venice Soap jss. Liquorice ij. Root of Florentine Orrice vj.
Flowers of Sulphur ss. Angelica-root ij. Oil of Aniseeds ss. trebble refined
Sugar viij. mucilage of Gum Tragacanth made in Hyssop-water, q. s. mix and make
Tablets or Troches, S. A. They are admirably prevalent against an Empyema,
Phthisis, or Ulcer of the Lungs, etc. and most powerfully promote Expectoration.

Salmon.] 1. This is no pleasant Medicine; your best way will be to dissolve
them in some proper pectoral Liquor, as Hyssop or Mint-water, or Tent, Alicant,
etc. and so drink the Solution.

2. Dose, a iij. ad vj. to be given in the Morning fasting; also in the
Forenoon; at four in the Afternoon; and at Bedtime.

XXIX. * Tabulae de Styrace, Tablets of Styrax.
Bate.] Styrax Calamita strained, Pulp of Raisons, A j. Powder of Liquorice vj.
Wood of Aloes, Cinnamon, A. ij. Nutmegs ij. ij. fine Bole x. Nutmegs preserved
dry jss. trebble refined Sugar xx. mucilage of Gum Tragacanth, q. s. mix and
make Tablets. They are Pectoral and Cordial, and wonderfully conduce to the
Cure of Catarrhs, Consumptions, etc.

Salmon.] 1. They are to be held in the Mouth till they dissolve, and suffered
to distill down the Throat by degrees, and that all the day long as you see
occasion.

2. If Catechu in fine Powder j. Flowers of Sulphur ss. be added to the
Composition, it will be much the better.

XXX, * Tabulae Tartareae, Tablets of Tartar.
Bate.] Crystals of Tartar in fine Powder j. trebble refined Sugar viij.
mucilage of Gum Tragacanth, q. s. mix and make Tablets. They are to hold
frequently in the Mouth against Vehement Thirst.

Salmon.] 1. They not only quench Thirst, but also cool the Heat of the
Stomach, strengthen it, and take away the Sickness thereof.

2. If Juice of Limons ij. be added to the Mucilage, and so made up and dried,
it will advance to the Intention of the Medicine, and please the languishing
Patient.

XXXI. * Tabulae Vermifugae, Tablets for killing Worms.
Bate.] Powder of Crude Hartshorn, Ivory, A. jss. white Sugar viij. Mucilage
of Gum Tragacanth, q. s. mix and make Tablets each weighing ss. Dose, No iij.
twice a day.

Salmon.] 1. I am of Opinion, that if the Hartshorn and Ivory pass a
Philosophical Calcination, they will not only, more easily reduce to Powder;
but as their Bodies will be more open so they will better operate to the end
desired.

2. That if to the Composition, you add Powder of Maw Worms vj. it will be much
more effectual to the Intention; augmenting also in proportion the Sugar, etc.

XXXII. * Trochisci Pectorales. Pectoral Troches or Tablets.
Bate.] Extract of Liquorice ss. white Starch jss. Musk Civet. A. gr. iij. Oil
of Aniseeds, gut. xij. trebble refined Sugar xij. Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth.
q. s. mix and make Troches. The Title shows the Virtues.

Salmon.] 1. They take away the Asperity of the Trochea Arteria, give relief in
vehement Coughs, open Obstructions of the Breast and Lungs, and prevail against
Hoarseness, Wheasings, Asthma's, etc.

2. You may hold them all day long in the Mouth, and suffer them to distill down
at leisures.

Explicit Liber PRIMUS.

PHARMACOPOEIA BATEANA.
LIBER II. Of Compound Externals.
CHAP. I. Of Lotions or Washes.
I. Acetum Lithargyrites; A Lotion of Litharge.
Bate.] LItharge of Gold (...) in fine Powder iv. best White Wind Vinegar viij.
mix, digest three days stirring it often, and filtering it. It is designed for
the Cure of Redness of the Face, Pustules, etc.

Salmon.] 1. Besides this, it is very drying, repercussive and anodyn, and a
very good thing to ease the Pain, and take away the Paroxysms of the Gout.

2. It cools, and therefore takes away the violent Heat of Anthonies Fire: and
put into the Eyes, it is of singular use to take away their Heat, Redness, and
Inflammation; and withal, to to dry up any Rhume, or violent hot Humor falling
into them.

3. But in these last cases it will be much more effectual, if to every Pint
thereof three Ounces of good Spirit of Wine be added; for then, it will not
only resist the Disease, but also strengthen the parts afflicted.

II. * Aluminatum, A Preparation or Lotion with Alum.
Bate.] Juice of Limons lb j. Alum ss. boil and despumate, S. A. It prevails
mightily against Redness of the Face, Pustules, etc. drinking in the mean
Season Cerevisiam Catapsoras, the Preparation of which see Cap. 15. Sect. 3.
Lib. 1.

Salmon.] 1. You are to bath it upon the Skin three or four times a day, or
oftener, and it ought to be done as hot as you can conveniently do it.

2. It cools and clears the Skin excellently; but if Saccharum Saturni ss. were
added it would yet be much better.

III. * Dentilavium Scorbuticum, A Wash against the Scurvy in the Teeth.
Bate.] Bistort-roots, Seeds of Scurvy Grass, A. ij. Alum j. Mastich iij. boil
in fair Water, q. s. to lb j. strain, and add Honey of Roses ij. mix and make a
Lotion.

Salmon.] 1. You are to wash the Teeth, and gargle the Mouth and Throat
therewith, if any Ulcers be there four or five times a day, or oftener.

2. If the Ulcers run much, and a Catarrh seems to be present, add to the
Composition, Saccharum Saturni ss.

IV. * Fotus Arthriticus, A Fomentation for the Gout.
Bate.] Sage, Rosemary, Camomile, Mugwort, Hypericon, common Wormwood, A. M.
vj. Bay Salt, M. iij. Water three Gallons; boil to two Gallons, then strain out
for a Fomentation.

Salmon.] 1. You are to bath with it as hot as it can be endured, and the Gouty
part ought (if it can conveniently be) to lie in it for some time.

2. You may repeat it three or four times a day or oftener, as need requires: it
infallibly gives ease; but sometimes is apt to send the Gout into the Stomach,
and then the Remedy is worse than the Disease, for it may chance to kill the
Patient.

3. Preparatives and Universals therefore ought to be given beforehand, that
the Morbifick matter may be either evacuated in part, or the Stomach defended
by proper Antidotes, which may have power to resist the assaulting Disease.

V. * Fotus Scorbuticus, A Fomentation for the Scurvy.
Bate.] Mugwort, Hypericon, Scurvy Grass, of both kinds, Ground Pine, A.M. iij.
Wormwood Common and Roman, A. M. iv. Rosemary, M. ij. Wild or Horse
Radish-Roots iv. Water, q. s. mix and boil, S. A. for a Fomentation.

Salmon.] 1. Bathing with it hot, it gives ease in Scorbutic pains, and takes
away the discoloring of the Scorbutic spots.

2. It may be used twice or thrice a day, or oftener as you see need require;
anointing the pained Parts with this Mixture. Oil of Nutmegs by expession ss.
Oil of Rosemary, gut. 10. Camphire, gr. vj. mix them.

VI. * Gargarisma Album, The white Gargarism.
Bate.] Plantane-water iij. red Rose Water j. Whites of Eggs (reduced Glaire)
No iij. Sugar Candy j. mix and make a Gargarism. Otherwise thus. Roots of
Althea iij. Quince-Seeds jss. Barley-water lb ijss. boil to lb jss. toward the
end add Liquorice scraped or rasped ij. Strain and add Glair of Eggs, No ij.
Sugar Candy, ij. mix and make a Gargarism. With which the Mouth is often to be
washed and gargled, and by degrees a little of it swallowed for the Thrush, etc.

Salmon.] 1. Either of them are cooling and cleansing, and leave the Mouth
moist in the heat of a Fever.

2. But if it be used for the curing of a Thrush, or sore Mouth, a Decoction of
Balaustians would do better than the Barley-water, adding also a little Spirit
of Wine.

VII. * Gargarisma Apoplecticum, A Gargarism against Apoplexies.
Bate.] Mustard Seed in Powder, Spirit of Castor, A. ij. Vinegar of Roses j.
make Mustard thereof, S. A. to which add, a strong Decoction of Rosemary and
Betony, A. lbj. Honey of Roses ij. mix them.

Salmon.] 1. It attracts Phlegm and watery Humors strongly out of the Head and
Brain, and gives relief in all those Diseases which proceed from a Fullness or
Obstruction of those parts.

2. you may use it several times a day at first; and very liberally at Night
going to Bed, because then the Head will be kept warm: afterward it may be
used only Morning and Night for some days.

VIII. * Gargarisma Scorbutician, A Gargarism against the Scurvy.
Bate.] Rosemary M. j. Cloves, No 40. Salt of Scurvy Grass ij. Omphacine lb
iij. boil to lb ij. It is good for putrid Gums in the Scurvy.

Salmon] 1. If the Gums be putrefied, or Cankers be present in them, it must be
often used in a day at least five or six times, till it is apparent that the
Putrefaction is ma^^red.

2. After that you may gargle with White Wind, wherein a little Salt of
Scurvy Grass is also dissolved.

IX. * Gargarisma Synanchicum, A Gargarism for a Quins^e.
Bate.] Jews Ears j. white Dog's Turd vj. Bramble Leaves, M. j. red Roses, M.
ss. Doves-foot, M. ij. Figs, No viij. Water, q.s. boil to lb ij. strain, and
add Elder Vinegar j. Honey of Roses iij. It is good against Ulcers of the
Mouth, Thrushes, etc.

Salmon.] 1. If it be used to gargle with, in Quinsies, it is better made with
Water, than any thing else; but if it be for Thrushes, Ulcers of the Mouth and
Throat, etc. then Red or Clarret Wine is better than Water.

2. In the first Case it ought to be often used; to abate the Inflammation, or
discuss the Tumor if possible; and as often in the latter Case, where cleansing
the Ulcer is required.

X. * Pedilavium Emmenagogum, A Wash to provoke the Terms.
Bate.] Mugwort, Pennyroyal, Calaminth, Camomile, A. M. iv. Water, q. s. boil
to lb viij. With which wash the Feet.

Salmon.] 1. If you would have it effectually to perform the Work, there ought
to be so much, as the Woman may sit in up to the Waste, for then it will have a
particular Operation upon the Womb.

2. Then after coming out of the Bath, the Matrix it self at least the outward
Sheath ought to be anointed with this Mixture. Oil of Nutmegs by Expression ss.
Oil of Savin. gut. x. Musk gr. iv. mix them.

XI. * Pedilavium Hypnoticum, A Wash inducing Sleep.
Bate.] White Poppy heads, No xx. white Poppy-seed j. Leaves of Lettice, M. iv.
Flowers of Water Lillies, M. vj. Violets, M. jss. Water, q. s. boil them. They
provoke Sleep.

Salmon.] 1. It is a good Medicament as it is here prescribed; but if you add
to it, in the boiling Opium ss. it will be so much the better; and then to bath
with it hot.

2. The Opium being added to it, as soon as the bath is over, and the Sick in
Bed, let the Forehead and Temples be bathed with the same.

XII. * Pedilavium Podagricum, A Wash for the Gout.
Bate.] Rosemary, Hypericon, Pennyroyal, Bay Leaves. Mugwort, A. M. iij.
Bay Salt xij. Sal Armoniack ij. Wheat Bran vj. Water two Gallons, boil, and add
Castile Soap ij. Spirit of Wine lb ij.

Salmon.] 1. It gives ease in the Gout by washing, but it endagers the sending
the Humor up into the Stomach, unless beforehand evacuated, or the Stomach is
fortified by some proper Antidote which may resist it.

2. If Opium j. be dissolved in the Wash it will yet be more effectual to the
Intention.

3. Immediately after the Wash is over apply over the place pained this
Emplaister. Oil-Olive j. Camphire ss. grind them together, and add Frankincense
v. melt, mix, and spread it on Cloth or Leather.

XIII. * Pedilavium Scorbuticum, A Wash against the Scurvy.
Bate.] Rosemary, Pennyroyal, Bay Leaves, Hypericon, Watercresses, A. M. iij.
common Salt lb j. Water, q. s. boil them, S. A.

Salmon.] 1. It eases Scorbutic pains of the Feet, and takes away Spots of the
Scurvy, and other Scorbutic Symptoms attending the Feet, or those parts which
are washed with it.

2. You may wash with it three or four times a day, but twice a day at least;
if Salt of Potashes iij. be put into it, it will cleanse more powerful, and
better answer the Intention.

CHAP. II. Of OILS.
I. Galbanetum Hartmanni, Hartman's Oil of Galbanum.
Bate.] Galbanum, p. j. Spirit or Oil of Turpentine, p. ij. digest and distill
by Retort, S. A.

Salmon.] 1. You must not fill the Retort above a third part full, then put to
the Receiver and Lute the Juncture, and distill in Sand, or a naked fire, but
with degrees of heat, first very gentle so as to warm the Retort, and by
degrees increasing it to the highest, so will you have an Acid Spirit, a
Volatile white Oil, then a yellow Oil, and at last a thick red Oil or Balsam;
which you may keep by themselves as they come over by changing the Receiver.

2. The Acid Spirit and Volatile white Oil, will come over nearly together, and
therefore may be taken in one Receiver, and afterward separated.

3. The other two may be taken severally as you please, or drawn together, if
you intend them only for an outward use.

4. The Acid Spirit may be separated from most of its Phlegm by distillation in
a Bolt-head; it is Sudorifick and Diuretic, opens Obstructions of the Lungs,
Reins, and Womb, provokes Urine, and expels malign Humors through the Pores of
the Skin. Dose, gut. 30.40. or more.

5. The Volatile Oil is accounted a Specific against Sand, Gravel, and Stone,
whether in Reins or Bladder, and prevails against the Cholick. Dose, gut. 10.
ad 20.

6. The yellow Oil and Balsam are good against Fits of the Mother, Vapors,
Wind. Dose, gut. iij. ad vj. outwardly, they are vulnary, cure Ulcers and
Fistula's, and ease all sorts of Pains, chiefly those of the Gout.

II. Galbanetum Sennerti, Sennertus his Oil of Galbanum.
Bate.] It is made as the former, adding Chemical Oil of Lavender j. and
distilling, S. A. It is a wonderful Remedy against the Palsy, being anointed
upon the part affected.

Salmon.] 1. The Acid Spirit has the Virtues of the former, and may be given in
the same Dose.

2. The Volatile white Oil, has the Virtues of the former also, and given in
the same Dose; it is a famous thing against the Palsy and Convulsions both
inwardly taken, and outwardly anointed upon the parts: It gives ease in a cold
Gout, and in all Pains proceeding from Cold.

3. But if you design the whole Distillation only for an external use, it will
be best to draw them all off together, and afterward to separate from them the
Acid Spirit; so will the Volatile Oil, yellow Oil, and red Balsam mix together,
which is the Galbanetum of Sennertus.

4. It cures Cramps, Convulsions, Palsies, Lameness, Aches and Pains in any
part; as also green Wounds, old Ulcers, Gouts, etc.

III. * Oleum Bufonum, Oil of Toads.
Bate.] Live Toads, No iv. boil them in Oil-Olive lb ij. for one hour, or till
they break; then strain and keep it for use. It is good against Pustles of the
Lips, and Cancers of the Breasts; it is also prevalent against the Dropsy, and
provokes Urine, being anointed on the Reins.

Salmon.] 1. It is said to be an excellent thing against all manner of
Breakings out of the Skin, of what kind soever; and cures a red Face, more
especially if mixed with a small quantity of Flowers of Sulphur.

2. I am informed that an old Man who had been troubled with the Gout for forty
Years, by anointing the places affected with this Oil for some time, was
perfectly cured thereof, so as he never had any more Fits of it.

IV. * Oleum Cosmeticum, A beautifying Oil.
Bate] Oil of bitter Almonds iv. Oil of Tartar per deliquium ij. Oil of
Rhodium, gut. iv. mix them. S. A. It cleanses the Skin, and smooths it.

Salmon.] 1. It brings off the Skin, but by degrees; it makes not the Face raw,
but makes it fall off in manner of a Scurf.

2. If there be Worms in the Face, it kills them all, brings them forth of the
Skin, leaving their holes behind, which afterward fill up again.

3. It ought to be used three or four times a day, or oftener, and to be
continued for five or six Weeks more or less, as you see occasion. It will
smart a little, but without any other detriment, and at length leave the Skin
very smooth, clear, and white.

V. * Oleum Cremoris, Oil of Cream.
Bate.] The inner green Bark of Elder fresh gathered, M. iij. the best Cream lb
ij. boil them well, till the Cream turns to an Oil, press out, and add more
fresh Bark of Elder, M. iv. boil again till the Bark grows crisp, and then
express the Oil. It is one of the best of Remedies against the Piles, Burnings,
an Erysipelas, etc.

Salmon.] 1. It is good against Inflammations of all kinds, as also Burnings and
Scaldings of all sorts, by anointing therewith and dipping a Linen Cloth in
the same (if need requires) and laying it over the Affect.

2. In using it for the Piles or an Erysipelas; it ought to be often anointed,
at least five or six times a day; and in the latter you may lay it on with a
Feather.

VI. * Oleum Milvinum, Oil of Kites.
Bate.] Young Kites or Gleads from the Nest, or older with Mag-pyes, No iv. let
them be exenterated and deplumed; and boil them in black Cherry-water, q. s.
adding Peony-roots iij. Castor j. Rue, M. iij. Flowers of Rosemary and
Lavender, A. M. ij. Flowers of Hypericon j. Roots of Valerian ij. add Oil-Olive
lb ij. and boil till they come to a Mash, or are boiled to pieces; press forth,
and the Oil which swims on top take off, and keep for use. At the time of an
Epileptick Fit, anoint the Soles of the Feet, Nostrils, and Nape of the Neck,
with this Mixture. Of the aforesaid Oil j. Chemical Oils of Rue and Savin, Ana.
j. mix them.

Salmon.] 1. It is chiefly to be done (if used preventively) three days before
and after the Full and New Moons; otherwise I should choose to use it Morning
and Evening the whole Month throughout.

2. During the Unction it will be good also to give inwardly. gr. iv. ad x. or
xij. (according to Age) of the Volatile Salt of Kites, in some proper Vehicle
every Morning fasting.

VII. * Oleum Paralyticum, An Oil against the Palsy.
Bate.] Mustard Seed lb iij. Castor ss. Cloves ij. Nutmegs iij. S. V. vi. beat
all well and digest them together in B. M. for twenty four hours, then strongly
press forth the Oil with a Press. Often anoint the Back bone, Nape of the Neck,
and parts affected therewith.

Salmon.] 1. It is a good thing if used according to this Composition and
Preparation, but it will be much more powerful if you add to it a third part of
Oil of Amber.

2. You ought to use it to all the parts affected, and that Morning and Evening
for many days together, giving inwardly Volatile Salt of Vipers.

VIII. * Oleum Pomosum, Oil of Thorn Apple Leaves.
Bate.] Fresh Leaves of Strammonium bearing Thorn Apples lb j. bruise them and
add Oil-Olive lb ijss. boil to the Consumption of the Juice; express, and add
fresh Leaves lb ss. Insolate for fourteen days, then boil to the Consumption of
the Juice, and press out. It quickly heals, even to a Miracle all Inflammations,
and all sorts of Burnings, whether by Fire, or boiling Water, melted Lead, or
Gun-pouder, or by Lightning.

Salmon.] 1. If the Skin be not broken, you need only to anoint it upon the
place affected, but often.

2. If the Skin be broken, it will be best to apply it Plaister-wise, and so
bind it up till the Fire is drawn out; and till that is done, no healing can be
expected.

IX. Oleum Ranarum, Oil of Frogs.
Bate.] Live Frogs, No xij. Oil-Olive lb jss. boil them for an hour, and
express the Oil. It cures Redness of the Face and Impetigo, helps Erysipela's
and Gangreens, and is a Specific against Cancers.

Salmon.] 1. It is a good thing for the Intention, but in my Opinion Oil of
Toads is much before it, to all the Purposes mentioned.

2. It is admirable also against the Gout, being anointed Morning and Evening,
and applied to the part mixed with Barley Meal, as a Pultice.

X. * Oleum Scorbuticum, The Oil against the Scurvy.
Bate.] Horse Raddish-roots vj. Scurvy Grass, M. iv. Lavender-flowers, M. ij.
Neats-feet Oil lb j. b^^l with a gentle Fire to the Consumption of the Juices;
pr^^^ out and add Spirit of Salt iij. Spirit of Scurvy Grass j. Oil^ of
Cinnamon and Cloves, A. ss. Oil of Origanum iv. mix them. With this Oil the
parts affected are anointed once a day, for half an hour very warm.

Salmon.] 1. But where Scorbutic pains affect in (...) cold habit of Body, you
must (besides anointing with it) apply it as a Pultice to the parts affected by
mixing it with Powder of Elecampane and Bay Berries, Ana.

2. In a cold Gout it is also a Specific, first anointing with it, and then
applying it in a Cataplasm as before directed.

XI. Oleum (...) Trichophues, An Oil for restoring Hair fallen.
Bate.] Fresh Southernwood bruised lb ss. old Oil lb jss. red Wine lb ss. boil
till the Herbs are crisp; then strain out: repeat this Work the third time with
new Southernwood: strain out, and add Bear's-grease ij. mix them well. It is
mightily commended for the Cure of an Alopecia, or for like falling of the Hair.

Salmon.] 1. (...) fignificat, quod capillos restituit: And Dioscorides uses it
in that Sense, where he says, (...), etc. Lib. 2. Cap. 97.

2. You must before you anoint rub the bald places with a warm coarse Cloth,
till they look very red, or you may do it with an Onion in like manner, then
anoint with this Oil, rubbing it well in for half an hour at a time, and this
repeat three or four times a day, for six Weeks together at least.

XII. * Oleum Tritici, Oil of Wheat.
Bate.] It is made by strongly expressing bruised Wheat, between hot Iron
Plates, so as the Oil may come forth. It is admirably good against Chops in the
Hands, Ulcers of the Feet, or Kibes, Chops of the Lips, Herpes, Scabbines of
the Skin, etc.

Salmon.] 1. You may anoint therewith three or four times a day, but chiefly at
Night going to Bed, and apply over where it is necessary this Emplaister.
Emplastrum Diapalma j. of this Oil j. Wax ss. mix them.

2. It is anodyne, abates Inflammations, and is good against Scurf, Dandrif, and
other Foulnesses of the Head in Children, being anointed on the part.

XIII. Oleum Viperarum, Oil of Vipers.
Bate.] Large, fat, live Vipers, No 3. Spanish Wine ij. Oil of Hypericon viij.
put them into a Vessel with a narrow Mouth, boil in B. M. to the Consumption of
the Humidity, and then press forth the Oil. It cleanses the Skin, heals the
Impetigo, etc. takes away Gouty Tophs, cures the Leprosy.

Salmon.] 1. It is indeed a good thing to cleanse the Skin, but it must be long
used, except it be fortified with some of the Volatile Salt of Toads.

2. And that it might the more effectually answer the Intention, while this Oil
is used outwardly, the Volatile Salt of Vipers ought to be taken daily
inwardly, whereby the malign Acid, which is the cause of those Distempers will
be effectually mortifyed.

CHAP. III. Of BALSAMS.
I. Balsamum Anodynum, A Balsam easing Pain.
Bate.] CAstile Soap j. Opium ss. Camphire vj. Saffron j. Alcohol of S. V.
xviij. digest in Sand, ten days and nights, then strain. Dip Linen Rags in it,
which apply to the pained parts, renewing the Application every fourth hour,
till all the Pain ceases. It wonderfully allays the Pains of the Gout.
Internally it is also given, gut. 30.40.50. in Wine.

Salmon.] 1. It is indeed a famous Balsam for easing of Pains, whether inward
or outward: outwardly applied, it ought to be renewed oftener than our Text
prescribes.

2. Inwardly given it not only prevails against the Gout, Rheumatism, etc. but
is of singular use against the Cholick, Gripings of the Guts, and the Stone,
whether in the Reins or Bladder.

3. It provokes Sleep, and causes rest, and therefore ought to be given at
Night going to Bed.

4. Given, ad ij. iij. or iv. in a Clyster it heals the Bloody Flux, and stops
all other Fluxes of the Bowels.

II. * Balsamum Faeminarum, The Balsam for Womenkind.
Bate.] Of the small Flowers of the musked Crane's Bill iv. Oil of sweet
Almonds new drawn lb jss. insolate forty days; then express out: add fresh
Flowers of Water Lillies and of white Lillies, A. iv. insolate again twenty
days; and express the Oil; to which add Oil of Jassemy iv. Civet j. mix S. A.
and make a Balsam. Anoint therewith the Perinaeum, Groins, Loins, Flanks of
Women, (...), in pariendi difficultate, who have hard Labor, or are not easily
delivered.

Salmon.] 1. The Oil is much better made by boiling till the Flowers are crisp;
and they may all be put in at once, as well as at several times, by which means
it will also be sooner done.

2. But it will be no perfect Balsam without the addition of some proper Resin;
of which kind are Turpentines of all sorts; to the former Oil, after expression
you may add, Strasburg Turpentine, Balsam Capivi, Balsam of Tolu, Chio
Turpentine, A. jss. Liquid Styrax iv. which mix well.

3. Being thus compounded, it will be much more powerful for the intended
purpose, besides which it will be a very good Vulnerary; and if any of the
parts be hurt or torn in the bringing forth of the Child, it will speedily and
safely heal them.

III. * Balsamum Lucatelli, Lucatellus his Balsam.
Bate.] The best Oil-Olive lb iij. Spanish Wine lb j. Venice Turpentine washed
in Rose Water viij. Wax lb j. boil S. A. adding red Sanders in fine Powder ij.
Balsam of Peru j. mix them. Outwardly applied, it is good against Burnings,
Inflammations, Ulcers, Wounds, etc. Inwardly it is given, ad j. or ij. in Wine
for inward Bruises, Ulcers of the Reins, Stone in the Reins and Bladder,
Difficulty of making Water.

Salmon.] 1. In making of this Balsam some few things are observable, first,
That the Turpentine is better unwasht than washed, because some of its most
Volatile, Spirituous and Essential parts are lost in that Agitation.

2. Secondly, That Strasburg Turpentine much exceeds the Venice in this
Occasion, as being much more Fragrant and Balsamic; and Cyprus and Chio are
yet still better than that.

3. That where such balsamic Resins are used it is not good to boil much the
Balsam, after the mixing of them, because much of their Spirituous and Volatile
parts fly away in that Action, and therefore it is best to boil the Oil and
Spanish Wine together first, to the Consumption of the Humidity; and then to
add the Resins, mixing them only by a gentle melting together, not boiling.

4. That the Balsam of Peru is too little in quantity ivss. is as small a
proportion as can be put into this quantity, to add any thing of Virtue to the
Medicament; and if instead of ivss. you allow ix. the Balsam will be very much
the better.

5. In our Pharm. Land. Lib. 5. Cap. 2. Sect. 50. you may see it, according to
the Colleges Prescript, which is in much differing Proportions.

6. The Red Sanders ought to be added after it is off the Fire, and the boiling
heat abated, otherwise it will not be of any good color, and then to be
stirred continually, till it is almost cold.

7. When I make it for my own use, my Proportions are these. Oil-Olive lb jss.
Spanish Wine lb j. boil to the Consumption of the Wine; then add the best Bees
wax lb j. when it is melted, put in Strasburgh, Cyprus, or Chio Turpentine lb
jss. Balsam of Peru viij. Red Sanders in fine Powder ij. melt, mix* and stir it
till it is cold. It Is a Balsam without compared.

IV. Balsamum Momordicae, Balsam of the Balm-Apple.
Bate.] It is made of the Fruit thereof, being insolated for a long time in
Oil. It is one of the best of things, against Wounds and Ulcers; a most
admirable thing against the Haemorrhoides or Piles, Ulcers of the Womb,
Ruptures, etc.

Salmon.] 1. I humbly conceive that by Momordica our Author intends nothing
more nor less than the Balm-Apple, and in that Sense we have taken him.

2. But most Herbalists take Momordica to be the Balsamitamas, which is clearly
another Plant, and bears no such Fruit as the Balsamina, Viticella, or
Balm-Apple-Plant does.

3. This Oil is temperate in respect of the first qualities, vulnerary, and
cures Pains, chiefly of the Haemorrhoides; it is also good for wounded Nerves,
Burnings, Ruptures, etc.

V. Balsamum Nucistae, Balsam of Nutmegs.
Bate] Nutmegs bruised, or beaten lb j. Spanish Wine lb ss. pure new made
Butter without any Salt in it lb ij. put them all into a Vessel which stop
close, and insolate for five days; then boil gently to the Consumption of the
Wine, and strain out the Balsam. Its use is as well internal as external. It
expels the dead Child, and brings forth the Secundine or Afterbirth, etc. It
is exhibited in Wine ad ss. it eases also the Pains of the Head and Spleen,
etc. outwardly it is anointed upon the part to ease all Pains proceeding from
Cold, or cold Causes.

Salmon.] 1. This is nothing more or less but an Artificial Oil of Nutmegs by
expression made by addition of the fresh Butter.

2. The insolation and boiling being over; whilst very hot, you must press out
the Oil, but it must be with an Almond Press as they make Oil of Almonds, or
Oil of Nutmegs by expression; otherwise a great deal of the Strength and Oil of
the Nutmegs will be left behind.

3. It comforts the Head and weakened Viscera, and is an excellent thing against
Ulcers of the internal parts; it discusses Wind, and gives ease in the Cholick
to a wonder.

VI. Balsamum Sclopetarium, A Balsam for Gunshot Wounds.
Bate] rx; Oils of Lineseed and Turpentine, A. lb j. Verdigrise ss. boil them a
little, S. A. It is used against Gunshot Wounds, and old Ulcers, for which
purposes it has no equal.

Salmon.] 1. It is an excellent thing against Burnings and Scaldings of all
kinds, whether with naked Fire, boiling Water or Oil, boiling Pitch or Wax,
melt-Lead, or other Metals, Nitre, Gun-pouder, etc.

2. Lay it on with Lint (the part being anointed with it) and then a proper
sticking Plaster over it; it will take out the Fire in a very short time, and
soon after heal the Ulcer.

3. It is esteemed also a most excellent thing for the healing all sorts of
putrified Sores, old Ulcers, running Fistula's, etc. doing those things which
sacarcely any other outward Medicine will do.

VII. Balsamum Spinale, A Balsam for the Back.
Bate.] Man's Grease iv. Goose Grease, Badgers Grease, A. iij. Oil of Bays ij.
Sage, Marjoram, Elder, dwarf Elder, Calamint, Origanum, Lavender, A. M. j. boil
all to the Consumption of the Juices, and press out; add Balsam of Amber j.
Butter of Mace ss. Petroloeum, Oil of Spike, A. ij. mix them, S. A. Anoint on
the Spina Dorsi, or Backbone, for the Rickets. Use it in the Morning; and at
Night a little before going into Bed, lay over it greasy Wool, as it is new
shorn off the Sheeps Back, and binding it fast to with a double Linen Cloth
sewed on.

Salmon.] 1. It is designed as an external help against the Rickets, and it is
of good use for such Children, as cannot be easily made to take things inwardly.

2. But besides anointing the Backbone, it will be necessary to anoint the
Stomach therewith Morning and Evening, as also all the Joints affected.

VIII. Balsamum Spleneticum, A Balsam for the Spleen.
Bate.] Rue, Ground Ivy, Camonile, Time, A. M.j. beat them together, and add
Ox-Gall, Neats-feet Oil, A. lb j. Aqua Vitae j. boil for an hour, and strain
out. It is of singular Virtue against Pains of the Spleen, and all other Pains
and Aches proceeding from a cold Cause.

Salmon.] 1. It is a good thing as it is, but if you add to the Composition,
Camphire ij. it will be much more effectual.

2. While this is using outwardly, let the Patient take in the mean time
Tinctura Martis every Night inwardly, in some proper Splenetick Vehicle.

IX. * Balsamum Sulphuris Bateanum, Dr. Bate's Balsam of Sulphur.
Bate] Flowers of Sulphur j. Florence Oil-Olive v. boil all with a gentle Fire,
(continually stirring of it) till it comes to the consistence of a Balsam. It
is most efficacious against all Ulcers, whether internal or external. Dose, ad
gut. 20. or more.

Salmon.] 1. It is good against Scabs, Itch, Pimples, Redness, Scurf, and all
sorts of breakings out of the Skin, taking them away, and making it white,
soft, and smooth.

2. Applied in the Gout, it is of good use, and gives ease in that Disease,
when many other Remedies fail.

x.* Balsamum Sulphuris Minerale, Mineral Balsam of Sulphur.
Bate.] Linseed Oil x. Sulphur in fine Powder ij. boil gently, continually
stirring it, till it comes to the Consistency of Honey. Let it be applied to
the place pained and weakened with the Gout, spreading it on Leather or Cloth,
and renewing it every third or fourth day.

Salmon.] 1. This has all the Virtues of the former, and therefore may
profitably be used to the same Intention.

2. In the Gout, etc. anoint with it very well, which done make another part of
it into a Cataplasm, with Powder of Elecampane-roots and Bay Berries, and apply
it after anointing, over the grieved parts.

XI. Balsamum Sulphuris Rulandi, Rulandus his Balsam of Sulphur.
Bate.] Flowers of Sulphur j. Oil of Nuts or Rapeseed vj. generous Wine ij.
digest eight days, stirring them sometimes; then boil to the Comsumption of the
Wine. It it is a singular Easer of Pain; A maturative and digestive in Wounds
of the Nervous parts: Dropped into the Ears, it takes away their Pain.

Salmon.] 1. It is good also against all vices of the Skin whatsoever, freeing
it from all its Defedations, for which purposes it is not lightly to be valued,
being only anointed thereon, Morning and Evening for some time.

2. It gives ease in the Gout, and in all Pains proceeding from Cold and
Moisture; and strengthens weak Nerves; and is a famous thing against Wounds in
what part of the Body soever.

XII. Balsamum Verum, A True Balsam.
Bate.] It is made of Snails with Shells, for a long time and much beaten with
an equal quantity of Sugar-Canday, so as to become a Balsam. It is good to
anoint with in the Smallpox.

Salmon.] 1. After the Smallpox are filled, and come to their full bigness,
you may safely anoint with this Medicine, it drys them and prevents their
pitting.

2. You ought to lay it on almost as often as it drys, till they become very
crusty; but being applied before they are come fully out, it may endanger their
striking in again, which you must with all care avoid.

XIII. Balsamum Magis compositum, Balsam the greater Composition.
Bate.] Balsam de Tolu, Capivi, Myrrh, Saffrons, Nutmegs, A. ij. Mastich,
Guajacum, Ammoniacum, Taccamahacca, Caranna, A. j. Chio turpentine ss. yellow
Wax j. Oil of Hypericon vj. Red Rose Water ix. melt first the Wax with the Oil;
then add the Tinctures and exhale the S. V. after add the Rose Water; which
after the cooling, let it be melted again in a gentle heat, and poured forth
into another fit Vessel, to keep for use.

Salmon.] 1. It is one of the best Vulneraries (of an Artificial Balsam) in the
World, and in the Cure of Wounds does wonders.

2. It also cleanses running Sores, old Ulcers, and Fistula's, and brings them
to a speedy Cure.

3. Applied also to the Gout, and to weak and pain Limbs, as also to a weak
Back: It gives speedy ease and relief: Inwardly given j. ad ij. at Night going
to Bed, it is good against Stone, Sand, or Gravel in Reins or Bladder.

XIV. Balsamum minus Cempositum, Balsam the lesser Composition.
Chio Turpentine ij. Oil of Hypericon iv, yellow Wax vj. Red Rose Water vj. mix
and make the Balsam in the same manner as the former.

Salmon.] 1. It is a singular Vulnerary, and cures Wounds almost to a Miracle,
yet in my Judgment, it is not so good a Balsam as the former.

2. It softens Scrophulous Nodes, Tophs, and Gums and in the Gout, or any Pains
of the Nerves, is little inferior to the former.

CHAP. IV. Of OINTMENTS.
I. Butyrum Amygdalinum, Almond Butter.
Bate.] LArge sweet Almonds (i. e. Jordan Almonds) lb j. macerate them in cold
Water and blanch them bruise them well in a Marble Mortar, sprinkling them
often (whilst beating) with a little fair Water. Then add fair Water, q. s.
till it grows thick like Cream; strain it hard out by pressing, and put it upon
a gentle Fire often stirring it, till it begins to boil: then add (that it may
coagulate or thicken) Juice of Limons j. suspend it in a good thick Cloth, that
there may be a separation of all the servse or thin parts, the Butter remaining
behind in the Cloth, which mix with Sugar and Rose Water, till it is of a
pleasant Taste. It is a delicate Anodyn; it lenifies or softens, and maturates,
and is good against the Gripings of the Guts in Children, for which it is very
much commended.

Salmon.] 1. The Sugar with which the Condiment is made ought to be trebble
refined; and the Rose Water ought to be that of Damask Roses.

2. For external Uses, it is a good Maturative, and therefore ought to be mixed
with Ripners; and mixed with Turpentine, and the Yolk of an Egg, it makes one of
the best Digestives in nature.

3. Inwardly against the Griping of the Guts you may give it from ij. ad vj. or
more, mixing with it, gut. i. ij. or iij. as you see convenient of the Oil of
sweet Fennel-seeds.

II. Butyrum Cerae, Butter of Wax.
Bate.] It is made of yellow Wax, dissolved in S. V. and filtrated, so that it
may remain in the Paper like Butter. Being edulcorated, it may be drank ad j.
as the most excellent of Remedies against the Dysentery or Bloody Flux.

Salmon.] 1. Outwardly it is good to stop Fluxes of Humors into Wounds and
Ulcers, and to cause them speedily to heal.

2. Inwardly it may not only be given against a Bloody Flux, but against all
other Fluxes of the Bowels whatsoever, with good success: It stops the Flux and
strengthens the Parts weakened. Dose, a ij. ad ij. twice a day.

III. * Linimentum Melluminatum, The Honied Liniment.
Bate.] Powder of Columbines, Sage, Mint, Nutmegs, A. ss. burnt Alum j. Honey
iv. mix them. It is good against Ulcers of the Gums, Inflammations, Looseness of
the Flesh about the Teeth, etc.

Salmon.] 1. If there be Ulcers in the Mouth, dissolve a little of it in Red or
Clarret Wine, and gargle therewith: then lay it in substance with Lint upon the
Ulcer it self, till it is cleansed.

2. It is good for Ulcers in other parts, and induces them to a speedy healing.

IV. * Linimentum Simplex, The simple Linniment.
Bate.] Juice of Nightshade, Oil of Roses, A. xx. boil to the Consumption of
the Juice, strain, and add Litharge, Ceruse, A. lb j. mix them, S. A. It is
good against Cancers in Women's Breasts, Heats, and Inflammations, Erysipela's,
etc.

Salmon.] 1. Anoint therewith Morning and Evening, and spread it upon soft,
gentle Leather, and cover the whole Affect therewith.

2. If Saccharum Saturni vj. be added to it, it will be more effectual to
answer all the Intentions for which it is designed.

V. Mel Saponis, Ointment of Honey and Soap.
Bate.] Common Soap, Honey, A. iv. Salt of Tartar ss. Fumitory-water ij. mix
them, S. A. It is a Cosmetick, and serves chiefly for whitening the Hands and
Face by washing therewith. It prevails also against Burnings, Inflammations,
Gout, etc.

Salmon.] 1. It is one of the best of external Remedies against the Gout, or
any kind of Pain or Tumor of the Joints, being spread upon Leather and applied.

2. If you please you may add to the Composition Camphire ss. it will be more
effectual to all the Intentions.

VI. * Savanetta Cosmetica, A beautifying Soap or Ointment.
Bate.] Venice Soap ij. dissolve it in Juice of Limons ij. add Oil of bitter
Almonds, Oil of Tartar per deliquium, A. j. mix, and insolate so long, till it
comes to the thickness of an Ointment, stirring it well every day. Lastly, add
Oil of Rhodium, gut. vj. vel q.s. and make an Ointment.

Salmon.] 1. It clears the Skin and makes it white, soft and smooth, freeing it
from Pimples, Breakings out, Scurf, Morphew, Sun burning, and other Defedations.

2. It is reported, that if it be spread thick upon a Cloth, and laid upon the
Face, or other parts of the Skin troubled with Lentils, Freckles, and the like,
it will take them away; but it ought to lie on two days, and to be renewed two
or three times, or till the scurf Skin seems to come off, which it will do in a
little time with the discoloring or spots upon it, which I have sometimes seen.

VII. * Vnguentum Albuminum, Ointment of the Whites of Eggs.
Bate.] It is made by mixing exactly Oil of Roses ij. with Whites of Eggs iv.
S. A. It is one of the best of Remedies against Burnings, Inflammations, etc.

Salmon.] 1. Anoint the Inflammation, Erysipela's, or part burnt or scalded with
it, then lay over the Affect more of the same laid upon Lint, and gently bind
it on, renewing it twice a day.

2. It loosens Contractions, and gives ease in the Gout, being prudently
applied.

VIII. * Vnguentum Antipyreticum, An Ointment against Burnings.
Bate.] Fresh Goosedung, Oil-Olive, A. iv. Vnguentum de Althaea, Oil of Roses,
A. j. Snow-water viij. boil with a gentle Fire, S. A. strain and add Camphire
j. mix them. It is very excellent against Burnings, etc.

Salmon.] 1. Anoint the Burning or Scalding therewith, and then apply it upon a
Linen Cloth, dressing it twice a day till the Fire is out.

2. If it be raw, and the Fire be once out by Application of this Ointment, you
must heal it after the manner of other Ulcers.

IX. * Vnguentum de Aurantiis, Ointment of Oranges.
Bate.] Fresh Oranges, but green, and not ripe; No vj. beat them into a Pulp
with their Peels; Bay Leaves, M. iv. Sage, Sorel, Marigold, A. M. ij. Juice of
Watercresses lb ij. fresh Butter lb ij. boil all to the Consumption of the
Juices, then press strongly out; to which add fresh Bay Leaves, and Sage
bruised as before; Cinnamon j. Nutmegs ss; boil again, till the Herbs are
crisp, and then press out again. It is an excellent thing against Scabs, Itch,
etc.

Salmon.] 1. What good it will do in the Itch, I know nothing of (the Vnguentum
de Enula cum Mercurio, or Neapolitanum, are a thousand times better:) but as to
Scurf, Dandrif, Pustles, Pimples Scabs, and other like Breakings out, it is a
singular good thing.

2. You may anoint therewith two or three times a day, till the Affect ceases.

X. * Vnguentum de Betonica Aquatica, Ointment of Water Betony.
Bate.] Water Betony, Sorrel, A. M. vj. bruise them, and add fresh new made
Butter lb ij. boil till the Herbs are crisp, and press out strongly; repeat the
boiling with fresh Herbs three times, strain or press out again, and add
Sulphur Vive in fine Powder ijss. Chemical Oil of Orange-peels j. mix and make
an Ointment, S. A. It cures Scabs, Itch, etc.

Salmon.] 1. Anoint the Scabby or Itchy places with it twice a day, laying over
them a Cloth dipped in the same, if it can with convenience be done.

2. It is good against Pustules, and other breakings out of the Face, Scurf and
Dandrif in the Head, scald Heads, etc. being daily anointed therewith.

XI. * Vnguentum Cephalalgicum, An Ointment for the Head.
Bate.] Ointment of Alabaster, Ointment of Roses, A. ij. Opium j. Saffron ss.
Oil of Nutmegs j. mix and make an Ointment. It is to be anointed on the Temples
and Forehead.

Salmon.] 1. What and how the Ointments of Alabaster and Roses are made, see
our Pharm. Land. Lib. 5. Cap. 4. Sect. 26. and 36. where you have their Virtues
and Uses.

2. It eases Pain in any part, but chiefly in the Head, for which it is
accounted a Specific: being anointed on the Forehead, Temples, Nostrils,
Pulses, and Soles of the Feet, it gives ease and rest.

XII. * Vnguentum Crinificum, An Ointment causing Hair to grow.
Bate.] Labdanum vj. Bears grease ij. Crude Honey ss. Southernwood in Powder
iij. Ashes of Reed-roots jss. Oil of Nutmegs j. Balsam of Peru iij. mix them.

Salmon.] 1. It is said to breed Hair, and restore bald places, etc. you must
first rub the place a good while with an Onion, till the Skin looks very red,
and then you must anoint it with this Ointment, laying over it, a Linen Cloth
dipped in the same.

2. And that it may be the more effectually done, it ought to be in like manner
repeated three or four times a day for five or six Weeks together at least.

XIII. Vnguentum Depilatorium, An Ointment taking away Hair.
Bate.] Quicklime iv. Auripigment jss. Root of Florentine Orrice j. Nitre,
Sulphur, A. ss. strongest Soap-Lees lb ij. mix, and boil to a just Consistency:
add Oil of Cloves, gut, xx. mix and make an Ointment, or rather Pultice.

Salmon.] 1. You must use it with great caution, because of its corrupting
quality, and if it lies too long, it may do mischief making Marks and Scars
upon the place.

2. Spread it thin upon a thick piece of Linen Cloth, and so apply it, or
anoint the place therewith, letting it lie for half an hour, more or less
according to the Nature, Quality, and Thickness of the Skin, etc.

3. The Hair being taken off, anoint the place with Oil or Ointment of Roses.
Mynsicht is the Author thereof.

XIV. * Vnguentum Digitalis, Ointment of Fox Gloves.
Bate.] May Butter lb iij. fresh Fox Glove beaten, as much as you can well put
into it; insolate for thirty days; then boil S. A. and press out strongly.
Anoint the places affected with the King's Evil therewith; for this purpose it
has no equal.

Salmon.] 1. You are to anoint therewith Morning and Evening, continually for
so long time till you find the Affect to cease: It dissolves Kernels in the
Neck, or elsewhere, and takes away all sorts of Scrophulous Tumors whatsoever.

2. But the Patient ought to purge once a Week with our Pilulae Panchymagogae,
and take a Decoction all along of Fox Glove inwardly.

XV. * Vnguentum Faciale, An Ointment for the Face.
Bate.] Camphire, Sulphur Vive, A. ij. Pomatum ij. strong Diasinapi strained
out j. Oil of Rhodium, gut. iv. mix and make an Ointment. It cures a Red Face,
Universals being premised.

Salmon.] 1. What Preparation of Mustard Seed the Diasinapi is, is hard to be
understood, however instead thereof you may take common Mustard, which we use
for Sauce, straining it through a Cloth from the gross body of the Seed.

2. If you anoint Morning and Evening therewith, for about fourteen days time,
it will do wonders, removing not only Redness, but Pustules, Worms, and most
other Deformities of the Skin.

XVI. * Vnguentum Familiare, The Familiar, or Family Ointment.
Bate.] May Butter vij. Wax, Rosin, A. iv. Crude Honey x. Wheat Flour vj, mix
them, S. A. It warms, moistens, loosens, discusses, cleanses, smooths, ripens
and digests; and is of familiar use for the speedy curing Fellons and Whitloes
in Fingers, and Kibes and Chilblains in the Feet and Toes. It also wonderfully
helps Scorbutic Ulcers in the Feet.

Salmon.] 1. It is not only good for Fellons, Whitloes, Chilblains and Kibes;
but it is of singular use to abate Inflammations, and bring Pushes to Ripeness
and Maturity.

2. Spread it upon Leather, and apply it warm to the part affected, renewing
twice a day till you find amendment.

XVII. * Vnguentum ad Fissuras, An Ointment against Chaps.
Bate.] Myrrh, Ginger, Litharge of Silver, A. j. Honey iv. Wax ij. Oil of Roses
vj. mix them, S. A. For the Rich, you may add, Oil of Rhodium, gut. xij. Leaves
of Gold, No 10. Otherwise thus. Fine Bole, Myrrh, Ceruse, A. ij. Ducks Grease,
q.s. mix and make an Ointment. It cures quickly.

Salmon.] 1. Any of these may do the deed; but this (more common and easy)
will do the work better. Beef Suet iij. Wax j. Strasburgh Turpentine ss. Oil of
Bitter Almonds, q.s. to bring it into the body of an Ointment being melted
together.

2. Anoint here with, Morning and Evening at Bedtime, and in a few days the
Chaps will be well.

XVIII. * Vnguentum ad Foveas, An Ointment against the Marks of the Smallpox.
Bate.] Oil of sweet Almonds ij Sperma Ceti iij. Oil of Rhodium, gut. iv. mix
and make an Ointment, S. A. It is a most excellent thing to take away the
Pittings or Marks of the Smallpox. It alleviates the Pain, and takes away the
Acrimony, etc.

Salmon.] 1. I would not have you think that this Ointment will take away the
Marks of the Smallpox, when once you have them, but rather that it is to
prevent them.

2. When therefore the Smallpox are fully come out, to prevent their Pitting,
you must anoint Morning and Evening with this Medicament; keeping the Face
warm, and thereby they will quickly dry up, and come off without any damage.

XIX. Vnguentum Fuscum, The brown Ointment.
Bate.] Colcothar and Phlegm of Vitriol, A. j. Celandine Vinegar jss. Flowers of
Verdigrise v. clarified Honey iij. mix and make an Ointment, S. A. It is one of
the best Cleansers in Wounds and Ulcers.

Salmon.] 1. This is made in imitation of the Vnguentum fuscum Wurtzij, which
you may see in our Doron Medicum, Lib. 3. Cap. 4. Sect. 13. and it has the same
Virtues.

2. And the Directions there for making that, will fully instruct you how you
ought to make this; and unless it be well done, the Medicine will not be of
that worth and validity, which you may expect.

3. It is not only a great Cleanser, but possibly the best of Remedies against
all sorts of running Sores, Ulcers or Fistula's, in what part of the Body
soever.

XX. * Vnguentum Haemorrhoidale, An Ointment against the Piles.
Bate.] Fresh new made May Butter lb iij. Flowers of Elder and Broom fresh
gathered, as many as the Butter will contain being bruised: Insolate for a
Month; then stir them well about, and bury them in the Earth, that they may
putrify for a Month; afterward boil, S. A. and press the Ointment out.
Otherwise thus. Ashes or Powder of burnt Cork j. Camphire ij. Opium gr. vj.
Vnguentum Populneum jss. mix them. Anoint upon the place affected.

Salmon.] 1. First, foment the part very well with hot Claret Wine, which done,
immediately anoint the Piles with either of these Ointments; which you must
reiterate, ( viz. the anointing) at least five or six times a day.

2. But the Fomentation may be made use of Morning and Night so long as the
Ointment is used; and the Patient may sometimes sit over a Chafing Dish of
Charcole, wherein small pieces of Amber are put for a Fume.

XXI. * Vnguentum Herpeticum, An Ointment against the Herpes.
Bate.] Quicklime, Auripigment, A. j. Tartar, Bay Salt, common Soap, A. ij.
Oil of Elder, q. s. mix and make an Ointment, S. A. Anoint the place where the
Herpes is, very well, and let it lie on twenty four hours: It will produce a
Crust, which being removed, you must anoint with Vnguentum Album.

Salmon.] 1. It is a sharp Medicine, and must be cautiously used; because of
the Poison of the Auripigment.

2. I must confess I am not for such doubtful (if not dangerous) Medicines, but
it may be much better used to any other part of the Body than to the Face.

XXII. * Vnguentum ad Lumbricos, An Ointment against Worms.
Bate.] Common Wormwood, Mint, Tansie, Rue, Leeks, Leaves of the Walnut-Tree,
A. M iij. Savin, M. iv. Bears-foot, M. vj. bruise them well with Worm-seed ij.
fresh Bryony-roots iv. Colocynthis, Aloes, A. ij. Bulls Gall lb j. new Butter
not salted lb v. White Wind lb ij. boil with a gentle Fire to the Consumption
of the Wine and Juices, then press forth.

Salmon.] 1. If Sow-bread j. has been added, it would have been yet better, and
more powerful.

2. You may anoint the lower parts of the Stomach, and Belly therewith at Night
going to Bed, and in some few days you will see the Effects; but you must be
careful that the Child takes not cold.

XXIII. Vnguentum Ophthalmicum, Eye Salve, or an Ointment for the Eyes.
Bate.] May Butter iv. white Wax j. melt and wash often with Rose Water; then
(the Water being poured forth) add Lapis Tutia prepared ss. Camphire ij. mix
and make an Ointment.

Salmon.] 1. Before you use this Ointment wash the Eyes with our Aqua Regulata,
or some other proper Eyewater, which done, put some of this Ointment into the
Eye, and for an hour or there-abouts gently bind it on.

2. You ought to use it for at least three or four Months or more, if any Pearl
or Film be upon the Eyesight, and it ought more especially Evening and Morning
be put into the Eyes, letting the Patient lie still in the Morning an hour
after it.

XXIV. * Vnguentum Paregorgicum, A mollifying or discussive Ointment.
Bate.] Wax vj. Turpentine iv. Honey iij. Wheatflower jss. Oil of Roses,
Vnguentum Haemorrhoidale, A. iv. melt them and make an Ointment, S. A. It is
good for Kibes and Chilblains in the Feet.

Salmon.] 1. It is good against Inflammations in any part, chiefly the Piles in
Ano, and is used with success against Kibes and Chilblains.

2. The Piles ought to be anointed with it five or six times a day, as also
Morning and Evening: And Kibes ought to be dressed therewith twice a day.

3. It discusses Tumors from cold, which will not brake, and mollifies and
ripens such, as Nature has disposed to braking.

XXV. * Vnguentum Piperinum, Ointment of Pepper.
Bate.] Powder of Elecampane, Flowers of Sulphur, A. ij. black Pepper jss.
Ointment of Roses xvj. Oil of Rhodium ij. mix and make an Ointment. It is a
complete thing for the Cure of Scabs, Itch, etc.

Salmon.] 1. It is good against Pustules or Pimples in the Face and Skin,
Worms, with which many Peoples Foreheads, Noses, and Chins much abound, and
other Deformities of those parts, as Scabs, Breakings out, etc.

2. Anoint with it Morning and Evening for some days, laying over (if need so
requires) some of the same spread upon thick Cloth or Leather.

XXVI. * Vnguentum Soleare, An Ointment for the Feet.
Bate.] Garlic beaten to a Mass iv. Hogs-Lard viij. boil to the Consumption of
the Juice, and press out; add Saffron in Powder j. Spirit of Salt ij. mix and
make an Ointment. Anoint the Soles of Childrens Feet herewith against the
Cough, etc.

Salmon.] 1. Applied also to the Soles of the Feet in Fevers, it is very
profitable to abate the heat of the Fever, and cause rest.

2. And made into a Cataplasm with Mithridate and Powder of Myrrh it is a
singular thing against the Gout and all Rhumatick pains.

XXVII. Vnguentum Sympatheticum, The Sympathetick Ointment.
Bate.] Oil of Roses, fine Bole, A. j. Linseed-Oil ij. Man's Grease, Moss of a
Man's Skull, killed by a violent Death, in Powder, A. ij. Mummy, Man's Blood,
A. ss. mix and make an Ointment, S. A. By this Ointment all Wounds are healed;
anointing the Instrument by which the Wound was made, once a day, every day, if
the Wound be great, otherwise, if the Wound be small, once every second or
third day may suffice. The Weapon is to be kept wrapped up in a clean Linen
Cloth, and in a place not too hot, lest the Patient suffers thereby.

Salmon.] 1. This is exactly from Barbet; but you may see another Composition
thereof in our Doron Medicum, Lib. 3. Cap. 4. Sect. 7. of which you may take
that which likes you best.

2. These Ointments are said to perform the Cure, provided the Nerves or
Arteries, or some principal Member be not hurt. See the place cited, for the
more complete Use thereof.

XXVIII. * Vnguentum Virilitatis, An Ointment against Impotency.
Bate.] Clarified Honey, Oil of Nutmegs by expression, A. ss. Pyrethrum, black
Pepper, Cubebs, A. ss. Civet j, Musk ss. Balsam of Peru j. mix and make an
Ointment, S. A.

Salmon.] 1. This Medicine wound be better, if it was accuated with Volatile
Salt of Vipers, or of Man's Flesh j. Balsam of Tolu ij. and an augmentation of
the Civet and Musk each to ij. Chemical Oil of Pismires j. mixing them well.

2. The Patient may anoint with it Morning and Night, the whole Penis or
Perinaeum, and also before the Act, because it stimulates mightily.

XXIX. Vnguentum Haemorrhoidale, An Ointment against the Piles.
Oil of Roses jss. Emplaistrum de Minio j. white Wax ss. being melted add
Aethiops Minerale ij. Opium ss. Saffron, Nutmegs, Camomile-flowers, A. j. Syrup
of Roses j. by a gentle heat exhale the Humidity, and mix them well, S. A.

Salmon.] 1. It is not only good against the Piles, which it cures by
anointing; but also a singular and approved thing against the Gout, or any
vehement Pain in what part of the Body soever.

2. First, anoint the part afflicted therewith; then spreading it upon Leather,
apply it, binding it on.

3. It has been found also by Experience to be an excellent thing to dissolve
Tumors, and Kernels in the King's Evil, being applied and renewed every other
day.

CHAP. V. Of CERE-CLOTHS.
I. * Ceratum Album, The White Cerate, or Cerecloth.
Bate.] WHite wax iv. Oil of bitter Almonds v. the whitest and purest Sperma
Ceri j. Ceruse washed in Rose Water jss. Camphire ss. mix them, S. A. It
softens, resolves, and is Anodyn: it cicatrizes in the Smallpox, and fills
them. It is indeed an elegant Cosmetick.

Salmon.] 1. If a little Turpentine or Frankincense be mixed with it, it will
stick the better, and the Cerate will be never the worse.

2. It may be laid upon Ladies Foreheads and Faces at Night going to Bed, and
taken off the next day, to make the Skin fair and smooth.

Added by the Translator.

II. Ceratum Cephalicum, A head Cerate, or Cerecloth.
Salmon.] 1. Gum Tacamahac, Mastich, Olibanum, A, j. Gum Elemi ij. Wax,
Frankincense j. Camphire ij. Opium in Powder j. Oleum Terrae, Oil of Nutmegs by
expression, Ana. q. s. mix and make a Cerate.

2. First, gently melt the Rosins and Wax; then add the Gum Elemi, after the
Pouders, and the other Gums; Lastly, the Camphire dissolved in the Oleum
Terrae, with the Oil of Nutmegs; malax them together, and make a Cerate, to
which if you please you may add a little Oil of Origanum and Oil of Cloves.

3. I^ comforts and strengthens a ^old and moist Head and Brai^ admirably,
eases the Megrin and Headache, and is of singular use against Colds, Coughs and
Catarrhs, etc.

III. Ceratum Stomachicum, A Cerate for the Stomach.
Salmon.] 1. Frankincense jss. Gum Elemi, Wax, Ana. ss. Oleum Petrae iij. Oil
of Cumin-seed distilled, Oil of Nutmegs by expression, Camphire, Ana. j. Oil of
Ben, q. s. melt the Frankincense, Gum Elemi and Wax together with a gentle
Fire; then being removed from it put in the Oils, in which let the Camphire be
dissolved, adding at last the Oil of Ben, so much as to give it, its due
Consistence.

2. You may spread it upon Leather or Cloth, and so apply it to the Stomach,
renewing it every other day, or as you see occasion.

3. It comforts and strengthens a cold and weak Stomach, causes a good Appetite
and Digestion, removes the Pains thereof, as also Pains and Stitches of the
Sides, discusses Wind.

3. Lastly, being worn for some time, it is a Specific for the curing of all
sorts of Agues whatsoever, C^olick Pains, Bastard Pleuri^es, etc.

IV. Ceratim Vulnerarium, A Cerate for Wounds.
Salmon.] 1. Wax, Frankincense, A. lb ij. Gum Elemi, Chio Turpentine, A. lb j.
Balsam de Tolu, de Chili, A. lb ss. melt the Wax and Frankincense at a gentle
Fire, then add the Gum Elemi and Turpentine, which being also dissolved. put in
lastly the Balsams de Tolu and de Chili, and continue stirring them till it is
nearly cold.

2. You may spread it upon Cloth or Leather, and apply it to either Wounds or
Ulcers, renewing it once or twice a day, as the Nature of the Affect does
require.

3. It also eases Pains in any part being applied proceeding from a cold Cause,
strengthens weak Limbs and Joints, discusses Swellings, and gives singular ease
in the Gout and Sciatica.

4. It oftentimes cures green Wounds at one or two dressings, and old Ulcers in
a very short time; applied over the whole Belly, it gives present relief in the
Cholick, and in short time after, perfect cure.

V. Ceratum ad Clavos pedum, A Cerate against Corns of the Feet.

Salmon.] 1. Gum Ammoniacum dissolved in Vinegar of Squills and inspiated ij.
Vitriol of Venus ss. (but some use Cyprian or Roman Vitriol, which they call
the blew Stone, of which they take jss.) white precipitate well edulcorated
iij. Strasburgh Turpentine a little, or q. s. mix and make a Cere-cloth.

2. You may spread it upon Cloth or Leather and apply it, renewing it when it
ceases to stick, or as you see occasion.

3. It is designed for the Cure of Corns in the Feet and Toes, for which it is
doubtless an excellent thing: It prevails also against old Ulcers, which are
hard to be cured, and dissolves or suppurates Veneral Buboes; and is said to be
good against Gums, Tophs, Nodes, etc. being applied.

CHAP. VI. EMPLAISTERS.
I. * Diachylon Odoratum, Perfumed Diachylon.
Bate.] EMplastrum Diachylon simplex lb iij. Powder of Florentine Orrice-roots
iij. Oil of Rhodium ss. Musk gr. iij. mix and make an Emplaster, S. A.

Salmon.] 1. It is anodyn, and resolves and discusses Tumors, and also of an
Emollient Nature, softning and ripening such as will come to Suppuration.

2. The Orrice-root and Oil of Rhodium are added, only to make it smell a
little the better.

3. It also digests, gently cleanses, and conglutinates new Wounds; and is good
for a Pain or Swelling in Women's Breasts.

II. * Diapalma Odorata, Perfumed Diapalma.
Bate.] Emplastrum Diapalma ( made with Unguentum and Oleum Rosatum, in the
place of Hogs-Lard and Oil-Olive) lb iij. melt it, and add Chemical Oil of
Rhodium ij. mix them, S. A.

Salmon.] 1. It is of a cooling, drying, astringent Nature; eases Pain, and
strengthens weak Parts, and stops Defluxions of Humors.

2. It is also often spread upon Leather and applied to Women's Breasts to dry
up the Milk.

3* Applied for a constancy to an old running Sore or Ulcer in the Legs, it is
possibly one of the best things in the World, and has sometimes performed a
Cure of that kind, when most other things have been used and have failed.

III. * Emplastrum Adhaesivum, A sticking Emplaster.
Bate.] Diachylon simplex, Diapalma, A. lb j. Burgondy Pitch, Sarcocolla, A.
iv. vel q. s. mix them, S. A. It serves for keeping Issues open, and freeing
them from Inflammation.

Salmon.] 1. Besides which, I know it by Experience to be one of the best
Emplasters in the World against the Gout, in what part of the Body soever.

2. It sticks well, eases Pain proceeding from a cold Cause, cleanses and heals
Wounds and Ulcers, etc.

IV. * Emplastrum Burgundicum. Of Burgundy Pitch Emplaster.
Bate.] Burgundy Pitch lb j. Powder of Cloves x. Chemical Oil of Pepper iij.
mix them, S. A. It is of singular use against the Headache, Ophthalmy,
Catarrhs, Vapors, etc. being applied to the Shoulders, and Nape of the Neck.

Salmon.] 1. It sticks well, and draws strongly, and therefore is a good thing
for the Divertion of Humors falling upon any part.

2. It is a Specific against the Gout, being prudently applied, Universals
being used beforehand.

2. It is good against Wounds of the Nerves, but ought not to be applied to any
depending part.

V. Emplastrum Camphoratum, The Camphorated Emplaster.
Bate.] Camphire jss. Balsam de Tolu j. Galbanum strained vj. mix them. It is
of use in the Suffocation of the Womb, Vertigo, etc. being applied to the
Navel; and has the Virtues of the Emplastrum Diagalbani.

Salmon] 1. Besides the Virtues ascribed to it by our Author; it is a singular
discussive, and cures a Gout proceeding from a cold Cause.

2. It is a good Vulnerary, and of singular use in Wounds of the Nerves, Pains,
Aches, and Weaknesses; applied over the Regions of the Stomach and Belly, it
prevails against the Cholick.

VI. Emplastrum Catarrhalt, An Emplaster against Catarrhs.
Bate.] Taccamabacca, Caranna, A. jss. Emplastrum de Betonica iij. Amber in
Powder j. Cloves ss. Sassafras Bark, Winter Cinnamon, A. ij. Balsam de Peru, q.
s. mix and make a Mass. It is to be applied to the Head being first shaved.

Salmon.] 1. Applied also to the Stomach, it comforts it, and discusses Wind;
and over the Region of the Belly, it eases the Pains of the Cholick.

2. Applied to the Joints t^ strengthens them; and to he Soles of the Feet, it
abates the Heat of Fever and causes Rest.

VII. * Emplastrum Diagalbani, Emplaster of Galbabanum.
Bate.] Galbanum prepared with Vinegar xij. Wax viij. Turpentine v. mix them.
S. A. It digests, softens, and resolves Tophs, Nodes, Scrophula's, and other
hard Tumors, and eases their Pain. It takes away Warts on the Hands and Corns
on the Feet; and strengthens the Nerves and Womb.

Salmon.] 1. I have known it successfully applied to Women's Breasts, which have
been very hard and painful, and much swollen; wherein it presently gave ease, and
totally discust the Tumor.

2. Applied upon the upper Region of the Belly, about the Navel, it is said to
prevent Abortion, and to cause the Woman to go out her whole time.

VIII. Emplastrum Diasulphuris Rulandi, Rulandus his Diasulpher Emplaster.
Bate.] Balsam of Sulphur iij. Wax ss. Colophony iij. being melted, add the
best Myrrh in sine Powder iijss. and boil S. A. It infallibly cures all sorts
of Ulcers and Wounds whatsoever.

Salmon.] 1. It is as good a Vulnerary as a Man shall usually meet with, it
cleanses, conglutinates, drys, and heals to admiration.

2. Spread upon Leather, and applied to the Joints in Arthritick pains, it
gives ease and removes them: And applied to a weak Back, it comforts and
strengthens the part.

IX. Emplastrum Epispasticum, A Blistering Emplaster.
Bate.] Burgundy Pitch xviij. Oil-Olive ss. being melted add Cantharides in
Powder iv. Seeds of Bishops-weed in Powder ij. mix and make a Mass, that may
stick firmly.

Salmon.] 1. You must spread it upon Leather, and let it lie twelve or fourteen
hours more or less, according to the nature of the part, and thickness of the
Skin.

2. Being taken off, apply over the place either Melilot Emplaister, or
Colewort Leaves, the smooth side next the Skin, dressing it at first twice a
day.

3. Many times an ill Symptom falls out in applying of this Emplaster, which is
a strange Pain, Heat and Sharpness in making of Urine, and sometimes their
Effects are such, as to cause pissing Blood; for all which, I would not have
the Patient to be out of Heart, since it is nothing but what is usual.

4. The Remedy of this is, to drink liberally Barley-water (made of that called
French Barley) casting away the first Water and using the second: to this I
usually add an equal, and sometimes a double quantity of Milk, which I a little
sweeten with trebble refined Sugar: This liberally drank, quickly takes off the
Pain.

X. * Emplastrum Febrifugum, An Emplaster against Fevers or Agues.
Bate.] Mastich in Powder vj. Aloes ij. fine Bole iij. Euphorbium, Saphisacre,
Bay Berries, Fenugreek, Venice-glass, A. ij. Pitch like Soot of Wood, Bay Salt,
A. jss. Turpentine iij. vel q. s. mix and make a Mass of Emplaster, S. A. It
oftentimes cures Tertians, and sometimes Quartans, being applied to the Wrists
three or four hours before the accession of the Fit.

Salmon.] 1. You may apply it so many hours before the coming of the Fit; but
you must also keep it on after it, as long as it will stick, and then renew it
again.

2. But if you will believe the Tradition, as soon as you take it off, you are
to cast it into a River or Brook, which has a Stream, that it may be carried
away therewith, and from thence forth, they say, the Ague shall never return
any more.

XI. Emplastrum Haemorrhoidale, An Emplaster against the Piles.
Bate.] Litharge of Silver lb j. Hogs Grease j. vel q. s. beat them well
together, so as to make a Mass of a fit hardness or stiffness for an Emplaster;
which may also be made into Suppositories, S. A. as need shall require.

Salmon.] 1. Being applied to the Joints in the Gout, it it eases the Pain; and
is good to dry up an old Sore, or running Ulcer.

2. Applied to the Back, it strengthens it, and eases the Pain thereof, though of
long standing: In a Suppository it eases the Pain of the Haemorrhoides.

XII. * Emplastrum Laterale, An Emplaster for the Side.
Bate.] Flowers of Sulphur v. Roots of Florentine Orrice ij. Cloves ss. Cumin
jss. being all in Powder, add Ship Pitch, Burgundy Pitch, A. iv. Turpentine
iij. Chemical Oils of Caraways and Rhodium, A. iv. mix them, S. A. It does much
good it Pleuritick pains, Phlebonomy being premised.

Salmon.] 1. It is also good against Pustles, Botches, Boils, and other
breakings out in the Skin, it draws them, and brings them out.

2. Applied to any place where there is Pain, it eases it after a singular
manner, discussing the Morbifick matter which causes it.

XIII. * Emplastrum Mammillare, An Emplaster for Women's Breasts.
Bate.] Sperma Ceti j. white Wax ij. Galbanum prepared with Vinegar ss. Oil of
Elder, q. s. It has no equal in all Scrophulous Tumors, Oedema's, and
Hardnesses of the Breasts, curdled Milk, etc.

Salmon.] 1. It is good against a Scirrhous, or any hard Tumor in Women's
Breasts, occasioned through a Blow, Cold taken, or Milk curdled therein.

2. Applied to a white Swelling in the Knee, called an Oedema, it discusses or
dissolves it, eases the Pain thereof, if any, and strengthens it: And indeed it
is good against any hard Tumor in what part of the Body soever.

XIV. * Emplastrum Nuchale, An Emplaster for the Nape of the Neck.
Bate.] Gum Elemi, Turpentine, A. ss. Olibanum, Mastich, Gum Tragacanth, A.
iij. fine Bole jss. Seeds of Fleawort, Myrtles, Balanstians, A. j. Euphorbium
j. Burgundy Pitch viij. Caranna x. Oil of Cloves, Balsam of Peru, A. gut. vj.
mix and make a Mass, S. A. Applied behind the Ears it takes away the Toothache:
Applied to the Nape of the Neck, it helps Ophthalmies, Desluxions into the
Eyes, etc.

Salmon.] 1. It was invented for the stopping of Catarrhs, or Defluxions of
Rheum upon any part.

2. Spread it upon Leather, and apply it as long as it will stick, then
renewing it: It is also good against Pains and Aches from a cold Cause, in what
part of the Body soever.

3. Applied to the places afflicted with Arthritick pains or the Sciatica; it
gives present relief, Universals being beforehand exhibited.

XV. Emplastrum Opiatum, An Opiate Emplaster.
Bate.] Diachylon magum iv. Quicksilver ij. Opium j. mix them. S. A. It
wonderfully conduces to the easing of Arthritick and Venereal pains.

Salmon.] 1. Besides which, it is a most excellent thing against all Rheumatick
pains proceeding from Wind, and Cold, and Sharpness of fermenting Humors.

2. Applied to the Reins, it gives ease in their Pains, though proceeding from
the Stone; and strengthens a weak Back.

XVI. * Emplastrum Paralyticum. An Emplaster against the Palsy.
Bate.] Powder of Earthworms iv. Calamus Aromaticus jss. Galangal vj. Honey, q.
s. mix and make an Emplaster. It has no second in the Palsy, being applied to
the parts affected.

Salmon.] 1. Before the Application of this Emplaster, you ought to anoint the
Paralytick parts, and all along the Backbone, twice a day with the Oil of
Amber before a good Fire, rubbing it well in for above half an hour, for at
least three or four days, or longer, according to the continuance of the
Disease.

2. This done, you may apply the Emplaster over all the parts affected,
renewing every other day.

3. And while this is a doing, let the Patient take every Morning and Evening
the following Draught. Black Cherry-water vj. Powers of Rosemary, Lavender,
Limons, Ana. gut. 20. Syrup of Citron-peels jss. mix them.

XVII. Emplastrum Podagricum, An Emplaster against the Gout.
Bate.] Opium, Venice Soap, A. ss. Emplastrum Diachalciteos ij. mix them, S. A.

Salmon.] 1. It is a Specific for the Gout (Universals being premised) but it
will give ease in any other pain whatsoever.

2. Before the Application of it, let the places pained be well bathed with the
following Mixture. Tincture of Opium made with S. V. iss. Camphire in small
bits iij. mix and dissolve.

XVIII. Emplastrum Saturninum, An Emplaster of Saturn, or White Lead.
Bate.] White Lead iv. white Chalk ss. Myrrh ij. an Amalgama (of Quicksilver,
p. ij. with Lead, p. j.) vj. old Lard, q. s. to make it into an Emplaster of a
stiff consistency in a cold Mortar. It cures callous and malign Ulcers, yea,
the most rebellious with one only Application, washing them first (if they be
foul) with the Water of the Solution of Lapis Salutis; immediately applying to
the Ulcer this Emplaster, spread thick upon Leather; and (if need be) holding
it on with a Plaster of Diachalciteos put over it, and binding it sufficiently
fast with a Woollen Rouler; this Application is not to be removed before
fifteen days is past.

Salmon.] 1. Besides the Virtues here assigned to it, it is a singular thing
against all Venereal pains whatsoever, whether in the Joints or Shin-bones.

2. It is also good against Venereal Nodes, Gums and Tophs, and all sorts of
Scrophulous or Strumatick Tumors or Swellings whatsoever, and is especially
commended against an Oedema in the Knee.

3. You may spread it on Leather, and renew it every second day, or third, at
farthest, bathing with the Mixture in the former Section every time, before you
apply the Emplaster.

XIX. * Emplastrum Scorbuticum, An Emplaster against the Scurvy.
Bate.] Flowers of Hypericon: Leaves of Mouse-Ear, Paul's Betony, Sea Scurvy
grass, A. M. ij. Wormwood, M. j. Oil of Roses vj. boil till the Herbs are
crisp, and press out, to which add Deers Suet, Wax, Honey of Roses, A. ijss.
Wheat Flower j. mix them, S. A. It is good against Scorbutic Ulcers, and
Breakings out.

Salmon.] 1. It eases also Scorbutic pains in what part of the Body soever,
being applied.

2. You may spread it upon thick Cloth or Leather, and renew it every other
day; made up into a Suppository it gives ease in the Piles.

XX. * Emplastrum Smecticum, The Cleansing Emplaster.
Bate.] Red Lead lb jss. Oil lb ij. white Soap iv, Wax ij. boil them, S. A. It
cleanses and resolves, eases the Pains of the Back and Joints, dissipates
Contusions, alleviates the Pains of the Gout, and prevents Abortion, being
timely applied to the Back and Navel, and kept continually on.

Salmon.] 1. It is a Specific against the Gout, and all sorts of Arthritick
pains, so that no Plaster is more famed for that purpose that I know of.

2. Spread it on Cloth or Leather, and apply it, and renew it again, when it
will stick no longer.

XXI. * Emplastrum Solare, An Emplaster for the Feet.
Bate.] Sheeps Suet iv. Ship Pitch, Rosin, A. viij. Frankincense xij. Saffron
in Powder ss. Cloves, Mace, A. vj. Cumin-seed jss. Labdanum vj. mix them, S. A.

Salmon.] 1. It is applied to the Soles of the Feet against Coughs and Colds in
Children, and such elder Persons, who cannot be easily prevailed upon to take
Physic.

2. Applied in violent Burning and malign. Fevers, it is said to draw away the
Heat, and give rest.

XXII. Emplastrum Spasmaticum, An Emplaster against Cramps and Convulsions.
Bate.] Ship Pitch iv. Castor, Oil of Costus, A. j. mix and make a Mass: The
Title shows the Virtues.

Salmon.] 1. Before you apply this Emplaster the part or parts affected ought
to be Morning and Night, anointed with the Oil of Amber, well chaffed in, and
that for three or four days together; which done, this Emplaister may be
applied.

2. Spread it on Cloth or Leather, and renew it when it begins to leave
sticking.

3. It is an excellent thing against all Pains and Aches, Gouts, and Rheumatick
Distempers proceeding from a cold Cause.

XXIII. * Emplastrum ad Strumas, An Emplaster against the King's Evil.
Bate.] Emplastrum e Cicuta cum Ammoniaco iv. Gum Elemi ss. Mercury precipitate
x. mix them. It heals Scrophula's and Struma's, vulgarly the King's Evil.

Salmon.] 1. It is applied to hard and painful Swellings in Women's Breasts,
(whether occasioned through Blows, or curdled Milk, or a Cold, which the Vulgar
call an Ague in the Breast) with admirable Success: It eases the Pain, softens,
and discusses or dissolves the Tumor.

2. Spread it on Cloth or Leather, and apply it, renewing it every third or
fourth day, and continue the Application till the Tumor or Swelling is wholly
vanished.

XXIV. * Emplastrum Synanchicum, An Emplaster against the Quinsey.
Bate.] White Dogs Turd in Powder vj. Crude Honey viij. Wheat Flour ijss. Wax
iv. Oil of Roses vj. vel q. s. mix and make an Emplaister. S. A. It is applied
to the Jugular, and parts of the Neck below the Ears, where the Pain is.

Salmon.] 1. It ought to be made large, and to be applied over the whole
Throat, from Ear to Ear, and renewed once a day.

2. Mean Season, while this is applying outwardly the Sick ought to take Spirit
of Sal Armoniack outwardly, gut. 20. ad 30. in four or five Ounces of
Milk-water, or black Cherry-water.

XXV. Emplastrum Tibiale, An Emplaster for the Shin-bones.
Bate.] Mercury ij. dissolve it in A. F. ij. add to it Hogs Grease iv. boil
them in an Earthen Vessel, continually stirring it with an Iron Rod or Spatula,
till it comes to the consistency of a soft Emplaister, by the exhaling of the
Humidity; then add yellow Wax j. Powder of Mastich and Olibanum, A. iij. mix
and make a Mass, S. A. It is profitable in the French Pox, for Nodes, Gums,
Tophs, etc.

Salmon.] 1. It is of use for such as have got Nocturnal Pains, and are
troubled with Nodes, Gums, etc. on their Shin-bones, to be applied and renewed
every fourth day.

2. But while this is a doing, it will be good for the Patient to take inwardly
some few Doses of the Prince's Powder, the Preparation of which, we have taught
in the aforegoing part of this Book.

XXVI. * Emplastrum Vermifugum, An Emplaster to kill Worms.
Bate.] Aloes in Powder j. Colocynthis, Myrrh, A. iij. Savin, Rue, Wormwood,
Tansie, Wallnut-Tree Leaves, Bryony-root, A. ij. Wax, Rosin, A. 4. Oil of Rue
ij. mix and make a Mass, S. A. Being applied to the Navel, it kills Worms, and
brings them forth.

Salmon.] 1. Spread it upon a round piece of Cloth or Leather, about seven or
eight Inches in Diameter, and apply it, laying the Center of it over the Navel.

2. But before you apply it, bath the Belly well with this Mixture. Strong
Decoction of Colocynthis iv. with which mix Ox-Gall jss. and therein dissolve
Aloes in Powder ij. adding at last Spirit of Wine j.

XXVII. Emplastrum de Minio Compositum, An Emplaster of Red-Lead Compound.
Red Lead half a Pound: Oil-Olive lb j. mix and boil to blackness, continually
stirring it, adding Colophony lb ss. It is also made with Linseed-Oil.

Salmon.] 1. This is the vulgar Gout Plaster, and an Emplaster for all sorts of
Aches and Pains in what part of the Body soever; and a good one it is; and though
simple, not to be despised.

2. In making of it, beware you boil it not too much, lest it be hard and
brittle, and so, not be apt to stick, which it ought to do; and let it be
rather of the Body of a Cerate than of an Emplaster.

3. Spread it on Cloth, and apply it to the parts afflicted, letting it lie on
as long as it will stick, and then renew it, which repeat as long as there is
occasion or need.

XXVIII. Emplastrum de Minio Compositum aliud: Another Emplaster of Red Lead
compound.
Minium or Red Lead iij. Oil-Olive vj. mix, boil, and add Vermilion j. mix them
well.

Salmon.] 1. The Virtues of this are the same with the former, and to be made,
used and applied in the same manner; but the Vermillion may be added toward
the end of the boiling.

2. It is more powerful than the former to all Intentions, and more
dissolutive, by reason of the Vermilion.

One Emplaster added by the Translator.

XXIX. Emplastrum Febrifugum alterum, Another Febrifuge Emplaister.
Salmon.] Frankincense xiv. Oil-Olive ij. vel q. s. Vermilion iij. melt and
make Emplaster than may stick.

2. Spread it upon an Oval piece of Leather about eight Inches long and five
Inches broad, and apply it to the Pit of the Stomach, letting it lie on as long
as it will stick; then renew it once more if you see occasion.

2. It cures all sorts of Agues, whether Quotidian, Tertian or Quartan without
any other help, and that mostly at one Application; In one hundred Examples
together, it has not failed of one.

CHAP. VII. Of CATAPLASMS.
1. * Cataplasma Apoplecticum, A Pultice against the Apoplexy.
Bate. BRyony Roots fresh, iii. Mustard seed, Black Soap, A j. Cantharides vi.
beat them well together: add the best Vinegar q. s. and make a Cataplasm to be
laid upon the Head shaved.

Salmon 1. It is a strong attractive, and draws a Blister singularly well; it
may lie on about twelve or fourteen hours more or less; and then being taken
off, a Mellilot Emplaster, or Colewort leaf may be applied.

2. In these kind of applications, the Patient is for the most part troubled
with a great heat, pain and sharpness in making of Urine, and sometimes with
Pissing blood: this is usual.

3. The Remedy is to drink freely and largely Barley Milk, made by mixing Milk
with Barley water, and sweetning it a little with trebble refined Sugar.

II. Cataplasma Cephalicum, a Pultice for the Head.
Bate Pouders of Cloves, Nutmegs, A. ii. Guinny Pepper ss. Diasinapi, or
Mustard vi. sower Leaven iii. Spirit of Lavender Compound iss, vel, q. s. mix
and make a Pultice for the Head being shaved.

Salmon. 1. It is a strong attractive, but not to blistring; it warms, comfort,
and strengthens a cold Head and Brain, and is good to be applied in Apoplexies,
Vertigoes, Lethargies, Megrims, Headachs, etc. from a cold cause.

2. Being spread upon Leather, let it be applied over the whole Head, being
first shaved: it is a good thing for a Catarrh from a cold and moist cause.

III. * Cataplasma Synanchicum, A Pultice for a Quinsey.
Bate.] White Dogs-turd j. Pulp of the Conserve of Red Roses ij. Syrup of
Meconium, q. s. mix and make a Pultice. It is to be applied under the Chin from
Ear to Ear, after Blood-letting.

Salmon.] 1. Lay it very thick upon Cloth or Leather, and lay it over the whole
Throat, under the Chin, letting it lie for six or seven hours, and then renew
it.

2. Before application thereof, let the Throat be anointed with Oil of
Jews-Ears; which is made by boiling the Jews-Ears (first steeped in Water for
twelve hours) in Oil-Olive till they are crisp, and pressing out the Oil, and
repeating the boiling in like manner with fresh Jews-Ears, to the time.

IV. Cataplasma ad Paronychiam, A Pultice against Whitlo's and Felons.
Bate.] Yolk of one new laid Egg, add to it common Rosin in fine Powder, q. s.
Balsam of Peru, gut. vj. vel viij. mix them well together, till they become a
Pultice. Apply it to the place affected: It is a famous Medicine.

Salmon.] 1. I know this by my own Experience, to be an excellent thing against
Whitlo's or Felons, giving ease in the extremity of Pain to admiration: and in
a very short time bringing them to suppuration, if Nature tends that way.

2. I have done the same thing, by mixing Rosin in fine Powder, with Hogs Lard,
as also with Beef or Sheeps Suet; though this made with the Yolk of an Egg, I
think to be the best of them all.

* Cataplasma Pestilentiale, A Pultice against the Plague.

Bate.] Pigeons Dung in Powder iv. Saffron ss. Mithridate, London Treacle,
Mustard Seed, A. j. Turpentine q. s. mix and make a Pultice. It is intended for
the breaking of Bubo's, After the Bubo is broken, apply this: Emplastrum de
Mucilaginibus, Diachylum cum Gummis, and Sticticum, A. iss. Galbanum ss. mix
them.

Salmon.] 1. If I might give my Vote, I should be for adding Black Soap iij.
Pulp of Onions, raw or roasted iiss. Quicklime j. mixing them.

2. Being applied it ripens and breaks Bubo's in a very short time to
admiration, whether Pestilential or not; and it is a good thing to ripen and
break other Tumors also.

VI. * Cataplasma Podagticum, A Pultice against the Gout.

Bate.] Black Soap iv. Yolks of Eggs No ij Saffron j. Oil of Spike j. mix and
make a Pultice, S. A.

Salmon.] 1. This is a good Medicine as it is, against the Gout, and all sorts
of Arthritick Pains; but it would be almost ten times more effectual, if to the
Composition you add. Camphir iss. ground with the Oil of Spike in a Mortar, and
then mixed with Chio Turpentine iv. adding this mixture to the rest of the
things.

2. Spread it thick upon Cloth or Leather, and apply it warm renewing it every
Twenty four, or Forty eight hours, as you see reason or need.

VII. * Cataplasma Solare, A Pultice for the Feet.
Bate.] Fresh Rue ij. fresh gathered Bryony-roots iv. s^^r Leaven, Bay Salt,
Black Soap, A. iss. Mustard iij. beat them well together, and add Vinegar, q.
s. It is to be applied to the Soles of the Feet in Fevers.

Salmon.] 1. There ought to be added Turpentine ij. ground with the Yolk of an
Egg: Camphir, Sal prunellae, A. j.

2. Being applied to the Feet in Fevers, it abates the violent heat, draws down
Vapors from the Head, which disturb the Brain, and causes rest.

VIII. * Epicarpia Febrifuga, The febrifuge Wrist-Pultice.
Bate.] Powder of White Hellebor ss. Nitre ij. Pulp of Figgs, q. s. so as to
make a Mass like a Pultice. Apply it to the Wrists two hours before the Fit of
a Tertian.

Salmon. 1. Spread it upon Leather, and apply it to both Wrists, letting it lie
on all the time of the cold and hot Fit, (if the Ague comes) and when the Fit
is over, renew it again.

2. It is reported, that at two applications, or three at the most, it has
cured Tertians when many other things have failed.

CHAP. VIII. Of CLYSTERS.
I. * Enema Alexiterium, A Clyster resisting Poison.
Bate.] SCordium M. j. Citron-seeds iij. Flowers of Elder, of Camomil, red
Roses, of Centory the less, A. P. j. Water q. s. boil and strain. To x. add
Juice of Kermes j. double refined Sugar ss. mix and dissolve. It is for the
drawing forth Malignity and Poison out of the Bowels, etc.

Salmon.] 1. It is of good use after Sweating in the Plague; as also after the
Measles and Smallpox, when they are fully come out, and begin to die again.

2. It is used also after the taking of Poison, when Emeticks will do no good,
as also after strong and violent Catharticks, which by their force melt the
Juices and excoriate, etc.

II. * Enema Colicum, A Clyster against the Colic.
Bate.] Decoctum commune ( prepared with Juniper Berries and Fenugreek seed A.
iij) x. Infusion of Crocus Metallorum, Oil of Dil, A. ij. Cas^^^e Soap,
Electuarium Leni^^^um, A. ounce; j. Chimical Oil of Juniper Berries ss. mix
them, S. A. It is admirable against the C^^ick, Iliack Passion, Stone, etc.

Salmon.] 1. O^ an external, used Clyster-wise, there is scarcely a better
Medicine in the World, and it may be twice repeated in Twenty four hours, if
the Fit goes not off; yea, twice in twelve hours.

2. Outwardly anoint the Stomach, and whole Region of the Abdomen with this:
Oil of Ben. j. Chemical Oils of Rue and Savin, A: ss. mix them.

III. Enema Balsamicum, A Balsamic Clyster.
Bate.] A strong Decoction of Horse-tail vj. Oil of Hypericon vj. Lucatella's
Balsam j. Balsam de Peru iij. mix them. It is a most excellent thing against
the Bloody Flux, and to heal the Excoriations of the Bowels, etc.

Salmon.] 1. This is often given after violent Catharticks, which excoriate the
Guts, and many times bring Blood away.

2. I think the Decoction of Horse-tail will be best to be made with
Chicken-broth; and adding to each Clyster S. V. ij. It may be exhibited so
often, till the Patient becomes well.

IV. * Enema Dysentericum, A Clyster against the Bloody Flux.
Bate.] A Sheep's-head killed with the Wool, and broken to pieces, (the Tongue
and Brains being taken out) boil it in Water q. s. ad lb vj, and strain out for
Clysters. You may add Flowers of Camomil, Mallows, and Marshmallows, etc. Or it
may be made of Butter not salted x. Sanguis Draconis ij. red Wine ij. Or
otherwise, of New Milk xij. Opium j. Saffron ss. being boiled, add White Sugar
iss, and the Yolks of two Eggs. They have the same Virtues with the former.

Salmon.] 1. The Medicament according to the Prescript is good; but if to each
Clyster you add S. V. ij. ad iv. or vj. according as the violence of the
Distemper, and the occasion may require, it will be ten times better.

2. And where the Distemper has been of long continuance, and the Patient
exceeding weak, so that Life is dispaired of, the one half of the Clyster ought
to be Spirit of Wine, or Brandy.

V. Enema Hystericum, A Clyster against Fits of the Mother.
Bate.] Decoctum commune x. Camphir j. Oil of Rue ss. Honey of Herb Mercury
iij. mix and make a Clyster.

Salmon.] 1. You ought to put into it Musk gr. x. ground with a few drops of
Juice of Limons, whereby its Virtue against Hysteric Fits will be doubled.

2. Anoint the Vulva and Womb with this mixture. Musk gr. vj. grind it with
Adeps Rosarum ss. which mix with Balsam of Peru j. Oil of Ben iij.

VI. Enema Oleosum, An Oily Clyster.
Bate.] Linseed Oil iij. Oils of Camomil and Dill, A. ij. Oils of Scorpions and
of Rue, A. i. Oil of Turpentine;i. mix them. It is an egregious Medicament
against the Colic, Stone, etc.

Salmon, 1. It is a singular thing indeed for the named Intentions, and will
not fail of answering expectation, so far as a Clyster can do: but if instead
of the Linseed Oil iij. you substitute Rape-seed Oil iij. it would be much more
specific.

2. Also adding to it Spirit of Wine ij. or iij. you will add to the Virtue of
the Medicament, and make it more discussive.

VII. Enema Terebinthinatum, A Turpentine Clyster.
Bate.] Decoctum Commune xij. Venice Turpentine ss. Yolk of one Egg: Syrup of
Violets iss. Diaphenicon i. mix and make a Clyster. It is admirably good
against the pain of the Stone.

Salmon.] 1. It is an excellent thing against the Colic and Wind in the
Bowels: but the chief design or intention of it is against the Stone and
Gravel, whether in the Reins or Bladder, for the easing of the pains thereof,
it is truly a Specific.

2. You may repeat it (if you see need) twice a day, till you see the desired
effects.

VIII. Enema Vinosum, A Clyster of Wine.
Bate.] Spanish Wine xij. Oil of Aniseeds ss. red Sugar iij. mix and make a
Clyster. It is good against the Tormina, or Griping of the Guts.

Salmon] 1. To make it more absolute, you ought to add to it Camphir ss. which
you may dissolve in the Oil of Aniseeds, and so mix it with the rest of the
Ingredients.

2. This as well nourishes a weak and consumptive Patient, as gives ease to one
that is in pain: if the sick is in a Consumption, add the Yolk of one or two
Eggs to it.

IX. Enema Vrinosum, A Clyster of Urine.
Bate.] Seeds of Rue, of Daucus, of Cumin, A. ij. Sena j. Urine lb iss. boil to
one half: strain, and add Species Hiera Simplex ij. Red Sugar iij. mix and make
a Clyster. It is a good Hydragogue, and prevails against the Dropsy.

Salmon.] 1. It evacuates more Water and Wind than can be well imagined, and
does more good than many Catharticks which are given by the mouth.

2. You ought to repeat it once every day, till the hydropick Humor is wholly
evacuated, at first, for a while, twice a day.

One Clyster added by the Translator.

X. Enema Spirituosum, A Spirituous Clyster.
Salmon.] 1. Spirit of Wine viij. Oils of Turpentine and Aniseeds, Ana. gut.
10. Broth of a Sheep's-head viij. mix and exhibit warm.

2. It is a Specific against the Bloody Flux; and therewith I have cured
several which have been at the point of Death.

3. Among the number of the rest, I cured one poor Man, who had lain twelve
Weeks languishing under that Distemper; I being sent for, found the Man, as I
thought, dead, at least a dying and senseless, his Eyes closed, his Teeth set,
and scarcely any signs of Life in him: the miserable condition of the Man, and
importunity of the Bystanders, moved me to try what I could do for him: I
presently caused this Clyster to be exhibited, he seemed to sleep and lie
quietly after it, resting twelve hours with it in his Body, and awaked easy
and pleased: it was repeated again, and afterward once a day for a Week,
(diminishing somewhat of the quantity of the S. V.) and in short time he
persectly recovered, to the wonder of all about him.

An APPENDIX containing Interjections and Suppositories.
XI. * Injectio Alba, An Injection of the White Troches.
Bate.] Trochisci albi Rhasi iij. Camphir j. Dissolve them in Frog-spawn Water
xij. S. A. It allays Inflammations and eases Pain, and is effectual against
Ulcers of the Yard, Gonorrhea's, etc.

Salmon.] 1. You ought to have a short Syringe, much like an Ear-Syringe, but
much less, and the Body of it all of a piece with the Spout.

2. Before using of it, let the Patient make Water, if he has occasion, and
then exhibit the Injection, injecting three Syringes full at a dressing; and
after, holding the end of the Syringe in, for about a Minute, before you suffer
the Water to come forth.

3. This ought to be done at first five or six times a day, afterward as the
Ulcer begins to heal, three or four times a day, and at last but twice a day,
till it is well: and it ought to be continued for some time after it is
seemingly perfectly well, lest it should return again.

4. If it be Wintertime, and cold Weather, the Injection ought to be made
Bloodwarm.

XII. Injectio Auricularis, The Ear-Injection.
Bate.] Rosemary-flowers M. ij. boil them in Boys Urine lb iss. to lb j. strain
out, and add Honey of Roses iv. mix them. It is good against Deafness and pain
in the Ears.

Salmon.] 1. It is good against Thickness of Hearing, Pain and Noise in the
Ears: It alleviates the Pain in Apostems, and brings them to maturation.

2. After the Ear has been well syringed with this Injection, you ought to drop
into it the following Oil. Oil of Ben. ss. Oil of Amber ij. mix them.

3. And the Ear is to be stopped with Cotton dipped in a strong Tincture of Musk
and Ambergrise, made with S. V.

XIII. * Injectio Benedicta, An Injection made of the Infusion of Crocus
Metallorum.
Bate.] Aqua Benedicta viij. Mercurius dulcis in subtle Powder iij. mix them
well S. A. It has all the Virtues of the Injection made of the White Troches,
at Sect. 11. above.

Salmon.] 1. It is an excellent thing against running Sores, old Ulcers,
inveterate Fistula's, and other like Disaffections, being used two or three
times a day.

2. And it prevails against a Gonorrhea, being injected four, five, or six
times a day, as directed at Sect. 11. aforegoing.

3. Exhibited Clysterwise in a Colic. (ij. iij. or iv. to twelve Ounces of
Chicken or Mutton-broth) it gives relief to a Miracle, and performs that which
no other Clyster in the World can do besides.

XIV. * Suppositoria Aluminosa, Suppositories made with Alum.
Bate.] Alum in fine Powder q. v. Whites of Eggs beaten together q. s. or so
much as may make the Powder of the Alum into a Paste, of which form
Suppositories, of several magnitudes and lengths, which dry for use. One of
these being anointed with Oil, and put up pro re nata, provokes to Stool in
several cases. They are of singular use in the Colic.

Salmon.] 1. The ordinary way which Country People have, is to take a good long
piece of Alum, of about a Finger's length, and with a Knife to cut or scrape it
into the shape of a Suppository, and so put it up; and this will do full as
well.

2. But of the shavings or scrapings, (that they may not be lost) you may, if
you so please, form Suppositories according to this Prescript.

XV. * Suppesitorium Hemorrhoidale, A Suppository for the Piles.
Bate.] It is made of Chalk and Vnguentum Populneum, so as to make a stiff or
hard Mass, S. A. It cools and stops the bleeding of the Hemorrhoids.

Salmon.] 1. It is of good use, where there is a vehement heat, and withal, an
untoward Costiveness of Body, in which case it ought to be so long used, till
all the hardened Excrements are come away.

2. It is of a brittle substance, and therefore must be used with much
tenderness, lest it break in pieces.

CHAP. IX. Of Medicaments ANOMALOVS.
I. * Acetarium Scorbuticum, An Antiscorbutick Sauce.
Bate.] SEa Scurvygrass-(chosen Leaves) iij. Trebble refined Sugar vj. Salt of
Scurvy Grass j. being well bruised together, add Juice of Oranges vj. and mix
them. In this you may dip all your Antiscorbutick Food.

Salmon.] 1. The Composition it good enough as to the Nature of it, but it does
not fully answer its Name; for the Ounce of Salt of Scurvy Grass, wholly takes
away the pleasure of it as to a Sauce.

2. In my Opinion, it would be much better to make a Potion of it, by straining
all the Syrup out from the Herb, by pressing, and so taking j. of it at a time
Morning and Evening in a Glass of Antiscorbutick, or Scurvy Grass Ale.

3. But leaving out the Salt of Scurvy Grass it may go then well enough for a
Sauce, and that a highly Antiscorbutick one too; if the Salt must be taken, let
it be taken in some other more proper Mixture, I am sure it will never make a
good Sallet.

II. Amuleta Pestilentialia, A Pestilential Amulet or Preservative.
Bate.] Auripigment jss. Angelica-roots vj. Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth, q. s.
mix and make a Paste, of which make Amulets, No xij. of a Globe-like form,
which roll up in Silk, and hang against the Region of the Heart.

Salmon.] 1. Paracelsus, Crollius, Hartman, and others, are of Opinion, that
there is a mighty Power, Force, and Virtue, in such like Amulets, made to
defend against the Infection of the Plague; I will not say much to the Matter,
but leave every one to use their own freedom.

2. However this I will say, that if my own Life lay at stake, I should rather
trust to some known and approved inward Specific Antidote, than to all the
famed Amulets in the World.

3. Though if the Philosophic Reason of the thing be considered and inquired
into, there may be much more in it, than many are aware of.

III. * Caryophylli Odorati, Perfumed Cloves.
Bate.] Styrax Calamita, Labdanum, A. ij. Benjamine j. Cloves ss. (...),
Charcole iij. make a subtle Powder; add Gum-water, q. s. so as make a Mass, of
which make little Rouls in the form of Cloves. They are used for the fuming of
the Bed-Chambers of sick People.

Salmon.] 1. Having a fire of live Charcole, you may put some few of them upon
it, which being set in the middle of the Room, will perfume it, in Infectious
and Pestilential times, and among ill smelling Diseases.

2. The Fumes also received up the Throat by the Mouth through a Funnel (whose
wider part is wide enough to spread over the whole Chasing-dish) are good to
stop vehement Coughs, and violent Catarrhs.

IV. * Cashew, seu Catechu, Rouls of Catechu.
Bate.] Catechu in fine Powder iv. white Sugar Candy ss. Roch Alum, gr. j.
Amber-grise, gr. iv. Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth made with Rose Water, q. s. mix
and make a Paste, which make into little Rouls, almost in the form of
Mouse-turds. They are good to dry up Catarrhs, and conduce admirably to the
strengthening of the Head, being held often in the Mouth.

Salmon.] 1. Being daily chewed in the Mouth, or otherwise held in the Mouth
till they dissolve, they comfort all the Spirits Natural, Vital, and Animal,
and cause a sweet Breath.

2. Being eaten every Night going to bed ss. ad j. they stop Coughs and
Catarrhs, heal Ulcers in the Lungs, and stop all sorts of Fluxes of the Bowels,
whether of Blood or Humors, as also Fluxes of the Womb, whether White or Red;
for which last, it is a Specific.

V. * Cremor Hordei, Barley Cream.
Bate.] Pearled Barley cleansed iv. boil (casting away the first water) in
Fountain Water, q. s. till it is soft; beat well the Barley with sweet Almonds
blanched, No 20. then add Barley-water, lb ijss. mix well, and express
strongly, S. A. add thereto trebble refined Sugar ij. Damask Rose Water, jss.
stir them well and make a Cream. It is diuretic and nutritive, quenches Thirst
in Fevers.

Salmon.] 1. It is of singular use to be given upon any Heat, Sharpness, or
Scalding of the Water, or Pissing of Blood, occasioned from the Malignity of
Epispastick Emplasters, or Blistering occasioned from Cantharides, being often
taken ij. iij. or iv. at a time.

2. It is also a very good thing in hectic Fevers, abating the Heat, and
restoring the Consumptive body.

3. And in other Fevers, it is given to abate their Heat and quench Thirst,
being mixed with Milk-water, or black Cherry-water in a trebble Proportion.

VI. * Dentifricium Dominarum, A Dentrifice for Ladies.
Bate.] Crystal prepared jss. Powder of Bricks of Pumice-stone, A. ss. Os
Sepiae, Coral red and white, A. ij. Pearl, Cloves, A. j. Musk, gr. iv. mix and
make a fine Powder: To which add Honey of Roses, q. s. so as to make a soft
Paste. Otherwise thus. Powder of Brick j. Spirit of Sulphur, q. s. so as to
make a Paste; to which being dried add, Powder of Tartar vj. burnt or toasted
Bread ss. mix them. Rub the Teeth therewith, and after wash the Mouth with Wine.

Salmon.] 1. In the latter Composition, Powder of Cremor Tartari, will be best
to be chosen, because it is finer, cleaner and more pure than Argol, or
unrefined Tartar.

2. If the Teeth be very foul, the Medicament must be used often in a day, at
least five or six times; and afterward, every time after eating.

VII. * Dentifricium Infantum, A Dentrifice for Children.
Bate.] New made fresh Butter j. clarified Honey vj. red Coral prepared ss.
make a Mixture, S. A. With this let the Gums of Children be rubbed twice or
thrice a day, for the more easy Breeding of their Teeth.

Salmon.] 1. But if you would have it do any good, you must rub the edges of
their Gums with it four, five or six times a day.

2. And when all is done, to rub them every hour in the day, with a good Coral
is a thousand times better; for the hardness of the Coral falling hard (and
that almost continually) upon the edge of the Teeth to be cut out of the Gum,
does in some measure deaden (as it were) or benumb the Gum it self, and so
makes it the more insensible of the Pain, and also facilitates the cutting of
the same.

3. And this is the reason, that such Children whom their Nurses are almost
always rubbing their Gums hard, with a smooth Coral, ever breed their Teeth
without any pain.

VIII. * Dentifricium Scorbuticum, A Dentrifice against the Scurvy in the Teeth.
Bate.] Salt of Scurvy Grass, Mace, A. j. Sage iv. burnt Alum ij. Salt
decripitated ij. mix and make a subtle Powder, to which add Honey of Roses, q.
s. make a Mixture. You are to rub your Teeth therewith, before the use of
Dentilavium Scorbuticum in Cap. 1. Sect. 3. of this Book.

Salmon.] 1. If your Teeth have a Crust upon them, and want scaling, the
Chyrurgeon ought to do it with his Instrument, before you use this Medicament.

2. This done (if need require) then three times a day, viz. Morning, and after
Dinner and Supper, rub your Teeth with this Dentrifice, washing them afterward
as directed.

IX. * Frontale Cephalalgicum, A Cephalic Application to the Forehead.
Bate.] It is made of Rose-cake, q. s. fried in Vinegar or S. V. and sprinkled
with Powder of Nutmegs j. Zedoary ss. Camphire ij. Apply it to the Forehead and
Temples.

Salmon.] 1. It is a singular good thing to ease the Pain of the Head, and
cause rest.

2. In vehement Pains, Vertigo's, Megrims, etc. you must often renew it, by
moistning it with Vinegar, as fast as you find it dries.

X. * Lapis Contrayerva, The Stone against Poison.
Bate.] Magisteries of Hartshorn, of white and red Coral, of Pearl, of white
Amber, of Crabs Eyes, A. ij. Roots of Contrayerva ss. the black points of Crabs
Claws ij, all rightly prepared; mix them together, and with Gelly of Vipers, q.
s. make it up into little Balls, which cover with Leaf Gold, and carefully dry,
S. A. some add to the Composition Ambergrise jss. It is a famous Cordial,
Antidote against Poison, and Sudorifick, prevails wonderfully against the
Plague, Smallpox, Measles, and all sorts of malign Fevers. Dose, ss. ad ss.

Salmon.] 1. Whether you ought to take the Magisteries of the Corals, Pearl,
Amber and Crabs Eyes, or their levigated Pouders only, is not easy to be
discerned by the Prescript, but either of them will do.

2. There is another Composition of this Stone in other Proportions, which you
may see in our Doron Medicum, Lib. 2. Cap. 24. Sect. 3. which we transferred
from Monsieur Charras, but in my Judgment, this of our Author is much the more
excellent, and may be used against all malign and pestilential Diseases from
gr. 10. ad j. in any proper Vehicle. See our Seplasium, Lib. 7. Cap. 25. Sect.
3.

XI. Lapis de Goa, The Goastone.
Bate.] Of the Hyacinth, Topaz, Sapphire, Ruby, Pearls, A. j. Emeralds ss.
Oriental Bezoar, white and red Coral, A. ij. Musk, Ambergrise, A. ss. Leaves of
Gold, No 40. make all into fine Powder, which bring into a Paste with
Rose Water, and form into oblong Balls not much unlike to little Eggs, drying
them well in the Shadow: then with a Limpets Shell, or some other thing of
like nature, let them be curiously pollished, that they may have a Gloss upon
them, S. A. It has the same Virtues with the former: Besides which it is a
Specific against Cramps and Contractions of the Nerves. Dose. a j. ad ss. or
more.

Salmon.] 1. It Is true you may make it up with simple Rose Water, but then it
will be apt to brake with the least fall; your better way will be to add a
little Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth, or Gelly of Hartshorn, or some such like,
which being dried will make the Stone, not only firmer, but the better also to
be polished.

2. Some are of Opinion, that you ought to take the Magisteries of those
fragments of precious Stones, etc. but I am confident, that if they be well
levigated upon a Porphyry, with a little Rose Water, it will be full as well;
what is required is, that their Pouders be impalpable, and soft like Flower.

3. It is an Antidote against Plague and Poison, and cures the Bitings of
Serpents, mad Dogs, or any other venomous Creature; it revives the Spirits,
chears the Heart, fortifies Nature, resists Melancholy, restores in
Consumptions, prevails against all Diseases of the Head and Brain, proceeding
from Cold and Moisture, causing a lively Presence* nimble Wit, a pleasant
Countenance, and a sweet Breath. Dose, j. ad j. See its Virtues and Use at
large in our Seplasium, Lib. 4. Cap. 65. Sect. 4. ad 8.

XII. * Linteum Crocatum, Saffron Cloth, or Stay.
Bate.] It is made by boiling Linen Cloth with Saffron ss. in Rue water, q. s.
and drying it. It is constantly bound under the Chin, during the come forth of
the Smallpox.

Salmon.] 1. It is an Opinion among the good Women, that a Saffron Stay being
applied to the Chin or Throat of the Child in the coming out of the Smallpox
will keep them out of the Throat; but what real efficacy it has upon that
account, I cannot tell.

2. This I am sure of, that a Gargle made of Saffron and Cochinele, A. ss.
Claret Wine lb j. double refined Sugar ss. will do feats in that kind, and is
much more effectual, that all the external Applications in the World.

XIII. * Masticatoria, Spitting Balls.
Bate.] Mastich iij. Pyrethrum, Stavesacre, A. ij. Angelica-root ss. Cubebs.
Nutmegs, A. j. Euphorbium ss. Wax q. s. mix and make a Mass, of which make
Masticatories, S. A. That is to say, Spitting Balls, or a large sort of Pills,
to be often chewed. They cause Spitting, purge the Brain, and help against
Thickness of Hearing, Palsies, and Diseases of the Head proceeding from Cold.
They cure also the Toothache.

Salmon.] 1. You are to put one of the Balls into your Mouth, and constantly to
chew it for some time, a quarter of an hour, or half an hour, more or less,
constrantly spitting out, as it attracts the Rheum or Spittle.

2. It is good to be used in case of Defluxions upon any part, especially upon
the Eyes, Teeth, Jaws, or Throat: it removes a Catarrh; and by often and long
using, evacuates the Morbifick cause of a Rheumatism.

3 It is said to be a singular thing to give ease in the Toothache, though the
pain be never so extreme.

XIV. * Mixtura Tubularis, A Mixture for the Pipe.
Bate.] The outward Hulls of Pistaches ij. Colts-foots, Betony, Rosemary, all
dried, A. iij. let them be cut, and add Raspings of Lignum Sanctum iij. white
Amber, Olibanum, grossly bruised, A. iss. Mastich j. distilled Oil of Nutmegs j.
make a mixture; to be taken as you take Tobacco. Or thus: Betony, Coltsfoot,
A. ij. Rosemary Flowers, outward Pistach shells or hulls, A. j. Cardamoms the
less iss. cut them, S. A. and add Oil of Aniseeds, gut. xvj. Oil of Cinnamon
gut. viij. mix them. Some add of the best Tobacco cut j. It is chiefly useful
in drying up Catarrhs, stopping of Fluxes of Rheums, Coughs, etc.

Salmon.] 1. What Virtue there can be in the outward Hulls of Pistaches for
this use, I can scarcely tell; in my Judgment, if as much dried Sage, or Winter
Cinnamon prepared, were added in the place thereof, or rather Pimento, the
Composition would be much better for the Uses it is intended.

2. It is good to dry up Fluxes of Rheums, stop Catarrhs, case the Toothache,
help Coughs, expectorate Phlegm, and take away the cause of a Rheumatism, being
taken in a Tobacco-pipe, in the same manner as you take Tobacco.

XV. Nodulus Facialis, A Nodulus for the Face.
Bate.] Barley parched, q. v. make it into fine Flower, which tie up in a Lawn
Rag into a Nodule. With which strew the Face, about the Eleventh Day after the
coming out of the Smallpox: it very much defends the Face against Scars and
Pittings.

Salmon.] 1. The same thing may be done with the Indian Maize, where English
Barley is not to be had, and it yields in parching, both a greater quantity of
Flower, and better for the purpose, than the other.

2. And for want of either of these, you may take unhulled Rice, (in those
places where it grows) which will answer the same end: but if the Rice be
hulled, it will not parch well, so as to be reduced to a soft flowery
substance, but in the parching it will grow dry and hard; the same understand
of Barley.

XVI. * Nodulus Hystericus, A Nodule against Fits of the Mother.
Bate.] Castor in fine Powder ss. Assa Fetida j. Oil of Amber ss. mix, and tie
it up in a bit of Silk in form of a Nodule. Let it be often held to the
Nostrils in time of the Fit.

Salmon.] 1. If you add to it gut. iv. of Oil of Hartshorn, it will be much the
better for this purpose.

2. It is good to smell to (for such as are troubled with Vapors, or Hysteric
Fits, or such as are apt to these Distempers, but not usual with them) at other
times, by way of prevention, in which cases I have known it used with success.

XVII. * Panis Diasarsae, Bread of Sarsaparilla.
Bate.] Sarsaparilla iij. China j. Caraways whole j. fine Wheat Flour xvj.
Yolks of Eggs, No ij. a little Yest or Barm; with Milk q. s. mix and make a
Paste, of which make Loaves to be baked in an Oven. It may be eaten as ordinary
Bread, in the French Pox, etc.

Salmon.] 1. It sweetens the Blood and Juices, and is of good use in other
Diseases where acid and moist Humors abound, as the Scurvy, Dropsy, Gout,
Rheumatism, Catarrh, etc.

2. If it be baked hard like Bisquit, it will keep longer, eat better, and be
more profitable to the sick.

XVIII. * Panis de Vipera, Viper Bread.
Bate.] Powder of Vipers Flesh j. Sarsaparilla iij. finest Wheat Flour lb j.
Yolk of one Egg: Yest a little: Milk q. s. mix and make a Paste, of which make
four little Loaves, or Cakes, which bake in an Oven, S. A. Let it be used as
common Bread, in the Cachexy, Scurvy, Leprosy, French Pox, etc.

Salmon.] 1. Let this as the former be made into the form of Bisquits, and
baked dry and hard like them.

2. Besides these particular Uses mentioned, it is a most singular thing to
restore in Consumptions.

XIX. Pasta Halieu^ica, A Paste or Bait for Fishes.
Bate.] Henbane-seeds ss. strong old Cheese, Cocculus Indi. A. iss. Wheat-meal
two spoonfuls, Aqua Vitae four spoonfuls Honey q. s. mix and make a Paste, S.
A. Break it into very small bits, and cast it into diverse places of the Water,
and it will draw the Fish.

Salmon.] 1. You may break it into small bits, about the bigness of White
Pease: but it ought to be cast in, in a proper Season for Fishing, which such
as are acquainted with the Art know best.

2. And though the Fish seem to be dead, yet they may be eaten safe enough, and
will eat as well as if taken by other means.

XX. Pasta Hippiatri, A Paste or Horse-Medicine for Farriers.
Bate.] Pouders of Fenugreek, Aniseed, Cuminseed, Carthamus Elecampane,
Coltsfoot, Flowers of Sulphur, A. ij. Juice of Liquorice (dissolved in
White Wind lb ss.) j. Oil-Olive, Honey, A. viij. Genua Treacle xij. Oil of
Aniseeds j. mix all together, and with Wheat-meal lb iss. vel q. s. make a
Paste, S. A. of which make Balls about the bigness of a Man's Fist. Dissolve
one of them in cold Water q. s. letting the Horse drink it all up at a time;
this do Morning and Evening, for fifteen days; in which time it will certainly
cure such Horses as are troubled with Asthma's, Coughs, and several other
internal Diseases: it makes such fat as are wasted and poor, and makes healthy
such as are infirm and diseased.

Salmon.] 1. This Medicine will do much better in a strong Decoction of Ground
Malt, Anglice-Wort, and given as hot as it is convenient for the Beast to take
it in.

2. And to speak without any thing of a Complement, it is a good thing for what
it is intended, and beyond many other Horse-Medicines, much valued and esteemed
in the World.

XXI. * Pasta Hypoglottida, A Paste to take away the Asperity of the Larynx.
Bate.] White Sugarcandy in fine Pounder iv. Oil of Sweet-Almonds new drawn j.
vel q. s. beat them well into a Paste. S. A. Hold a little thereof often in the
mouth.

Salmon.] 1. It is of singular use against Coughs, Colds, Shortness of Breath,
Difficulty of Breathing Wheesings, Hoarseness, and other Distempers of the
Latinx, Breast and Lungs.

2. Let it be held five, six, or seven times a day, or more, in the Mouth, and
suffered to distill down at leisure; more especially let it be used at such
times as the Cough is present and troublesome; but at other times at discretion.

XXII. Pasta Regalis pro Emulsionibus, The Royal Paste for Emulsions.
Bate.] White Poppy-seed j. Sweet Almonds blanched iv. Eryngo-root condited ij.
The four greater cold Seeds, Ana ss. Sugar Candy ij. mix and beat them into a
Paste, S. A. At time of using it: Of this Paste j. Aqua hordeata lb j. mix and
make an Emulsion, S. A.

Salmon.] 1. It is singular good against pain, heat, and sharpness of Urine, or
scalding thereof, making of bloody Urine, or pissing Blood, and the like.

2. The Patient may drink a Draught of the Emulsion about Eight in the Morning:
another Draught about Eleven a Clock: a Third at Four in the Afternoon: and the
last at Night going to Bed.

3. But you ought to be cautious, that the Coldness thereof may not hurt the
Stomach; if any such thing be perceived, add to the Emulsion j. of Aqua
Mirabilis.

XXIII. * Pisa Lutea, Yellow Pease.
Bate.] Yellow Oker ss. Florentine Orrice-root ij. Wax j. Turpentine, q. s. so
as it may be made up into the form of Pease of various Magnitudes. They are
used to keep open Issues.

Salmon.] 1. That is the principal Intention, and where they are apt to dry up,
or will not easily be kept open, they are much better than white Pease.

2. They draw gently, and abate Inflammations which are sometimes usual to those
kinds of Sores.

XXIV. * Pisa rubra, Red Pease.
Bate.] Vermilion ss. Hermodacts ij. Wax vj. Turpentine, q. s. make it up into
the form of Pease.

Salmon.] 1. These are stronger than the former, and attract Humors more
powerfully, by reason of the addition of the Hermodacts.

2. But they do it gently, and without any evil Symptoms, by reason of the
Artificial Cinnabar, or Vermillion, which powerfully corrects all Accidents.

XXV. * Pisa Viridia, Green Pease.
Bate.] Verdigrise, white Hellebore, A. ij. Cantharides j. Root of Florentine
Orrice jss. Wax vj. Turpentine, q. s. Or, you may make them of Verdigrise,
Cantharides, A. ij. A^ripigmentum ss. Wax ij. Turpentine, q. s. mix them. They
are used for Issues.

Salmon.] 1. These are yet stronger than the latter, and designed to make their
own way, where the Patient will not permit the use of the Knife.

2. Afterward way being made, the Pisa Rubra may be applied till the Issue is
complete and runs well; which done, the Pisa Lutea may lastly be used for a
constancy.

XXVI. Pomum Ambrae, Pome-Ambers, or Sweet-Balls.
Bate.] Styrax Calamita vj. Benjamine j. Labdanum ij. white Sanders, Cloves, A.
jss. Marjoram, Damask Rose-Leaves, A. iv. Musk, Ambergrise, A. ss. Mucilage of
Gum Tragacanth (made with Damask Rose Water) q. s. or so much as may make up
the Ingredients into a Paste for Balls, S. A. Being held to the Nose, they stir
the Blood by their grateful Odor, and cheer the Heart above measure in
Apoplexies, Epilepsies, Pestilential Airs, etc.

Salmon.] 1. If they be made into the usual Magnitude for Pills, they may be
taken every Night going to Bed, ad j. against the same Distempers, and that way
used they will be more powerful to the Intentions, than by bare smelling to
them.

2. Besides which, being firmly made up into little Beads, and bore through the
middle, they may (when dry) be put in order upon a String, and worn as a
Necklace about the Neck.

XXVII. Pilae Odoratae, Sweet Balls.
Bate.] Venice Soap vj. Styrax Calamita, Benjamine, A. ss. Marjoram iv. Cloves,
No 12. Musk, gr. ij. Damask Rose Water, q. s. mix and make Balls, S.A. They
cleanse well, and have a grateful Scent, comforting the Nerves, Skin of the
Hands, etc. They serve to wash withal.

Salmon.] 1. It is good to wash in the Morning with them, for cleansing, and
whitening the Skin, the constant use of which will make it very pure and soft.

2. It is good to wash the Head also with them in a warm Larder, which is
troubled with Scurf, Dandrif, or other Defedations usual to those parts.

XXVIII. Suffimentum Hystericum, An Hysteric Fume.
Bate.] Asa fetida j. Rue, M. j. best Wine-Vinegar lb j. boil them in a Pot
with a narrow Mouth, S. A. The hot Fumes are to be received often in a day up
the Mouth (being open) and Nostrils.

Salmon.] 1. If at the same time the Patient takes fifty or sixty Drops of the
Liquor inwardly in any proper Hysteric water, it will be much more effectual.

2. But using it as a Fume, there ought to be added to it Oil of Hartshorn ss.
whereby the Power of it for this purpose will be ten times increased.

XXIX. * Torquis Infantum, A Necklace for Children.
Bate.] It is made of the male Peony-root and Henbane-root fresh gathered, cut
into round pieces and bored through the middle, and strung in order upon a Thread
or String. Which being wrapped in fine Linen or Lawn, are to be worn about the
Neck in the time of breeding of Teeth. They are said to facilitate the breeding
of Teeth, and prevent Convulsions.

Salmon.] 1. It is used as an Amulet, in which I believe there is no more
Virtue for driving away Pains in breeding of Teeth, than there is in the Words
being worn about the Neck as a Pentacle.

2. But for such as have Faith in the thing (and I know not but their Faith may
do the Work) they may put it about their Childrens Necks, and let them wear it
as long as they are breeding their Teeth.

3. If in this time, the Child should be cross and froward, and peevish, with
the anguish of its Teeth cutting, the Parent or Putter on thereof must wholly
blame themselves (and not the Medicine) for that they were People of little
Faith.

XXX. * Turundae Acousticae, Ear Tents to help the Hearing.
Bate.] Galbanum, Ship Pitch, A. ij. white Hellebore in fine Powder 5. Civet,
gr. vj. mix them; divide the Mass into eight or ten parts, making each into the
form of a Clove; which wrap or tie up in a very thin piece of fine Linen or
Lawn, fixing a Thread to the greater end thereof, for the more easy pulling it
forth again out of the Ear. It is one of the best of Remedies against Deafness.

Salmon.] 1. It may be a good thing for all that I know, but I have had no
Experience of it, and therefore only recommend it to your Prudence in making
Trial.

2. I must confess, I admire not the white Hellebore in it (because it is of a
putrefactive Quality) and within j. it is nearly half as much as the rest of
the Ingredients; but possibly the Emplastick Bodies of the Gum and Rosin, may
so chain or fetter it up, as that it may do no great mischief.

An APPENDIX to the former Book.
CHAP. X. TABVLA POSOLOGICA.
THis is fitted for the more easy computing the Doses or Quantities of certain
Ingredients, going into several of the Compositions in the last Edition of the
London Dispensatory: In some of them the Doses of the purging Ingredients are
computed exactly; in others, as near as the Proportion to the given Quantities
would hear.

I. Aromaticum Caryophyllatum. In iv. is contained of
Ambergrise, gr. iv. Musk, gr. j.
II. Aromaticum Rosatum* j. gr. xij. contain
Ambergrise, gr. j. Musk, gr. ss.
III. Benedict. Laxat. Species. ij. gr. 7. contain
Diagrydium, Esula, Hermodacts, A. gr. xv. Turpethum, ss.
IV. Caryocostinum. ss. contains
Diagrydium, Hermodacts, A. gr. xv.
V. Catholicum. vij. contain
Sena, j. Polypodium. Rhubarb, A. ss.
VI. Confectio Hamech. j. contains
Diagrydium, gr. vijss. Sena, Agarick, A. j. Epithymum, ss. Colocynth, in
Decoct. gr. xv.
VII. Confectio Alkermes. ij. ij. contain
Ambergrise, Pearl, A. gr. j.
xj. contain
VIII. Confectiones de Hyacintho Spec. Ambergrise, Musk, A. gr. j.
IX. Decoctum Epithymi. iv. contain
Epithymum, Sena, A. iv. Black Hellebor, gr. xv. Turbeth, Myrob. Chebul. and
Indar, A. ij. Agarick, gr. v. Po^ypodie, j.
X. Decoctum Senae Gereonis. iij. contain
Sena, xij. Polypodie, ss.
XI. Diacarthamum. j. contains
Diagrydium, gr. ix. Turbeth, gr. xviij. Carthami, Hermodacts, A. gr. xij.
XII. Diacodium. ix. contain
Poppy-heads, iijss. in Decoct.
XIII. Diachylon Ireatum. jss. contain
Pull. Florentin Orrice, j.
XIV. Diacinnamomi Species. jss. contain
Musk, gr. j.
XV. Diaprunum Solutivum. vjss. contain
Scammony j.
XVI. Diaphoenicon ss. gr. xiv. contain
Diagrydium, gr. xij. Turbeth, gr. xxxij.
XVII. Diarrhodon Abbatis. iij. j. contain
Greater cold Seeds, ss. Musk, gr. ss.
XVIII. Diasatyrion. x. contain
Musk, gr. j. Ambergrise, gr. ss.
XIX. Diascordium. v. gr. xij. contain
Opium, gr. j.
XX. Diaturbeth cum Rhabarb. ij. gr. 17. contain
Hermodacts, Turbeth, A. gr. xij. Diagrydium, gr. vj. Rhabarb, gr. xv.
XXI. Electuarium amarum maj. j. contains
Aloes ij. Turbeth, Rhubarb, A. gr. xv.
XXII. Electuarium Amarum min. vss. contain
Epithymum, gr. v. Aloes, j.
XXIII. Electuarium e Citro solutiv. iij. contain
Diagrydium, gr. vj. Turbeth, gr. vijss. Sena, gr. ix.
XXIV. Electuarium Lenitivum. j. contains
Powder of Sena, j. Polypodie, Sena in Decoct. A. j.
XXV Electuarium Sassafras. j. contains
Ambergrise, gr. j. Musk, gr. 1/12;.
XXVI. Electuarium e Succo Rosar. iijss. contain
Diagrydium, gr. xij.
XXVII. Emplastrum Barbarum mag. iss. contain
Opium, gr. j.
XXVIII. Emplastrum Cephalicum fort. j. contains
Black Pepper, Euphorbium, Pellitory of Spain, A. gr. vj.
XXIX. Emplastrum Diachalciteos. viiss. contain
Burnt Vitriol, j.
XXX. Emplastrum Epispasticum. iij. contain
Cantharides ij.
XXXI. Emplastrum Hystericum. ij. iss. contain
Gall. Moschat. Alipt. Moschat. A. gr. j. Musk, gr. ss.
XXXII. Emplastrum Oxycroceum. iij. contain
Saffron, j.
XXXIII. Emplastrum de Ranis. j. contains
Quicksilver, ss.
XXXIV. Hierae Diacolocynth. Species. j. contains
Colocynthis, Agarick, A. gr. vj.
XXXV. Hierae Logadij, the Electuary. vij. contain
Colocynthis, Opoponax, Sagapenum, Polypodium, A. j. Diagrydium, Agarick, A.
ss. Hellebore white, Hellebore black, A. gr. j. Spurge-seed, Euphorbium, A. gr.
vj. Aloes opt. gr. v.
XXXVI. Mithridatium. iv. ij. contain
Opium, gr. j.
XXXVII. Moschelaeum. j. contains
Musk, gr. j.
XXXVIII. Philonum magistralis. ss. contains
Opium, gr. iv. vel v.
XXXIX. Philonum Romanum. iss. contain
Opium, gr. ijss. Henbane-seeds, gr. v.
X L. Philonum Persicum. iv. contain
Opium, gr. ijss. Henbane-seeds, gr. v.
XLI. Pilulae de Agarico. j. contains
Colocynthis, gr. iv. Turbeth, gr. x. Agarick, gr. v. Hiera picra, gr. viij.
XLII. Pilulae Aggregativae. j. contains
Diagrydium, gr. v. Colocynthis, Agarick, A. gr. ij. Turbeth, Aloes, A. gr. vj.
XLIII. Pilulae Aureat. j. contains
Diagrydium, Aloes, A. ss. Colocynthis, gr. ij.
XLIV. Pilulae Cochiae maj. j. contains
Diagrydium, gr. ivss. Turbeth, gr. ix. Colocynthis, gr. vjss.
XLV. Pilulae Cochiae min. j. contains
Scammony, Colocynthis, Aloes, A. gr. xiij.
XLVI. Pilulae de Cynoglosso. ss. contains
Henbane-seeds. Opium, A. gr. j.
XLVII. Pilulae Diambrae. j. contains
Ambergrise, gr. j.
XLVIII. Pilulae de Eupatorio maj. j. contains
Rhubarb, gr. vij. Aloes, gr. x.
XLIX. Pilulae faetidae. j. contains
Colocynthis, Opopanax, Sagapenum, Epithymum, Aloes, A. gr. iv. Turbeth, gr.
iijss. Scammony, gr. ijss. Esula, Hermodacts, A. gr. jss.
L. Pilulae de Gutta Gamandra. j. contains
Cambogia, gr. ix. Scammony, gr. vj. Aloes, gr. xv.
LI. Pilulae de Hermodactylis. j. contains
Colocynthis, Turbeth, Hermodacts, Sagapenum, Aloes, A. gr. iij. Opopanax, gr.
jss. Euphorbium, gr. ss.
LII. Pilulae Hierae cum Agarico. j. contains
Aloes, j. Agarick, gr. vij.
LIII. Pilulae Imperiales. j. contains
Agarick, Sena, A gr. v. Aloes, ss. Rhuba^b, gr. viij.
LIVE. Pilulae de Lapide Lazuli. ij. gr. v. contain
Epithymum, Agarick, A. gr. iv. Lapis Lazuli, gr. ijss. Black Hellebor,
Scammony, A. gr. j.
LV. Pilulae Mechoacanae. j. contains
Mechoacan, gr. viij. Turbeth, gr. vj. Esula, gr. iij. Leaves of Spurge. Seeds
of dwarf Elder, Agarick, A. gr. iv.
LVI. Pilulae de Opopanace. j. gr. x. contain
Colocynthis, Hermodacts, Sagapenum, Opopanax, A. gr. v. Turbeth, gr. iv.
Scammony, gr. ij. Aloes, gr. xij.
LVII. Pilulae sine Quibus. j. contains
Scammony, gr. vj. Agarick, Rhubarb, Sena, A. gr. iv. Aloes, gr. xiv.
LVIII. Pilulae de Styrace. gr. vj. contain
Opium, gr. j.
LIX. Pulvis Diasenae. j. gr. vj. contain
Diagrydium, gr. vj. Sena, gr. xxiv.
LX. Pulvis Haly. j. contains
Greater cold Seeds, gr. vj.
LXI. Pulvis Senae Compositus maj. j. contains
Sena, ss.
LXII. Pulvis Senae Compositus min. ijss. contain
Sena, gr. 32.
LXIII. Pulvis Warwicensis. gr. xxj. contain
Scammony, gr. xij.
LXIV. Saccharum Perlatum. j. contains
Pearls prepared, j.
LXV. Sief de Plumbo. jss. contain
Opium, gr. j.
LXVI. Sief de Thure. iv. contain
Opium, gr. vj.
LXVII. Species Cordiales temperatae. ijss. contain
Ambergrise, Musk, A. gr. j. Pearl, gr. xij.
LXVIII. Species Diamargarit. frigidi. ijss. contain
Greater Cold Seeds, gr. viij. White Poppy Seeds, gr. ij.
LXIX. Species Diambrae. j. gr. vij. contain
Ambergrise, gr. iij. Musk, gr. j.
LXX. Species Diamoschu dulcis. ijss. contain Musk, gr. j.
LXXI. Species Diamaschu amari. j, gr. x. contain
Musk, gr. j.
LXXII. Species Diatracanthi frigidi. j. gr. x. contain
Greater Cold Seeds, gr. viij. White Poppy Seed, gr. iij.
LXXIII. Species Diatrion Santalon. j. gr. iv. contain
Greater Cold Seeds, gr. 12.
LXXIV. Species Liberantis. vss. contain
Ambargrise, Musk, A. gr. ss.
LXXV. Syrupus Cichor. cum Rhab. vj. contain
Rhubarb infused, j.
LXXVI. Syrupus de Epithymo. j. contains
Epithymum, j. Infus. Myrobalans, ij. Infus. Polypody, Infus. Agarick, A. gr.
vj. Infus.
LXXVII. Syrupus de Meconio. ix. contain
Poppy-heads boiled, iijss.
LXXVIII. Syrupus Papaveris Composit. ix. contain
Poppy-heads boiled, iij.
LXXIX. Syrupus de Pomis Magistralis. j. contains
Sena, j, Coct. Epithymum, j. Coct. Rhubarb Coct. Agarick, A. gr. v. Coct.
LXXX. Syrupus de Pomis Purgans. vj. contain
Sena infused, gr. j.
LXXXI. Syrupus de Rhabarbaro. vj. ij. contain
Sena infused, and Rhubarb, A. gr. 25.
LXXXII. Syrupus Rosaceus cum Agarico. vj. contain
Agarick infused, j.
LXXXIII. Syrupus Rosaceus cum Helleb. j. contain
Myrobalans, v. Sena, Polypody, Epithymum, A. ss. Rhubarb, ss. Black Hellebor,
gr. iijss.
LXXXIV. Syrupus Rosaceus cum Sena. vj. contain
Sena, j.
LXXXV. Theriaca Andromachi. iv. contain
Opium, gr. j.
LXXXVI. Theriaca Londinensis. j. contains
Opium, gr. j.
LXXXVII. Trochisci Aliptae moschatae. ijss. contain
Ambargrise, gr. iij. Musk, gr. ss.
LXXXVIII. Trochisci de Carabe. j. contains
Opium, gr. j.
LXXXIX. Trochisci de Gallia Moschata. ss. contains
Ambargrise, gr. iij. Musk, gr. ss.
XC. Thochisci de Ligno Aloes. v. contain
Ambargrise, gr. iij. Musk, gr. ss.
XCI. Trochisci de Terra Lemnia. ij. contain
Opium, gr. j.
XCII. Trochisci e Violis Solutivi. ijss. contain
Scammony, gr. iv. Turbeth, gr. 24.
XCIII. Tryphera minor. vj. contains
Scoria of Iron. Myrobalans, A ij. Musk, gr. j.
XCIV. Tryphera Solutiva. ss. contains
Diagredium, ss. Turbeth, gr. xij.
XCV. Unguentum album Camphorat. vj. contain
Camphire, gr. vij.
XCVI. Unguentum Enulatum cum Mer. j. contains
Quicksilver, ij.
XCVII. Unguentum Neapolitanum. j. contain
Quicksilver, j.
XCVIII. Unguentum Tutiae. iij. contain
Lapis Calaminaris, ss. Lapis Tutia, j.
XCIX. The Doses of simple Catharticks in substance. Agatick, j. j. ij. Aloes,
j. j. ii. Bryony-roots, j. ss. j. Carthamus, j. iv. vj. Cassia Fistula, ss. j.
ij. Cataputia minor. Bacc. No x. Cataputia minor. Fol. 4.5. Colocynthis, gr.
vj. x. xx. Ebuli Sem. j. ij. iij. Ebuli Succus, iv. v. vj. Ebuli Cortex, j. j
ss. ij. Elaterium, gr. j. ij. iij. Epithymum, j. ij. iv. Esulae Cortex, gr. vj.
xij. xv. Euphorbium, gr. iij. vj. xij. Frangulae Cortex intern. j. jss. ij.
Gratiolae Fol. j. ij. iij. Gutta Gamba, ss. j. ss. Hellebor nig. gr. xv. jss.
ij. Hermodacts, ij. iv. vj. Jalapium, j. iij. iv. Ireos Succus, ss. ij. iij.
Lapis Armenus, ss. j. jss. Lapis Lazuli, ss. j. jss. Manna, j. ij. iij.
Mechoacana, ij. ivss* vj. Mezerei fol. Cort. gr. vj. xij. xv. Myrobalani, ij.
vj. viij. Opopanax, ss. ij iij. Polypodium, ij. vj. viij. Rhubarb, j. jss. ij.
Ricini Nuclei. No iv. viij. xij. Rosar. Damasc. Succus, ss. jss. ij. Sagapenum,
jss. ij. iij. Scammonium, gr. vj. xij. xx. Sena, ij iijss. vj. Soldanella, jss.
ij. iij. Spin Cervin. Baccae, No 30.40.50. Spin Cervin. Succus, ij. iv. vj.
Tamarindi, j. ij. iij. Turpethum, ij. iij. iv.
C. To the former, these following Particulars may be added.
Aquae Minerales, lbiij. ad viij. Brassicae jus. ad lbj. Cremor Tartari ij.
iij. iv. Genistae Flores. Succus, iv. vj. viij. Gum Guajaci, iij. iv. vj. Lac
Ebutyratum, lbij. iij. Lac Recens Mulctum, ad lbj. Mercurialis, Coctum in
Brodio, M. j. Oleum Seminum Lini, iij. iv. vj. Persici Flores. Succus, iv. vj.
viij. Pruna Damasc. Macerata, No 12.16.20. Pruni Sylvestr. Flores. Succus, iv.
ad viij. Sambuci turiones pulv. j. ij. Serum Lactis, lbij. iij. iv. Terebinth.
Venet. iij. iv. vj. Violarum Succus, j. jss. ij.

CHAP. XI. Orthotonia Verborum Medicinalium.
THis last Chapter showing the true Pronountiation of certain Medical Words, is
added for the sakes of such Apothecaries and others, who, by reason of
Ignorance, or from mere use, are wont to pronounce them false, without regard
to their true Quantities, which are here noted, to avoid that Error.

A.
Abba^tis Diarrho^don. Abie^tis lignum. Achille^a herb. Aconi^tum. Ado^nis
flos. Aeluro^pus. herb. Aethio^pis, herb. Alabastrinum, ung. Alectorolo^phus.
Alce^a. herb. Alco^hol Vini. Aloephangi^nae Pil. Aly^pum. herb. Amara^cus.
herb. Amba^rum. Amo^mi Sem. Amygdali^num ol. Anacardi^na nux. Anagy^ris. herb.
Ana^tis axungia. Androsa^ce. herb. Anemo^ne. herb. Anethi^num oleum. Ani^me
gum. Anody^num Ung. Anthe^ra Rosarum. Antho^rae Radix. Antirrhinum. herb.
Apoze^ma. -- (...). Apozy^num. herb. Arbu^tus. Arde^a. Avis. Are^gon. ung.
(...). Arisa^rum. herb. Aristolochi^a. Arme^na Bolus. Armenia^ca mala.
Asbesti^num linum. Aspala^thum lignum. Asphode^lus. herb. Athanasi^a. herb.
Atta^gen, avis.
B.
Baccha^ris. herb. Balani^um ol. Balsami^ne. herb. Barbare^a. herb. Barda^na.
Benzo^i^num. Bomba^cis sem. Bombyci^na lana. Bunia^s -- a^dis. Rad. Byssi^num
linum.
C.
Campho^ra. (...). Canca^mum gum. Cannabi^num oleum. Cantha^ri, insecta.
Caphu^ra. (...). Cappari^num oleum. Capreo^lus, animal. Carbassi^num linum.
Cardami^ne. herb. Caryi^na. herb. Caryi^num oleum. Caryocostinum. Castor --
o^ris. Cathe^ter. (...) instrum. Cauca^lis. herb. Centauri^um herb. Calci^tis.
(...). Chamaemeli^num ol. Chamaemo^rus. Chamaepi^tys. Chebu^lae myrob.
Cheiri^num oleum. Cholago^ga potio. Chrysoli^thus. Chrysopra^sus, lapis.
Chrysomeli^num ol. Cina^rae radix. Cinnaba^ris. Citri^na cera. Clema^tis
daphnoi^des. Clyste^res. -- (...). Cocina vestis. Colchi^cum. herb. Colco^thar.
Colute^a. (...). herb. Coralli^na. Coralli^num Arcanum. Corono^pus, Rad.
Costinum oleum. Cotyle^don. herb. Crataeogo^non. -- (...). Croci^num oleum.
Crystalli^num sacchar. Cumi^num. Cymi^num. Curcu^ma. (...). Cuscu^ta.
Cassu^tha. Cya^ni. flores. Cycla^men -- i^nis. Rad. Cynnorrho^di cons.
Cynosba^ti cons. Cype^ri Rad. Cypri^nus lapis. Cyti^ni flores.
D.
Daphi^num oleum. Diacrocu^ma. Dianu^cum. Diaphoeni^cum. Diaphore^sis. (...).
Diarrho^don Abba^tis. Diospy^ros. herb. Diphry^ges. Dropax -- a^cis.
Dryopte^ris. (...).
E.
Ebe^num lignum. Empye^ma. (...). Ene^ma. (...). Epili^num herb. Epu^lis.
(...). Eranthe^mum. (...). Eri^ca. herb. Errhinum. Erythroda^num. Exosto^sis
(...).
F.
Fagi^nus. Febrifu^ga potio. Figuli^num Vas. Formi^ca.
G.
Gaga^tes. Glauci^nus color. Glotti^des, aves. Gratio^la. herb.
H.
Hali^mus. herb. Hedychro^i Troch. Hedysa^rum herb. Heliochry^son. herb.
Hellebori^ne. herb. Herba Pari^dis. Hierobota^ne. herb. Hippolithus lapis.
Hippopota^mi dens. Hippu^ris. (...). Hormi^num. Hydrago^gus. (...). Hypeco^um.
herb. Hyperi^cum.
I.
Jace^a. herb. Janthi^nus color. Jasmi^num oleum. Illece^bra. herb. Intu^bus.
Intu^bum. Iri^num oleum. Isa^tis herb. Juju^be. Jujubi^nus Sir. Juniperi^num
ol.
L.
Lauda^num. Labda^num. Lada^num. Lago^pus. herb. Lampsa^na. herb. Lapis
Arme^nus. Lapis Lazu^li. Lathy^ris. herb. Lauri^num Ung. L^^tisci^num lign.
Leucoi^um. Leucoi^num. ol. Leucogra^phis. herb. Libano^ is. (...).
Lithanthra^ces. Lumbri^ci.
M.
Macropi^per. Malaba^thrum. Marta^gon. herb. Mastiche. Mastichi^nae Pil. Meli^a
terra. Melicra^tum. Melinum oleum. Melo^num sem. Melope^po. (...). Melopepo^nis
sem. Micle^ta. (...). Mumi^a. Myoso^tis. (...). Myrrhi^num ol. Myrti^num ol.
N.
Narcissi^num ol. Nardi^num oleum. Nenu^phar. Nenuphari^num ol. Nepe^ta. herb.
Nervi^num Ung.
O.
Ocy^mum, Oci^mum. Oesy^pus. Omphaci^num ol. Onobry^chis. herb. Opa^lus, lapis.
Ophioscoro^don. herb. Ophthalmi^a. morb. Ornithoga^lon. herb. Opopa^nax --
acis. Origa^num. Osy^ris. herb. Oxa^lis -- i^dis. Oxycra^tum. Oxyrrhodi^num.
P.
Pampi^ni folia. Papaveri^num ol. Paru^lis. morb. (...). Pepo^nis Sem. (...).
Perdi^cis. Fell. Periclyme^num. herb. Periplo^ca. herb. (...). Petroseli^num.
Peuceda^num. Phellodrys. (...). Philanthro^pus. (...). Phylli^tis. herb.
Plata^nus, arbor. Piperi^num ol. Polyga^la. herb. Polygona^tum. Polygo^num.
herb. Polytri^chum. Pompho^lyx -- y^gos. Potamogi^ton. (...). Prasi^nus color.
Pria^pus. Propo^lis -- (...). Psilo^thrum. Ptisa^na. Pylo^rus. (...).
Pyre^thrum. (...).
R.
Rapha^nus. Resi^na. Ricinus. com. Rubri^ca. ochra.
S.
Sambuci^nus Sir. Sampsu^chum. Sampsuchi^num ol. Sandara^cha. ^andy^cis emp.
Sanguisu^gae. Santali^num cerat. Sapphiri^na Aqua. Sardo^nyx. (...). Saxifraga.
Scario^la. Schoenopra^son. Securida^ca. herb. Scordi^um. Serapi^num gum.
Sesami^num ol. Sesa^mum. Sinapi^num oleum. Sisa^ri Radix. Smilax-a^cis. Sophi^a
chirurgorum. Storax -- a^cis. Strobi^lus. Strobili^na resina. Styra^cis Pil.
Styraci^num ol. Sycomo^rus arbor.
T.
Taraxa^cum. Teta^nus. morb. Thalassina vestis. Tragopo^gon. (...). Tribu^lus
aquat. Trichoma^nes. Tripo^lis. (...). Tryphe^ra. -- (...).
V.
Vagi^na. Vene^tus sapo. Vernix -- i^cis. Veroni^ca. Vesi^ca. Vi^cia.
Umbili^cus. Vomica morb. Ura^chus. Ure^ter -- e^ris. Ure^thra. -- (...).
Usne^a.
Z.
Zeopy^rum. Zibe^thum. Zizy^pha. Juju^bae. Zythoga^la. Posset Drink.
Two General RULES.
I. ADjectives in [inus] derived from Sensitive Animals, from the Names of
Families, also from proper Names, and Names of Countries are long in the
Penultima, or the last Syllable save one. As,

Caro agni^na. Pinguedo anati^na. Stercus equi^num. Syrupus Byzanti^nus. Sena
Alexandri^na. Manna Calabri^na, etc.
II. Adjectives in [inus] derived from things non-animate, viz. from Herbs or
Plants, Stones, and various other Matters (of which kind are many formed of
Greek Words:) Also Adjectives derived from Adverbs of Time, or from
Substantives denoting the four Principal Seasons of the Year, are always short
in the Penultima, or last Syllable save one. As,

Acanthi^nus. Amaracinus. Cedri^nus. Cypressi^nus. Fagi^nus. Glauci^nus.
Adamanti^nus. Amathysti^nus. Hyacinthi^nus. Diuti^nus. Crasti^nus. Pristi^nus.
Perindi^nus. Hornoti^nus. Seroti^nus. Cari^nus. Theri^nus. Opori^nus.
Chimeri^nus, etc.
Excepted out of this Rule, as having their Penultima long: Matuti^nus.
Vesperti^nus.


THE END.
INDEX RERVM.
The Characters or Marks explained.
ACetarium Scorbuticum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
921. Acetum Lithargyrites. 869. Acetum Mellis. 729. Acetum Pestilentiale. 730.
Acetum Radicatum Medicines added by the Translator.
733. Acetum Terebinthinatum Medicines added by the Translator.
732. Aethiops Minirale. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
400. Alkekengi Conditum Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
799. Allium Conditum Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
799. Alumen Dulee 375. Alumen Febrifugum 377. Aluminatum Doctor Bate's more
Usual and Experimented Receip's.
870. Amuleta Infantum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
. 933. Amuleta Pestilentiali. 921. Ani^^^^ Hepatis. Vid. Vitriolum Martis.
Antifebrile Concharum. 404. Antihecticum Poterii. Doctor Bate's more Usual and
Experimented Receip's.
403. Antimon. Diaphoreticum Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
404. Antimon. Diaphoretic. fixum. 412. Antimon. Medicamentosum. 413. Antimon
Resuscitatum. 414. Apozema potenter Expectorans. 745. Aqua Absinthii Composita.
Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
32. Aqua Alexiteria. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
32. Aqua Aluminosa. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
1. Aqua Animalis. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
2. Aqua Anisi, Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
v. Spir. Anisi. Aqua Antiphthisica. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
2. Aqua Antiscorbutica. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
3. Aqua Antiscorbutica alia. 4. Aqua Arthritica. Vid. Aqua omnium florum. Aqua
Asgae faetidae. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
Vid. Spir. Asae faet. Aqua Asthmatica, vid. aqua Pectoralis. Aqua Aurant.
corticum. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
Vid. Spir. Aurant. Cort. Aqua Bechica. 4. Aqua Benedicta. 4. Aqua Benedicta
composita, Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
5. Aqua Camphorata. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
5. Aqua Caryophyllorum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
6. Aqua Cephalica. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
6. Aqua Cerasorum composita. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
7. Aqua Chalybeata. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
7. Aqua Chamaemeli comp. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
8. Aqua Chamaemeli comp. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
33. Aqua Cinnamomi, Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
vid. Spir. Cinnam. Aqua Cinnamomi Cardiaca. Doctor Bate's more Usual and
Experimented Receip's.
8. Aqua Cinnamomi Hordeata. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
9. Aqua Cochleariae Comp. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
34. Aqua Cordialis. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
35. Aqua Cordium composita. 9. Aqua Cosme tic 9. Aqua Crinalis. Doctor Bate's
more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
10. Aqua Cucumerum comp. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
10. Aqua Cynosbati comp. 11. Aqua Digitalis. 11. Aqua Embryonum. Doctor Bate's
more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
11. Aqua Epidemica. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
12. Aqua febrifuga. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
12. Aqua foeniculi dulcis, vide Spir. foenic. Aqua Formicarum. 13. Aqua Fortis
Duplex. 13. Aqaa Fortis Aluminata. 13. Aqua Guajaci, vid. Spir. Guajaci. Aqua
Herpetica. 14. Aqua Hirundinum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
14. Aqua Hormini comp. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
15. Aqua Hungarica. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
15. Aqua Junip. Bacc. vid. Spir. Junip. Aqua Lactis Alexiteria. Doctor Bate's
more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
16. Aqua Lactis Cardiaca. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
17. Aqua Lactis Nephritica. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
17. Aqua Lactis Pectoralis. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
18. Aqua Lactis Scorbutica. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
18. Aqua Lamii comp. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
18. Aqua Lenitiva. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
35. Aqua Lavendulae, vid. Spir. Lavendulae. Aqua Limon. cort. vid. Spir.
Limon. Aqua Melluminata. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
19. Aqua Menthae. vid. Spir. Menthae. Aqua Mercurialis. 19. Aqua Nucis Mosch.
vid. Spir. Nucis Mosch. Aqua Odorifera. 20. Aqua omnium florum. Doctor Bate's
more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
20. Aqua Ophthalmica. 22. Aqua Ophthalmica Sapphirina. Doctor Bate's more
Usual and Experimented Receip's.
22. Aqua Opii vid. Spir. Opii. Aqua Papaveris. errat. vid. Spir. Papav. Aqua
Papaveris alba. vid. Spir. Pab. alb. Aqua Papaveris nig. vid. Spir. Pap. nig.
Aqua Pectoralis. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
23. Aqua Pectoralis. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
36. Aqua Persicariae comp. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
24. Aqua Picarum comp. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
24. Aqua Pneumonica. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
24. Aqua Prolifica. 25. Aqua Propectoralis. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
36. Aqua Proalexiteria. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
36. Aqua Regia. 25. Aqua Rutae, vid. Spir. Rutae. Aqua Salivalis. 26 Aqua
Sarsae comp. 27. Aqua Sassafrass. vid. Spir. Sassafras. Aqua Senelorum comp.
Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
27. Aqua Siphylica. 28. Aqua Stimmios sulphurata. 28. Aqua Styptica. 29. Aqua
Succini. vid. Spir. Succini. Aqua Tussilaginis comp. Doctor Bate's more Usual
and Experimented Receip's.
30. Aqua Venustatis. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
31. Aqua Vermifuga. 31. Aqua. Vulneraria. 31. Arcanum Aluminis. 378. Arcanum
Corallinum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
379. Arcanum Corallin. Paracelsi. 384. Arcanum Cosmeticum. 388. Arcanum
Duplex. 388. Arcanum Goddardianum. Medicines added by the Translator.
604. Arcanum Joviale. 391. Arcanum Scriptorium. 392. Aurum Fulminans. 394.
Aurum Mosaicum. 416. Aurum Potabile. 574. Aurum Vitae. 398.
B
Balsamum Anodynum. 880. Balsamum Apoplecticum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and
Experimented Receip's.
153. Balsamum Embryonum, vid. Spir. Embryon. Balsamuml Foeminarum. 880.
Balsamum Lucatelli. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
881. Balsamum Magistrale. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
154. Balsamum magis-compos. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
886. Balsamum minus-comp. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
886. Balsamum Martiale. 154. Balsamum Momordicae. 882. Balsamum Nucistae. 883
Balsamum Paralyticum. 156. Bals. Podagr. v. Bals. Anodyn. Balsamum Saturninum.
159. Balsamum S^^opetarum. 883. Balsamum Spinale. 884. Balsamum Succini. Doctor
Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
160. Balsamum Spleneticum. 884 Balsamum Sulphuris Antim. 161. Balsamum Sulph.
Anisatum. 162. Balsamum Sulph. Bateanum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and
Experimented Receip's.
884. Balsamum Sulphuris Benzoinatum. 164. Balsamum Sulph. Knoephelii. 166
Balsamum Sulph. minerale. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
885. Balsamum Sulphuris Rulandi. 885. Balsamum Sulphuris succinat. Doctor
Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
169. Balsamum sulphuris Terebinthaturn. Doctor Bate's more Usual and
Experimented Receip's.
170. Balsamum Tartari. 127. Balsamum Veneris. 173. Balsamum Verum. 886.
Balsamum Virilitatis, vide Ung. Virilitatis. Bezoar Animale. 417. Bezoarticum
Joviale. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
419. Bezoarticum Lunare. 421. Bezoarticum Martiale. 423. Bezoarticum Minerale.
Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
424. Bezoarticum Mercuriale. 430. Bezoarticum Saturni. 431. Bezoarticum
Solare. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
432. Bezoarticum Veneris. 436. Bolus Alexiteria, seu Cardiac. Doctor Bate's
more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
856. Butyrum Amygdalinum. 887. Butyrum Cerae. 888. Butyrum Succini, vide Bals.
succini.
C
Calx Auri, v. Aurum Fulminans. Calx Jovis. 440. Calx Lunae. 437. Calx Saturni.
i. e. Plumbum Ustum. Cardiacum Coeleste. Doctor Bate's more Usual and
Experimented Receip's.
802. Cardiacum Magnum. i. e. flos Cordialium, vide Spiritus Cardiacus Magnus.
Caryophilli odorati. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
922. Cashew, seu Catechu. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
922. Cataplasma Apoplecticum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
912. Cataplasma Cephalicum. 912. Cataplasma Synanchicum. Doctor Bate's more
Usual and Experimented Receip's.
913. Cataplasma ad Paronychiam. 913. Cataplasma Pestilentiale. Doctor Bate's
more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
914. Cataplasma Podagticum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
914. Cataplasma Solare. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
914 Catharticum Caesareum. 831. Caudela Amygdalina. Doctor Bate's more Usual
and Experimented Receip's.
710. Caudela Nenupharina. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
710. Cauterium Lunare. 544. Ceratum album. Doctor Bate's more Usual and
Experimented Receip's.
898. Ceratum Cephalicum. Medicines added by the Translator.
899. Ceratum ad Clavos pedum. Medicines added by the Translator.
900. Ceratum Stomachicum. Medicines added by the Translator.
899. Ceratum Vulnerarium. Medicines added by the Translator.
900. Cerevisia Butleri. 739. Cerevisia Catapsoras. Doctor Bate's more Usual
and Experimented Receip's.
740. Cerevisia Embryonum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
740. Cerevisia Hydropica, Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
741 Cerevisia Jovialis. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
741. Cerevisia Oxydorcica 742. Cerevisia Scorbutica. Doctor Bate's more Usual
and Experimented Receip's.
743. Cerevisia Scrophularia. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
743. Cerevisia Vernalis. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
744. Cerussa Antimonii. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
441. Cerussa Martis. 445. Chalcanthum Rubefactum. 446. Chalybs sine Acido.
Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
446. Chalybs Tartarisatus. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
449. Cicera Tartari. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
840. Cinnabaris Antimonii. 450. Clissus Agrimoniae. Medicines added by the
Translator.
792. Clissus Argentinae. Medicines added by the Translator.
790. Clissus Betonicae. Medicines added by the Translator.
790. Clissus Farfare. Medicines added by the Translator.
791. Clissus Hederae Terrestris. Medicines added by the Translator.
791 Clissus Peti. Medicines added by the Translator.
83. Clissus Portulacae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
789. Clissus Prunellae. Medicines added by the Translator.
791. Clissus Vitrioli. 105. Colcothar Vitrioli. 105. 455. Conserva
Aurantiarum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
800. Conserva Hepatica Corallitana. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
ibid. Conserva Nicotianae. 801. Corpus sine Anima. 455. Corvus Epilepticus.
456. Cromor Hordei. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
923. Crocus Jovis. 458. Crocus Veneris. 459. Crystallum Lunae, vide Vitriolum
Lunae. Crystallum Minerale. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
606.
D
Decoctum Album. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
745. Decoctum Amarum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
746. Decoctum Amarum alterans. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
ib. Decoctum Ambrosianum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
747. Decocticum Analepticum. ibid. Decoctum Antimoniale. 748. Decoctum
Antiphthisicum. 748. Decoctum Astacorum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and
Experimented Receip's.
749. Decoctum Digitalis. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
749. Decoctum Diureticum Augenii. 750 Decoctum Dysentericum. 750. Decoctum
Ictericum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
750. Decoctum Limacum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
751. Decoctum ad Morsum Canis Rabidi. Doctor Bate's more Usual and
Experimented Receip's.
751. Decoctum Pacificum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
752. Decoctum Polychrestum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
752. Decoctum Praeservatorium. 753. Decoctum ad Rachitidem. 753. Decoctum
Rubiae Tinctorum.754. Decoctum Rubicundum. 754. Decoctum Reguli. Doctor Bate's
more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
754. Decoctum Rhabarbari. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
755. Decoctum Scorbuticum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
755. Decoctum ad Sitim. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
756. Decoctum ad Strumas. 756. Decoctum Traumaticum. 757. Decoctum ad Tussin.
Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
757. Decoctum Ulni. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
758. Dentifricium Dominarum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
923. Dentifricium Infantum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
924. Dentifricium Scorbuticum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
924. Dentilavium Scorbuticum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
870. Diachylon Odoratum Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
901. Diacreta. 461. Diapalma Odorata. Doctor Bate's more Usual and
Experimented Receip's.
901. Diatartarum. 462. Diatessaron Potabile. 759. Diatrachea. Doctor Bate's
more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
463.
E
Elaeosaccharum Cardiacum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
803. Elaeosaccharum Carminativ. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
803. Elaeosaccharum Foeniculi. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
803. Elaeosaccharum Nucistae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
804. Elaeosaccharum Sassafras. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
804. Electuarium Album. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
832. Electuarium Antepidemicum. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
839 Electuarium Asthmaticum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
832. Electuarium Caryophyllatum Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
833. Electuarium Castitatis. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
833. Electuarium Chalybeatum. 833. Electuarium Diarrhodi. Doctor Bate's more
Usual and Experimented Receip's.
834. Electuarium D^cis Sabaudiae. 834. Electuarium Epilepticum. Doctor Bate's
more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
834. Electuarium Juniperinum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
835. Electuarium Lithontripticum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
835. Electuarium Macis. 836. Electuarium Orvietanum. 836. Electuarium
Oxydorcicum. 837. Electuarium Paralyticum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and
Experimented Receip's.
838. Electuarium Pectorale. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
838. Electuarium Piperinum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
838. Electuarium Vermifugum. 839. Elixir Anodynum Le Mort. Medicines added by
the Translator.
196. Elixir Camphoratum. 184. Elixir Juniperinum Rolfincii. Medicines added by
the Translator.
198. Elixir Menstruale Le Mort. Medicines added by the Translator.
197. Elixir Proprietatis Dulce Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
185. Elixir Proprietatis Pestilentiale. 190. Elixir Proprietatis Tartarisat.
191. Elixir Salutis. 192. Elixir Vitae. 194. Elixir Vitae Maetsianum. Medicines
added by the Translator.
196. Elixir Vitrioli. 194. Elleborus albus praepar. Doctor Bate's more Usual
and Experimented Receip's.
464. Emplastrum Adhaesivum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
901. Emplastrum Burgundicum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
902. Emplastrum Camphoratum. 902. Emplastrum Catarrhale. 902. Emplastrum
Diagalbani Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
903. Emplastrum Diasulphuris Rulandi. Emplastrum Epispasticum. 903. Emplastrum
Febrifugum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
904. Emplastrum Febrifugum alterans. Medicines added by the Translator.
911. Emplastrum Haemorrhoidale. 904. Emplastrum Laterale. 905. Emplastrum
Mammilare. 905. Emplastrum de Minio Comp. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
910 Emplastrum de Minio Comp. aliud. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
911. Emplastrum Nuchale Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
905. Emplastrum Opiatum. 906. Emplastrum Paralyticum. Doctor Bate's more Usual
and Experimented Receip's.
906. Emplastrum Podagticum. 907. Emplastrum Saturninum. 907. Emplastrum
Scorbuticum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
908. Emplastrum Smecticum. 908. Emplastrum Soleare. Doctor Bate's more Usual
and Experimented Receip's.
908. Emplastrum Spasmicum. 909. Emplastrum ad Strumas. Doctor Bate's more
Usual and Experimented Receip's.
909. Emplastrum Synanchicum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
909. Emplastrum Tibiale. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
910. Emplastrum Vermifugum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
910. Emulsio de Avellanis. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
711. Emulsio Cathartica. 711. Emulsio Expulsiva. Doctor Bate's more Usual and
Experimented Receip's.
712. Emulsio Cretacea. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
712. Emulsio Dactylorum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
713. Emulsio Paeoniata Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
714. Enema Alexiterium. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
915. Enema Cholicum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
915. Enema Balsamicum 915. Enema Dysentericum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and
Experimented Receip's.
916. Enema Hystericum. 916. Enema Oleosum. 916. Enema Spirituosum. Medicines
added by the Translator.
918. Enema Terebinthinatum. 917. Enema Vinosum. 917. Enema Urinosum. 917. Ens
Veneris. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
465. Epicarpia febrifuga. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
914. Essentia Absinthii. 174 Essentia Alexipharmaca. Medicines added by the
Translator.
182. Essentia Antihysterica. Medicines added by the Translator.
182. Essentia Asthmatica. Medicines added by the Translator.
181. Essentia Cardui ben. Medicines added by the Translator.
176. Essentia Hyssopi. Medicines added by the Translator.
177. Essentia Martis. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
177. Essentia Metallorum ad Vermes. Medicines added by the Translator.
181. Essentia Pulegii. Medicines added by the Translator.
180. Essentia Regia. Medicines added by the Translator.
180. Extractum Absinthii. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
330. Extractum Alhandal. 331. Extractum Antiscorbuticum. Doctor Bate's more
Usual and Experimented Receip's.
335. Extractum Catarrhale. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
346. Extractum Chalybis. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
335. Extractum Diatessaron. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
336. Extractum Drasticum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
337. Extractum Ecphracticum. 338. Extractum Febrifugum. Doctor Bate's more
Usual and Experimented Receip's.
339. Extractum Fellis. 340. Extractum Hypnoticum, seu Laudanum, Doctor
Goddard's Arcana.
346. Extractum Ictericum Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
341. Extractum Lenitivum. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
347. Extradtum Maltae comp. 341. Extractum Melampodii. Doctor Bate's more
Usual and Experimented Receip's.
342. Extractum Panchymogogon. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
349. Extractum Paregorgicum. 343. Extractum Pectorale. Doctor Bate's more
Usual and Experimented Receip's.
344. Extractum Peticum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
345. Extractum Sarsae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
345. V. Aq. sarsae comp.
F
Febrifugum Salis, i. e. Sal Armoniacum Volatile. Febrifugum Crollianum, vid.
Antifebr. Conch. Febrifugum Riverii. 467. Flores Antimonii. 469. Flores
Antimonii Diaphoret. 476. Flores Benzoini. 477. Flores Bismuthi. 483. Flores
Joviales. 485. Flores Salis. 608. Flores Salis Armoniaci. 609. Flores Salis
Armoniaci Martiati. 610. Flores Sulphuris albi. 488. Flores Viridis. Aeris.
489. Flores Vitrioli. 611. Flores Zinci. 491. Flos Cordialium, nec non
Cardiacum Magnum. 42. Focus Arthriticus. Doctor Bate's more Usual and
Experimented Receip's.
870. Fotus Scorbuticus. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
871. Frontale Cephalalgicum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
924.
G
Galbanetum Hartmanni. 874. Calbanetum Sennerti. 875. Gargarisma Album. 871.
Gargarisma Apoplecticum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
871 Gargarisma Scorbuticum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
872. Gargarisma Synanchicum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
872. Gelatina Cornu Cervi. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
792. Gelatina Corroborans. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
79^. Gelatina Ichthyocollae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
793. Gilla Theophrasti. 492. Guttae Goddardianae. Medicines added by the
Translator.
604.
H
Helleborus albus praep. V. Elleborus. Hepar Sulphuris. 583. Hercules Bovii.
Vide Aurum Vitae.
I
Ignis Philosophicus. Vide Phosphorus. Infusio Aperiens. Doctor Goddard's
Arcana.
735. Infusio Arthritica. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
735. Infusio Benedicta. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
736. Infusio Cachectica. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
736. Infusio Icterica. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
737. Infusio Ireata. 737. Infusio sancta 738. Injectio Alba. Doctor Bate's
more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
918. Injectio Auricularis. 919. Injectio Benedicta. Doctor Bate's more Usual
and Experimented Receip's.
919. Jovis Amalgama, i. e. Crocus Jovis. Julapium Antiscorbuticum. 759.
Jalapium Aperiens minus comp. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
776. Julapium Aperiens magis comp. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
776. Julapium Asthmaticum. 760. Julapium Cretaceum. Doctor Bate's more Usual
and Experimented Receip's.
760. Julapium Fragorum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
761. Julapium Hystericum Camphorar. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
761. Julapium Hystericum Farinaceum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
761. Julapium Hystericum Foetidum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
762 Julapium Hystericum Mithridaticum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and
Experimented Receip's.
762. Julapium Hystericum Moschatum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
762. Julapium Idaeum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
763. Julapium Perlatum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
763. Julapium Purpureum. 763. Julapium ad Rachitidem. Doctor Bate's more Usual
and Experimented Receip's.
764. Julapium ad Sitim. Vide Decoct. ad Sitim. Julapium Tartarisatum. Doctor
Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
764. Julapium Vitae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
764. Juniperi Baccae candefactae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
801. Jupiter Diaphoreticus. 494. Jupiter Nitratus. 622. Jusculum Galli. Doctor
Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
714.
L
Lac Aluminis. 584. Lac Amoniaci. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
716. Lac Asae foetidae, vid. Julap. Hyst. foetid. Lac Benzoini. Doctor Bate's
more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
585. Lac Mercurii. 587. Lac Saturni, vide Magist. Saturni. Lac Scammonii. 587.
Lac Sulphuris. 367. Lapis contra yerva. Doctor Bate's more Usual and
Experimented Receip's.
925. Lapis de Goa. 925. Lapis Medicamentosus. Doctor Bate's more Usual and
Experimented Receip's.
588. Lapis Salutis. 590. Laudanum Liquid. Cidoniat. 326. Laudanum Liq.
Tartarisat. 328. Laudanum sine Opio. 329. Laudanum Goddard. Doctor Goddard's
Arcana.
vide Extract. Hyp. Laudanum Liquidum. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
vide Tinct.Opii. Laudanum Starkii, vid. Pil. Matthaei. Linctus Benedictus.
Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
796. Linctus Expectorans. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
797. Linctus Haemoptoecus. 797. Linctus Synanchicus. Doctor Bate's more Usual
and Experimented Receip's.
797. Linimentum Melluminatum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
888. Linimentum simplex. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
888. Linteum Crocatum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
926. Liquamen Silicum. 591. Liquamen Sulphuris 596. Liquor Acuens, vid. Lac.
Scammonii. Liquor Cephalalgicus Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
597. Liquor Limacum. 599. Lohoch Album. Doctor Bate's more Usual and
Experimented Receip's.
798. Lohoch Domesticum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
798. Luna Potabilis. v. Tinct. Lunae.
M
Magisterium Antimonii Diaphoreticum. 353. Magist. Benzoini. Doctor Bate's more
Usual and Experimented Receip's.
355. Magist. Bismuthi. 357. Magist. Gittae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and
Experimented Receip's.
361. Magist. Jovis. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
362. Magist. Lithargyrites, vid. Sal Litharg. Magist. Lunae, vid. Vitriolum
Lunae. Magist. Martis, vid. Extract. Chalybis. Magist. Saturni. 364. Magist.
Sulphuris. 367. Magist. Tartari. 370. Magist. Turpethi. 373. Magnes Praeparat.
496. Mars Diaphoreticus. 496. Mars Fulminans. 498. Mars Potabilis. 268.
Masticatoria. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
927. Matter Balsami, vid. Balsam Parylit. Mel. Saponis. 888. Mercurii Purgatio.
499. Mercurius praecipitat. albus. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
506. Mercurius praecip. correctus. 511. Mercurius praecipitat. sixus. 513.
Mercurius praecipitat. flavus. 513. Mercurius praecipirat. griseus. 517.
Mcrcuiius praecip. Incarnatus. 518. Mercurius praecip. Laxativus. 520.
Mercurius praecipitat. per se. 522. Mercurius praecipitat. ruber. 526.
Mercurius praecip. solaris per se. 531. Mercurius praecipitat. Viridis. 534.
Mercurius Sublimat. ruber and flavus. 503. Mercurius Vitae correctus. 535.
Mercurius Vitae Purgans. 535. Miva Borraginis. Doctor Bate's more Usual and
Experimented Receip's.
794. Miva Consolidae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
794. Miva Dialthaeae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
794. Miva Satyrii. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
795. Mixtura Aaticolica. 716. Mixtura simplex. Doctor Bate's more Usual and
Experimented Receip's.
46. Mixtura Tubularis. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
927. Mucilago Nephriti^a. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
795.
N
Nitrum Antimoniatum. 612. Nitrum Cachecticum. 614. Nitrum Catharticum. 615.
Nitrum Corallatum. 616. Nitrum Fixatum. 616. Nitrum Hermaphroditicum. Doctor
Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
621. Nitrum Joviatum. 622. Nitrum Nitratum. 622. Nitrum Perlatum. 625. Nitrum
Saturnisatum. 626. Nitrum Sulphuratum. 627. Nitrum Vitriolatum. 627. Nodulus
facialis. 928. Nodulus Hystericus. 928.
O
Oleum Aloeticum. 132. Oleum Antimonii Saccharatum. 133. Oleum Baisami, vid.
Balfam Paralytic. Oleum Balsamicum. 135. Oleum Bufonum. 875. Oleum Camphorae.
135. Oleum Chartae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
139. Oleum Cosmeticum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
876. Oleum Cremoris. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
876. Oleum Heracleinum. 140. Oleum Lintcorum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and
Experimented Receip's.
142. Oleum Ludi. 142. Oleum Lumbricorum. 143. Oleum Martis. 145. Oleum
Milvinum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
877. Oleum Paralyticum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
877. Oleum Polypodii. 146. Oleum Pomosum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and
Experimented Receip's.
877. Oleum Ranarum. 878. Oleum Sacchari simplex. 147. Oleum Sacchari comp.
Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
148. Oleum Saponis. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
148. Oleum Saturni, vid. Bals. Saturnium. Oleum Scorbuticum. Doctor Bate's
more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
878. Oleum Silicum, vid. Liquamen silicum. Oleum Tabaci. 149. Oleum Talchiper
deliq. 599. Oleum Tartari purgans, vid. Mag. Tartari. Oleum (...) Tricophues.
879 Oleum Tritici. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
879. Oleum Viperarum. 879. Oleum Viridis aeris. 600. Oleum Vitrioli dulce.
Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
150. Orviteanum. 836. Oxysaccharum Emeticum. 731.
P
Panacea Aurea. 538. Panacea Cathartica. 540. Panacea Hartmanni. 541. Panacea
Holsatica. V. Arcan. Duplex. Panacea Schroderi, vide Merc. praecip. fixus.
Panis Drafarsae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
928. Panis de Vipera. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
929. Passulae Laxativae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
801. Pasta Halieutica. 929. Pasta Hippiatri. 929. Pasta Hypoglottida. Doctor
Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
930. Pasta Regalis pro Emulsion. 930. Pedilavium Emmenagogum. Doctor Bate's
more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
872. Pedilavium Hypnoticum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
873. Pedilavium Podagticum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
873. Pedilavium Scorbuticum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
874. Phosphorus. 350. Pilae Odoratae. 932. Pilulae Aethiopicae. Doctor Bate's
more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
840. Pilulae de Ammoniaca Magistral. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
841. Pilulae Angelicae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
841. Pilulae Anticolicae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
842. Pilulae Antimoniales. 842. Pilulae Antipodagricae. Doctor Bate's more
Usual and Experimented Receip's.
843. Pilulae Balsamicae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
843. Pilulae Castitatis. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
845. Pilulae Catarrhales. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
845. Pilulae Crapulariae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
846. Pilulae Cretaceae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
846. Pilulae de Creta Palmarii. 846. Pilulae Hydropicae. Doctor Bate's more
Usual and Experimented Receip's.
847. Pilulae Hystericae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
847. Pilulae Lithontripticae. 848. Pilulae Lunares, vid. Vitriolum Lunae
Pilulae Marocostinse. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
848. Pilulae Masticatoriae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
849. Pilulae Matthaei, alias Starkii. Doctor Bate's more Usual and
Experimented Receip's.
849. Pilulae Melanagogae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
850. Pilulae Pacificae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
850. Pilulae Pavii. 851. Pilulae de Pice. 851. Pilulae Restringentes. Doctor
Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
852. Pilulae de Sagapeno. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
852. Pilulae Sinapinae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
853. Pilulae Styracinae. 853. Pilulae Tartareae Bontii. 853. Pilulae
Vaticanae. 854. Pilulae Vermifugal. 854. Pilulae Vomitoriae. Doctor Bate's more
Usual and Experimented Receip's.
602. Pisa Lut^a. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
931. Pisa Rubra. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
931. Pisa Uvridia. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
931. Pleres Archonticon, vid. Pulvis Pleres Archon. Plumbum Album and Cerussa.
601. Pomum Ambrae. 932. Potio Alba. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
717. Potio Febrifuga. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
717. Potio Hydropica. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
718. Potio Pleuritica. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
718. Pruna Laxativa. 802. Ptisana Cathartica. 719 Pulvis Aethiopicus. Doctor
Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
807. Pulvis albus. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
807. Pulvis Anticardialgicus Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
808. Pulvis Anticolicus. 808. Pulvis Antimonii Russellianus. Medicines added
by the Translator.
830 Pulvis Antipyreticus. 809. Pulvis Arthriticus Turneri. 809. Pulvis
Asthmaticus. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
809. Pulvis Basilicus. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
810. Pulvis ad Calculum. 810. Pulvis Cantianus. Doctor Bate's more Usual and
Experimented Receip's.
810. Pulvis Cardiacus Corallatus. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
811. Pulvis Cardiacus Eboratus. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
812. Pulvis Cardiacus Perlatus. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
812. Pulvis Cardiacus Rubeus. 812. Pulvis ad Casum. Doctor Bate's more Usual
and Experimented Receip's.
813. Pulvis Cibarius. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
813. Pulvis Cinnabaris comp. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
813. Pulvis Cornachini. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
814. Pulvis Coronatus. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
815. Pulvis Crinalis. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
815. Pulvis Cucuphalis. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
816. Pulvis Epidemicus aureus. 816. Pulvis Epilepticus. Doctor Bate's more
Usual and Experimented Receip's.
817. Pulvis Febrifugus certus. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
817. Pulvis Griseus. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
818. Pulvis Haemoptoicus. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
818. Pulvis Hermodactyl. comp. 819. Pulvis Hystericus. Doctor Bate's more
Usual and Experimented Receip's.
819. Pulvis lctericus. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
820. Pulvis Lateralis. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
820. Pulvis Liliaceus. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
820. Pulvis Martialis comp. 821. Pulvis Odoratus. 821. Pulvis Ophthalmicus.
Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
822. Pulvis Oxytocius. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
822. Pulvis Pannonicus rubeus. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
822. Pulvis Pectoralis. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
823. Pulvis Pepticus. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
824. Pulvis Pleres-Archonticon. 824. Pulvis Pleuriticos. Doctor Bate's more
Usual and Experimented Receip's.
825. Pulvis Purpureus. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
825. Pulvis ad Rachitidem. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
825. Pulvis fine Pari. 826. Pulvis. Solearis. Doctor Bate's more Usual and
Experimented Receip's.
826. Pulvis Sternutatorius Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
826. Pulvis Stomachicus. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
827. Pulvis ad Strumas. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
827. Palvis Sympatheticus. 827. Pulvis Tertianarius, vide Pulvis Antipyr.
Pulvis Vermifugus. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
828. Pulvis Uvularis. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
828.
R
Ranarum Hepata. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
829. Regulis Jovialis. 542. Regulus Lunaris. 543. Regulus Martis. 549. Regulus
Solaris. 555. Regulus Veneris. 556. Ros Vitrioli. 93. Rosa Solis. 734.
S
Saccharum Aluminis. V. Alumen. Dulc. Saccharum Ambaratum. Doctor Bate's more
Usual and Experimented Receip's.
805. Saccharum Caryophyllatum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
805. Saccharum Eboratum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
805. Saccharum Persicorum. 806. Saccharum Sambucinum. Doctor Bate's more Usual
and Experimented Receip's.
806. Saccharum Saturni. Medicines added by the Translator.
668. Saccharum Tormentillae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
806. Sacculus Embryonum. V. Cerevissia, etc. Sal Absinthij Crystallinum. 629.
Sal Aceti Essentiale. 630. Sal Aceti fixum. 631. Sal Alkali. 632. Sal Aluminis.
633. Sal Antimonij Zwelferi. Medicines added by the Translator.
706. Sal Armoniacum fixatum. 634. Sal Armoniacum Volatile. 636. Sal Armoniacum
Volatile Oleosum. 637. Sal Chalybis. 643. Sal Cibarius. V. Pulvis Cibarius. Sal
Coralliorum. 650. Sal Cornu Cervi Succinatum. 653. Sal Decripitatum. Doctor
Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
655. Sal Diurericum. 656. Sal Duplex. V. Arcanum D^plex. Sal Febrifugum.
Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
656. Sal Jovialis. 657. Sal Lithargytes. 662. Sal Martis, i.e. Sal Chalybis.
Sal Martis Catharticus. 663. Sal Margaritarum. 651. Sal Perlarum. 651. Sal
Oculorum Cancrorum. 653. Sal Philosophorum. 665. Sal Polychrestum. 665. Sal
Saturni. 668. i. e. Saccharum Saturni. Sal Spongiae Volatile. 673. Sal
Sulphuris. 674. Sal Tartari. 677. Sal Tartari Volatile. 684. Sal Viperarum
Volatilis. 688. Sal Veneris, i. e. Flores Viridis Aeris. Sal Vitrioli
compositum. Medicines added by the Translator.
709. Sal Volatile Oleosum forma sicca. Medicines added by the Translator.
637. Sal Volatile Aromaticum and Oleosum. Medicines added by the Translator.
638. Sal Volatile Oleosum and Aromaticum Extemporaneum. Medicines added by the
Translator.
639. Sal Volatile Oleosum Cephalicum Extemporaneum. Medicines added by the
Translator.
639. Sal Volatile Oleosum febrile and Stomachicum Extemporaneum. Medicines
added by the Translator.
639. Sal Volatile Aromaticum per digestionem. Medicines added by the
Translator.
640. Sal Volatile Aromatic. per distillation. Medicines added by the
Translator.
640. Sal Volatile Oleosum quod Odorem Urinosum non habet. Medicines added by
the Translator.
640 Sal Volatile Oleosum Le Mort. Medicines added by the Translator.
641. Sal Volatile Oleosum Aliud. Medicines added by the Translator.
641. Sal Volatile Oleosum nobilissimum. Medicines added by the Translator.
642. Sal Volatile Oleosum Extemporaneum. Medicines added by the Translator.
642. Sal Volatile Oleosum Antivenereum. Medicines added by the Translator.
642. Sal Volatile Oleosum Vulgar. Medicines added by the Translator.
643. Sal Urinae Volatilis. 690. Sapo Tartareus. 603. Saranetta Cosmetica.
Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
889. Scammonium Aurantiatum, vid Extract. Drastic. Scammonium Cydoniatum.
Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
855. Scammonium Limoniatum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
855. Scammonium Rosatum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
856. Secundinae preparatae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
557. Sedativum Archaei. 557. Serum Aluminatum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and
Experimented Receip's.
719. Serum Hepaticum. 720. Serum Scorbuticum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and
Experimented Receip's.
721. Serum de Sedo. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
^A 722. Serum Sinapinum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
722. Silices Praeparati. 558. Spiritus Alkermes. Doctor Bate's more Usual and
Experimented Receip's.
37. Spiritus Aluminis. 38. Spiritus Aluminis Dulcis. 39 Spiritus Ambrae.
Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
39. Spiritus Anisi. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
107. Spiritus Asae foetidae. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
109. Spiritus Aurantiarum Corticum. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
110. Spiritus Benzoini. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
40. Spiritus Camphorae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
41. Spiritus Cardiacus magnus. 42. Spiritus Cerasorum. Doctor Bate's more
Usual and Experimented Receip's.
43. Spiritus Cinnamomi. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
111. Spiritus Cochleariae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
43. Spiritus Coralliorum. 45. Spiritus Cornu Cervi succinatus. Doctor Bate's
more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
46. Spiritus Diatri^n. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
46. Spiritus Dracunculi. 48. Spiritus Embryonum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and
Experimented Receip's.
48. Spiritus Foeniculi dulci. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
111. Spiritus Guajaci. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
112. Spiritus Hormini comp. 49. Spiritus Hyssopi Verus. Doctor Bate's more
Usual and Experimented Receip's.
49. Spiritus Juniperi Verus. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
50. Spiritus Juniperi Bacc. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
114. Spiritus Lavenduli florum. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
115. Spiritus Limonium corticum. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
116 Spiritus Mannae. 53. Spiritus Menthae. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
118. Spiritus Millepedum. 55. Spiritus Nitri. Doctor Bate's more Usual and
Experimented Receip's.
56. Spiritus Nitri Bezoarticus. 58. Spiritus Nitri dulcis. Doctor Bate's more
Usual and Experimented Receip's.
59. Spiritus Nucis Mocshat. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
119. Spiritus O^ii. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
120. Spiritus Papaveris erratici. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
125. Spiritus Papaveris albi. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
126. Spiritus Papaveris Nigri. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
126. Spiritus Reginae Hungariae, vide Aqua Hungarica. Spiritus Raphani
compositus. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
127. Spiritus Rhoeadus crapularius. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
61. Spiritus Rutae. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
128. Spiritus Salis Armoniaci. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
128. Spiritus Salis Armoniaci Bate. 61. Spiritus Salis Armoniaci Tartarisatus.
68. Spiritus Salis Armoniaci Succinatus. 68. Spiritus Salis Armoniaci
Chalybeatus. 69. Spiritus Salis Coagulatus. Doctor Bate's more Usual and
Experimented Receip's.
69. Spiritus Salis Martialis. 70. Spiritus Sambuci. 71. Spiritus Sanguinis.
72. Spiritus Sassafras. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
128. Spiritus Saturni. 74. Spiritus Spongiarum. 77. Spiritus Succini. Doctor
Goddard's Arcana.
129. Spiritus Tabaccae. 79. Spiritus Theriacalis camphoratus. 84. Spiritus
Veneris. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
85. Spiritus Vini Succinatus. 88. Spiritus Vini Tartarisatus. 88. Spiritus
Viperarum. 90. Spiritus Vitae aureus, vide Tinct. aurea. Spiritus Vitrioli. 94.
Spiritus Vitrioli Coagulatus. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
103. Spiritus Vitrioli Diaphoreticus. 104 Spiritus Vitrioli Essentificatus.
105. Spiritus Vitrioli Martis. 106. Spiritus Vitrioli Philosophicus. 106.
Spiritus Vitrioli Tartarisatus. 107. Stypticum Regis. 30. Succi Scorbutici.
Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
723. Suffimentum Hystericum. 932. Sulphur Antimonii. 560. Sulphur Antimonii
Combustibile. 561. Sulphur Antimonii Russelianum. Medicines added by the
Translator.
830. Sulphur Auri. 574. Sulphur Auratum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and
Experimented Receip's.
565. Sulphur Vitrioli 567. Sulphur Vitriole Martiale. 568. Sulphur Vitrioli
Narcoticum. 569. Suppositoria Aluminosa. Doctor Bate's more Usual and
Experimented Receip's.
920. Suppositorium Haemorrhoidale. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
920. Syrupus Allelujae. 765. Syrupus Ambrosianus, vide Decoct. Ambrosianus.
Syrupus Antepidemicus. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
777. Syrupus Ammoniaci. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
783. Syrupus Antihydropicus. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
777. Syrupus Antiscorbuticus. 765. Syrupus Asaesoetidae. Doctor Goddard's
Arcana.
780. Syrupus Aurantiarum. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
777. Syrupus Balsamicus. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
766. Syrupus Balsamicus min. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
vide Sir. Capivii. Syrupus Benzoini. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
778. Syrupus Benedictus. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
766. Syrupus Capivii. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
778. Syrupus Carannae. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
788. Syrupus Cardiacus auratus. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
766. Syrupus Calybeatus. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
767. Syrupus Chalybeatus Albius. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
767. Syrupus Chalybeatus Corallatus. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
768. Syrupus Contemperans. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
779. Syrupus de Croco. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
768. Syrupus Exonerans. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
779. Syrupus ad Fissuras. 769. Syrupus Foetidus. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
780. Syrupus Galbani. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
781. Syrupus Guajaci comp. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
780. Syrupus Hypnoticus Balsamicus. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
782. Syrupus Hemoptoicus. 769. Syupus Hypnoticus pectoralis. Doctor Goddard's
Arcana.
781. Syrupus Hystericus. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
781. Syrupus Julapii. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
777. Syrupus Jovis. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
783. Syrupus Jovialis. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
769. Syrupus Limacum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
770. Syrupus Lumbricorum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
770. Syrupus Martis. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
783. Syrupus Mastiches. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
779. Syrupus de Myrrha. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
771. Syrupus Myrrhae, Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
787. Syrupus Olibani. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
788. Syrupus Odoratus min. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
784. Syrupus Pectoralis simp. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
785. Syrupus Pectoralis Balsamicus. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
784. Syrupus Peponicus. 771. Syrupus de Peto. Doctor Bate's more Usual and
Experimented Receip's.
772. Syrupus de Rapps. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
772. Syrupus Rosarum Damascenarum. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
785. Syrupus. Rosarum rubrarum. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
786. Syrupus Rosarum Odoratus. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
786 Syrupus Sambuci florum. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
786. Syrupus Sambucinus comp. 773. Syrupus Sapientum. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
787. Syrupus de Scammonio. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
773. Syrupus Scammonii. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
779. Syrupus Sidereus. 774. Syrupus Styracis. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
784. Syrupus de Sulphur. 774. Syrupus Terebinthinatae comp. Doctor Goddard's
Arcana.
787. Syrupus Tolutanus Magistralis. 774. Syrupus ad Tussim. Doctor Goddard's
Arcana.
788. Syrupus Vermifugus. 775. Syrupus Uterinus. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
788.
T
Tabulae Absinthiacae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
857. Tabulae Amygdaloedes. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
857. Tabulae de Angelica. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
857. Tabulae Antimoniales. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
858. Tabulae Antisynanchicae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
858. Tabulae de Aurantiis. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
858. Tabulae Burgessianae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
859. Tabulae Cordialgicae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
859. Tabulae Carmin^tivae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
860. Tabulae Catharticae. 860. Tabulae Diambrae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and
Experimented Receip's.
860. Tabulae Diambrae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
861. Tabulae Diatragacanthi. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
861. Tabulae Divinae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
861. Tabulae Embryonum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
862. Tabulae Emeticae. 862. Tabulae Farfareae. 863. Tabulae Foeniculinae.
Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
863. Tabulae Griseae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
863. Tabulae Hemoptoicae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
864. Tabulae Helenii. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
864. Tabulae Infantum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
865. Tabulae Lenthales. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
865. Tabulae de Pipere. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
865. Tabulae Prunellae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
866. Tabulae Rosaceae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
866. Tabulae Saponaceae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
867. Tabulae Stomachieae, vide Pleres Archonticon. Tabulae de Styrace. Doctor
Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
867. Tabulae Tartarcae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
867. Tabulae Vermifugae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
868. Tartarum Aceti, vide Sal Aceti Essential. Tartarum Antimoniatum. 693.
Tartarum Chalybeatum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
694. Tartarum Emeticum. 696. Tartarum Laxativum. 698. Tartarum Vitriolatum
Antimoniale. 699. Tartarum Vitriolatum Emeticopurg. 740. Terra Vitrioli Dulcis.
581. Testes Apri praeparati. 829. Testes Equi preparati. Doctor Bate's more
Usual and Experimented Receip's.
829. Tinctura Absinthii. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
199. Tinctura Absinthii simp. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
268. Tinctura Amara comp. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
269. Tinctura Ambrae griseae. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
270 Tinctura Ambrae. Vid. Spiritus Ambrae. Tinctura Ammoniaci. Doctor
Goddard's Arcana.
271. Tinctura Amygdaloides. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
199. Tinctura Angelicae seminum. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
271. Tinctura Antemetica. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
272. Tinctura Antepeleptica. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
273. Tinctura Anticolica. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
274. Tinctura Anti-hydropica. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
275. Tinctura Antimelancholica. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
277. Tinctura Antimonii Emetica. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
201. Tinctura Antimonii Purgans. 260. Tinctura Antiscorbutica. Doctor
Goddard's Arcana.
278. Tinctura Armoniaci. 207. Tinctura Asae faetidae. 209. Tinctura Asae
faetidae. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
279. Tinctura Asthmatica. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
210. Tinctura Aurantiarum Corticum. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
320. Tinctura Aurea. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
211. Tinctura Balsami Capivii. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
281. Tinctura Balsami Tolutani. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
281. Tinctura Benzoini. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
282. Tinctura Bezoartica, 213. Tinctura Calefaciens. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
284. Tinctura calida major. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
285. Tinctura calida minor. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
286. Tinctura Cambogiae. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
301. Tinctura Carannae. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
287. Tinctura Cardamomi. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
285. Tinctura Cardamomi. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
214. Tinctura Cardiaca. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
288. Tinctura Cardiaca Restringens. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
289. Tinctura Caryophyllorum. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
284. Tinctura Carui. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
215. Tinctura Castorei. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
290. Tinctura Cathartica Ridglei. 216. Tinctura Cephalica. Doctor Goddard's
Arcana.
292. Tinctura Cephal. Cordialis. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
294. 293. Tinctura Cerussae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
217. Tinctura Chamaemeli. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
217. Tinctura Chamaemeli florum. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
294 Tinctura Chinae. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
308. Tinctura Cinnamomi. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
289. Tinctura Cochleariae comp. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
218. Tinctura Coelestis. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
271. Tinctura contra Iliacum. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
294. Tinctura Contra yerva. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
296. Tinctura Corallij. 219. Tinctura Cordialis. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
295. Tinctura Cordialis Epidemica. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
296. Tinctura Coroborans. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
297. Tinctura Croci. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
288. Tinctura Cubebarum. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
286. Tinctura Ellebori Utriusque. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
277. Tinctura Exonerans. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
298. Tinctura Febrifuga. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
299. Tinctura Ferri. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
221. Tinctura Galbani. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
300. Tinctura Gambogiae. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
301. Tinctura Glycyrrhizae. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
310. Tinctura Gratissima. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
vid. Tinct. Thymi Citrini. Tinctura Guajaci. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
302. Tinctura Guajaci Corticis. 223. Tinctura Galbaneti. 224. Tinctura
Haematitae. 224. Tinctura Hierae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
226. Tinctura Hypnotica. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
303. Tinctura Julapii. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
275. Tinctura Juniperi Bacc. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
274. Tinctura Juniperi. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
227. Tinctura Lavendulae florum. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
273. Tinctura Limonum Corticum. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
297. Tinctura Lunae. 229. Tinctura Martis. 233. Tinctura Martis aurea. 238.
Tinctura Martis Tartarisata. 240. Tinctura Mastiches. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
304. Tinctura Melampodii. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
242. Tinctura Melissae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
243. Tinctura Mellis. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
244. Tinctura Menthae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
272. Tinctura Moschi. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
305. Tinctura Myrrhae. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
306. Tinctura Myrrhae comp. 245. Tinctura Nucis Moschatae. Doctor Goddard's
Arcana.
293. Tinctura Nutritiva. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
308. Tinctura Oculorum Cancrorum. 246. Tinctura Odontalgica. 247. Tinctura
Olibani. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
309. Tinctura Opii simp. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
303. Tinctura Opii comp. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
310. Tinctura Papaveris erratici. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
317. Tinctura Paralytica. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
248. Tinctura Pectoralis. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
310. Tinctura Perlarum. 249. Tinctura Peruviana, Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
312. Tinctura Piperis. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
250. Tinctura Potentialis, vide Tinct. Paralytica. Tinctura Proprietatis. 251.
Tinctura Quartanaria. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
312. Tinctura Regalis, i. e. Spir Ambrae. Tinctura Rhabarbari. Doctor Bate's
more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
251. Tinctura Rhabarbari Absinthit. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
316. Tinctura Rhaeados, vide Spir. Rhaeados Crap. Tinctura Rosarum. Doctor
Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
252. Tinctura Rubra. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
317. Tinctura Rutae. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
318. Tinctura Sacra, vid. Tinct. Hierae. Tinctura Salviae. Doctor Goddard's
Arcana.
292. Tinctura Salviae Absinthit. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
319. Tinctura Salutis, vide Elixir Salutis. Tinctura Sassafras. Doctor Bate's
more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
253. Tinctura Saturni. 253. Tinctura Scammonii. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
298. Tinctura Schaenanthi. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
299. Tinctura Scorbutica. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
256. Tinctura Senae Absinthit. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
319. Tinctura Serpentar. Virgin. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
322. Tinctura Serpylli. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
257. Tinctura Stomachica. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
257. Tinctura Stomachica Cordialis. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
320. Tinctura Styracis. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
321. Tinctura Succini. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
258. Tinctura Sudorisica. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
322. Tinctura Sudorisica min. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
323. Tinctura Sulphuris 261. Tinctura Taccamahacchae. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
324. Tinctura Terebinthinae. e Chio. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
325. Tinctura Thymi Citrini. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
326 Tinctura Valerianae. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
323. Tinctura Veneris. 264. Tinctura Virginiana. Doctor Bate's more Usual and
Experimented Receip's.
267. Tinctura Winterani. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
278. Torquis Infantum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
933. Tragaea Granorum Acts. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
830. Trochisci Pectorales. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
868. Turundae Acousticae. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
933. Turpethum Minerale. 513.
V
Vinum Arthriticum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
723. Vinum Arthriticum purgans. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
724 Vinum Chalybeatum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
725. Vinum Ecphracticum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
725. Vinum Hippocraticum. 726. Vinum Hydropicum. 727. Vinum Scelotyrbicum.
Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
728. Vinum V^perinum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
728. Vitriolum Camphoratum. 701. Vitriolum Lunae. 702. Vitriolum Martis.
Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
705. Vitriolum Veneris. 489. Unguentum Albuminum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and
Experimented Receip's.
889. Unguentum Antipyreticum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
890. Unguentum de Aurantiis. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
890. Unguentum de Betonica Equatica. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
890. Unguentum Cephalalgicum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
891. Unguentum ^rinificum. 891. Unguentum Depilatorium. 891. Unguentum
Digitalis Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
892. Unguentum Faciale. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
892. Unguentum Familiare. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
893. Unguentum ad Fissuras. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
893. Unguentum ad Foveas. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
893. Unguentum Fuscum. 894. Unguentum Haemorrhoidale. Doctor Bate's more Usual
and Experimented Receip's.
894 Unguentum Haemorrhoidale. Doctor Goddard's Arcana.
898. Unguentum Herpeticum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
895. Unguentum ad Lumbricos. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented
Receip's.
895. Unguentum Ophthalmicum. 895. Unguentum Paregorgicum. Doctor Bate's more
Usual and Experimented Receip's.
896. Unguentum Piperinum. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
896. Unguentum Soleare. Doctor Bate's more Usual and Experimented Receip's.
897. Unguentum Sympatheticum. 897. Unguentum Virilitatis. Doctor Bate's more
Usual and Experimented Receip's.
897. Vomitorium Aluminis, vide Serum Aluminatum. Uvae Passae and Corinthiacae
purgantes, vid. Passulae Laxativae.
Libri Medici, Anatomici, Chirurgici, and Plantarum Historiae, qui prostant
Venales apud Sam Smith and Benj. Walford, Londini. 1694.
In Folio.
JOannis Raii S. R. S. Historia plantarum generalis, species hactenus editas,
aliasque insuper multas noviter inventas, and descriptas complectens,
accesserunt Lexicon, and nomenclator Botanicus cum Indicibus Necessariis 2 vol.
1684. Wilughbeii Ornithologia, sive historia Avium cum Iconibus elegantissimis
ex recensione Joannis Raii S. R. S. -- Ejusdem historiae Piscium libri IV. cum
figuris elegantissimis totum Opus recognovit Jo. Raius S. R. S. Joannis Raii S.
R. S. Synopsis Methodica Animalium Quadrupedum and Serpentini Generis:
vulgarlum notas Characteristicas, Rariorum descriptiones integras exhibens: Cum
Historiis and Observationibus Anatomicis perquam curiosis. Praemittuntur
nonnulla de Animalium in Genere, Sensu, Generatione, Divisione, etc. Land.
1693. Octavo. -- Ejusdem Synopsis Methodica Stirpum Britannicarum. 1691.
Octavo. Richardi Morton, M. D. Regii. Collegii Medicor. Land. Socii, and
Censoris PYPETOLOGIA seu exercitationes de morbis universalibus acutis. Land.
1692. Oct. -- Ejusdem Phthisiologia seu excercitationes de Phthisi tribus
libris comprehensae, totumque opus variis historiis illustratum. Land. 1689.
Oct. Gulielmi Cole, M. D. Novae Hypotheseos ad explicanda febrium
intermittentium Symptomata and typos excogitatae Hypotyposis. Una cum
Aetiologia remediorum, speciatim vero de Curatione per Corticem peruvianum.
Accessit Dissertatiuncula de intestinorum Motu peristaltico. Land. 1663. Oct.
Gualteri Harris, M. D. Collegii Medicor Land. Socii atque Censoris tractatus de
morbis acutis Infantum. Land. 1689. Oct. Theodori de Mayerne Equit. Aurati Mag.
Brit. Reg. Archiatror, comitis, Praxeos in morbis Internis praecipue
gravioribus and Chronicis Syntagma, ex adversariis, conciliis ac Epistolis ejus
summa Cura ac diligentia concinnatum. Land. 1690. Oct. Pharmacopaeia Bateana,
Qua Nongenta circiter Pharmaca e praxi Geo. Batei Regi Carolo Secundo Medici
primarii excerpto ordine alphabetico concise exhibentur. Editio altera priori
multo locupletior: cum viribus ac Dosibus annexis. Item Arcana Goddardiana ex
Autographo Autoris Desumpta. Cura Ja. shipton. Land. 1691. Duod. Pharmacologia
seu Manuductio ad Materiam Medicam in qua Medicamenta Officinalia, Simplicia,
in Methodum Naturalem digesta succincte, and accurate describuntur, cum notis
generum Characteristicis specierum synonymis, differentiis, and Viribus, Opus
Omnibus Medicis, Philosophis, Pharmacopaeis, Chirurgis and Pharmacopolis
utilissimum a Sam. Dale 1693. Processus integri in Morbis fere omnibus Curandis
a Do. Thoma Sydenham M. D. Conscripti, quibus accessit graphica Symptomatum
Delineatio, in 12o. price one Shilling. 1693. Phtisiologia Lancastriensis, cui
Accessit Tentamen Philosophicum de Mineralibus Aquis, in eodem Comitatu
Observatis. Authore Carolo Leigh M. D. Oct. 1604. Hippocratis and Galeni Opera
Gr. Lat. conjunctim edita per Chartarium 13 tom. Paris. -- Opera Gr. Lat. cum
Annotat. Foesii. Genevae. 1615. Bidloo Anatomia humani Corporis cum. 105. fig.
illust. 1685. Diemerbroeck Opera omnia Anatom. and Med. Vltrajecti 1685.
Bibliotheca Anatomica 2 vol. cum siguris Genevae. 1685. Boneti (Theo)
Sepulchretum sive Anatomia pract. 2 vol. Genesis 1679. -- Thesaurus
medico-practicus 3 vol. Genesis 1692. -- Medicina Septentrionalis 2 vol, cum
figuris. Ibid. 1685. -- Mercurius compitalitius sive index med. pract. Ibid.
1683. Dioscoridis Opera Gr. Lat. ex interp. J. Saria. Genesis Lacunae-Epitome
Operum Galeni. Lugduni Theoph Paracelsi Opera Omnia 2 vol. 1658 Riverii Opera
Omnia Medica. Genesis 1679. Zacuti Lufitani Opera 2 vol. Lugduni. 1647. Fabr.
Hildani Opera Med-Chyrurg. cum Severino. 1682. Sennerti. Opera omnia 5. tom. in
3 vol. Ludg. 1666. Aquapendente Opera Anatom. and Phys. cum fig. 1687.
Malpighil Opera omnia. Londini. 1686. Schenkli Observationes Med rariores 1665.
Pharmacopaeia Collegii Reg. Londini. -- Augustana Aucta and renovata. --
Bruxellensis. Zwelseri Animad* in Pharmacop. August 2 vol. Pisonis and
Margravii Hist. Indiae cum fig. 1658. Jonstoni Hist. Anim^lium 2 vol. cum
figuris. Charleton de differentiis Animalium. 1677, Matthiolus in Dioscoridem
de plantis cum fig. 1674. Breynii Plantarum Exoticarum Centuria cum fig. Horti
Indici Malabarrici tom. xi. cum fig. 1692. Bauhini Historia Plantarum 3 vol.
cum fig. Morisoni psantarum historia universalis cum fig. Herna^dez historia
plantarum, Animalium, and Mineralium Mexicanorum cum fig. Spigelii Anatomia
Corporis humani cum figuris. Mentzelii Index Plantarum cum fig. Rivini ordo
Plantarum cum figuris. 1691. Chabraei Stirpium Sciagraphia and Icones. 1678,
Etmulleri Opera omnia 2 vol. 1688. Horstii Opera omnia Medica. Forresti Opera
omnia 2 vol. Fernelii Universa Medicina. 1680. Lipenii Bibliotheca Medica.
1679. Plucknetii Phytographia 3 vol. cum 800 ^ig-1692. Sylvii (de la Boe) Opera
omnia. 1681. Zeidlern Anatomia humani Corporis. 1686.
Libri Medici Quarto.
ACta Eruditorum Lipfiae ab An. 1682. ad An. 1693. The Philosophical
Transactions, published by the Royal Society, in 8 vol. which are continued
from Jan. 1693. and published Monthly. Miscellanea curiosa medico-phisica Anni
xx* 1692. Willisii Opera Medica. Amst. 1680. -- De Anima Brutorum oxon. Harderi
Apiarium Observat. Med. 1687. Munnick Chirurgia 1689. Dolaei
Encyclopaedia-Chyrurgica. 1689. -- Encyclopaedia Medica. Waltheri Sylva Medica
opulentissima. Spindleri Observat. Med. 1691. Blegny Zodiacus Medico Gallicus
Anni 5. 1980.
THE TABLE OF DISEASES.
A.
ABortion, Child in the Womb to strengthen. Aq. Embryon. A. Horm. c. A. Lamii
c. Caudel. Nenuph. Cerev. Embryon. Emp. Smect. Emuls. Dactyl. Sacch. Torm. Sp.
Embryon. Tab. Embryon.
After Birth to expel. See Dead Child. After pains to ease. Aq. Chamaem. c. See
Carminatives.
Alopecia. See hair falling. Analepticks. See Restorers. Anodyns. See easers of
pain. Antimonials, see Preparations of Antimony. Apoplexy to cure. Bals. Apop.
Bez. Lunar. Calx Lunae. Catapl. Apop. Elix. Vitae. Elix. Vitriol. Garg.
Apoplect. Pom. Ambrae. Sp. Sal. coag. Sp. Sang.
Apostems to cure. Aq. Chalybeat Bals. Sulph. Anisat. and Terebinthinat. Pil.
Matthew.
Appetite to cause. Aq. Pneumon. Elect. Caryophillat. Nitrum Cachect.
Arthritis, and Arthriticks. See Gout. Asthma to cure. Allium condit. Aq.
Behic. Aq. Bened. c. Aq. Cinnam. cum Ox. Sq. Aq. Digitalis. Aq. Pector. Balsama
Sulphurata. Cerev. Butl. Cons. Nicot. Elect. Asthmat. Elix. Salutis. Extr.
Petic. Flor. Benz. Fl. Sulph. alb. Infus. Cachect. Julap. Asthmat. Lac Ammon.
Lac. Benz. Lac. Sulph. Liquam. Sulph. Nitr. Saturn. Ol. Sacch. simp. etc. Pasta
Hippiatri Pil. Sinap. Pil. Styracin. Pull. Asthmat. Pull. Epidem. aur. Serum
Sinap. Sp. Hyssop. Sp. Milleped. Sp. Nitri. d. Sir. Balsam. S. de Myrrh. S. de
Peto S. Sulph. S. Tolut. magist. Tab. Divin. T. Helen. T. Sapon. Tinct.
Asthmat. T. Melamp. T. Sulph. Vic. Hydrop. Ung. Solear.
Astringents, Stypticks. Aq. Styptica. Bez. Martial. Calcanth rubef. Ol. Mart.
Pil. restring. Pull. Uvular. Stypt. Regis. Sir. Chalib. corallat. Ter. Vitriol.
d.
A^rophia. See Consumption, and Restorers.
B
Back pained, and weak. Aq. Lamii comp. caudel. Nenuph. Emp. Smect. Emuls.
Dactyl.
Barrenness to take away. Aq. Prolif. Cliss. vitriol. Gelat. c. c. Miv. Satyr.
Sp. Ambrae. Sp. junip. Test. equi praep. Tinct. Sassafr. Vin. Viper. Ung.
Virilitat. Ol. Formicar.
Bait for Fishes. Ol. Polypod. Pasta Halieut.
Belching and Wind. Aq. Pneum. Elaeos. Foenic. Sp. Ambrae. Tinct. Hier.
Belly to loosen. Bals. Tart. Dec. Rhab. Elix. Salut. Ol. Aloet. Pass. Laxat.
P^l. C^tarrh. Ptis. Cathart. Sacch. Persic. Sal. Polych. Suppos. Alum. Tart
Laxat. Tinct. Hier. T. Prop. T. Rhab. T. Stom. See Purgers.
Beautifiers. See Cosmeticks, Preparations of Alum, Nitre and Tartar.
Bezoarticks, Alexitericks. See resisters of ^oyson. Biting of mad dogs. Dec. ad
mors. can. rab. Extr. D^atessar.
Birth to hasten and facilitate. Bals. Foeminar. Bals. Nacist. Pull. Oxytoc.
Secundin. praep. Testes equi praep.
Bloody flux. Butyr. Cerae. Chalcanth. rubef. Dec. dysenteric. Enem.
Dysenteric. E^em. Balsamic. P^l. Matthew. Pil. Pacif. Sal Litharg. Terr. Vitriol.
d. Tinct. Ros. Trag. gran. Acts See Astringents and Opi^tes.
Blood to re^tifie or purify. Antim. diaph. etc. Cath. Caesar. Cerev. Butl. C.
Cataps. C. Vernal. Cerus. Antim. Dec. Ant. Dec. Polychr. Elect. alb. Infus.
sant. Mag. Ant. diaph. Merc. vitae corr. Nitr. Sulph. Panac. Hartm. Sal Coral.
Sal. Tart. Sp. Coral. Sp. Vitr. diaph. Tab. Antim. Tinct. Coral. See
preparations of Antimony, Mercury, and Tartar, Purgers, Scurvy. Blood
coagulated to dissolve. Aq. Chalyb. Christ. miner. Nitr. fix. Sp. Vitriol. tart.
Bleeding at Nose, etc. Bals. magistr. Chalcanth. rubef. Stypt. Regis. Ter
Vitrioli dule. Tinct. Haematit. See Astringents.
Breathing difficult. See Asthma. Breath stinking. Cathart. Caesar. and Corp.
sine anima.
Breasts swelled hard. Emp. Diagalb. and Emp. Mammil.
Breast or Thorax wounded. Dec. astacor.
Burnings, Inflammations. Bals. Magistr. B. Lucat. Magist. Saturni. Mel. Sapon.
Ol. Cremor. Ol. Pomos. Tinct Ceruss. Ung. Albumin. Ung. Antipyret.

C
Cachexia. Antim. diaph. Ant. diaph. fix. Ant. Medicam. Dec. amar. Cerev. Butl.
Elect. alb. Essent. Mart. Extr. Diatess. Infus. cachect. Magist. Ant. diaph.
Mars potab. Nitr. cachect. panis de Viper. Pil. de Ammon. mag. Pull. Martial. c.
Sal. Urin. Volat. Sir Jovial. Tab. Antim. Tart. Chalybeat Tinct. Antim. purg.
T. Armon. T. Hierae. T. Martis. Cancers. Arc. Coral. Bals. Saturn. Cerev.
Scroph. Croc. Jov. Linim. simp. Magist. Saturn. Merc. sublim. rub. and flav.
Ol. Bufon. Ol. Ranar. See Preparations of Antimony, Mars, Hepaticks.
Cardiacks, or Cordials. Aq. Caryoph. Aq. Cinnam. Car. diac. Aq. Cordium c. Aq.
Lact. card. Cardiac. coelest. Elaeosacch. card. Elix. Vitae. Flos Cordial. and
Cardiac. magn. Jul. perlat. Jul. Vitae. Lap de Goa. Miv. Borrag. Nitr. Coral.
Nitr. perlat. Pull, Cardiack. corallat. E^orat. and perlat. Pull. Pannon. rub.
Pull. purp. Rosa Solis. Sacch. Ambarat. and Caryoph. Sal. Coral. Sp. A^k. Sp.
Coral. Sir. Cardi ac. aurat. Sir Sambuc. c. Tab. de Angel. T. de Aurant. T.
Diambr. T. gris. T. de styrac. Tinct. Bezoart. T. Coral. T. Meliss. T. Perlar.
T. Virgin. Vin. Hippocrat. Aq. Cordial. and Tinct. Cordial. D. G.
Cardialgia. Diacreta Emuls. Cretac. Jul. Cretac. Pull. Anticardialg. Pull.
Griseus. Pull. Cardiac. rub. Tab. Cardialgic.
Carminatives, Discussers or Expellers of Wind, etc. Aq. Chamaem. c. Cons.
Aurant. Elaeosacch. Carmin. and Foenic. Elix. Salut. Elix. Vitae. Ol. Balsam.
Pull. Lateral. Pull. Peptic. Rosa Solis. Sp. Ceras. Sp. Embryon. Sp. Junip. Tab.
de Aurant. T. Carmin. T. Foenic. T. de Piper. Tinct. Asthmat. T. Cardam. T.
Carui. T. Chamaem. T. Piper. T. Rhab. Aq. Abs. c. and Aq. Chamaem. c. D. G.
Catarrhs to cure. Bals. Sulph. anisat. Benzoinat. etc. Cashew. Dec. Antim.
Elix. Vitriol. Emp. Bargund. Emp. catarrhal Emp. nuchal. Extr. Pareger. Flo.
Benz. Fl. Sulph. alb. Lach. Sulph. Laudana omnia. Mag. Benz. Mixed. Tubul. O^.
Vitriol. d. Pil. Catarrh. P. Matthew. P. Pacif. P. Styracin. Pull. epidem. aur.
Pull. Pect. Sulph. Vitriol. narcot. Sir. de Croco. S. de Rapis. S. de Sulph. S.
Tolut. mag. Tab. Amygd. T. Ros. T. de styrac. Tinct. Amygd. T. G^^jac. T. Sulp.
Extr. Catarrhal. D. G.
Catarrhs suffocative. Cons. Nico.. Pil. de styrac. Sir. de Peto.
Cephalicks. Aq. Cephal. Bals. A^oplect. Bez. Vener. Catapl. Cephal. Cerev.
B^tl. Emp. Catarrhal Pil. Vatican. Sacch. Ambarat. Sacch. Caryoph. Sp. Ceras.
Sp. Vini succinat. Sp. Vitrioli Philos. Tab. diambr. Tab. de P^per. Tinct.
Succin. T. Melamp. T. Serpyll. Vitriol Lunae.
Chalybeats. See Preparations of Mars. Chaps and Clifts to heal. Ol. Tritic.
Sir. ad Fissuras Ung. ad Fissuras.
Chilblains to cure. Ung. famil. and Ung. paregor.
Child in the Womb to str^ngthen. See Abortion. Colic, Illiac Passion. Allium.
condit. Aq. Chamaem. c. Aq. Pneum. Bals. magistir. B. Sulph. anisat. and
succinat. Cathart. Caesar. Cons. Aurant. Croc. Ven. Elect. Piper. Enem. colic.
and oleos. Fl. Sulph. alb. Lac. sulph. Mag. Saturn. Mixed. Antiolic. Ol. Balsam.
Pil. Anticol. Pil. de Sagap. Pull. Anticol. Pull. Lateral. Sacch. Samb. Sal. Arm.
volat. oleos. Sp. N tri d. Sp. Sal. coag. Suppos. alumin. Test. equi praep.
Tinct. Junip.. T. Succin. See Anodyns, Carminatives, Opiats.
Consumption. Emuis. Dactyl. Liq. Limac. Dec. Limac. Sir. Lumbric.
Contractures. See Spasms. Contusions. Aq. Chalyb. Bals. Lucatel. Bals.
magistr. Emp. Smect. O. Sapon. Pal. ad casum.
Convulsions. See falling sickness. Corns and Warts to cure. Bals. magistr.
Cauter. Lunar. Emp. Diagalb. Liquor. Limac. Ol. virid. aeris.
Cosmeticks. Aq. Cosmet. Aq. Venust. Arc. Co^met. Cerat. alb. F^o. Bismuth. and
Zinci Lac. Merc. Mag. Bismuth. Mel. Sapon. O. Cosmet. Ol. Talch. O. Tritic. O.
Viper. P^ae odor. Savan. osmet. Sp. Benz. Tinct. Absinth. See ^r parations of
Alum, Nitre, Tartar.
Coughs. Aq. B^ch. Aq. Pect. Bals. Sulph. anis. and tereb. Dec. ad Tussim.
Elect. Pect. Laudan. Liq. Limac. Loh. alb. etc. Mixed. tub. Ol. Sacch. Past.
Hypoglot. Pil. Catarrh. P. Matthew. and Pacif. P. Sinap. Serum. Sinap. Sir. de
rapis, and de Sulph. Tab. Amygd. Dialth. Diatrag. Farf. Lenth. and Ros. Troch.
pect. Ung. Solear. See Expectorators, Asthmaticks, Pectorals.
Courses to provoke. See Provokers of the Terms.
D
Dandrif to remove. See Morphew. Dead Child, and secundine, or aft^r birth. to
expel. Bals. Nacist. Testes equi prep. etc.
Diabetes to cure. Aq. Bened simp. and comp. Diaphoreticks. See Sudorificks.
Diarrhea. See Fluxes of the B^lly. D^^ness of sight. See Opthalmicks.
Diuretics. See Urine to provoke. Dropsy to cure.
Aethiop. miner. Antimon. diaph. Ant. d. fix. Ant. Medicam. Aq. bened. Aq.
Ceras. c. Arcan. Corallin. Bez. Solar. Cerev. Butleri. C. Hydrop. C. Vern. Dec.
Ambros. Elect. alb. El. Chalyb. Enem. Urinos. Essent. Mart. Extr. A^hand. Extr.
Diatess. Infus. Ireat. Infus. sanct. Luna potab. Mag. Ant. diaph. Mag. Git.
Mars potab. Merc. praecip. alb. etc. Nitr. Antim Ol. Bufon. Pil. Pil. Aethi.
op. Sacch. sambuc. Sal. diuret. Silic. praep. Sp. Sal. coag. Sir. Lumbric. Tab.
Antim. Tinct. Chochlear. c. T. Junip. T. Mart aur. T. Scorbut. Vin. Chalyb Vin.
Hydrop. purg. Vitriol. Lunae. Drunkenness. See Surfeits. Dysenteria. See
Bloody Flux.
E
Easers of Pain, Anodyns, Paregorgicks. Aq. Pneumat. Bals. Anod B Magistral. B.
Nucist. B. Sulph Rul. B. Tartari, B^z. Lunar. Butyr. Amygd. Cerat. Alb.
Crystal. min. Dec. Pacisic. Emp. Diagalb. Emp. Opiat. Emp. Smect. Ens Vener.
Extr. Paregor. Inject. alb. Inject. ben. Laudana omnia. Liquor. Limac. N^tr.
fixat. Nitr. sulph, Ol. Chartae. Ol. Heracl. Ol. Sapon. Ol. Tabac. Pil. Pacif.
Sal Urin. Volat. Sp. Camph. Sulph. Vitriol. narcot. Ung. Paregor.
Eccoproticks. See Purgers. Elephantiasis. See Leprosy. Emeticks. See
Vomitories. Emmenagogicks. See Provokers of the terms. Empyema to cure. Aq.
Bened. Aq. Tussil. c. Tab. Saponac. See Pectorals. Epilepsie. See
Falling-sicknes. Erysipelas, Rosa. Bez. Lunar. Lap. Medicam. Lap. Salutis.
Linim. simp. Ol. cremor. Ol. Ranar. Ung. Haemorrhoid.
Expectorators, Coughs to cure. Apoz. potenter. Expector. Aq. Digital. Bals.
Sulphuris. Knaeph. Linct. Bened. Linct. expect. Loh. alb. Loh. Domest. Mixed.
Tubular. Pil. de Pice. Sir. de Myrrh. Tab. Saponac. Masticator. Pil.
Masticator. See Asthma, Pectorals.
Eyes diseased. See Ophthalmicks.
F
Fainting. See swooning. Falling Sickness, Convulsions. Aq. Hirundin. Aq.
Picar. c. Bals. Succin. Bals. Sulph. anisat. Bez. Lunar. Calx Lunae. Cinnab.
Antim. Corv. Epilept. Dec. D gital. Elect. Epilept. Elix. Vitriol. Elix. Vitae.
Emuls. Paeon. Luna potab. Ol. Heracl. Ol. Milvin. Ol. Sapon. Pull. Cinuab. c.
Pull. Epilept. Ranar. Hepat. praep. Regul. Lunar. Secundin. praep. Sp. Ceras.
Sp. c. c. succinat. Sp. Embr. Sp. Sang. Sp. Vener. Sp. Vini succinat. Sulph.
Vitriol. Sulph. Vitriol. narcotic. Sir. de Peto. Testes Apri, and Equi praep.
Tinct. Succin. Tinct. Ven. Vitriol. Lunae. See Preparations of Antimony
Vitriol, Cephalicks.
Fellons, Whitloes to cure. Catapl. ad Paronych. Ung. Familiar. Ung. Paregor.
Fevers to cures, febrifuges. Alum. Febrif. Antifebr. Conchar. Aq. Febrif. Aq.
Formicar. Arcan. dupl. Dec. Bez. Jov. Bez. Solar. Catapl. Solear. Croc. Ven.
Ambros. Diatess potab. Emp. Febrific. Epicarp. febrif. Extr. febrif. Febrifug.
River. Flo. Sal. Arm. Martiat. Lac. Alum. Lap. C. yerv. Lap. de Goa. Merc.
praecip. per se. Mixed. simp. Nitr. Antim. Nitr. Corallat. Nitr. Hermaph. Nitr.
Perlat. Ol. Antim. saccharat. Pil. Antim. Pil. Matthew. Pil. Pacif. Pil. de
Sagap. Potio febrif. Pull. Antipyr. Pull. Febrif. certus. Pull. Pannon. rub. Sal.
Alum. Sal. diuret. Sal. Febrif. Sal. Litharg. Sal. Viperar. Sedativ. Arch.
Serum Alum. Sp. Alum. Sp. Caph. Sp. Mann. Sp. Nitr. Sp. Sal. A^m. Sp. Sal.
coag. Sp. Saturn. Sp. Viper. Sp. Vitriol. coag. Sp. Vitriol. Philosoph. Sulph.
Aurat. Tartar. Antim. T. Chalyb. T. Vitriolat. Antimoniale. T. Vit.
Emetico-purg. Tinct. Cathart. T. Hierae. T. Ros. T. Saturn. T. Stomach.
Fissures. See Chaps. Fistula's, Ulcers to cure. Aq. Alum. Aq. chalyb. Bals.
Saturn. Bals. Sulph. Antim. Bals. Vener. Croc. Jov. Magist. Saturn.
Fistula Lachrymalis. Aq. Ophthal. Sapph. See Ophthalmicks.
Fluxes, or Looseness of the Belly, Whites in Women. Alum. dulc. Alum. Febrif.
Bez. Animal. B. Mart. Caudel. Amygd. Laudana. Sal. Litharg. Tinct. Ros.
Freckles, Lentils, etc. to take away. Aq. Bened. Ol. Talch. See Cosmeticks,
Preparations of Tartar.
French Pox. Aeth. min. Antith. Pot. Aq. Sarsae c. Aq. Siphyl. Arc. corallin.
Aur. Vitae. Bez. Merc. Bez. Sol. Cerus. Antim. Cinnab. Ant. Croc. Jov. Elect.
alb. Emp. Tibial. Emp. Opiar. Infus. sanct. Jup. diaph. Jup. Nitrat. Mag.
Saturn. M. Turpeth. Merc. praecip. alb. Merc. subl. Nitr. Antim. Nitr. Cachect.
Panac. Aur. P. Cath. P. Hartm. Panis Diasars. and de Viper. Pil. Aethiop. Pil.
Balsam. Pull. Liliac. Regul. Mart. Sp. Saturn. Sulph. aurat. Tab. Antim. Tinct.
Guajac. See Preparations if Antimony and Mercury.
Fruitful to make. See Barrenness to take away.
G
Gangreens to prevent. Ol. Ranar. Tinct. Myrrhae.
Gonorrhaea to cure. Caudel. Nenuph. Emuls. de Avellan. Emuls. Dactyl. Gelat.
Irchthyoc. Inject. alb. Inject. ben. Lac. Alum. Merc. praecip. virid. Pil.
Castitat. P. cretac. P. de creta Palm. P. Restring. Potio alba.
Green Sickness Elect. Chalybeat. Essent. Martis. Infus. Cachect. Sp. Vitriol.
Martial. Sir. Jovial. Tinct. Antim. purg. T. Armon. T. Martis aur. Tin. Chalyb.
See Cachexia, preparations of Mars, Antimony.
Griping of the Guts. B^t. Amygd. Elaeos. Nucist. Enem. Vinos.
Gout, Arthriticks. Allium condit. Aq. Hungar. Aq. Omn. flor. Bals. Anod. B.
Sulph. miner. B. Tartar. Catapl. Podagric. Cicer. Tartari. Cinnab. Antim. Dec.
Ambros. Pacific. Diatart. Elect. Duc. Sab. Emp. Opiat. Emp. Podagric. Emp.
Smect. Emp. Solear. Fotus Arthrit. Infus. Arthrit. Infus. sancta. Jup. diaph.
Jup. nitrat. Laudana. Liquor. Limac. Magnes praep. Mel. Sapon. Ol. Sapon. Ol.
Tabac. Pedilav. Podagric. Pil. Antipodagr. Pil. Matthew. Pil. Pacific. Pull.
Arthrit. Pull. Hermod. c. Pull. Lateral. Pull. Solear. Pull. Sternutat. Sal. Arm.
volat. Sp. Salis coag. Vinum Arthrit. Vin. Arthrit. purg. See Anodyns, Opiates.
Gums, Tophs, Nodes, to dissolve. See Nodes to dissolve.
H
Haemorrhoids. See Piles. Hair falling. Aq. Crinal. Ol. Chartae. Ol. (...).
Pull. Crinal. Ung. Crinific.
Hair to take away. Ung. Depilatorium.
Hearing to help. Aq. Crinal. Inject. Auricul. Masticat. Ol. Balsamic. Pil.
Mastichat. Sp. Milleped. Turund. acoustic.
Head medicines. See Cephalicks. Headache to cure. Aq. Cephal. Bals. Magistr.
Emp. Burg. Frontal. Cephalalg. Ol. Sapon. Pil. Matthew. and Pacific. Pull. Cucuph.
Pull. Sternut. Ros Vitrioli. Rosa Solis. Tab. Diamb. Tinct. Melamp. Ung.
Cephalalg. See Gephalicks.
Hecticks. See Phthisis. Hernia. See Ruptures. Herpes, Serpigo to cure. Aq.
Bened. Aq. Herpet. Ol. Chartae. Ol. Tritic. Ung. Herpet.
Hepaticks, Spleneticks. Bals. Splenet. Cerev. Batl. Cerev. Jov. Cons. hepatic.
corallit. Elect. Diarrhod. Extr. Diatess. Extr. E^phract. Pil. de Ammon. Mag.
Pil. Tartar. Bont. Serum. hepatic. Sp. Cochlear. Tab. Abs. Tinct. Abs. Tinct.
Rosar. See Chalybeats.
Hicket, or Hiccough. Elix. Prop. Laudana. Sal Armon. vol. Tab. Diambr. Tinct.
Hier. T. Stomach. See Stomaticks.
Hoarsness and Wheezing. Pil. Styracin. Emp. Solear. Pil. Solear.
Horses Asthmatick, and wasted. Pasta Hippiatri.
Hypnoticks, inducers of sleep. See sleep to cause. Hystericks. Bals. Succini.
Bez. Jov. Bez. Saturn. Calx. Jovis and Lunae. Cerev. Jovial. Cliss. Vitriol.
Croc. Jov. Croc. Ven. Elix. Caph. El. Prop. dull. El. prop. Pestilent. and
Tartar. Emp. Camph. Emp. Diagalb. Enem. Hyster. Ens Vener. Flor. Jovial. Jul.
Hyst. camphorat. farinac. foetid. mithridatic. moschat. Junip. Bacc. candef.
Jup. diaph. Jup. nitrat. Mag. Jov. Nod. Hyst. Ol. Camph. Pil. Hyst. Pull. Hyst.
Regul. Jov. Reg. Solar. Sal. c. c. succinat. Sal. Jov. Secundin. praep. Sp.
ceras. Sp. c. c. Sp. Succin. Sp. Samb. Sp. Ven. Suffim. Hyst. Sir. Samb. c.
Testes. equi praep. Tinct. Asae foet. T. Galbanet. T. Propriet. T. Serpyll. T.
Succin. T Vener^s.

J
Jaundice yellow. See Yellow Jaundice. Iliack Passion. See Cholick. Impetigo.
See Ringworms, and Leprosy. Impotency to cure. Miva Satyr. Sacch. Ambarat.
Testes Apri praep. Vin. Viper. Ung. Virilit.
Inflammations. See Burnings. Inflammation of the Eyes. Aq. Camphorat. v.
Ophthalmicks.
Issues. Emp. Adhaesiv. Pisa Luteae, rubra, and Viridia.
Itch to cure. See scabbiness.

K
Kibes and Chilblains to cure. Ung. famil. and Ung. paregor.
Kings Evil. Aq. Bened. cerev. schrophul. Dec. ad Strum. Emp. Diagalb. Emp. ad
Strum. Mag. Turpeth. Pull. ad Strum. Sal Spong. Ung. Digital. See preparations
of Antimony, Mercury.

L
Lethargy. Pull. Sternutat. See Cephalicks.
Leprosy, Elephantiasis. R. Bez. Ven. Dec. Ulmi. Ol. Viper. Pan. de Viper.
Pil. Balsamic. Vin. Viperin. See scabiness.
Lice to kill. Ol. Heraclein.
Liver Medicines See Hepaticks, Chalybeats, preparations of Tartar. Loches
suppressed. See Emmenagogicks. Lues Venerea. See French Pox. Lust to abate.
Elect. Castit. Pil. Castit. See Preparations of Champhir.

M
Madness to cure. Elleb. alb. praep. Extr. Melamp. Pull. coronat. Tinct.
Saturni. Mad Dogs biting. See biting. Marks, or pittings of the Small pox to
prevent. Bals. verum. Cerat. alb. Nod, facial. Ung. ad foveas.
Measles, Smallpox* Dec. rubicund. Emuls. expuls. Lap. c. Yerv. L. de Goa.
Pull. Aethiop. P. Alb. P. Cantian. P. purp. Sulph. aur.
Melancholy to cure. Arcan. dupl. Cardiac. coelest. Extr. Melamp. Mars diaph.
Miv. Borrag. Pil. Melanch. Pil. Pavii. Pull. Coronat. Sal. Viper. Sp. Saturn.
Sir. Jov. Tart. chalyb. Tinct. Armon. T. Mart. T. Melamp. T. Saturn. See
preparations of Mars and Tin.
Memory to refresh. Pull. cibar. Pull. Crinal.
Milk curdled to dissolve. Emp. Diagalb. Emp. mammill. Ung. famil. Ung.
Paregoric.
Morphew, Scurfe, Dandrif. Bals. Saturn. Aq. Merc. Lac. Merc.
Mouth stinking. See Breath stinking. Mouth Ulcerated. See Ulcers in the mouth.
N
Nephriticks, stone breakers. Alkek. cond. Aq. Cucum. c. Aq. Cynosb. c. Aq.
Lact. nephrit. Aq. Persic. c. Aq. Senel. c. Cons. Cep. coralit. Elect.
Lithontript. Liquam. Silic. Miv. Dialth. Nitrum Cachect. Pi. Lithontrip. P.
Matthew. P. Pacif. Sacch. Sambuc. Sal. Spong. Vol. Sal. Urin. Silic. praep. Sp.
Alum. Sp. Coral. Sp. Junip. Sp. Spong. Sp. Ven. Tinct. Junip. Sir. Tereb.
comp. D. G.
Nodes to dissolve. Emp. Diagalb. Ol. Viper. Noise in the Ears. See pain in the
Ears.

O
Openers of Obstructions, or Ecphracticks. Ens Vener. Extr. Ecphract. Infus.
Sancta. Nitr. Cathart. Nitr. Hermaph. Sp. Alum. d. Sp. Millep. Sp. Nitr. d. Sp.
Sal. Arm. Chalybeat. Sp. Sal. Martial. Sp. Viperar. Sp. Vitriol. Diaph. Sp.
Vitriol. Mart. Sp. Vitriol. Philosoph. Sp. Vitriol. Tart. Sulph. Vitriol.
Martial. Sir. Lumbric. Sir. Sider. Tart. Antim. Tart. Chalpbeat. Tinct. Antim
purg. T. Arm. T. Ferri. T. Mart. Vin. Ecphract. Vitriol. Mart.
Ophthalmicks, dimness of sight, Diseases of the Eyes. Aq. Camph. Aq. Ophth.
Aq. Ophth. sapphirin. Cerev. Oxydorc. Elect. Oxydorc. Emp. Burgund. Emp.
Nuchal. Ol. Linteor. Pull. cibar. Pull. ophth. Sp. Millep. Sir. de Peto. Vitriol.
camph. Ung. Ophthalm.
Opiates. Bals. Anodyn. Emp. Opiat. Emp. Podagric. Extr. Paregor. Laudana. Pil.
Catarrh. Pil. Matthew. Pil. Pacif. Sir. de croco. Tinct. Bez. Ung. Haemorrh.
Extr. Hpyn. D. G. Sir. Hypn. pect. D. G. Sir. Hypn. Balsamic. D. G. Sir. Hypn.
Balsamic. D. G. Tinct. Opii. D. G. Ung. Haemorrh. D. G.

P
Pain and Noise in the Ears. Cons. Nicot.. Pil. styrac. Sir. de Peto.
Pain of the Stomach. Elect. Caryoph. El. Piper. Pull. Stom. Sir. de Peto.
Tinct. Hier. T. Rhab. T. Stom. Pain of the side. Bals. Magistr. Emp. Lateral.
Pull. Lateral. See Pleurisy.
Palsy to cure. Bals. Apop. B. Paralyt. B. Succin. Cinnab. Ant. Elect.
Paralyt. Emp. Paral. Extr. Diatess. Galbanet. Mastichat. N tr. cachect. Ol.
Balsam. Ol. Lumbr. Ol. Paralyt. Pil. Masticat. Sp. Sang. Tinct. Galbanet T.
Paral. T. Succin.
Palsy of the Tongue. Catapl. Apopect. C. Cephal. See Apoplexy, Cephalicks.
Palpitation of the Heart. Pull. Griseus Cardiac. Coelest. Elect. Caryoph. Sal.
Arm. volat. oleos. Tinct. Meless.
Pectorals, Pulmonicks. Aq. Bechic. Aq. Caryoph. Aq. Lactis. pect. Aq. Pector.
Aq. Tussil. c. Extr. Pector. Liquam. Sulph. Pil. Matthew. Pil. Pacif. Pull. Pect.
Sp. Hyssop. Sir. Bals. S. Limac. S. de Rapis. S. Tolut. mag. Tab. Burg. T.
Dialth. T. Diatrag. Tab. Farfar. T. Lenth. T. de styrac. Tinct. Sulph. Troch.
Pector. Aq. Lenit. D. G. Aq. Pect. and Propect. D. G. Sir. Pect. Balsam. D. G.
Perfumes, and sweet scented Medicines. Aq. Odorif. Bals. Apop. Caryoph. odor.
Corp. sine. Anima. Diachyl. Odor. Diapalm. odor. Pilae odorat. Pom. Ambr. Pull.
odorat. Sp. Ambrae. Sp. Benz.
Pestilence or Plague to cure. Acet. Pestil. Amul. pestil. Bals. Sulph. Bez.
Jov. miner. B. solear. Catapl. Dec. praeserv. Elect. Macis. Elix. Caph. Elix.
Prop. Lap. e. yerv. Orviet. Pull. Cant. Sal. Viper. Sp. Saturn. Sp. There. camph.
Viper. Sir. de Sulph. Tinct. Bez. T. Prop. T. Virgin. Elect. Antepidem. and
Sir. Antepid. D. G.
Phthisis, Hectic, Tabes, Consumption of the Lungs. Aq. Antiphth. Aq. Ben. Aq
Dact. pect. Bals. Sulph. anis. Dec. Antiphth. Dec. Limac. Extr. Malt. c. Flo.
Sulph. alb. L^c. Sulph. Liquam. Sulph. Mag. Saturn. Pil. de Pice. Rosa solis
Sir. Bals. S. Limac. S. de Rap. S, Pepon. S. de Peto. S. Tolut. mag. Tab.
Sapon. Tinct. Amygd. T. Saturn. See Pectorals, Restorers.
Piles or Hemorrhoids to cure. Aq. Chalib. Bals. Momord. Emp. Haemorrh. Ol.
cremor. Suppos. haemorrh. Tab. Divin. Ung. Haemorrh. and Ung. Hemorrh. D, G.
Pining to cure. See Phthisis, Restorers. Pissing Blood. Aq. Chalyb. Cons. Hep.
Corallit. Testes Apri.
Pleurisy to cure. Aq. Animal. Aq. Tussil. c. Bals. Sulph. Emp. Lateral. Ens.
Ven. Liq. Sulph. Nitr. Sulph. Potio Pleurit. Pull. Lateral. Pull. Pleurit. Sp.
N^tri. Sp. Rhaead. crap. See Pectorals.
Preparations of Alum. Alum. dulc. Alum. Febrif. Aluminatum. Aq. Alumin. Aq.
fort. aluminata. Aq. Herpet. Arc. Alum. Lac. Alum. Lap. Medicam. L. Salut. Pull.
sine pari. P. Uvular. Sal. Alum. Serum. Alum. Sp. Alum. d. Suppos. Aluminos.
Preparations of Antimony. Antihect. Poter. Ant. diaph. Ant. diaph. fix. Ant.
Medicam. Ant. Reuscit. Aq. Stim. sulph. Bals. sulph. antim. Bez. Jov. B. Lunar.
B. Mart. B. miner. B. Solar. Cerev. Cataps. Ceruss. Mart. Cinnab. Antim. Dec.
Antim. Elect. Alb. Febris. Riv. Fl. Antim. Fl. Ant. diaph. Magist. Ant. diaph.
Merc. Vitae. corr. and purg. Nitrum. Antim. Ol. Ant. saccharat. O ^ysacch.
emet. Panac. ^ur. Pan. cathart. Pan. Hartm. Pil. A^tim. P.l. Basil. Pull.
Cantian. P. ^omach. P. Liliac Regul. Jov. R^g. L^n. Reg. Mart. Reg. Solar. Reg.
Vener. Sulph. Antim. Sulph. Ant. Comb. Sulph. aurat. Tab. Antim. Tart. Ant.
Tart. Emet. Tart. vitriolat. antimoniale. Tart. Vitriolat. Emetico-purg. Tinct.
Ant. Emet. T. Ant. purg.
Preparations of Camphir. Aq. Camphorat. Bals. Anodyn. E^ix. Camph. E^^p.
Camph. E^em. Hyst. Front. cephalalg. Julap. Hyst. camph. L^q. Cephalaig. Mixed.
simp. Pil. Castitat. Pil. Hyster. Sp. Camph. Sp Theriac camph. Tinet. Cerus.
Vitriol. Camph. Ung. Antipyr. Ung. Facial.
Preparations of Copper, or Venus. Bals. Vener. Bez. Ven. Croc. V^n. F^^.
virid. aeris. Ol. Virid. aeris. Regul. Ven. Sp. Ven. Tinct. V^neris.
Preparations of Lead or Saturn. Bals. Saturn. Calx. Sat. Bez. Sat. Emp. Sat.
Mag. Sat. N^tr. Sa^. Pil. C^stitat. Sal. Sat. Sp. Sat. Tinct. Sat.
Preparations of Luna, or Silver. B^z Lunar. Calx. Lunae. Caustic. L^nar. L^na
potab. Regu^. L^mar. V^triol. Lunae.
Preparations of Mars, or Iron. Aq. Chalib. Bals. Mart. Bez. Mart. Cerus. Mart.
Chalyb. sine Acid. Chal. Tart. C^iss. Vitriol. Elect. Chalyb. Ens Ven. Ess.
Mart. Extr. chalyb. B. Ecphr. E Icter. F^o. Sal. Arm. Martiati. Julap.
Antiscorb. Mars. diaph. Mars. potab. N^tr. Cachect. Ol. Mart. Pil. Pavii. P.
Restring. Pull. Icter. Pull. Mart. c. Regul. Mart. Sal. Chalyb. Sal. Mart.
Cathart. Sp. Viriol. Mart. Sulph. Vitrioli Mart. Sulph. Vitr. narcot. Sir.
chalyb. S. chal. corallat. S. Jovial. S. Sider. Tart. chalyb. Tinct. Armon. T.
Ferri. T. Mart. T. Mart. aur. T. tartarisat. Vin. Chalyb. Vin. chal. Purg.
Vitriolum Martis.
Preparations of Mercury, or Quicksilver. Aeth. miner. Arc. Corallin. Arc.
Jov. Aur. Mosaic. Aur. potab. Aur. Vitae. B^z. Merc. Bez. min. Bez. Solar.
C^nnab. Ant. Croc. Jov. Emp. opi^t. Emp. ad Strum. Emp. Tibial. Inject. ben.
Lac. Merc. Mag. Turpeth. Merc. praecip. alb. etc. Merc. sublim. rub. ec flav.
Merc. Vitae. Cor. Merc. Vitae purg. Panac. ^ur. Panac. cath. Pil. Aethiop. Pil.
Balsam. Pil. de creta. Palm. P I. Hydrop. Pull. Basil. Tab. Infant.
Preparations of Nitre. Aq. fort. dupl. Aq. fort. aluminat. Aq. Reg. Arc. due.
christ. miner. Ess. Mart. Nitr. Antim. N tr. Cachect. N. Cathart. N. ^o^al. N.
fixat. N. Hermaph. N. Jov. N. Nitrat. N. Perlat. N. Saturn. N. Sulph. N.
Vitriolat. Reg. Mart. Reg. Ven. Sal. Alkal. Sal. Polychr. Sp. Nitri. Sp. Nitri.
Bez. Sp. Nitri d. Tab. Prunell. Ung. depilator.
Preparations of Sol, or Gold. Aur. Fulm. Aur. potab. Aur. Vitae. Bez. Solar.
Regul. Solar.
Preparations of Sulphur. Bals. Sulph. Anisat. etc. Elect. Asthmat. Emp.
Diasulph. Rul. Emp. Lateral. Fl. Sulph. alb. Hep. Sulph. Lac. Sulph. Liquam.
Sulph. Pil. Styracin. Pull. Asthmat. P. Pect. P. Pleurit. Sal. Polychrest. Sal.
Sulph. Sir. de Sulph. Tab. Amygd. Dialth. Divin. and Sapon. Tinct. Sulph. Ung.
depilat. Facial. de Beton. aq. and Piperin.
Preparations of Tartar. Bals. Tart. Cicer. Tart. Dec. Pacif. Jul. Tart. Mag.
Tart. Mel Sapon. Mix. simp. Nitr. Herm. Ol. Cosm. Pil. M^tth. and Pacif. P.
Tart. B. Pull. Buil. Cornach. and Icter. Sal. A m. Vol. Sal. Tart. Sapo Tart.
Sav. Cosm. Sp. Sal. Arm. tart. Sp. Vitr. diaph. Sp. Vitr. tart. Sulph. Vitriol.
Tab. Cath. and Tart. Tart. Ant. T. Chalyb. T. Emet. T. Laxat. T. Vitrioli
antim. T. Vitr. Emetico-purg. Tinct. B^z. T. Cerus. T. Mart. tart.
Preparations of Tin, or Jupiter. Antihect. Poter. Arcan. Jovial. Aur. Mosaic.
Bez. Jov. Calx. Jov. Cerev. Jov. Croc. Jov. Dec. ad. mors. canis. rab. Fior.
Jov. Jup. diaph. Jup. Nitr^t. Mag. Jov. Regul. Jov. Sal. Jov. Sir. Jov.
Preparations of Vitriol. Aq. fort. dupl. Aq. Herpet. Arc. Dupl. Chalc. rubef.
Clis. Vitr. Eliz. Vitr. Ess. Mart. Flo. Vitr. Gil. Theoph. Jul. purp. Lap.
Medic. and Salut. Mixed. simp. Nitr. Vitr. Ol. Vitr. d. Panac. H. Pil. Vom. Pull.
sine pari. P. Sympath. Ros. Vitr. Sp. Vitr. Coag. and diaph. and Tart. Stypt.
Reg. Sulph. Vitr. and S. Vitr. narcot. Tart. Vitriolat. Antim. Terr. Vitr. d.
Tinct. Antim. purg. T. Bez. Vitriolum camph. Ung. Fuscum.
Priapism to help. See Lust to abate. Provokers of the Terms. Aq. Chamaem.
comp. Essent. Mart. Extr. Fellis. Mars. fulm. Pedilav. emmenag. Pull. Oxytoc.
Sp. Junip. Sp. Sal. Arm. chalyb. See Chalybeates, Hystericks.
Purgers. Cath. Caesar. Cerev. Cataps. Cerev, Vern. Dec. Amar. D. P^lychr. D.
ad strum. D^atart. Emuls, cath. Ext^. Alhand. E. Drast. E. F^ll. E ^^la^p.
Infus. ben. Lac. Scam. Mag. (...). M. Tart. Merc. pr^ecip. alb. ^^c. M. subl^m.
rub. and ^^^v. M. Vitae purg. Mixed. Anticolic. Nitr. Cath. Panac. Cath. Pil.
Ammon. mag. P. Angel. P. B^ls. P. C^^pul. P. de C^^t. Palm. P. Hydrop. P.
maracost. P. Melanag. P. Pavii. P. de Sagap. P. Tart. Bont. P. Vatic. P.
Vermif. Potio alb. Potio hydrop. Pris. cath. Pull. A^thr. Turn. P. A^thm. P.
B^^l. P. Cornach. P. Coronat. P. H^rm. c. Sal. Mart. Cath. Scam. cydon. Lymon.
R^sat. Sir. bened. Sir. de Scam. Tab. Cathart. Tinct. Antim. purg. T. Asthmat.
T. aurea. T. Cath. R. T. Scorb. Vin. Arthrit. purg. Vin. Hydrop. Ung. ad
Lumbric.
Pustles to cure. Aq. Mellum. Aq. Ophth. Sapphir. Ol. ^ufen. See Redness of the
Face.
Pustles in the face. See redness of the face.
Q
Quartan Agues, Tertians to cure. Aur. Vitae. Emp. febrif. Ep^carp. febrif.
Flo. Sal. Arm. marriat. Lac. Alum. Mag. Saturn. Mars diaph. Ol. Antim. sacch.
Pil. de Ammon. mag. Pil. de Sagap. Pull. Antipyr Pull. febrif. cert. Ranar.
Hepat. praep. Sp. Camph. Sp. Viper. Sulph. aurat. Tart. chalyb. Tinct. Armon.
T. Hier. T. Mart. T. Saturn. T. Stom. Vin. chalyb.
Quinsey, Ulcers in the Mouth. Catapl. Cynanch. Emp. Synanch. Garg. Synanch.
^inct. Synanch. Tab. Antisynanch.

R
Redness of the Face, Pustles, etc. Acer. Litharg. Aluminat. Aq. Bened. Aq.
Mercur. Cerev. Cataps. Dec. Rubrae. Tinctor. Lac. Mercur. Mag. Saturn. Ol.
Ranar. Ung. Facial. See Cosmeticks.
Resisters of Poison. Aq. Epidem. A. Lact. Alexit. Aur. potab. Aur. Vitae. Bez.
Animal. Bez. min. Bolus Alexiter. Emuls. expuls. Enem. Alex. Flor. Salis Infus.
Sanct. Lap. c. yerv. L. de Goa. Mixed. simp. Pulv. Albus. P. Cantian. P. Pannon.
rub. P. Purpur. Sal. Tart. Volat. Sal. Viper. Sp. Sal Arm. Sp. Sambuc. Sp.
There. camph. Sp. Viper. Sp. Vitriol. diaph. Salph. Aurat. Tab. de Angel. Tinct.
Bez. T. Virgin. Aq. Alex. and Proalex. D. G.
Restorers. Aq. Cordium c. Aq. Lact. pect. Crem. Hord. Dec. Analept. Dec.
Limac. Gelat. c. c. Jul. Vitae Jusc. Galli. Put. Cardiac. perl. Sir. Limac. S.
Pepon. Tinct. Mellis.
Rest and Sleep to procure. R. Laudan. Hypnotica. Opiata. Pedil. Hypnot.
Revivers of the Spirits, See Cordials. Rickets to cure. Bals. Spinal. Dec. ad
Rachit. Ens. Ven. Jul. ad Rachit. Pull. Pull. ad Rachit. Regul. Ven. Sp. Millep.
Sp. Vitriol. Mart.
Ringworms, Tettars, etc. B^z. Ven. Flo. Bismuth. and Zinci. Magist Bismuth.
Ol. Chart. Ol. Ranar. Ol. Viper.
Roughness or dryness of Tongue and Fauces. Medetur Dec. Ulmi. See Thrush.
Rheumatism to cure. Aq. Animal. Aq. Omn. F^or. Dec. Rhab. Pan. Diasars.
Running of the Reins. See Gonorrhaea. Ruptures to cure. Miv. Consolid. Sp.
Sal. coagul. See Astringents.

S
Salivating Medicines. Aq. Salival. Mastichat. Mixed. Tubul. Panac. aur. Pil.
Masticat. See Preparations of Mercury.
Scald head, or Tinea. Lap. Medicam. L. Salut. Mag. Turpeth. Ol. Sapon.
Sciatica to cure. Aq. Hungar.
Scabbiness, and Scabs, Itch, etc. Aq. Camph. Arc. Corallin. Cerev. Cataps. C.
Scrophul. C. Vernal. Dec. Antim. Lap. Salut. and Medicam. Mag. Git. Merc.
praec. alb. etc. Merc. sublim. Panac. Hartm. Sal. Tart. Sal. Tart. Volat. Sp.
Vitriol. diaph. Sp. Vitr. tart. Tab. Divin. Ung. de Aurant. Ung. de Beton. aq.
Ung. Piperin.
Scrophula, Struma. See Kings Evil. Scurf to remove. See Morphew. Scurvy to
cure. Acetar. scorb. Antihect. Poter. Antim. diaph. etc. Aq. Antiscorb. Aq.
Lact. scorb. Arcan. dupl. Bez. Jovial. Cerev. Butl. C. Scorb. Cerus. Ant. Cons.
hepat. corallit. Dec. Scorb. Dentif. Scorb. Elect. alb. Emp. Scorb. Extr.
Ecphr. Fot. scorb. Garg. Scorb. Infus. Ireat. Inf. fanct. Jul. Antiscorb. Mars
potab. Nitr. cachect. Ol. scorb. Pedil. scorb. Pil. Aethiop. Sal. diuret. Sal
urin. Vol. Serum scorb. Ser. de Sedo. Sp. Cochl. Sp. Coral. Sp. Vin. tart.
Succ. scorb. Sir. Antiscorb. Sir. samb. c. Tab. Antim. Tinct. Armon. T. Cochl,
c. T. Mart. aur. T. Scorb. T. Virgin. Vin. scelotyrb. Aq. Cochl. c. Sp. Raph.
c. D. G. See Preparations of Antimony, Mars.
Serpigo. See Herpes. Sight weak or depraved. Aq. Ophthalm. Sapph. See
Ophthalmicks.
Skin rough and filthy, or deformed. Ol. Tritic. Ol. Viper. Pilae odor.
Sleep to cause. Laudana omnia. Nitr. cachectic. Pedilav. hypnot. Sulph.
Vitriol. narcot. Sir. de croco. See Opiates, Rest.
Small Pox, See Measles. Spasm, Contractures. Bals. Paralyt. Emp. spasm. Lap.
de Goa. Nitr. Cachect. Ol. Balsamic. Ol. Lumbr. chym. Sp. Vitr. diaph. Sir.
Lumbric. See Palsy, Convulsion.
Splenetick Medicines. See Hepaticks. Spots called Ephelides, to cure. Aq.
Bened. Savan. Cosmet.
Spitting blood. Linct. haemopt. Miv. Consolid. Pull. haemopt. Sir. haemopt.
Tab. haemopt. Tinct. Haematit. See Astringents.
Stone in Reins and Bladder. Aq. Omn. flor. Aq. Persic. c. Bals. Lucat. B.
Magistr. B. Tart. Enem. colic. Enem. oleos. Enem. terebinth. Nitr. Hermaphrod.
Ol. Ludi. Ol. Vitriol. d. Pull. ad Calcul. Sal. Viper. Testes Apri praep.
Stitches in the side. See pain in the side.
Stone breakers. See Nephriticks,
Stomaticks, and diseases of the Stomach. Aq. Pneumon. Cerev. Batl. Dec. Amar.
Elect. Caryoph. Elix. Junip. Elix. Prop. El. Vitae. El. Vitriol. E^tr. D^atess.
Flo. Sal. Arm. mart. Pil. de Ammon. mag. P. Angel. P. C^apular. P. Marocost. P.
Vatic. Pleres Arch. Pull. Stom. Rosa Solis. Sacch. Caryoph. Sal. Arm. Vol.
Oleos. Sal. Philos. Sedat. Arch. Sp. Junip. Sp. Ven. Sp. Vitr. coag. Tab. Abs.
Tab. de aurant. Tab. Diambr. Tab. de Piper. Tinct. Abs. T. Hier. T. Prop. T.
Ros. T. Serpyll. T. Stom. Aq. Abs. c. and Tinct. Amar. D. G.
Stypticks. See Astringents, Preparations of Alum, Vitriol. Surfeits,
Drunkenness. Pil. crapular. P. Matthew. P. Pacif. Sp. Rhoead. crapular. Tinct.
Absinth.
Suppression of Urine, Heat and Pain in making Urine, Strangury. Emuls. de
Avell. Mucil. nephr Pull. Liliac. Aq. omn. flor. v. see
Nephriticks, Diuretics, Sudorificks, Diaphoreticks, or sweating Medicines.
Alum. febrif. Antifeb. Conch. Antim. diaph. etc. Aq. Stim. Sulph. Arc. Jov.
Aur. fulm. Mos. and potab. Bez. Animal. B. Jov. B. Lun. B. min. B. Sol. Cerus.
Ant. and Mart. Cinnab. Ant. Croc. Jov. Dec. Ambros. D. Ulmi. Fl. Ant. Fl. Benz.
Fl. Sal. Arm. Jup. diaph. and nitrat. Lap. c. yerv. L. de Goa. Mar^. diaph.
Merc. praec. rub. Mixed. simp. Nitr. Cachect. Ol. Camph. Panac. Heart. Phosph.
Pil. Matthew. and Pacif. Pull. alb. P. Cant. Sal. Acet. essent. S. Alum. S. Arm.
Vol. S. Philos. Sedat. Arch. Sp. Camph. Cochl. c. c. Dracunc. Mann. N^tr. Sal.
Arm. Samb. Saturn. Succin. There. Camph. and Vitriol. diaph. Sulph a^^at. Tart.
A^tim. Tinct. Bez. G^ajac. and Virgin.
S^^ooning and fainting. Aq. Cinnam. cardiac. Julap. perlat. Vitae. Sp. Alk.
^p. Ambrae. Sp. Embryon. Tab. gris.

T
Tabes to cure. See Pining or Consumption. Teeth to breed easily. Dentifric.
Infant. and Torquis Infant.
Teeth to whiten. Dentisrie. Dominar.
Toothache to case. Alum. dulc. Arc. Alum. Emp. N^chal. M^^ic^t. Ol. Chartae.
O^. H^ra^l. Ol. Tabac. Pil. Matthew. P. Pacif. P. Masticar. Sp. Tabace. Tinct.
Guajac. Tinct. Odontalg. Torq. Infant. See Anodyns, Opiates.
Terms to provoke. See Provokers of the Terms. Tertian Agues to cure. Emp.
febrif. Epicarp. febrif. Lac. Alum. Pull. Antipyr. P. Febrif. cert. Sp. Camph.
Sulph. aurat. Tin^t. Hier. T. Stom.
Thirst to quench. Bez. Animal. Crem. Hord. Christ. miner. Dec. alb. Dec. ad
Sitim. Jul. Frag. Jul. Idaeum. Jul. purp. Nitr. sixat. Nur. Sulph. Serum de
Sedo Sp. Vitriol. coag. Tab. prunel. Tab. Tart.
Thrush. Ulcers in the Mouth. Aq. Mellum. Dec. Ulmi. Garg. alb. G. synanch.
Linim. Mellum. Tab. Antisynanch.
Tophs, Nodes, Gums, to dissolve. Emp. Diagalb. Ol. Viper.
Traumaticks, Vulneraries. Aq. Chalyb. Aq. Vuln. Bals. Lu^at B. Magistr. B.
Sulph. An^im. B. Sulph. B^t. C^rev. serophul. Dec. Antiphth. Dec. Astac. Dec.
Traum. Pil. Matthew. Tab. de Angel. Tinct. Asae foet. T. Ocul. caner.
Timpany to cure. Aq. Ceras. c. Sp. Sal. coag.

V
Vertigo to cure. Elect. Epilept. Emp. Camph. Emuls P^^on. Sacch. Caryoph.
Sulph. Vitriol.
V^n^real Nodes to dissolve. Emp. Tibi^le.
Ulcers, Wounds, Fistula's to ^ure. Aq. Alum. Aq. Ben. Aq. Camph. Aq. Vulner.
Arc. C^rallin. B^s. Lucat. B. Mag. B. Mart. B. Momord. B. Saturn. B. Sclop. B.
Sulph. Ant. and Bat. B. Ven. B^z. Ven. Croc. Jov. Elix. Prop. Emp. diasulph. R.
E^^p. Saturn. Merc. praec. and sublim. Ol Tritic. Pil. Matthew. Pull. sine pari.
P. Sympath. Sal. Litharg. Sal. Tart. and Tart. Vol. Tinct. Myrrh. T. Ocul. c.
T. Prepriet. Ung. Fusc. U. famil. U. Pareg. Ung. Sympath.
Ulcers in the Mouth. C^tapl. Cynanch. Emp. Synanch. Garg. Synanch. Linct.
Synanch. Tab. Antisynanch. See Thrush.
Ulcers in the Head. See scald Head. Vomitories, Emeticks. Antim. refuse. Apoz.
potent. expect. Aq. Formic. Dec. Digital. Dec. Regul. Extr. Petic. Mag. G^t.
Merc. praec. per se. Merc. praec. rub. Oxysacch. Emet. Pil. Antim. Pil. Vom.
Serum. Alum. Sp. Tabac. Sulph. Ant. and Ant. combust. Tab. Emet. Tart. Antim.
Tart. Emet. Tinct. Antim. Emet.
Urine to provoke. Alkek. cond. Aq. Cacum. comp. Aq. Cynosb. c. Aq. oma. Flor.
Aq. stim. sulph Bals. Lucat. Bals. Succin. Cons. Hepat. corallit. Crem. Hord.
Crot. Ven. Dec. D^^et. Augen. Elect. Junip. F^o. Sal. Arm. Ju. Fragor. Mars
d^^ph. Mars. Fulm. N^tr. Hermoph. Pil. Matthew. Pil. Pacif. Sal. D^^ret. S.
Martis Cathart. S. Polychr. S. Tart. S. Tart. Volat. Silic. praep. Sp. Alum. d.
Sp. Ceras. Sp. Junip. Sp. Misleped. Sp. Nitri. Sp. Nitri duc. Sp. Sal. Arm. Sp.
Sal. Arm. succinat. tartarisat. and Chalybeat. Sp. Sal. Cong. Sp. Sal. Mart.
Sir. Lumbric. Tinct. Antim. T. Coral. T. Junip. T. Serpyll. Vin. Ecphract.
Vulneraries, See Traumaticks. Uvula relaxt. Pulv. Uvularis.

W
Warts to cure. See Corns. Wheezing. See Hoarsness. Whitloes to cure. Catapl.
ad Paronych. Ung. familiar. Ung. Paregor.
Whites in Women. Aq. Bened. Aq. Horm. c. Aq. Lam. c. Caudel. nenuph. Gelat.
Itchthyoc. Lac. Alum. Pil. crerac. Pil. de Cret. Palm. See Fluxes.
Wind to Expel. See Carminatives. Womb Medicines. See Hystericks. Worms to
kill. Aeth. min. Aq. Vermif. Aur. Vitae. Bals. magist. Bez. Animal. Elect.
Vermif. Elix. Prop. Emp. Vermif. E^s. Ven. Merc. or ecip. Ol. Al^et. O^ Heracl.
Ol. Tabac. Pil. Vermif. Pull. Vermif. Sacch. Persic. Sal Sulph. Sir. Vermif.
Tab. Infant. Tab Vermif. Tinct. Abs. T. ^orall. T. H^er. T. Prop. T. Ung. ad
Lumbric.
Women's breasts, swelled. See Breasts swelled. Worms to cure. Pull. Sympath. and
Ung. Sympath. See Ulcers.
Wound healers. See Traumaticks. Wounds of the Breast, or Thorax. Dec. astacor.

Y
Yellow Jaundice. D^c. Icteric. Elect. Alb. Extr. I^ter. I^fus. I^ter. Jul.
Tart. Pull. I^ter. Sal. diuret. Sal. Urin. Sp. Sal. coag. Sir. Jov. Sy^ L^m^ric.
Tab. Antim. Tart. chalyb. Tart. Vitriolat. antim. V^n. Chalyb. See preparations
of Mars and Tartar.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 24. b. Line 25. read, A. iv. p. 25. b. l. 15, 16. dele [for two days.]
and r. [with the second degree of fire.] p. 108. a. l. 9. r a ii. p. 112. a. l.
17. r. Wine q. s. p. 124. b. l. 9. r. of those ill. p. 133. b. l. 16. r. from
them all. p. 160. b. l. 31. dele [in fine powder.] l. 34. r. dissolve the Wax.
p. 139. a. l. 17. r. sena. x. l. 31. r. a Gallon. l. 33. r. it with syrup of.
p. 367. a. l. 33. for Sal, r. Sal Tartari. p. 369. a. l. 30. r. Flowers of Salt
of. p. 417. b. l. 33. r. it has not all. p. 449. b. l. 17. 18. r. a ss. ad ii.
p. 458. a. l. 25. r. given a gut. 10. p. 504. a. l. 25. r. twenty four hours
the. p. 516. b. l. 12. r. Oil of Sulphur iii. p. 540. a. l. 26. r. How this. p.
583: b. l. 30. r. contrive for outward applications. p. 653. b. l. 25. r. Sal.
Cornu Cervi. p. 669. b. l. 12. r. than any of the. p. 700. a. l. 1. r. Tartarum
Vitriolatum. p. 706. b. l. 26, 27. dele [by abstracting with the Spirit
therefrom.] p. 735. a. l. 3. dele [Bate.] and add [] p. 837. b. l. 3. r.
Oxydorcicum. p. 840. a. l. 16. r. Cicera Tartari. p. 882. b. l. 10. r. compare.

ADVERTISEMENT.
AT the sign of the Archimedes and Spectacles, in Ludgate Street, near the
West End of St. Paul's, lives John Marshall, who both Turns and Grinds, makes
and sells all sorts of Glass Instruments, as Perspective Glasses, Telescopes,
Microscopes single and double, Horoscopes, Sky Optics, Reading Glasses, from
the smallest size to 12 Inches Diameter, Concaves, which burn by Reflection,
from the least size to 20 Inches Diameter, Concave Cylinders and Cones of
Metal. He has invented, a Pocket Microscope, more useful than any yet made,
opproved of by the Royal Society, and a large double Microscope; Microscopes
according to Mr. Lewenhoek: Also Microscopes of the said Marshals designing, a
singular Invention for the advantage of Light, the like of which was never done
before. Also a Tripple Perspective, or Wheel Perspective, having Three Concaves
in one single Eye Glass, accommodated to all sights, Ages, Airs, and Places,
never thought of by any other Man. He has also Speaking Trumpets, Crystal
Prisms, and Spectacles fit for all Ages in Silver Tortoise-shell, Horn, or
Leathern Frames by whole sale or retail; with many other sorts of Optic
Instruments (for brevity sake) not here named.


