(...). A PANEGYRIC ON THE CORONATION OF KING JAMES II. AND His Royal Consort
QUEEN MARY. On APRIL 23. 1685.

By the Author of the Plea for Succession, in Opposition to Popular Exclusion.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Davis in Amen-Corner. 1685.

(...), A PANEGYRIC ON THE CORONATION OF King JAMES II.
GReat CHARLES adieu! Tears cannot recall, yet we cannot but send 'em after Thee.
These are little Tributes, we may pay without fear of COMMONS, whose Votes
cannot seal our Eyes, though once they shut our Purses! We leave Thee to Eternal
Triumphs, where that Heavenly Quire turns Prophesy to Exultation,

At last grown weary of an Earthly Crown,
Crowned with an Heavenly One! O blessed Remove
From a Throne below, to a Throne above! This was sung to the King on last
New Years Day.

Now Melpomene be gone: with thy mourning Weeds be gone: Blubber not the
Triumphs of the Day: it is thy Sovereign's Command, Be gone.

Come, Polyhimnia, clad in thy gayest Robes, unlaced from Poetic measures;
with Garments flying loose, and careless, as the Times; Come, Solemnize the Day.

Tell, how the Nations flow, as to an Universal Head; how all Lands, with their
proudest Barks, plow up the British Seas; and every Tide throws in Foreign
Climes upon us: till all Babel's scattered Tongues make here their Rendezvous,
and at one View represent the World! Wise men, blown in from every Wind, with
submissive Sails salute the Warlike Isle, and offer Presents to the rising
Monarch of the World!

Tell, how the Godlike CHARLES in Celestial Vehicle, enclosed with the winged
Quires of Heaven, descends awhile from his Throne above, and with equal motion
hovers o'r our King, to see, and adorn the Day. While the Heavens, but now
tucked up, as flying from us; now descend in pearly drops, and, like the Holy
Oil from His Sacred Head, stream Blessings to all the Corners of the Land.
Which done, the joyful Sun brisks from behind the Cloud; weaves Garlands of His
Rays, and crowns His Head with Glories: while the Planets, through Streams of
Light, smile down their sweetest Influences.

See (if thou can) how He sits on His Royal Throne! How Peers, like Stars,
lie buried in His Light! See how the Queen imparts Her Gracious Beams; while
the Beauties, that attend, shrouded by Her Light, grow pale, and sink into the
milky way! See how the silent Rounds attentive stand; as if turned all to Eye,
and Ear; looking like the intellectual World, gazing on the Throne above; while
Traitors Heads, set o'r the Hall, Envy struck, do again look pale, and dye!

Tell the Miracles of the Day, viz.

How that Devil, whose name is Legion, is dispossessed; and the Nation, that
once did cut, and wound itself; now clothed, and in their wits, sit down at
their Royal Master's Feet!

How that lying Spirit, once smug'd up in Republic, and Excluding Forms; like
Heathen Oracles, at the approach of this Diviner Light, stabbed with Grief, runs
howling back to Hell!

Tell the Fiends sad Tales to the black Club below; how they make bold Sd -- y
stamp; Armstrong's Hands to shake; old Tony's blinking Eyes to outrun their
Tap; and turn the Joyner's Raree-Shew to Lamentations; filling the Infernal
Court with Shreeks, and Yells; which sound to the Belgic Shore; and make the A
late Pamphlet so called.
PROTESTANT RAZOR, there forged, and set to the murder of a Monarchy; turn
edge, and cut the Traitors Throats.

Tell how the Hollow Cries reach the British Isle; spoil Wappin Treats, and
quick Dispatches; confound the Bench, and make the stubborn House now at last
apt to change!

But draw a Cloud between thy self, and JAMES, our Sun, rising from his Western
Seat to his Zenith at Whitehall; attended with Peers, and Nations, like the
Host of Heaven (where may He shine in Meridian Glory, till taken up to
Ariadna's Crown, and Cassiopeia's Chair;) a Story fit for none, but great
Norfolk's hand.

When the God of Sleep has given Rest to Thy wearied Mind, wearied with the
tedious Glories of the Day: then rise to a second Show.

See how the winged People of the Air stand all at Gaze, called up by an
Artificial Day!

Survey the Thames, now better peopled, than the Town; tell how, many Houses
become joint Tenants to a little Skull, and Streets lie trust up in Liters! How
Echoes from the Shores, and Giants meet, and battle in the Air! while the
wondering Fish come shoaling in; and now officious grown, with scaly Backs
support the over-loaded Boats!

Let us now behold our KING, dear to God, and Man; shielded by the hand of
Heaven from harms of Foreign Wars, and Flemish Fights; where covered with
Smoke, and Fire; with Blood, and Brains of shattered men, he out-dared even
Guns, and Death! Snatched by the hand of Heaven from the Northern wreck;
secured from raging Seas, and madness of the People! From Exclusions,
Associations, and the Rye! A Royal Soul, whom Miracles have preserved, and
Angels crown!

Instead of Pyke, and Musket, we have Liberty and Law; instead of Rumps, and
Associations, a rightful Sovereign; and Peace, instead of Fields of Blood. An
Argument of a Divine care over Him, and us; which has given to each his Right;
to him His People, to us our King.

Let us honor all the Instruments of our Peace: whom bold Addresses would have
ravished, like Jewels from the Crown: those Atlases of State, whose Heads, and
Shoulders, helped to save Three Nations; and fixed a tottering Throne.

That Head, and Glory of our Bench; whose Merits may atone the Faults of others
of the Robe.

That unwearied Head, which laden with Age, and Honors; often sought, and now
at last has gained the unwilling Shade!

Worthies, whose bright Names, like fixed Stars, shall shine to future Ages.

Let Newmarket-Fire, which burnt Two Kings from Death; made 'Em outstrip, and
surprise the Plot, and saved us all from the flames of War; and was sent from
Heaven, like a Countermine, to blow up that Plot, which was made, and brought
from Hell; yearly blaze in all our Streets.

Hail, Sacred Town! Honored to be the Nations Sacrifice! In whose Ashes Heaven
wrote the deepest Characters of Love, for in thy Death we all do live! A second
Jericho, first cast down by Heaven for his Peoples safety; and then by Fanatic
Rage condemned to perpetual Ruins: who would give to destroy the whole, but
not to restore this little part! Hither, as to an Holy Land, let every Loyal
Pilgrim come; and here erect his Better Monument of Praise.

For the just Heavens took the injured Princes part; Michael, and his Angels,
with the Stars in their courses fought; and every Creature did conspire their
Sovereign's Right.

Then plot no more; for he, that upheld the Subject, will never fail the KING.
Heaven is never idly busy; for Wonders are not done for naught. When Israel
is brought from Egypt, through red Seas, and howling Deserts, and delivered
from a plotting Amalek; Balak shall never overcome, though Balaam turn
Inchanter for him.

Then plot no more: the Lernaean Monster needs must fall, when our Alcides
conquers Serpents from his Cradle! See him laden with bloodless Victories over
them, before whom Religion, Law, and Valor fell! A Wise, and Noble Soul, Just
to all Men, Fast to his Friends, Venturous of his Life, whose Martial influence
turns all to Champions, and re-peoples the Land with Giants. A Soul, in all
points, shaped for Glories. To Thee King Arthur and his Knights must bow; and
St. George yield up his Spear, and Day! England's King! England's Champion!
England's Guardian Angel! in whom dwells all that is Great, and Just, and Good!

Methinks I see that undaunted Foot set on the Necks of them, that cut it off;
and that rising Head, like the clambering Sun, looking over all the Thrones
about it! To Thee shall the wild Morocco, and distant Bantam seek! To Thee
shall the Nations look for Laws of Peace, and War! while each Pole shall bend,
and meet to bear thy Canopy!

Then plot no more: the proudest Waves may break themselves, but never move the
Rock.

Let those white Doves, the sweet Emblems of Peace, and Love; that at the Royal
Change sat upon his Arms, listening to the proclaiming their great Master, be
happy Omens of a blessed Reign.

Nay,

We will fear no more: who have a God, that works such Wonders for us.

We will fear no more: who have a King sprung from a Royal Stock, whose
greatest Fault was Mercy! A King, who has said, He will govern by the Laws: A
King, that never broke His Word: JAMES the Just: whose innate Goodness does
more oblige Him to make an happy People, than Oaths, and Covenants, could do
others, to make a GLORIOUS KING.

Great JAMES, we entirely acquiesce in Thee! Better tutored be the Tongues that
shall presume to tutor a King, a Politician, a Divine! We will not dare to
reproach thy Word; or disturb the couching Herds.

Go whining Whig; seduce no more; foul Fiend avaunt, pollute not this Sacred
Ground; go to Ditches stinking as thy Breath, there be laid for ever; there
croak thy ugly Tones; there swell, burst, and dye: while we our Loyal Triumphs
sing.

FINIS.

