etching of Susanna Perwich by P. Rogerson SUSANNA PERWICH
P. Ro^erson del'


Here Is all that is left. Reader, untimely Death
Has Snatched the rest: he needs would stop the breath
Of this our sweet harmonious Queen of love
And by her lifeles picture plainly prove
Nor Goodness, Beauty, Breeding finest parts
Where sin is found n^n shend from his feirce darts
But what the Effigies wants, the Book will tell
(...) Jnwarrd Splendors, look and View them well.


THE Virgins Pattern IN THE Exemplary Life, and lamented Death OF Mrs. SUSANNA
PERWICH, Daughter of Mr. ROBERT PERWICH; Who departed this Life, every way
rarely ^^complished Virgin, in the flower of her Age, at her Father's House in
Hackney, near London, in the County of Middlesex* July 3. 1661.

Published at the earn^^^ request of diverse knew her well, for the use and
benefit of others*

By John Batchiler, a near Relation, that occasio^^ly has had an intimate
converse in the ^^ly with her, more or less, the grea^^^^ part of her Life.

London Printed by Simon Dover, and are so (...) at his House, in Martins, near
Alde^sgat^ and at Booksellers shops, (...)

To all the young Ladies and Gentle-women, of the several Schools, in and about
the City of London, or elsewhere; more particularly to those of Mrs. Perwich
her School at Hackney.
Sweet Ladies and Gentle-women,
THE reason why this ensuing Relation (worthy of all future memory) is chiefly
presented unto you, is the equity and congruity thereof; together with that
particular right, by which you, of all others, seem to lay claim to it. The
Person here spoken of, was bred up in the same Fa^ily with you, and among you,
a daily object before you, and a lively example to as many of you as had wisdom
to take notice and make use of it. The manifold Excellencies that shined in
her, whether natural, acquired, or infused, are not unknown to you. Whatever
was ornamental to body or mind, from nature, breeding, or grace it self, she
had as much of it, yea, more (all circumstances considered) than any that I
have heard or read of. Indeed some there were of those eight hundred that have
been educated in her Father's house within the compass of her time, that did
outdo the rest in their respective seasons, some in one quality, some in
another, according to their different capacities, and the pains they took, or
the time they spent, more or less, in the School: but not any one that came
near to her in one half of those endowments and rare abilities (without offense
be it spoken) that She had attained unto, as will appear abundantly in the
ensuing Narration thereof. For if that be true which Mr. Rogers, Mr. Bing, Mr.
Coleman, Mr. Brian, Mr. Hazard, and the rest of the Masters of the School, have
often said in respect of the several qualities she learned of them, that (to
use their own words) they knew not where she has left her fellow in the world:
when all her other excellencies are considered also, in conjunction with them,
it must needs be then much more true. That is a rich Jewel which is made up of
all manner of precious stones; and that a sweet Nose-gay that has all sorts of
fragrant flowers in it; even such lustres and pleasant mixtures were
conspicuous in Her, to every unprejudiced and impartial eye. Indeed it was her
hap to be less known to, and less loved by some, than others; whether it were
out of a secret envy at her eminent worth, by which she out-shined them, or
from too severe a censure of that in her, which even in themselves (because of
higher rank in the world) they did easily allow, I know not. But this I can and
do affirm, with truth concerning her, that when she was told above a year
before her death, that certain persons (not here to be named) who wished her
well, were jealous of her, lest she were puffed up with pride, and the love of
vanity; the only answer she made, was, That whatever they thought of her, she
honored them for the grace of Christ she believed was in them, and that she
hoped God would enable her to make a good use of this their fear of her, for
the better observing of her own heart, and the keeping it the more humble.

Among those inducements that occasioned the publishing of this, some of the
chief are these which follow.

First, to rofute the opinion of such as greatly blame the education of public
Schools, as if they were places of all other, most dangerous to corrupt the
manners of youth: Behold here a great instance to the contrary, besides many
others that might be named of the very same School, there having been always
some as virtuous and religious young Gentlewomen brought up there, as in any
private Family whatsoever. Nor is it difficult to go to the several Cities and
Counties of this Kingdom, and find out the Houses in which many of them are
surviving, beautiful Ornaments of the places where they live, eias there
Virgins, Wives, or Matrons.

Secondly, to give a proof of the restlessness of a Soul once touched with
Divine Love; for let it be where it will, though cumbered with never so much
business, and called off with never so many divertisements, yet early or late,
at one time or another, it will have its opportunities of converse with God,
and will not be hindered, but rather lose both meat and sleep; than such
opportunities as these.

Thirdly, to let all men see that there is something in that which we call
Grace, which in the midst of all the most enticing vanities, and blandishments
of the world, can and does ravish the heart more then all these ever did or
could do. Here was a young Gentlewoman in the flower of her Age, compassed
about with all manner of delights and entertainments, that a carnal mind could
desire, and yet what dead things were they to her, and she to them! how were
they mutually crucified each to other, when once her nature was renewed, and
she felt the sweetness of the change! how was an entire Communion with God,
even an Heaven upon Earth unto her! Holiness (let profane scoffers and
wretched Atheists say what they will of it) has something in it more lovely
than all the Beauties in the world; something more sweet than all the Musicks
in the world; something more (...) all the Pleasures in t^ (...)

Fourthly and lastly, to set a rare Patte^^ and Example to all that shall
happen to hear or read of this Relation; and indeed this is none of the least
inducements, because it pleased the Lord that diverse, who are now living, are
able and ready to witness and acknowledge, that her Example, while they were in
the Family with her, did not only convince them of their own neglect of the
duties which she constantly practiced betwixt God and her own soul, and smote
their consciences for it; but did so far work upon them, as to cause them to do
the like ever since. It may therefore be reasonably hoped, that God may bless
the same Example unto others, though she be dead; and were it not for such an
end as this, how vain would the publication hereof be? Can it any way avail
her now she is gone? surely nothing less; let none therefore be so uncharitable
as to think, that the Author hereof can propou^^ (...) end therein, but such
(...) ^ned. He hopes he ^^th better learned Christ; nor yet that what is here
related is more out of favor or affection than otherwise. Those that please to
enquire, will find witnesses enough to assert the whole truth of the premises;
and therefore notwithstanding the unkind censures of any, out of a desire of
serving Christ, and the good of precious souls, he can appeal to God, he has
done this, and accordingly makes it his earnest Prayer for a blessing on it:
who to show his resolution to own and make good whatever is here said,
subscribes his Name,

John Batchiler.

To the READER.
Courteous Reader,
IF it be asked why any part of the abovementioned Relation is repeated in
Verse, it is for the sake of such as affect Poetry, rather than Prose; but in
case those that read the Prose avoid the Verses, as containing part of the same
matter, let them also please to take notice, that diverse things are
interspersed in Verse, that they find not in the Prose, and that at least one
half of the Verses, viz. from the 50. Section to the end, is all new matter,
and I hope such as will not be altogether unprofitable to the ingenuous
honest-hearted Reader.

J. B.

The exemplary Iafe, and lamented Death of Mistress Susanna Perwich, Daughter of
Robert Perwich, of Hackney, in the County of Middlesex, Gent. who dyed a rarely
accomplished Virgin, at one of the clock in the afternoon, on Wednesday, the 3.
of July, 1661. in the 25. year of her Age.
SHE was born upon the 23. day of Sept. in the year of our Lord, 1636. in the
Parish of Aldermanbury, London; where, having by the care and cost of her
Pa^ents been sent to School to learn to read ^s soon as capable thereof; Her
early pregnancy while a child.
this was remarkable in her at that tender age, that she ^ould needs learn by
hearing and observing others rather than by the teaching o^ her Mistress, taking
a delight it seems t^ get her learning altogether by her own industry; yea, so
impatient she was of being instructed by any, that she would altogether refuse
their help, and yet rested no^ till she had attained to an ability of reading
Scripture, full as well and as distinctly as any of her elder Sisters; an
argumen^ of such Pregnancy and Ingenuity, as is no^ ordinary in young children.

When she was seven years and a hal^ old, her Father removing his dwelling to
his School at Hackney, where now he live^ She among the rest of his Children, A
most rare Musician, and plays at sight on the Treble Viol at 14. years and a
half old.
had the advantage of a choice breeding there, and in short time made no small
Progress in it, especially in the grounds of Music; for at fourteen years and
a half old, She was able to play in Consort, at the first sight upon the treble
Viol, and this with so much skill, ease, and sweetness, that She gave no
ordinary hopes of proving a very rare Musician. Indeed such an harmonious soul
She had, and a genious so exceeding tractable to all sorts of Music, Took her
Music as it were naturally.
that one of her Masters (Mr. Ives hy name) was wont to say he could play no
new Lesson before her, but She would have it presently: insomuch that not
himself only, but diverse others her Instructers in that Art, were not a ^^tle
proud of her.

The first that grounded her in the notes (...) Music, and enabled her to play
so ex^llently on the treble Viol, was Mr. Tho^as Flood, who falling sick, and
continuing (...) a long time, it occasioned her Father (...) make choice of a
new Master (Mr. Wil^am Gregory by name) who being eminent^^ skilful at the Lyra
Viol, did very much ^^tter the making and forming of her ^and, Becomes
excellent at the Lyra Viol.
and was the first that gave her that ^re delicious stroke, which afterward
be^me so singularly peculiar to her self. He so taught her all varieties of
rare turn^^gs. That which made her so expert, both (...) her own play, and in
judging of others ^hen She heard them, was her most cu^^ous ear, seldom
equalled by any, the very ^st Masters in that Art. Diverse Books ^he read of
excellent composure, and under^^ood them well; nor cared She for any Les^^ns
but what were very choice; but her ^hief delight was in divisions upon grounds
(...) which She had the best that England ^^uld afford.

Her principal Master at the Viol, for the ^^st seven years, was Mr. Stephen
Bing, a ^^rviving witness of her admirable abili^^es, which in great part (to
his honor be it spoken) She gained from him, it being very much his care and
ambition, to encourage her with the best grounds and suits of Lessons that
could be gotten, and thereby bring her to the highest perfections attainable at
the Viol.

When She played on this Instrument, though singly, as She used it, it gave the
delight of a full Consort; but when in Consort with other Viols, or a set of
Lute^ only, or Viols and Lutes together, or with the Harpsicord or Organ, still
her Instrument was Queen of all, and as if it ha^ been touched by more than a
mortal hand, gave so delicious a sound, and so distinctly too, that any
judicious ear might discei^ it above the rest; insomuch that it might be truly
said, look what the racy flavor i^ to the richest Wine; fragrancy to flowers*
varnish to colors; burnish to gold; sparkling to diamonds; and splendour to the
light^ that was her ravishing stroke to all the other Music; She plays
incomparably, and yet sits as if she min^^ it not.
and yet (which was the more admirable) She sat so steady, and free from any
the least unhandsom motion in her body, so modestly careless, and as it were
thoughtless of what She was about, as i^ She had not been concerned at all; and
al^ this She did, though She never spent the tenth part of that time in private
practice which others are wont to do; for indeed She made better use of her
time, at other sorts of higher Music, which was much sweeter to her, as we
shall hear anon.

As her accomplishments at the Viol were superlatively great, so at the Lute
also, in which Mr. Ashberry having done his part toward her, in teaching of
her till he dyed; And at the Lute.
Mr. John Rogers the rare Lutenist of our Nation, for the last three years,
came after him, and added much more to her; professing that her skill at this
Instrument was so very exquisite, and her hand so sweet, that he never taught
any like her. When She played on the Viol, She seemed to transcend at that
Instrument above all the rest, and when She played on the Lute, She seemed to
transcend as much there; such a contention, and so pleasant, scarce was ever
known from one and the same Virgins hand before.

Had leisure given leave, that She could have spared time from her other
Instruments and employments, Mr. Albertus Brian, that famously velvet fingered
Organist, would gladly have done the same for her, which he has done for one
of her Sisters yet living, in making her as rare at the Harpsecord, as She was
at any of her other sorts of Music; and so have paired the two Sisters
together; one set of the choicest Lessons at this Instrument, ^lso at the
^arpsecord.
at the request of the said Mr. Brian, She learned of him, and as himself
affirms, not only attained them in a very short time, but played them as well
as he himself could.

To this her Instrumental Music we may add her Vocal, no less delicious and
admirable, if not more excellent; as if her Lungs had been made on purpose, (as
no doubt they were) by their natural melodies to outdo the artificial; She
sings most sweetly.
and here Mr. Edward Coleman, her Master, and one of greatest renown, for his
rare abilities in singing, deserves no less thanks and commendations for the
care and delight he took in perfecting her in this Art also, than any of her
other Masters.

She was an incomparable Dancer, as at Country, so in French dances, wherein
she was so excellently curious, in her Postures, footings, and most graceful
countenance, A most curious Dancer.
that Mr. Hazard, her last and chief instructor therein, and one of the rarest
Masters of that Art in England, accounted her a prime Flower of the Age in that
respect, and said She was as knowing therein, as any Dancing Master whatever.

The Fame of all which at last grew so public and universal, that there are
few places in England but have heard thereof, yea, and many parts beyond the
Seas too. For not only persons of high rank and quality, of all sorts, came
from London, the Inns of Court, Her Music^ frequented by strangers from all
part not only in England, but in foreign Nations.
and out of several Counties, to hear and judge of her abilities, especially
the chiefest Musick-Masters that are now living: but many foreigners also, as
French, Spanish, Italian, Dutch, as well Agents and Ambassadors, as other
Travelers into these parts, desired a taste of these her rare qualities,
always going away with high admiration, saying that they had now seen one of
the choicest rarities of England, and professing they never heard or knew of
the like in any of their own Countries.

All other parts of excellent breeding she likewise had; whatever curious Works
at the needle, or otherwise can be named, She had all other parts of breeding,
whether in curious works or whatever else.
which Females are wont to be conversant in, whether by silver, silks, straws,
glass, wax, gum^, o^ any other of the like kind, she was perfectly skilled in.
To say nothing of her ability at the pen, where, being an accountant, her skill
was more than ordinary women have; and in Arts of good house-wifry, and
Cookery, wherein she had a good share likewise; I hasten rather to the more
noble perfections of her mind, which indeed were very aimable and lovely.

For she had a delicate and nimble wit, a quick apprehension, a clear
understanding, a sound judgment, ^er natural ^^rts.
a fine invention, a tenacious memory, which (as we shall hear anon) she was
not wont to stuff with vanity, but with what was most worthy to be learned and
kept. And as these natural parts and reasonable faculties of her soul, so her
moral virtues also were eminent. She was very discreet, ^er moral ^irtues.
wise, and prudent in her actions; not passionate, nor retentive of anger,
never over merry, but modestly grave and composed; of a very comely and handsome
carriage, insomuch that strangers were wont to say, when she came into their
presence, they had not seen a more sweet comportment, or a more taking person.
For disposition, so affable, kind, and courteous, that she soon gained the love
of all, where ever she came. Her discourse was always pertinent and useful,
not at all loquacious, her speech being rather sontentious, than garrulous.
These and many such like graceful ornaments, added unto the comeliness of her
person, rendered her very winningly acceptable to all that knew her. But that
which most of all commends her, and justly leaves her a very imitable example
to all that shall hear of her, and for which principally this present Relation
is penned, is much more considerable than what has been yet said: Namely, that
choice and precious work of Grace upon her heart, which God was pleased to work
in her, and by which all her other excellencies were sweetly sanctified; the
occasion whereof was as follows.

About four years since, being disappointed in the enjoyment of her desires in
a Match then propounded to her, Her Conversion, and the occasion of i^
by the sudden death of the party that had gained her affection, she wisely
considered with her self, what the meaning of this so sad a providence should
be; and at last, after many Prayers and tears to God, that he would bless this
unexpected stroke to her, and some way make her a gainer by it, her heart began
to be much broken and melted toward God, Her brokenness of heart
not so much for this temporal loss (which she often said might have proved a
snare to her) as at the sight and sense of sin, and her estate by nature (which
(though well educated all her time before) yet till now she had not taken much
notice of.

The good work of God thus happily begun, ceased not, but went forward in her
heart daily, to the joy of such near Relations as knew of it; nor could she be
quiet, till she had uttered all her mind herein to them, earnestly desiring the
assistance of Counsel and Prayer, that she might fully understand her
condition, and not be deceived therein. Of all things, she was exceedingly
urgent with God, that he would not suffer her to be mistaken herein. Indeed her
fears thereof at first were many and great; the questions she put about it, not
a few, but never came to be satisfied therein, till God was pleased to give her
a sight of that poisonous fountain of original corruption, Her deep sense of
Original sin.
with which she found her self always pestered, and so hindered in her
desisired progress toward Heaven, that this sin above all others she much
bewailed.

And farther became so deeply sensible of the danger thereof, and the necessity
of an effectual remedy against it, She makes haste to Christ.
that she made haste to run unto Jesus Christ. (...) help, and that not only
for the pardon of this sin, but for power against it, and that continually.

Hereupon finding her heart always burdened with sin, full of corrupt motions
and affections, and yet still relieved by applying Christ, with what he had
done and suffered, unto her self, and also feeling her desires stirred up by
the good Spirit of Grace, more eagerly to long after God, and the knowledge and
enjoyment of him; and farther perceiving, that though the same good Spirit
sometimes would melt her heart, yet at other times was pleased to leave her
without those inward warmths, which in the use of the best means she labored
after, but by her own strength could not attain unto: she from thence concluded
that these changes which she thus felt within her, were the effects of some
real and true work of God upon her; for thus she argued, how comes it to pass,
that I feel these alterations in my self, now and never before? How is it, that
sometimes I am delighted with the inward and sweet workings of the Spirit of
God upon my heart? and that at other times I am troubled for the want of it? I
lived under the same Ministry before; the same public Ordinances; enjoyed the
same helps in the Family, and from faithful friends that sought my souls best
good, and prayed much for it; yet never till now could I find any of all this
experience, from the different workings both of Sin and Grace in my own heart.
Sure this is of God, said she, and can be from nothing else. Thus at last she
came to be somewhat persuaded and confirmed concerning the goodness of her
spiritual state, as one that was now got over the pangs of the new Birth,
though not without many a salt tear, and broken heart.

Answerable to this first work, was the rest that followed to her dying day,
especially within the last two years of her life, Her Religious course ^f Life.
and somewhat more; for when it pleased God so to order it by his permissive
providence, that one which she most dearly loved, became guilty of a great
offense through a sudden temptation that seized on her; it went near to her,
and was a great occasion of making her search into her own heart and ways,
more narrowly than ever, and not only to bless God that had kept her from the
like, Looks more narrowly into her own heart.
but also to mourn for those frailties of her youth, which formerly she minded
not, though no other than what usually befall the very best that are.

Thence forward she betakes her self to a more careful and strict watchfulness
over her own heart; Is very watchful over her self, and keeps close to duty.
and to close and constant duty, not only in the Family, but most of all in
secret, betwixt God and her own soul; insomuch that when she was sometimes
missing, and earnestly called for, but could not be found; at last it appeared
that she had often hid her self, to be alone with God, in the duties of
meditation and fervent Prayer.

One of the first Discoveries hereof, was upon this accasion; being retired
into her Closet, and as she thought, Her secret Communion with God, discovered
against her Will.
had sufficiently fastened the door inwardly, one of her most intimate
Consorts, upon an urgent occasion, running hastily in with a violent motion,
thrust the door open, little thinking at that time, that she had been there;
where she kneeling upon her knees, turned about to see what the matter was, the
tears in the mean while, trickling down both her cheeks, but was much troubled
at this interruption, and discovery of her Devotion.

Indeed that was one of the matters of her complaint, that she wanted
convenience for retirement, where she might fully vent her Soul to God, without
disturbance or observation; and therefore because the house was always full of
company, havi^^ well nigh an hundred, and sometimes mo^^ of Gentlewomen with
their attendants; an^ the Servants and Children of the house every where going
up and down, She seeks the greatest privacy for her Devotion.
in ev^^ Room, so that she could get no place (...) privacy; her manner was, in
the day time, to get into the Garden, at such hour^ when others might not so
freely come into it, and there with her Bible, or some other choice Book, spent
an hour or more i^ Reading, Meditation, and such ejaculation^ as she could send
up to Heaven in walking at which seasons, Finds much sweetness in her lonely
walks with God.
she has sometimes sai^ to such as she was wont to tell her min^ to, her heart
has been as much warm^^ and refreshed in converse with God, as when she has
been most affected upon her knees elsewhere.

Mornings and Evenings she never sailed, by her good will, to read some portion
of Scripture (if not called away by extraordinary business on a sudden) and to
pour out her heart to God in private Prayer; A diligent Reader of the
Scriptures.
for which, because no place in the house was so convenient, and so far from
noise and sight of others, as one certain remote room, where none usually came
at ^^ose hours, The chief place of her retirement for holy duties.
therefore that place of all others ^^e made choice of, in the dark Winter
^venings, and the Mornings before the ^amily was up; many a time has she
vi^^ed one corner of that Room, which was ^ost retired, with eyes and hands
lift up to ^eaven, kneeling at a chair with great ^^fection, which though she
never knew that any took the least notice of (for that would ^ave been a
trouble to her) yet a certain ^eer relation that often looked in at a cran^y of
the door, which she had fastened in^ardly, and did not a little joy to see her
(...) employed, is yet surviving as an eye-wit^ess of it. Sometimes her red
eyes and ^^lubbered face, discovered her, before she could get conveniences to
wash them, notwithstanding that her hood was pulled over them. Nothing did more
abash or ^rouble her, than when any suspected what she had been about; not out
of any shame of Religion (for that she owned upon all occasions very freely,
Much troubled when discovered in them.
as well among the Gentlewomen in the Family, as elsewhere) but out of an
honest affectation of being more in this sense, than she would seem to be.

So sweet and pleasant was her Comm^nion with God in such retirements as these
that she said, if ever she should change h^ condition, it should be more for
this reason than any other, that she might have the full and free use of her
time, and oth^^ helps for her soul.

It was observed, that she was alwaye^ out of the way at five a clock, and
appear not till the Bell rang to Supper, at six ^clock, or thereabout, which
time she spen^ in the aforesaid Duties.

If at any time she had omitted duty, 'tw^^ one of her greatest troubles
afterward, Is much troubled for sins of omission.
an^ when she sequestered her self unto duty, whether of Meditation or Prayer,
she usually read some part of David's Psalms ((...) Book which she greatly
delighted in) because she always found matter there, ver^^ proper, preparative
and helpful to her i^ the said Duties.

Among other profitable and fruitful Meditations, she was not a stranger to
thoughts of Death, even in her best health* insomuch that when she heard a
passing Bell or knel for any, her custom was to retire into a solitude for a
good space, sometimes an hour or more, there to affect her heart with such
considerations as ^ere suitable to the occasion.

She never was better pleased then when ^e met with any in holy Conference (a
pra^se which she used ( as often as she could ^t opportunity) that communicated
exp^riences of the same corruptions and tem^ations, that she found in her own
heart; She loves the Communication of Christian experiences.
and withal, the same ways of help and ^^lief against them.

When she found a deadness and coldness upon her heart, as sometimes she did,
By the deadness of her own heart finds continual need of assisting Grace.
and ^ould not get it into a good frame toward ^od, by any means she could
use, this in^^rence she made from it; that she hereby ^erceived her dependence
must be wholly upon Free Grace, as for the acceptance of that she did, so for
assistance and ability ^o do what she ought: And several times upon this
occasion would let fall expressions ^f wonderment, Wonders at those that plead
for a power in nature.
how any that pretended to (...) real acquaintance with God, and carry ^orrupt
hearts about them, always dogged and set upon by temptations from Satan, and
an evil world, could plead for a power ^n themselves unto any thing that is
good.

Her care for the spiritual welfare of her ^eer Relations, and some others whom
she dearly loved, was very great, and thereupon took occasion often to
admonish, exhor^ and persuade them, She is careful for the souls of others.
about the things the concerned their eternal state; sometim^^ with tears
lamenting their danger, when they walked loosely; and then again rejoicing as
much, when she perceived an^ ground of hope for them.

One time when she was asked what sh^^ thought of the condition of one that
sh^^ was trusted with the special care of, Her character of true Grace.
and w^^ wont to take some pains with, in the ma^ters of her soul; she
answered, the greate^ thing she doubted her for, was, lest she neglected
private duties, which she could never perceive she spent any time in; supposing
(as there was good reason she should (...) that the driving of that secret
Trade for Heaven, is one inseparable property of tru^^ Grace, and that the want
thereof, together with the ordinary neglect of Family-dutie^ and public
Ordinances (whatever the outward Profession might be) were argument^ of a very
ungracious and profane heart.

A quick discerner of others that made profession of Religion.
A notable spirit of discerning she had for when she heard any make semblance o^
love to God, and were very confident o^ their own good estate, but withal spoke
very woodenly (as her expression was) about matters of Religion, and the
experiences ^^ereof, she much pittyed their case, and ^ayed earnestly, that God
would open their ^^yes; convince them of their sin and hypo^^isie; show them
them evil and danger of it, ^^d effectually bring them home unto himself; often
saying, what pity it was, that any who are otherwise qualified with ma^y
desirable good things of nature, should ^iss of the highest and best
improvement of ^^em for God, and at la^^ perish themselves or want of Grace.

When any vain language, or sinful ex^ressions (such as the abusive use of, A
wise reprover of sin.
O lord! or O God!) came from any of the Gentlewomen in the House, or any
others; ^r any evil action was done by them, she would reprove it so wisely,
with so mild and meek a spirit, that they were ashamed of ^t, and sometimes
were reformed for the ^uture, at least in her sight and hearing.

Two principal helps which she coveted most, and made the greatest use of, were
good Books and good Company.

Of good Books she had some stone, but those that she took chiefest delight in,
The choice Books she read.
were Mr. Shepards true Convert and his sound Believer. Mr. Baxter's Call to
the unconverted. Dr. Goodwin his triumph of Faith, and heart of Christ in
Heaven, toward sinners upon earth. Dr. Spurstow upon the Promises. Mr. Watson
his Christian Cha^ter. Mr. Brooks his riches of Grace. M^ Love's works. Mr.
Craddock's Book (...) Knowledge and Practice. Mr. Francis R^berts his Key of
the Bible. Besides some C^techetical Books, as Mr. Baal, Mr. Eus^bius Paget his
questions and answers upon most of the Books of the Old and New Testament; Her
Practice every night, before she went to sleep.
some one of which she alwaye^ read every night in her bed, immediatel^ before
sleep, and then fed upon them (...) her first waking, by which means she
e^creased much in knowledge, and kept he^ heart warm whilst it was thus
pre-occupie^ from all things else in the morning.

Since January last, she and two or three more, in three months time, read over
the whole New Testament, Reads over the whole New Testament in 3. months time.
and all along as they went, (still reading an whole Book at (...) time)
discoursed of the Contents of what they had read; when any doubt arose in her
readings either from Scripture or other Books, she sought for satisfaction by
putting questions, Full of questions from what she read.
and always showed a good understanding, in the v^^^ mysteries of Divine
Truth, and experi^^^^^l Grace, in that no answers ever relished with her, but
what most agreed, both with the Analogy of Faith, and the common sense of the
best Christians.

Her next great help (as was before hinted) she found to be good Company, Her
deligh^ in good Company and good Discourse.
which she always desired and sought for, and when she had it, improved it.
Fruitful discourse she would either set on foot, or endeavor to keep up, and
drunk it in as pleasantly, as thirsty men do that which best satisfies their
thirst. Among all other subjects, none pleased her better than to talk of
Heaven, sometimes saying, Oh how sweet would it be to know what is doing there;
and then in a kind of rapture would break out with such affection and language,
as argued a very great inward Joy at the hopes of her coming thither one day.
Such a full content and inward refreshment she felt in conferences of this
Nature, Her Music a burden to her in comparison.
that she would often say, her Music was a burden to her, in comparison; and
that were it not in conscience to her duty of being useful by it in so public
a Family, she would spend much less time in that, and more in this; The
Spiritual use she makes of her Music
yet she confessed sometimes (through Grace) it helped to raise her own heart
toward the highest Music of all, and for that (...) practiced it more than
otherwise she ^^ld have done.

Upon occasion when some had been greatly taken with the melody she made, both
by her voice and instrument, yet how short (says she) does this come of a warm
Prayer, A warm Prayer or ^eavenly ^onference ^weetest of all to her.
or heavenly Conference? and indeed she found it so many a time, when her heart
which has been heavy and sad at first, has by such Prayers and Conferences
gone away greatly cheered and revived, but never could find the like effects
from her Music only.

No day of the Week unto her so welcome and desirable as the Lord's Day; Lord's
days most welcome to her; dancing days wearisom, are but these pleasant.
dancing days were always wearisom, but these pleasant to her, and therefore
usually (if much ilness hindered not) she was up more early on these days
than^ any other, and spent less time in putting on what she wore; her head on
these days of late years she never dressed, and for that reason always went
close covered with her hood. She was very diligent and attentive at the public
Ordinance, carefully writing the Sermon, and examining her notes when she came
home, A diligent Writer of Sermons.
which she would not fail to mend by such help as she could get, either at the
repetition in the Family, or otherwise, and as constantly re-enforced all by
Prayer for a blessing upon it, Loses her meals rather than opportunity for
prayer.
when she could get opportunity and place convenient, either in her own closet,
or elsewhere, and would rather lose her Supper or come late to it, then miss of
her aim herein.

Yet here it must be remembered that it was not always thus with her upon these
days, nor at other times; for she some^imes complained of her own heart, and
^ow wearisom these holy duties were to ^he flesh; Is much troubled at
divertisements.
how apt she was to be taken off ^y divertisements in the Family occasions;
that many times when she came down in a morning with a resolution to keep her
mind and intent upon God all the day, she was frequently disappointed therein,
and still taken off by one business or other, or by some temptation unto
vanity, that was ready to surprise her. The consideration whereof at other
times much troubled her, Is much comforted at the thoughts of Heaven, where no
interruptions will be.
kept her under a sense of own her weakness, and caused her sometimes to break
forth in these or the like words. O! how sweet will Heaven be! where there will
be no interruptions by sin, or wearisomness of the flesh! What a perpetual rest
will that be, when we once come to enjoy it!

By her good will she would not be absent at any time when the Lord's Supper
was administered, By her good will never misseth the Lord's Supper.
of which having always a weeks warning, she failed not with great care to
examine her own heart, and put up strong cries to God for a fitness to so great
a Duty, and so high a Privilege; and indeed sometimes had more fear than
ordinary of her unworthiness to partake of it, as appeared by her discourse,
which usually was much upon this subject all that Week. So desirous was she not
to be found at that Feast, without her wedding garment; it was no small trouble
to her sometimes to think what general mixtures there are in that fellowship,
in all places throughout the Land; yet being persuaded that to such a sincere
receiver, as could not have it otherwise, God would come in with his presence
and blessing; she attended upon it in the place where God by his Providence had
cast her lot.

Sinful alterations in public Worship she very much feared, She much fears
pollution in the Worship of God.
and that she might the better understand the pure Institutions of Christ, and
what is contrary thereunto, she took great care to inform her self therein, by
reading of such Books as she could get the clearest light from. Much enquiry
she made after the Martyrs, as well of ancient times, as in later days, what
they suffered for, and upon what occasion, desiring and resolving, if she had
lived, to have read over the history thereof.

And because she perceived that the Romish Religion, and whatever else is a
kin^ to it, is an undoubted piece of Anti-christianism, that every true servant
of Christ ought to bear testimony against, in these parts of the world, and
knew not how soon her self with others might possibly be called to it; Takes
pains to be instructed in Christ's Institutions, about Doctrine, Discipline and
Worship.
therefore she betook her self to the getting a good information in those
truths that were likely to be most opposed, especially about the Worship of
God. Such Books as lately came forth upon these subjects, she endeavored to
get, and diligently read. Among other subjects, that of the reign of Christ
upon earth was very pleasant to her; for though her belief reached not so far
as to conclude that Christ shall come to reign personally on earth again, yet
she rejoiced exceedingly, Joys much at the thought of Christ's Kingdom upon
earth.
that he shall certainly reign in this world by the effusion of his Spirit, at
least, in the hearts of men, and that then Antichrst shall be wholly ruined,
and that glorious song of triumph sung, The Kingdoms of this world, are become
the Kingdoms of the Lord and his Christ.

And because the Book of the Revelations points at those times wherein these
desirable changes shall be, Reads the whole Book of the Revelations at one
time.
she thought it not improper for her, (though of the female sex) to pry into it
with humble reverence and Prayer, and therefore sat down one day with another
friend, to read over that whole Book, at one time, which accordingly they did;
beginning at the first Chapter and never ceasing till they had read ove^ the
whole two and twenty. This she di^ about three months before her Death, an^ the
reason why she did so, was, that sh^^ might take the better notice of the whole
Prophecy, and have a full prospect thereof, as it were, Reads an excellent
Comment upon the Revelations two or three times over.
all at once; and that which mad^ the reading of it the more pleasant and
profitable to her, was the light which she had gained before, in the knowledge
of this Book, by twice or thrice reading over th^^ judicious Comment upon it,
published b^ Mr. Francis Roberts before mentioned, it his Key of the Bible.

A great sympathizer with the suffering servants of Christ.
She had a very compassionate heart toward the suffering servants of Christ,
whether by imprisonment or otherwise; pittyed them much; spoke often of them,
sometimes with tears in her eyes; and praye^ for them constantly with great
affection.

Visits some choice friends in the Tower, and comforts them with Music and
discourse.
Some of her acquaintances, and very dear friends, such as the Lady Willowby and
some others, not here to be named (who highly valued her, and desired her
Company (as often as might be) she frequently visited for several years together,
while under their restraint in the Tower of London; to whom after a sweet and
more spiritual converse otherwise, she would sing and play with all alacrity
imaginable, to comfort them in their sadness; accounting it an high honor to
her, that she was any way able to be a refreshment to those that she thought
were dear to God. To such persons and to such places as they were in, though
the closest prisons, she went readily and joyfully; but when invited to any
Musick-meeting in London, where the choicest ears, and most skilful Masters of
Music coveted to hear and admire her, though never so earnestly desired, Would
not b^ prevailed with to go t^ Revels or dancing Bals
she was still backward to it. One time above the rest, with very great
importunity she was strongly set upon by some Gentlemen of special
acquaintance, to be present at the Revels or dancing Balls, but being left free
to her own choice, whether she would go or not (at which she was very glad) she
absolutely and irrefregably refused it, as thinking it no way suitable, either
to her Person or Profession of Religion.

Nor were the Musicks aforesaid, which she so freely imparted to her said
friends in Prison, all the comfort they had from her, but her Spiritual and
Christian converse also, was a de^igh^ to them, (as is before hinted) as theirs
likewise was to her; insomuch that when she returned home from visiting them,
Accounts it (...) sweetness and glory to suffer for Christ.
her discourse was so raised, and her affections so quickened, that she would
sometimes say, O! how brave a thing is to suffer for Christ! who would not wish
to be among the souls under the Altar, that cry, how long Lord will it be, ere
thou revenge our blood on them that shed it! Thus triumphing, as it were, with
a kind of heroic spirit of Martyrdom before hand; further adding, that since a
Death must be undergone, what better or more noble death can there be, than
thus to die? Yet fears her own strength ^f called to suffer.
Yet at other times she had as great fears upon her, saying, that if she were
called to suffering, she doubted she should not hold out; only the
consideration of good Company, a good cause, and especially of a good God (she
said) would encourage one much.

Among her other gracious qualifications, this was not the least, (especially
of latter times) a very tender conscience, as might be instanced in many
particulars, wherein she rested not till she received satisfaction to all
doubts, from such arguments as were cleared by Scripture, and approved of by
persons able to judge in the case.

Yet rather ^han would ^ffend other, resolves to deny her self in that
particular.
To which also must be added, that when she perceived any, especially such as
she had a reverence to, remained unsatisfied in any of her actions, she was
always ready upon knowledge of it, from their own ^ouths, to forbear it, out
of a tenderness ^f grieving any of the generation of the ^ust, or any way
scandalizing her Profession, though as to her own particular, she ^t the same
time did think what she was ^o desired to forbear warrantable in it ^elf.

As for black spots or patches, A great hater of black spots.
as they are ^alled, she abhorred them with her very soul, and was so far
displeased at the sight ^hereof, that when any of the Gentlewomen made use of
them, she seldom or never ^eft, till she had prevailed with them, to forbear
that so uncivil a dress, or else desired her Mother to take them off from them.

As great an enemy she was to any uncomely attire; nor did she affect rich
laces, And of all uncomely and undecent dresses.
or any thing over costly, but what was most ^eat in a plain ga^b, much more
minding the Ornaments of the hidden man, which in the sight of God are of
greatest price.

It was a great abashment to her, Could not endure to hear her own praises.
when ^ome unwisely uttered high praises of her to her face, and thereby put
her unto a blush; the fear whereof, made her often modestly refuse to come into
such Company at other times: Indeed she knew God had blessed her with some of
those liu^ things (as she was wont to call them) which the sensual world
magnified too much, Fears the pride of her own heart.
an^ she desired to be very thankful for them but withal was much afraid of
being lift^ up with pride, and therefore entreate^ friends in that respect to
pray for her.

As she was always ready to assist he^ Mother in Law in the Family and Sch^^
so she had a particular reverence and ver^ dear affection to her own Father, A
ready help in the Family.
who cheerfulness and content, was one of the greatest pleasures she had in
this world; (...) his sadness and trouble at any time, (...) great an occasion
of grief to her; And a most dutiful and tender child to her Father.
and therefore did what she could to minister a^ manner of comfort to him, by
the perfo^mance of those dutiful and tender respects, which as a child she owed
him.

As for her condition in respect of a si^gle life, She wanted no profers for
marriage.
it was not for want of profers from several that would gladly have obtained
her, but through dissatisfaction in the qualifications of the Persons, she
being resolved (God assisting her) never to mat^^ any, Resolves never to marry
any but such as may help her in her way to Heaven.
were his worldly advantages nev^^ so great, unless she were well assured
((...) far as charity could judge) of the goodne^^ of his spiritual state, and
he likely-^oo^ of his being a real help to he^ in the way (...) Heaven. Had
she lived to a perfect recovery from sickness, diverse considerable offers
(known to some friends) would speedily have been made to her, of which she
might have taken her choice; but now God has otherwise declared his pleasure
in the highest and best disposing and preferring of her, even by making her a
Bride in Heaven, to him who for some years past, had ^gotten her heart from all
other Objects; and to whom she stuck with all faithfulness, till at last after
a sore fit of sickness, she dyed in his arms; the occasion whereof I now hasten
to.

In Whitsun Week, at the earnest desire of a very dear friend, she went to
London, Her sickness unto Death, with the occasion of it.
where (as Providence ordered it) she was unhappily lodged in damp Linen,
which in the night time clung fast about her, and had left that in her, which
she her self said (as soon as she awaked) would prove her Death; whereupon in
the morning it being made known, the best means that could be, were used to
prevent the danger of it, but the Lord was not pleased to give success therein;
and so after three or four days she returned home, Her mind runs altogether
upon her own Death.
(upon Saturday J^^^ ^^e 8th.) to her Father's House at Hackney, where all her
mind from that time, still ra^ upon the thoughts of her own Death; the strong
apprehensions whereo^ put her upon a great improvement of her remaining time,
both in Reading, Praying, and Discoursing, Prepares for it.
like one that expected shortly to leave the world; for she said she felt that
about, her which would carry he^ away quickly, Exhorts her friends to prepare
for a change.
and was much worse inwardly, than perhaps any one thought; and therefore
exhorted one of her Sisters, whom she dearly loved, and conversed most with, t^
mind eternity, to think much of her change, and labor to be prepared for it;
acknowledging the goodness of God to her self, who had spared her so long.
After this time she grew worse and worse, till on Saturday June the 22. (14.
days after her return home) she took her bed, She takes her bed in a Violent
Feavour.
in order to her grave; where being seized upon by a Violent Fever, her
strength was so wasted, and her spirits gone, that upon the Teusday after at
midnight, (being June the 25.) she was hardly able to chatter, Three days
after sends for all friends to take a solemn leave of them.
and so sent for her Father, Mother, and Sisters, to see them once more, and
take a solemn leave of them; who when they were come and sat all weeping about
her, with great lamentation, after a little space, as if strength had been
renewed on purpose for that end, she began to utter her affections and desires
to them about many things, wherein she expressed her self, with so much
prudence, Discourses excellently with intermissions for diverse hours.
^iscretion, and composedness of mind, and ^his for almost four hours together,
with ^ome intermissions, that it was mavelous ^o behold; among other things
she much ^erswaded to the preservation and streng^hening of a love and unity
among ^ll Relations. At last as she was say^ng, With her Father's leave gives
all she had to several friends.
that she had nothing to leave them ^n memorial of her, presently her Father
^old her, he gave her free liberty, to dispose ^f whatever she had; at which
she was ^ery much pleased, and thanking of him, distributed to every one
according to her ^wn mind; her several Rings to be worn di^tinctly, as she
directed, by her Father, Mother, and Sisters; two of her Rings she ^ut upon her
fingers, and taking them off again, Distributes her Rings, Clothes, Works,
Books and Instruments.
gave them to be kept for her two Brothers beyond Sea, as a token to them from
her dying hand; all her Clothes, her Watch, and a certain piece of Plate mark^d
with her own Name, she gave to one Sister; all her Works and Instruments of
Music to be divided betwixt three other Sisters; her Books also she disposed
of; and as a Legacy to all the Gentlewomen of the School; Her Legacy to the
Gentlewomen of the School.
she commended her dying desires and requests to them, that they would not
spend their time in reading of vain Books, but instead thereof, to betake
themselves to the best Book of all, the Bible, and such other choice Books, as
might do their souls most good; as also that they would be constant in the use
of private Prayer; that they would be careful to sanctify the Lord's Day, and
not waste those precious hours in overcurious dressings; and that they would
behave themselves reverently at the public Ordinances, it having been a great
offense to her formerly when any have done the contrary.

Then falling into speech about her Funeral, Expresses her mind about her
Funeral.
in what Room she desired her Hearse might stand, where she should be Buried,
and other particulars about the manner o^ it; she desired that all might be
done decently, and that Dr. Spurstow, by whose Ministry she had been much
edified and comforted, might Preach at her Intermen^, in all which she
submitted to her Father's pleasure.

But that which was very remarkable in this her large Discourse, Seems not
afraid of Death.
she shed not one fear nor seemed at all sadded at her approaching Death; and
when she was told that her Fathers heart was ready to break, wh^ fare- weeping
and groaning by her all the while; she said she was sorry for it, a^^ asked why
he would do so? adding farther that for her part, she was in God's hand and
willing to yield up to him, hoping that ^ll friends would endeavor to do the
like; ^^d so being now quite spent with speaking ^or she desired not to be
intterrupted, till ^er whole mind was uttered) she lay still ^^e rest of the
Night.

The next Day being Wednesday, June ^he 26. Dr. Spurstow came to visit her,
What promise she relied upon, though in the dark.
^ho asking her what she found in her self? that she thought concerning her own
spi^itual State? as also what evidence she had ^f Gods Love? or Promise to rely
upon? ^he answered, that she was in the dark as ^o her own evidences, and that
they were ^ot so clear to her as she could wish; yet that she was not without
hope; that she ^ad found much sweetness in many passa^es of Scripture; but from
that chiefly (Ro^^titus the 8. and 28.) All things shall work together for
good, to them that love God. After Discourse ended, she desired of the Doctor,
that she might once more hear him Pray, and accordingly had her desire ^herein.

The same Day in the afternoon, she ^as more strongly assaulted than before;
for ^ow to her Peaver, and almost exhausted ^trength, convulsive motions were
added, and ^isings of the Mother, by which when she had been greatly afflicted,
and beyond all hope recovered again out of them, Her thankfulness for a little
ease, and pious resolution if she lived.
s^^ called to her Sister sitting by, and ask what day of the Month it was;
who enquiring after the reason of that question, w^^ told by her, that if she
lived, she would celebrate it for ever hereafter, in a thanks^ remembrance of
her being thus reviv^^ again, as it were like another Lazarus.

The next day lying in a slumber, as he^ Sister thought, She awakes out of a
kind of trance.
she suddenly turns he^ head to her, and hastily tells her, that she had a
Call to be gone; a Call, says she, b^ whom? God has Called me, replied she to
be gone from hence, and I must die why, how do you know it? said the other very
well says she, I am sure it will be so and therefore do not reckon upon my Life

One coming not long after to visit her and to pray with her, asked her how she
did; I am going to Heaven, said she, a^ fast as I can.

Three nights after this, God in a wonderful manner supporting her under
continual pains, so that friends hoped she might wear them out; well, says
she, for all th^^ I shall dye, and be at rest in Heaven wit^ my dear Lord,
before the morning comes yet it proved not so, for she lived almos^ four days
after, sometimes giving new hope of recovery, and then falling bac^ again.

All the time of her sickness she was ve^^ patient, Prays very much for
patience, and is answered.
earnestly praying that God ^ould enable her still so to be, and that ^e might
not murmur while his hand lay (...) heavy on her. Ever and anon she would ^^y
out, little does any know what I feel; ^ut I hope, says she, God will
strengthen ^^e to the end. She often enquired whe^^er any were seeking God for
her, which ^hen she was assured of, blessed be God, ^^ith she, he will reward
them for it.

Three things she desired might earnest^y be sought for from God on her behalf,
^atience under her so grievous sickness, ^lear evidences of God's Love, and an
easy ^assage, if God should call her out of this ^ife; in all which she was
graciously an^wered, as every one that attended her from first to last, can
witness.

One time she seemed to lie in a kind of Agony, Some fear seizes on her, but
presently vanishes.
and suddenly breaking out with these words, said, shall I say that God ^ath
forsaken me? no, I will not. All the ^ime after she seemed well satisfied, and
much at peace in her mind concerning her future state, nor had any fear at all
upon ^er; for being told by her Sister, that she was persuaded, if God should
be pleased to take her from hence, she should be happy with him; she replied, I
doubt it not in the least, and was never heard to let fal^ one word to the
contrary all the while after.

Submits to the will of God.
Being asked (as she often was) how she did? she answered, in pain all over,
eve^ as God will have it; the Physician I see can do me no good, but one word
from Go^ can help all, if he please.

At another time she looked about her, and said to the standers by, God might
ha^^ made you all like me, and I might have bee^ in your case, if it had seemed
good to him, b^^ his holy Will be done.

Upon the Lord's Day before her Death, when speech almost quite failed he^
(though not her senses nor understanding, Her meditations fixed on God.
which she had even to the last) she softl^ uttered these words in the midst of
very great pains, which all that day universally seized on her, the Goodness of
God is the bes^ goodness, the Goodness of God is the best goodness; often
repeating of it, as if her hear^ were holy taken up with that Meditation.

When a near friend stood by her praying earnestly, for her in this extremity,
at every sentence she testified a very great affection, Her great fervency in
time of prayer, though weak.
by such a lifting up her eyes and hands toward Heaven, as if her whole soul
had ascended in every petition, which occasioned some heavings of the Mother;
and being told, that since it came by the zeal ^f her heart in Prayer, God
would sweeten ^t to her; she replied, I question it not.

On the Monday morning, She fortels the hour of her own Death.
she often mut^ered out very softly, these words, two days and an half more,
and then I shall be an rest; which she repeated two or three times; and
accordingly from that very time, she did live two days and an half, to wit,
And dies at the same hour.
till Wednesday Noon following, and then began to draw on apace toward her
last breath.

Indeed her pains now seemed to leave ^her, or her strength rather, being able
no more to struggle; and so lying in a kind of quiet sleep, at last panting for
breath a short space, in a small silent groan, gave up her precious soul into
the hands of God, whose Angels carrying it away to Heaven (as we have
comfortable ground of hope to believe) left us all in bitter mourning and
wailing over her dead Body.

When she was laid out in the Chamber where she dyed, The great lamentation at
her laying out.
dressed in her Night clothes, one would have thought she had been in a kind of
smiling slumber; and now the Gentlewomen, with the rest of the Family, and some
neighbors coming to see her, and give her their last salute, it would have
broken ones heart, to have heard and seen the many cries, tears, and
lamentations, that the Room was filled with.

So dear a child she was, and of such high deserts (as has been already
related) that her Father and all friends, thought her worthy of a very decent
Burial, and accordingly upon Saturday the sixth of July, she was attended to
the grave with a numerous Company, in manner following.

The Hearse covered with Velvet, was carried by six servant Maidens of the
Family, Her honou^^ble Burial.
all in White; the sheet was held up by six of those Gentlewomen in the School,
that had most acquaintance with her, in mourning Habit, with white Scarf^ and
Gloves; a rich costly Garland of gum-work, adorned with Banners and Scutchions,
was borne immediately before the Horse, by two proper young Ladies, that
entirely loved her. Her Father and Mother, wi^h other near Relations, and their
Children, followed next the Horse, in due order, all in mourning; the Kindred
next to them, after whom came the whole School of Gentlewomen, and then persons
of chief rank, from the Neighborhood, and from the City of London, all in
white Gloves, both Men, Women, Children, and Servants, having been first
served with Wine.

When the Hearse first entered the Church, the rest of the Schools were all
there, in their respective places, affectionately sympa^hizing with the rest of
the Mourners. I know not whether Hackney Church has often not more weeping
eyes; and aching hearts in it, on such an occasion, so great^y and generally was
she beloved.

The Horse being set down, with the Garland upon it, the Reverend Dr. Spurstow
applied himself to the proper work of the ^eason, and preached upon those
words, The Text preached upon at her Funeral.
(...) Cor. 3.22. Death is yours. From whence, after he had declared at large
the sweetness that lies in this word Death, as it is a part of Christ's Legacy
to a Believer, he made such useful inferences and applications, ^s were proper
for the occasion.

This done, the rich Coffin anointed with ^weet Odors, was put down into the
Grave, ^n the middle Alley of the said Church, The place of her Burial.
un^^ ^he same stone, where Mrs. Anne Carew, ^ne of the great beauties of
England in her ^ime, and formerly a Gentlewoman of the School, and intimately
acquainted with her, was buried; being the second of those five Gentlewomen
only, which have dyed out of ^er Father's House, among? those eight hun^red,
that have been educated there, within ^he compass of seventeen years.

And now what follows after all this? i^ it not a fair warning to us, The
Conclusion of all.
that yet survive her, to bethink our selves of our own condition? and whether
we be ready for death, i^ we should be suddenly called, as she in (...) manner
was? should we not make it ou^ constant Prayer, and utmost endeavor, t^ number
our days, and so to number them as to apply our hearts to Wisdom, even t^ that
Wisdom only, which will make us (...) to dye? All the days of my appointed
tim^ will I wait (says Job) till my change come O let that be our saying too,
and our practice also.

Upon the aforesaid Mrs. SUSANNA PERWICH.
I. A Description of her Person.
AMong the many Female Glories,
Which may be seen sometimes in stories,
Let candid Readers show us where
She can be found, that may compare
With Her this paper now sets forth,
Far short of her rare parts and worth.
Her Person comely, Red and White,
Mixed curiously, gave great delight.
Pure snows, with Rich Vermilions stream,
Strawb'ries in the Silver dish of Cream.
Fresh-blown Cornations, Queen-like reigns,
While Violets tincture all her veins.
Straight, Proper, Handsome, every Feature,
Set in due place, made her a Creature.
Much loved; let us take a special view,
Look where you will, you will find it true.
Her dark brown Hair, her double mould,
More lovely were, than sparks of Gold,
Her own mere natural curious Tresses,
Outshine all adventitious Dresses.
Round Argent Brows! whoever mark^
Her smooth high Foreheads Eban-Arks;
Tralucent Temples, through her Locks,
Peer out like Alablaster Rocks.
From her black jetty starry Eye,
Ten thousand sparkling Lustres fly.
Brave generous Spirits siderial,
Move quick about each nimble Ball.
Under a Velvet Coverlet,
Each glittering Star does rise and set.
Such Eyelids, fittest Caskets be,
For such bright Gems effulgency.
Ouches of Gold, encircling passes,
About this pair of burning-glasses.
Two Hemisphears, with two such Suns,
Over Microcosm's seldom runs.
Midst these twin-flames, a marble Mount,
Mounts ridge-wise up, down from her front.
On each side of which ridge you will spy,
Aurora's Rosy blushes lie.
Her sanguine Checks, like two Queen-apples,
Natures great Artist neetly couples.
Her two Ambrosial ruddy Lips,
In deepest Scarlet dye she dips.
Who views her well-set polished Teeth,
Will think two ranks of Pearls he sees.
Twixt these matched milk-white Ivory rows,
A sweet breathed Aromatic slows,
All down 'long to her swan-like Neck,
Her fine Complexion has no speck.
Her pair of round Crowned rising Hills,
Each moment with new panting fills.
Her sleck soft downy checkered Wrists,
Small Azure threads, finely entwists.
Her Lilly Hands, long woodbine Fingers,
Hang ever quivering, never lingers,
In trembling strokes, which always she,
Tunes into sweetest Harmony.
I scarce ere see them, but the sound,
Of Music seems thence to rebound.
No Unions, no choice Jewels are,
Found any where, that may compare,
With th'very Nails, or Joints, or Bones,
That her ten sister-fingers owns.
You Would scarce know which are richest things,
Her knuckle bones, or Di'mond Rings.
More curious is each Satin limb,
Than the silken trails that cover him.
Thus if you take her every way,
How lovely she is! what shall I say?
Her Head, her Face, her every part,
Most graceful was, there need no Art,
Be used at all, her to adorn,
With Paints or Pearls, she being born,
Natures own Masterpiece; white Skin,
Rose-lips, fair Breasts, sweet Smiles, and in
Her gestures such a compound Grace,
Made her to beautify the place
Where e're she came, her goodly look,
At first sight the beholders took;
And won their hearts immediately,
With her thenceforth to live and dye.
II. Her natural parts.
Yet this is but the outside, we
By looking inwardly shall see,
More Orient Beams; within her shined
The choicest Beauties; she was lined,
With stuff more costly there; such Rays
of Radiancy she thence displayes,
As if the Pangloretta she,
Of her whole Sex was made to be.
Her sharp, sublime, and pleasant Wit,
Made her Companion very fit,
For the rich pregnant genious.
Of those were most ingenious.
Fine jests, quick answers readily,
Flowed from her tongue most fluently.
Rhet'rick she had, and Eloquence,
As if she would been at great expense
In learned Schools: fine sentences
Dropped from her, great dependences
Were in her words; the sense and matter
Was useful, solid, she would not scatter
Vain talk, but what best profited
Her self and others, that she fed
Their ears withal; what she had learned
From well-read Books, and what she earned
By her industrious Meditations,
Or by her careful observations
From others speech, that she laid up,
And therewith made her guests to sup,
When they came in to visit her,
And to them was an Instructor.
III. Her moral Virtues.
Not rash, but most deliberate
In all things, and considerate;
Prudent she was, discreet, and wise,
Humble and meek, no lofty eyes
In her were seen: she never frowned
With angry looks, such as abound
In rugged tempers; modesty
In bashful blushes constantly
Colored her Face; no garishness,
Or any wanton foolishness
Stained her at all; she much desi'd
These vices, and them ever fly'd.
Most gentle, affable, and kind,
She was to all, you scarce could find
One so benign; few of this Age,
Among young folks, or among the Sage,
Beyond her went in courtesy,
More ready was to gratify
Favors received: she would requite
Such kindnesses with all her might.
She had a noble generous heart,
As she was able to impart.
IV. Her charity to the Poor.
Where need required she, suffered none
In vain to her to make their moan.
The meanest Beggar at the door
She pitied, and relieved the Poor.
By her good will, no one should want,
Specially those in Covenant:
For them it was her chiefest care,
When they were sick, hungry, or bare,
Most to refresh: she would be sure
Them food and raiment to procure,
Whoever wanted, they should not,
If succor for them could be got.
V. Her sympathy with the suffering servants of Christ.
Christ's suffering Members she would visit,
As often as time served, she would not miss it.
The Exile and Imprisonment,
Of some dear Friends she would much lament.
Was their blood shed? she felt the dart,
That wounded them, 'twent to her heart,
To think what dark, close, dungeons they
Were stifled in, both Night and day.
Great pity caused her to yearn
For them, and all her bowels turn
Within; when she got them among,
Tears from her eyes, and from her tongue
Sad language flowed: she did partake
their sorrows, head and heart did ache,
^t thought of what they suffered; she
^ould not forbear to go and see
^ow't fared with them, though she were shent,
And many a precious hour she spent,
To comfort them what she was able,
In this their case so lamentable.
VI. Her partnership in friends afflictions.
Mourned others? she in sympathy
Would mourn also, when they did lie,
In any doleful misery.
Their griefs she always made her own,
And ever greatly did bemoan
Their sad calamities: her heart
In sorrows deep did bear a part.
Did Parents sigh? she sighed too;
Grieved they? she knew not what to do,
Till she had found out some relief,
To case the pain of Parents grief.
Were any of her near Relations,
Afflicted by sad alterations
^n health, estate, or comforts any,
^er groans were such, her tears so many,
^s i^ alone concerned: so deep
^ere her rescentments, she would so weep,
^s if her heart would break asunder,
and the great burden truckle under.
VII. Her love to peace.
Peace was the darling of her heart,
So that to her no greater smart
Could come, then when a difference rose
Among dear Friends, she would interpose,
And by her wise calm moderation,
More firmly knit each dear Relation.
VIII. Her most excellent breeding.
Next her improved breeding high
You will perceive now by and by.
No quality or rare perfection,
But 'twas her own, make what election
You please of most desired skill,
That Females glory in, she will
Excel them all throughout the Town,
Yea Kingdom too, and wear the Crown,
Of a renowned veneration,
From all the rest of the whole Nation
IX. Her incomparable abilities in Music of all sorts, both vocal and
instrumental.
First for her Music, who can give
Sufficient praise? or cause it live,
As it deserves in memory?
And that to all posterity?
Ask Rogers, Bing, Coleman, and others,
The most exactly skilful Brothers:
Ask Brian, Mell, Ives, Gregory's,
Hows, Stifkins, all, in whom there lies,
Rare Arts of Music, they can tell,
How well she sung: how rarely well
She played on several Instruments,
What high admired accomplishments,
She had attained to; Angels hands,
On Lute or Viol scarce commands
A sweeter touch; she never shall,
Be equaled by the Nightingale.
If Kings and Princes claim the best,
Of Melodies above the rest,
'Twas she could give them, she alone,
Whether from Art, or natures tone.
So tuned a voice! so shrill a sound,
In Male or Female rarely sound!
Each Crotchet, Quaver, Minnum, Note,
Kept time within her warbling throat.
Soft, deep, high strains, in treble Song,
Flowed sweetly from her sugered tongue.
No strings of Harp, no Organ Pipe,
Strecht or reached higher; she was ripe
Even for the heavenly Chorus; she
Of all sorts, gave such Harmony.
Where she was singing had you come,
By chance into the blissful Room,
You Would thought by the melodious Air,
That Quiers of Angels had been there.
Laws, Sympson, Polewheel, Jenkins, all
Among the best Masters Musical,
Stand ravished while they hear her play,
And with high admiration say,
What curious strains! what rare divisions!
Are we not among Celestial Visions!
This is no humane hand! these strokes,
The high immortal Spirits provokes
To listen to her! she plays so,
That after her none takes the bow,
To play again; it is too much,
To take the confidence to touch,
The Instrument which she laid down,
Or go about to win the Crown,
Which she had set on her own head,
With Laurels all enamelled.
No, no, they must wholly despair,
To give one such delicious Air
Of which she millions gave; each touch
To most judicious ears was such,
So sweet, so quick, so dainty, rare,
That nothing could therewith compare.
No strain but was incomparable,
And by men's Art insuperable.
The deepest grounds where utmost skill,
Of a rich fancy lay, she still
Most finely nicked; her nimble Arm,
Still made a most delicious Charm.
Quick numerous motions she would show,
With her swift, gliding, jumping bow.
Even in a moment she would measure,
Thousands of strokes, with ease and pleasure,
Where others hundreds scarce could reach,
Though such as most professed to teach.
All this, both by her hand and brain,
Without the least toil, labor, pain.
X. Her handsome sitting at her Music
No Antic gestures, or bold face,
No wrigling motions her disgrace.
While she is at play, nor eye, nor head,
Hither or thither wandered.
Nor nods, nor heaves in any part,
As taken with her own rare Art.
All vain conceited affectation,
Was unto her abomination.
With body she never sat ascue,
Or mouth awry, as others do.
Careless she seemed, as if her mind,
Were somewhere else, and yet we find
Performances to admiration,
And our exceeding delectation.
XI. A most curious dancer.
As hand and tongue, her feet also,
She curiously had taught to go.
Her motions measure all the ground
Exactly, while sweet Musicks sound:
That whosoever observed her tread,
Must needs be much enamoured.
If French or English Dances were
An ornament, how finely there!
Did she outdo all she came near;
To the wonderment of them that see her?
XII. A Composer.
As Lessons she, so Dances too,
When old were spent, could make more new.
Masters themselves, sound at the closure,
A curious skill in her composure.
Then to preserve her memory,
Oh let them always practiced be!
And to keep up their Authors fame,
Oh let them also bear her Name!
XIII. Good at the Pen.
She writ well, cypher'd, cast account,
Could tell to what the sums amount
Spent in the House, and greater too,
If need required, as often as you
Demanded it; fair letters write,
Pregnant, with sense, worthy the sight
Of learned Secretaries. She
In needles Art attained to be
XIV. Her rare skill in all sorts of Works.
Perfectly curious; every work
In which a cunning skill did lurk,
She had it at her fingers end,
And loved therein sit time to spend.
In black-works, white-works, colors all,
That can be found on earths round ball,
She did excel. Wax, Straws and Gum,
Silks, Gems, and Gold, the total sum
Of rich materials she disposed
In dainty order, and composed
Pictures of men, birds, beasts, and flowers,
When leisure served at idle hours.
All this so rarely to the Life,
As if there were a kind of strife,
'Twixt Art and Nature: Trees of fruit,
With leaves, boughs, branches, body, root,
She made to grow in Winter time,
Ripe to the eye, easy to climb.
Buds, blossoms, foldings, Sunny beams,
In checkered shadowings finely streams,
Among the thickest clusters there,
Whether of Apple, Cherry, Pear.
Here hangs a Plumb, a Strawberry,
An Orange there, a Goseberry,
An Hony-succle, July flower,
Wetted as 't were from a fresh shower.
The Rose, the Violet, the Lilly,
The goodly Tulip, Daffadilly,
With many more varieties,
Of natures chiefest rarities.
XV. Her great humility in the midst of all her excellencies
All these rich qualities she had,
Most beauteously and bravely clad
With ornaments of every kind,
Whether for body or for mind.
And yet which was the Crown of all,
She was not touched with pride at all.
No vain conceit puffed up her heart,
With thoughts of this her great desert.
Although there was a glorious sound,
Went of her worth, all England round,
In London, when great meetings were
Of curious ears, which here and there
Lay scattered, and were got together,
And one much pleased with another,
In their own Musicks, yet she still
The Laurel bears, not any will
Farther contend when she has played,
But down their Instruments all laid.
Yet notwithstanding this, when even
She was again desired, she never
By her good will would come again,
'Twas not her pleasure, but her pain,
To hear her own admired Name
Sounded with golden trump of fame.
When commendations before her face,
Her high encomia's did enchase;
When tongues of Strangers could not hold
Till they her praise to all had told,
Yea to her self too, yet her ear
Never listened to it, 'twas her great fear,
Lest some black evil her should seize,
If puffed up by such things as these.
XVI. Gives God the glory of All her ric^ qualities.
Blessings she did acknowledge them,
And often said, she should condemn
Her self of much ingratitude,
And not her duty understood,
Unless she very thankful were
To him that of all gifts that are,
The fountain is, to him alone,
She joy'd to give what was his own:
And with the best of all she had
Sincerely serve him, and make glad,
Her pious friends, that earnestly,
Prayed for this her humility.
XVII. Abominates black spots.
Black spots to her abominable
Were always held, nor was she able
To bear their sight, she did complain,
Till they were taken off again,
Where e're she saw them, her self ever
So much detested them that never
Durst she wear them, for well she knew,
If she had don't she must renew
Repentance for it: she would never disgrace,
God's workmanship in her own face,
Whose luster never shines less,
Than when in such an whorish dress.
XVIII. And nakedness.
Nor naked was her back or breast,
What was most chaste she loved best.
Whisks, Handcherchiefs, she would always wear,
Where others shamelesly went bare.
They yet live whom she carefully
Consulted, what most lawfully
In all parts of her garb she might
Wear without sin, and do what is right.
She never would in the least desire,
Uncomeliness in her attire.
XIX. Delights in decent and modest attire.
Decent she loved, and neat to be,
As best befitted her degree.
Her Whisks, Quoifs, Hoods, and silver purles
Suited her garments silken furles.
Fine Bracelets, Earrings, Neck-laces,
Sometimes those parts encompasses,
That when she led the Dances among
The many beauteous Ladies young,
Which to her Mother's Scoool were sent,
She might give them the more content.
Yet this to her no pleasure gave,
For she had rather been more grave,
But that the business of her place
Required such an handsome grace.
XX. A transition from morals to supernaturals.
Thus we a little now have seen
What were the virtues of this Queen
Of Diamonds, in moral things,
But that which lifts her on the wings
Of highest same, is yet behind,
The best endowments of her mind,
In works of grace and holiness,
Let Us see her now in that brave dress.
XXI. Her conversion, and the occasion of it.
That which first wrought upon her soul,
And did her happy name enrole
Among true Converts, was the Death
Of a dear friend, whose mortal breath
Gone suddenly, left such impression,
(According to her own confession)
That she enquiring of her God,
What was the meaning of this rod,
'Twas plainly told her, reformation
And not at all her desolation:
But that her souls eternal good
Was only sought; at which she stood
Pausing a while, and then she said,
Is this the reason God has laid
His rod upon me? I Will repent
Of every sin, I Will now relent;
I Will search my heart, I Will try my ways,
I Will hearken what my conscience says,
Concerning mine eternal state,
And what is like to be my sat;
Lest I likewise surprised be,
By sudden death as well as he.
XXII. Her self-examination.
Thus first resolving she proceed^,
Examins Thoughts, and words, and deeds,
Compares them with God's holy Word,
To see wherein her dearest Lord
Offended was, and what the spring,
Such filthy noisome streams did bring,
Wherewith she was polluted so,
And did a fresh still overslow
So fast upon her; last she spies
Whence 'twas, and then aloud she cries
XXIII. Her sight of Original sin, with the danger of it.
O my great Sin Original,
Hence, hence, my foul corruptions all
Boil up, break forth, contaminate
What e're I do, communicate
Abominations ugly stain
To my best actions; hence my pain,
Even from the grand iniquity
Of Father Adam wickedly
Rebelling against his Maker, when
In's loins lay all the sons of men.
Then I among the rest was there,
And in that sin had equal share!
Oh how I am indrencht all over,
In that abominable gore!
How filth, and sin, and misery,
And even a Hellish slavery
Inthrals me now! what hideous crimes
Grow thick upon me! how betimes
Each morning does my naughty heart
Cast forth its filth! how many a dart
All the day long do I send out
Against Heaven in my rebellion stout!
As full of poison as the Toad!
Or Serpents which lie on the road,
With speckled skin, but venomed head,
Indangering all that on them tread!
XXIV. She complains of temptations from sin and Satan.
Satan still tempts me every day,
Yea hour and minute, there is no way
Left open for me to escape
His fierce assaults, the ugly shape,
Of some new guilt or other still
Deforme my heart, my mind, and will.
No sooner are his evil motions,
Suggested to me, or his potions
Of poisonous lusts in's golden cup,
To my vile senses offered up,
But I embrace them, and comply
With his allurements presently.
Base my affections! base my heart!
Oh how the dread of 't makes me start!
To think how dangerous is my case,
And that the only proper place,
For such a sinner is to fry;
In Holl's hot fire eternally.
XXV. Cries out to God for strength against them, and for a thorough work of
Grace in her heart.
Thus, thus, she muses, and then prays,
God would not leave her in these ways
Of sin and death, Oh no said she!
Let God do what he will with me,
Chastise, afflict, break, bruise, correct;
So he will vouchsafe me to direct
In path of Life, and me translate
Out of this sinful cursed state,
In which I now by nature lie,
And crown me with the dignity
Of his high favor, mercy, grace,
And cause my feet to run the race
Of his Commandments, then I
Nor care to live, nor fear to dye.
When once sweet influences of Love,
All melt my heart, drop from above.
This, this, is all my soul requires,
O let it burn in these pure fires!
These Aromaticks! let them give
Their powerful odors, I shall live
Best in these flames; O what a change
Is here! O tell me, is 't not strange!
That she should make such blessed use
From her friend's Death, thus to produce
Life in her self! therefore it was
She joy'd so much, as often as
She spoke thereof, and plainly found,
God's love to her did more abound,
In taking of that friend away,
Then if he had lived to this day.
Such great good sometimes God intends,
When he some sharp affliction sends.
'Twas her own frequent saying too,
That all things put together do
Work for the good of those that fear,
And love God, with an heart sincere.
XXVI. Her progress in the work of Grace.
The groundwork thus begun in her
'Bout four years since,she did bestir
Her self to carry on the building,
With precious stones, and costly guilding.
Her time far spent, she now makes haste,
And by her good will does not waste
One minute more; she will redeem
The time that is lost, a great esteem
She puts on every person, thing,
That helped reform her wandering.
Now she keeps close to the good old way,
Careful no more to go astray,
But wisely walks with circumspection,
And often makes a sad reflection
Upon her former course of life,
Contending with an holy strife,
To go the faster unto bliss,
Nor stopped till come where now she is.
XXVII. The pains she took for sound knowledge.
What pains she took fully to know
Sweet heavenly Truths! how she would go
From Book to Book! to catechize,
Her self where the foundation lies.
In Perkins, Baal, or any other
That could teach better than other.
XXVIII. Writes diligently at Church.
The paper Books, and Sermon notes,
She left behind, plainly denotes,
With how much reverend care she did
Receive God's Word, and wisely hid
It in her heart; she would repeat
Choice passages, and made the seat
Of what she heard her heart to be,
More than her writing Book we see.
When she came home, she did retire,
On the Lord's Days, and much enquire
What she had missed of what was said,
And when her Notes she over read,
Soon mended, if they wanting were
With a devout Religious care.
XXIX. Seeks blessing upon what she hears by prayer.
This being done it was not all
Sh'was wont to do, for she would call
For blessing on it, with bended knees,
From him whose eye in secret sees.
Ejaculations from her heart,
She Would frequently to Heaven dart.
No time so pleasant as the Night,
When she might most be out of sight.
No place by her so much desired,
As where she might be most retired,
^^ar from all noise and observation,
^o pour out her souls warm devotion.
When she sometimes could not be sound,
^he'd hid her self, where the sweet sound
Of her deep sighings, sobs, and cries,
Might secretly to Heaven rise,
^nheard of any but his ears,
Who knew her thoughts, and saw her tears.
XXX. Hates vain Books, but studies the Bible much.
Vain wanton Books her soul abhorred,
As an offense to her dear Lord.
The Bible was her chiefest Book,
In which her practice was to look
And read, and meditate all day,
As often as she could get away
From other business; her great care
Was to grow rich in knowledge there.
Hard questions sometimes she would put,
And liked the Answers which best cut
All knots; she was inquisitive,
That she her heart as a large hive,
Might fill with honey combs of Truth,
On which she sucked thus in her Youth.
Such Keys she used frequently,
That opened Wards which easily
Would not give way without: her mind,
With heavenly thoughts she thus refined.
XXXI. What good Books she read, and what was her evening and morning Work.
The Works of Watson, Shepherd, Love,
Goodwin, and Spurstow, to improve
Was her endeavor and delight,
As much as might be, day and night.
Some one of these she always kept
At her Beds head, and before she slept,
Did read an hour and sometimes more,
That laden with a precious store,
She might take rest, and when her eyes
First opened, before she 'gan to rise,
She did revolve what she had read,
The night before within her Bed.
While in the morning others slept,
She meditated, prayed, and wept.
XXXII. Sins of omission trouble her.
Sins of omission many times,
Touched her as much as acted crimes.
If she were heavy, dead, or dull
At Holy Duties, it did pull
Her heart much more with inward grief,
Than if by hands of wretched Thief
Her choicest treasures all were lost,
Wherein was greatest worth and cost.
XXXIII. Her delight in the Sabbath, and the duties of it.
When Sabbaths came or Sacrament,
Her devout soul then strongly went
To celebrate those blessed seasons,
With ardent zeal: no carnal reasons
Prevailed with her, to take her off;
Nor aching head, nor painful cough
XXXIV. She sees a need of Christ in all.
Could ever cool her hot affection,
Yet still complained of imperfection
In all her duties, and then cried,
Oh woe to me! had not Christ died
To purify my holy things:
Thus by her Faith she often brings,
What Christ had done and suffered too,
To her own heart; and this she would do
Continually, on all occasions,
When Satan came with his invasions.
XXXV. She is careful about Christ's pure Worship.
Pure Doctrine, Worship, Discipline,
In her souls eye did brightly shine.
To these her heart was so endeared,
That their pollutions she much feared.
XXXVI. She fears her own strength if called to suffering.
Sighing she said, O how shall I
Suffer for Christ! him to deny
How grievous is it! and yet how weak
Am I to bear! sure 't will soon break
My feeble spirit in bonds to lie,
When I am called to testify
The truths I own: the times may come,
When a fierce cruel Martyrdom,
May true Believers portion be;
And if it chance to fall on me,
What shall I do? I Am full of care,
Lest I in sufferings lose my share.
And yet I tremble at the thought
Of those sad sorrows may be brought
Upon me, for the Gospel's sake,
Of which I now profession make.
However I will learn to trust
Him whose performances are just,
His many gracious Promises
Contain in them great sollaces,
Which never yet failed, when trusted on,
And by true faith relied upon.
Besides I Am much refreshed by
The thoughts of that good Company,
Which in their sufferings altogether,
Will much encourage one another.
XXXVII. She had many profers for marriage.
Many there were sought her good will,
Rich, handsome, beautiful, but still
She them refused, she never would Wed,
Or cared for the marriage Bed,
Till such a one a Suitor came,
That felt the love, adored the Name
Of her dear God: till she could say,
He was a man could warmly pray,
And first in Christ's own bosom lay.
XXXVIII. Her company was loved, and much desired by friends.
So sweet she was, courteous and kind,
And in all hearts so much entwined,
That whosoever knew her would
Do to the utmost what they could,
With Father, Mother, to prevail
For her Converse: they would not fail,
As often as might be, her to get
Abroad with them, and scarce would let
Her return home in many days,
Desiring rather she always
Might stay with them. But oh the fate!
That by such means she felt of late!
For when at a friends house she meets, Her sickness unto death, with the
occasion of it.

And lodges there, behold damp sheets
Cling close about her in the Bed,
At which she waking said, I Am dead:
And so it proved, alas! for woe!
At thought on it I Am afflicted so!
That brinish tears drop from mine eyes,
My heart with throbs, and inward cries,
All broken is! what shall I say?
She Is thus untimely snatched away!
Shall I the careless Maid go blame?
And tell her what a horrid shame,
It is, that by her negligence,
So choice a one is lost from hence?
Alas! alas! it is no boot,
She was permitted thus to do it,
God's own o're-ruling Providence
Was pleased it self thus to dispense.
XXXIX. The manner of her sickness, and how grievous.
What I therefore shall further do,
Will our sad griefs yet more renew,
In telling what her sickness was,
And that therein she lay even as
Upon a rack, in torments great,
The pain whereof made her to swea^,
And us to weep 'bout her beds side,
And with our floods raise a full tide.
XL. Her patience and submission unto God, under all her pains.
O God! O God! she often cried,
And on his Goodness still relied,
To be supported and preserved,
Till she with Patience fully served
His holy Will; 'midst all her grief
This was to her a great relief,
To think that still within his hand
She safely lodged, and his command
As much obeyed in what she felt,
As when upon her knees she knelt.
No froward word, fell from her lips,
When tortures wrested hands and hips,
Convulsive motions, Mother fits,
New sorrows night and day begets,
And yet she is silent, 'cause she knows,
'Twas God alone that sent these throws.
XLI. A cloud of fear comes, but vanishes again.
One time a little fear her seized,
But presently her heart was eased,
As careful standers by did find
By the sweet expressions of her mind.
Shall I think God has me forsaken
Says she? since Christ the load has taken
Of all my sins; no, I Will not dread
Nor sin, nor Satan, when I Am dead,
I doubt not, but in Bliss to be,
And beatisick Visions see.
XLII. Her thankfulness when a little eased.
When God was pleased her to revive
A little, and make her alive
Again, as 'twere, from pangs of death,
These words she uttered at next breath.
Pray Sister tell me, what is the date
Of this good day? I Will celebrate
Its memory, if I longer live,
And God shall please more time to give.
Then thee and I Will both strive to be
Better by far; the world shall see,
Our business is in grace to grow,
And hand in hand to Heaven go.
XLIII. ^he calls for ^^iends to ^^ke leave of them.
The last Tuesday i'th'month of June,
Finding her self much out of tune,
And that her time 'gan to draw nigh,
When she undoubtedly must dye,
Her Father, Mother, Sisters all
At midnight she thought fit to call,
Of them to take her solemn leave,
And so go hasten to receive
A better life, when this should end,
As God at this time did intend.
XLIV. Her speeches ^o them.
For several hours such exhortation
She gave them all, to admiration,
Speeches so grave, so wise, so good,
And all so plainly understood,
So sage, so serious, so religious,
So full of prudence, so ingenious,
That every word went to the heart
Of those that heard them, every part
Of her discourse so profited,
That all the while their tears were shed
So much the faster, and the thought
This precious Life could not be bought
At any rate, but must be lost
From all friends here, O how it cost
Thousands of groans all that night long!
At every word fell from her tongue.
XLV. Her Legacies left in memorial of her.
When she had spoke her mind at large,
And to all there had given charge,
Of love, sweet unity, and peace
After she should have her release
From hence, then with her Fathers leave,
'Twas her desire each should receive
Some token from her, to be kept
By them that round about her wept.
Her Rings, her Books, her Instruments,
Her Works, her Clothes, her Ornaments,
Of every sort, she parted so,
That every one their own might know.
XLVI. Especially those to the Gentlewomen of the School.
But among all her Legacies,
Some of the very best were these.
To the young Ladies of the School,
The holy Scriptures Cristal pool
She did commend, to wash their eyes,
When they first in the mornings rise.
By sweet devotions she desired,
They Would labor to get their hearts fired
As often as might be, wanton Books
To throw away, and sober looks
Bring always when they did attend
The public Ord'nance, and to spend
Their precious time on the Lord's Day,
Not in vain dressings, but to pray,
Read, meditate, and so improve
Those holy hours in purest love
To heavenly things. Thus far she went,
And then began to be quite spent.
XLVII. Her mind is Heavenward.
When a friend asked her how she found
Her self next day? with a low sound
She said, I go to Heaven, I
Now hasten thither, thither fly
As fast as may be, on the wings
Of faith and hope, where Angels sings.
Yet after this she lingered out
Another full whole week about,
And some hours more, in torments great,
Yet not perceived at all to fret
Against Gods hand, but quietly
Resigned her self in peace to dye.
XLVIII. She foretells the hour of her Death, which proved accordingly.
On Monday Morning before she died,
Two days and half she often cried,
And then shall my soul be at rest,
In my Lords bosom, and be blessed.
She said so, and it proved so,
As if her Lord was pleased to show
This secret to her, for at noon
Next Wednesday, her breath, how soon
Was It gone? in a weak silent groan,
And we left mourning all alone!
You that late tolled her passing bell,
May hasten now to ring her Knell.
She Is dead! she is dead! there is no more hope
Of her Life here, the only Scope
She aimed at, now she does enjoy,
Whilst sore afflictions us annoy.
XLIX. She is wholly taken up with thoughts of Christ, and coming to him.
All she sought was a better Life,
And to become the Lambs dear Wife.
His Jewels, Bracelets, righteous Robes,
His blood, his Spirit, his starry Globes,
Her eye and heart were eager after;
The hopes of these filled her with laughter
Amidst the many screeks and tears,
She met with from the King of fears.
Faith, Love, Humility, each grace
Shined bright in her, the lovely face
Of her dear Lord when first she spied,
She cared not then how soon she died.
That thus adorned she might be bold
To stand before him, and behold
Those radiatures that glitter there,
Where the eternal blisses are.
How swift her motions were! that thither
She might come richly laden, whither
Pure spirits fly, till she had got
The place where lay her goodly lot.
How restless was she! therefore flies
On wings of Angels 'bove the skies,
Before we thought on it, up she goes,
In glorious Chariots, where no soes
Of sin or death molest her more,
Which wracked her here with pains so sore.
L. The lamentation over her dead body upon the floor.
While she lies dead upon the floor,
How friends stand weeping at the door!
While she is in her Night clothes dressed,
How sweet her smiles are 'bove the rest
That yet survive! how many kisses
On her dead face! there is none that misses
To take their farewell. Oh! how many
Came crowding in! there was not any
But longed to see her once again,
While she above ground did remain.
What floods of tears there now did meet
On her pale cheeks, and winding sheet!
All eyes about her full of bubbles,
And all their hearts too, full of troubles.
They wring their hands, lift up their voice
Aloud in cries, and mournful noise.
LI. The neighbors lament her loss.
And now when these sad tidings came
Abroad in the Town, and when the same
Began to spread the City round,
And the whole Country. Oh the sound!
Of deep fetched sighs that you might hear,
In every place! how many a tear
Fell from the eyes of all that knew,
How great, how sore this loss! more true,
And general griefs were never known,
In any age, for such an one.
She lived desired, lamented died,
Who loved her now 'twas fully tried:
Both far and near all England over
She Will be bewailed by thousands more.
LII. How dutiful she was and tender of her aged Father.
No Father e're more dearly loved
A child; no child yet ever proved
More gracious, dutiful, and tender
To a dear Father, she would render
What e're to the utmost she could give,
To make her Father's comforts live:
The chief staff of his age she was,
The greatest stay. Alas! alas!
What stays are these to lean upon!
Broken so soon! and so soon gone!
LIII. Her Funeral solemnity.
At her sad parting Funeral,
What numerous eyes were weeping all!
What aching hearts! what heavy looks!
What overflowing spreading brooks
Of surging sorrows! mourning blacks,
Scarfs, Gloves, Wine's given, nothing lacks
To celebrate the Obsequies
Of her that thus lamented dies.
Great pity 'twas, said old and young,
As she in the room stood them among,
In Velve^ Hearse, with Garlands crowned,
And her Companions weeping round.
Friends, Neighbors, and acquaintance all
Came flocking in both great and small,
To mourn for this rare flower of youth,
And follow her to the graves mouth.
At her Interments lamentation,
So crowded was the Congregation,
That He the Word did then dispense
Scarce saw a greater audience,
On such occasion, in that place:
It Is Hackney Church, where her sweet face
Now hidden lies, covered with dust,
While her blessed soul among the just
Sings and triumphs. Well! she is gone,
What now remains more to be done?
Though her griefs end, our agonies
Thus now begin sad Elegies.
LIVE. An Elegy upon her Death.
Deep sighs! torn hearts! wet eyes! bemoan
The Mistress of our joys; each groan
Lament the loss that Ages past
N'ere knew so manifold, make have
To drop your Pearls upon her Hearse,
And cause her live in mournful Verse.
Come Parents dear, weep over your child,
On which you have so often smiled.
Come Music Masters, hear the tone
She trils forth in her dying groan.
Come Ladies lay your Ivory hand
On her soft skin, a while here stand,
To see what difference sickness makes
On fairest beauties, when it takes
Color, and freshness quite away,
As 'twill from all of you one day.
Come Brethren, Sisters, Kindred all,
And see how vain it is to call
Her back again, she hears no more,
Now she is arrived at the other shore.
Come Strangers which so ravished were
With many a curious dainty Air,
That she was wont to melodize
Into your ears, before your eyes.
Come young ones see what here lies cropped,
A Rose in 'ts bloom, the Tree is lopt,
While yet the fruit remained upon 't,
Before 't had time to ripen on 't.
Come all her old acquaintances,
See now in deaths black balances
What your weight is, when life is gone,
It may be your own case anon.
Come Virgins wreath your flowers about
Your Garlands, as you carry her out.
Your turns will come ere long to go,
The same way too, it must be so.
Take Patterns from her Virtues rare,
That you with her in bliss may share.
LV.
Mean while, Alas! what shall we say,
From whom she is now thus fled away?
The sables of the darkest night
Take place while she is out of sight,
The boauteous heaven never shed such beams,
As slow'd from her in golden streams.
Lusters of Grace outshine the rays
Of the bright Sun, even at noon days.
Now these absenting disappear,
What have we left our hearts to cheer?
The Garden which she visited,
No Garden is now she is dead.
No Walks, no Arbors, beds of flowers
Smell sweet, no artificial bowers
Give us content, now she is gone,
And we left in them all alone.
Within doors there is no Company,
For want of her Society.
Her single self was more than many,
Too fill her room up there is not any,
Among our remaining socials left,
Alas! alas! we are bereft,
Of such a full Consort in one,
That all our Musicks now are gone.
Lute, Viol, Song-book, altogether,
Cannot make up such another.
Where once her measuring feet did tread,
Alas! we now our tears do shed,
And wet the floor, our trembling hearts
^n sorrowing motions act their parts.
No Dances, Voices, Lessons, more,
We must expect from her; our sore
Is very grievous! who can tell
How such strong passions to repel?
Which in renewed surges rise,
From our sad hearts and watery eyes.
LVI. Another Elegy.
Indeed if she could once again
Appear as formerly, our pain
Would soon assuage; her warbling arm,
Soft touch, sweet voice, would quickly charm
Our doleful plaints, her Music strains
More cordial were than all the grains
Of rich Ingredients Doctors give,
To make their dying Patients live.
If precious, Powders, Pearls, or Gold
Could save Life, she had lived till old.
No Syrrups, Liquors, Tulips, Gems,
Can so far sap dry withered stems,
As to revive them, one cold breath
Quite kills them, from the mouth of death.
But stay a while, methinks I hear
Her rare set melodies so clear,
As if her own well tuned head,
At sound thereof rose from the dead.
Others when neither heart nor life
Seemed to remain in them, the strife
Betwixt her hand and Instrument,
So filled them with a rare content,
That out of deepest sadness they
Cheerful and pleasant went away.
And may not such effects as these
Give us also a little ease?
From the same Musicks? Alas! no!
All that now proves but a vain show.
LVII. What her friends should do now she is gone.
What once we heard, must hear no more.
Our business now is to deplore
What cannot be recalled, and strive,
To do as she did when alive.
Pray, Read, Discourse, and Meditate
Of what concerns our future state.
This was her work, her greatest joy,
She counted all the world a toy,
Compared with this. Her heavenly King
She longed to go to, longed to sing
In that loud Chorus, sweeter lays,
And from her soul tune higher praise,
Then lungs or fingers here could make,
Even then when often her head did ache.
Her Viol-strains, her Vocal trils,
We never would miss with our good wills,
Though she was wont often to complain,
She played and sung in no small pain.
Willing she was at any time,
To help such hearts, as fain would climb
Into celestial thoughts, all these,
In love to Christ, she loved to please.
Thinking no better use could be,
Of her sweet Musicks harmony.
LVIII. Her, passage toward Heaven.
At last when she had run her race
Allotted here, she speeds apace
To her dear God, with many a groan
She cries to him, and makes her moan,
That weary of this world she would fain
Return her spirit to him again.
And so she did, to Heaven she hy'd,
Where now she lives Christ's joyful bride.
His ornaments are now upon her,
His glorious eyes now fixed on her,
Before under her pained head,
While she lay in her dying bed,
His arms enclosed her; but now
He has fulfilled his marriage vow,
And taking her up to his Throne,
Gives thousand smiles for every groan.
With new embraces, sollaces
He kindly now her compasses.
In stead of this worlds clamorous noise,
Much sweeter Music feeds her joys.
Her songs are now all Hallelujah,
To her eternal King Jehovah.
Oh thither let our souls desire
In divine ardours now expire.
LIX. A review of her.
But shall I leave her thus? Ah no!
Methinks I cannot let her go.
Methinks I see her in the Walks
About the Garden, where she talks
With her own soul, unto her Lord
Of those sweet things which in his word
She then and there had newly read,
And therewith her heart fully fed.
Methinks I see her in the room,
Where she was daily wont to come,
At meal times still, with some good Book,
Which always she 'long with her took,
Within her hand, under her arm,
That she her precious soul from harm
Might safely keep, while thus employed,
All her life time until she died.
Methinks I see her in the front,
Among the young Ladies she was wont
To lead up, on the dancing days,
When friends and strangers came always;
Methinks I see her take the Viol,
That such as would ^ave no denial,
She might in great civility,
With her sweet Music satisfy.
Methinks I see her, here and there,
Above, below stairs, every where,
With pleasant look, with cheerful eye,
And kind salutes, still passing by.
Alas! alas! shall I no more
See her, as I was wont before!
She Is gone! she is gone! what shall I say?
We must all follow the same way.
Who knows how soon? we must all come,
As well as she to the cold tomb.
LX. An exhortation to repentance, and preparation for death
Shall we then any more delay
Speedy repentance? since each day,
Each hour, each minute, may cut off
Our thread of life? since one small cough
May quickly waste us? or consumption
Soon end us? Oh! let no presumption
Possess the healthy, lusty, young,
Though never so well, though never so strong,
In flower of Age, in heat of youth,
In vigor, freshness, yet how does
Death seize on them with his cold blaste;
And cause them fall at's foot as fast
As leaves from Trees? fears he to blow
On any mortal wight? ah no!
When their time's spent, and hour is come,
To others they must yield their room.
What do we talk of weeks, days, hours?
When we cannot say one moments ours;
The distance 'twixt our life and death,
^s't any more than one short breath?
LXI. No possible exemption from death to any, how good or great soever.
The richest ransoms cannot give
The greatest Dons the least reprieve.
No heaps of gold, no Counsels deep,
Can any one from a grave keep.
No honors, beauties, riches, wealth,
Wisdom or learning can give health,
Or save ones life a moment more,
Then was appointed long before.
As goodness, so nor greatness can
Prolong the time of our short span.
Dukes, Nobles, Earls, Kings, Princes, Queens
As well as others, deaths black screens
Shall surely visit, the same shades
They must pass through, same dismal glades
Shall seize on them too, they shall have
Experience of the darksom grave.
Where smell, nor color in their dust
Shall make a difference, they all must
Be equal there; Scepters and Spades
Are much as one, where death invades.
Giants and Babes are both alike
To him, when his keen darts do strike.
He gives to all a conquering charge,
And in that war there is no discharge.
Monarchs and Beggars the same state
Have after long, or later date.
Nor Robes, nor Crowns, nor splendid Throne
Fence Royal hearts from dying groans.
No Kingdoms, Armies, Empires can
Here privilege the mightiest man.
Then midst great banquets, sports, and pleasure
Should not the greatest Prince sind leisure,
To meditate on this sad fate,
Which him also early or late,
Most certainly will seize upon?
He never grows wise till this be done.
LXII. The exhortation to prepare for death re-enforced.
This being so, and needs must be
Without prevention, as we see,
Shall we remain still in the deep
Of sins security; and sleep
Our selves to death? shall we not rise
With quickest speed, and rub our eyes?
That we may clearly see the way,
Where we were wont to go astray,
^t to avoid? and choose the road,
That they went in, whose blessed abode,
^s now in Heaven? if we do not
Thus here, even as our bodies ^ot
^n slime and filth, our souls also
Laden with sin, to Hell must go.
LXIII. How to become fit to dye, and the fruit of it.
should we not then be always ready
When death us calls? and with a steady
Hand of true faith take a strong hold
^n Christ? that so we may be bold
Deaths face to look on without fear,
When e're he shall to us appear?
Ghastly and grim his visage is,
Yet he shall send us up to bliss.
His killing darts, his cruel stings
Never hurt the good, no terror brings.
Faith, Holiness, Sincerity,
Makes death a precious Legacy
To gracious hearts; it them transmits
Thither where each believer sits
Surrounded with most glorious grace,
Reflected from his Saviors face.
And where now she is in high content,
Whom we below here thus lament.
LXIV. A serious exhortation to the Gentlewomen, that either are or have been
of the School.
Now you young Ladies of the School,
Lest your affections grow too cool.
Sit down, consider well your case,
Have any of you firmer place
Than she? in this worlds tottering frame
Are not you all of the very same
Mould as she was? may not your lot
Be the very next to her? are not
The same infirmities in you?
Same weakness, frailties, causes too
Of sin and death? have you exemption
More than the rest? can a redemption
Be gained for you more than other,
By power, or favor, 'bove another?
Tell me, what is the privilege
That you can for your selves allege?
Are you young? handsome? beautiful?
Could not she say as much to the full
As most of you? have you rare parts?
Or are you skilled in curious Arts
In Works? or Musicks? any thing?
That Is excellent? can you play? sing?
Beyond all humane expectation,
Even unto greatest admiration?
All this she did, and yet we see,
Her under stroke of death to be.
Have you more honors? riches? wealth?
A greater share in strength or health?
Well! be it so; will this avail
To give you rescue? will death fail
One moment of his time? or will
He make long stay for you, until
You ready are; at your request?
And so spare you above the rest?
What warrant have you sor't? will he
By greatest offers bribed be?
Or will he at your stern command
Forbear a while, and make a stand?
If this would cause him not to strike,
Or disappear, then sure it is like,
^or great, nor small, rich, poor would dye,
^ut either would command or buy
^ife for themselves, and still renew
^r words, or gifts, as dangers grew
From their diseases, or old age,
What e're they had, they would still engage
New sums, for a new term of years,
To save them from the King of fears.
But let us not be deceived, Alas!
Such fine expedient never was
Yet practiced, nor never will,
But we undoubtedly shall still
Find that black fate irrevocable,
Still like himself, inexorable.
If Fathers sighs, or Mothers groans,
If dear Relations doleful moans,
If friends bewailing round about
Could keep out sickness, drive death out;
If brinish tears or lamentations,
Or the most fervent invocations;
If the Physicians care and skill,
Or richest Cordials in the bill
That he prescribed, could have prevailed
Her to preserve, we had not failed
Of our desire, she had not died,
Nor we so bitterly have cried
For our sad loss; what then remains?
But that with all your might and pains
You hasten, and your selves apply
To live so, as not fear to dye.
She you a lively pattern gave,
So serious was she, and so grave,
So humble, holy, heavenly;
So much in duties constantly,
So little minded she the pleasures,
The house afforded, or earths treasures;
So weaned from this world below,
So fast she did to glory go;
And all this daily in your sight,
Early in the morning, late at night;
That if you do not imitate
These her rich qualities, your sat
Will be most lamentable; you
Of all the rest that most her knew,
Take heed you do not carelessly
Let slip the opportunity,
That yet you have, the precious season
Of grace that yet remains, what reason
Have you to look for happiness,
Unless you practice Holiness?
As late she did, while yet alive.
Sweet Ladies, I beseech you strive
To be like her, get her renown,
That you in Heaven may wear a Crown,
As she now does. Oh give sweet rest
To Jesus Christ betwixt your breast.
Let him your bosom-jewel be,
He was to her; I fain would see
You all enflamed with the same love,
That she to this her Lord above
Had always burning in her heart;
O labor here to act her part.
Her Legacy do not forget,
Which she among those jewels set
She valued most, and left to you,
Her memory sometimes to renew.
Prayed she in secret? do you go
In secret too, and pray you so.
Did she much love to read and hear
Gods holy Word? and many a tear
Shed from a broken heart? did she
Always with God delight to be?
In holy thoughts; in sweet Communion,
In near acquaintance, strictest union?
Oh that I could persuade you all
Unto the same! oh that the call
Which her example gives you, might
So work upon you in the sight,
Of all that know you, that it may
Occasion all your friends to say,
Though her removal be your cross,
Yet it is your gain, and not your loss.
LXV. A particular advice to all near Relations.
Where dearest love, most sweet content
Have lost their object, where the bent
Of strong affections want the scope
They used to aim at, where the hope
Of some rare, choice delight does fail,
And where no comforts can prevail,
To quiet and compose the mind,
The only remedy I find,
Is presently to hasten from
The mud-dry'd stream; and haste to come
To the sweet fountain of all good,
Where it will best be understood,
How deep our sorrows are, how great
Our unknown troubles; what is the heat
Of our inordinate desires,
And those hot scorching burning fires
That flame within us? Oh let us there
Drench deep, refresh our souls, take care
To quench our droughts, thence take reliefs
That may give ease to all our griefs.
A fountain it is so calm, so cool,
So healing too, a silver pool
So clear, so fresh, so pleasant taste
It gives to all, that we but waste
Our precious time while we refuse
Its dainty streams; oh let us choose
This safe, sure help, above all others
That Brethren, Sisters, Fathers, Mothers,
Can us afford, in our distress.
All put together give much less
Support or comfort, one small drop
From this high spring, down from the top
Of that gold Mountain where it runs,
Gives more refreshments than whole tuns
Of these low muddy waters here,
Even when they seem to run most clear.
If we then haste to wash, bath, drink
Of this sweet font, we never shall sink
In The Sea of our own passions wide,
But bear up against the strongest tide
Of sorrows, while this is the helm
Of our hopes, what can overwhelm
Or drown us? we shall never split
Our Ship with shelves, or sands, or hit
Against hard rocks, no boistrous blasts,
Or surging storms shall hurt our masts.
Where doleful plaints immoderate are,
And endless, these aloud declare
We loved too much what we lament
In such excess, and must repent
Of this great sin, shall we not rest
In what God does, as ever best?
Shall we not suffer him fulfill
His own all-wise and sovereign will?
Are we so angry 'cause the flower
Is cropped by him, who has the power
To take his own when e're he please?
What though we plead such things as these?
Ah! 'twas a flower, so sweet, so fair,
So beautiful, so choice, so rare,
A flower we loved to look upon
With great delight, that flower alone,
Which we rejoiced in most of all,
Above the rest on the round ball.
Well't may be so; perhaps we smelt
Too much unto't, perhaps we felt
Our hearts too much engaged, our hand
Too much upon it, our eye to stand
Upon this flower, and there to pore
On the fine streaked colors more,
Then we should do; how many a flower
Have we often spoiled in one short hour,
With our warm hand, and our hot breath,
Have we not withered it to death?
Apes hug their young and lose them so,
When we in our great folly go
The same way too, is it any wonder,
If the wise God does put asunder
Us and our comforts? let us be wise
At last, oh let us now advise
What our great duty is, surely
It Is to be silent, not ask why
God has done this? when he consumes
Man for his sin, can all his fumes
Or frets within give any ease?
Or cause the hand of God to cease
From the least stroke? ah no! how vain
Is It? and how sinful to complain?
Shall sorry man thus with his Maker
Contend so fiercely? be partaker
Of so great guilt, and not submit?
But still remain in's sullen fit,
If we continue to do so,
May it not bring some greater blow
Down quick upon us? let us Take heed
Lest God in his great wrath proceed
Us more to punish; we should rather
Seek to find him our tender Father,
By humble, patient, child-like fear,
Let us adore him and revere
His holy Name. He Is a good God
If we please him, his very rod
All dipped in honey shall relieve
And comfort give, when we most grieve.
As for our friend that now is gone,
Our dear Relation we bemoan,
So much, so long, let us rejoice,
That though no more we hear her voice
Amongst us poor mortals, yet she is where
Much better friends, Relations are.
She sings much sweeter tunes than ever,
She plays unwearied strains that never
Shall have an end, her aching head
Now aches no more, her restless bed
Pains her no more, her cries and groans
Are all turned to melodious tones;
Her cares, her griefs, her brinish tear
Are now all lost, and all her fears
Are vanished quite, she is laid to rest
In her Lords bosom, there is a nest
Of such strong comforts she never knew.
So fresh, so springing up a new,
That if we loved her, we must needs
Rejoice to think what she there feeds
Upon for ever, what sweet smiles
She lives among? and what high piles
Of wealth and store she there enjoyes?
While we remain still in the noise
Of a loud, clamerous, roaring world,
Where we from toil to toil are hurled
Tossed, vexed, tormented more and more
With turmoils, crosses, troubles sore,
All sorts of sins, temptations, crimes
Still us annoy in the best of times,
We e're yet met with: every kind
Of wants, diseases, griefs of mind,
Solicit us, we never are quiet,
Nor never shall be, till the same diet
She now feeds on, be ours also.
Oh! thither let us make haste to go
In our affections first, and then
At our last dissolution, when
God shall appoint, mean while let us
Be in deaths often, for we best thus
Befriend our selves, by frequent sights
Of Death's black face, do cause the frights
Thereof to cease; familiar talk
With a Death's head in every walk,
'Midst all our mirths and banquettings,
If we discern deaths glimmerings,
If in our gardens and our bowers,
And our converse among sweet flowers,
Still we with death acquainted are,
And for his darts always prepare,
It never shall take us suddenly,
Nor yet find us unfit to dye.
LXVI. Upon the words of the ^^xt, 1 Cor. 22. Death (...) yours.
Now in the close of all I Will next,
Tell you the seasonable Text,
The Reverend Doctor pleased to take,
And did a useful Sermon make
At her Interments. Words were these,
Sweet Death is yours. Death gives you ease,
That Death which all Believers dye,
And by which though their Bodies lie
In slimy Valleys of the grave,
Yet those same filthy slimes they have
So sweetened by Christ's rich perfume,
(His odours sure will never consume)
That there they lie as if in beds
Of fragrant Roses, he that sheds
Salt tears upon them does but mingle
Bitter with sweet; there is no one single,
No, nor yet compound smell that can
Match the Aromaticks of that man,
In's very grave, that dies a Saint,
His Sepulcher needs no rich paint.
Though what lies there all putrid be,
Though spoiled in the fine symmetry
Of every part, yet I dare say
That at the Resurrection day
That dust shall blossom; a new flower
Shall bud and blow from thence; that power
That urn'd it there, with better scent
Shall sweeten't, and make redolent.
Most costly odours never gave
So rich a scent as that shall have.
This very dust, is dust of Gold,
Bought with vast sums, can never be told.
Christ's own heart blood, that precious thing
Was all paid for the purchasing
This very dust; this rotten mould
Blessed Angels one day shall behold
Quickened again, immortalized,
With Christ's own body similiz'd
As vile as it is, splendors of Glory
Shall brighten it, the highest story
Of bliss it shall be mounted to,
So high, so very high, that you
Shall see the twinkling starry globes
Beneath this dust, the costly robes
It shall be vested with outshine
The Sun at Noon, all beams combine,
When this dry dust unites again,
To fix upon it, and remain
In their full lusters. Purity
Most incorrupt, agility
Most quick and active, then shall be
The new raised bodies property.
If thus this casket as before,
Shall be embroidered all over
With richer things then Gems or Gold,
More then empearl'd. We may be bold
To think the jewel lately pent
Within it much more Orient.
That Diamonds all glittering Angles
More sparkling are than all the spangles
We elsewhere s^^. The difference must
Be vastly great betwixt this dust
And that which quickened it: the glory
As we do find by sacred story,
Which has a reference to the tomb
And fleshly part, is yet to come.
But now the Nobler part, the mind,
If we consider well, we find,
Is in possession presently,
When it does from its body fly.
Next moment is it not transposed
From Earth to Heaven? and reposed
In The bosom of sweet rest and peace?
Has it not gained a full release?
From sins? temptations? miseries?
From all sorts of calamities?
Has it not left a world behind,
In which we nothing else can find,
But vanities and sore vexations,
With thousand thousand molestations?
Has it not blisses now, and store
Of such high joys 't never knew before?
Is It not enrob'd, enthroned, encrown'd?
With brighter glories, circled round
With lusters more intense by far
Than any in those orbs that are
Now visible to humane eyes?
Does not Christ's own sweet Vision rise
Into emperial culminations,
Of unapproached coruscations?
What is the spangled Canopy
Compared with this bright fulgency?
Seated in this high chair of State
Does not the glorious soul now hate
Sins snares below? this m^re and clay
Which here 'twas clogged with the other day?
Does it not now with scorn behold
This our contemptuous dirty mould?
Is not the very dust it treads
Now made of Stars? are not the beds
Where now it takes repose the same,
Which Christ himself longed till he came
Unto, when he his life had shed
And for poor sinners to death bled?
While thus in goodly dignity
It sits aloft, sublime, and high,
While Angel-like it is arrayed,
And all its golden beams displayed
Before its Sovereigns beauteous face,
Spouse of his heart, and of his Grace
The large replenished subject is,
And reigns thus in eternal bliss:
While it is bedewed, embalmed, o're-run
With streams from this never setting Sun,
While all sweet influential Powers
And virtues down upon it showers,
While Union, Vision, Joy and Rest,
Peace, Light, and Glory makes it blessed,
While his love warms, melts, and inflames
The soul, while all the pregnant names
By which all future good is shown,
Unto this blessed soul are known,
While it partakes, sucks, feeds upon
All this, as if it self alone
Enjoyed it all, and this for ever,
Must keep it always, lose it never.
Tell me I pray what is thy thought
Of that sweet death such things has wrought
For this raised soul? what Legacy
More rich could well be given by
Him, that by death gives such a life,
So full of bliss, so free from strife?
LXVII. The character of a Believer's death.
These things considered, now I shall
Proceed with Truth sweet death to call,
A silver bridge that passes over
All good souls to the other shore.
A golden key made to unlock
The gates of Glory to Christ's Flock,
To open Wardrobes, Treasuries,
Where all rich stores and jewels lies.
A sweet sleep in perfumed bed
Where just men rest their wearied head.
An Officer that gives possession
To him that makes sincere profession
Of all his hopes and expectations
With full complete remunerations.
Accomplisher of his desires,
And what by true Faith he requires.
Performer of sweet Promises,
That eases of all grievances.
Remover of his cares and fears,
Answers all prayers, wipes off all tears.
That turns the seed into its crop,
Rich grace into its gallant top
Of Glory; roots to full-blown flowers.
Griefs drops into the golden showers
Of Joy; that crowns the Conqueror
Who fought for Christ, the laborour
In Wine Press of afflictions great,
Rewards his sufferings, sorrow, sweat
Which he with patience underwent,
Self-abnegation, and content.
A tite Ship that through surging Sea
Bears a true Christian quite away,
From Rocks and quicksands to his port,
Which he seeks after, that strong fort
Which men and devils too cannot
Or hurt, or batter, with their shot.
The ladder by which up we climb
To the place not measured out by time.
The Midwife of a purer birth;
An Inlet to the sweetest mirth;
That to the Bridegroom gives his Bride,
Knits knots no more to be untied
Betwixt them, puts the glittering Crown
Upon her, and the sumptuous Gown
Of needle work in Ophir Gold,
The garment which never waxes old.
That with August inauguration,
Seats her in highest installation
Among those bright mansions which before
Prepared were, and evermore
Stand firmly fixed. That dwelling place
Among beams which from a Savior's face
Create whole myriads of blisses
Perpetually, and never misses.
If this be all the alteration
That death makes by a separation
Of soul and body for a space
Till both meet in so high a place,
Shall we not count it our best friend,
That brings us to so brave an end?
ACROSTIGKS.
I.
S orrows how great! How fast they come
U pon our hearts! how burdensome!
S ighs, sobs, griefs, tears, most bitter moans
A re our food now! more deep fecht groans
N e're came from any; we are left
P ast remedy; this sudden theft
E ver surprizeth where he can
R ich, poor, small, great, there is no man
W hate're he be must look to escape
I ts killing stroke; upon his nape
C ruel assaults will give their blow
H is life to end before they go.
II.
S ore griefs must needs afflict us when
U ntimely death the best of men
S natcheth away, when Virgins young
A re cropped in the bud, and placed among
N ight- sepulchers; when we do see
N ew blossomed Roses scattered be
A t deaths black foot: may not we say?
P itty, oh pity us! we pray
E specially since our sad griefs
R eturn so fast, and no reliefs
W ill ease our heavy sinking hearts,
I n midst of our most doleful smarts.
C ome Lord, true grace, peace, comfort give
H ear us, give answer, while we live.
III.
S he is blessed no doubt, now she is gone
U nto her Lord; Him, him alone
S he most desired, and loved to meet
A s Mary did, where his blessed feet
N ew tidings brought, of such sweet peace
N one knew before; she would never cease
A t any time to labor after
P art of those toys, that fill with laughter
E ternally; where she might find
R est, Pleasures, Blisses for her mind:
W here she might sing above the skies
I n sweeter notes new melodies.
C hrist had her heart, his bosom she
H ath now got her repose to be.
SUSANNA PERWICH. Anagram I. SIN'S WAN CAEAR UP.
IS SIN WAN? let us CHAR UP our hearts
It Is struck dead by Christ's own keen darts.
Though it leave mortals, pale, WAN, dead,
Yet 'twas it self first conquered.
Our WAN looks shall revive again,
Let Us CHEER UP; when Christ 'gins to reign
Sin lives no more: well't may look WAN
When it lies sprawling, and never can
Get up again: its deadly wound
Admits no cure. How sweet's the sound
Of this good news unto our ears!
With how great joy our hearts it CHEARS!
Does she CHEER UP? is her base sin
Turned to rich Grace? her drossy tin
Into pure gold? Any do^^ WAN looks
To beauties? do joye^ p^ea^^^^ brooks
Fill her with a Fel^^ity
Ineffable, Eternally*
Let us CAEAR UP too, may not we
Hope for the same as well as she?
No doubt we may, if we but live,
As she did us example give.
Then we (as she) may hope no more
To SIN or look WAN as before.
SUSANNA PERWICH. Anagram II. PURCHASE SWAN-IN.
SWANS sing most sweetly when they dye,
Saints do the like most usually.
But what is the IN such SWANS as these
Take harbor in with well turned lays?
Is It not bright Heaven, that blissful port,
The chiefest of all Inns of Court?
Fair lodgings there were furnished
For our sweet Songster that is dead.
Dove-like she lived, Swan-like she died,
And Phenix-like to Heaven fly'd,
From that low moorish River here
She raised with many a brinish tear.
This Heavens SVVAN-IN she therefore sought
Of whom, and for what 't might be bought.
And when at last st^ ^^^d ^derstood
No other price (...) Christ's heart blood
Could PURCHASE it, ^he then made bold
From thence to fetch huge heaps of gold
And paid down for it, whereby she made
A gainful PURCHASE: there is no trade
Like this with Christ to buy and sell
This her experience knew full well.
So this brave PURCHASE heavens SWAN-IN
She makes, and now she dwells therein.
SUSANNAH PERWICHE, Anagram III. AH! IC HEAVENS PURE SUN. AH! I C see now (late
dim Half Moon)
Bright HEAVENS PURE SUN in'ts glorious Noon.

MOon-like before my squallid motions
Swelled all my banks with brinish lotions.
Broad streams, high tides flowed and reflow'd,
So that huge Vessels might have rowed
In The lowest waters, my griefs made
So deep no foot therein could wade.
But now methinks I look more blithe
Now I Am got in conjunction with
My blissful SUN and source of light
My day's now come, my darksom night
Is gone and past; my cold moist drops
Are all dried up: I Am on the tops
Of spicy Hills: Olympian beams
Send rolling out such flaming streams
As me ingulf; I Am circled round
With glomerations which abound
Where shades were wont: black miry earth
I Have changed for HEAVEN by a new birth.
Death killed me not, but gave a life
Above all sorrow, sin, and strife.
What wisdom is it on earth to stay,
For any that get HEAVEN may?
Who would not turn his dross to Gold?
Pebbles to pearls? his dirty mould
To all-tralucent glittering beams?
Foul muds into PURE Crystal streams?
His pricking thorns to softest downs?
His clods to stars? crosses to Crowns?
Who would not change bitter for sweet?
Vile gall for honey? with running feet
Haste quick away to that brave place,
Where he may see in's Savior's face
Ten thousand smiles, joys, beauties, blisses,
And thence receive millions of kisses
Sweeter by far, than any Nectar;
Which for our tears is an Elixar
That turning them to silver balls,
Stills all our groanings, cries and brawles?
I Am blind to earth now I Csee HEAVEN
I Will feed no more on sins sour leav'n.
In stead of rags, I here wear Robes,
And under feet tread spangling Globes.
Here I walk round from Tower to Tower,
And pass along from Bower to Bower.
Here Angels sing, there Cherubins,
Archangels here, there Seraphins.
I stand and listen in a gaze,
I hear and see what does amaze
My ravished soul. Dominions high
Here sit enthroned, and there does fly
A winged Chorus. Melodies
To what shril mounted strains they rise!
Hallelujah, Hallelujah,
How they chant to great Jehovah!
Lutes, Viols, Harps, Cytherns, Gettars
Compared with these, oh what harsh jars
Do they send forth! and what sad lowers
Sit on the looks of fairest flowers,
Colors, or beauteous faces here
Compared with the bright objects there!
Visions I see incomparable,
Rare tunes I hear unutterable.
Fast am I held by ears and eyes,
Yet mine imagination flies
Farther and farther; therefore I
Away with speediest motions hye
To view where the mighty Potentates
And all the rest of the glorious states
Do reign and rule; where all the Powers
And Principalities down showers
Their more than golden lusters; where
The several Heavenly places are
I read of in that holy Word,
First did the knowledge me afford
Of these rare things: but most of all
I view the Seat Imperial,
Where HEAVENS PURE SUN with glittering rays
Sits, and his Majesty displayes
With most corruscant emanations,
Commanding lowliest adorations
From highest Powers. Oh what pure lights
Does he transfund! what dazzling sights
Gives he! it is true all Heaven over
I see high Thrones, myriads, and more:
Yet all these are but the glimmerings, he
Sheds from his own dread effulgency.
All Crowns Vibrat from his great Crown;
Whole Thrones from his great Throne drop down;
Not single beams, but Suns, whole Suns
From this PURE SUN still streaming runs.
As sparks from huge great Di'monds fall
While cut in numerous Angles all:
Or as Gold Oar from mighty Mountains,
Roll in small sands through silver fountains.
The Heaven of Heavens shines in his face,
He brightens Glory 't self: the place
Where he is enthroned all flaming is,
So ever radiantizing it is,
That were it not refracted to
Created eyes, it would undo
The boldest Angels to behold
In glimpse not a minute old
The splendors often, in one straight line
So unapproach'd is it in its shine.
Oh glorious object! what intense
And condensed pleasures fetch I thence!
Would't not me prove a very sot,
If I all ravished should not
Break out in wonders? therefore now
Without all blame you will me allow
To joy that my half-Moon's thus drowned
In The Ocean lusters me surround;
And as one wrapped up in a Trance,
Wondering my wonders still to advance,
And say, Ah! I Csee with m' own eye,
Bright HEAVENS PURE SUN eternally.
EPITAPH.
HEre Beauties, Odors, Musicks lie,
To show that such rare things can dye.
Weep Passenger, weep, sigh, and groan,
When was e're such another known?
From Heaven she came with Melodies,
And back again to Heaven she flies.
Here follow certain Copies of Verses, composed by some of the friends of the
Deceased. In memory of that eminently Virtuous, his much honored Cozen, Mrs.
Susanna Perwich.
ANd what! is death of late so meal'd mouthed grown
As to slight courser, and to feed on none
But natures choicest dishes? must her heart
Needs feel the point of his all-conquering dart?
Could neither Beauty, Virtue, him provoke
To hold his hand from this sad fatal stroke?
Could they have don't, then certainly we may
Conclude that she had lived still to this day.
It Is no Hyperbole to say her mind
Others in rarest ex'lencies out-shin'd.
The Virtues which elsewhere lay scattered,
Within her breast were all concentered.
But why do I thus stammer out her worth?
There needs an Angels tongue to set it forth.
Yet now she is gone; let not her dear friends weep,
(...) she is not dead, but only fallen asleep;
(...) her rejoice, that God them honored so,
^^^h a rich gift upon them to bestow.
With whom we leave her, and shall add but this,
In heavenly joys her soul now sollac'd is;
Warbling out sweetest Anthems 'bove the skies,
Not such as are found in the Lythurgies.
Well! what remains, but this one wish, that we
Who stay behind, may be as good as she?
S. R.

Some serious thoughts let forth for my deceased Friend, Mrs. Susanna Perwich.
OH help me Muses, you that softly sing
In solitaries, bring me on your wing,
Where grief may melt me, and my tears extend,
To touch, each loyal heart that means to spend
Some select mournings, that our lives may be
The perfect Emblems of true Piety.
We know our frailties, and we cannot express
It more to purpose (mortals) see this Hearse
Whereon does lie, the body of our Friend,
A soul too good, too great, too soon to end;
And yet her star is not extinct, for she
Triumphs in glory over misery.
What mean then thus our thoughts to mourn, o^ why
Do they complain? will still my watery eye
Dissolved be in tears? stop, stop, no more
Of thy distilling; peace, it is time, give over.
Lift up thy down-cast senses, see her set
In beams of brightness, labor thou to get
To her preferment, and thou may be sure
Thou will exchange thy dross for what is pure*
Call home thy dunghill cogitations, be
An imitator of her charity.
Abound in goodness, and let love invite
Thee to her pattern, for her sole delight
Was to be pious, courteous, sweet to all;
Not vainly proud, nor subject to have gall.
Free to forgive the greatest wrongs, and she
Never took pleasure in much jolity;
But wisely pondered in her serious cell
'Twas best becoming wisdom for to dwell
Within its proper walls, and there to be
Protected from injurious falsity.
In sum, her life was such as might have been
A Nautick-card, to guide the best of men.
I. H.

Upon that incomparable Lady, Mrs. Susanna Perwich, the miracle of her Age, for
all Excellencies, both Spiritual and Temporal.
WAat ails my thoughts? I Am haunted so with grief,
That to my mind nothing can yield relief.
that do I ask the reason? it is plain,
^a'n't every face an Elegiack strain?
^reat sorrow cannot be smothered, in each eye
^ppear the sad complaints of misery.
What are we mortals now at last bereft
^ven of that little which the Fall had left?
What is that Lady struck by death's keen darts,
^n whom concentred all the heavenly Arts?
^hus sad were mortals, when Astrea flew
^o Heaven, and bid the cursed earth adieu.
^'m naught but storms within, they will not be pent,
My heart must break, or I must give them vent.
Come then my Muse, try if raised by her fall,
Thou can her image to my mind recall:
Her beauty and rare features I Will forbear,
Lest thinking on them, I should surfeet there.
I Will boast not of her blood, though in her face,
Both Lancaster and York had equal place:
But she was Musicks Masterpiece, a wonder,
Oh that I could but run division on her.
What means this sudden stroke? did Pallas fe^
(Musicks great Goddess) to be challenged here
In her own Art, and lose that glorious name,
Which has so sounded in the trump of fame?
Or wa'n't the heavenly Lyra sweet alone,
To make a Consort? is she thither gone?
When hospitality out of England went,
She Is said to ave yielded up her breath in Kent;
So Music in her, whom we now bemoan,
I fear will prove to'ave given its last groan.
If she unseen did sing, I wished to be
All ear; if after that I her did see,
My wish was changed, I fain would be all eye,
That so I might her glorious gifts epsy.
Sure nature framed her for this intent,
That of their wishes men might still repent.
Orpheus his well tuned soul in her did live,
If to Pythagoras we may credit give;
He made the eared Oaks dance to his lays,
And duller stones the walls of Thebes to raise.
But what is more, she stony Rocks could move,
Rough tempers mild after her play would prove.
But if you look on skill in Musicks Art,
What is most rare, she had a well-tuned heart:
For although others the spears harmony
Could never hear, because of the noise and cry
Of worldly things, yet sure she this had heard,
Her soul to Heaven was so often reared:
She never was so well pleased with Musicks airs,
As when she rose to Ela in her prayers:
'Twas far more pleasure to her, and content,
To tune her heart, than tune her Instrument.
Those rarities that in her breast did lie,
She clothed all with rich Divinity.
When the three Goddesses did each contend
For the golden Ball, Parts did recommend
It unto Venus; but she unto Grace,
On the contrary did give the chiefest place;
For though those earthly Sirens did their part;
That each might gain that golden Ball, her heart;
Yet she did stop her ears to all their strife,
And gave it unto Christ, the Lord of Life.
She was our Phoenix, but this breaks my heart,
Her ashes cannot another Life impart:
But is she dead? and did not every thing,
Rush into its first Chaos once again?
For since the harmony of the world is gone,
I expect nothing but confusion.
Philosophy now fails, that argument
It used to prove the Heavens are permanent,
In here is confuted, for her perfect form,
Could not discharge her body from the worm.
E. B.

UPON
Mistress
Sure there are mysteries hid in this Name,
Under it is comprehended so great fame.
Search well the Holy Language, Rabbis all,
And see what mean the lerters radical.
Never were a Females parts improved so high,
Nature in her did meet with industry:
And every letter in this Name sure will
Prove Hieroglyphics of her various skill.
Equal to her were none, for parts, or worth,
Religion yet did chiefly set her forth.
Weep Reader, weep, this fair one's snatched away,
In her best years she felt her strength decay.
Can any read this without sighs, and say,
Here lies a mirror wrapped up in clay?
Idem.

An Elegy on that peerLess VIrgIn, SVsan^ PerWICh, Paragon of aLL VertVe, the
fLoVrIshIng gLory of her Sex, Who LateLy DeCeaseD,
DDCCLLLLLLLLXVVVVVVVVVIIIIII.
Would tears permit, would sighs an^ sobs give way
My honest Muse her mournful deb^ would pa^
Unto thy Hearse, dear Saint. Can grief give time
Or knows it measure, cannot compose a Rhyme?
Strong duty bids it try, though it be confused,
Grief to trim Dress, or Order is disused.
Now from the Fortress of my love-stor'd heart
Officious words would sally, to bear part
In The rites, but by an ambushment of tears
Surpised: I Will try again devoid of fears.
Now try we if 't be true, or mere surmises,
That from the Phoenix urn another rises:
If this prove true, 'twil give our grief a lank,
Whose prouder swelling laughs at bound or bank
Were I in Sect a Petrolitan
Holding that mannerly devotion ran
Through the Conduits of the Saints: her Name alone
I would adore, at her shrine make my moan.
If not by Precept, but by Precedent
(A breathing Precept) Virtue best is sent
Into the soul, behold a perfect Guide,
In whom all Virtues are exemplifi'd:
Courted by strong Temptations to be proud,
Yet in Fames silver Trumpet sounds aloud
Her great Humility; which was the ground
Whereon her other Virtues flowered were found,
This virtue is the ground on which the rest
Run sweet division in a fair contest.
On this firm Basis that bright Fabric stands,
Which kisses Heaven and the Clouds commands,
So many excellencies were her lot,
One in another beauty is forgot.
As calm she was in words as in desires,
Knew not her Sexes tempests nor their fires.
Some are but fairer Aeolus his Dens,
In which the winds and blustering storms he pens.
Beauty, Proportion, Color do define,
To which some graceful motion well adjoyn;
Whereto may voice be added, all these here
Conspired to place her fame above a Peer.
Though chaste and comely seldom we do see
In high degrees (at least) conjoined, yet she
Was Beauties darling, Modesties delight,
Giving as rare as ravishing a sight.
Hackney, the Ladies University
Of Female Arts the famous Nursery;
Which in their kind at least, may well compare
With those of the other Sex; what Arts so rare
Which are not liberally furnished here?
Mathematics they count within their Sphere;
Arithmatick in music couched you will find;
Geometry has in their dancing shined.
Astronomy's best read in the Ladies eyes;
Rhetoric first from women did arise;
Their Logic, Will, our Reason does defy;
There are Grammarians for Orthography.
Tongues there abound. Blame not in improper Muse
In Elegies still Elogies we use.
This University she graced, wherein
To the chief College Students she did win.
She there proceeded highest Graduate,
Mistress of Arts that are professed thereat.
How great a loss that University
O^ her bereft sustained! how great's the cry
Of that famed College, which she did adorn
Which knows but one long night without a morn?
How dumb's their Music and their dancing lame!
Or if both's good, yet neither is the same.
Those pretty Doves eyes with griefs needle seil'd,
They prick their fingers till their works blood yield
In all the needles Curiosities
Exactly she was read, view, wipe your eyes.
In dancing reached perfection of the foot,
Yet not with labor much gave her mind to it.
Her Music jars Division in this strife,
Whether she sang or played more to the life,
That subdivided, whether on the Lute
Or Viol best her fingers sweet did suit.
Her Hand and Ear fell out which should be best
The Hands none such by all she is confessed.
In all her Exercises shown such Art
Neglectedly concerned in each part,
As if to her they all were natural,
Or she to them were supernatural;
And so in truth she was, her nobler Fire
Unto a higher Region did aspire.
This by her bearing is well figured out,
Which rightly does her represent devout.
The Field is Argent; charge, a Chevron fable
Betwixt three Eaglets, which to view are able
Her Crest, a Southern Sun, in Noontide glory,
Thus Eagles prove their young, in Natures story
Not silken Arts, nor graceful steps, nor dresses
Not modish ordering heart-ensnaring Tresses,
Not Art with Nature, Instrument with Voice
Can make a Female Glory to rejoice;
Nor Natures paint, but much less that of Art,
By which your Dames of pleasure make their mart
But a bright burnished mind, whose luster vies
With the Celestial Lamps, dazzling all eyes.
In The Heavenly Academy she was verst,
Knowledge there is tasting, things are not rehears^
But done, not only for a blaze professed,
But Action there with constant heat is blessed;
In the Celestial University
She now degrees of Glory takes more high.
She once blessed Earth, while acting on this stag^
Now gives Heavens Book of Bliss another Page,
Which gives me greater Amors, and much more
I long to read it now, than e're before.
You Will say, my Muse soars not so high a flight
As justly rates her worth; confessed, it is right
One cause is this, her wings with grief are wet,
Or else her Lute had strained a nobler set.
S. B.

To the READER.
Courteous Reader.
SOme pages of this sheet being left void for want of matter, rather than they
should stand empty, I have filled them up with short practical Quaeries,
grounded (for the most part) upon such pregnant Scriptures as have the answer
still perspicuous in them, the rest may be supplied with answers from the mind
of the Reader, either negatively or affirmatively, according to the nature of
the Quaeries. And because my aim is to speak something that has a particular
reference to all sorts of sins and duties, I have therefore put my Quaeries
accordingly; and for the more delight and variety, disposed them into a
miscelaneous order. At first indeed, I thought to have filled up this sheet
only, and no more, but my hand being in, I proceeded to a double century and
somewhat more, and have divided them into Decads, for the better help of
memory, and to prevent weariness; so remaining an hearty well-wisher to thy
souls best good, I subscribe,

John Bachiler.

I. DECAD.
1. Whether the imputed Righteousness of Jesus Christ by Faith, be not the
true formal cause of a Believers Justification? whether the satisfaction he
has made to his Father's Justice on behalf of the Elect, be not sufficient?
whether the merits of his Active and Passive obedience, do not arise from the
dignity of his Person? and whether he that denies this, does not make the
Gospel void? Esa. 53. throughout, 2 Cor. 5.21. Mat. 3.17. Heb. 7.25, 26, 27.
compared with Romans 4.14. Gal. 3. from 17. to 27. and Chap. 4.5.

2. Whether he that affirms total and final falling away from special Grace, be
not a downright Arminian, and Cozen-German to a Papist?

3. Whether he that holds the power of nature (otherwise called Freewill) may
not strongly be suspected to be unknown to himself, or at least not to take due
notice of the workings of sin and Grace in his own heart?

4. Whether one may not be a zealous Preacher against sin, and for inherent
Grace, in order to Justification thereby, and yet be a Jesuit, or every whit as
bad, whatever his pretense may be to the contrary? and whether such may not be
accounted upholders of the doctrine of merit, and establishers of their own
Righteousness? Romans 10.3.

5. Whether it be possible to cover a sinners spiritual nakedness with any
other garments, but those which Christ wears on his own back? Rev. 3.18.

6. Whether the Righteousness of Christ applied by Faith, be not both coat of
Mail and cloth of Gold; and such too, as nothing can either pierce or sully?
and whether he that has this upon him, be not both securely and bravely
arrayed from head to foot? Ephesians. 6.11. compared with Rev. 1.13.

7. Whether any other robes have such rich embroideries, or are hung with so
many, and so costly Jewels, as those robes of Christ, which both himself and
his People wear? Es. 61.10. Cant. 1.10, 11.

8. Whether Christ has any Dowry with his Bride? and whether her Wedding
clothes are not of his providing, Ezekiel. 16.13, 14. compared with Rev. 21.2.

9. Whether it was not an unparalled love for Christ, to account the day of
Espousals, with one that had neither Beauty, Parentage, nor Portion, to be the
day of the gladness of of his heart? Cant. 1.6. Eze. 16.3, 4, 5, 6. compared
with Cant. 3.11.

10. Whether by the Queens, her being all glorious within ( Psalm. 45. 13.) and
by her clothing of wrought Gold, be not meant, the splendors of Grace in the
heart, and the shine of them in the Life?

II. DECAD.
11. Whether, if Grace be the Flower, sincerity and godly simplicity, be not
the lasting fragrancy and beauty of that Flower?

12. Whether the Flames of Divine Love are not most vehement, even flames of
God? and whether those flames are not raised and maintained from the sweetest
Fuels? Cant. 8.6. compared with Chap. 1.12.

13. Whether these flames shall ever go quite out for want of fuel, or can be
extinguished, either by men or devils? Jer. 31.3. compared with Romans 8.35. to
39.

14. Whether the very best duties of the best Saints, have not need of Christ's
perfumes to sweeten them? and whether much incense be not therefore added to
their Prayers, because they are in themselves very unsavory, and from very
noysom hearts? Rev. 8.3.

15. Whether in the golden Vials (mentioned Rev. 5.8.) though the Prayers are
the Saints, the odours are not Christ's? and whether the reason why they are
all called odours, be not, because the denomination is always from the better
part?

16. Whether fervent Prayers from holy hearts, make not as sweet a smell in
Heaven, as their praises make melodies? Psalm. 141.2. Cant. 2.14.

17. Whether a soul can truly live without Christ any more than the Body
without wholesome food, Joh. 6.27, 32, 33.

18. Whether the highest Angels feed on better dainties than the meanest
Saint? and whether the Love of God be not a full and a sumptuous Feast? Psalm.
36.7, 8. and 34.8. compared with Esa. 25.6.

19. Whether the hardest heart does not drink in the Love, and melt in the
Blood of Christ, as sugar sucks up, and melts in wine? Romans 5.5.

20. Whether one can begin too soon to love God? or can love him too much? or
can suffer or lose, or do too much for him? and whether he does not deserve the
very best of all we have? the best of our time? the best of our affections? the
best of our enjoyments? and accordingly whether he does not expect it? Deuteronomy.
6.5. Genesis 4.4. compared with Mal. 1.8.

III. DECAD.
21. Whether true saving Faith may not well be said to have an Eagles eye,
since in a right line it can look on the brightest Sun, the Sun of
Righteousness? Esa. 45.22. compared with Mal. 4.2.

22. Whether a weak Faith, like a palsy hand, may not lay hold on a pardon or
purse of gold? the woman came trembling to Christ, Luke 8.47. Mark 9.24. Joh.
6.37.

23. Whether the lowly grace of Humility, like the delicate scented Violet,
that even kisseth the earth, and as 'twere hides it self under its own leaves,
be not as sweet as any of the Taller graces? and whether this be not a thriving
Grace? Psalm. 25.9. Prove. 29.23. Jam. 4.6. 1 Pet. 5.5.

24. Whether they have not the quickest and best hearing, who have an ear in
their heart that listens to, and hears the smallest motions of the Spirit of
Grace? Esa. 30.21.

25. Whether Faith and Love are not a pair of golden wings, with which a
gracious heart flies to Heaven every day? Psalm. 11.1. and 143.9.

26. Whether the lowest sighs from a broken heart, do not make the loudest
Prayers? and whether a Prayer upon the knee, will ever reach Heaven, unless it
be a Prayer on the wing too? Psalm. 51.17. Esa. 37.4.

27. Whether all the day long, wheresoever or howsoever employed, the sending
up of frequent ejaculations to Heaven, be not to drive a secret, but thriving
trade for Grace, and the comforts of it? Psalm. 139.17, 18. Esa. 26.8, 9.

28. Whether any one truly penitent groan, was ever unheard of God? or one
penitent tear unseen or unbottled up by him? and whether God will defer the
deliverance of his afflicted People one moment longer than is necessary? 2
King. 20.5. Psalm. 56.8. 1 Pet. 1.6.

29. Whether he that suffers or loses most for Christ, be not the greatest
gainer? Mat. 5.11, 12. Romans 8.17, 18. 2 Cor. 4.17.

30. Whether by some men's lives and actions, it may be supposed, that they do
really believe there is a God, a day of Judgment, an Heaven and an Hell?

IV. DECAD.
31. Whether the death of many righteous in a few months time, be not a sad
prognostication of much evil to come? and whether every day of our life, we
ought not seriously to think of, and carefully prepare for the hour of our
death? Esa. 57.1. Job 14.14. Psalm. 90.12.

32. Whether a covert under the wings of the Almighty, be not a safe and a warm
place in stormy times? and whether they may not reckon themselves secure whom
God keeps? Psalm. 91.1, 4.

33. Whether the bosom of God be not the sweetest, highest and brightest place
in Heaven? and whether it be not the place where Abraham lies? Luke 16.23.

34. Whether his case be not to be lamented, who makes it his business so to
live, as to dye a fool? and whether a poor Lazarus be not in an happier
condition than he? Luke 12.20. and Chap. 16.22.

35. Whether he that refuses to answer God's Calls and Counsels in the time of
his Life, can expect God's answers to his calls and cries at the hour of his
death? Prove. 1.24 to 31.

36. Whether Fornicators, Adulterers, and other such like, shall not do well to
consider, that God's eye is broad open upon them at midnight, when no candle is
in the room, no company there, and the curtains drawn round about them? and
whether he does not see their thoughts too, as well as their actions? Psalm.
90.8. and 139.1 to 14. Heb. 13.4.

37. Whether, if every idle word must be accounted for, as certainly it shall,
Mat. 12.36. it will not be sad with them, whose mouths belch forth nothing but
oaths, cursings, blasphemies, scurrilities, all manner of filthy
communications, and bitter revilings against God, his ways and People? Psalm.
10.7. Romans 3.13, 14. 1 Pet. 2.23. Jude 15.

38. Whether the righteous God be not engaged to a severe punishment of the
wrongs and injuries done to him and his? and whether present forbearance will
pass for payment, or does not make way rather for the heavier blows at last?
Psalm. 37, 12, 13. Eccles. 8.11, 12. Prove. 11.21.

39. Whether God will be mocked, or does not take notice of the intolerable
insolences of profane scoffers at his Holy things, especially his servants
the Prophets, and the messages which they bring? and whether this was not one
great cause of all that wrath that brake out against Judah, when they were
carried away captives into Babylon? 2 Chronicles. 36.16. Gal. 6.7.

40. Whether the terrible Judgments of God, in the present death of four of
the Actors of the passion of Christ, upon the very place where, and while they
were acting it (mentioned by Philip Melancthon) are not to be taken notice of
by such as adventure on such bold attempts?

V. DECAD.
41. Whether Idolatry were not one principal sin, that sent the ten Tribes into
perpetual captivity? and whether the practice of it among Christians, be not
one great hindrance of the conversion of the Jews, who having smarted so much
and so long together for that sin, do they not now dread to come where it is,
or to embrace that Religion that is defiled with it? 2 King. 17.7. to 19.

42. Whether the worshipping of the true God, after a false manner, be not
Idolatry in the Scripture account, as well as the worshipping of a false God?
and whether God cares for any worshippers, but such as worship him in Spirit
and Truth? Ezekiel. 43.8. John 4.24.

43. Whether a little pollution, mixed with the pure Doctrine, Discipline and
Worship of God be not like a little spider in a cup of rich wine, which may
poison it as well as a bigger? and whether God does not expect full as great
care and caution about the matter and manner of his Worship in the days of the
Gospel, as he did in the days of Moses, who was not to vary in the least, from
the pattern that was showed him in the Mount? Exodus 35.40. Ezekiel. 44.7, 8.

44. Whether it be not the peculiar Office of the Spirit of God, to teach his
People to pray? and whether any prayers will be accepted, but such as he
dictates? Romans 8.15, 26, 27. Psalm. 10.17.

45. Whether seeming grace or holiness, will qualify a man for happiness, any
more than real sins? and whether those Scribes and Pharisees, which our Savior
calls Hypocrites, in their external acts of worship, and public profession of
Religion, were not in appearance very devout men? Mat. 23.14, 25, to 30. Phil.
3.4, 5, 6.

46. Whether any leaven so sowers the Conscience? any thorn so sharply pricks
it? any dagger so deeply wounds it, as hypocrisy? 1 Cor. 5.8. Prove. 18.14.

47. Whether Swearers, Drunkards, Whore-masters, or any other profane persons
and lewd livers, be any whit the better men, because they go to Divine Service
twice a day, and perhaps can say all the Prayers without book too (being so
often used to them) unless they truly repent and reform? Esa. 29.13. Jer. 7.9,
10, 11.

48. Whether the Gospel should not be preached in season and out of season? and
whether; where vision fails, the people are not in danger of perishing? 2 Timothy
4.2. Prove. 29.18.

49. Whether the darkness, occasioned among a People, by the absence of the Sun
of Righteousness, and his shining Gospel, be not far greater, and more terrible
than that of Egypt, it being a deprivation of a more glorious Light? Luke 1.79.

50. Whether they that cannot endure the light of the Gospel, have not sore
eyes? and they that cannot see the light of it when it shines brightly, are not
stark blind? and whether they that do their utmost to extinguish it, are not
willing to have themselves and deeds undiscovered, and so go to Hell without
stop? Joh. 3.19, 20. Ephesians. 5.13. 2 Cor. 4.3, 4.

VI. DECAD.
51. Whether Christ his local descent into Hell, were an Article of the
Christian Faith, the first 400. years after Christ? and whether those words of
our Savior upon the Cross, It is finished, (Joh. 19.20.) do leave any ground
to believe that he suffered any pain, or felt any farther wrath of God
afterward, as common People are apt to conceive, by those words of his,
Descending into Hell?

52. Whether the words of that Article in the Creed, Crucified, dead and
buried, do not sufficiently express Christ his remaining in the state of the
dead, without the addition of any other words? and if they do, whether then the
following words must not be taken in a distinct sense? or else be liable to the
danger of a Tantology?

53. Whether the Lords day does not consist of as many hours as any other day?
and whether it ought not to be wholly set apart, either for personal duties in
secret; or for private duties in the Family; or for public duties of Piety in
the Congregation, and of charity among Neighbors, as occasion requires? Exodus
20.8, 9, 10, 11. and Chap. 31.13, to 18. Levit. 19.3, 30. Mat. 12.1, to 9.

54. Whether a great and strict charge does not lie on Parents and Governors
of Families, to Catechize Children and Servants, and to instruct them in the
admonition and nurture of the Lord? and whether the want of this be not one
great hindrance to the work of the Gospel in the public ministration of it?
Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. Prove. 22.6. Ephesians. 6.4.

55. Whether the want of frequent and plain Preaching and pressing the
fundamentals of Religion, by the Ministers of the Gospel, be not one chief
occasion of the great ignorance and confusion, that is ordinarily found in the
minds of People, about matters of Faith and Practice, and of their aptness to
be seduced into errors?

56. Whether it may be ever hoped for in this world, that all men shall be just
of a mind, or of the same opinions and apprehensions (in matters disputable at
least) any more than all to be of one and the same complexion and feature in
their faces? 1 Cor. 1.12. and Chap. 3.3, 4, 5, 6. and Chap. 12.4, 5.

57. Whether Parents ought not to bear a great reverence toward their
Children, in doing and saying nothing in their sight and hearing, which they
are unwilling to have them learn or practice? and whether evil communication in
them as well as others, does not corrupt good manners? 1 Cor. 15.33. Ephesians. 4.29.

58. Whether often dropping savory and good speeches among those we have
ordinary converse with, in design to win souls, or to quicken grace in our
selves and others, be not a sowing of precious seed, that will be sure to come
up at one time or another in a fruitful Harvest? and whether Abraham, Joshua,
and David, with other eminent Saints in Scripture, were not wont to be much
employed this way? Genesis 18.19. Josh. 24.15. Psalm. 34.11. Prove. 31.1, to 10.
Prove. 1.1, 3, 4. and Chap. 10.21.

59. Whether he that willingly and constantly neglects the duties of secret
meditation and Prayer betwixt God and his own soul, may pass in charity ^or a
good Christian? Mat. 6.5, 6.

60. Whether a cold, flat, dull spirit of Prayer among Gods People, be not a
sad symptom, both of their unfitness to suffer afflictions, and unpreparedness
for deliverance out of it? Esa. 43.22. and whether when God intends mercy, he
does not give an heart to pray earnestly for it? Jer. 29.10, to 15.

VII. DECAD.
61. Whether the floodgates of all manner of sins standing open among a
People, and no stop put to them, will not let in also inundations of
judgments? and whether in such times there can be any more than two parties
found, either such as willingly partake of the common guilt, or such as sigh
and cry for the abominations committed among them? Lam. 1.8, 9. Ezekiel. 9.4.

62. Whether those that live mo^^ holily, mourn for their own and the Nations
sin most affectionately, and pray for their Prince most fervently, are not the
best subjects? 1 Timothy 2.1, 2.

63. Whether pure Religion, and undefiled, does not consist in the
conscientious performances of the duties of both Tables, viz. of Holiness
toward God, and Righteousness toward men? and whether he that most truly
fears God, does not most truly honor the King too? and whether the second must
not needs be affirmed, where the first is granted? 1 Pet. 2.17. Act. 24.16.

64. Whether there can be any comfort in suffering, unless it be for well
doing? and whether a man has not need of a very good and clear cause, that
lies in a Prison for it? 1 Pet. 3.17.

65. Whether Prayers and tears are not the Saints weapons, and after their
death too? and whether by ^hese they may not hope to prevail against their
adversaries in due time, Rev. 6.9, 10. Exodus 2.23, 24, 25.

66. Whether injuries, especially ^or God's sake, are not patiently to be born,
rather than revenged? and whether Christ himself give not a great example and
proof of it? Luke 6.28, 29. 1 Pet. 2.23.

67. Whether it was not providential, that the name of the first man that dyed
for the Christian Religion (Stephen) should signify a Crown? and whether that
crowned Emperor, Philip the Arabian (Successor to Gordianus) who in the time
of the 7th. persecution was slain, because a Christian, was not advanced to a
much higher dignity than he had before, by his being crowned with Martyrdom? 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. Jam. 1.12. Rev. 2.10. and 3.21.

68. Whether a Prison for Christ's sake, does not become a Palace and place of
glory, and a close stinking dungeon, a Paradise of sweetest pleasures? and
whether Christ himself be not fellow-Prisoner there? Rev. 2.10. Act. 12.7. and
16.25. Mat. 25.36.

69. Whether fires of the Saints Bodies are not made of the richest fuels? and
whether God smells not sweet savours from these flames? Phil. 2.17. Romans 12.1.

70. Whether the Ashes of holy Martyrs, are not reserved in golden Urnes? and
whether the most lasting perfumes, are not found in the graves of those that
dye in, and for Christ, especially since Christ himself and his odours lay in a
grave? Joh. 19.39, 40, 41. 1 These. 4.14, 16.

VIII. DECAD.
71. Whether the History of the ten persecutions, especially the Martyrdoms of
the Apostles, of Epagathus, Zenon, and other Noble men of Rome, of Ignatius
Bishop of Antioch, of Eustachius, one of Hadrian's most ^aliant Generals of his
Armies, of ^olycarpus Bishop of Smyrna, of Fe^^citas and her seven Sons, of
Germa^icus Sanctus, Maturus, Attalus, Laurentius, Blandina, with very many
others, are not most pleasing and profitable to be read in suffering times?

72. Whether visions of God, and ^is holy Angels, to some of the afore^aid
Martyrs, and their fellows, did not fill them with ineffable joys in the midst
of their greatest sufferings? and whether the intensness and sweetness thereof,
were not the true reason (as the Writers of these things report) why from
morning to night they could endure such exquisite torments, as burning plates,
scalding lead, boiling oils, and many other such like, inflicted on their
naked bodies, as if they had never felt them? 1 Pet. 4.13, 14. Heb. 10.35. and
12.2.

73. Whether some may not be killed, but not hurt? and others not only dye, but
be killed by death? Rev. 2.11, 23.

74. Whether all the world be not a place of exile to him, whose Country is
Heaven? and whether a Believers home can be any where but in his Fathers house?
John 14. 2. Heb. 11.13, 14, 15, 16.

75. Whether Holiness be not the beauty of youth, and the glory of old age? the
shine of this, and of the other world? Prove. 1.8, 9. and 16.31.

76. Whether the Sun in the firmament has half so many beams and influential
powers, as the Covenant of Grace has consolations? and whether the Promises
are not the breasts thereof, and so full, that the Babes of Christ can never
empty them by sucking? Heb. 6.17, 18. 2 Pet. 1.4. Esa. 66.11, 12.

77. Whether God be not such an ever and overflowing Fountain of Life and
Grace, as sends forth millions of fresh and new streams continually? and
whether all other fountains of good are any other than so many single drops of
this? Psalm. 36.8, 9. Esa. 12.2, 3.

78. Whether all our flowers grow not in Gods Garden? and whether he be not
provoked to crop them, when we look too much upon them, or smell too much to
them? Hos. 2.8, 9, 10.

79. Whether engaging the heart more than is meet, in creature comforts, be not
like a surfeit from sweetmeats, that often brings death? Luke 8.14. 2 Timothy 3.4.

80. Whether most men like spiders, do not suck poison from God's flowers;
rather than like Bees, make honey out of them? and whether ingratitude, does
not turn his honey into gall, and presumption, his grace into wantonness? 2 Timothy 3.2. Jude 4.

IX. DECAD.
81. Whether it be not better to suffer than to sin? and whether many do not
wish they had done so, when (...) is too late? 1 Pet. 4.16. Mat. 27.3, 4, 5.

82. Whether God will thank any man for being so over-careful or bu^^ in
providing for the peace of the Church (or his own peace rather) tha^ he is not
so careful as he should be for the purity of it? and whether it be (...) good
way to procure its peace, b^ yielding to any thing that pollutes it? Ezekiel.
13.17, to 23.

83. Whether a tender conscience, that fears to offend God in the least thing,
especially in matters of his divine Worship, be not less dangerous, than a bold
conscience that adventures far, and a large conscience tha^ can swallow any
thing for preferment^ sake? and whether a tender conscience be not a better
guard upon the purity of Gods holy Ordinances, than a forward compliance with
those precepts of men, which (if Christ himself be worthy of belief) renders
the Worship of God vain? Esa. 29.13. Mat. 15.7, 8, 9. Mark. 7.6, 7, 8, 9.

84. Whether carnal policy, love of ^^lf and base fear, have not betrayed ^any
a brave Cause? and whether he that steps back, and loses but one ^oot of his
ground, does not draw his ^dversary the faster and more fiercely ^^n him, till
he be quite beaten out of ^he field by him? Gal. 1.16, 17. and ^hap. 2.4, 5.

85. Whether those wounds upon ^he Gospel, be not most gaping, and those gashes
in the profession of it, ^he deepest, which are made by men, who being reputed
truly godly, do most unworthily renounce, or at least not openly, strenuously
and constantly assert, those professed Principles and practices, which with
good reason, they formerly, more ways than one declared for, and maintained,
in the face of the whole world? and whether Francis Spira found not the bitter
fruit of such a tergiversation from the Truth, when he subscribed to the Popes
Legate? Oh how did he cry out of the shipwreck which he had made of Faith and a
good Conscience I how did he torment his own soul, with that dreadful Scripture
( Prove. 14.14.) The back-slider in heart shall be filled with his own ways!
which sore judgment the Lord avert (for his mercy sake) and prevent in others.

86. Whether patience under afflictions, be not best maintained in a gracious
heart, by thinking well of God, and a firm belief that all things shall work
together for good? and whether the consideration, that God is a creating God,
and so able to create succors and means of help, when all visible hopes from
second causes fail, be not a ground of great consolation to Believers when most
oppressed? Romans 8.28. Heb. 12.5, 6, 7, 10. Esa. 50.2. and 59.1.

87. Whether God intends any more hurt to his servants, when he puts them into
the fire, than the Refiner does to his precious metals, when he puts them into
the Furnace? and whether it can reasonably be imagined, that he means to
consume his gold and silver, and so impoverish himself? Mal. 3.2, 3. Zachar.
13.9. 1 Pet. 4.12.

88. Whether Gods actions are not always best, how cross soever they may seem
to us, and done upon the highest and best reasons? and whether there be not
good reason for us to conclude so, though sometimes we understand them not?
Psalm. 136.5. Prove. 3.19, 20. Job 36.22, 23.

89. Whether God only be not the most absolute Sovereign, that by a peculiar
prerogative, makes his own will the rule of whatsoever he does, both in Heaven
and Earth? and whether any thing can possibly be contingent to him, or happen
otherwise (even in any the least circumstance) than he has before decreed,
ordained, and appointed? or than he orders, permits, and directs? Job 9.12.
Esa. 46.11. Act. 2.23. and 4.28. and 17.26. Romans 9.15, 18, to 24.

90. Whether God be not greatly to be observed and admired, in all that he
does, not only in his works of Creation, but in the continued course of his
renewed Providence? and whether every thing that proceeds from God, should not
lead us to God? Act. 17.26, 27.

X. DECAD.
91. Whether it be not a duty to follow Providence, and not to lead it? to be
led by it, and not to drive it? or whether we can have peace in doing or
suffering any thing without a good warrant, or call from God? Psalm. 73.24. Heb.
5.4.

92. Whether Original Sin was not the Devils first Brat, begot upon humane
nature, with its own consent? and whether millions of millions more, of all
manner of transgressions, have not ever since been conceived and sprang from
the same womb? Genesis 3.4, 5, 13. 2 Cor. 11.3. Romans 5.12, 16, 17, 18, 19. Genesis
6.5. Eccles. 8.11. Jam. 1.14.

93. Whether all manner of miseries and deaths, have not come in at this door
only? Romans 5.12, to 17. Jam. 1.15.

94. Whether we are not worse enemies to our selves by far, than the Devil can
possibly be, since he can never hurt us without our own consent? Prove. 1.10.
Psalm. 50.18.

95. Whether the heart of man before 'twas entered and possessed by sin, was not
the very Paradise of Paradise, an Eden within Eden it self, even Gods own sweet
Garden of delight, where himself, and Son, and Spirit, did all dwell and
converse together? and whether ever since it has not been the very spawning
place of all filthiness? a Cage of unclean birds? an horrible deep and dark
pit, of hissing stinging Serpents? and these so bedded and twisted together,
and so continually multiplying, that it is utterly impossible they should ever
be destroyed any other way, but by plentiful streams of Christ his own wreaking
warm blood, poured hot upon them, from his dying heart. This indeed can stiffle
and kill them, when nothing else can, Genesis 1.27, 28. compared with Chap. 6.5.
and with Jer. 17.9. as also with 1 John 1.7.

96. Whether Pelagiamsm, that denies Original Sin, and makes death not to be
the punishment thereof, but the mere necessary consequence of nature only, be
not a most dangerous Heresy? and whether the doctrine of general Redemption,
which grants Original Sin, but then takes it off again from all mankind, by
attributing too large an extent to the death of Christ, be not every whit as
dangerous? and whether both these Grand Heresies, are not against most express
Scriptures? the first against, Romans 5.12. and chap. 3.9, 10, 11, 12, 22, 23.
Gal. 3.23. the second against, Esa. 53.11, 12. Joh. 17.9. Romans 3.26. and 5.12.
and 6.23. compared with, Genesis 2.17.

97. Whether the roarings which some men have in their Consciences, when their
own sins and Gods wrath, are let out against them, even here in this Life, be
not more hideous and lamentable, than those that were made by the Bull of
Phalaris, or the red-hot chains and grid-irons, that some of the holy Martyrs
were broiled and fried to death by? and yet how short does this come of Hell?
Prove. 18.14. Mat. 27.4, 5. Mat. 22.13. and 25.41. Esa. 33.14.

98. Whether force and violence, upon so tender a place as Conscience, are not
sore temptations? and whether, while they cause men to sin against their own
light, they do not often occasion far more grievous torments inwardly, than
those outward fiery trials of affliction can possibly be, which they dread so
much, and seek this way to avoid? Prove. 14.14.

99. Whether God be not as skilful, yea infinitely more skilful, to draw good
out of evil; yea the greatest good out of the greatest evil, than men are to
make sovereign Triacles out of strong poisons? Romans 8.28.

100. Whether the blood of Christ be not the most sovereign Balsom? and whether
it be possible for the least wound, that ever sin made, to be cured without it?
and lastly, whether Christ be not the best Physician, as well as Chyrugion,
since none that he has undertaken, ever miscarried under his hand, or ever
can, Heb. 9.14, 22. Mat. 9.12. Luke 10.34, 35. John 6.37.

XI. DECAD.
101. Whether all the Monarchies in the world, and millions more of the same
kind, can bear equal weight with one dram of saving Grace? and whether they
that make drudges of themselves to get wealth, but never mind the salvation of
their precious souls, do not sell Heaven and Happiness for a golden nothing,
and so make sad work for themselves when they lie a dying? Mat. 16.26.

102. Whether a little Religion in great persons, does not go a great way, and
shine far? and whether such persons, in the midst of their many temptations
from Honors, Riches, and Pleasures, are not rather to be pitied and prayed
for, than envied? 1 Cor. 1.26.

103. Whether Jesus Christ be not worthy to be accounted and made use of, as
the most illustrious and refulgent Jewel that can be worn, either in the bosom
of Noblest Ladies, or on the Diadems of mightiest Monarchs? 1 Pet. 2.6, 7.

104. Whether Glory does not sparkle in Grace here, as in a rich Diamond full
of Angels, and Grace flame in Glory hereafter, as in a bright shining Sun? and
whether that which is called Grace in the cradle, be not the same, that is
called Glory upon the Throne? 2 Cor. 3.18.

105. Whether the poor Groom in the Stable, or the Scullion in the Kitchen,
that has true Faith in Christ, and sincere Love to God, shall not be sure of a
place in Heaven, when the great Lord or Lady which he serves, having none of
these Graces, shall never come there? Jam. 2.5.

106. Whether it be not great pity, that one should get into the Suburbs of
Heaven, but never into Heaven it self? and whether it does not concern the
fine-spun Hypocrite, and the great moralist, to think of this? Mark 12.3.

107. Whether every one should not strive to be better than others, and to set
the liveliest patterns of holiness? and whether the lowly Grace of Humility,
which like the delicate scented Violet, hangs its head near the ground, and
hides it self as 'twere, ununder its own leaves, be not as sweet as any of the
taller graces? Tit. 2.7. and 3.1. 1 Cor. 14.12. also, Prove. 15.33. and 22.4. 1
Pet. 5.5.

108. Whether many Heathen, for their moral virtues, did not outdo many of
those, that in our days, go by the name of Christians? and whether it be not
best, so to live always, as one would wish to have lived when he comes to dye?
Mat. 11.21.

109. Whether he takes not the most desirable journey, and has not the best
company for his fellow-travellers, that goes toward Heaven, and gets thither
at last, though sometimes his way be dirty? Mat. 7.14. compared with, Prove.
3.17.

110. Whether the Saints do not always walk with the best guards; for while
wicked men are attended with none but the Devil and his Imps, are not they ever
surrounded with the holy Angels, and with God to boot? Psalm. 91.9, 10, 11, 12.
Heb. 1.14.

XII. DECAD.
111. Whether it be not the wisest way to get preferment in that Court, where
all are Kings? and whether a Believers Crown of Thorns, that is lined with
Diamonds, be not richer, and more easy, than those Crowns of Diamonds that are
lined with Thorns? Rev. 1.6. Mat. 13.7, 22.

112. Whether any Garden or Gallery, be so pleasant, sweet, and stately to walk
in, as where Christ and his Spouse are wont to meet? and whether any
nourishment be so desirable, as that honey and milk which they eat of, and
those spiced Wines which they drink? Cant. 5.1. and 7.5. and 8.2. Esa. 25.6.

113. Whether the Citizens Merchandise, or the Countrey-mans Husbandry, the
Gentleman's Revenues, and the Poor man's Labors, are not more or less
prosperous, sweet and comfortable, as they have more or less interest in God,
and converse with him? Deuter. 28.2, to 21.

114. Whether any calling, employment or business, can be warrantable, which
one cannot in Faith pray for, and expect a blessing on? and whether
Stage Players, makers of Popish Pictures and Images, and many others, are not
concerned in this Quaery? Romans 14.23. Esa. 44.9, to 21.

115. Whether a secret curse does not the same in some men's great Estates, that
worms do at the roots of fairest flowers? and whether every thing on this side
Heaven, be not either a Feather or a Thorn, vanity or vexation of spirit? Prove.
3.33. Mal. 2.2. Job 20.26. Eccles. 1.2, 14.

116. Whether holy tears have not a shrill voice? and whether a right Prayer
indeed comes not into Gods ear, as soon as it is out of a Believers heart?
Psalm. 6.8. Esa. 65.24.

117. Whether one affectionate warm active Christian, among many cold ones, be
not like one live coal, that enkindles many dead ones? and like a lodestone,
in the midst of many needles, which draws and gives magnetique touches to them
all, by virtue whereof, they draw others likewise? 1 Cor. 11.1. Heb. 3.13. John
1.43, to 47. Act. 18.24, to 28.

118. Whether passions out of order, are not like fire out of the chimney? and
whether all care ought not to be used to keep them within their due place and
compass? Jam. 1.19, 20. and 3.5, 6. Ephesians. 4.26.31.

119. Whether it be not the duty of Husbands and Wives, not only to pray for
and with one another, at times of ordinary address to God, but also at special
seasons in their retirements, frequently set apart for that purpose betwixt
themselves? and whether this be not an excellent means to procure blessings
upon, and to keep all things in sweet harmony in their Families? Zachar. 12.11,
12, 13, 14. Luke 1.6.

120. Whether the Husband ought not to dwell with his Wife as a man of
knowledge, and to be a good guide and head to her? and whether the Wife by her
virtues, should not become a Crown to her Husband? and whether in this case,
the Head and the Crown be not well met? 1 Pet. 3.7. Prove. 12.4.

XIII. DECAD.
121. Whether Kings, Princes, and Nobles, have not the greatest opportunities
of doing good in their Generations? the greatest obligations upon them toward
God? and the greatest accounts to make to him? Esa. 49.23. Psalm. 101.
throughout, and Psalm. 34.11. 2 Chronicles 29.36. Esth. 4.13. Nehem. 1.4. Luke 1.3.

122. Whether Judges and Lawyers, of all others, have not the most frequent and
lively representations of the day of Judgment before their eyes? and whether
such of them as take Bribes, give wrong Judgment, undertake bad Causes, and
refuse to plead good ones, shall not certainly come to their trial, at that
High Tribunal? 2 Chronicles. 19.6. Levit. 19.15. Prove. 31.9. Esa. 1.17, 23. Deuteronomy.
25.1. also, Psalm. 94.21. Esa. 5.23. Heb. 10.30.

123. Whether those are not weak Nets, or those Nets not well managed, which
will catch and hold little fishes only, but not great ones? and whether those
Laws are not as weak, or at least weakly executed, that catch little offenders
only, but let great ones escape? 1 Samuel 8.3. Esa. 29.21.

124. Whether the pardoning of many and great crimes, be not sometimes very
seasonable and necessary? and whether this be not to imitate God himself, in
one of his most Royal Prerogatives? 2 Samuel 19.21, 22, 23. Prove. 10.12. Exodus
34.7. Jer. 50.20.

125. Whether he that is implacable against another, that has causlesly
offended him, so as never to pardon nor forget the wrong done to him, has any
reason to hope for mercy from God, whom himself offends daily and hourly? Romans
1.31. Luke 17.2, 3. Mat. 6.14, 15. 2 Cor. 2.7.

126. Whether he that prays God would forgive him, as he forgives others (whom
he neither does forgive, nor ever will) does not thereby give answer to
himself, and conclude never to be forgiven? or at least, does not his tongue
contradict his heart? and that in the sight of him who knows all hearts? Mat.
6.12, 13, 14, 15. Act. 15.8. Luke 6.37. and 11.4.

127. Whether some men do not sin fearfully, by rash vows, and obstinate
resolutions, without and against all rule or president from the Word of God?
and whether such men fall not into dreadful snares thereby? or can have any
other way to deliver themselves from the sin or danger thereof, but by
repenting with all speed, and nullifying such unwarrantable vows and
resolutions? Judge. 11.39. Act. 9.23, 24. and 23, 12, 13, 14.

128. Whether it be not an unparalled, both crime, folly and cruelty, to be
irreconcilable to another for the same faults, (or perhaps less) that ones
self either is or has been guilty of, and yet reckon upon going to Heaven at
last, without any greater (or perhaps not so great) evidence of repentance or
reformation, than the Party he is so irreconcilable to does give? Mat. 18.32,
33, 34, 35.

129. Whether a man's own Conscience be not a Law, a Witness, and a Judge to
himself? and whether the Righteous God does not pass the same Sentence upon a
man, that his own conscience does? Prove. 14.14. Romans 2.14, 15, 16. 1 John 3.20,
21.

130. Whether it be likely that he, who at any time thinks it too soon to
repent, or thinks it soon enough to repent at any time, means ever to repent at
all? and whether any man be truly wise, but he that is wise at last, and so
wise for eternity? Heb. 3.7, to 16. Romans 2.5. Prove. 19.20. Deuteronomy. 32.29.

XIV. DECAD.
131. Whether part of a good Mothers employment, should not be a constant
endeavor to instill knowledge and grace into her Childrens hearts? and the like
of a Mistress to her Maidens? Prove. 31.1. 2 Timothy 1.5.

132. Whether a disobedient Child, that truly repents, and endeavors to amend
for the future, may not hope for mercy from his Father in Heaven, in case he
cannot obtain none from his earthly Parents? and whether he that wants bowels
to another in misery, may not fear he shall find as little favor himself, when
he stands most in need of it? Luke 15.17, to 22. Prove. 12.10. Jer. 6.23. Jam.
2.13.

133. Whether it be possible for Children, by all the duty and love they can
express, to make full payment of what they owe to Parents? and whether they
ought not to do their utmost to become comforts to them, and be grieved at the
very heart if they have been crosses? Luke 15.18, 19.

134. Whether they are not the best neighbors, friends and companions, whose
constant discourse is most heavenly, and their examples most Holy? 1 Thessalonians. 1.7.

135. Whether she makes not the best Wife that has two Husbands, one in Heaven
as well as one on Earth? and whether she can love the latter well, unless she
love the other better? Cant. 2.16. and 6.3. and 7.10.

136. Whether to match with Christ be not high preferment? and whether Gods
most wonderful condescension, in accepting any poor vile mortal, and making one
fit to become a Spouse for his Son, be not a good document and instruction to
those Parents, that sometimes find their Children match below their rank and
estates, provided they meet with internal qualifications of mind, suitable and
commendable in the want of other things? Mat. 22.2. Esa. 54.5.

137. Whether pride be not a swelling tumor, most angry, fiery, and festering,
and upon the worst place of all, the heart? and whether reviling language does
not argue a blistered tongue, and slanderous lips cut like a Razor? Prove. 16.5.
and 21.24. and 29.22, 23.

138. Whether any two that lie in a bed together, after personal and secret
liftings up of their respective hearts to God, can spend their time better
before they rise, than by quickening each other with holy conference, and
consulting how best to serve God all the day after? Psalm. 5.3. and 63.6. Mal.
3.16.

139. Whether as soon as our eyes are open in the mornings, we should not
prevent Satan, by giving the first possession of our hearts to God? and whether
it be not needful always, to set a watchful and strong guard about them, to
keep the Devil out? Psalm. 63.1. and 88.13. and 139.18. also, Prove. 4.23.

140. Whether the Prayer of Jonah out of the belly of the Whale, got not as
quick to Heaven, and without wetting its wings too, as Solomon's did from the
Holy Temple? and whether he that prays most sincerely has not the sweetest
breath, as well as he that sings most spiritually has the sweetest voice?
Jonah 2.7. Cant. 2.14. Rev. 5.8.

XV. DECAD.
141. Whether God in his appointed time, will not fully vindicate the honor of
his own holy Ordinances, upon the prophaners, despisers, and contemners of
them? and whether ^e has not done so sooner or later, ^n all foregoing Ages?
Malech. 1.7. Isa. 5.24. Ezekiel. 22.8. Amos 2.4, 5. 1 Cor. 11.30.

142. Whether a quiet, but evil Conscience, be not an Ulcer most dangerous, and
of all others, the most incurable? Prove. 18.14. Mat. 2.5. Genesis 4.13, 14.

143. Whether he be not the best Soldier, that maintains a spiritual warfare
against Sin, Satan, and his own evil heart? 1 Timothy 1.18, 19. Ephesians. 6.11, 12.

144. Whether the Devil, that old and subtle Serpent, be so able and cunning
to deceive a man, as a man's own heart is to deceive it self? and whether Satan,
with all his temptations, can hurt us without our own consent? and whether sins
are not greater or lesser, as more or less o^ our own will is in them? Genesis
3.13. compared with, Jerem. 17.9. Jam. 1.14.

145. Whether Godliness be not an hard trade or mystery, to be diligently and
carefully learned? and whether that Apprentice deserves, or can expect to live
well hereafter, that trifles away his opportunity, and is not industrious to
get the mysteries of his Trade before his time be out? 1 Timothy 3.16.

146. Whether all the most precious commodities that Merchants, Goldsmiths and
Jewelers deal for, are not sorry wares, in comparison of those that a good
Christian trades for with Heaven? Prove. 3.13, 14. Mat. 13.45, 46.

147. Whether it be not a miserable thing, for one to have the chief work for
his soul to do, when the glass of his Life is run out? and whether it be not in
vain for him then to call time again? Heb. 3.7, 13. and 12.17.

148. Whether that stubborn Impe^itent, which would not be reclaimed in his
lifetime, by all counsels and entreaties whatsoever, might not thank, himself
for those horrors, which caused him to cry out at his last breath, Oh! that I
had been made a toad under a block, when I was made a man? Prove. 1.24, to 32.

149. Whether mutual admonitions, reproofs and exhortations, are not duties
that lie on all men in their fit seasons? and whether, when they are wisely
placed, they are not like Apples of gold with Pictures of silver? Heb. 3.13.
and 10.25. Tit. 3.10.

150. Whether the weakest men, are not soonest and most invincibly conquered by
their own passions? and whether he be not the greatest slave of all, that is a
slave to his own lusts? Eccles. 7.9. Prove. 14.17. Romans 7.14, 23.

XVI. DECAD.
151. Whether he be not guilty of an high affront against God, that will not be
prevailed with to imitate him, so glorious a pattern, in pardoning offenders,
and showing mercy to such as have need of it? Luke 6.36, 37, 38. compared with,
Prove. 1.29, 30, 31.

152. Whether he that most sympathizeth with the poor suffering Servants of
Jesus Christ (be they hungry, naked, sick, or in Prison) according to his
ability, shall not be well paid in the other world? Mat. 25.34, to 41.

153. Whether he that wants such a sympathizing heart as aforesaid, and is not
ready to the utmost of his power, to give ease and succor to the said
suffering Members of Christ, may in charity be supposed to be any true integral
part of Christ's mystical Body? 1 Cor. 12.26, 27. Ephesians. 4.25. and 5.30.

154. Whether Jesus Christ does not improve all the interest that he has in
Heaven, for the good of his Redeemed Ones, the interest of his Godhead, the
interest of his Sonship, the interest of his Mediator-ship? and whether he
does not deserve, that they also should improve all the interest they have in
this world, for him? Joh. 17.12, to 26. Heb. 6.20. and 7.25. Psalm. 116.12, 13,
14.

155. Whether he that has a great Estate, but not an heart to improve it for
God, were not much better be without it? and whether he that has both these,
does not either find or make opportunities, to express his great love to Christ
this way, and so not only brings a blessing upon what he enjoyes here, but
lays up vast treasures for himself hereafter? Luke 16.19, to 26. compared
with, Luke 19.8. and Mark 10.21. and with Luke 16.9.

156. Whether if Darius an Heathen Prince, thought the Present of an handful of
cold water offered him in his Progress by Sinetas a poor Shepherd, (for want of
something better) worthy to be received into a cup of gold, and then the cup it
self to be given to him (as Aelian reports in his various History) will not the
great God much more reward him that gives but a cup of cold water (if he be
able to give no better thing) to one that bears the name of a Disciple? Mat.
10.42.

157. Whether he that does good with what he has, according to his ability,
while he lives, be not the best Executor to his own Estate? and whether he that
is most rich in good Works, be not the richest man? 1 Timothy 6.18, 19. Rev. 14.13.

158. Whether Covetousness be not Idolatry, and such Idolatry, as of all
others, has most worshippers, and most hearty ones? and whether some rich
pinching muck-worms, though they pay all men their dues, yet may not dye much
in debt, viz. to their own backs and bellies? Colos. 3.5. Eccles. 5.11.

159. Whether unjust and cruel gripers and graspers, as well as profuse wasters
of Estates, have not sad accounts to make? and whether this Epitaph may not be
written on their grave-stones, Here lies the worlds rich fools, who dyed
miserable poor men? Luke 12.20. Eccles. 2.18, to 24.

160. Whether King Cyrus his kisses to his Favorites, were not of greater value
than the golden Cups he gave to strangers (as Xenophon reports?) and whether
Gods special love, be not much more desirable than his common mercies? Exodus
19.5. Cant. 1.2.

XVII. DECAD.
161. Whether honest thrift, and ingenuous industry in men's particular Callings
(always provided that God has his due share of their hearts, and their time
in his Service) are not great gatherers, and fill not the bag apace? and
whether that which men get by lying, cozening, cheating, and stealing, is not
wont to be put into a bag that has many holes in it? Prove. to. 4. and 12.24,
27. and 22.29. also, Micah 6.10, 11, 12. Hag. 1.6.

162. Whether a good Conscience be not a Nightingale, that sings all the year
long in a man's own bosom? the best and most sure friend in evil times? and a
continual Feast, affording the daintiest dishes in their proper seasons? Act.
23.1. and 24.16. Romans 9.1. 2 Cor. 1.12. 1 Timothy 1.5, 19. and 3.9. 2 Timothy 1.3.
Heb. 13.18. 1 Pet. 3.16, 21. Prove. 15.15. and 14.14.

163. Whether the loss of ones inward peace, for the greatest profits and
preferments in the world, can possibly be recompensed thereby, or be recovered
again with ease? Mat. 16.26.

164. Whether temporal things, are not first desired, and then had, but
spiritual things first had, and then desired? and whether true desires of
Grace, do not suppose and proceed from Grace? Neh. 1.11. Esa. 20.8, 9. 2 Cor.
8.12.

165. Whether the Graces of the Spirit of God, may not sometimes be found
environed with ill natures, and thorny dispositions, as ripe Strawberries among
nettles, and under briry bushes? 1 Cor. 6.10, 11.

166. Whether the highest stars make not the quickest motions, and heavy
bodies, when nearest their centers? and whether the holiest hearts do not the
like, in their Heavenly motions toward God? Psalm. 63.8. and 143.6, 9. and
119.60.

167. Whether the speech used by a Persian Queen, when her King gave her a most
costly Jewel to wear, saying, You Sir, are my only Jewel; may not most properly
and truly be uttered by the Spouse of Christ, to him her Sovereign Lord and
Husband? Prove. 5.10, to 16.

168. Whether in times of desertion, one may conclude, Gods face will not shine
again, any more than by a dark Night, that the Sun will not return in the
Morning? and whether a burning-glass, that has nothing in it at midnight, may
not the next day, be full of condensed and flaming beams? Psalm. 30.5. and Psalm.
4.6. and 80.3, 19. Esa. 54.6, 7, 8. and 57.17, 18.

169. Whether a gracious heart, may not interchangeably enjoy assurance, and be
troubled with doubtings? and whether Faith of adherence, be not a good relief
in the want of assurance, though one should live and dye without it? Cant. 8.5.
Job 13.15.

170. Whether purity of heart and life, be not a most necessary qualification
for Heaven? and whether those that want this, or scoff at it, under the names
of Puritan, Roundhead, Phanatick, or such other opprobrious terms, are ever
like to come there without Repentance? Mat. 5.8, 20. and 12.14. also, Rev.
22.15.

XVIII. DECAD.
171. Whether Masters and Mistrisses, are not answerable for the souls of their
Servants, as well as their Children? and whether they ought not to train up
them also, in the nurture and admonition of the Lord? Genesis 18.19. Josh. 24.15.
Psalm. 101.6, 7. Esth. 4.16. Nehem. 13.19. Ephesians. 6.9. Col. 4.1.

172. Whether Servants, both males and females, are not then most diligent,
faithful, and cheerful in their places; and do not then give that respect and
reverence which is due unto them they serve, when they remember, well consider,
and practice what God requires of them in his Word, especially in, Ephesians. 6.6.
and Colos. 3.22. Tit. 2.9, 10. where they are commanded to obey their Masters
in all things, not with eye-service, as men-pleasers, but in singleness of
heart, fearing God?

173. Whether the world has not as much need of the labor of the poor, as of
the wealth of the rich? and whether the inclining of all sorts of persons
respectively, to a natural affectation to, and delight in, the several Callings
and employments which they voluntarily choose, how mean, base, and servile
soever they are, be not a great argument of the wise and wonderful Providence
of God, overruling particulars, for the good of the whole? Esa. 28.24, to 29.
and Genesis 4.20, 21, 22. Act. 17.26.

174. Whether he be not the best Scholar that has most learned Christ? and the
best read in the Scriptures, that is most guided by them? Act. 4.13. Ephesians. 4.21.
2 Timothy 3.15, 16.

175. Whether the purest and sweetest knowledge be not derived from Gods own
Book, the Bible? and whether there only are not the richest Mines to dig in?
the fullest stores and magazines, of all desirable good things? Prove. 2.1, to
10. Psalm. 19.7, to 11. Colos. 3.16.

176. Whether the light of Gods countenance cannot make day in the darkest
soul at midnight? and one kind word from him, revive the heart in the midst of
the pangs of death? and whether he be in any danger of sinking, that is
supported with everlasting arms? or of fainting, that is refreshed with the
cordials of Divine Love? Psalm. 4.6. and 27.1. and 36.9. Can. 2.3, 4, 5. Esa.
2.14. and 40.11. Deuteronomy. 33.27.

177. Whether the same omnipotent Power of God, that is an hedge of protection
to his People, and a wall of brass for their defense, is not an hedge of thorns
to scratch their enemies, and a wall of fire to devour them? Job 1.10. Ier.
1.18, 19. Act. 9.5.

178. Whether any one can possibly be devoured in a den of fiercest Lions, or
drowned in the deepest waters, or burned in the most raging flames, while God
is there with him, and undertakes his safety? Dan. 6.22. and Chap. 3.25. Exodus
14.21, 22. Esa. 43.2.

179. Whether the sweetest nature, that can be found amongst men, can get to
Heaven without grace? and whether the least degree of Grace will not meliorate
and sweeten the most crabbed and unpleasing nature? Phi. 3.6, to 11.

180. Whether married or unmarried, young men or old, Virgins, Wives, or
Widows, can live happily, or dye comfortably, without a sure interest in, union
to, and Communion with Jesus Christ? Joh. 14.19. 1 John 5.12. Cant. 1.2, 3.

XIX. DECAD.
181. Whether hardness of heart, and final impenitency, be not of all
Judgments the most dreadful? and whether the serious consideration thereof,
would not damp the joy of the most riotous sinner in the world, and make him
tremble every moment, for fear of his dropping presently into Hell? Romans 2.5.
Psalm. 7.11, 12, 13. Job 21.12, 13, 23, 24, 25.

182. Whether that conviction which ends not in true conversion, does not still
leave a man under the power of sin, in the gall of bitterness, and the state of
damnation? and whether convinced sinners should not look well to this? Mat.
18.3. Act. 3.19. and 8. 22, 23.

183. Whether he that never knows any more than one birth, that is, a mere
natural birth only, be not sure to dye three deaths, viz. a natural, spiritual,
and eternal? and whether he that passes through two births, and so is born
again, shall not be sure to escape the two later deaths, and find the other
also upon the matter, no death at all, properly so called, but a sweet sleep
rather? Joh. 3.3. Rev. 20.6. 1 Thessalonians. 4.14, 15.

184. Whether the death of Infants, be not an unanswerable Argument to prove
that they have sin in them, at least Original Sin, as well as those of grown
age, for how else could they be subject to death, which is the wages of sin
only? Romans 3.22, 23. and 5.12. and 6.23.

185. Whether a Believer, standing on the mount of a Promise, may not from
thence take a pleasant prospect of Heaven, and particularly of the
glorification of his own humane nature, sitting at Gods right hand, in the
person of his Savior? and whether after such a fight as this, all things here
below will not look dim and duskish, as colors do through Church-windows, when
the Sun shines bright upon them? Act. 7.55, 56. Heb. 11.1, 13, 14, 15. 2 Cor.
5.1, 2, 3, 4.

186. Whether the same flowers, that ere while were seen under a warm and a
shining Sun, to display themselves with great beauty and cheerfulness, may not
hang dangling soon after with drops of rain, and be vio^^ntly dashed with
stormy showers, ^om a black and tempestuous Heaven ^ver them? and whether such
a ^hange may not possibly befall the Graces and Comforts of Gods dearest
Children, and yet they remain his Children still, as the other remain flow^rs?
Psalm. 88. throughout, Esa. 63.7, 8, 9. Jer. 31.18, 19, 20.

187. Whether in times of greatest afflictions, and inward seeming desertions,
the Graces of holy hearts may not smell sweetest, as Flowers do after showers
of rain, Spices, when most bruised, Rose-waters, in the Limbeck, and
Juniper-wood, in the burning flames? Psalm. 51.17. Cant. 2.14. and 5.5, 6. and
8.6, 7.

188. Whether the very excellency of holy gratitude, consists not in this, viz.
as fast as our mercies grow fresh and new upon us, in what kind soever, to
present them as so many new-blown flowers to God, to have the first smell of
them? Esa. 18.7. Psal^ 72.10. and Psalm. 76.11.

189. Whether Christ, and the Spirit of Grace, are not two great Comforters, as
well by the appointment o^ God the Father, as their own free consent, in which
Believers only have (...) special interest? and whether for this reason, among
others, the four Occumenical Councils of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus and
Chalcedon, in clearing and establishing the Doctrines of Christ his Divine
Person, the distinction of the two natures subsisting in it, and the Deity and
Personality of the Spirit, against Arrius, Macedonius, Nestorius, and the rest
of the Heretics of those times, did not eminent service unto the Gospel? Joh.
14.16, 17, 18, 26.

190. Whether it be not a most notorious absurdity and contradiction to affirm,
that the Spirit of Grace, which is supernatural, and altogether invinceable in
it self, can ever be so far resisted or quenched, as to be totally ex^elled out
of that heart, where it has ^een once received in truth? and ^hether the heart
of man, being de^eitful above all things, full of imagi^ations, which are only
evil, and that ^ontinually, and so desperately wicked, that ^one can know it,
can be supposed to have any the least power to fetch in saving Grace of it
self? and whether he that asserts these two dangerous points, does not,
implicitly at least, deny the absolute freeness and unchangeableness of Gods
love, and make his Acts of Grace vallid or invallid, according to the will of
his own Creature? Genesis 6.5. Jer. 17.9. 2 Cor. 3.5. Joh. 15.5. compared with,
Romans 9.15. Mal. 3.6. Ezekiel. 36.31, 32.

XX. DECAD.
191. Whether sanctified contentment, will not make every condition sweet? and
the contrary, make any thing, be it never so satisfactory and comfortable in it
self, burdensome and intolerable to the restless mind? and whether true
thankfulness or unthankfulness for mercies received, are not proportionable to
these two? 1 Timothy 6.6. Exodus 16.2, to 22. Psalm. 106.24, 25.

192. Whether one may not be very poor and very rich at the same time? and
whether some men in their rags, have not a great interest in God, while others
in their stately Robes, have none at all? Jam. 2.5. Luke 16.19, to 24.

193. Whether poor Servants, and others in lowest condition, should not take
arguments from their own meanness here in this world, to seek after the Kingdom
of Heaven the more diligently, that so they may have as large Revenues there as
any others? and whether our Savior does not imitate as much, where he says,
the poor receive the Gospel? Zeph. 3.12. Mat. 11.5. Mark 12.42. Luke 4.18. and
6.20.

194. Whether Parents that have many Children, and but little or nothing to
leave with them when they dye, have not the more need to seek after Portions of
Grace for them, pour forth many Prayers, and exercise much Faith in the
Covenant of Grace, on Grace on their behalf? Genesis 17.7. Act. 2.39. Psalm. 37.29.
1 Samuel 1.27. compared with, Chap. 2.7. Genesis 48. throughout.

195. Whether Faith in Christ, the great Savior and deliverer of mankind, be
not the best Midwife to women in travel, and the best Nurse for them and their
Children afterward? and whether their chiefest care should not be to make sure
of this Midwife and Nurse, above all others? 1 Timothy 2.15. Psalm. 91.14, 15, 16.

196. Whether idleness be not the Devils cushion? and whether slothfulness does
not gather f^lth, as standing waters do mud? Ezekiel. 16.49. 1 Timothy 5.13.

197. Whether a firm persuasion of Gods omniscience, omnipresence, hatred of
sin, and of his power and resolution to punish it, where not repented of, would
not prevent millions of sins that are hourly committed throughout the whole
world? Psalm. 50.21, 22. and 90.8. and 139.1, to 13.

198. Whether the bare believing that there is a God, that Christ is the Son of
God, the Scriptures the Word of God, and that all men ought to walk according
to them, be any other kind of faith, than the Devils themselves have? Jam.
2.19, Mat. 8.29. and Chap. 4.6.

199. Whether to bear and forbear among Friends and near Relations, be not
excellent and most necessary duties? and yet how difficultly are they learned?
and how few are there that practice them well? Romans 15.1. Gal. 6.2. Ephesians. 4.2.
Colos. 3.13.

200. Whether growing in Grace, be not the only way to thrive? and whether he
does not become richer and richer that trades at this Mart, and without fear
too of losing what he has already got? 2 Pet. 3.18. Prove. 3.13, 14, 15. and
4.7, 8, 9.

XXI. DECAD.
201. Whether the Office of Ambassadors, the Arts, cares and pains of
Shepherds, Fishermen, Husbandmen, Carpenters, with diverse others such like,
ought not to be known to, and imitated by those Ministers of the Gospel, that
have the oversight and trust of Souls? and whether they are not the best
Preachers that move the hearts of their Hearers, more than tickle their heads?
2 Cor. 5.20. Cant. 1.8. Mat. 4.19. 1 Cor. 3.9, to 14. and Chap. 2.4.

202. Whether the plague upon the Streams, Rivers, Ponds, and Pools of water,
in the Land of Egypt (Exodus 7.) were not as dreadful as any of the other
plagues? and whether impurities in Universities and other Schools of Learning,
be not as great a plague as that, and as much to be dreaded and prayed against?
Psalm. 23.2. Ezekiel. 47.1, to 13.

203. Whether young Scholars, that take upon them the work of the Ministry,
before they are well lined with Learning, and have thoroughly studied the whole
Body of Divinity, are not like new rigged Ships, that are put out to Sea,
without ballast or burden?

204. Whether sanctified Studies, in a Learned head and Holy heart, do not
reduce Ethics, Metaphysics, and Theology into one Science?

205. Whether many a sweet kernel, does not lie in the Criticisms of the
Original Languages of the Holy Scriptures?

206. Whether John Bradford, that blessed Martyr, was not worthily called Holy
Bradford, who prayed as much as he studied, did both upon his knees, and seldom
or never sat at meals without wetting his trencher with his tears, either of
godly sorrow for sin, or from a melting warm love to God? Psalm. 6.6. Luke 7.37,
38.

207. Whether he that delights in Hunting, be it for love of the Venison, or
for sport, can pick out more pertinent Scriptures to meditate upon, than the
Preface of the 22. Psalm. where Christ is called the Hind of the Morning? and
the first verse of the 42. Psalm. where David says, that his soul panted after
God, as the Heart pants after the waterbrooks?

208. Whether Goldsmiths can deal any where for such pure gold, as is
mentioned, Rev. 3.18. or the Vintner, for such rich Wines, as we read of in,
Esa. 25.6. and Cant. 5.1. and 8.2. and whether it is not their chiefest wisdom,
to drive their whole stock there?

209. Whether a seeds-man shall not do well to consider, that he that sows most
tears for sin, shall have the richest crop? and the Ploughman, that his Plough
in the field will speed much the better, when he is careful in the due seasons
of it, to Plough up the fallow ground of his own heart too? Psalm. 126.5, 6.
Jer. 50.4, 5. Luke 6.21. also, Jer. 4.3. Hos. 10.12.

210. Whether there be just reason for any to despair, since it is not possible
for the sins of any to be so great or numerous, as Gods mercies are infinite?
and these most freely offered to them that have the greatest need of them? Esa.
55.1, 2, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10. 2 Samuel 24.14. 1 Chronicles. 21.13. Mat. 11.28, 29. Joh.
6.37. Heb. 4.16. Rev. 22.17.

XXII. DECAD.
211. Whether the Pope be not Antichrist in the Judgment of Ribera himself,
though a Jesuit, and many others of their own most learned Writers?

212. Whether the slaughter of the Witnesses, be not the immediate forerunner
of the downfall of Antichrist, though the darkest dispensation is not the inlet
of the happiest times that ever the world yet saw? and whether the duration
thereof will not certainly end at three years and an half from the true Epoch
and beginning thereof? Rev. 11. throughout.

213. Whether the doctrine of the Spiritual Reign of Christ on earth for a
thousand years in a sober sense, were not a common received doctrine by the
Fathers of the first ages after Christ? and whether he that consults, Iraeneus,
Tertullian, Lanctantius and others, without prejudice will not find it so? Rev.
20.6.

214. Whether the Conversion of the Jews, ought not to be believed and prayed
for* and whether it be not propable, that one special means thereof may be by
Christ his own appearing in the Clouds, so as every eye shall see him, as he
did to Saul the Jew, when he was going to Damascus? Ezekiel. 36. and 37.
throughout, and Chap. 39.23, to 29. Zachar. 9. and 10. throughout.

215. Whether the Society of the Jesuits are not the richest, most subtle,
potent, diffusive and influential on the affairs of the whole world, of any
others? and whether they spare for any cost to procure, or want correspondents
to give them the knowledge of greatest secrets in Princes Courts?

216. Whether all the Monarchs and States, both small and great upon the whole
habitable earth, have so many Emissaries and Agents abroad, as one single man,
the Pope? and whether they take not upon them all manner of names, shapes,
habits, trades, and employments, where they come?

217. Whether the Pope his craft, in setting on foot and continuing the Holy
War in Palestine for almost 200. years, was not as great as devout Bernards
mistaken zeal was, in promoting of it? and whether the Popes ever since, have
not been as crafty Foxes for themselves, among the Princes of Europe?

218. Whether such unparalled usurpations, insolences, uncleanness,
Sodomies, sorceries, witchcrafts, cruelties, blasphemies, and all manner of
most horrible impieties, have been ever found among any sort of men since the
Creation of the world, as among the Popes?

219. Whether Pope Alexander the 6th. was not rightly served, while himself was
poisoned with the first draught of that Cup, which he and his accomplices had
prepared to poison others?

220. Whether Caesar Borgia his Son, the Duke of Florens, among all the plots
laid by him and his crafty Secretary, Matchiavil, committed not a foul error,
in not thinking of, and providing for a surprise by death? and whether himself
did not see it, and repent of it, when it was too late, as the History of his
life witnesses?

XXIII. DECAD.
221. Whether much credit be to be given to the Popish Editions, of Ambrose,
Chrysostom, Jerome, Augustine, and all the rest of the Greek and Latin Fathers,
(whose Authorities they urge so much upon us) since their Index expurgatorius,
has been in use? and whether many of their Schoolmen, which they so much boast
of, do not abound more with nice and needless distinctions, than sound Divinity?

222. Whether Popery, spreading so greatly as it does in all parts of the
world, it be not a foul shame for Protestants to be so divided, and thereby
weakened among themselves? and whether it be not matter of sport, even to Satan
himself, to see what irreconcilable differences and ammosities still continue
among them?

223. Whether God will long bear it at the hands of his own Children, thus in
his sight and presence to quarrel, fall out and fight with each other? and
whether, when nothing else will quiet and reconcile them, the Rod shall not? 1
Cor. 3.3. and 11.18.

224. Whether since Grace is the most uniting Principle in the very nature of
it, and sin the most dividing Principle, it is not just cause of wonder, that
the People of God of all others, should be so much divided, and wicked men so
firmly knit among themselves? and whether any reason can possibly be given for
it, but the prevalency of sin on their part, and Gods just judgment in
permitting it, by way of punishment on his part? Romans 16.17, 18. 1 Cor. 6.1, to
9.

225. Whether those Scholars are not great wasters and abusers of their time
and studies, who take much pains to get all manner of Learning, except the
knowledge of the Bible and their own hearts?

226. Whether a Believers habitation, be not of all others, the most stately?
and whether it be not seated in the finest air, and with advantage of the
bravest Prospect? Psalm. 90.1. and 91.1, 9. 1 John 4.16. Heb. 11.16.

227. Whether it be worth the while to live, unless it be to answer the ends of
our Creation, and to be fit to dye? and whether Watermen, Mariners, and all
that travel by Sea, have not as much reason as any, to be provided for death
every moment? Jam. 4.14. Job 9.25, 26. Psalm. 39.4, 5, 6. and 90.4, to 13. Job
14.14.

228. Whether the leaves of Trees, that fall so fast in Autumn, and the sight
of a flourishing Garden, deprived of all or most of its fair Flowers, that
stood there but an hour before, are not lively Emblems of man's mortality, and
the suddenness of his remove by death, especially in times of great sicknesses,
and Epidemical diseases? Psalm. 39.10, 11. and 90.5, 6. and 103.15, 16. Job
13.25. Esa. 64.6.

229. Whether among those that attend at Funeral solemnities, there be one of
twenty usually, that make the sad occasion of their appearance there, the
subject of their own thoughts, or the matter of their discourse with others?
and whether this be not an argument of a common, and very great insensibleness
among men, of the strokes of God upon them, and the hardness of their hearts
under them?

230. Whether the highest Angels, and the lowest worms, are not
fellow creatures? and whether there be not an infinite distance, as well
between God and the highest creatures, as between him and the lowest? and
whether the consideration thereof, should not make poor mortals, even the
greatest that are, to walk humbly toward God? Job 42.5, 6. Esa. 6.2. Job
15.14, 15, 16.

XXIV. DECAD.
231. Whether a clear and full sight of God, be not the only way for a man to
come to the right knowledge of himself? and whether this, of all things else,
is not most to be desired, and speedily sought for by him? Job 42.5, 6. Psalm.
139.1, to 18.

232. Whether they that bear the most eminent testimonies for Christ upon
earth, shall not bear the biggest palms in their hands, and stand nearest his
Throne in Heaven? Rev. 7.9, to 17.

233. Whether it be likely, that they will ever be convinced of the evil of
those actions, which being once done, they are resolved to justify, and
instead of amending, recriminate upon others? and whether it be not a most
deplorable thing, that bitter exaspirations, and mutual accusations of this
nature, should be found among the differing parties of Gods own People, in
times wherein all had need to seek peace with God and among themselves, and do
their utmost, by a meek healing spirit, to make up all breaches? 1 Cor. 3.3, 4.
Gal. 5.10, to 16. and 6.1, 2. 1 These. 4.9, 10, 11. Ephesians. 4.2, 3.

234. Whether God does not touch the heart first, with his powerful magnetic
Love, before it ever moves or can move in the least toward him? and whether
the eye of Christ, did not first spy Zacheus in the Sycomore-tree, Nathaniel
under the Fig Tree, and Mary in the Garden, before ever they spyed him? 1 John
4.19. Hos. 11.4. Luke 19.5. Ioh. 1.48. and 20.13, 14, 15, 16.

235. Whether those comforts that fail in the dried streams, as in the loss of
Husbands, Wives, Parents, Children, all other near and dear Relations, Friends
and Estates, with whatever else is of like nature, can be made up any where, so
well as in and by the Original Fountain of them all, God himself? and whether
it be not the greatest wisdom when all is done, to hasten thither with all
possible speed that may be? Job 6.15. and 19.13, to 20. Prove. 23.5. Habak.
3.17, 18, 19. Psalm. 36.9, 10.

236. Whether to make an absolute, free and full resignation of ones self, and
all that one has, to the Will of God, to be disposed of as he pleases, be not
the only way to give him the Glory of his Soveraingnty? and whether to do or
suffer any thing for him, with a willing and cheerful heart, does not argue
much Grace, and is not to be accounted an high Honor? 2 Samuel 15.25, 26. Psalm.
40.7, 8. Mat. 26.39, 40.

237. Whether they that follow Christ in good earnest, do not deny themselves,
and take up their Cross daily? and whether they are not in mind always
resolved, ready and prepared, to part with House, Land, Revenues, Estate,
Liberty, and Life too, if called for, rather than forsake Christ? Mat. 4.20.
and 16.24, 25. Mark 10.29, 30.

238. Whether every Promise, Prophecy, and Threatening in Gods Word, has not
hitherto been most punctually performed, in the due season of it, in all former
ages, even to a tittle? and whether there be any the least reason to doubt,
that what is not yet accomplished, shall be when the sit time is come? Genesis
48.15, 16. Exodus 12.41, 42. Micah 7.20. 1 King. 13.1, to 6. compared with, 2
King. 23.4, to 9. Gal. 4.4. Ephesians. 1.10. Mat. 5.18.

239. Whether those that have escaped from dangerous diseases, long and wasting
sicknesses, or death it self, when they were without all hope or expectation of
recovery, are not in all likelihood, reserved for some great good or evil? and
whether it be not a duty incumbent on them, to consider much of it, and lay it
to heart? Esa. 38. throughout.

240. Whether Physicians, of all others, have not the best opportunities,
sometimes to deal effectually with the souls of their sick, or dying Patients,
about the matters of eternity, if they have but the heart and the skill to do
it? and whether God does not expect they should improve this advantage for him,
as well as for themselves and their Patients?

XXV. DECAD.
241. Whether the guilt of very many of the sins, both in City and Country, be
it drunkenness, uncleanness, swearing, Sabbath-breaking, and whatever else is
of like kind, does not lie at the Magistrates door, unless he put forth the
utmost Power that God has given him, to punish and reform them? and whether
God ever intended that he should wear his sword in vain? Romans 13.1, to 8.

242. VV^^^ her naked breasts and black spots, do not argue foul hearts? and
whether the Ladies that use them, would be willing to appear in such a dress at
the day of Judgment? or may not meet with sore rebukes herealso, as the
daughters of Zion did, in Esa. 3. from v. 16, to 25.

243. Whether wanton looks, wanton guarbs, wanton words, and wanton books, be
not the Devils snares to catch, and the Devils poisons to vitiate and deprave
hearts? and whether all manner of unlawful sports and games, do not insensibly
undo thousands here, and then before they are aware of it, trapan them into
Hell, out of which there is no recovery? Esa. 3.16, to 25. Romans 13.13. Gal.
5.19. Ephesians. 4.19. 1 Pet. 4.3, 4. Job 21.12, 13.

244. Whether false wares, false weights, false lights, false measures, and
false asseverations, are not too frequent in Trades-mens shops and whether the
gain that com^s in that way, lies not under an eating, (though happily at the
present an undiscerned) curse? Prove. 11.1. and 12.22. Micah 6.10, 11, 12.

245. Whether nature will not be content with little, and Grace with less? and
whether a Righteous man's little, be not more than a wicked man's much? 1 Timothy
6.6. Prove. 15.16, 17. and 16.8.

246. Whether Believers have not possession of Heaven already, since their Head
is there? and whether Christ be not gone thither before hand, as a Messenger or
Harbinger, to trim up the Lodgings appointed for them, and to secure them for
them, till they come themselves? Joh. 14.2. Heb. 6.20.

247. Whether the soul be not a glorious Bride, when once Christ is become its
Bridegroom; especially since he marries it not in its own cloth^s, but such as
are fitted for it, out of the Wardrobes of Heaven? Mat. 25.10. Esa. 61.10. Rev.
21.2.

248. Whether she be not the most amiable Virgin, and will not make the
sweetest Wife, that has Christ lying as an handful of Myrrh continually
between her breasts? Cant. 1.13. and 5.4, 5.

249. Whether early and young Saints, are not as acceptable to God, as rare and
choice fruits, set ripe on a Princes board some weeks before the ordinary
seasons of them? Jer. 2.2. Eccles. 12.1.

250. Whether a Believer, brightly shined on by the light of Gods pleased
countenance, and at the same time giving out the lusters of his inherent graces
to standers-by, be not a rich Diamond that sparkles in the midst of Sunbeams?
Psalm. 31.16. and 110.3. Mat. 5.16. Phil. 2.15.

XXVI. DECAD.
251. Whether the People of God are not his Jewels? Mal. 3.17. yea, his Crown,
his glorious Crown, and Royal Diadem? Esa. 62.3. yea, his Crown-Jewels? Zach.
9.16. and whether he will suffer these his Jewels to lie long in the dirt, or
this his Crown to be always trodden under the feet of his enemies?

252. Whether God having freely and most strongly tied himself to his People,
both by his Word, his Promise and his Oath (such a threefold knot, as there is
none like to it) be not greatly injured by such as disbelieve, or make question
in the least of his performances? Heb. 3.12. and 6.16, 17, 18, 19. Mat. 13.58.

253. Whether holy Meditations do not dwell on the very Hill of Frankincense,
and on the Mount of Spices? and whether every busy thought, like the nimble
honey-Bee, does not pass from blossom to blossom, from flower to flower, that
is, from one Promise to another, from one Providence to another, and so through
the variety of all sorts of pleasant subjects, and gather sweetness, till it
has filled its whole Hive (the heart) with the purest honey? Psalm. 104.34. and
Psalm. 94.19.

254. Whether frequent and faithful examinations of ones inward state, and how
things stand between God and the soul, be not a most necessary and important
duty? and whether this, of all things else, ought not to be most diligently
minded, whatever else be neglected? Psalm. 4.4. 2 Cor. 13.5.

255. Whether Apostatizers, Timeservers, and all such as shamefully desert
their formerly received sound Principles and holy Practices, do not consult
destruction to themselves, and run the hazard of those sore curses, mentioned
in, Deuteronomy. 29.21?

256. Whether he that abounds altogether in his own sense; accounts whatever
himself affirms to be as authentic as some divine Oracles is a^^ry with, and
severely censorio^^ of, those that do not, or cannot forsake their own
Principles as all false, and embrace his as all Truth, be not guilty, at least,
of the suspicion of Pride? or whether he be not a kind of little Pope, that
pretends to infallibility, whilst perhaps under strong delusion? and whether
such an one be not rather to be neglected, than disputed with? Jam. 1.12. Prove.
21.24. 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11.

257. Whether evil thoughts are not the spawns of sin, and evil words and
actions the products of those spawns? and whether Cockatrices eggs, while
hatched by Cockatrices, will not bring forth their own kind? Mat. 12.33, to 38.
and 15.18, 19, 20. Esa. 59.4, 5.

258. Whether every man ought not to be very careful what objects he fixes his
eye and his heart upon? and whether God be not King of hearts, and deserves not
that every man should give him (not a part only but) his whole heart? and
whether he that does this, does not take the wisest course, to make the worst
part of himself to become the best? Job 31.1. Psalm. 62.10. Prove. 23.26. Ezekiel.
36.26.

259. Whether being imposed upon, in matters of Conscience, where Christ has
left it free, be not as grievous and intolerable from one sort of men as from
another? and whether, if there be any difference, it be not most intolerable
from those that are, or have been, or at least pretend to be Brethren?

260. Whether the right stating and granting of true Christian liberty, so as
to prevent licentious extravagances on the one hand, and unjust severity on the
other hand, would not be most satisfactory to all peaceably-minded good men?
and whether till this can be done, it be not best for every one to think it
possible, that he may be under some mistakes as well as his dissenting
Brethren, and so resolve to allow and receive a mutual freedom in following
their respective light, and exercising a friendly familiarity, and hearty love
toward one another? Gal. 5.1. Ephesians. 4.2, 3. 1 Thessalonians. 4.9. Heb. 13.1. 2 Pet. 1.7.

XXVII. DECAD.
261. Whether the most exact platform of the purest Church, both for Doctrine,
Worship, and Discipline, ought not to be the constant Rule, Standard, and
Pattern to all the rest? and whether such a platform can be given by any, but
God himself; or is to be looked for, or can be found any where else, but in the
Word of God, and in that only? Exodus 25.40. Heb. 8.5. and 9.23.

262. Whether some Churches may not, as to essentials, be true Churches, though
very corrupt, and so be far from conformity to their true Pattern, (as a
leprous man is a true man, notwithstanding his Leprosy?) but whether it be not
the duty of every such Church, to endeavor to their utmost, the nearest
agreement attainable to the pattern aforesaid? Rev. 22.18, 19. Phil. 3.17.

263. Whether in case such Churches, as are now last mentioned, do not profess
they ought, or do not visibly intend and endeavor in good earnest, with all
their might, to be every way like their Original Pattern, both in Doctrine,
Worship, and Discipline; it be not the duty of every one that would live and
dye with a clear and quiet conscience, to come out from among such Churches,
and join with those that come nearest the said Original Pattern? and whether
this kind of separation, even from true Churches thus corrupted, and willing to
continue so, be not as justifiable as separation from a false Church? yea, and
whether such a separation as this, be not so far from being blameworthy, that
it is absolutely necessary, and must be performed, by all that desire to become
Gods People, and would have him dwell among them? 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16, 17, 18.

264. Whether the great noise and cry that is abroad in the world against
separation, would not be much silenced, if once the abovementioned Rule and
Standard of the first pure Churches in the Scripture, were every where agreed
to, admitted, and observed? and whether in the mean time, the Papists do not
think they have as much reason to account Protestants to be Separatists, as
several parties of Protestants do account each other?

265. Whether the sight of any person or persons, that are very poor, beggarly,
hungry, ragged, naked, wounded, maimed, diseased, deformed, or any way
miserable, should not both occasion pity in us toward them, and excite us, as
we are able, to comfort and relieve them; but also cause us to lift up thankful
hearts, that we are not in their case? 1 Cor. 4.6, 7.

266. Whether all that Trade in Victualling, as Cooks, Vintners, Drawers of Ale
or Beer, and such like, do not put the poison of a Curse into their own dishes
and Cups, while they so greatly contribute to the sinful waste of the good
Creatures of God, in supplying their gluttonous and drunken Guests with
whatever they call for, till they become no better than brutes in disgorging
themselves, and casting out their filthy vomits? Esa. 28.3, 8.

267. Whether sanctification of Sabbaths, a right and holy participation of
Sacraments, diligent reading and hearing of the Word of God, heavenly
Conference, and other the like Duties, are not always prized, attended upon,
and practiced more or less, according to the measure of Grace received by any?
and whether the want of delight in them, or the accounting them a burden
rather, be not an ill sign of an evil heart? Esa. 58.13. Mal. 3.16. 1 Cor.
11.23, to 30. Jam. 1.21, to 26. also, Mal. 1.12, 13. Amos 8.5.

268. Whether a Believers, both Life and Treasure, does not lie hidden and out
of sight to the world, even as the roots of fruitful Trees lie under ground,
and as gold and silver Mines run in the bowels of the earth undiscerned and
unthought of, by them that walk upon it? Colos. 3.3, 4. Ephesians. 3.8, 9.

269. Whether in long and lingering sicknesses, especially if accompanied with
much pain and anguish, a patient acquiescency under the hand of God, a
submissive acceptance of the punishment of ones iniquity therein, and a
cheerful satisfaction in the Will of God, who is pleased thus to use his Rod,
be not an argument of a gracious frame of heart, and of a sanctified
improvement of the affliction? and whether the contrary frame of spirit, does
not produce contrary effects? Romans 5.3, 4. and 15.4, 5. Colos. 1.11. 2 Thessalonians.
1.3. 2 Thessalonians. 1.4. Heb. 6.12. Jam. 1.3, 4. and 5.10, 11. Levit. 26.41. Job
1.21, 22. and 2.10. also, Esa. 51.20. Jonah 4.9.

270. Whether the education of Youth, be not a weighty business, a great trust,
and a work that requires much care and diligence, wisdom and skill to manage
it? whether it be not an eminent service (when well done) to Church and State,
yea and to Christ himself too? and whether all Parents and Guardians of
Children, Tutors in Universities, Schoolmasters and Shool-Mistrisses, ought
not to be earnest with God in Prayer, for his constant assistance, and their
comfortable success therein? Prove. 22.6. Ephesians. 6.4. 1 Samuel 19.20.

Three concluding Quaeries.
1. Whether Peter, Paul, and Barnabas in their times; Polycarpus, Ignatius,
Tertullian, Cyprian, Athanasius, in their times; Ambrose, Chrysostom,
Augustine, in their times; our Guildas among the ancient Britains; our English
Wickleife, and Tindal, Oecolampadius, Martin Luther, Philip Melancthon, John
Calvin, Beza, and the rest of the most famous, both German, and French-Divines,
in their respective ages; yea, and whether John Knox, John Reynolds, Jewel, the
Rogerses, our late Golden-mouthed Preston, Sibbs, Reverend Usher, and thousands
more, the choicest and most successful Ministers of the Gospel, did ever blunt
their own Holy Zeal, dispirit their own frequent Preaching, and cooll the
hearts of their Hearers, with reading every word from their written papers, and
so turn their Sermons into Homilies? and whether, though in some cases, to some
persons, some little use of notes may be allowable, and convenient, yea, perhaps
necessary; yet the constant and total use of them by others (as is practiced by
too many in this our present age) does not argue lazyness, or an over-affected
niceness and curiosity in words and language, rather then such a Passionate
desire of saving souls, as becomes the faithful Ministers of the Gospel? and
lastly, whether it be likely, that those who accustom themselves to this way of
reading, rather then Preaching Sermons, while they are young, and their
memories as well as other parts be quick and nimble, will leave it when they
are old, or will be ever able to preach in the dark, or when their sight grows
dim?

2. Whether the Apostle Paul by his command of doing all things decently and in
order, 1 Cor. 14.40. intended any more than the doing of all those things only,
which God by him his Penman had commanded and positively set down, and in the
self-same order and holy Method too, which he also had plainly and fully
expressed? 1 Cor. 11.34. and 16.1, 2. Colos. 2.5. and whether it can be
reasonably imagined, that Paul gave authority to Titus, (Chap. 1.5.) to invent
or add any the least circumstance for matter or manner, in or about the
Worship of God in Crete, more then what he had formerly appointed, and himself
Practiced elsewhere? and lastly, whether the Prohibition of the Apostle, in
Coloss. 2. from ver. 8. to the end, That none should be subject to Ordinances,
according to the Commandments and doctrines of men in Will Worship, does not
extend to all following times, and all future Churches of Christ.

3. Whether he that diligently reads and considers the 6th and 7th Chapters of
the Acts of the Apostles, will not find, That the only occasion of Stephen the
Proto-Martyr, being accused of Blasphemy and stone^ to death, was his bold and
resolute defense (...) the spiritual Worship brought in by Christ, in
opposition to the Jewish Rites and Ceremonies, which though appointed by God
himself at first, yet now are out of date and usless? and whether this very
thing was not one of those pretended Crimes, that Christ himself was arraigned
for in the High Priests Hall? as appears in, Mat. 26.57, to 69. compared with,
Joh. 4.19, to 27. and whether a good cause with a man's own innocence in the
sight of God and his own conscience, be not one great support to him under the
severest censures, and sharpest sufferings he can meet with from this world?

FINIS.

