A DECLARATION OF THE Irish Army IN ULSTER: Sent to the Parliament in a Letter
from WIILLIAM BASIL Esquire, Attorney General of IRELAND: Which Letter and
Declaration are ordered by the Parliament to be Printed: And were referred to
the Council of STATE to see it don accordingly.

To which is added some Remarques thereupon, by a private Pen.

LONDON, Printed by William Du-gard, by the Appointment of the Council of
State, 1650.

Die Veneris, Junii 28, 1650.
A Letter from Dublin of the 20 of June, 1650. from Mr William Basil, with a
Declaration of the Nobility, Gentry, and Commanders of his Majesty's forces,
of the Province of Ulster, dated 20 of May, 1650 were this day read.

Ordered,

That the said Letter and Declaration be forthwith Printed.

Ordered,

That it be referred to the Council of State, to take care to see the same
printed accordingly, and to take such course touching the Printing thereof, as
they shall think fit.

HEN. SCOBELL Cleric. Parliament.

Right Honorable!
I Have sent your Honor here enclosed a Copy of a Declaration lately put out
by the Northern Irish-Armie, who are fallen down toward the Legan, and have don
much mischief in our Quarters there, Colonel Venables write's that the Scots
there com under the Enemy, and contribute to their relief, and that he
himself durst not leav those parts where he is, lest they should rise in Arms.

Those in Tecrohan sent out on Saturday last to surrender upon terms to march
away with bag and baggage, and three Pieces of Ordnance; but their Conditions
were rejected by Ours.

My Lord Deputy continue's yet about Catherlogh. The sickness exceedingly
increases in the Place; Not having else to trouble your Honor at present, I
humbly crav leave to be

(Right Honorable!) Your Honors most humble Servant William Basil.
For the right Honorable, William Lenthal Speaker of the Parliament of England.
Dublin 20 Junii 1650

THE DECLARATION OF THE Nobility, Gentry, and Commanders of His Majesty's
Forces of the Province of ULSTER.
WHereas we are given to understand, That some ill-affected Members, for
private respects of their own, and malice to our Party, have endeavored to sow
sedition, and discord betwixt us, and such as are well-affected to his
Majesty, both of the Scottish Nation, and others, alluring many of them, from
time to time, to harbor very prejudicial and jealous thoughts of our
proceedings, by casting the calumny, and asspersion on us, That our intention
and actions tend rather to our own particular Ends and private Aim, then to the
advancement and preservation of his sacred Majesty's Interest, Crown, and
Dignity in this Land; which evil practice can produce nothing, but sad,
destructive, and lamentable effects, as it is too too well known already by
woeful experience: For it is most palpably evident that the like unhappie
misconstruction enforced the Scots at first to rise in Arms, and invade England
against his Majesty, their own flesh and blood; that occasioned the falling
out of the Irish, and Scots in the beginning of these Wars of Ireland. That was
only and solie the cause of the beheading of his late Majesty of happy
memory, all these mischiefs being perpetrated by the practice, and policy of
the Up-starts of England that this day trample under foot in misery, thraldom,
and slaverie, the Nobility, and Gentry of England by raising and exalting the
basest abortive Scums of that Kingdom, to the greatest hight of Honor, Power,
and Command; that allured the Scots hitherto to endanger their lives,
endeavors, and fortunes, first in England, as aforesaid, and secondly in this
Kingdom against our Nation when we little exspected ever any such sedition,
or quarrel could be fomented betwixt us, and them, or that they having once in
their hands all the Forts, and Garrisons in this Province (excepting a few)
should be so far deceived by the sinister practice of the Parliament of
England, as that they have not at present the Command of any of them in all
Ulster; so as consequently it is to be feared, ere long none of the Scottish
will be suffered, either Gentry, or Commonalty to inhabit in any part of this
Province, bordering on their native Kingdom of Scotland: All which we cannot
choos but sadly take to heart; and that the rather, because we see our
fellow subjects so misled, and withdrawn from their obedience to his Majesty
in not siding with us in the present service, mis-constructing, by the evil
suggestion of others, our endeavors and intentions, which might sufficiently
give us an occasion of discouragement; whereas our Party, and Nation for the
clearing and removal of all past mischievous practices of that kind on our
parts, and prevention of any the like jealousy, and discord hereafter, We
thought it necessary, and do accordingly declare and avow, in the sight of the
great God of Heaven and the World, That our Intentions and Resolutions are, to
the last man, to endeavor, with the loss of our lives, estates, and fortunes,
the advancement and preservation of his Majesty's service and interest in this
Kingdom, and of all those whatsoever that prosecute his quarrel so far forth,
as we be not troubled in the free exercise of our Religion, as we will no
way hinder or trouble any person or persons of what Nation, or quality soever
adhering to his Majesty, to exercise, and embrace his or their own profession,
or Religion: All which, with Gods assistance, our actions shall ere long more
expressly manifest in the view of the world.

Finally, It is our intention that we shall make no distinction or difference
between our selves, and so many of the Scottish, or other Nation whatsoever,
that now shall (as we invite them with Heart and Hand) join in his Majesty's
service, or any way freely contribute to, or countenance the same, but as
becomes Brethren, and fellow subjects engaged in one quarrel for their true
and lawful King. Dated at Charlemount the 20 of May, 1650.

Emerus Cloughensis, Rich. Farrall, J. Lough, In. Skillen, Ter. O Neale,
Alexander mac Donnell, Shane O Cahant, Hugh mac Quire, Turt. Boil, Br. O
Neale, Miles Swine, Hugh mac Mahoon, Owen O Dougherdy Turl. O Quin, Br. O
Neale, Ph. O Neale, Fer. O Boil, Br. mac Mahoon, Cormock Mahellen, Cull. O
Donnell, Jo. Mr. Donnell, Jo. Mr. Donnell.


Remarques, or Observations upon the foregoing DECLARATION.
THat Truth is the Daughter of time has been said of old, and is made manifest
by every days experience. What has been contrived and transacted heretofore
in Closets, come's now to be published by the Actors themselves to the view of
the world. It has been long believed by those who took the boldness to examine
those Acts of darkness (and by those things that did appear, and were in
motion, to judge the things unseen, and the Principles of those proceedings)
that there was a very good understanding between the late King and the Irish
Assassines. And though at first they were to bear the Odium of their horrid and
ever to be detested Murders, and endeavor of the exstirpation of the English
Name and Interest there: And for that purpose were direfully devoted to
destruction, and marked out and distinguished for it by Proclamation; of which
yet a special care was taken, by the late Tyrants express Order, that only
forty Copies, and no more, should be printed, and none of them delivered
out, without his like special Order, lest too many should know he had called
them Enemies, whom he intended to make use of, as of his good Catholic
Subjects of Ireland, for special service; when the work, agreed on between
them, had once been finished there. And accordingly soon after they had acted
their Butcherie, and made that miserable destruction of the poor unarmed
English, whom the rare government and policy of that place, managed by the
Basha's of his Tyranny, had kept unarmed; (for their better security no doubt
among inveterate Enemies) And that sufficient forces were sent hence by the
Parliament of England to chastize with a just retribution those bloody
Murderers, whereby they were like to receiv another reward for their good
service to his sacred Majesty, then they had agreed for, and be like enough
to give eye for eye, tooth for tooth, and life for life, They were then
presently taken into his Protection, and a Cessation made with them, that they
might be reserved for the future sevice they were designed unto, namely the
Conquest of Scotland: To which service some of them were dispatched, so soon as
by the drawing over of those apostatizing English who being sent thither by
the Parliament, to whom by special Act the managing of that War was committed,
for reducing that Kingdom to the obedience of this, the rest of these good
Irish could be left in a condition of security against those few English that
remained faithful to their Trust and Interest. And how fairly they attempted,
and how nearly effected that conquest under the leading of Montross joined with
his Northern and Western Mountaineers, is very well known: when, after several
bloody skirmishes beyond the Forth, at last, by the total rout of all their
forces at Kilsyth, there was no place of safety left for any persons of
quality that were Covenanteers, but they were forced to seek it in England.
But all this is now dissembled and must be forgotten; And their good souls
being now as full of Love and Candor, as they were once of Blood and Murder,
are extremely afflicted with a pang of Ingenuitie, to think there should be
some ill-affected Members, (they say not of what body) that should go about
to sow sedition and discord, they mean sure (for their Declaration is not
guilty of proper expression every where) to beget some misunderstanding
between them who have but one End, Namely, the Scots-Kings sacred Majesty's
Interest; And they think it a foul Calumny, that they should be said to have
any particular ends or private aim, but only are carried with a single
intention to the preservation of the said Interest. We should not much dispute
what they affirm, if they would tell us what this Interest is, whether the true
Interest of the late King, or an assumed one; for of the present Interests, We
shall say nothing. The true one all rational men, that are acquainted with
affairs of State, can judge as well as he could, or as they can; and do believe
that it was not for that Interest that so many people of the English Nation
were Murdered and destroyed, and that the Popish Religion should be only
permitted there. But it is very probable the Interest that Tyrant propounded was
a perfectly- Arbitrarie and Despotical rule, which he could find none, but
they, so base as to be subservient to settle. The reward of their service
should therefore be to settle the Popish Religion in Ireland, and to tolerate
the practice of that worship in England. And to com certainly to the End, viz.
Tyranny, he would balk no way; War, Murder, Popery, all acceptable, all
lawful; only the nearest was best, and ruled his election.

But that they should be such true and loyal Subjects, as they thus publicly
pretend, is a little hard to beleev; We must therefore examine upon what
grounds they became so; Old quarrels and inveterate feu'ds are not usually
exstinct, but upon very evident advantages and signal obligations. It Is well
known, when King James had a design to make a nova Scotia in Ireland, he was
not very dainty of oppressing the Irish, to make way to gratify his
unblushing begging Nation; whose deep sens of their beggerie made them
insensible of what ever they received; and the obversation of the dreadful and
hated Images of their former state of life kept them in continual fear, that
nothing could be sufficient to assure them they should not again be as they
were: And therefore with a wild profusenes, which only the Scots call
liberality, he introduced multitudes of them into the Province of Vlster,
into those lands which the Irish then believed they might have deserved as
well, if an Act of grace had restored them to the possession of that which
'twas their ill hap, their Ancestor's former Rebellion had forfeited. And
indeed, by reason of his known weakness and impotencie in giving, that whole
Province was already possessed in their hopes, and a design was laid in time
to have in realitie, by finding some or other to forfeit also the English
Plantations there; and accordingly they began with that belonging to London,
that the strong Town of Derrie, and also that of Coleraine coming into the
dispose of the Royal bounty, bestowed for the rewards of an unknown virtue,
might also be made Scottish, for the better security of all the rest: during
all the time the Irish, were full of Complaints, and there was no such
affection in them to the Royal Interest, which was then to enrich his own flesh
and blood with the donations and distributions of the large Patrimony of their
Predecessors. And after the late Tyrant came to rule, while his covetousness
was yet chiefly in his eye, the whole Province of Connaght must be planted for
satisfying of it, That is, it must be taken from the Irish and old English
(now become also Irish) upon the account of some forseitures by former
Rebellions, and in order thereto a survey was made of the whole Province, and
there wanted nothing but distribution. But upon the coming hither of the
Commissioners from the Parliament of Ireland in the year whereof the most part
were Papists, and who by the Queens mediation were received with special favor,
that whole business was laid aside, and there was no more speech of the
Plantation of Connaght; but after many secret conferences with the Popish part
of those Commissioners, with the effect whereof their fellows were never
acquainted, they were received into the Tyrants special favor, and went home
with great satisfaction of him. And it must be believed that it was some
special service they were to do, for which he would give a whole Province,
which he already accounted his own. And the first apparent Act of their
gratitude for giving over the prosecution of that plantation, and receiving
them into such special intimacie was their Barbarous Murder and Assassination
of the English, and their endeavor to exstirpate all Monuments not only of the
English name, but of every thing of civilitie, that was brought thither by
them; and yet, after this, the same favors continued to them by that King, and
all endeavors used by him, to keep them from just punishment for their
perpetrated nameless, matchless wickedness; in Comparison whereof, the Sicilian
Vespers, the Parisian Nuptials, and the Mattens of the Valtoline have lost much
of their fame, and must give place in all thoughts of abhorrencie to the
infernal actions of these Monsters. And the grants after made them in favor of
Popery by Ormond in his first Treaty with them, and those additional secret
ones by Glamorgan, which his own Instructions take notice of, as such as were
not fit for him publicly to grant by Ormond, his Lieutenant, as he called
him, or as the condition of his affairs then stood openly to own all these
things (which to open largely, were the subject of a Volume, and can be here
but touched) do evidence beyond contradiction that the Interest, to which those
loyal souls do with so great candor and integrity adhere, is the Interest of
Popery, as agreed to be made subservient to the ultimate Royal Interest of
absolute Tyranny.

And yet these poor Scots must be bored through the nose with a bulrush, and
made believ that this Interest and their Kirk-Interest are very reconciliable
in that Communi tertio of the King's sacred Majesty. And that they might well
enough agree, if it were not for Ill-affected Members that would cause some
misunderstanding between them. They would make them believ that at the breaking
out of the Rebellion in Ireland (which they will needs call a War) they had no
quarrel against the Scottish Nation, but 'twas brought on and occasioned by
this party working division. Indeed it is true that for a few of the first
days after the beginning of that horrid Butcherie, they did forbear the Scotch
Nation, knowing their good natures such, as they would be content to sit
still, and see the English destroyed, so they might escape, there would be the
more room for Colonies of their Nation; And it would be much more easy to
deal with one Nation then with both. And also for that they knew the Scots had
then in Scotland some formed forces standing, that might in few hours have been
transported, being once at the water's side, that might have much distracted
their proceeding, till they had made some good progress in their execrable work.
But when they had destroyed the most of the English, save those in strong
Towns, and found that the Scots were only upon Treaty for sending of forces,
which were not like to arrive so soon but that they might without danger deal
also with them, They then let Them, as well as the English, taste of their
humanity, as to all their gudes and gear. And that they did not so generally
fall upon their lives is not to be imputed to their Mercy, because they knew
they should die often, or be long a dying (and feel themselves to be so) by
being compelled to return into Scoland, believing that transmigration to be
wors then that into the other world. And yet now th^se Scots can be all one
with these Irish, against the English, for carrying on the Interest of their
King, according to the Covenant, against the Commonwealth of England, and
present Government of it; upon whom they bestow the free expressions of their
natural dialect, dignifying them with the honorable Epithets of Vpstarts, and
basest abortive Scum of this Kingdom. This dirt of theirs we shall cast aside,
and not trouble our selves to answer, only tell them, there are none in the
Government of England but are descended from Adam, and have no ambition to
derive themselves higher. And our envy shall never carry us (against so
evident demonstration, as their natural disposition and constant manner of life
hold's out in all their convers, both among themselves and toward others) to
deny that they be derived from a stem of some hours greater antiquity, unless
any could believ (notwithstanding their bodies) that they are the Children of
that Father, who according to the opinion of some good Antiquaries, was created
before this visible world. Abortive and Scum are fit flowers for their
invective; notwithstanding the Abortion (for the Scum we shall not touch,
being properly their own) there has been strength enough to chastize them,
through the assistance of God, to whom the cry of blood is asscended, and from
whose most just and irresistible hand more judgments then one pursue's both
them and the whole family that they pretend to advance. They seem to be
sorry the Scots have no strong holds in their hands in Vlster, but that they
are deprived thereof by the subtlety of the English. Indeed when they began to
unite with them by the setting on of their Priests at Belfast, under that
ridiculous stalking horse of the King's Interest, it was time to unkennel that
vermin. And he should be very credulous that could believ that the Irish
would have left them in perpetual quiet possession; especially if they shall
but consider how George Monroe, who had contracted a better understood
agreement with them, and came with his forces from among them, used the rest of
the Scot's party. But this is too much for opening of their eyes who will be
blind; let them go together till they fall together under the ruins which
they pretend to support.

But their next peng of good nature is very remarkable, by the violent working
whereof they cannot choos but wondrous tenderly take it sadly to heart, and are
full of fear, that ere long none of the Scottish either Gentry or Commonaltie
will be suffered to inhabit in that Province, bordering upon their native
Kingdom of Scotland. Poor Scots! can ye swallow these Gudgeons? do ye think
the Irish do so perfectly love your company for Presbytery and Covenants
sake? or for what other good quality is it that they would never yet take
notice of, that ye are become so dear to them? Is there never an one remaining
of all their ancients Clan's or Septs, that can derive a title to the land in
that Province? They were wont to keep their pedigree well enough without an
Herault's-office; And took a course their families might not be extinct for
want of Progeny, which were never used to be differenced among them by that
nice distinction of Natural and Legitimate children: it is hard to be believed
but some of their spawn would at one time or other pretend a Title, and
(notwithstanding this same new dearness upon your Kings account) had rather
have your room, than your company there; and that they will make you believ
too, had they none else to fear or defend themselves against, but the Scots in
Vlster, or their assistance from Scotland.

But how come's Emerus Cloughensis their Bishop-General (if at least the
Declaration be his work, the weakness whereof agree's not with such parts, as
report has given him) to be in this humor of prophesying? Perhaps his fury
has transported him into an exstasie; or has heated him to a temper of
vaticination; or rather, perhaps it is for that he see's in policy and
prudence it ought to be so; and therefore believing that it will, he habit's
his expression with the mantle of sear and sorrow, to serve a turn withal for
once upon those wretched Scots. But however it were no shame to be taught of
an Enemy; at least we may well let them be our Remembrancers, and as soon as
may be make good those Irish fears, and remove those Scots, if not out of the
Land, yet at least so far from the Sea as they may keep no correspondence with
the rest of their Nation, which yet, in spite of all, will have this of favor,
that it they live within Land, they will be out of the view of those shores
that must needs awaken their memories to unpleasant suggestions.

At last they com to speak out without any implication for the removal of all
mis-construction of their past or future actions, Declaring in the sight of God
and the world, their intentions and resolutions to the last man, with their
lives, estates and fortunes, to endeavor the advancement and preservation of
his Majesty's service and interest in that Kingdom, and of all those whoever
that prosecute his quarrel upon the condition of the free exercise of their
Religion; Behold the ground of their former and future service to this King of
Scotland, and to his Father: And the price of the Massacre and Assassination of
the English, and of the present union and good understanding between the Scots
in Vlster and them. They will be equal too, they will give, as well as take a
liberty 10 any person of what Nation or quality soever (so he adhere to
their King) to exercise and embrace his or their own profession or Religion.
They that know them will not be much taken with their Concessions, they have
here provided for an evasion without coming to their sheat Ancor of fides non
est haereticis servanda. They will have free exercise of their own Religion,
but allow only to exercise and embrace that of others; what mean's the
emission of that Modification [free] if their intention were fair, and the
addition of [embrace] which, applied to Religion, can only signify an
internal Act, and may be, when they pleas, interpreted exclusive of outward or
public and free exercise: But if they mean fair, twere good they would tell
how long they have been of this mind; or how long'tis since they received a
faculty to make such a promiss. We did not exspect this holy year would have
given any thing of Indulgence to the Heretics. And for fact, we certainly
know they would hardly suffer Ormond (though their adored Kings Lieutenant, and
General of all his Forces, and therefore also of their Forces, if they were
then the Kings Forces) have a Preach made him in Kilkennie by his own Chaplain
(though privately) when he was lately there among them, although perhaps there
would have been but little difference between one of their Preachments and his.
And it will be very hard for them to give an assurance that will bind that
they shall not do the like hereafter by the Scots, or any else who trust them.
They conclude they will make no distinction nor difference between themselves,
and as many of the Scots Nation, or any other that shall now, upon their
invitation (which they do with heart and hand) join in their Kings service, or
any way contribute to, or countenance the same. And we believ there will be
no difference put between them, by this Commonwealth, and the Governors and
Forces of it. But as they together have espoused the Interest, and carry on
the designs of the declared Enemy of this Commonwealth; so they must exspect
to be used as Enemies; and therefore let them no longer impose upon the world,
with the dissimulation of a Religious Interest, and complain of a persecution
for conscience sake. This Declaration of theirs having taken off that mask, And
taken away from them the pretense of urging their conscience for a moderation
of punishment, or impetration of pardon, they having barefaced owned another
Interest, the fate of which they must now be content to suffer; which if it
prove happy, it is more than it has been hitherto. And it is not like to
thrive much the better for their assistance, upon whom their black guilt of so
much innocent blood is like to draw an heavy vengeance from the just hand of
that God who has given it for a Law to these times, when he had rested from
punishing the cruelties of the first, That he that sheddeth man's blood, by man
shall his blood be shed. And it is neither their pretenses can blind his
All-seeing Eyes, nor any of their combinations or conjunctions avoid the
powerful executions of his irrefistible Arm, by the mighty goings out whereof
he will abate every Pride and Tyranny that think's to exalt it self against
the providential dispensations of his infinite wisdom carrying on his work, his
strange work in this last period, verging toward the end, and consummation of
all things.

FINIS.
SInce the former part hereof was in the Press, the following Relation is com
to hand, which containing the History of the proceeding of this Irish Army,
since their last coming into Ulster, until they were destroyed, I thought it
necessary to publish it with their Declaration: And the rather, that all men
may take notice, that the constant going on of Providence is, that so soon as
any undertake the Cause of that accursed family, which lie's under direful
fates, they presently fall under the same Curs and speed accordingly.

A perfect Relation of the total Overthrow of the Irish Army in Ulster, by my
Lord President of Connaught.
SIR!
I Have sometime since divorced Virgil's Aeneids from his Georgicks. Arma
virumque cano -- sound's in my ears as the Cataracts of Nilus, when Tityre tu
patulae yield's to no aer, but of a Psalm. SIR! could I resist your sweet
violence I suffer from you, I would not force my weaned temper to the Relation
of a Battle, it com's so near Lot's wife looking over her shoulder. Besides, I
know this late Overthrow given by my Lord President of Connaught to the Army
of Ulster will cross the Seas with emulation of Letters, which shall have the
Van: yet it being the first complete Victory, and, in this conjuncture of
time, deriving such important consequences, I shall offer it you in the draught
of a Landscape: for truly to attempt a draught of it to the life, I might as
profitably whisper to the slain carcasses to react their own Tragedies.

SIR! I must not bring you presently upon the field to view the corpse; Rarities
are not to be presented to the exspectation in the bud, but full blown: and
certainly Canaan was more welcome and beautiful for the Spiral March the
Israelites made through the Wilderness: and truly that soliditie of Conduct, and
dexterity in arresting alladvantages that preceded the Battle, weigh-equal in
my scales with the Victory it self. For my L. President of Connaught was
matched with a person of as signal abilities as this Kingdom afforded, the
Bishop of Chogher, a man of a deep judgment, quick apprehension, indefatigable
spirit, ready execution; and then qualified with as handsome a compacted Army
to actuate his designs, as I have seen in this Kingdom. He was the Irish Adam;
for they stood and fell in him.

It was the 14th of April, that my Lord President rendezvouz'd the forces
quartered in the Laggan, having sent Orders to Colonel Venables to do the like
with those quartered in the Claneboys, appointing their general rendezvous
about Charlemont with all speed. The Enemy with no less vigilance draws to
an head about Monaglan, seeking to make good some quarter about Charlemont,
whereby to disappoint the Conjunction of our forces. My L. President resolv's
to advance upon the Bishop, and to crush his Army before it grew to sinewey.
But what my Lord intended to have don by retale, God ordered for wholesale.

In this instant of time my Lord understand's that a Party of the Bishops had
surprised the Castle and Fort of Toom, which commanded the passage, where Lough
Neauf run's into the Banna, and that they had passed over a party of Horse and
Foot into the Country of Antrim. This was a sad check; it gained time to the
Bishop, and divided our forces: for Venables was ordered back, to take it in:
My Lord in the interim marches all by the Lough side on Tyrone, both to prey
their Kireaughts which lay in those great fastnages of Glankankan which were
guarded with some five troops of horse, and Colonel Phil. Mac Touls Regiment,
Turlough Mac Art Oges Regiment, and General Major O Lanes Regiment: as also to
engage those Regiments so, as they might not infest Venables at Toom: and
accordingly my Lord did fetch two or three preys from them, which gave much
refreshment to his men, skirmish't and killed diverse of those Regiments, and
return's again to Draganon, to let the Bishop see he would not quit him his
ground, though single. Toom yield's to Venables, after it withstood a strong
Battery, and a Mortar-piece upon quarter, and being reintrencht, could not
have been gained without loss of Foot, of which my Lord stood most in need of.
The Bishop's Army by this time grew round and thick, and my Lord was forced to
retire toward Omagh for some provisions, which he had sent up thither to
supply his forces withal: so the Bishop advances about Charlemont: and now it
is an hard game to bring my Lord and Veuables together.

The Bishop was too hard a match for any one of them, although my Lord
President with the Lag began forces, and his Brother. Audly Coots Regiment of
Horse kept the field against him, held him up, and daily with his horse rode to
seek advantage upon him; but could neither find, nor force any; his quarters
were too strong: my Lord perceiving the Bishop would not quit that ground, out
of which there was no forcing of him, (it was the same ground that Owen Mac Art
encamped in, when the General Major Monroe, and we lay about him with 10000
men, and he marched away in spite of us) and that his provisions grew low,
and his men discouraged, that no overture of service could be made, he retired
into the Country. Now the Bishop advances and keeps the Mountain-way from
Charlemount to Dungeven (the places the ordinary Map will show you) by which
means still Venabls and my Lord are disjoined; My Lord President not able on
that ground to serve with his horse, sent Orders to all the Country to put over
their goods and remove themselves on this side Lough-foyle, by which means the
Bishops Army was straightened for Victuals, and the Corn being in the ground
the Country suffered but little. Dungeven only was taken in by storm, and
defended gallantly by Lieutenant Col. Michael Beresford, to the last man:
Ballicastle was as poultron-like delivered: and Limavaddy Castle, belonging to
Major Philips, was only attempted by menacing parties, Major Philips having
resolutely burnt all his out houses, or any thing that might advantage the
Enemies covert-approach. My Lord President encamped on the other side of the
River of Strabane and Neauf at 28 miles distance from Dungeven, twice or thrice
beat up his Guards: but the Bishops Army was all encamped upon a shaking bogg.
My Lord President had, upon his retiring from the Omagh, commanded Major King
with three Troops of horse to Eleskillin, and Major Read with 300 foot both to
Garrison the place, and to make a division by falling into their Quarters, and
to cut of their Convoyes of Victuals, and the daily recruits the Bishop
exspected; which was performed by Major King, with much diligence.

The master-point was all this while how to work a conjunction of the
Claneboye's forces: for my Lord resolved, if it could be effected, immediately
to put it to a day: and the Bishop knew not well how to enter the Country, or
at least feared it, my Lord so ordering himself, that nothing could be got
without fighting, and that upon disadvantage, my Lord being now upon the
Defensive. There is a passage close under Lifford called Clanlee, fordable over
Lough foil, though very much disused. The Bishop over this intended to fall
in behind my Lord, and so to shut him out of the Country. This that the
Bishop thought his masterpiece, my Lord President made use of to his
destruction; for my Lord dissembled the knowledge of it: and my Lord under
pretense that the Souldierie did straggle into the Countrie-houses, being so
near, advised them to retire behind Breag-dough, another strong pass behind
this Chanlee 3 miles, and made himself ready, that as soon as the Bishop should
enter Clanlee-pass with his Army, he would rise, and make good Breag-dough;
so that the Bishop should find nothing but trouble; and that now Venables men
being ready at Colerain, should march to Derry, and so ferry over. This was so
handsomely managed, that when my Lords forces saw the Enemy at Clanlee-foard,
they thought the Country lost, when it was the first step to his safety. The
Bishop, to carry his intention the closer, marched up past Clanlee to
Strabane, as if he would force his passage upon my Lord that way. My Lord
send's parties over the River, skirmisheth, beat's his Horse to their Foot: so
the Bishop retire's as if he would encamp above Clanlee, and, after a little
halt, rusheth into the Lough with Horse and Foot: at the same instant my Lord
President rises, and marches to Breagh-dough, for which pass the Irish strove
hard: My Lord dispatcheth away to Colerain for Claneboys men to advance to
Derry, and that he would engage the Enemy so, that he should not return to
stop them. The Bishop was very angry to be thus deluded; drawe's all his
horse and foot into Battalia, as if he would give battle, faceth my Lord
President. My Lord drew up his, who had only his own Regiment of Horse, and
four Troops of Col. Rich. Coots (his other being with major King) and about
300. Country horse commanded by Colonel Sanderson, and about a 1000 foot of his
own Regiment, and his brother Colonel Thomas Coots Regiment, they continued 9
or 10 hours pickering: my Lord President had no reason to fight, for he was
sure to have the accession of Venables forces speedily; So the Bishop toward
evening began to draw off his Army toward the Pass: my Lord well supposing
that the Bishop (finding that he had no ways advantaged himself) might draw
over to prevent the conjuncture with Venables, fell to a dispute with the
Bishop in hors-logick, charging him home with 4 Troops of horse, which the Irish
very gallantly recieved: in it Captain Tailor of our side was killed in the
midst of their Pikes, Capt. Carchart shot very dangerously, and about 8
Troopers: the Enemy lost about 60 men, and diverse sorely wounded. The hot
charges from so small a party, and in bad ground, made the Irish march the
mountainest ground they could find to Litterkenny, my Lord coasting by them,
and keeping the Country under his protection By this time Venables foot being
about a 1000 are com to Derry, my Lord and they are joined, and they advance
upon the enemy now at Litterkenny. My Lord understanding that the Bishop had
sent off a party into Kilmacrenan to take in Dee, and to fetch in provision,
thought it not fit to let the opportunity slipof fighting him; so upon the 21
June at Schear follis two miles above Litterkenny, they both imbattail'd; the
Irish were about 4000 foot and 400 horse, my Lord President about 2000 foot and
800. horse; the Irish were in gross Battalia's my Lord drew up his in small ones
handsomely, disposed to succor one another. The forlorns encounter fiercely on
both sides, till at last all hands were engaged at push of Pike, and clubbing
of Muskets; the Gronnd was such that my Lords horse, nor the Enemies could
encounter each other, or my Lords horse charge their foot; but the smalness of
my Lords divisions, were easily rallied, moved nimbly, whilst the Enemies
gross of infantrie fought themselves into a rout, and at last into a flight: but
what horse my Lord ordered for a rescue, followed the execution, which was as
noble a one, and victorious as ever was in this Kingdom. They lost all their
Arms and provisions of the field. They have lost all their Officers and all
their men. My Lord President has made a List which I have sent you, but Sir,
it is impossible for him to know it, for the execution has been 33 miles from
the place he fought in; for Major King being at Elleskellin with those Irish,
fell on by my Lord Presidents orders sent to him, upon the defeat betwixt that
and the Omagh; and has slain many hundreds, and after my Lord had completed
his List, Major King took the Bishop on the 25 of this month and 200 horse, and
scattered and killed all the rest, who escaped the execution of the field: it is
possible that a fortnight hence we may know the Officers; But I, who have
spoken with the protected people am certain, that they can not learn of a 100
men escapid, and some 3 or 4 Officers, whereof Sir Philem Oneale, and Alex.
Mac-donnell (the Earl of Antrims brother are two: my Lord President lost one
Captain about seven men, Col. Fennicks shot, Major Hary Gore shot, Captain Gore
and Ensign Gere hurt with Pikes; and some common Soldiers hurt at push of Pike.

The holds of Bellicastle, and Dungeven, and Lifford which they had fortified,
they have quitted. Thus God has wrought a great deliverance, first to us in
these parts, who, certainly if my Lord had miscarried, had been al put to the
sword; and next unto the whole Kingdom, this being the Armado the Irish relied
upon. It was not only the greatest strength of Foot this Kingdom of Ireland
had, but that Foot likewise whose merit they esteemed much.

These were the first that began the Rebellion, that continued it, and these
are they (praised be God) that have ended it. My Lord President is immediately
for the field, though these ten weeks he has been in constant action, and I
am sure put to as hard streights to preserv the Province of Ulster, as ever
any one has been; and truly an ordinary spirit would have fainted under the
work. His experience is best able to represent his own wants, though they are
palpable enough; no man ever served masters upon a cheaper rate; and had not
the forces under him a clear apprehension of his self-racking to supply them,
the affairs in Ireland, by my dial, would have gone back many degrees. Sr,
though I have tired you, you would be content to read another volume to the
same tune: a sharp and well supplied prosecution end's this work this Summer,
in humane appearance. How much my Lord President has contributed to it within
this half year, obteining two Victories, in the first against Sr George Monroe,
in which he spoiled all the horse of Connaught and Ulster, besides the
slaughter he made of the foot; and in this clean one, which left no gleanings
but such as Major King gathered up, envy it self must confess. I shall only
add my observation, The instabilitie of my Lord President's friendship with
this Ulster Army, for about this time twelv-moneth the heads of this Army
were at my Lord President's table and now their heads are upon the gates and
marketplace of Derrie, a dear ordinary and great interest for the
forbearance. It seems my Lord know's how to borrow crutches, and then burn
them. Sr, I will rest in exspectation of a line from you.

Omagh, June 2^. 1650.

FINIS.

