Harrison.
I. Caren.
^. Cook.
^. Peter's.
T. Scott.
^. Cl^m^nt.
O. Cromwell.
Ad. Scroope.
(...)
(...)
(...)


THE LIVES, ACTIONS, AND EXECUTION OF The prime Actors, and principal
Contrivers of that horrid Murder of our late pious and Sacred Sovereign King
CHARLES the first, of Ever blessed memory.

WITH Several Remarkable Passages in the Lives of others, their Assistants,
who died before they could be brought to Justice.

By GEORGE BATE, an observer of those Transactions.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Vere, at the sign of the Angel without Newgate,
1661.

To the Right Honorable James Lord Marquess of Ormond, Earl of Brecknock, Lord
High Steward of his Majesty's Household, Knight of the most Noble Order of the
Garter, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc.
Right Honorable,
I Hope your Lordship will be pleased to pardon the Authors presumption in his
humble Dedication to your Lordship, of this small Description of the prime
Authors and Contrivers of the most Horrid Murder that ever was committed in
the Face of the Sun; For such I am sure your Lordship did always account that
of our late Sovereign, and such likewise was it looked upon by all Truly and
Piously Ingenious in the whole World.

Far be it from me to have the least thought, that my mean Pen should draw a
Lively Representation of his late Majesty's (both) natural and acquired
virtues shining with so much splendour through the Dark and thick Clouds of his
Afflictions; yet to the end the world might see the Blackness of the Designs
of these Miserable Men, who so wickedly persecuted our Sovereign like a
Partridge upon the top of the Mountains. I have at the close hereof attempted
something that might make them appear the more Wicked, by how much they
Murdered so Pious, so Incomparable a Prince.

My LORD, You had your share of the miseries in those times, and your Life was
hunted after by these Bloodhounds. The remarkable passages of whose Lives and
Deaths are here presented to your Lordships View; this being but as an Essay to
what hereafter shall be set forth in a greater Volume.

And now may your Lordship Live to see Peace Flourish all your time, and may
your Children inherit ^he Blessing thereof, as well as your outward substance;
May your Lordships Loyalty (which cannot be exceeded) be Copied out by them;
and may the reward of your Fidelity and Constancy be an immortal Crown when
God shall take you to his own Kingdom, is the Prayer of,

Your Lordships Humbl^ Devoted Servant, GEORGE BAT^

The Prooemium.
WHen it pleased Almighty God to turn again the Captivity of Sion, and to
return with glory his Sacred Majesty, to the undoubted Dominions of his
Ancestors, after a black and dark night of Confusion, Usurpation, and
Rebellion; and (by his appearing within this his own Hemisphere) to dispel and
scatter all those malignant Clouds which for twelve years together had
beni^hted these three Nations; The Parliament thought it their duty in the
behalf of the People of England, to make inquisition for that sacred and
innocent blood which was shed in their names, and upon the pretended account of
their consent: For which purpose, a special Commission of Oyer and Terminer was
issued, and the Sessions House in the Old Baily appointed for their tria^ and
condem^ation: Now the inten^ of this discourse is to give a discovery of the
Lives, Educations, an^ Deaths of the prime Actors an^ principal Contrivers of
that horri^ Murder of Butchering our late pious and sacred Sovereign King
Cha^^ the First of ever blessed Memory wherein I cannot but premise the
prophetique expression of that hol^ Man of God Mr. Christopher Love when he was
upon the Scaffold viz. That those who had gotten pow^^ by policy, and used it
with cruelty, should l^se it with ignominy, at the close o^ which words, Mr.
Love was interrupted by Alderman Titchbourn, the^ S^^riff of London, who would
no^ suffer^^m to proceed; but the Alde^man has since found it verified i^ his
own experience, having sinc^ changed his Chain of Gold, for Fet^ers of Iron.

In the prosecution of this design, many strange and horrid consultations were
in debate; the original contrivers whereof were very few; ^he first Cockatrice
Egg that was hatched in this wicked crew, was Lt. Col. Joyces seizing the King
at Holmby, whereby he was immediately taken from Major Genesis Brown, who then
attended him by order of the Parliament; and translated to the power and
tyranny of a vicious and merciless Army, and at that time (being but the
proemium of the Kings afterward unhap^y fate) it was the words of Cromwell to
Hugh Peter's, by way of question, Whether there could not be found a way to
settle the Nation without the King? To whom that miserable wretch replied, That
there was no way to do it, but by taking off his head.

This Oliver Cromwell being thus the chief Actor in this sad Tragedy and for
that he received not the r^ward of his iniquity in this Worl^ but is conveyed
to the immedia^ Judgment of the all just God, shall only give you a brief
Char^cter of his Education and Life, wi^ some notes and observations on (...)
Death.

Oliver Cromwell was a man, to gi^ him his true Character, of val^ in the head
of an Army, and wicked policy in the front of (...) Council; being born in
Hunting (...) Shire, and brought up in the Un^versity of Cambridge, until his
d^bauched incivility, and sottish i^ sobriety expelled him that plac^ He was so
constant and lewd a Live at his first coming into the World, that his wits in
his afte^ years was chiefly employed to mak^ up the breaches of the former; for
which purpose he foresaw tha^ there was no way to help his d^cayed Estate, but
by turning facti^s, upon which account, he ^esently appears a great Stickler
against Monarchy and Episcopacy: ^^d presently lays hold of the first
^^portunity to appear in Arms, and ^assed through all the degrees of ^ilitary
employment, until at last ^e arived at General of the Army; ^aving first
supplanted or under^^ined all honester men that stood in ^is way, wading to the
Government ^f these Nations over head and ears (...) blood; for having first
spilt the ^nnocent blood of our Sovereign, and polluted his soul therewith, he
^ares not to spill the blood of his ^ubjects like water, plenty where^f was
shed in our streets, during ^is short and troublesome Reign, by ^is oppression,
dissimulation, hypocrisy, and cruelty: When he was owned by a few to be
Protector, he called several Parliaments, expecting that they would throw that
Title and the Government of these Nations upon him; but this way would not do,
for though he nominated the very men that should fit in some Parliaments, and
sent his private letters to have his own creatures chosen in others; yet he
could not be established by them, which occasioned that his desperate
expression at the dissolving one of his Parliaments, That he would rather be
roled in blood with infamy to his grave, then surrender up that power which God
and the People had put upon him.

In the year 1656, a Parliament was called, and indeed his last; where none
were suffered to sit, but such as would sign to own his usurpation; and one
day, when about a hundred and odd sat, the greatest part whereof were either
his own servants, alliance, or friends, he is voted King (as some of them have
said since, only to set him upon that ticklish pinnacle, that so his fall ^ight
be the greater) but the Army ^ould not endure that title which so ^^tely they
had buried with so much ^retetended seeking of God, other^ise called hypocrisy
and mocking ^f God; but yet he accepts of the ^ignity, pre-eminence and
pre^ence of a King in all respects what^oever, and acts as one accord^ngly.

But here his heart is broke, he ^o ingratiate himself with the People,
mittigates the Tax, although his expense increased, the public Assesment is
reduced from 120 to ^hreescore thousand pounds per men^em, and the charge of
the Navy and Army continues as before, whereby he ran much behind hand with
them both; and in the mean time the King our now gracious Sovereign began to
revive in the hearts of the people, several sums of money are sent him out of
England, of which Oliver gets intelligence, then he begins to contrive plots,
many innocents are drawn in, Dr. He^it t^a^ innocent lamb, with others, are
devoured by this ravenous Wolf, the Gen ry all the Nation over are disturbed
and imprisoned, and all things now begin to be in a strange confusion; he sends
for the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London, and to them Crocodile like he weeps
and tells a story of the Kings preparation on the other side the water, that a
great plot had been designing against him to the imbrewing the Nation again in
blood, with other strange stories never thought of, before he contrived them
himself; and now like the Devil he began to rave and tear when he perceived his
Kingdom to be at an end; and at last having a Jury of distempers in him, all
concentring together at one time to agonize that wicked body that had been the
Author of so much mis^hief and Murder, he died on the ^hird of September 1658,
and al^hough he had at that time the so^^mnization of a Funeral fit for a ^ing
of England, yet his ignomini^us Statue and the mock Pomp of ^^at days glory
was soon turned in^^ shame and disgrace, by his own ^ouldiers and friends, who
(now ^y the change of Government from ^ichard his Son to the Rump Parlia^ent:)
defaced and destroyed that ^tate wherein he was set up in Westminster Abbey,
and converted ^is Protectorship into a more scur^ilous disparagement, then that
of ^ne of his meanest Soldiers. We ^ill take leave of this Monster, and ^ome
to some of his wicked Abet^ors, only will leave this Super^cription to be
engraven on his Tomb (if he be thought worthy of one.)

Here lies ignominious dust,
Which was the only seat of lust;
A man and yet a Monster too,
That did both King and State undo;
Most people say, this is his doom,
That here he don't deserve a Tomb.
The Life of Ma. Genesis Thomas Harrison.
HAving given you a short account of the General of this black A^my; the next
whose picture shall be presented to you, is Maj. General Harrison, a great
Canter in Divinity, and a principal Header of the Fifth Monarchy Professors. He
was born at Newcastle under line in the County of Stafford, of very mean
parents, although he afterward arrived to a very considerable Estate: being
gained chiefly by the miseries of the times, and the hypocrisy of his
pretended preaching. His Father was a Butcher, who brought him (according unto
his ab^litie unto Learning, and after a while placed him with one Mr. Hulk, an
Attorney of Cliffords Inn. But, what ever the matter was, he desired to live
rather by the ruins, than by the practice of the Law: For not long after, he
betook himself from his Pen to the Sword, and so insinuated himself with the
deluded Army, that he past from one command to another, till at last he
attained to be Major General of Wales; in which employment to characterize his
tyranny, would swell to a volumn far exceeding this intended Discourse. The
Laws of the Land were not executed in Wales, but Major General Harrisons Laws
were there in full force. No Orthodox Minister could there be suffered, but
whom he pleased to allow; and with the assistance of his Chaplain Mr. Vavasor
Powel, (a giddy headed Parson, and second Brother to H. Peter's) he endeavored
the modeling of that Country, so, as that none but their own proselytes should
teach and instruct the people. In a word, he was the chief Holden forth to that
dangerous people called Fifth Monarchiers, and the chief Incendiary to set on
foot, malignant and evil designs against that sacred Institution of Kings and
Princes; and one that upon the trial of our most innocent Sovereign, used this
expression, That they should blacken that white person as much as they could,
in drawing up their charge against him.

About the time of the Murder of our said Sovereign, he was in great
reputation with the Army; insomuch as he was several times entrusted with the
Kings person, during that wicked confinement: He brought him from the Isle of
Wight to Windsor, and there had the charge of his person: And it was reported
to the King at that time, That this Major General Harrison had a design on foot
to murder him privately. Which upon Harrisons trial, he denied, saying, That
the King did once task him with such a thing, but would not believe it when he
saw his countenance: and that the King said unto him, If those persons had been
present that brought him such a report, he would give them the lie, for that he
himself had some skill in Physiognomy, and perceived in his face better
principles.

When the King was brought to his trial, this Harrison was every day at that
bloody Court; he was at all the private meetings for carrying on that wicked
Act; he was at the consultations for drawing up that horrid Charge; he was one
who appointed the time, the place, and the manner of the Kings Execution; and
he was lying in the bed with Ireton in a Chamber in Whitehall, where Cromwell
lay: Likewise, when those Miscreants contrived a Sub-warrant to murder the
King, which was drawn up by Cromwell for Hacker to sign, that morning when
this unparalleled act was done.

He continued one of the Darlings of that Rump Parliament, until the year
1653. about which time they began to think of a New Representative, as they
then called it.

But Maj. General Harrison contents not himself with the illegal power of the
Rump Parliament; but conspires with Cromwell for their dissolution, although by
his own confession in Newgate, it happened otherwise, which take as follows.

That morning that Cromwell went to dissolve them, being the 23. of April,
1653. he called Harrison to go along with him; which he did, and as he
pretended at that time, not knowing his design: But coming with him into the
Parliament House; and observing the disorder he put them into, by reason of his
intention to dissolve them, he began to think that those Members intended to
perpetuate themselves; and that there were others, whom, he said, God would
finish his work by: and hereupon he sided with Cromwell, commanding the Speaker
to come out of his Chair: but he said, he would not come out, unless he were
pulled out: to which Harrison said, Sir, I will lend you my hand; which the
Speaker giving him, he came out of his Chair, and so that piece of a Parliament
were then interrupted.

But Cromwell now seeing the way was laid open for himself to usurp; and having
killed to take possession, puts Harrison upon the work of dissolving that mock
Parliament: which being done, they now contrive which way to call such a
Parliament as would do what they pleased: and this was that which was called
the praying Parliament, of which Praise-God Barebone was a Member. These were
not chosen by the Country, but by Cromwell and Harrison, but after they ^ad
played with the Gove^^ment ^wo or three months, these were ^ikewise in like
manner dissolved.

And now these two stand in competition, who should be greatest in ^his earthly
Kingdom. But Cromwell having an Over-vote with the Officers of the Army, gets
the head ^f Harris n, and will either make ^im bow to his designs, or break ^im
in pieces: which Harrison refu^ing to do, lays down his Commission and Command
together; and ^as ever after the Usurpers Priso^er, being carried from Castle
to Castle through most parts of the Nation, like an exiled Malefactor. ^n which
condition he continued for ^ome years, until he was released ^y the Rump
Parliament, whom ^otwithstanding he would not ac^nowledg, but looks for the
immediate Reign of our Savior upon the ^arth.

There was little more observable in the passages of his Life, but what were
immediate forerunners of his Death. Maj. G. Lambert having made an escape from
the Tower, had preengaged some factious persons in the Country, of which this
Harrison was one, to raise Forces against the King, who was now voiced in most
parts of the Nation, to be returning home. But Harrison was taken in the very
point of time, wherein he intended to have headed a Party, and was brought
Prisoner to the Tower of London, where he continued some months before he was
arraigned in the Old Baily.

He being brought to the Bar, seemed to flight and unconcern himself in the
Trial; his Conscience being feared, was not at all penitent for being
instrumental in shedding the innocent blood of that pious Prince: But saying,
That although other Kings had been privately assassinated, yet what he had done
was in ^^e face of the Sun, and in the fear (...) the Lord. He was found guilty
^y his Jury, and was condemned to ^e hanged, drawn and quartered.

On Saturday the 13 day of October, ^e was brought from Newgate; con^ucted by
a Troop of horse and some (...) the Trained Bands, and attended ^y the Sheriffs
Officers, being drawn ^n a Sledg through the streets to ^hairing-Cross: where a
Gallows was ^^ected for his execution. All the ^ay as he went, he endeavored
to ^iscover to the world the undaun^edness of his spirit, by the smiles of ^is
countenance; which notwith^a^ding would not do: for he betrayed (...) himself
much fear by an agony of ^wet, and the more than ordinary ^^embling and shaking
of his ^oynts.

Being come to the Gallows, he ^scended the Ladder, where he ^pake to the
following effect: That all that had been done in the late War, was by the
strange and wonderful Providence of Almighty God; That all the Windings and
Turnings that had been seen in the late Changes had been ordered and contrived
by the same Providence; That by this Providence he was drawn in to be an
unhappy Instrument in the Kings Death; And the same all wise-disposing
Providence had brought him to that End.

After he had spoke a little time to the same purpose, he went to Prayers; and
then began to make himself ready for the Executioner. He bare up his spirits as
much as could be, to flight Death, having taken a strong Cordial in the
morning to that purpose. His last words were, That now he was going to the Lord
Jesus, and should at the last Day, come again with him i^ Glory, to judge the
Kings and Princes of the Earth, and those that ha^ been his Judges. He was not
so much thrown off the Ladder by the Executioner, but went as readily off
himself. After which, the sentence was executed upon him; his members were cut
off, and with his bowels burnt; his Head was severed from his body, and on
Tuesday following set on Westminster Hall Gate; and his four Quarters were
ordered to be set upon the Gates of the City of London.

Thus ended He, that did betray
H^s King and Country; made a prey
Of Law and Gospel, and did spend
His chiefest skill to pu^ an end
To Kingly Power, and throw down
Both the Kings ^itle and his Crown.
The Life of Colonel John Jones.
Colonel John Jones, came of mean Family in Wales, was (...) man of no repute
before the War; he was sent up to London to be an Apprentice, but was pl^ced
as a Serving-man to a Gentl^ man; and afterward was preferred to Sir Thomas
Middleton Lord Mayor of London, with whom h^ lived many years in the said
capacity; but the Wars coming on, h^ like the rest thought it would b^ good
fishing in troubled waters, h^ went forth at the beginning of the Wars a
Captain of foot, and b^ his factious principles, which at tha^ time was the
only way to get into preferment, he was taken notice of, and was countenanced
and advanced by the Cromwelian party; by reason whereof he was chosen a
Parliament man in an absent place, and by degrees came to be made Governor of
Anglesey in North Wales, and several other successive employments: And now the
same party thirsting after the blood of the King, this John Jones is made a
chief instrument in prosecuting that horrid Murder, and an eminent blood-hound
in pursuing this innocent game; he set his hand to the Act for constituting
that Court of Injustice, and likewise signed and sealed that black warrant for
the Execution; for which service he gained more and more in the esteem of those
wretched men, and was suddenly after sent with Corbet, Ludlow, etc. one of the
Commissioners of Parliament: (so called) for the Government of Ireland, i^
which place it is admirable to thin^ with what state and tyranny he ca^ryed
himself, persecuting all tha^ were contrary to his principles, taking up old
Laws concerning the brewing of Beer and Ale, and pu^ting them in execution with
rigor plaguing all the houses in Dubli^ that sold drink, and not suff^rin^ any
one to be in any public employment, that was seen to go into an Alehouse; by
which means people were forced to bugger Alehouses and Taverns, and to go in
at bac^ doors; and on the other hand, tur^ing all out of employment that were
not of the same Church with him discountenancing Orthodox Ministers, and
encouraging Mr. Patients, formerly a Stocking-footer in London to preach every
Sunday before the Council of Ireland in Christ-Church Dublin; finally, to go
into an Alehouse or a Protestant Church, during his domination, were crimes
a^ike, and alike punished; insomuch that none but Anabaptists and Welsh^en were
entertained at that time in beneficial places.

News hereof was brought to Oliver Cromwell, who by this time had assumed the
Protectorship, and a way is contrived by him to get Col. Jones into England,
but so as not to give him occasion of offense: which accordingly was done; for
he was ^ent over with some Papers to Oliver Cromwell, but was never sent back
again by him with an Answer thereunto.

He being a Man of an active spirit, would not go off the Stage thus: out plays
another game to ingratiate himself with the Protector, and so to come into
favor again. For which purpose he marries a Widow, Oliver Cromwell's own
Sister; conceiving, that he marrying into that Family, he might take
advantages, and lay hold of opportunities a the Court for the preferring of
himself: but this likewise proved ineffectual, for he never raised himself on^
step higher by this conjugal Tie, bu^ only to be one of those Mushroo^ Lords,
which Cromwell made out (...) the meanest of the People. Which mock honor his
Lordship did no^ long enjoy, for soon after Cromwe^ dying, and he being one of
his dis-obliged kindred, made it his business (...) unpin the frame of that new
mad^ Government, whereby the rubbi^^ and ^afters fell upon their own hea^ and
limbs; he being one of the chi^ supplanters of his Cozen Richar^ Cromwell.

This exploit being thus accomplished, he is now very active (...)
Wallingford-house, for bringing i^ the Rump again; which succeedin^ according
to his expectation, he wa^ again made one of the Commissioners for the
Government of Irelan^ with the aforenamed persons. He ^ent over again in July
1659, with ^ievt. Genesis Ludlow, who was Commander in chief of the Forces: and
^udlow coming back again, left this Col. John Jones his Deputy there; ^ho being
now Dominus fac totum, ^cts as rigorously as ever: which ^range kind of
carriage of his, Mr ^teele, then Chancellor of Ireland, (a ^an of as haughty a
spirit as himself) could not brook: For finding himself overtopt by one whom he
^hought much his inferior; he very ^airly left Ireland, and the Government
thereof to this aspiring Phaeton, ^ho suddenly after run them all unto
confusion.

By this time the Rump Parlia^ent was turned out again, by Lam^ert, and a
Committee of Safety have ^ow the Government tossed into their ^ispose. With these
Colonel John ^ones presently strikes in, and own^th their power by a
Declaration from Ireland. But here this Unfortunate Jack was soon dethroned For
on the 6. of December following about five of the clock in the evening, Col.
Sir Theophilus Jones, Col* Bridges, and two or three more discountenanced
Officers, in pursuance of a Design very privately contrive^ and carried on,
siezed on Col. Joh^ Jones, and the rest of the then Council of Ireland, took
the Castle of Dublin, and declared for a Parliamen^ and Genesis Monck, who was
then it Scotland, and had declared for the like. This Col. Jones is kept close
Prisoner in the Castle of Dublin, and the Rump Parliament getting into the
saddle again, send for him and the rest over: but by that time he was come to
Town, the Secluded Members had admittance into the House, by reason whereof,
nothing was done against him at that time.

And suddenly after, preparation being made for the Kings coming home, Col.
Jones hides himself; but ^otwithstanding ^his concealment, ^e was discovered
one Evening a^out twilight, in Finsbury fields near ^ondon, and apprehended,
and car^^ed Prisoner to the Tower of London, ^here he remained till he was
^rought to his Trial.

The twelfth of October 1660, he ^as brought with the rest to the Old ^ayly,
and his Bedfellow, Mr. Scot, ^eing immediately tried before, and ^ound guilty,
he thought it was but ^n vain to plead, for that their Arguments were the same,
which they ^ad contrived to answer their Charge: and so he was soon found
^uilty.

And on Wednesday following, he with others were drawn on a hurdle ^o
Charing Cross aforesaid, where he ^pake to the following effect: That ^e did
now see what he had often be^ieved, viz. That it was the Power that made the
Law, for that some years before they had the power i^ their hands, and
whatsoever the^ did at that time, was accounted La^ and executed accordingly;
Tha^ now the King had executed the La^ upon them, and that the King di^ nothing
but what he would have done himself, were he in the King case: For the King did
but like a loving and dutiful Son to a dear an^ loving Father. After a small
prayer, he committed his Soul into the hands of God, seemingly peniten^ and was
quartered as before.

Go thou time-serving Serving-man,
Take thy reward from Dun, that can
Best pay thee; one who will be sure
Thy utmost payment to procure.
Then Exit Jack, without applause,
And bid adieu to the Good Old Cause.
The Life of Master John Cook.
MR. John Cook, a man of very good natural parts, had they been employed to
the purpose for which God gave them; Was of ^n inconsiderable birth, and of a
^mall and mean Fortune: however, ^y his missimployed policy, and the ^old
attempt of being Solicitor in ^he cause against the King, in that wicked Court
of Injustic^; He was afterward preferred to be a Judge in Ireland: by which,
and other ways, he arrived to a considerable Estate.

The first notice or mention which I find of him is, that he was a Barrister
Grays Inn, but had very little or n^ practice, and such men were adjudged fit
for the prosecution of that horrid Murder; who like Judas would betray their
Lord for Thirty pieces of silver, which was the reward of his iniquity.

The Rump Parliament about the 10. of January 1648, after they had made an Act
for constituting a High Court of Justice, directed an Order to this Mr Cook,
together with Mr Ask and Dorislaus, to draw up a Charge against his Majesty, in
which Mr Cook was very active, and was the man that subscribed that wicked
Libel in the behalf of the Commons of England, (who disowned that horrid
Murder,) and therein called his innocent Majesty, Murderer and Traitor, and
therefore prayed Justice against him as such a person; saying, That the blood
that had been spilt, cried for it. When the King was brought before those
bloody miscreants, Mt Cook stood up and made (...) long Speech to them against
the King, according to the aforesaid Charge; and when the King began ^o speak
any thing by way of answer, ^^e would interrupt him. He did often complain to
the Court, that the King trifled away time. He moved, that if the King would
not plead to that wicked Charge, the things con^ained therein might be taken
pro confesso: and the last day he demanded Judgment of the Court against the
Prisoner at the Bar, (which was the title he gave the King of England, etc.)
Upon which sentence passed, and the horrid murder was soon committed after the
same,

And it is to be observed, That this Mr Cook was at that time pricked in
Conscience, by the expression which he used to an old friend of his,
discoursing with whom about the Kings Death, he said, That the King was a wise
and a gracious Prince; but he must die, and Monarchy wit^ him.

And now having had a finger i^ this innocent blood, he was resolved to plunge
himself over head and ears therein; for presently after he writ^ a Book
entitled, Monarchy no creatur^ of Gods making, and therein says, That the late
King (meaning our blessed Sovereign King CHARLES the First) was the fattest
Sacrifice that ever was offered to Queen Justice, etc.

These things made the Rump Parliament begin to think of a way to reward him;
and Ordered him as the thanks of the House, 300 l. per Annum in the County of
Waterford in Ireland, whither they sent him likewise, and made him a Judge of
that Law, which himself, contrary to his Oath, his Conscience, and his Reason,
had thus traitorously and maliciously broken and offended.

He was not long in Ireland, before the Commissioners for Government of Ireland
made choice of him as the chief Judge to examine, try and give sentence upon the
Irish, according to such Qualifications, as a pretended Act of that Rump
Parliament had made and allowed, and to transplant whom they pleased, into
Connaught: some for their murder of the Protestants, and others for their
pretended delinquency in assisting of the King: For which action I have heard
his moderation much commended.

During the time of his being thus a Judge, he was smitten with sudden checks of
Conscience, which often made him, even upon the Bench, to fall into strange
sighs and groans, expressing his sorrow for the Death of the King; and has
been often seen to strike his breast, which was seconded with a groan, and then
followed this expression, Ah poor Charles, poor Charles! As if the guilt of that
innocent blood lay heavy upon his Soul, and tormented him with continual and
renewed disturbances.

He continued in Ireland for some years, during which time he preached up and
down the Country; favored the Anabaptists; and at last, the Government
changing, he was fiezed upon in Ireland, and sent by the Parliament or
Convention there, unto the Council of England, to receive the just punishment
of his demerits. Being brought to London, he was immediately sent to the Tower,
where he remained some time, until he was brought to Newgate, and received a
fair Trial in the Old Bailey, London.

Upon his Plea before the Court, he expressed himself with such Law and
Learning, that the Judge applauded the same, saying, That he was very sorry to
see, that one that understood the Law so much, should transgress it so much. It
was proved against him, That he often interrupted the King in his Answers to
that Court, and did use many unhandsom and uncivil expressions toward the
King, all the time of that wicked Trial; he being one of the loudest-mouth'd
Bloud-hounds that pursued that innocent Lamb-like Prince, in a full cry, all
those days in which he was brought before them. The Jury that were upon him,
went not out of the Court, but suddenly found him guilty.

On Tuesday following he was Ordered to die at Chairing Cross. He was now as
penitent at his Death, as formerly he had expressed himself in his life. He was
drawn upon a hurdle from Newgate to Chairing-Cross aforesaid; all the way as he
went, lifting up his hands and his eyes, he would often turn his face toward
the people, desiring them to pray for him. Being come to the aforesaid place,
he went up the Ladder very penitently and cheerfully; he told the Sheriff, That
as for himself, h^ thanked God, he could welcom^ Death: but as for Mr Peter's
(who wa^ to die with him) he could very well have wished that he might be
repreived for some time, for that he was neither prepared nor fit to die.

He said little as to the making of a Speech, but prayed most earnestly and
with affection both for the King and people: which being done, the Executioner
did his Office, and being quartered, his Head was Ordered to be set on
Westminster Hall, and his Limbs were sent to be set upon the Gates of the City
of London.

Law lies a bleeding; Monarchy
Expires; sure then the Law must die.
But both revive, and Cook is made
A sad example to his Trade.
His Head stands as a fair Take-heed,
How they the bounds of Law exceed.
The Life of Master Hugh Peter's.
MR. Hugh Peter's, a man of a continued turbulent spirit, and as it is generally
reported, little better than frantic: One that as he was a general Abettor and
Encourager of all turbulent principles: so he particularly improved them in
that horrid Act of the Kings murder.

He was brought up, as I am informed, in the University of Cambridg, and from
thence (having taken his Degrees) he set up the trade of an itinerary Preacher,
never being constant or fixed to any one place or benefice: and roved about the
world, like an universal Churchman, called Jesuits: for sometimes he was in
New England; sometimes in Holland and about the Low Countries, and anon here in
England, where he pretended, that his tender conscience could not be yoked to
the Church of England, nor submit to the Order and Government of the Bishops.

When these unhappy Wars began within these at that time unfortunate Nations,
this Hugh Peter's began to show himself a forward Incendiary, to stir up and
animate all factious and discontented persons, now to appear and vindicate
themselves and children from the Imposition of Prelatical Tyranny; and
persuaded such whose heads were as giddy and whimsical as his own, That it was
the Lords Cause, and that now he was carrying on his own work among them.

When the Parliament had raised Forces, he goes out Chaplain to a Regiment, and
many times appear^ed a Captain in Arms himself, he preached the Soldiers into
courage, to maintain and justify their Rebellion, and by wicked and absurd
comparisons would tell the Soldiers, That Heaven was full of Redcoats that had
been killed in that Cause; and that all they that continued in the same, should
arrive at the like happiness. It would be too tedious to insert the many
frenzical and frenetick humors, which this profane Prophet used during the
time of the Armies tyrannical domination, and how the more politic chief
Officers have laughed in their sleeves to see this sad wretch abuse both the
Scriptures and the Soldiers too, with his wicked and scandalous
interpretations thereof.

When the King was siezed at Holmby, by the damnable impudence of a till that
time mean and despised Officer, he was the first man that ever was heard to
make mention of the Kings Death, or for ought I know, so much as to imagine it.
He was at the several meetings with Cromwell, Ireton, Harrison, and those other
few persons that contrived it privately among themselves at the Star in
Colemanstreet, and the Nags head over against Basinghall street; he prepared
the People and Soldiers by Sermons for that wicked murder; and made use of
his Calling (wherein he should have been the Minister of Peace) to be the
Trumpeter of Treason. Afterward when the King was at Windsor, he was among the
wicked Council of the Army, at the hatching of this Design; and when they
brought the King from thence to London, he rode before him audaciously like his
Almoner.

This wicked Jesuitical Priest, was the only busy man, that directed how and
where the Act for Establishing the High Court of Justice, should be proclaimed;
which done, he said, That there was a day a coming, (meaning that day when the
King should be murdered) that the Saints had been for many years a praying
for. And when that bloody Court sat, he used this expression, That he could
even reverence them, their sitting did so much represent the great day of
Judgment, and the trial of the whole world, which should then be performed by
the Saints.

And now Mr Peter's begins not only as a private person, but as a Minister, to
prosecute this worst of Evils. For the next day after the Court of that
Injustice sat, he preached at Whitehall before that grand Tyrant Oliver
Cromwell, and for his Text took that then abused place of Scripture, Psalm. 149.
the three last verses; To bind their Kings in chains, and their Nobles in
fetters of iron: This honor have all the Saints, etc.

The Murder of the King is finished, and now Hugh Peter's runs on to make
Divinity the handmaid of his Devilish Doctrine: For the next Sunday after that
abominable Fact was committed, he preaches again, and took his Text, Isai.
14.18, 19, 20, 21. All the Kings of the Nations, even all of them lie in glory,
every one in his own house. But thou art cast out of thy grave, like an
abominable branch: and as the raiment of those that are slain, thrust through
with a sword, that go down to the stones of the pit, as a carcass trodden under
feet. Thou shall not be joined with them in burial etc. Upon the top of the
margin whereof was written, The Tyrants fall. And in his Application of that
misinterpreted Text, he compared the King of Babylon, to the King of England:
all the time of which odious comparison, Cromwell sat before him laughing, not
being able to forbear the same, to see this wicked Instrument of the Devils,
thus plausibly and confidently to avouch and maintain this hellish practice.

The next occurrence which happened during these strange transactions, was the
Parliaments appointing Oliver Cromwell to be Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and to
reduce the Earl of Ormond and the Lord In chiquin, to the obedience of that
Rump Parliament: Who is appointed his Companion, but Mr Hugh Peter's, and he
must be the immediate Chaplain to the Devils Champion. In this Expedition for
Ireland, it was strange and almost wonderful to think how God cursed them with
success, and how suddenly that Nation, which had so long groaned with the
daily effusion of blood, was within the space of a year or a little more,
reduced to that usurped power: Here Mr Peter's advised them to make short work
of the business, and by giving an example to the strongest Garrison, they might
thereby frighten the whole Nation: Pursuant whereunto, Tredagh was stormed, and
although Quarter was promised, yet none was given, and 4500 souls were there
butchered; most of which were English and Protestants. Which cruel Act, giving
an allarm to the whole Country, caused the rest to surrender upon Articles.

About the year 1656. when Oliver Cromwell had assumed the Government, Hugh
Peter's is a great Courtier and a continual Asserter and Vindicator of his
Usurpation: but however it came to pass, Hugh Peter's is presently out of
favor, because he had too far courted a Court-Lady, and as some say, his
active spirit had carnally known her: hereupon Hugh Peter's grows litrle better
than stark mad, raves like a Bedlamite, and shows himself much more void of
sense, than ever he was before: yet notwithstanding, for the wicked service he
had done, and for the further more damnable services which they expected he
might, he was again dubbed a favorite to his aforesaid wicked Patron.

Finally, in the beginning of the last year of Olivers Tyranny, Dunkirk being
now besieged, and every day expected to be taken, Hugh Peter's is sent over to
encourage the Soldiers as ^his former wont had been, and being landed upon the
Sands of Flanders, he immediately fell down upon his knees, and hypocritically
praying, told the Soldiers, That he had assurance from God, that they were to
be the Instruments of making his name known to the utmost parts of the earth.

Presently after Oliver dies, and Peter's preaching the next day in the Chapel
at Whitehall, took his Text in Deuteronomy, My Servant Moses (...) dead: The
drift of his Sermon being to make out Oliver Cromwell equall^ the Servant of
God, as Moses ha^ been.

And here ends the further mention of our Prophet, for Governmen^ ever and anon
afterward being shifted from one factious party to another, at last all proved
for Restaur^tion of our Gracious Sovereign which happy day now hastening, an^
like the wings of morning makin^ haste to a perfect day, Hugh Pete^ with that
black crew, desire to be a abscond, and as much in the dark (...) their actions
had been, now play N^ inventus. But the eye of the Almighty Providence, at last
found him out Although he flew for sanctuary to (...) Woman's bed, that had now
newl^ lain in. But the intelligence being certain, that he was there they
press^ in upon him, he denying his name t^ be Peter's, but his name was Thompson
and begging of the Constable and ^^e rest, that they would not call ^im Peter's,
for fear the people should tear him to pieces: But be^^g brought to the Tower,
he not ^nely confessed himself to Sir John ^^binson, but was well known to be
^he same man.

And here we shall conclude his wicked life, and come to the passages of his
miserable death. Being ^rought to hi^ T^yal, it is strange to ^hink with what
stupidity he beha^ed himself; for although upon ^is Arraignment he said he
would not plead guilty for all the World, yet upon his Trial he was found ^o be
as is before expressed, one of the principal Actors in that sad Tragedy, and
brought in guilty by his Jury, not being able to plead the least rational
circumstance for himself.

On Tuesday following, he was ordered to die, but was much discomposed both in
spirit and mind, for he retained much of his former Frenetick humors now he
was going to Execution: He was drawn upon a Hurdle from Newgate to Charing
Cross, sitting therein like a Sot all the way he went, and either plucking the
Straws therein, or gnawing the Fingers of his Gloves. Being come to the place
aforesaid, not like a Minister, but like some ignorant Atheist, he ascended the
Ladder, but knew not what to say or how to carry himself at the hour of his
death, but standing there a while, at length he perfectly burst forth into
weeping, and then after a little pause he held his hand before his eyes, he
prayed for a short space, and now the Hangman being ready, he very often
remembered him to make haste by checking him with the Rope, and at last very
unwillingly he turned him off the Lader, and after he had hung almost a quarter
of an hour, he was cut down and quartered: His Head was set on London Bridge,
and his Limbs on the City Gates.

Upon Hugh Peter's, written by an ingenuous Spectator of his Execution.

See here the last and best Edition,
Of Hugh, the Author of Sedition;
So full of Errors, it is not fit
To read, till Dun's Corrected it:
But now it is perfect, nay far more,
It Is better bound then 'twas before.
And now I hope it is no sin
To say, Rebellion, take thy swing:
For he that says, says much amiss
That Hugh an Independent is.
The Life of Mr. THOMAS SCOT.
MR. Thomas S ot was born in the County of Buckingham, of no noted Family: The
first occasion of their public notice, was by the wicked projects of this
unfortunate m^n, He was sent to London by his friends to be brought up in some
honest Calling, which he was never so honest as to practice. The highest
preferment that he could reach before the Wars, was being a Partner to a Brewer
in the Precinct of Bridewel, but of his honesty and faithfulness in his
carriage therein, I leave to his acquaintance and Neighbors to judge.

But he hoping to make better profit by having a hand in brewing of State
Affairs, makes friends to a Borough in Buckinghamshire, where he was chosen a
Burgess, and so improves the good will of this his Country, who made him a
Parliament man, to the destruction and confusion of the whole; for being
pre-prejudiced against the B shops and a constant envier against Monarchy, he
now had an opportunity to vent his malice, and spit his venom by long Speeches
and dilated Harr a gues in the Parliament.

This Tho. Scot being now crept into the House of Commons, whispers Treason
into many of the Members ears, animating the War, and ripping up and studying
aggravations thereunto, was forward upon all Tumultuous occasions, to
exasperate the people against the Bishops, and through them, striking at the
King himself.

But it is to be observed how the drift of his malice soon after appeared: This
covetous wretch was so great an enemy to the Bishops, only that he might be
partaker of their Lands; for not long after that too forward Abolition of that
Order and Government, he then gets into the Bishop of Canterburies house at
Lambeth, and there Lords it with as much state, as if he wanted nothing but the
Title of an Arch Bishop.

And now his estate and his factious principles increase together, grasping as
much of the Church Lands as he could, and being of opinion that it had been no
Sacrilege, if he had pulled down the Churches themselves; and did not think it
enough for himself to be engaged in the Lands of the Church, but he would
engage his Son in the Lands of the King, who was chosen, and acted as one of
the Trustees at Worcester house in the Strand, for sale of the Lands of the
King, Queen and Prince.

In the year 1647. finding himself so far precipitated in the occasions and
promoting of the War, he sticks close to the Army, and says, There was no
putting up the Sword after they had once drawn it against the King, is admitted
to the consultations of their private Meetings: When they were contriving the
death of the King, he was one of the chief underminers of that Parliament; For
when they Voted, the Concessions of the King at the Isle of Wight were a
sufficient ground for the peace of the Nations, he with others, and their never
failng Speaker, fly to the Army, and coming to Town caused most of them to be
secluded; and he was one of the forty Members that Usurped the Title of a
Parliament after they had driven away almost three hundred of their number, and
was a chief instrument in setting on foot that wicked thing called An Act of
Parliament for the Trying of the King. And because the Kings Seal could not be
used to pass an Act against himself, they all set their own Seals to that
horrid instrument, amongst whom, this Mr. Scot's was one.

Every day that this wretched Crew (called the High Court of Justice) sat,
this Mr. Scot would be sure to be amongst them; he was present and stood up
when that impudent and unparaleld President commanded the Sentence to be read,
and he set his ^^^nd and Seal to that bloody Warrant for the Execution.

And now they thought their work was done after they had thus barbarously
murdered the King: Those few Members take upon them the Authority of the three
Nations, and Mr. Sc t is appointed one of their Council of State, acts in the
nature of a Secretary of State, and is made the only person to manage the
^ntelligence, as well Foreign as ^omestick, both public and private, and
thinks himself little other then a petty Prince, in which condition he
continued till the year 1653. at which time they were dissolved by the Ambition
of the Grand Usurper.

He kept under him (during the time of his domination) several Spies, called
Pursivants, and was a continual perplexer of Printers and Booksellers, not
suffering them to vent the least light of Transactions for the information of
the people, but by his Substitutes, especially Ledsum; all honest and true
Intelligence was not only seized and suppressed, but the Divulgers thereof
were both punished and imprisoned.

When Oliver Cromwell took the Government upon himself, this busy body lay idle
all the time, only behaved himself like a Wasp upon all occasions putting
forth his sting: He did nothing observable during that Usurpation worth our
mention in this abridgement of their actions.

But that Government under him ceasing, and Richard Cromwell now being settled in
the scornful seat of his Father, Mr. Scot begins again to show himself, and was
a very active instrument in dethroning that foolish pretender, and a chief
Counselor at Wallingford house with Lambert, Fleetwood, etc. for the
establishing of the Rump Parliament.

Which succeeding according to his desire, he now appears as eminent as before,
and is re-instated in the places which under the Rump Parliament he had
formerly exercised.

But a second breach occasioned their second disturbance, Lambert having lately
victoriously overcome an undisciplined handful of men in Cheshire, under the
command of ^ir George Booth, comes up to London like a Conqueror, and sets the
Wheels so on work, as if possible, to turn out that Rump Parliament again, and
so by Olivers policy to take the Government upon himself. And thus these
Traitors fell out amongst themselves, which brought Our Sovereign to his Right.

Mr. Scot was much tickled at this sudden News, and appears now as one that
could not brook such an in^^rruption; to which purpose, he with Mr. Weaver, Sir
Anthony Ashley Cooper, etc. Gentlemen of far honester principles then himself,
set on foot several designs for regaining the sitting of that Juncto, as that
of Portsmouth, taking the Tower of London, etc. which brought them again once
more to their Usurped Government, and he is employed by them, with Mr. Luke
Robinson, to be as Spies over the actions and intentions of wise General Monck,
who was now upon his March toward London, which proved ineffectual for their
design; for although they would not suffer him to speak with any persons but
where they were present, yet they could not gain from him the least cranny to
peep out at whereby they might understand or guess at his future intended
purposes.

Soon after, that Noble General gives the Secluded Members liberty to go into
the House, who till that time had been debarred by force from that their
privilege, who only sat to consider how another Parliament might be called
and to dissolve that but supposed Parliament: And before their intended
dissolution Mr. Scot stands up and moves the House, that before they did
dissolve, they would declare, That all the Proceedings which had been made in
relation to the Kings murder, should be confirmed by the Parliament; which
motion was so ill recented, that had not some moderate persons interceeded, he
had been at that time called to the Bar of the House, for mentioning them to be
so barbarous as to be conceived to countenance or own the Kings murder; at
which time he used this wicked expression, That he desired no greater honor
then to have it Engraved upon his Tombstone, Here lies Tho, Scot, one of the
Judges of the late King, to the end the World might take notice of it.

The Parliament which met the 23d. of April, being summoned, Mr. Scot flies
beyond the Seas, to seek a place for that hot head, which he said he could not
hide, which proved true, for not long after his Majesty's restoration, he was
taken notice of in Fla^ders, and there seized and sent Prisoner into England,
and brought to the Tower of London, where he remained some time until he was
brought to his Trial.

Upon his Arraignment in the Old Ba^ley he h^d little to say for himself,
pleading the power by, which he acted to be a legal p were bec use they were
owned by the people, etc. But being told that the power by which he acted were
not the ^enth part of the Commons of England, and that if there had been a full
House of Commons, and Lords likewise, they could not by any Act of theirs take
away the life of the poorest Cripple at the Gate, much less the Kings: He was
left to his Jury, and so was presently found Guilty.

And on Wednesday following, he with others, were drawn from Newgate ^n a
Hurdle to their aforesaid appointed place of Execution. All the way as he went,
his countenance was composed with a seeming cheerful gravity, and being come to
Charing Cross he obdurately and insensibly ascended the Ladder: He spoke very
little to the people, his chief business there, as he said, being to pray which
being ended, he made no long stay, but was soon executed and q^artered,
according to his Sentence; his Head was set up on the Gate of London Bridge,
and his Qu^rters were set on the Gates of the City.

This treacherous Scot desired to have,
No other Motto on his Grave.
Then this; That he was one that laid
This bloody Scene, anth' King betrayed.
But he no Grave could now attain,
Where^y that Motto should remain.
The Life of Col. Daniel Axtel.
COl. Daniel Axtel was a man of a malicious and covetous spirit; he was born of
very private Parents, and sent up to London to be put forth Apprentice: He had
not staid long at his Trade, which was a Grocer, before these destructed
Nations began to show their distempers; and seeing nothing but letting of it
blood would (as they said) procure its settlement, he appeared a very forward
instrument in taking up of Arms: He went forth into the War but a private
Soldier, yet notwithstanding being a spiritually gifted man (for so he was
termed) he very quickly arrived at the mark of a more public notice.

When the Army were gathered together at New Market in a mutinous manner
against their Masters the Parliament, Agitators were chosen out of each Company
to represent their pretended grievances. Here Col. Axtel (then but an ordinary
Officer) was looked upon as an eminent and fit person to carry on that factious
and wicked design of refusing to disband the Army, when they were commanded
thereunto by the Parliament, and when the Parliament and the King had come to
Terms of Peace in the Isle of Wight, he comes up in the head of the Agitators,
and at the Bar of the Parliament House, he is forward in impeaching the Members
thereof, calling them rotten Members, etc. and at that time being Lieutenant
Colonel to Col. Hewsons Regiment of Foot, he was very active that day the
Secluded Members were imprisoned and disturbed, and was more then ordinary
Officious in the doing thereof.

When the High Court of cruel Injustice was established, all the time during
their sitting, he commanded the Guards in Westminster Hall which attended them,
and when the King came through the Hall to his Trial, he commanded the
Soldiers to cry Justice, Justice, and had the valor to beat such as did not
execute his commands; and when Bradshaw taxed the King with delays and
trifling away time, saying the Commons of England demanded him to answer to his
Charge, (a Lady from the Gallery said not half the Commons of England) this
Col. Axtel said to s Soldiers, shoot the Whore, pull her down, etc. And after
upon the last day of their sitting, he again commanded them to cry Execution,
Execution.

Afterward being the day when this unparaleld murder was to be accomplished,
Col. Axtel was very busy that morning at Cromwels Chamber door, where Ireton
and Harrison then lay together in Whitehall, and Col. Hunks, Col. Hacker, and
Col. Phaire, to whom the Warrant for ^xecution was directed, being sent for
thither, Oliver Cromwell would have had them signed a Sub warrant to the
^xecutioner for the murder of the King, but Col. Huncks refusing, this Col.
Axtel told him, he was a peevish man, and that he was sorry to think, that now
they were going into a safe Harbor, Col. Huncks should strike Sail before they
had cast Anchor.

He went afterward into the next expedition for Ireland, where he soon
comenced Colonel. And it is strange what Hellish cruelties he used there, not
only against the Native Irish, whom he would murder like Vermin but even
against Protestants and English not favoring either, although he had not only
promised but assured them fair Quarter.

The Army at this time being universally Anabaptists, and under the Government
of that Grand encourage^ of them Henry Ireton, then Deputy of Ireland, Son in
^aw to Oliver Cromwell, this Col. Axtel was so too, being a general disowner of
Orthodox Ministers, and a great countenancer of Sects and Factions, and a self
conceited Preacher himself.

He was made Governor of the County and City of Kilkenny in Ireland, and here
he shows his cruelty so conspicuous, as that his very merciless brethren of the
Army condemn him: He hanged what Gentry of the Country he pleased, whether they
were guilty or not, never affording them any Trial, but making his own Will his
Law, he exercised it according to his discretion, by reason whereof, many
Innocents causelessly suffered; and for which, his own brethren on the Army drew
up Articles against him in a Court Marshal, and he had then received punishment
for the price of blood, had not the Anabaptist, and Charles Fleetwood in the
head of them, at that time being the predominant party, past by the business.

Soon after Charles Fleetwood being removed from the Government of Ireland, and
Henry Cromwell sent over thither to represent the Lord Deputy of that Nation;
the Anabaptists was not only discountenanced by him, but their domination was
reduced and levelled equal to those of different principles, which Col. Axtel
perceiving (as likewise that now they were not suffered to have that rambling
latitude to domineer over the weak brethren as formerly, for such they counted
all not alike principled with themselves) he with three others, formerly like
himself, Governing Charles Fleetwood, and indeed all Ireland, as they pleased,
viz. Col. Barrow Adjutant, General Allen, and Quarter Master Genesis Vernon, came
to Henry Cromwell, and in a great deal of seeming dissatisfaction, delivered him
up their Commissions, from that time ceasing to act any further, because they
could not act as they pleased.

There was very little more observable during Oliver Cromwels ^ife, only that
in that vacancy he ^ad a fair opportunity to increase his estate, which indeed
he made ^rise to at least 2000 lib. per annum.

At last Oliver dies, and Richards weakness being practiced upon, (by his
cunning and treacherous Kindred, though false friends) Col. Axtel appears very
busy therein, and the Rump Parliament appearing again upon the Stage, he has
order for a Regiment of Foot, and is sent to Ireland, where he had not been
long, before Sir George Booth appeared in the head of a party in Cheshire; for
the overcoming whereof when the Army of England were thought too little but
help must he had from Ireland also, for which purpose Col. Axtel is sent over
ommander in Chief of the Foot, and Col. Sa^key of the Horse, which coming over
of theirs proved ineffectual, for that the business was done before their
landing.

When Lambert and the Rump Parliament fell out, Col. Axtel is very forward and
assistant for the dissolving of them; he is one of the Saints at Wallingford
house, and a contriver of the settlement of the Nation by a Committee of
Safety, and he likewise is resolved with Lambert And the rest to fetch Genesis
Monck out of Scotland, or to make him submit to their terms; and accordingly
he went down to head the Irish Brigade, then in Ch^shire, and marches them into
the North, but they very unwilling ^ndertook that business, and although with
entreaties, beggings, prayers, and tears he wo^d them to pr^ceed in th Good Old
Cause yet he coul not prevail upon them; for they discer^ed both Lambert and
their own chief Officers, and declare for General Monck and ^he Parliament, and
now Col Ax^el is left to seek his fortune, which at that time was more
despera^^ h^^ when he first left his Master to go into he Army.

When the King ws coming home, he commits himself to the private Chamber of a
particular friend, who thought it not safe to entertain him long, since
Proclamation was made or for that purpose, and so delivering him up to the next
Constable he was ordered to be s^nt to the ^ower of London.

And sho^tly after that, he was brought to his Trial in te Old-^^iley, where
his ^hi^^ ^lea, was, That he had d^^ (...) ^^ng during the time of the Trial of
the King, but what he was commanded t^ by his superior Officers, That he might
have suffered as much for disobeying them, as now he was like to do for
performing them; That he was no Parliament man, none of the High Court of
Justice, no Counselor, no Contriver, none that Sat, none that Signed to the
^ings death, only acted as a Soldier under command by virtue thereof. But the
Witn^sses proving the aforementioned pass^ges of his life, and that he had
often confessed in Ireland, that he had been a chief instrument in bringing the
King to that f^tal Axe, as also several other black and horrid, circumstances,
to prove him a principle promoter thereof; he was soon found guilty by the
Jury, and accordingly received Sentence of condemnation.

And on Friday following he was drawn from Newgate to Tyburn upon an Hurdle: He
seemed to be penitent, but yet retained a cheerful countenance. Being come to
the Gallows, he seriously told the People, that he went out n the Wars at the
beginning thereof, by the instigation and encouragement of a Minister in
Ironmonger ^ane, who stirred him with many motives to show him it was the cause
of God etc. and many words to the same effect. After which he prayed most
affectionately for all sorts of people, uttering many Heavenly and Christian
like expressions, and at last concluding desiring God for that poor Wretch that
was then to imbrue his hands in his Blood, to bath his Soul in the blood of
Jesus Christ. His end Was full of penitence and sorrow, and now being fitted to
die, he very willingly submitted to the hand of Justice, and being hanged, was
soon after quartered, and his Limbs are disposed of upon the Gates of the City.

This active Man commands the Guard
Of that black Court, and loud was heard
To c^ll for Justice, and did beat
Such as would not the same repeat:
Friend, pray be patient, now I hope,
Justice has met you with a Rope.
The Life of Gregory Clement.
GReg. Clement was a man hardly, worth the mention, considering the wickedness
of his lewd life; He was a Merchant by his first profession, but failing
therein and growing into a desperate fortune, thought to thrive by
merchandising in Bishops Lands, wherein he got a considerable estate: He was
turned out of the Rump Parliam. for lying with his Maid at Greenwich, but was
received amongst them again at their return after Olivers interruption. His
guilty Conscience and his Ignorance together, would not suffer him to make any
Plea at the Bar or Speech or Prayer at the Gallows: For being there, he was
asked whether he had any thing to say before the Hangman did his Office, he
said no, upon which, Execution was done, and being quartered, his Head was set
upon London Bridge' and his Limbs disposed of as the rest.

The Life of Col. Adrian Scroop.
COl. Adrian Scroop was descended of a good Family in Buckinghamshire. He was
in those days a great Puritan and stickler against the Bishops, which made him
in the beginning of the W^rs to take up Arms against the King. He went forth
at first a Captain of Horse, but being inveterate against the King, he soon got
preferment in the Army.

He was no Parliament man, and yet was drawn in as he pretended, by Oliv^r
Cromwell to be one in the black List for the Trial of the King: He was most
days at that Court when that wicked crew sat upon His Majesty, and especially
the last day w^^^. Sentence was giv^ (...) him, and afterward (...) and sealed
the bloody Warr^^t for that horrid murder.

I find little mention of him all that short time of Olivers Usurpation: But
when the King came home, and set forth the Proclamation commanding those that
were his Fathers Judges to appear, who were either fled or had hid themselves;
Col. Scroop comes in, and delivers himself up unto the Speaker, with some
others, and they had made a Vote, that he should be only fined a years value
of his estate: But soon after, he discoursing with General Brown about the
Kings murder, justifies the act thereof, saying, He did believe it to be no
murder; with other expressions tending to prove that the King did deserve
death; which being reported to the Parliament, he was wholly excepted out of
the Act of general pardon.

And being brought to his Trial in the Old Bailey, the chief part of his plea
was not so much to justify the act, as the power by which he acted, saying,
That they were owned both at home and abroad, and that he was no Parliament
man, but acted by their Authority, who were then the Supreme Authority of the
Nations, and he hoped that Authority would excuse him. But being told as all
the rest had been, the vanity of that plea, and the weakness of his Argument to
prove the same, and how far they were from the least color of Authority, he
was left to his Jury, who soon brought him in guilty: And on Wednesday
following, he was brought from Newgate to Charing Cross upon a Hurdle. He see
(...) to look very cheerfully upon the Ladder. He bewailed his unfortunate
discourse with General Brown to be the chief cause of his being brought
thither. And after he had prayed a pretty space, he surrendered himself up to
death, which was soon done, and he was likewise quartered as the rest before
him had been, and disposed of accordingly.

The Life of Mr Joh^ ^arew.
MR J^hn Carew was bor^ Cornw^^ and descended of a very ancient Family there:
He was always of very f^ctio^s and turbulent principles; at last ^^rived at
the same pitch of Op^^^^^ with Major General Har ison, and did partake of the
same (...) with him; and it is no wo^^ (...) that n^ was one of the Jud^es of
(...) King, wh^ was con^^^^^ng to (...) of his own Brother.

All the time of the (...) he app^^ed very maliciously against the King, and
indeed all kind of Monarchy. And when the Army came up to pu^ge the House, when
indeed none wanted more purging then those who were left afterward in it. This
Mr. Carew was one, and was very busy at the passing of the Act for
establishing a High Court of Justice; he set his Hand and Seal thereunto; he
was every day at the Court, and showed his assent to the King^ murder by
standing up when the Sen^ence was read against him, and he likewise signed and
Sealed to that w cked Warrant.

Afterward when the Rump Parliament was turned out, he Sequestered himself from
any public employment, and kept himself reserved and retired; being utterly
against Olivers Usurpation, as indeed he was against all M^narchial G^vernment;
and to give him his due, he was one that made the least advantage by the
m^series of the times, then any man besides which I knew in that Rump
Parliament.

But the King being now come home, and he being known in his own Country to
have been a forward instrument in that evil design, was seized there, and sent
up Prisoner to the Tower of London, and afterward was brought to his Trial
with the rest in the Old Baily.

Upon the reading of his ^nditement, which said, that they had committed that
horrid murder, not having the fear of God before th^i^ eyes, but being led by
the instigation of the Devil; he pleaded error to the Indictment, saying, That
what was done, was not in suc^ a fear, but in the fear of the most Holy and
most Righteous Lord, which troubled the Court much, to see him make ^od the Au
hour of their murder. He was l^kewise about to have justified the Authority of
the Rump Parliament, called by Mr. Prynn very well the Unparliamentary Juncto,
which was answered as before, having no other matter to plead for himself, the
Jury went forth and found him guilty.

And on Monday following, he was drawn from Newgate to Charing Cross on a
Hurdle: First having prepared himself by drinking three pintes of Sack to bear
up his spirits, which caused a more then ordinary flushing in his face, all the
way he went, and sweat so much, that his Handkerchief could fearcely keep the
water from running down his face: But his Spirits notwithstanding thus
encouraged, could not out-dare the conflict. Being come to the Ladder, he
lifted up his Hands and his Eyes, and had some private jaculations to himself.
He spoke very little, having now, as he said little else to do then to pray, in
which he was but short; wherein he desired God to guide and direct the Kings
Majesty, to bless the three Nations with peace and happiness, and all sorts of
people therein; after which he submitted, and being turned off the Ladder, he
was soon dead, and quartered; which being done, his Quarters were begged by his
Brother of the King, and by him they are buried.

This wretched and unhappy man
Appears, and does the most he can
To shed his Sovereigns Royal blood;
Which done, caused another flood
Of tears and sorrow from all these
Who with their Treason could not close
The Life of Col. Francis Hacker.
COl. Francis Hacker at the beginning of the Wars was a man of a desperate
Fortune, one of a greater bulk of body then of perfections of mind; his
factious principles advanced him in the Army, and made him of great repute with
those Miscreants who contrived the Kings death, insomuch, as the High Court of
Injustice thought they could not pitch on a fitter man unto whom to direct that
wicked Warrant for to see the Kings murder performed.

That morning this horrible act was to be committed, Cromwell sends for this
Hacker, with Col. Phaire and Col. Huncks, and would have those three to sign a
Sub Warrant for the Kings murder; the last two refused, but Col. Hacker
subscribes to whatsoever Cromwell himself had Written for that purpose.

This Col. Hacker likewise by virtue of the said unwarrantable Warrant from
that High Court of Injustice, goes to Col. Thomlinson, who had then the custody
of the Kings person, and demands the King from him; carries him in the midst
of his own Regiment through St. James Park, conducts him through the Gallery to
the Banqueting House, and from thence brings him upon the Scaffold; and there
stands according to his pretended Warrant, to see that bloody and unparaleld
Execution.

Afterward he continues in the Army, sides with all parties that have the
Government, and was a Col. in the Army at the very time when the King came
home, and being seized and examined in order to find out the mystery of this
Regicide, he was sent to the Tower of London, and shortly after with the rest
brought to his Trial.

His Trial was very short, in regard he could not deny the aforesaid actions
of his in that unparaleld business; and being asked by the Court, to whom he
directed his Sub warrant to strike the fatal blow, he answered, that he did not
know, for Cromwell, bid him write something and bid him put his hand to it, but
whose hand he put in for that purpose he could not tell: This being all his
plea, he was soon brought in guilty likewise.

And on Friday following, he was drawn from Newgate on a Hurdle to Tyburn;
where he spoke very little for himself, only left the whole business of
prayer to be carried on by Col. Axtel, who performed it for them both; after
which being ended, he was only hanged, and being cut down he was put in a
He^se which was there brought to carry b^ck his Body, his Son has begged the
same from the King, who granted him his Fathers body without quartering, and
accordingly buried the same in the City of London.

As for Quarter Master William Hewle^, in regard that though he be Condemned,
yet is Reprieved, in order to a clear discovery of this wicked act: I shall
leave his Character and Description to the time, when Justice shall likewise
make him an Example for putting on a Vizor on his Faces and a Frock on his Body
for such a horrid purpose.

There are eighteen more Condemned viz.

Sir Hard ess Waller, William Hevenningham, Isaac Pennington, Hen. Ma tin,
Gilbert Millington, Ro^ert Titch urn, Owen Roe, Robert Lilbu^n, Hen^y Smith,
Edmund Harvey, John Dow^s Vincent Potter, Augustine Ga^land, George Fleetwood
Simo^ M^yne, Thomas W^it, James T mple, Peter Temple; of whom I think not
convenient to write any thing of their lives, til I shall be prepared to give
an account al^o of the manner of their deaths. These are close prisoners in the
Tower of London, till the pleasure of the Parliament shall be declared
concerning them.

Several others there are, viz.

William Say, John Barkstead, Sir Michael Livesly Miles Cor^et, Thomas Woogan,
Mr. Love, Daniel Blagrave, Andrew Broughton, E^ward Denby, John Dixwel, Thomas
Challo^er, John L^sle, William Cawley, John Okey, Will. Goff, John Hewson,
Valentine Wanton, Ed Whaley, Edw. Ludlow, Cor. Holland; Who wander about the
World as Vagabons, like Cain with they cry of blood at their Heels, who at
last will ^o question be found out by the All searching hand of divine
Justice, and brought to receive a condign punishment f^r their horrible
Treason; of whom also in time we shall give you a more perfect account.

And thus I conclude the story of these few wretched and miserable Traitors,
whose Limbs are set up as Lots Wife's Pillar of Salt, the remarkable examples
of the Almighties just punishment, that thus would imbrew their hands in the
Sacred blood of his own Anointed, which was so far a Deicide, as Kings are
called Gods upon the Earth, and which ought to be the prayers of all truly
Christianized, That God would cleanse the City and Nation from the guilt of
that precious blood, so inhumanely and unchristianly shed, as before sail, and
keep these Nations from Rebellion and privy Conspiracy, from all false Doctrine
and Heresy, that no Jesuitical plots from abroad, or Anabaptistical or
Schismatical consultations at home may he ever able to raise Sedition in the
people, or dist^^^ the peace of the King.

The Life of Henry Ireton.
HEnry Ireton, Son-in-Law to Oliver Cromwell, a man full of wicked policy and
contrivance; and his Fathers chief Counselor, and second in all his
undertakings: he arives at Comisary Gene. in the Army, very factious in his
Principles, and a great encourager of all that were such; A great Promoter of
the Kings Death, and one that stood in the margent of Olivers enterprise in
that wicked murder; he was not only of the High Court of Justice, but took upon
him with Major Genesis Harison, etc. the appointing of the time, place, and manner
of the Kings Execution.

After which he goes over with his Father Cromwell into Ireland, and by him is
left Lord Deputy thereof; here he made victorious in the reducing of many
Garrisons there, and at last sets down before Limerick, which Siege was the last
that ever he made, for not long after the surrender of that City, he dyed of
the Plague, his Death was very sudden and strange to the Army; but however he
was sent into England, carried to Summerset House where his Father mocks his
Body with that vain glory, which himself had often declared against, and a
Funeral in great state is made by the Army, interring him among the Kings of
England, and Iretons Wife Oliver Cromwels own Daughters ordered by her Fathers
means 2000 pound in money, and 2000 pound per Annum out of the Land of Goran in
Ireland, being of the Lands belonging to the Marquess of Ormond, which he has
now repossed again according to an Act of Parliament made in that behalf.

Oliver erects a Tomb for this victorious Sectarian Champion, with his
Effigies, and his Wifes lying by him in King Henry the sevenths Chapel, which
is since ignominiously broken down, and no footstep lest of his remembrance in
that royal and stately memorial of our English Kings, and his name is now as
rotten, as his Carcass perished through the wickedness of his bloody Life.

The Life of John Bradshaw.
JOhn Bradshaw borne in Cheshire, (and better sure it had been if he had nere
been born) a man, although brought up in that honorable practice of the Law,
yet a shameful and most wicked destroyer of the very foundation and corner
stone thereof he was made Judge of the County Palatine of Chester, and
afterward of the Sheriffs Court in Guild Hall London, and from thence most
auda, tiously and impudently he appears in the Front of the High Court of
Justice, as their President; and judges him that was the Judge of the Law: and
now I even tremble to think how I saw him the day of the Kings Trial in
Scarlet, with a heart and conscience as deep dyed as his Gown, most divilishly
and inhumanely staining that white innocence of the Kings Majesty, with
approbrions and wicked language, which I dare not mention in this place, unless
I give occasion of making that sad wound to bleed afresh in the sight of all
tender, and truly pious Christians.

This wicked and unparralleld murder, was not called to account in his Life but
he lives (though in a very timorous condition) and acts as President to the
Council of State afterward, and has given him (by those who thought that by
taking of Gods anointed, they did the Devil good service) several considerable
Revenues, both in Hampshire and Cheshire, and among the rest lives (though not
securely) in the Deanary of Westminster, where for his safeties sake he built
his Study on the top of Westminster Abbey, higer than the like was ever seen
before, getting as nigh Heaven as he could whilst he lived, as not expecting to
come there when he dyed.

All the time of Olivers short Reign, he acted not: But the Rump Parliament
coming into play again, he is again reinstated in his former Presidentship, and
is made the prime Lord Comissioner of the great Seal of England.

But Lambert turned out the Parliamen again, he raves now like one stark mad,
flinging out of the room in usury, and calling them all Traitors, and whilst
the Committee of Safety sat, he seeing now that all things would make for the
Kings interest, goes home and takes his Bed, and never comes abroad more, his
wicked body was tortured wiih many distempers, languishing in much pain and
misery, insomuch that he was often reported, and really thought to be dead
before he truly was, his conscience being seared, he repented not of his
aforesaid wicked practices; and at last this miserable man passed through the
aforesaid, much afflicted and tormented body to the immediate Judgment of God,
and no doubt is gone to his place, his body was burned in Westminster Abbey.

The Life of Doctor Dorislavs.
DOctor Dorislavs formerly a Doctor of the civil (by him made the uncivil) Law
was by an order of this corrupted piece of the Parliament, made one of the
chief Council with Mr. Ask and Mr. Cook, to contrive and prepare a charge
against the King, and very confidently he appears in the Court against him,
seconding Mr. Cook in his wicked demanding of Justice against the King. This
Dr. Dorislavs pleaded that the King ought to answer the Court, and not in the
least to question their authority, which proved his own death at ^ast; for not
long after, he being sent into Holland in the nature of an Agent from the
Parliament, was stobbed in his lodging in the Hague by some resolute persons,
who likewise not questioning their own authority) resolved to make him a part
example of the Kings Murder, his body was brought from Holland to Baynards
Castle in Thames Street, and from thence privately interred and accompanied
with some pretended mourners in Westminster Abbey.

The Life of Thomas Hammond.
THOmas Hammond of Surry, and of no great fortune there. He went out into the
Army one of the Life guard of the Earl of Essex, and was afterward made
Lie^yten^^ Genesis to the train of Artillery under the Lord Fairfax; this Col
Hammond afterward was preferred to have the custody of the King at the Isle of
Wight, and there not only undutifully but very sawcily and peremptorily behaved
himself toward him, not suffering the King to have any papers about him but
what he would first peruse; and when the Parliament made those Votes of non
addresses; as it has been credibly reported, Letters were write to this Col.
Hammond, by Oliver Cromwell (who found that nothing could be done in their own
affair, till the King were taken off) that he should either remove the King
out of the way or prison him by one means or other. Upon which Mr. Osborn then
being in the Country, writs a letter to the House, that Major Rolfe had confessed
that such a Letter was written to Hammond to the aforesaid purpose: but that
Hammond had a good allowance for keeping the King, and therefore would not do
it because he would not loose his allowance, and desired the said Mr. Osborn to
join with him in conveighing the King to some private place, and then they
would do with him what they pleased.

This business was strangely hudled up in the House, the Army party therein
arguing that Osborn was a Malignant, and no notice was fit to be taken of his
words; others said that the Examination of the business was a Malignant design
to draw Col. Hammond to this Town that so the King might make his escape in the
Cols. absence. But although the business was then hushed up, yet Mr. Osborne and
others offered to confirm the design, and that Rolfe was appointed to pistol
the King, but still they endeaver to abscond the truth, Rolfe is sent up by
Col. Hammond with letters to the House, and therein denies the business, and
although the thing appeared plain, (notwithstanding Rolfe with a trembling
voice not half loud enough to make a satisfactory answer, pleads at the House
Bar, that there was no such thing) he was suddenly conveyed out of the way by
the Army, and Hammond was never so much as questioned.

Presently after the design being carried on for the Kings Murder this Col.
Hammond presents to the House a Scandalous libel called the Agreement of the
people, which contained nothing else but a desire of the Kings trial and a
subversion of the ancient Laws of the Land, which was ordered to be printed,
although not a hundred part of the people had not the least thought thereof.

And the next thing is the bringing the King to his trial in Westminster Hall
instead of the pretended making him a glorious King, and bringing him home to
his Parliament, and this Col. Hammond (contrary to the advice, and to the great
grief of Dr. Hammond) appeared as one of the Kings Judges, and afterward
became one of the great promotets of the Tyrannical usurper, and in the year
1654. When Oliver took the Protectorship upon him; Col. Hammond is sent into
Ireland as one of the Privy Counsel of that Nation, Charles Fleetwood was made
Lord Deputy, and Milts Corbet, C^l. Thom^^son, etc. were made of the same
Council w^^^ him, for Oliver durst not trust such near him who had so lately
betrayed the King; as conceiving they would do the like by him; but Col.
Hammond being landed at Dublin his Councelship was soon ended.

For before a fortnight was ended he dyed of a spotted Fever there very
suddenly and unexpectedly, dying senecless, and therefore no account can be
given whether he repented of that horrid murder or no; Fleetwood and his
factious crew, gave him a solemn funeral and interred his Body in
Christ-Church Dublin.

And here I cannot but observe, how that politic usurper Oliver Cromwell,
desired to remove all those who were in the least concerned in the Kings death
as far from him as he could for the aforesaid reasons. Who were all sent into
Ireland, viz. This C. Hammond, Col. John Jones, Lievt Gen Ludlow, Mr. St^^le,
Col. Hews^n, Col. Phatre, C. M. Thomlinson Mr. Miles Corbet, Justice Cook,
Col. Axtell H^wlet, etc. Col. Huncks,


With many other private Officers, of the Army.

The Life of Colonel Richard Deane.
RIchard Deane was first brought up by a Hoyman belonging to the Town of
Ipswich, and afterward going to Sea, was Boatswain of a ship. But the Wars
coming on, he goes forth into the Army, and there thrives in many successive
employments, because a man of like principles with those that then had the
domination, viz. the Sectarian (which was the greatest) part of the Army when
the Kings Death was contrived amongst them: this Colonel Deane is a very
forward busie-body, to promote and countenance it; he was one of the High Court
of Injustice, Seals the Warrant for the Murder, and with Harison and with
Ireton appoints the place of Execution.

After which he continued with the Army, went into Scotland with Cromwell when
he conquered the covenanting Professors where he was a Colonel of Horse, and
finally he is made one of the General at Sea with General Monck, and General
Blake, in the Fights which were made with the Dutch; but in the second Fight
with them, he encouraging the Seamen, was shot in pieces with a Cannon Bullet,
and all the small remains they could find of him, were Coffind up and brought
to Greenwich, and from thence were carried by water in a solemn manner to
Westminster, and buried in the Chapel of King Henry the Seventh.

The Life of Colonel Thomas Pride.
THo. Pride a man of a very mean (yet of a very uncertain) Birth, some of the
Ancients have reported that he was a poor boy brought up by the Parish of St.
Brides, Alies St. Bridgets London, and by them put forth at first, to an
Ale-House-keeper in Bride Lane to draw drink, but whether this be true or no I
will not assert it: But the first mention that I find of him, was, being a
Servant to Mr. Hiccocks a Brewer in Southwark, and now living in the
Bridg-house in S. Tulyes Street, there, with him he was a Drayman, and a common
carrier of Beer with the Slings.

When the Wars began (he being a busling fellow in any disturbance) he went
forth an Ensign under the Earl of Essex, but by his continual siding with
People like himself, viz. Ignorant, yet impudent in all their proceedings, he
at last commences Colonel of a foot Company, and now his meaness aims at
nothing more than to be one of the Princes of the People.

And when the Army at New-Market-Heath began the business of agitators, and by
that means to forsake their old Masters the Parliament. Colonel Pride
encourages and animates them thereunto, and upon their coming to London, he
appears a great stickler to have the impeached Members, and Major Genesis Brown
brought to Justice, and because the greater part of the House was so honest as
to scorn to be taught and frighted into any illegal and base practices by the
Army. This Colonel Pride together with Sir Hardress Walter, and Col. Hewson,
seize all the aforesaid honest and conscientious Members, driving them away
from the exercise of their trust committed to their charge by their Country, and
for some time forcing the greatest part of them into an Ordinary, called Hell
near Westminster Hall, which accasioned some to use that expression that Pride
carried the Parliament to Hell.

After this he proceeds according as the faction lead him, and is a great
Counselor in all the consultations about the Kings Death, and when the King
was brought from Windsor to his own House at St. Jamses. Col. Pride was very
angry that the King was brought into his Chamber, although (it being then cold
weather) it was only for a small time (Col. Pride having a fire in that
Chamber) until another fire in another room could be provided for the King.

And now the time drawing near wherein they intended this horrid Murder;
Colonel Pride is made one of the Kings judges, he is among them very active
every day, and when that black sentence was pronounced, Col. Pride sets his
hand and seal to the murder, and with his Regiment is upon the guard that day
it was accomplished.

Matters thus suceeding, and his Pockets being filled with the spoils of the
people, he begins to think, then of his Draymans place, yet of a Brewers trade,
and accordingly he laid out a considerable sum of money upon a Brew House in
Pie-Corner, and by his Wife and substitutes kept the same for many years
together.

After came on the Wars of Scotland, which when Cromwell undertook, he is a
chief follower of his said Master, and is very forward in that enterpriz. And
after when the Scotch Trophies and Colors were taken, and for the honor of
that victory hanged up in Westminster Hall; he was the Man that uttered the
expression, that he would have the Lawyers Gowns hanged there too.

And thus he continues till Oliver takes the Government upon himself, Col.
Pride assists him in this too, and stands up very much for this new made
Protector, noe ways doubting but that if Oliver were a King he should be one
of his Inferior Princes; not long after h^ dubd him S. Thomas Pride, and yet by
his usurping Master when they were among themselves was often called Sir. Thomas
Slingsby, which indeed was the more proper name of the two.

Col. Pride being of a very great corpulent Body, by reason whereof his Gate
was very uncomely, Cromwell would used ^o say, when he saw him coming ^owards
him, see here how Pride comes wadling too and again, as if he h^d the Slings
upon his back.

And being newly Knighted, he thought to adventure upon some noble Achievement
to make himself famous, and his first encounter was at the Beare-Garden, where
the Bea^es felt the couragousness of h^^ valor, and were all slain in t^
Fight, upon which Col. Pride can off the Conqueror;

For which and other services, t^^ valourous Knight was suddenly ^^ter made a
Lord, and thinks the Lords place would become a Dr (...) man very well; This
mock hom^ sat not long before the Fabricator of it had an end put to his Life,
and Col. Pride thought it not manners to stay behind him, whom he had always
followed in all his designs, and fearing a swing, instead of his slings, he
dyed about a month after him, near Nonsuch in the County of Surry, which Park
of the Kings so called, he had as his Portion for his aforesaid wicked
Services, the manner of his Death is uncertain, as that of his Birth, being
buried in a Church, near there abouts, in the County of Surrey.

The Life of Francis Allen.
FRancis Allen, a Citizen and Gold Smith of London, and Lived Over against St.
Dunstans Church, near Temple Bar, was a great stickler against the King, and
one that had no way to improve his now decaying Estate, but by siding with the
rising Sectaries; by which means he was made one of the Commissi^ners for their
Customs, and a Trustee for Sale of the Lands of the Bishops, Deans, and
Chapters. And the time coming on wherein his Sovereigns blood was to be spilt,
he appears a forward Designer of that wicked Act, and accepts very readily of
the employment of one of the Kings Judges; where he appeared every day to
propagate the Murder, and was a great encourager of others to do the same. He
likewise Signed to the warrant for the Execution, and was ever after a
continued Rumper, and a great enemy of Olivers, because he dissolved them: and
I think it will not be unseasonable to insert in this place part of a mock
hymn, which was made pretendedly by Mr. John Goodwin; although only a Jeer
made in imitation of the like Drollery which he made and caused to be Sung in
his Church.

Then spoke one Allen of the City,
at which we gave a shout.
Who said indeed it was great pity,
we should be thus turned out.
But Cromwell answered him again,
and said, it was such as he,
That were the Spunges of the land,
and now must squezed be.
Which indeed in some case was not said amiss, for he arrived at a very vast
estate by being a Customer, and one of the Treasurers for sale of the King,
Queen and Princess Lands at Worcester house, and of the lands belonging to
the pretended Delinquents, at the Lord Cravens House in Drury lane; besides he
compassed a considerable Estate out of the Lands of the Bishop of Chester, at a
very inconsiderable rate.

He dyed much about the time with Oliver Cromwell, at his assumed house at
Fox-hall, and presently after him dyed his Wife also, leaving their illegal and
ill-gotten Estate to his Brother Deputy Allen a Herald Painter in London, whose
Heirs I doubt will have little cause to glory in it.

The Life of Thomas Andrews.
ALderman Thomas Andrews was at first a Linen Draper upon Fish-street hill,
but improved his Estate better by the times then by his Trade, for which
purpose he was made a Treasurer for Plate, Money, and one of the Treasurers at
War, for which he received three pence per pound; he was likewise one of the
Commissioners for the Customs, and with his brother Allen was likew^se one of
the Treasures for sale of the Lands of the late King, Queen and Prince, etc.

These employments being gainful to him, made him take any course to maintain
and propagate the power by which he received them, whereupon he sides with the
Kings Murderers, and appears at that Court as one of his Judges, and at last
signs likewise the Warrant for Execution,

And now having had a hand in the King's blood, he is resolved to blot out the
Name thereof. For in the year, 1649. Alderman Reynoldson Lord Mayor of London,
in whose Mayoralty an Act was set on foot for the abolishing of Kingly
Government, and for the declaring our now Sovereign, then Prince, a Traitor;
which was Ordered to be proclaimed in the City of London. But honest Alderman
Reynoldson refused to be present at that wicked Proclamation, and publicly
and plainly told them, he would not publish any such thing; and for such his
denial, was fined two thousand pounds, and three months Imprisonment; yet
notwithstanding this, Alderman Andrews accepts of the place of Mayor in his
absence: proclaims the Act against Kingly Government, and serves out the
remaining part of Alderm. Reynoldson's Government, as if he had been legally
chosen to do the same, and the next year succeeding, was chosen himself by
the City, Lord Mayor of London.

He arrived at very little notice afterward, unless a Knighthood from the
Protector, which he but little while enjoyed, although he was a principal Man
at the proclaiming Richard Cromwell after the Usurpers Death.

He had very many Children, most of his Sons got their Estates in Employments
under him, but never lived to enjoy them; for to his continued grief, he was
hardly out of Mourning for one, before he had occasion to mourn for the loss
of another; At last a Suit of law coming upon him for a wrongfully detained sum
of money which he injuriously kept in his hands of another Man's, he dyed
suddenly full of years, in the Year 1659. and had he lived a Year longer,
three that had been Lord Majors of London in Twenty years time had held up
their hands at the same Bar where they had Condemned many Wretched persons
which had not so much deserved it as themselves.

The Life of Col. John Venn.
COl. John Venn, was a Citizen of London likewise, and as I have heard a
decaying Tradsman, he was taken notice of for his more then ordinary
forwardness against the Kings interest; when the Wars increased, his Factious
Principles increased too, by reason whereof he was made Governor of Windsor,
where he had the opportunity to increase his Estate, not only by the Plunder
of the Country thereabouts, but by getting into his possession much of the
Kings household stuff, Hangings, Linen, etc. He was a chief Consultator with
the wicked Council of the Army at Windsor, and gave his Vote among them to
Murder the King.

Mr. Christopher Love, afterward Martyred, Chaplain to his Regiment, who
instructed him in better Principles then he afterward professed, and about the
year, 1645, or 1646: this Col. Venn took a house in Aldersgate Street, London,
for the only reason that he might be near unto Mr. Love, who then preached at
St. Annes Church, Aldersgate, not far from Venns Lodging; and about the year,
1647: this professed Religious Colonel, being to remove from thence to a place
called Brumley near Kensington, by reason of which distance he could not enjoy,
as he pretended, the benefit of Mr Lov's soul searching preaching, whereupon he
hired the Author of this small Treatise to be a constant Hearer of M. Love, and
to take his Sermons in Short-writing, who made it his business all the week
following to transcribe them again into a legible hand, whereby what Mr. Love
preached one Sunday at St. Anns, was the next Sunday repreach'd by Col. Venn in
his own Family. And yet this wretched Man acts contrary even to these
Principles; in the year, 1648, he forsook both Mr. Love and his Religion too,
and sides with the then prevailing factious party, and is nominated one of the
Judges of the King, who by this time they had contrived to put to Death, to the
great affliction and more then ordinary trouble of spirit of Mr. Love.

Finally, he was one of the Judges of the King, and most impudently sat among
them; he signed likewise to that black Authority that caused that unheard of
Execution: and lastly, he proved a great enemy to Mr. Love, whom formerly he so
earnestly thirsted after, and would not appear to help him either in his
Imprisonment, Confinements, or Death.

But at last, he himself was not much regarded, The judgments of God followed
him in a troubled Conscience; and at last, going to Bed very well with his
wife, he was found dead by her the next morning; no persons that were with him
that night, nor his wife that lay by him, being in the least sensible of his
approaching end.

The Life of Sir William Constable.
SIR William Constable, was one of those who appeared eminently against Kingly
power, he was a Colonel in the Parliaments Army, and a great Sider with the
Sectarian part thereof; his Estate was engaged for Debt, and he knew no way to
recover his Decays but by saying and doing as those wretches commanded; He sold
his Estate to Sir Marmaduke Langdale for twenty thousand pounds, and afterward
beggs it again of the Parliament; for that as he said Sir Marmaduke Langdale
was a Delinquent, and so his Estate was in their Dispose, his thus decayed
fortune made him side with the Conspirers of the King's Death, and he was one
of his Judges, and set his Hand and Seal for taking away the Life of the King,
and did as much as in him lay for transplanting and removing the very Name and
memory thereof. He died in the Reign of the last usurping Tyrant that I pray
England may ever have.

The Life of Sir John Danvers.
SIR John Danvers was a Colonel in the said Army, was Brother to the Earl of
Danby, who he proved to be a Delinquent in that Rump-Parliament, whereby he
might overthrow his will and so compass the Estate himself; he sided likewise
with the Sectarian party, was one of the King's Judges and lived afterward
some years in his sin without repentance.

But drawing near to his Death I have cause to believe that he repented of the
wickedness of his Life, for that, then Mr. Thomas (now Dr.) Fuller was
conversant in his Family and preached several times at Sir John Danver's
desire in Chelsey Church, where I am sure, all (that frequented that
Congregation) will say he was instructed to repent of his misguided and wicked
Consultations in having to do with the Murder of that just Man. He died, (but
how I cannot give an account) and has no Question received his Judgment.

The Life of Isaac Ewer.
ISaac Ewer, began his Estate with the Wars, and increased therein according to
the success thereof; he was a Colonel at Colchester Siege and there was at the
Council of War upon Sir Charles Lucas and Sir George Lisle, he was one of the
Kings Judges, and Signed the Warrant for the Murder; afterward went with
Cromwell into Ireland, he was at that unheard of bloody Quarter which was given
to 4000 five hundred accomplished Men, at Tredagh in Ireland; where none in
Arms escaped their Murder; although many of them laid down their Arms upon
promise of their lives, which notwithstanding they Murdered; he was afterward
at the Siege of Clonmel in Ireland, and from thence at Waterford where the Town
being taken he died suddenly after of the Plague, and was there buried.

The Conclusion.
ANd thus you see how Evil pursued these wicked Men, who thus thirsted after
the blood of their Sovereign; Nay, I say of one of the most Pious Princes as
ever Ruled the English Scepter. A King who had no other fault but his too much
Clemency, wherewith his nature did abound; whose Piety was as Transcendent as
his Clemency, immovable as the Rock which neither the unruly Waves of
Sedition impetuously breaking thereupon, nor the Boisterous and Irresistible
winds of persecution could work into the least compliance, or disturb in his
resolved stedfastness; one that like the Palm Tree that could flourish with
the greater splendour by how much he was Pressed with ponderous inconveniences,
and with our Savior could bear the Cross with as much ease as he did his
Crown, and improve his Afflictions to the right use for which God Originally
intended them, he could Spurn at the Glittering Glory of an Earthly Crown, and
handling Christ's Crown of Thorns could by the eye of Faith discern an immortal
and eternal Crown of Glory.

His Patience under Gods Afflicting hand was like that of St. Paul's far
above all that the world could do to abuse it, and not only so, but rejoicing
in his Tribulation also. The Imprisonment of his Body could not in the least
confine his mind, but rather give the greater advantages to his heavenly Soul
for nearer and more desired converses with the King of Kings. No undutiful or
unhandsome usage which he received from the meanest of his People could
Aggravate him into any passionate reflections, or exasperate above the degree
of his sweet and complacent Temper, he could not be wrought beyond the bounds
of his reason, although he had to do with unreasonable Men, nor was ever heard
to use any expressions of Gaul and Wormwood toward those that gave him Gaul
and Vinegar to Drink; he blessed those that cursed him, he prayed for those
that persecuted him; and he desired that those who would not suffer him to live
with them in his Earthly Kingdom, might be received with him into the
Capacious Kingdom of Heavenly Glory.

His Charity was as Universal as that required from a Universal Christian;
viz. To the greatest and most eminent of his forward Adversaries; to those who
spit in his Face, he desired that their Faces might shine with the Unction of
the Spirit, and others who Vilifyed him with crying out Justice and Execution
against him, he prayed that their sin might be forgiven, and that they might
not receive that Justice upon themselves which they called for unjustly to be
Executed upon him. Nay, and further, he did often declare that he did as freely
forgive all the world with as much freedom as he did hope to be forgiven, and
named one particular person among the rest, saying, viz. I forgive Miles Corbet
too, One who made it the greatest ^f his study to stretch abused law, Arguments
against the King, and aggravating the Kings demanding Justice against the Five
Members with all the exasperating circumstances imaginable, which was the chief
Original cause of the future civil and unhumane Bloodshed, and yet our most
Pious and charitable Prince had charity even for this Man.

His moderation was known unto all men, far above all mortal rules or
observations, take him which way you will, either as Man, a Christian, or a
KING, and in all three you shall find him to abound in his moderation; his
private Life as a Man was above the reach of envy to Tax him with any thing
that might Blot or Stain his blameless conversation; His Christianity caused
him to comply with the Peevish Precipitate Distempers of the times, hoping
thereby to allay that furious Fire which broke out among the Giddy headed
People. And this our Gracious Sovereign throwing the water of his
compassionate Christianity thereon to quench it, it proved like water cast on
Lime, burned and smoak't with the greater Violence.

His Kingly moderation far exceeded the other two, for he Stooped and
Condiscended even to things below himself, that he might let all the w^rld see
his readiness to comply with any thing that might gratify their distempered
and infatuated frenzy, which though nothing could do, he yet retained his
aforesaid serious and moderate temper; and having at that time to deal with a
contradicting and gainsaying People, he moderately contrives all things, as
much as in him lay, to reconcile and make up their ruined and irrecoverable
Breaches.

And lastly, His moderate Diet, his temperance in all other affairs, his
constancy to his Queen, his fixed Religion, his heavenly Inclinations, his
continued Devotions, his melting Clemeny, and his abused Charity, do all like
so many Foiles show the blackness of that Barbarous Action of Butchering such
a Pious Prince, the parallel of whom cannot be Sampled among the now Peaceable
Kings of the Earth.

In a word, His very Enemies could give him no worse a caracter then what is
contained in this, dimidium of his real worth, which is represented but in
dead colors, which no d^ubt but a more curious Pen will represent to it is
lively Species. Some have said (as Cornet Joyce) that if ever King of England
went to Heaven, our Glorious Martyr King Charles did, who laid down his Life;
and rather would lo^^ his Prerogative, then the People shou^^ loose their
Privilege. Oliver Cro^well himself said, that he was a unwise and Pious Man,
but that he wi^^ Unfortunate in his War. And Cook said he was Wise and a
Graciou^ Prince, but that he must Dye, and Monarchy with him.

And this was he whom these miserable Men Sentenced to Death as a Murderer,
and a Traitor, whom Devils must acknowledge as one whose pure conversation
might cause his Name to be Registered in the Calanders of the Sainted Martyrs,
valuing not so much his own, as the Lives and Safeties of his People.

A Gentleman standing at his sad interment, threw this Distick into the Vault.

Non Carolus magnus, nec Carolus quintus.
Sed Carolus Agnus hic Jacet intus.
FINIS.

