PSALMS and HYMNS Composed and fitted For the present Occasion Of Public
THANKSGIVING, October 24. 1651.

By W. Barton Preacher of God's Word.



LONDON, Printed by William Du-Gard, October 21. M. DC. LI.

Psalm. 47. 6. Sing praises to God, sing praises, sing praises to our King, sing
praises.
Psalm. 66. 2. Make a joiful nois unto God all ye lands, sing forth the honor
of his Name, make his prais glorious.
To the Right Honorable THE PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF ENGLAND.
Most Renowned, Prospered, and most Candid Christian SENATORS!
THe LORD of Life and Glory, who asscended up on high, and led our Captivity
captive, has in these later days appeared on Earth (as he ever does in
Heaven) in behalf of his Spous, and has dispensed unto you (the friends of the
Bridegroom) most incomparable Signal Victories and Conquests in her behalf; for
which you have worthily enacted many Sweet and Solemn Days of Triumphant
Thanksgivings; which Thanksgivings being indeed much advanced by singing of
Psalms, it is a thousand pities that the Psalms in use are not by this day
cured of so many grievous defects and gross absurdities, as have been of long
time discovered in them: For although those gross faults were generally
corrected by a worthy Member of your Honorable House, in an Edition by him put
forth many years ago; yet was that endeavor wholly dashed by a reference to
the Assembly, who, under an opinion of bringing them most strictly to the
Original, made them in many places more dark and disorder lie then could be
well amended for the present: upon which consideration I was emboldened, with
the assent of Mr Rous (the first Author) and with the assistance of some Godly
Learned men, to endeavor a new Translation, both clear and smooth, and
accurately compared with the Original; which having effected and presented, it
pleased your Honors to refer it to Mr N. Mr B. and Others to review, and report
to the House; but they, accounting the said Translation too Poetical, do intend
to compile a new one out of it, more strictly to the words, which doubtless
will produce that obscurity of Phrase, and deformity of Style, which marred
the other, and made it less acceptable and profitable to the People: and for
which very reason this new Composure of mine was more accurately framed,
having formerly put forth a Translation of mine own, which was not wholly
innocent of that Original error, which indeed the Translators do not always so
easily apprehend.

Now, because this Review of the Committee may be very tedious to wait for, (it
being a year and more since the Order past the House, and I cannot perceiv they
are half way in the work) and when it is don, it must needs vary from the
express Text by Paraphrase or Metaphrase, for a great part; and because the
Opportunities are become indeed Importunities, and very urgent, I presume to
dedicate to your Honors this short Assaie of Psalms and Hymns, being ready to
print and publish the whole Book, if it pleas your Honors to allow me the
security of my Copy, that no man print it from me, and those that are
interessed therein; without which favor, the present printing of the whole
would endanger my utter undoing, having already endebted my self so deeply upon
the said account: But if after publication of all, your Honors shall receiv
better satisfaction by any other endeavors, I shall fully rest satisfied in
this, that it shall be determined by the Supreme Authority of England, which,
from the first, I have publicly owned, obeyed, honored, prayed for, pleaded
for, and praised God for, as a singular Blessing to this Nation, under which
we may lead peaceable and quiet lives in all Godliness and Honesty; and if
any fearing God be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto them. In
conscience and confidence whereof, I rest

Your Honors most dutiful and devoted Servant, for Jesus sake, W. Barton.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY The Lord General CROMWELL.
Right Honorable!
YOu do very well know, that no Opinion is more unscriptural or irrational,
then to deny the Duty it self of Singing Psalms, and Spiritual Songs of Prais
to the glory of God; sor even Nature dictateth no less to the very Heathens;
and the Scripture is so express and urgent for it, that as well we may deny
prayer, as this kind of Prais: Neither can the mistake of many dissuade the
pious practiser of this Duty to desist, but rather provoke his zeal, like
David dancing before the Ark; blind Bartimeus, crying after Christ; or the
Children, crying Hosanna; and Verily, if such should altogether hold their
peace, the Stones would sing.

I acknowledge that most of the Psalms exstant do want a more exquisite
Composure; and I deny not but Christians, gifted that way, may compose and
sing new Songs to the glory of God, in the Congregations; but if those Songs
be not composed out of Scripture, I believ they will want that gravitie and
weight, that Majesty and Authority, which these have to excite affection, and
edify the understanding. Wherefore, having Composed a few of this kind, very
proper for the Seasons and Solemnities GOD's gracious Providence bestow's upon
us, I humbly crave leav (*most Noble LORD!) to present these, and especially
the Soldiers Hymn, to Your Lordship's pious and prudent Animadversion, hoping
to obtein Your Honor's Approbation of this Scriptural Collection, as a livelie
Description of the Condition You have so much experienced; And that You will
say, and many after You, That this Scripture is (at this Day) fulfilled in
our ears, and in Your persons.

GOD Almighty preserv Your EXCELLENCY to be an Happy Instrument of Our full
Deliverance, and the strong Establishment of Englands Commonwealth, together
with the Flourishing Estate of the whole Church of Christ, as prays*

Your EXCELLENCIE'S most humble Servant, W. Barton.

To the Courteous Reader.
THE poor and imperfect Translation of the present Psalm-Book (not yet
thoroughly amended by any hand) gave occasion to some to say more wittily then
wisely, That Hopkins and Sternhold had persecuted David more then Saul did, and
has made some men to abhor the offering of the Lord: Yet those Autors did
rarely (doubtless) for those Times, and are registered in Chronicles among men
of Note, and their labors have certainly edified Godly men, and glorified God,
although in these Times of glittering Knowledge, and the perfection of Language
and other Gifts, the great defects and faults of these Psalms cry aloud for
amendment; and certainly when once we have in our flock a male, I mean, a
complete Book, Mal. 1. 14. then to offer these lame and blind Psalms, and so
to sacrifice a corrupt thing, will be cursedly evil: but to desert the Duty
wholly (since some Psalms are tolerably translated) is certainly a sin. I
conjecture with my self what has more prejudiced this Duty, then the weakness
of the Translation; namely, the wicked application of Psalms by malevolent
Spirits, as I heard sometime a Hedg-priest give forth the 21 Psalm, at such time
as the Book of Sports was commanded to be read, to the grieving of the Spirits
of the godly: Nevertheless this wicked purpose did not corrupt God's
Ordinance, though (to their sin only) it did abuse it, lest by that argument
we should forfeit all prayer and preaching.

These I say are the true causses of the decaie of the most heavenly Duty
and Exercise of that Ordinance of Psalm-singing; yet lest the amendment of the
Psalm Book, and of the Times themselves by universal and powerful reformation,
should reduce Christians to that Primitive Duty of singing Psalms, Satan has
suggested some witty scruples amongst godly spirits, which for present
satisfaction and future preparation of good Christians, I shall hope, though
briefly, yet clearly and fully to answer.

I. It is objected that they cannot Psalm. 131. 44. 119.
say they are not puffed in mind; We have not gone back from thee. I have kept
thy Testimonies with my whole heart, etc.

Answ. 1. Every true Christian can say so in some measure, or in some sens, 1 John 2. 27. You have an anointing that teaches you all things -- and even as
it has taught you, ye shall abide in him. Gal. 5. 24. Those that are Christ s
have crucified the flesh, with the affections and Iusts thereof.

2. Thou ought yet to learn to be able to say so; Col. 3. 16. Teaching and
admonishing one another in Psalms and Hymns, etc. He that take's special
notice of his lesson begin's to learn it.

II. They object, that is not proper for them to say, Whenas we sale in
Babylon: I will divide Sechem, etc.

Answ. Are they not yet in Babylon think you? Sure if God have called his
people out of Babylon, Rev. 18. 4. they (at least) were in it. As for Sechem,
and such like, David glorie's in his Conquests, wherein he is both a Type of
Christ, (in whose Conquests we are made partakers) and of the Church; and his
Temptations and Deliverances do in a Figure represent ours. As Paul says, Heb.
11. 19. That Abraham received his son from death in a Figure, and that Mount
Sion and Mount Sinai, Sarah and Hagar, were an Allegory, Galat. 4. ver. 24.

III. Some object, that more pertinent expressions may be used by Psalms
composed on purpose, and of our own invention, as they did in the Primitive
times. 1 Cor. 14. 26.

Answ. 1. You cannot show so much Scripture, that they used unscriptural
Psalms, as we can, that they did use Scriptural; For Psalms and Hymns and
Spiritual Songs which Paul commands to be used, Col. 3. 10. are proper terms
of the O. Test. Psalms, as Mr Cotton fully proves in his defense of this
Ordinance. And if our Savior did allude to the Jewish Custom of Thanksgiving
at the Sacrament, as Weems says, we think no less at his singing of an Hymn,
Mat. 26. 30. whereas they have not a word to intimate the custom of
unscriptural Psalms.

2. When the Psalms were first penned by David, some were Histories of Ancient
matters, 77, 78, 114, 135. and many more: Some were Prophecies of things to
com, as Psalm. 79, 85, 126. and others; yet the Spirit of God thought fit to
edify the present generation with the Records and Meditation of past and
future things, yea, Were not these best of all for such uses? Was it not most
sweet to them in times of Invasion and Hostility, to call to mind God's
protecting, prospering, and avenging of Israel coming out of Egypt, Psalm. 114.
and 136? And are not these things written for our learning as well as theirs?
Romans 15. 4. yea consider if our Invention can equal the pat and pertinent
expressions taken out of Scripture upon all occasion: for then certainly we
should be to seek for Texts, as much as for Psalms.

IV. Some object, that none can render the Scripture into Verse, but must needs
vary from the Original, in the signification of many words.

Answ. So they must do also in the prose Translation: For that which is elegant
in the Hebrew, would be Barbarism, at least Soloecism in our Languages, as
abundantly appears by Ainsworth's Translation.

2. Sometimes by means of the latitude of Poesy, more full and proper
significations may be expressed, then in the prose Translation, as Psalm. 1. 6.
(...) To know with favor; Psalm. 118. 22. (...) To refuse with disgrace; Psalm.
106. 38. (...) To shed abundantly, and hundreds such, which the Prose does more
sparingly.

3. Consider the property and nature of Verse, that if David had Translated his
own Psalms, the expression must have been different in another Language, though
to the same effect, and the Spirit of God (using the Translation of the LXX)
much varie's the Words of the Old Testament. And if I had as much to spare as I
have spent about the work, I could easily demonstrate, out of uncontrouled
authorities, how closely I have followed the Original, though now I must
content my self with on Apology, and putting forth some special Hebraisms in a
Capital letter.

Lastly, some object that they dare not sing, because of a mixed multitude, that,
they say, curs themselves.

Answ. And therefore we shall not bless God and his Church; Surely their
faults cannot be charged upon us, if they should sing damnation to themselves.

2. The same objection would deny us all Prayer, and spiritual Communion,
which is not so far admitted unto them now adays, but should they com in as
strangers, they could not pollute the Ordinance nor the Church, and the
majesty of it might be blessed to their good. 1 Cor. 14. 14, 25.

To them that imagine one should sing the Psalm and the rest hear, it is but an
imagination, and that groundless; Where Is your Scripture for it? We learn
thence to join Voices as well as Votes, Psalm 34. 3. Com and let us exalt his
Name together. Psalm. 66. 4. All the earth shall worship Thee, and shall sing
unto Thee, they shall sing unto Thy Name. Yet it might suffice to answer such
fond surmises with 1 Cor. 11. 16. We have no such custom, nor yet the
Churches of God.



PSALM. XLVIII.
GReat is the LORD; his prais no less;
for so must we record,
In this his hill of holiness,
and City of our Lord.
2 Mount Sion is a beauteous thing,
and on her Northern side
The City of the mighty King,
the whole earth's joy and pride.
3 The Lord, within her palace there,
is known a refuge nigh:
For lo the kings assembled were,
together they past by.
5 They saw it, and they marvelled,
but there they durst not stay,
But, troubled and astonished,
they made great haste away.
6 Great terror there fell on our foes,
and grievous pangs of pain:
As sharp as women in their throws,
at any time, sustain.
7 And like as when, at thy Command,
the furious East-winde roar's,
And spread's his wracks in sight of land,
upon the Tarsian shores.
OR,
And as a furious Eastern wind
put's Tharsian ships to wrack,
Such furious force our foes did find,
when thy hand drove them back.
8 In The City of this King of powers
we saw, as we were told:
This City of this God of ours
God ever will uphold.
9 And these thy sure Compassions, Lord,
thy kindeness and thy grace
Most quietly did we record
within thy holy place.
10 For like thy Name, so is thy prais,
as far as Land extend's:
And store of righteousness always
thy right hand comprehend's.
11 Therefore, let Sion plenteously
of heavenly joies partake:
And Judah's Daughters leap for joie,
for thy just judgments sake.
12 Walk round about, and Sion view,
her stately turrets tell:
13 Her palaces consider you,
and mark her bulwarks well;
Tell it to all posterity,
14 For this God does abide
Our God and Guide perpetually,
till death he will be our guide.
OR,
Tell it to all POSTERITY,
for even to our last breath
This God 's our God perpetually,
And our safe Guide till death.
PSALM. Lxxvi.
THe Lord is known in Judah well,
and his most glorious Name
Is very great in Israel,
which does extol his fame.
2 The tabernacles of his grace
at Salem you may see:
And Sion is the dwelling place
where He desire's to be.
3 The burning arrows brake he there,
the arrows of the bow,
The battel-sword, and shield that were
the weapons of the foe.
4 Much brighter is thy glorious Crown,
more excellent each way,
And worthy of much more renown
then all the mounts of prey.
5 Lo, thou have spoiled the stout of mind,
and they have slept their sleep:
Their hands the mighty could not find,
their lives they could not keep.
6 O God of Jacob thy reproof
sent many a daring head,
Charet and horse, with thundering hoof,
to sleep among the dead.
7 Thou, Lord, alone deservest fear
due to thy dreadful Name:
For who may in thy sight appear
when once thy wrath does flame.
8 When thou did make thy judgment com
from heaven shining clear,
The earth that heard it was struck dumb,
and all sat still for fear.
9 Even when the LORD to judgment rose,
and sent those judgments forth,
To save, from their incensed foes,
all meek ones of the earth.
10 The fury that in man does reign
unto thy prais redound's:
Remaining wrath thou shall restrein,
and set men's passions bounds.
11 Vow to the LORD your God, and pay,
let all about his throne
Bring gifts to him, to him, I say,
that is a dreadful one.
12 The Spirit of Princes (his proud foes)
he cut's it clean away:
And terrible he is to those
that earthly Scepters sway.
See a second Meter of this already printed, and some other Psalms, fit for the
present occasions, as the 126, the 149, also the third Hymn, in any Common tune.

To the tune of the old 148 follow these*
PSALM. XL VI.
Give laud unto, etc.
GOd is our strength and stay,
when dangers do abound:
A present help always,
and ready to be found:
And we therefore
Fear not at all, though the earth should fall,
or be no more.
2.
And though the mountains high,
were carried from the shore:
In the deep seas to lie,
and troubled waters roar,
And though it make
The billows rise, and with great nois
the mountains shake.
3.
For there is a river here,
whose streams do flow abroad,
And shall most sweetly cheer,
and glad the City of God:
Those tents of grace
Where God most high does sanctify
his dwelling place.
4.
Within the midst of her
does God himself abide
Her sure Deliverer,
therefore she shall not slide;
For God, I say,
Shall send her aid, ere be displaid
the break of day.
5.
The heathen raged with nois,
the Kingdoms moved were,
Then God put forth his voice,
and earth did melt for fear:
This God of power
Has here abode, and Jacob's God
is our high tower.
6.
O, com behold and see
what works the Lord bring's forth!
What Desolations he
has wrought in all the earth!
Whose mighty hand
Make's war to ceas, and settle's peace
in all the land.
7.
He break's the spear and bow,
and quite cut's off the same,
The Chariot he does throw
into the burning flame.
Be still, says he,
And know that I am God most high,
and known will be.
8.
I will be magnified,
of all the heathen Coasts,
And all the earth so wide
of me shall make their boasts;
This God of power
Has here abode, and Jacob's God
is our high tower.
PSALM. 135. I. Part.
GIve laud unto the Lord,
and prais his holy Name;
Do ye his prais record,
and spread abroad his fame.
Ye that resort
To our great God, and have abode
in Sion's Court.
2.
His honor O proclaim,
for good and kind he is:
Sing praises to his Name,
a pleasant work it is:
Jacob has he,
Chose to Himself, and all his wealth,
must Israel be.
3.
And this I clearly know,
the Lord's a mighty one,
And that all gods do ow
subjection to his throne,
for He bring's forth
Whatever he pleas, in deeps, in seas,
in heaven, and earth.
4.
He make's the vapors rise
from earth's remotest ends:
And lightnings (from the skies)
With showrs of rain he send's.
The wind likewise
Whatever it is, He bring's from his
large treasuries.
5.
Firstborn of man and beast,
in Egypt he smote dead:
And tokens, not the least,
in midst thereof he spread,
And there let fall
His dreadful hand on Pharaoh, and
his servants all.
6.
Who did great Nations smite,
and mighty Kings did kill:
The Giant Amorite,
and him of Bashan hill:
Sihon he slew
Of famous note, and Og he smote,
and overthrew.
7.
And Canaan's Kingdoms all
by him were overthrown,
And so their land did fall
an heritage to his own:
An heritage
For Israel therein to dwell,
from age to age.
8.
O Lord thy glory shall
eternally endure:
And thy memorial
for ever shall stand sure:
And Lord thy Name
From ages past shall always last,
and be the same.
A new Hymn of Reformation out of Isai. 66. 8, 9, 7.
Ye Children which etc.
OH who has heard of such a thing,
as now God's power to pass does bring!
or who has seen such things as these?
For shall the earth (can any say)
be made to bring forth in one day?
are Nations born at once, with eas?
As soon as Sion traveled,
she presently was brought to bed,
and brought forth children without aid.
Before she traveled she brought forth,
before her pain came, came the birth,
and of a brave Man-child was laid.
Ver. 9, 10.
For shall I bring unto the birth,
and shall I not cause to bring forth,
says the Almighty Sovereign Lord?
Or shall I cause to bring forth some,
and then untimely shut the womb,
thy God, O Sion, spoke this Word:
Rejoice ye with Jerusalem,
and let her lovers, all of them,
of her spiritual joies partake:
Rejoice, I say, lift up your voice,
be glad with her and much rejoice,
all ye that mourned for her sake.
12. 11. 12. again with Chap. 60. 4.
For lo, says God! I will extend
the peace of Israel far an end,
that like a river it shall seem:
Then shall the glorious dignity
of the Converted Gentiles be
like to an overflowing stream.
That ye may suck and be at rest
with Consolations from her breast
milk forth, and much delighted be
With her bright glory overjoi'd,
suck and be nursed at her side,
and dandled on your Mother's knee.
Verse. 14. Psalm. 24. With Psalm. 149. 5. and Isa.
Which when ye see your hearts shall joie,
your bones shall flourish wondrously,
like a sweet herb that freshly grow's:
Then shall the hand of God be known,
toward his servants every one,
and his displeasure toward his foes.
For lo! their worm shall never die,
their fire shall burn perpetually,
and not be quenched night nor day:
But Saints shall shout upon their beds,
eternal joie shall Crown their heads,
sorrow and sighs shall flee away.
The downfall of Antichrist to the same tune. Revel. 12. 10, 11.
Now is salvation com abroad,
the strength and kingdom of our God,
now has his Christ displayed his might,
For the accuser's made to fall.
he that accused our Brethren all
before our God, both day and night.
And him they quel'd, and over-came,
by the pure blood of Christ the Lamb,
and by their testimony true,
For by that double-edged sword,
the witness of his faithful word,
this enemy they overthrew.
11, 12.
Nor did they spare their utmost breath,
nor love their lives unto the death,
but boldly laid down all at stake.
Therefore, ye Heavens! lift up your voice,
and ye that dwell in them rejoice,
in this salvation to partake.
But woe to you, to you, O SIRS!
the Earth and Sea's Inhabiters,
guilty of this Accuser's Crime.
For Satan is com down to you,
having great wrath, because he knew
he now must have but little time.
Chap. 11. 17. Chap. 7. 10, 12.
We give thee thanks with one consent,
O Lord our God OMNIPOTENT.
which art and wast and art to com.
For thou have taken unto Thee
thy great power and authority,
and reigned in despite of ROME.
Salvation to OUR GOD therefore,
Wisdom and blessing evermore,
to him that on the throne does sit.
And to the Lamb be glory bright,
thanksgiving, honor, power and might,
Amen faie We, and SO BE IT.
A Song of Thanksgiving out of Isa. XII Chapt. All people, etc.
LORD! I will prais thee now this day,
though thou wast angry with me sore,
Thine anger now is turned away,
and thou my Comforts do restore.
Behold! God is my Savior strong,
I will confide, as not afraid,
For great Jehovah is my song,
also my strength and saving aid.
Therefore, by means of this supply,
possessed with joie and great delight,
Shall ye draw water plenteously,
out of the wells of saving might.
Then shall ye say, O prais the LORD,
call on his NAME, declare his DEEDS
Among the PEOPLE, and RECORD
how far his NOBLE fame exceed's.
Sing to the Lord the sweetest hymns
of solemn prais, with joie and mirth,
For he has don transscendent things,
and this is known in all the Earth.
O thou that do in Sion DWELL
cry out, and shout for thou do see,
The holy ONE OF ISRAEL
is mighty in the midst of thee.
The Soldier's Hymn, Out of Psalm. 144. 1. and 2. and Psalm. 18. To any general
or common tune.
BLessed for ever be the LORD,
who is my strength and might,
Who taught my hands to use the sword
my fingers for to fight.
My goodness and my fort likewise,
my shield of saving power,
My Savior from mine enemies,
and my exalted tower.
Psalm. 18. 32, 33.
It Is God that by his power and might
strongly gird's up my loins;
And make's me take my way aright
to perfect my designs.
He make's my feet to be as swift
as are the Hindes in pace,
And I must count it as his gift
that gain's me each high place.
35, 36.
Thou gav'st me my Salvation's shield
to arm me most complete:
And thy right hand has me upheld,
thy favor made me great.
Thou gav'st me scope and liberty,
enlarging it so wide.
That still my feet stood steadfastly,
and did not slip aside.
40, 48. The necks thou gav'st me of my foes,
that I (empowered by thee)
Might utterly destroy all those
that greatly hated me.
38 Thou lift's my head above them all
that did my hurt conspire,
And sav'dst me from that tyrant Saul
whom fury set on fire.
29 I ran through armed troops, by thee,
and safely 'scap'd them all,
And by my God assisting me
have I lept over a wall.
37 I overtook my foes that fled,
for I pursued apace:
Nor till they were extinguished
did I forsake the chase.
Mine enemies I did so greet
with blows not dealt in vain,
That down they fell under my feet,
and could not rise again.
They cried and called on every side,
but there was not to save:
Yea even to the Lord they cried,
but he no answer gave.
49, 46.
Therefore will I give thanks to thee
among the Gentiles, LORD
In songs of prais with melody,
will I thy Name record.
46 O blessed be my rock of power,
that ever does abide,
And let the Lord my Savior
be highly magnified.
60 Deliverance great he give's indeed,
and mercy keep's in store
For David and his sacred seed,
and that FOR EVERMORE.
FINIS.

