A Funeral-Sermon FOR THE Reverend, Holy and Excellent DIVINE, Mr. Richard
Baxter, Who deceased December. 8. 1691. WITH An Account of His LIFE.

By WILLIAM BATES, D. D.

LONDON, Printed for Brab. Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhill. 1692.

To the Right Worshipful, and his much Honored Friend, Sr Henry Ashurst,
Baronet.
SIR,
YOur Noble and Constant Kindness to Mr. Baxter Living, and your Honorable
Respect to him Dead, have induced me to inscribe the following Memorial of him
to your Name. He was most worthy of your highest Esteem and Love, for the first
Impressions of Heaven upon your Soul, were in Reading his unvalued Book of the
Saints Everlasting Rest. This kindled a mutual Affection in your Breasts: his
Love was Directing, Counselling, and Exciting you to secure your Future
Happiness: your Love was Observant, Grateful, and Beneficent to him. The
Sincerity and Generosity of your Friendship, was very evident, in your
appearing and standing by him, when he was so roughly and unrighteously
handled, by one, who was the dishonor of this Ages Law; whose Deportment in a
high place of Judicature, was so contrary to Wisdom, Humanity, and Justice,
that there need no foul words to make his Name odious. Of this and your other
Favors Mr. Baxter retained a dear and lasting Sense; and in his dying hours
declared, that you had been the best friend he ever had. He has finished his
Course, and received his Crown: His Name will shine longer than his Enemies
shall bark.

I cannot omit the mentioning, that Mr. Boil and Mr. Baxter, those
incomparable Persons in their several Studies, and dear Friends, died within a
short space of one another. Mr. Boil was engaged in the Contemplation of the
Design and Architecture of the visible World, and made rare discoveries in the
system of Nature: not for Curiosity and barren Speculation, but to admire and
adore the Perfections of the Deity in the Variety, Order, Beauty, and
mavelous Artifice of the Creatures that compose this great Universe. Mr.
Baxter was conversant in the invisible World: his Mind was constantly applied
to understand the harmonious Agreement of the Divine Attributes in the Economy
of our Salvation, and to restore Men to the Favor and Image of God. They are
now admitted into the enlightened and purified Society above: where the immense
Volumes of the Divine Wisdom are laid open, and by one glance of an eye, they
discover more perfectly the Causes, Effects, and Concatenation of all things in
Heaven and Earth, than the most diligent Inquirers can do here, in a thousand
years Study, though they had the Sagacity of Solomon. By the Light of Glory,
they see the face of God, and are satisfied with his likeness for ever.

It Is a high honor to you, that Mr. Boil and Mr. Baxter should by their Last
Will nominate you amongst their Executors. It was the Saying of a Wise Roman,
Malo divi Augusti judicium, quam beneficium. I had rather have the Esteem of
the Emperor Augustus than his Gifts: for he was an understanding Prince, and
his Esteem was very Honorable to a Person. That two who so excelled in Wisdom
and Goodness, should commit to your Trust the disposal of their Estates for the
Uses of Piety and Charity, is a more noble Testimony of their Esteem of your
Prudence and inviolable Integrity, than if they had bequeathed to you rich
Legacies.

It is a satisfaction to me, that I have complied with Mr. Baxter's desire in
Preaching his Funeral-Sermon, and with yours in Publishing it. I shall
unfeignedly recommend Your self, your excellent Lady, and virtuous Children, to
the Divine Mercies: and remain, with great Respect,

SIR, Your humble and faithful Servant, William Bates.

A SERMON On the DEATH of Mr. Richard Baxter.
Luke 23.46. And when Jesus had cried with a loud Voice, he said, Father, into
thy Hands I commend my Spirit.


THE Words are the Prayer of our Blessed Savior in the Extremity of his
Passion. His unrighteous and implacable Enemies had nailed his Body to the
Cross, but they had no power over his Spirit, that was ready to take its flight
to the Sanctuary of Life and Immortality. This dying Prayer of Christ is a
Pattern for sincere Christians: He has invested them with the Relation of
Children of God; and authorizes them by his Example, to commend their departing
Spirits to his powerful Love. The Observation I shall unfold and apply, is
this: It Is the Privilege of dying Saints, to commend their Spirits into the
Hands of their Heavenly Father.

In discoursing of this, I shall, I. Consider the Foundation of this Privilege.
II. Show what a blessed Privilege this is. III. Apply it.


I. The Foundation of this Privilege is to be considered: This is built upon
two things.

1. The Relation of God to the Saints.

2. His Perfections joined with that Relation.

1. The Relation of God to the Saints. The Title of Father is upon several
Accounts attributed to God.

(1.) He is a Father by Creation: O Lord, Isa. 64.
thou art our Father: we are the Clay, thou art the Potter, we are the Work of
thine Hands. He formed Man's Body into a Majestic Figure, becoming his
original State, being Lord of the lower World. But in a peculiar manner he is
styled the Father of Spirits: they have a near Alliance, and Resemblance of the
Father of Lights, in their intellectual Powers, and their immortal Nature. From
hence it is, the Angels are called the Sons of God: Job 2.
They are the eldest Offspring of his Power. Adam has the Title of the Son of
God. Luke 3.
And since the Fall, Men are called God's Offspring. There is an indelible
Character of Dignity engraven in the reasonable Nature by the Hand of God. But
since Man turned Rebel to his Creator and Father, this endearing obliging
Relation aggravates his Rebellion, but gives him no Interest in the Paternal
Love of God, of which he has made a deadly Forfeiture. It Is threatened against
ignorant perverse Sinners, He that made them, will not save them.

(2.) Upon the account of external Calling and Profession, there is an
intercurrent Relation of Father and Sons between God and his People. Thus the
Posterity of Seth are called the Sons of God: Genesis 6.
and the entire Nation of the Jews are so styled; When Israel was young, Hosea
11.
I called my Son out of Egypt. And all that have received Baptism, the Seal of
the holy Covenant, and profess Christianity, in this general Sense may be
called the Children of God. But it is not the outward Dedication that entitles
Men to a saving Interest in God, unless they live according to that Dedication.
There are baptized Infidels, as well as unbaptized. How many every day fall as
deep as Hell, whose hopes were high, on the account of their external
Christianity.

(3.) God is our Father upon a more excellent Account, by Renovation and
Adoption. The natural Man is what St. Paul says of the voluptuous Widow, dead
while he lives. There is not only a cessation of spiritual Acts, but an utter
incapacity to perform them: he cannot obey nor enjoy God. Now the renewing of
Man is called a Regeneration: Our Savior tells Nicodemus, Verily I say unto
you, Unless a Man be born again, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.
The reason of the Expression is, because there is a new Nature, spiritual, holy
and heavenly, communicated, different from the carnal, polluted and earthly
Nature, derived from the first Adam. And as the Relation of a Father results
from the communicating a vital active Principle to another, in that kind of
Life like his own: so God by making us Partakers of a Divine Nature, of his
Life and Image, is styled our Father: Of his own Will beg at he us, Jam. 1.18.
with the Word of Truth. And we are said, to be born again, 1 Pet. 11.25.
not of corruptible Seed, but incorruptible, by the Word of God, which lives
and abides for ever. By the Divine Influence, the Word of God implants in them
such Qualities and Dispositions whereby they resemble God, are holy, as he is
holy, in all manner of Conversation. They are called godly, as they are like
him in their Minds, Affections and Actions. And to such God has the Heart and
Eye of a Father, to regard and relieve them in all their Exigencies. Psalm.
103.13.
Like as a Father pities his Children, so the Lord pities them that serve him.

We are also the Children of God by Adoption. This heavenly Privilege is
obtained for us by the meritorious Sufferings of Christ, and is founded in our
Union with him. God sent his Son, Gal. 4.
that he might redeem them that were under the Law, that they might receive the
Adoption of Sons. For his sake we are not only pardoned, but preferred to this
Heavenly Dignity. It Is worthy of Observation, that the Degrees of our
Redemption mentioned in Scripture, have annexed to them parallel degrees of our
Adoption. Thus when it is said, We are redeemed from the Curse of the Law, it is
added, That we might receive the Adoption of Sons. When it is said, We are freed
from the servile Spirit of the Law, it follows, We have received the Spirit of
Adoption, Romans 8.15.
whereby we cry, Abba, Father. And the Apostle tells us, That the redemption of
our Bodies from the bondage of Corruption, into the glorious Liberty of the
Sons of God, is our Adoption, that is the manifestation of it before all the
World.

Our Adoption is founded in our Union with Christ. A Member of Christ, and a
Son of God are the same: It Is therefore said, As many as received him, Joh.
1.12.
to them gave he Power, or Privilege, to become the Sons of God, even to them
that believe on his Name. Gal. 3.8.
And ye are all the Sons of God, by Faith in Jesus Christ. This is the vital
Band of our Union with Christ, and invests us with his Relation to God. When he
was to leave the World, he sends this comfortable Message to his Disciples; Go,
Joh. 20.17
tell my Brethren, I ascend to my Father and your Father, to my God and your
God. His Relation has the precedence in Order, Dignity and Causality. He is
God's own Son, Romans 8.3.
in a sense infinitely high and proper to himself: Heb. 1.5.
To which of the Angels said he at any time, Thou art my Son, to day have I
begotten thee? The sublimest Prophet breaks forth with Wonder, Isa. 53.
Who shall declare his Generation? It Is above our Capacity and Conception. It
becomes us to acquiesce in what the Scripture reveals. He is the eternal Word
and Wisdom of God, Heb. 3.
the Brightness of his Father's Glory. This is the most fit Comparison: for as
Light is productive of Light without any diminution; so the Eternal Father
communicated his Essence to the Son. In short, God is Christ's Father by
Nature, and God by Dispensation; he is our God as the Author of Nature, and our
Father by Adoption.

Before I proceed, it is fit to observe the Excellence of the Evangelical
Adoption above the Civil Adoption among Men.

(1.) Adoption is a legal Act in imitation of Nature, for the Comfort of those
who are without Children. But God had a Son, the Heir of his Love and Glory.
His adopting Love is heightened by considering our Meanness and Vileness: we are
but a little breathing Dust, worthless Rebels. The Apostle cries out in a
rapture of Admiration and Joy, Behold what manner of Love the Father has
bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Sons of God! If we consider the
natural Distance between God and us, as he is the Creator, and we are the Works
of his Hands, it is truly infinite; but the moral Distance between the holy
righteous God and the guilty polluted Creature, is, if it were possible, more
than infinite: Love inconceivable! That releases us from Bondage, and adopts us
into the Line of Heaven. If we admire any thing of this World in comparison of
it, it is a sign we have no share in this Privilege.

(2.) Civil Adoption conveys no Praiseworthy Qualities into the Person that is
adopted. A King may adopt one to be his Son, and the Heir of his Kingdom, but
cannot endow him with a Royalty of Spirit, with ruling Wisdom, with Justice and
Equity, Clemency and Bounty, with Magnanimity and Fortitude, that may qualify
him to manage the Scepter. The adopted Prince may be of a low sordid
Disposition, a Slave to his vile Lusts, and designing to enslave others. But
all the adopted Sons of God are divinely renewed; they are purified from
defiling and debasing Lusts, and are adorned with all the Graces of the Spirit,
that God is not ashamed to be called their God and Father, Heb.
Heb. 2.
nor Christ ashamed to call them Brethren. Now from this special Relation and
Interest of God in the Saints, there is a sure Foundation of their Trust in his
saving Mercy. David addresses himself to God for his preservation from imminent
Danger, I am thine, Psalm. 119.
save me: As if his miscarrying would be a Loss to God, who had so dear a
Propriety in him.

I come now to the second thing that encourages the praying Faith of the Saints
when they leave the World, to commend their Souls to him, His Perfections
joined with his Relation: His Love inclines, his Truth engages, and his Power
enables him to bring them safely to Heaven.

1. His Love. This is the brightest Ray of the Deity, the first and clearest
Notion we have of God. St. John tells us, God is Love. His Love cannot be fully
expressed by the dearest Relations and Affections in Nature. The Relation of
Parents, as it is most deeply implanted in Nature, so it implies the most
cordial, strong and tender Affection. But as God is infinitely greater and
better than earthly Parents; so he equally excels them, as in his Abilities, so
in his good Will to his Children. Our Savior directs us, Call no Man Father
upon Earth, for one is your Father, which is in Heaven: The Title and Love of a
Father is peculiar to him. Our Savior argues, If you that are evil, know how
to give good things to your Children, how much more shall your heavenly Father
to those that ask him? The Inference is strong, not only from the Divine
Authority of the Speaker, but from the native Perspicuity of the Things: for
the Love of an earthly Father is but an Infusion into his Breast from the
heavenly Father, and but a faint resemblance of his Love. The Love of a Mother
is more tender and endearing than of a Father: Even a fearful Hen will fly upon
Death, to preserve its tender Brood from the Devourer: Yet the Love of God to
his Children far excels it. Can a Woman forget her sucking Child? What Heart,
what Marble is in her Breast so incompassionate and unrelenting, as to neglect
her helpless Infant? She may, but, says God, I will never forget thee. The
Seraphims, those bright and unperishing Flames, are but faint and cold, in
comparison of God's Love to his Children.

It Is observable how the Love of God to them expresses it self in all the
Notions of Propriety and Preciousness, to make it more sensible to us. They are
styled his Treasure, Exodus 19.
his Jewels, Mal. 3.
the most precious part of his Treasure, Zech. 9.16
the Jewels of his Crown, that are the richest Jewels. Now will he throw away
his Treasure, or suffer the cruel Enemy to rob him of his Jewels? Will he not
take them into his safe Custody? It Is to be observed, that the Esteem and
Affection of God principally respects the Souls of his Children: Their Souls
have an original Affinity with him in their Substance as Spirits: and being
born again of the Spirit, they are Spirit in their Divine Qualities and
Endowments, and more endeared to him than by their first Alliance. His tender
Care to preserve them, will be correspondent to his Valuation and Love.

Moreover, the Condition of departing Souls affords another Argument of
reliance upon his Love; for they leave this visible World, with all their
Supports and Comforts; they are stripped of all sensible Securities: And will
he leave them fatherless in such a forlorn and desolate State? His Love is
expressed by Mercy, Compassion, Pity, melting Affections, that are most
tenderly moved when the beloved Object is in Distress. Our Savior propounds an
Argument for dependence upon the delivering Love of God, from the Exigence of
his People; Shall not God deliver his own Elect, the Designation of Love, who
cry day and night to him? He will do it speedily. Love is never more ardent and
active than in times of Distress. Therefore when his dying Children are
deprived of all their Hopes and dependence upon Creatures, and fly to him for
Protection and Relief, will he not hear their mournful Requests, and grant
their fainting Desires? When their earthly Tabernacles are so ruinous, that
they are forced to dislodg, will the Love of a Heavenly Father suffer their
naked Souls to wander in the vast Regions of the other World, seeking Rest, and
finding none? Certainly he will bring them into his reviving Presence. If
Divine Love be so condescending, that the high and lofty One that inhabits
Eternity, Isa. 57.
dwells with the humble and contrite Spirit, to revive the Spirit of the
Humble, when they are confined to our lowly Earth, we may be assured, when that
Spirit shall be divested of Flesh, he will bring it to Heaven the Temple of his
Glory, to be with him for ever. It Is greater Love for a King to lay aside his
State, and dwell in a mean Cottage with his Favorite, than to receive him into
his Palace, and communicate to him of his rich Abundance. It Is another most
comfortable Consideration, that the Love of God is unvariable toward his
Children: His Love is the sole moving Cause of our filial Relation to him:
James.
Of his own Will he begat us by the Word of Truth. His Sovereign free Love was
the Principle of his electing any to the Dignity of being his Children: This
Love is as unchangeable as free; and Election that proceeds from it, is as
unchangeable as his Love. What can induce him to alter his Affection toward
them? For such is the perfection of his Knowledge, that he can never be
surprised by a sudden new Event, that may cause a change in his Mind and Will.
He foresaw all the Sins of his People, with their provoking Aggravations. Now
if the foresight of them did not hinder his electing Love in its rise, can they
frustrate its end, the bringing of them to Glory?

Besides, we may argue from what his Love has done for his Children, to what he
will do: He has given his Son and Spirit to them, the surest Signs of his Love,
if we consider the unvaluable Excellence of the Gifts, and the Design of the
Giver.

The Son of God is the most excellent Gift of his Love, as undeserved, as he
was undesired: And from hence the Apostle argues, He that gave his Son for us
all, how much more will he with him give us all things? Blessed God! What
richer Evidence, and more convincing Demonstration can there be of thy Love?
Will he not with him give us all things? The Inference is direct and
conclusive, with respect to temporal and eternal Things. He will give to his
Children in the present World, whatever his Wisdom, in conjunction with his
Love, sees good for them. To illustrate this by a low and familiar Instance; If
a Mother bestows upon her Daughter rich Jewels for her Marriage-Ornaments, will
she deny her Pins to dress her? And we may as strongly argue, that with his Son
he will give us eternal Blessings. Will he give us the Tree of Life, and not
permit us to eat of the Fruit of it? What was the design of his Counsel and
Compassion, in giving his Son to be a Sacrifice for us, but to restore us to
his Favor? The Apostle reasons strongly, If when we were Enemies, we were
reconciled to God by the Death of his Son, much more being reconciled, we shall
be saved by his Life. He has paid our Ransom, and reversed the Sentence of
Condemnation against us; and it invincibly follows, he can more easily
accomplish our Happiness in Heaven. If Love justify a Sinner, it will glorify a
Saint.

And as the Gift of the Son, so the most precious Gift of the Spirit to God's
Children, to make them holy and heavenly, is the most certain sign of his Love
to them. The Apostle in the fullest expression speaks of it; God who is rich in
Mercy, for his great Love wherewith he has loved us, even when we were dead in
Sins, quickened us together with Christ: By Grace ye are saved. Sanctification
is the effect of rich Mercy, great Love, and saving Grace. The Children of God
are sealed by the Holy Spirit to the Day of Redemption: that Seal distinguishes
them from the obstinate and polluted World, and ratifies the conveyance of
eternal Life to them. The Spirit is styled the Earnest of the Inheritance. His
dwelling in the Saints by his sanctifying and comforting Operations, is an
Earnest of their dwelling with God in his Sanctuary above. From hence the
Apostle propounds a strong Argument to assure the Saints, upon their leaving
this World, of their reception into Heaven; Now he that has wrought us for the
self-same thing, is God; and the Almighty always obtains his End: who has also
given us the earnest of his Spirit. Holiness is the Morning Star of the great
Day; Grace is the Preparative and Assurance of Glory: For although the Saints are
in themselves mutable, and while there remains Corruption within, and a
tempting World without, are liable to falling away, yet the free and powerful
Love of God that revived them when dead, will preserve them living; that which
raised them from the Grave, will prevent their relapsing into it. The Gifts of
God are without Repentance. How triumphantly does the Apostle express his
Confidence, Romans 8.
Who shall separate us from the Love of God? Shall Tribulation, or Distress, or
Persecution, or Famine, or Nakedness, or Peril, or Sword? These are the most
powerful Terrors that the perverse World, in combination with the Devil, can
make use of to constrain us to desert the Service of God; but they are vain.
Nay, in all these things we are more than Conquerors, through him that loved
us: For I am persuaded, that neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor
Principalities, nor Powers, nor Things present, nor Things to come, nor Height,
nor Depth, nor any other Creature, shall be able to separate us from the Love
of God, that is in Christ Jesus our Lord. This blessed Assurance of the Apostle
is not raised from his extraordinary Privileges, not from the apparition of
Angels to him, nor his rapture to Paradise, nor special Revelations, but from
the Love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord, that everlastingly embraces all his
Children. Briefly, in that God has given his Son to die for us, and his Spirit
to live in us, his Son to purchase and prepare Heaven for us, his Spirit to
prepare us for Heaven, a dying Saint may with blessed Tranquillity commend his
Soul into God's Hands.

I have more particularly considered the Fatherly Love of God, what a strong
Security it affords to his Children, that he will never leave them, in that no
Point requires and deserves more Confirmation, and weight of Argument to press
it down into our distrustful Hearts.

2. The Divine Truth affords a strong Security to the Children of God, to
commend their Souls to him at last. Truth is an Attribute as essential and dear
to God as any of his Perfections. And in the Accomplishment of our Salvation,
he ordered all things becoming to his Wisdom, that is for the illustration of
all his principal Attributes, and accordingly designed the Glory of his Truth
equally with the Honor of his Mercy. Thus he declares to his chosen People,
Know therefore that the Lord thy God, he is God, the faithful God, Deuteronomy. 7.9.
which keeps Covenant and Mercy, with them that love him, and keep his
Commandments. The Attribute that is set next to the Deity, as most sacred, is
the Faithful God; and that further expressed, keeping Covenant and Mercy; for
he delights in fulfilling his Promises, as in the freest Acts of Mercy. The
Psalmist breaks forth with the affectionate Praises of these Attributes, Psalm.
138.2
I will worship toward thy holy Temple, and praise thy Name for thy loving
Kindness and thy Truth: for thou have magnified thy Word above all thy Name.
His Word here immediately signifies his Promise, that has its rise from his
loving Kindness, and its performance from his Truth. This he magnifies both
with respect to the matter of his Promises that are exceeding great and
precious, and the fulfilling them above all that we can ask or think. God
cannot repent or lie; his Counsels are unretractable, from the Immutability of
his Nature; his Promises are infallible, from his Fidelity: they are as
unchangeable as the Sun and Stars in their appointed Courses; Jer. 31.35.
nay, more stable than the Center: for Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but
not a tittle of his Promises, and our Hopes be unfulfilled. If the Frame of
Nature were dissolved, it would be no loss to God, who is glorious and blessed
in his own Perfections: but if his Promises fail, the Honor of his Truth would
be impaired and blemished. The Psalmist says, Those that know thy Name, will
trust in thee: Those who know the Creature, its Levity, Mutability and
Mortality, will be discouraged from trusting in it; but those who know the
eternal Constancy of God in his Nature and Promises, will securely rely upon
him.

Now the Promises, the Declarations of God's Love, without which we cannot have
any solid and sustaining Hope in our Death, assure us of God's receiving the
separate Spirits of his Children. There was a constant clearness, tho not in
that degree of Light as since the appearance of Christ, of the Happiness of the
departed Saints. Dying Jacob breaks forth with a lively Hope, Genesis 49.18.
O Lord, I have waited for thy Salvation. Job says, Tho he kill me, yet will I
trust in him; that is, for his Almighty Mercy in the next State. The Psalmist
expresses his Confidence, Thou will guide me by thy Counsel, Psalm. 73.24
and receive me into thy Glory. After the safe conducting him through a World
of Troubles and Temptations, he would bring him to Heaven, a Place of equal
Purity and Glory. David when he was in pressing Peril, Psalm. 31.5.
addresses to God, Into thy Hands I commend my Spirit, to be preserved as a
precious Depositum; thou have redeemed me, O Lord God of Truth. His Assurance
is built on God's Right and Title to him, Thou have redeemed me, and his
everlasting Fidelity. The Apostle speaks with full assurance, We know that 2
Cor. 5.1.
if our earthly House of this Tabernacle be dissolved, we have a Building of
God eternal in the Heavens. And, we are confident, I say, rather to be absent
from the Body, and present with the Lord. St. Peter encourages Christians when
surrounded with Death, to commit their Souls to him: 1 Pet. 4.1.
Wherefore let them that suffer according to the Will of God, commit the
keeping of their Souls to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator. He
encourages them to encounter Death in its most formidable Pomp, by considering
their Souls shall be safe for ever, upon the account of God's Right and
Interest in them, and his Fidelity: he has an original Right in them by the
first Creation, as they are intellectual immortal Spirits in their Nature, but
a nearer and more especial Right by a new and nobler Creation, as they are
renewed Spirits, made like to him in his Holiness, the most Divine Perfection.
The Relation of Creator implies his omnipotent Love, and the Attribute of
Faithful, his eternal Love declared in his Promises. There can never be the
least cause to charge him with Insincerity or Inconstancy. The Favor of God is
round about the Righteous as a Shield: Psalm. 5.
And his Faithfulness is round about him, Psalm. 89.
that he is always ready to perform his Promise to them. They may safely trust
the worth of their Souls, and the weight of Eternity with him, who has said, he
will never leave them, nor forsake them.

Besides, the Promise of a Reward to the obedient Children of God, is secured
not only by his Fidelity, but the declared Equity of his Proceedings in his
final Judgment. It Is a Regality invested in the Crown of Heaven to dispense
Rewards: Whoever comes to God, Heb. 11.6.
must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently
seek him. His Being and rewarding Bounty are the Foundations of Religion. It Is
true, such is the Distance between God and the Creature, and the eternal
Obligations of it to God, that it can challenge nothing from God, as due to its
Merit. Justice unqualified with Bounty and Clemency, owes nothing to the most
excellent Obedience of the Creature, tho innocent. But since the Fall, our best
Works are defective and defiled, and want Pardon; and our heaviest Sufferings
are but light in the Balance, against the exceeding Weight of Glory. But the
Apostle tells the Thessalonians, It is a righteous thing with God to recompense
Tribulation to them who trouble you: and to you who are troubled, rest with us.
Consider them in the Comparison; It Is becoming his governing Justice to punish
the unrighteous Persecutors, and reward his faithful Servants who suffer for
his Glory. Now the present Life is the Day for our Work, as our Savior says,
I must do the Work of him that sent me, while it is called to Day: And at Death,
the Spirit returns to God that gave it, in order to Judgment, either fatal or
favorable, according to the tenor of Men's good Works, and the desert of their
bad. The Promise is to them, who by patient continuance in well-doing, Romans 2.
seek for Glory, and Honor, and Immortality, they shall obtain eternal Life.
Our Savior encourages his suffering Servants, Be faithful to the Death, and I
will give you the Crown of Life. The complete Reward is reserved to the great
Day of universal Recompenses, when the Sons of God by Regeneration, shall be
the Sons of a glorious Resurrection. But the righteous Judge will give a present
Reward at the end of the Day, Luke 20.35.
to all that with unfainting Perseverance have performed his Work. Our Savior
tells us, Mat. 20.9.
that all who wrought in the Vineyard, received their Rewards in the last Hour
of the Day: The Parallel is instructive, that when the Night of Death comes,
the Reward will be dispensed. There is a Law recorded concerning the paying
Wages to those who were hired, that it should be in the end of the Day; that it
should not be detained all Night with thee until the Morning. Deuteronomy. 24.15.
The Allusion is very congruous, that God will fulfill his own Law to his Sons
that serve him. The Reward shall not abide with him the long dark Interval, the
Night, wherein their Bodies sleep in the Grave, till the Morning of the
Resurrection. Our Savior promised the dying Penitent, To day shall thou be
with me in Paradise. The End of our Faith is immediately attended with the
Salvation of the Soul: The Labor of Faith being finished, is productive of the
beatifick Vision in the State of Light and Glory. The Sum is, That the Children
of God, who have by constant Conversation sincerely endeavored to please and
glorify him, may with an entire Resignation commit their Souls to his Hands, as
if an Angel were sent from Heaven to them in their dying Agonies, with the
comfortable Message, that they should presently be with God.

3. The Divine Power, in conjunction with Love and Truth, is the Foundation of
our secure dependence upon God in our last Hours. This Consideration is
absolutely necessary for our sure Trust: For Love without Power is ineffectual,
and Power without Love of no comfortable Advantage to us. The Apostle gives
this reason of his cheerful and courageous Sufferings in the Service of God,
For I know in whom I have believed, 2 Timothy 1.
and am persuaded he is able to keep what I have committed to him, till that
Day. His Faith respected the Promises of God concerning his Salvation, which
are infinitely sure, the Divine Power being alsufficient to fulfill them. The
precious Depositum that is committed to his dear Care, he can and will preserve
inviolate. The Father of sincere Believers, is the Lord of Heaven and Earth,
who by his Word, without the least strain of his Power, made the World, and
preserves it from falling into Confusion. It Is the Essence of Faith, to assure
us of God's Almighty Mercy to all that have the true Characters of his
Children, that are qualified for his Salvation. Our Redeemer joins the two
Relations of our Father and our God; the gracious and the glorious Relation are
inseparable. Now the Love of our heavenly Father engages the Power of our God,
that we shall want nothing to secure our Happiness, that is within the object
of Omnipotence.

I shall insist no further upon the Consideration of the Divine Power, because
it will return under some of the following Heads of Discourse.

II. The Blessedness of this Privilege is to be unfolded. This will appear by
considering,

First, What is the Depositum, the Thing that is entrusted in God's Hands.

Secondly, What is implied in his receiving of it.

In answer to the first; It Is the Soul, the more excellent and immortal Part of
Man, that is commended to God's keeping.

1.'It Is our more excellent Part in its Nature and Capacity. Man is a compounded
Creature, of a Body and a Soul: the Body in its Original and Resolution is
Earth; the Soul is of a divine Descent, a spiritual Substance, and in the
Nobility and Perfections of its Nature, but a little lower than the Angels:
it is the vile Body, but the precious Soul.

In its Capacity it incomparably excels the Body; for the Body lives and moves
in the low Region of the Senses, that are common with the Worms of the Earth;
but the Soul in its Understanding and Desires, is capable of Communion with the
blessed God, of Grace and Glory. From hence it is, that the whole World cannot
make one Man happy; for the Ingredients of true and complete Happiness are the
Perfection and Satisfaction of the Soul. The Apostle tells us, The less is
blessed of the greater. Can the World bring Perfection to Man, that is so
incomparably short of his Imperfection? Our Savior assures us, the Gain of the
whole World cannot recompense the Loss of one Soul. There is a vast Circuit in
our Desires, and all the Lines terminate in the Center of Blessedness. Can the
World give sincere Satisfaction to them? Solomon who was as rich and high as
the World could make him, has left an everlasting Testimony of the Vanity of
transient Things, from his experimental Observation, and the Direction of the
Holy Spirit: So he begins and ends his Sermon, Eccles. 1.1. and 12.8.
Vanity of Vanities, all is Vanity; so vain and vexing, that we shall not only
be weary of them, but of this Life, Eccl. 1.17.
wherein we use them. Can the Creature make us happy, when their Emptiness, and
Anguish annexed to it, makes our Lives miserable? The World cannot satisfy our
narrow Senses: The Eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the Ear with hearing,
much less the infinite Desires of our supreme Faculties. Those who are now
enchanted with its Allurements, within a little while will see through its
false Colors. As when one awakes, all the pleasant Scenes of Fancy in his
Dream vanish; so when the Soul is awakened in the End of Life, the World and
the Lusts thereof pass away, and the remembrance of them.

I shall add further; What clearer Evidence can we have of the worth of the
Soul, than from God's Esteem, the Creator of it? Now when God foresaw the
Revolture of our first Parent, that brought him under a double Death in one
Sentence, temporal and eternal, and that all Mankind was desperately lost in
him, then his compassionate Counsels were concerning his Recovery: His Love and
Wisdom accorded to contrive the Means to accomplish our Redemption, by the
Death of his incarnate Son: 1 Pet. 1.
We are not redeemed with Silver and Gold, but with the precious Blood of
Christ, as a Lamb without spot and blemish. Of what value is a Soul in God's
account, that he bought with his own Son's Blood, the most sacred Treasure of
Heaven? We may say for the Honor of our Redeemer and our own, O anima! erige
te, tantivales. Aug. in Psalm. 103.
that which the Angels cannot, we were so valued by God himself, that his Son
became Man, and died on the Cross for the Salvation of our Souls. I shall only
mention another Evidence and Effect of God's valuation of our Souls, that is,
the eternal Weight of Glory, which exceeds all the Thoughts of our Minds, and
Desires of our Hearts. What are all the Kingdoms and Pleasures of the World, in
comparison of that Blessedness God has prepared for those who love him? Now the
Soul that is inestimably precious, and should be most dear to us, is secured
from Danger, when received by God's Hands.

2. The Soul is our immortal Part. The Body is compounded of jarring
Principles, frail and mortal: A Casualty or Sickness dissolves the vital Union,
and it falls to the Dust. But the Soul is a Spirit by Nature, and immortal by
its inherent Property. Its spiritual Operations performed without the ministry
of the Senses, (the Eye of the Mind contemplates its Objects, when the Eyes of
the Body are closed) demonstrate its spiritual Nature: for the Being is the
Root of its working, and consequently that it exists independently upon the
Body: But of this we have the clearest assurance in the Scripture. This is
another demonstration that present Things cannot make us happy, for they
forsake us the first step we take into the next World, and then the Soul enters
into Happiness or Misery equally eternal. The Immortality of the Soul, and the
Immutability of its State, are inseparable then; for the present Life is the
time of our Work, the next is of Recompenses according to our Works. If we die
in the Lord, the Consequence is infallible, we shall live with him for ever: If
we die in our Sins, we shall not be received by his merciful Hands, but fall
into his bottomless Displeasure. And of what concernment is it to have our
Souls with God in that infinite and incomprehensible Duration? All the Measures
of Time, Days and Weeks, Months and Years, and Ages, are swallowed up in that
invisible Depth, as the Rivers that pour into the Sea, are swallowed up without
any overflowing of its Waters. The Dove that Noah let out of the Ark, as a Spy
to discover whether the Deluge was abated, found not a Place to rest on; but
after many Circuits in the Air, it returned to the Ark. If our Thoughts take
wing, and multiply Millions of Millions of Ages, we cannot rest in any
Computation, for there remains after all an entire innumerable Eternity.

Secondly, I will consider more particularly what is contained in this blessed
Privilege: The reception of the Soul into God's Hands, implies three things. 1.
Entire Safety. 2. Heavenly Felicity. 3. It Is a certain Pledge of the reviving of
the Body, and its reunion with the Soul in the State of Glory.


1. Entire Safety. After Death the separate Soul of a true Believer immediately
passes through the airy and Ethereal Regions to the highest Heaven, the Temple
of God, the native Seat and Element of blessed Spirits. The Air is possessed by
Satan with his Confederate Army, who are Rebels to God, and Enemies to the
Souls of Men: he is styled the Prince of the Power of the Air: Ephesians. 2.
He often raises Storms and Tempests, discharges Thunder and Lightning, the
woeful Effects of which are felt in the lower World. The Numbers, the Strength,
and the Malice of the evil Angels to the Souls of Men, render them very
terrible: We may conjecture at their Number, from what is related in the
Gospel, Mark 5.
that a Legion possessed one Man. They are superior Spirits to Man, and tho
stripped of their moral Excellencies, Holiness, Goodness and Truth, yet retain
their natural Power at least in great degrees. Their Malice is unquenchable.
It Is said of the Devil, He goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may
devour. All the Joy those malignant Spirits are capable of, is the involving
the Souls of Men in their desperate Calamity. And tho they know their opposing
God will increase their Guilt and Torment, yet their Diligence is equal to
their Malice, to seduce, pervert and ruin Souls for ever. Now when the Saints
die, all the Powers of Darkness would, if possible, hinder the ascension of
their Souls to God. What David complains of his cruel Enemies, is applicable in
this case, Their Souls are among Lions; and if destitute of divine
Preservation, the Danger would be the same; as if a little Flock of Lambs were
to encounter with a great number of fierce Lions, or fiery Dragons. Anger sets
an edg upon Power, and makes a Combatant but of equal Strength to overcome. How
dangerous then would the Condition be of naked Souls, opposed by over-matching
Enemies, armed with Rage against them? How easily would they hurry them to the
Abyss, the Den of Dragons, the Prison where lost Souls are secured to the Day
of Judgment?

But all the Potentates of Hell are infinitely inferior to God: they are
restrained and tortured by the Chains of his powerful Justice: a Legion of them
could not enter into the Swine without his permission, much less can they touch
the Apple of his Eye. That black Prince with all his infernal Host cannot
intercept one naked Soul from arriving at the Kingdom of Glory. Our Savior
assures us, None is able to pluck them out of his Father's Hands. John 10.
The Lord Christ our Head and Leader, having vanquished in his last Battle on
the Cross, Principalities and Powers, made his triumphant Ascension to Glory:
Thus his Members having overcome their spiritual Enemies, shall by the same
Almighty Power be carried through the Dominions of Satan, in the sight of their
Enemies, (tormented with the remembrance of their lost Happiness, and Envy that
humane Souls should partake of it) to the Place of God's glorious Residence.

I shall also observe, that as the Lord is a God of Power, so he is a God of
Order, and uses subordinate Means for the accomplishment of his Will. Our
Savior has revealed, that the Angels transport the separate Souls of the
Righteous to Heaven: Those glorious Spirits, who always behold the Face of God,
such is their exact Obedience to him, and perfect Love to his Children, that
they disdain not to protect his little ones in this open State. Mat. 18.10
They rejoice at the Conversion of Sinners, at their first entrance into the
Way of Life, and with tender watchfulness encompass them here, never
withdrawing their protecting Presence, till they bring them to their celestial
Country, and resign their Charge to the Lord of Life. How safe are the departed
Saints, when conveyed through Satan's Territories by the Royal Guard of Angels
that excel in strength?

2. Heavenly Felicity. The receiving of holy Souls into God's Hands, is
introductive into his Presence, which is both a Sanctuary to secure us from all
Evil, and a Storehouse to furnish us with all that is good. The Lord is a Sun
and a Shield: he is to intellectual Beings, what the Sun is to sensitive,
communicates Light and Life, and Joy to them. In his Presence is fullness of
Joy, Psalm. 16.11
at his right Hand are Rivers of Pleasure for ever. All that is evil and
afflicting, is abolished: all that is desirable, is conferred upon his
Children. A glimpse or reflected Ray of his reconciled and favorable
Countenance, even in this lower World, infuses into the Hearts of his Children
a Joy unspeakable and glorious: a taste of the Divine Goodness here, causes a
disrelish of all the carnal Sweets, the dreggy Delights which natural Men so
greedily desire. And if the faint Dawn be so reviving and comfortable, what is
the Brightness of the full Day? None can understand the Happiness that results
from the full and eternal sight of God's Face, and the fruition of his Love,
but those who enjoy the Presence of God in perfection. His Goodness is truly
infinite; the more the Saints above know it, and enjoy it, the more they esteem
it, and delight in it. His complete and communicative Love satisfies the
immense Desires of that innumerable Company of blessed Spirits that are before
his Throne: there is no Envy, no Avarice, no Ambition in that Kingdom, where
God is all in all.

The Divine Presence is an ever-flowing Fountain of Felicity. The continual
reflection upon this, makes Heaven to be Heaven to the Blessed: their Security
is as valuable as their Felicity: they are above all danger of losing it.
Methinks the belief of this should cause us, as it were with Wings of Fire,
with most ardent Desires to fly to the Bosom of God, the alone Center of our
Souls, where we shall rest for ever.

3. The reception of the Soul into Heaven is a certain Pledge of the
Resurrection of the Body, and its reunion with the Soul in the State of Glory.
The Covenant of God was made with the entire Persons of Believers: therefore
under the Law the sacred Seal of it was in their Flesh. To be the God of
Promise to them, implies his being a blessed Rewarder to them. Our Savior
silences the Sadduces, who disbeliev'd the Resurrection, from the tenor of
God's Covenant, I am the God of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, which Title he
was pleased to retain after their Death; Now God is not the God of the Dead,
but of the Living. The immediate Inference from thence is, that their Souls did
actually live in Blessedness, and that their Bodies, tho dead to Nature, were
alive to God with respect to his Promise and Power. If we consider that the
Divine Law binds the outward Man as well as the inward, and that during the
time of our Work and Trial here, our Service and Sufferings for the Glory of
God are from the concurrence of the Soul and Body, it will appear that the
Promise of the Reward belongs to both, and that the receiving of the Soul into
Heaven, is an earnest of our full Redemption, even that of the Body. It Is true,
there is no visible Difference between the Bodies of the Saints and of the
Wicked here; they are sick with the same Diseases, and die in the same manner.
As it is with Trees in deep Winter, when they are covered with Snow, we cannot
distinguish which are absolutely dead and destined to the Ax and Fire, and
which retain their Sap, and will be fruitful and flourishing in the returning
Year: so the dead Bodies of the Godly and Ungodly, to external appearance, are
alike: But what a vast difference will be between them in the next World! The
Bodies of the Ungodly, in conjunction with their Souls, shall be cast into the
Lake of Fire; the Bodies of the Godly resumed by their Souls, shall enjoy a
full and flourishing Happiness for ever.

The Application.
1. This may inform us of the contrary States into which dying Persons
immediately pass: The Children of God resign their Spirits to the Hands of
their gracious Heavenly Father, but Rebels and Strangers to God, fall into the
Hands of a revenging Judge. Could we see the attending Spirits that surround
sick Persons in their last Hours, what a wonderful Impression would it make
upon us? A Guard of glorious Angels convey the departed Saints to the Bosom of
God's Love, and the Kingdom of his Glory. But when the Wicked die, a Legion of
Furies sieze upon their expected Prey, and hurry them to the infernal Prison,
from whence there is no redemption.

How many Rebels and open Enemies to God are in the Pale of the Christian
Church? They will loudly repeat, Our Father which art in Heaven,
notwithstanding the impudent and palpable Atheism of their Lives: they live as
if they were independent, and not accountable to him who will judge the World
without respect of Persons. The more strict his Commands are, the Contempt of
them is more visible. Our Savior's Prohibition is peremptory, I say unto you,
Swear not at all: but how many make no more conscience of Swearing than they do
of Speaking, and pour forth Oaths of all fashions and sizes. We are severely
forbid all degrees of Impurity, in the Look, in Words, or in Wish; yet how many
without reflection or remorse, continue in the deepest Pollutions! We are
commanded to live soberly in this present World; yet how many indulge their
swinish Appetites, and debase themselves even below the Beasts that perish. And
as the sensual Appetites are notoriously predominant in some, so the angry
Appetite is tyrannous in others. Pride, Wrath, Revenge, possess the Breasts of
many: How often for a slight, or but reputed Injury, they are so fired with
Passion, that their hot Blood cannot be satisfied without the cold Blood of
their Enemies. In short, many live in such open defiance of the Divine Law, as
if there were no God to see and punish their Sins, or as if they would make a
trial whether he will be true to his Threatening, and revenge their bold
Impieties: They are partly worse than Brutes; for having an understanding
Faculty, a Principle of Reason, they submit it to Sense: and partly worse than
Devils; for as the Devils, they rebel against God, and yet not, as they,
tremble in their Rebellion. Now when Death is ready with its cold Hands to
close their Eyes, and Conscience awakes out of its Slumber, what Horrors seize
upon them! They are stripped of their carnal Securities, the Creature cannot
help them, and the Creator will not. They have been Enemies to that Love that
made them and preserved them, and, notwithstanding their violent Provocations,
has spared them so long. They have rejected that infinitely condescending and
compassionate Love, that so tenderly beseech'd them to be reconciled to God, as
if it were his Interest to save them. Whither will they fly from their Judge?
What can rescue them from instant and irrecoverable Misery? Can they hope that
Mercy will be their Advocate? Their Condemnation is so righteous, that Mercy
cannot dispense with it. It Is a fearful thing to fall into the Hands of the
living God, who lives for ever, and can punish for ever. Who knows the Power of
his Wrath? It Is boundless beyond all our Thoughts and Time. O take notice of
this with Terror, all ye that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces, Psalm. 50.
and there be none to deliver!

Others are not so visibly disobedient as notorious Sinners, but are as really.
You may see their Picture in the disobedient Son, mentioned by our Savior in
the Gospel, Matthew. 21.28, 30.
who when his Father commanded him to go work in the Vineyard, answered, I go,
Sir, and went not. It Is true, they perform the external part of some Duties,
and abstain from the gross acts of some Sins, but it is with an exception and a
reserve. A Duty that is contrary to their carnal Appetites and Interest, they
will not perform; a Sin that bribes them with Profit or Pleasure, a
temperamental Sin, they will not part with. Now any indulged habitual Lust is
not the Spot of God's Children, but denominates the Sinner a Child of the
Devil: for tho the Saints till they are divested of frail Flesh, have their
Allays, and cannot be exempt from the relics of Sin; yet the Divine Nature
communicated to them, is opposite to every Sin, and is an active Principle to
subdue Sin.

And from hence S. John tells us, He that is born of God, cannot sin, that is,
deliberately and habitually: Such Sinners, tho in the Hour of Death they may
address with all the applying Titles, Our Father, and our God, shall ever be
excluded from his sacred and saving Protection.

2. Let us seriously consider whether we are of this spiritual Progeny, the
Children of God, not only in Title, but in Reality. The Inquiry is of infinite
moment; for all the Promises and Privileges of the Gospel are annexed to this
Sonship: This secures us from the Wrath to come, and entitles us to the eternal
Inheritance; Fear not, Luke 12.
little Flock, it is your Father's good Pleasure to give you the Kingdom. This
Inquiry is very useful to calm and quiet the troubled Saints, and to awaken
unregenerate Persons out of their confident Dream of their good State. Many
sincere Christians are infinitely concerned whether they are the Children of
God; of this their Tears and Fears give abundant evidence. The reasons of their
Doubts are partly the Jealousy of their own Hearts, which are naturally
deceitful above all things, and most deceitful to a Man's self; and partly from
the consequence of the Deceit: for knowing the inestimable value of this
Privilege, to be the Sons of God, and that if they are deceived in it, they are
undone for ever, they are anxiously thoughtful about it. But carnal Persons who
are not acquainted with the Hypocrisy of their Hearts, nor duly understand the
excellence of the Privilege, easily believe what they coldly desire. And the
great deceiver of Souls is equally subtle to varnish what is evil with the
false colors of Good, and to conceal what is good under the appearance of
Evil. From hence it is, that many tender-spirited Christians are timorous, and
full of unquiet Agitations all their Lives: and many who have but a show and
fair pretense of Religion, are undisturbed and hopeful, till at last they fall
from their supposed Heaven and high Hopes, into the Abyss of Misery.

This Trial will be most clear and convincing, by representing from Scripture
the inseparable Properties and Characters of the Children of God, that
distinguish them from all that are in the State of unrenewed Nature. The
Apostle tells sincere Christians, The Spirit it self witnesses with our
Spirits, that we are the Children of God. Here is a Consent and Agreement of
those Witnesses, in whom are all that is requisite to give value to their
Testimony. For the Spirit of God, such is his unerring Knowledge, who searches
the deep things of God, and such is the absolute Sanctity of his Nature, that
he can neither deceive nor be deceived, so that his Testimony is infinitely
sure, and of more worth than the concurrent Testimony of Heaven and Earth, of
Angels and Men. The other Witness is the renewed Conscience, that is acquainted
with the Aims and Affections of the Heart, as the Apostle says, Who knows the
things of a Man, save the Spirit of a Man? This Faculty reflects upon our
Actions, and the Principles of them: to this Faculty is referred the decision
of our spiritual State; If our Hearts condemn us not of any allowed Sin, 1
John. ^.
then have we Peace toward God. From the consent and agreement of these
Witnesses, there is a blessed Assurance of our Evangelical Sonship, that
overcomes all our Fears. Now this Testimony is rational and argumentative, from
the discovery of those Graces that constitute a Person the Child of God. I will
make the Inquiry concerning the Grace of Faith and of Love, which are the vital
Bands of our Union with Christ, the principal Fruits of the sanctifying Spirit,
and the Symptoms of Salvation.

(1.) The Grace of Faith is expressed in Scripture by receiving of Christ: Joh.
1.12.
this answers to God's offer of him to our acceptance in the Gospel. It
receives him entirely in his Person and Natures, as the incarnate Son of God;
and in his Office, as a Prince and Savior, Acts 5.31.
to give Repentance and remission of Sins. This receiving Christ implies an Act
of the Understanding and the Will; the Understanding assents to the Truth of
the Divine Revelation, that Christ crucified is an alsufficient Savior; and
the Will closes with the Terms of it, that he will save to the uttermost all
that obey him: From hence it follows, that reliance upon him, and a sincere
resolution to obey him, are necessarily included in saving Faith. This
Scripture-Account distinguishes between that substantial Faith that is proper
to the elect Children of God, and the Shadow of it in the Unregenerate; the one
is the intimate and active Principle of Obedience, the other is a dead Assent
without Efficacy, a mere Carcass and Counterfeit of Faith. A sincere Believer
as fervently desires to be saved from the Dominion and Pollution of his Sins,
as from the Guilt and deadly Malignity: a carnal Man desires an Interest in
Christ as a Savior, that he may securely enjoy his Lusts.

The crafty and cursed Serpent deceives Men to their ruin, by citing
Scripture, and misapplying it. The Promise is sure, Whoever believes, shall be
saved; and he easily persuades them they are Believers. It Is strange to
astonishment, that Men who have Reason and Understanding, should presume in a
high degree of the present Favor of God, and their future Happiness, as if
they were his dear Children, when their Enmity against his holy Name and Will
is evident in their Actions.

We can never have too firm a dependence on God's Promise, when we are
qualified for that Dependence. Come out from among them, 2 Cor. 6.17, 18.
and be ye separate, says the Lord; and touch not the unclean thing, and I
will receive you, and will be a Father to you, says the Lord Almighty. Faith
that purifies the Heart and Conversation, invests us with this blessed
Privilege, and all the saving Mercies annexed to it.

(2.) From the spiritual Relation between God and Believers, there naturally
and necessarily results a sincere, dutiful, child-like Love to him,
correspondent to his beneficent and fatherly Love to them: This God
indispensably requires, and specially delights in; Thou love Truth in the
inward Parts. Psalm. 51.
Filial Obedience is inseparable from filial Love in its Reality: For this is
the Love of God, 1 John 5.3.
that we keep his Commandments. Our Savior distinguishes between sincere
Lovers of him, and pretended, that they who love him, keep his Commandments;
John 14.23, 24.
but they who love him not, keep not his Commandments.

The Obedience that springs from Love to God, is uniform, respects all his
Commands: for the two filial Affections, an ardent Desire to please God in all
things, and an ingenuous Fear of displeasing him in any thing, are inseparably
joined with our Love to him.

The Obedience that proceeds from Love, is free and voluntary, from Inclination
as well as Duty. How passionately does the holy Psalmist express his Affection,
O how I love thy Law! In the Covenant of Grace, God promises to write his Law
in the Hearts of his Children: Heb. 8.10.
not only in their Minds and Memories, but to endear it to their Affections.
There is much difference between servile and constrained Obedience, and filial
chosen Obedience, as between the Motion of a living Man from the Soul, the
inward Spring of Life, and the Motion of an Image or Statue from forcible
Weights and Wheels.

From filial Love proceeds godly Sorrow, if at any time by Carelessness and
Surprise, or an over powering Temptation, on, his Children do what is offensive
and odious in his sight. When they consider their unkind and unthankful Returns
for his Mercies, they look to their Heavenly Father with Grief and Shame, and
down upon themselves with Abhorrence and Indignation: They are wounded with the
sting of that Expostulation, Do ye thus requite the Lord, Deuteronomy. 32.6
O foolish People and unwise? Is he not thy Father who bought thee?

From filial Love proceeds a Zeal for his Glory; If I be a Father, where is my
Honor? A Child of God is dearly concerned that his Name be reverenced and
magnified, his Laws be observed, his Worship maintained, that his Interest be
advanced in the World. He has a burning Zeal against Sin and presumptuous
Sinners. Psalm. 69.
The Prophet Elijah says, I have been jealous for the Lord of Hosts: for the
Children of Israel have forsaken thy Covenant, and thrown down thine Altars.
Those who with an indifferent Eye see the Cause, the Truth, the Interest of God
depressed in the World, do renounce the Title of his Children.

From the Relation to God as his Sons, proceeds a sincere fervent Love to all
the Saints. St. John infers, 1 John 5.1.
Every one that loves him that begat, loves him that is begotten. Grace is not
less powerful in producing cordial mutual Affections between the Children of
the same Heavenly Father, than the subordinate Endearments of Nature.
Notwithstanding the civil Distinction between them, some high and rich, others
mean and poor, yet there is a spiritual Equality; the lowest Saints are Princes
of the Blood Royal of Heaven. To him that has washed us from our Sins in his
Blood, Revel. 1.
and made us Kings and Priests to God, be Glory for ever.

The filial Relation to God inclines and encourages all sincere Christians to
resign themselves, even in their most afflicted Condition, to the Wisdom and
Will of God. Our Savior meekly yielded up himself to his cruel Enemies, upon
this Consideration, The Cup which my Father has given me, Joh. 18.11
shall I not drink it? The Saints in imitation of Christ, and upon the same
Ground, entirely resign themselves to the Divine Disposal; for their Heavenly
Father loves them better than they can love themselves.

Finally, The filial Relation to God is productive as of lively Hopes, so of
ardent Desires to be with him. Love makes them to esteem Communion with him
here in his holy Ordinances, as the Joy of their Lives. The Psalmist when
banished from the Tabernacle, breaks forth in his impatient Desires, Psalm. 43.
When shall I come and appear before God? that is, in the Place where he
communicates his Grace to those that worship him. But our Father is in Heaven
as his Throne, and most gloriously exhibits himself to his Saints there. The
Earth is the Element and Residence of carnal Men, of their Souls as well as
their Bodies: They desire their Inheritance may be on this side Jordan, and are
content to leave the Heavenly Canaan to those who like it. But those who are
born from above, desire to be dissolved, that they may be in their Father's
House, and his reviving Presence for ever.

3. Let us be persuaded to prepare for the reception of our Souls in the next
World. The present Life is a Passage to Eternity, and it is so short and fading,
so uncertain and hazardous, that it is our principal Wisdom without delay to
secure our Souls in the future State. Our Savior says, I must work the Work of
him that sent me while it is Day: John 9.4.
the Night comes when no Man can work. Now is the accepted Time, now is the
Day of Salvation. It Is our indispensable Duty and main Interest now, to work
out our own Salvation with fear and trembling. In the state of Death there is
an Incapacity to do any thing in order to Salvation: There is no Work nor
Wisdom in the Grave: and all the Offers of Salvation cease for ever. The
Sufferings of the Son of God are not a Ransom for Sinners in that State: He
reconciled things in Earth and in Heaven, but not things in Hell. The Golden
Scepter is extended to none there, the Holy Spirit strives with none, they are
without the Reserves of Mercy. The Guilt of Sin remains in its full Obligation,
the Pollution of Sin in its deepest Die, and the Punishment of Sin in its
Extremity for ever.

O what Folly is it, or rather Frenzy, not to provide for our Souls in their
greatest Exigence! Common Reason instructs us, knowing our own Weakness, to
commit our Treasure to the custody of our Friends, which we cannot otherwise
keep from our Enemies; especially to such a Friend as can and will preserve it
for our Use and Advantage. The Soul is our Jewel above all Price, it is our
Wisdom to secure it out of all danger: Let us therefore commit it to the safe
and sure Hands of our Heavenly Father, otherwise we cannot preserve it from the
infernal Spirits, the Robbers and Murderers of Souls.

The wise Preacher denounces a fearful Evil, Woe be to him that is alone when he
falls; Eccl. 4.10.
for he has not another to help him up. In all the Senses of falling, Death is
the greatest Fall: the High, the Honorable, the Rich, fall from all their
State; and Men of all Degrees are forsaken of all their carnal Comforts and
Supports. If then the solitary Soul has not a God to receive, support and
comfort it, how woeful is its Condition! Methinks the apprehension of this
should strike a Terror so deep into the Hearts of Men, that they should be
restless till they have secured a Retreat for their departing Souls.

For this end let us, according to the earnest Advice of St. Peter, 2 Pet. 3.
be diligent, that we may be found of him in Peace, without spot, and blameless.

The Lord Jesus is the only Peacemaker of the righteous and holy God to
Sinners. The Judge of this World is flaming with Wrath, and terrible in
Vengeance to Sinners that appear before his Tribunal out of Christ. We shall
for ever be excluded from his blessed Communion, without the Mediator restore
us to his Favor. Our Reconciliation only is by Redemption in his Blood. Col.
1.20.
The Chastisement of our Peace was upon him. Isa. 53.
He is the Lord our Righteousness, by whom alone we can stand in Judgment. God
was in Christ reconciling the World to himself. There is now an Act of Oblivion
offered in the Gospel to all that come to God by him. We have sure Salvation in
his Name: But we must with consenting Wills, close with him as our Lord and
Life. The first Gospel preached by the Angel after his coming into the World,
declares, There was born in the City of David a Savior, Christ the Lord. We
must not separate between Christ the Savior, and Christ the Lord; between his
Salvation and his Dominion. God indispensably requires we should resign our
selves to his Son as our King, and rely upon him as our Priest to atone his
Displeasure. If we thus receive him, he will restore us to the Favor and Peace
of God, established in an everlasting Covenant.

How tenderly and compassionately does the great God invite Sinners to re-enter
into his Favor, to acquaint our selves with him, and to be at peace! His
Ambassadors in his Name, and in Christ's stead beseech them to be reconciled
to God. But their perverse Spirits would have God reconciled to them, that they
might be exempt from Punishment; but are unwilling to be reconciled to him, to
part with their Lusts. In short, reconciliation with God necessarily infers
defiance with Sin. Ye that love the Lord hate Evil. If Men do not cease their
Rebellion, there is no shadow of hope to obtain the Divine Favor.

Do ye provoke the Lord to Jealousy, are you stronger than he? Jealousy is
the most sensible and severe Affection. As it is with a Town taken by storm, all
that are found in Arms are without Mercy cut off; so all that at Death are
found with the weapons of unrighteousness, their unrepented unforsaken Sins
about them, must expect Judgment without Mercy.

Lastly, Let the Children of God be encouraged with Peace and Joy to commend
their Souls to him. Let rebellious Sinners tremble with deadly Fear upon the
brink of Eternity; but let the Saints, with a lively Hope, enter into the
Divine World.

If Men possess their Treasure with Joy and Jealousy, and guard it with
vigilant Care, will not God preserve his dearest Treasure, the Souls of his
Children committed to his Trust?

Can Love forsake, can Truth deceive, can Almighty Power fail? Will a Father, a
heavenly Father, be without Bowels to his own Offspring? No, he cannot deny
himself: he is readiest to relieve, when they are in distress.

Old Simeon is a leading Example to Believers: after he had embraced Christ in
his Arms, how earnestly did he desire his Dissolution? Lord, now let thou
thy Servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy Salvation. St. Stephen
in the midst of a shower of Stones, with a blessed Tranquillity, makes his dying
Prayer, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit. If the Fears of humble Souls arise in
that hour, because they have not the Conspicuous marks of God's Children, the
Graces of the Spirit in that degree of Eminency, as some Saints have had: Let
them consider, there are different Ages among the Children of God: some are in
a state of Infancy and Infirmity; others are more Confirmed: but the relation
is the same in all, and gives an interest in his promised Mercy. The weakness
of their Faith cannot frustrate God's faithfulness. It Is the Sincerity, not the
Strength of Grace, that is requisite to Salvation. If Faith be shaking as a
bruised reed, and but kindling as the smoking flax, it shall be victorious. O
that these powerful Comforts may encourage dying Christians to commend their
Souls with Ardency and Assurance to God, their Father, and Felicity.

I have now finished my Discourse upon the Text, and shall apply my self to
speak of the other Subject, the Reverend Mr. Richard Baxter, that Excellent
Instrument of Divine Grace, to recover and restore so many revolted Souls to
God, out of the Empire of his Enemy: or in the Apostles Language, to translate
them from the Kingdom of Darkness, into the Kingdom of his dear Son. I am
sensible, that in speaking of him I shall be under a double Disadvantage: For
those who perfectly knew him, will be apt to think my Account of him to be
short and defective, an imperfect Shadow of his resplendent Virtues: others who
were unacquainted with his extraordinary Worth, will from Ignorance or Envy be
inclined to think his just Praises to be undue and excessive. Indeed if Love
could make me eloquent, I should use all the most lively and graceful Colors
of Language to ^dorn his Memory: but this Consideration relieves me in the
Consciousness of my Disability, that a plain Narrative of what Mr. Baxter was,
and did, will be a most noble Eulogy: and that his substantial Piety no more
needs artificial Oratory to set it off, than refined Gold wants Paint to add
Luster and Value to it.

I shall not speak of his Parentage, and his first Years: but I must not omit a
Testimony I received concerning his early Piety. His Father said with Tears of
Joy to a Friend, my Son Richard I hope was sanctified from the Womb: for when
he was a little Boy in Coats, if he heard other Children in play speak profane
Words, he would reprove them to the Wonder of those that heard him.

He had not the Advantage of Academical Education: but by the Divine Blessing
upon his rare Dexterity and Diligence, his Sacred Knowledge was in that Degree
of Eminence, as few in the University ever arrive to. Not long after his
Entrance into the Ministry the Civil War began, and the Times rained Blood so
long, till the languishing State of the Kingdom, was almost desperate and
incurable. How far he was concerned as a Chaplain in the Parliament's Army, he
has published an Account, and the reasons of it.

After the War, he was fixed at Kederminster. There his Ministry by the Divine
Influence, was of admirable Efficacy. The Harvest answered the Seed that was
sowed. Before his coming, the Place was like a Piece of dry and barren Earth,
only Ignorance and Profaneness as Natives of the Soil were rise among them;
but by the Blessing of Heaven upon his Labor and Cultivating, the Face of
Paradise appeared there in all the Fruits of Righteousness. Many were
translated from the state of polluted Nature, to the state of Grace; and many
were advanced to higher degrees of Holiness. The bad were changed to good, and
the good to better. Conversion is the Excellent Work of Divine Grace: the
Efficacy of the Means is from the Supreme Mover. But God usually makes those
Ministers successful in that Blessed Work, whose principal Design and Delight
is to glorify him in the saving of Souls. This was the reigning Affection in
his Heart; and he was extraordinarily qualified to obtain his End.

His Prayers were an Effusion of the most lively melting Expressions, and his
intimate ardent Affections to God; from the abundance of his Heart his Lips
spoke. His Soul took Wing for Heaven, and rapt up the Souls of others with him.
Never did I see or hear a holy Minister address himself to God with more
Reverence and Humility, with respect to his glorious Greatness; never with more
Zeal and Fervency correspondent to the infinite Moment of his requests; nor
with more Filial Affiance in the Divine Mercy.

In his Sermons there was a rare Union of Arguments and Motives to convince the
Mind and gain the Heart: All the Fountains of Reason and Persuasion were open
to his discerning Eye. There was no resisting the Force of his Discourses
without denying Reason and Divine Revelation. He had a mavelous Felicity and
Copiousness in speaking. There was a noble Negligence in his Style: for his
great Mind could not stoop to the affected Eloquence of Words: he despised
flashy Oratory: but his Expressions were clear and powerful, so convincing the
Understanding, so entering into the Soul, so engaging the Affections, that those
were as deaf as Adders, who were not charmed by so wise a Charmer. He was
animated with the Holy Spirit, and breathed Celestial Fire, to inspire Heat and
Life into dead Sinners, and to melt the obdurate in their frozen Tombs.
Methinks I still hear him speak those powerful Words: His Sermon before the
House of Commons 1660.
A Wretch that is condemned to die to Morrow cannot forget it: And yet poor
Sinners, that continually are uncertain to live an Hour, and certain speedily
to see the Majesty of the Lord to their unconceivable Joy or Terror, as sure as
they now live on Earth, can forget these things for which they have their
memory: and which one would think should drown the matters of this World, as
the report of a Canon does a Whisper, or as the Sun obscures the poorest
Glo-worm. O wonderful stupidity of an unrenewed Soul! O wonderful folly and
distractedness of the ungodly! That ever Men can forget, I say again, that they
can forget, Eternal joy, Eternal Woe, and the Eternal God, and the place of
their Eternal unchangeable Abodes, when they stand even at the door; and there
is but the thin Vail of Flesh between them and that amazing sight, that Eternal
gulf, and they are daily dying and stepping in.

Besides, his wonderful diligence in Catechizing the particular Families under
his Charge, was exceeding useful to plant Religion in them. Personal
instruction, and application of Divine Truths, has an excellent advantage and
efficacy to insinuate and infuse Religion into the Minds and Hearts of Men, and
by the Conversion of Parents and Masters to reform whole Families that are
under their immediate direction and government. While he was at Kederminster he
wrote and published that accomplished Model of an Evangelical Minister, styled
Gildas Salvianus, or the Reformed Pastor: In that book, he clears beyond all
cavil, That the Duty of Ministers is not confined to their Study and the
Pulpit, but that they should make use of opportunities to instruct Families
within their Care, as it is said by the Apostle, that he had kept back nothing
from his Hearers that was profitable, but had taught them publicly, and from
house to house. The Idea of a faithful Minister delineated in that book, was a
Copy taken from the Life, from his own zealous Example. His unwearied industry
to do good to his Flock, was answered by Correspondent Love and Thankfulness.
He was an Angel in their Esteem. He would often speak with great Complacence of
their dear Affections: and a little before his Death, said, He believed they
were more Expressive of kindness to him, than the Christian Converts were to
the Apostle Paul, by what appears in his Writings.

While he remained at Kederminster, his Illustrious Worth was not shaded in a
Corner, but dispersed its Beams and Influence round the Country. By his
Counsel and Excitation, the Ministers in Worcestershire, Episcopal,
Presbyterian and Congregational were united, that by their Studies, Labors,
and Advice, the Doctrine and Practice of Religion, the Truths and Holiness of
the Gospel might be preserved in all the Churches committed to their Charge.
This Association was of excellent use, the ends of Church Government were
obtained by it: and it was a leading Example to the Ministers of other
Counties. Mr. Baxter was not above his Brethren Ministers, by a Superior
Title, or any secular advantage, but by his divine endowments and separate
excellencies, his extraordinary wisdom, zeal, and fidelity: he was the Soul of
that Happy Society.

He continued among his beloved people, till the year 1660. then he came to
London. A while after the King's Restoration, there were many Endeavors used
in order to an Agreement between the Episcopal and Presbyterian Ministers. For
this end several of the Bishops elect, and of the Ministers, were called to
attend the King at Worcester-House: there was read to them a Declaration, drawn
up with great wisdom and moderation, by the Lord Chancellor the Earl of
Clarendon. I shall only observe that in reading the several parts of the
Declaration, Dr. Morley was the principal manager of the Conference among the
Bishops, and Mr. Baxter among the Ministers: and one particular I cannot
forget; it was desired by the Ministers, that the Bishops should exercise their
Church Power with the counsel and consent of Presbyters. This limiting of their
Authority was so displeasing, that Dr. Cosins, then elect of Durham, said, If
your Majesty grants this you will Unbishop your Bishops. Dr. Reynolds upon this
produced the Book, entitled, The Portraicture of his Sacred Majesty in his
Solitude and Sufferings, and read the following Passage: Not that I am against
the managing of this Presidency and Authority in One Man by the joint Counsel
and Consent of many Presbyters: I have offered to restore that, as a fit means
to avoid those Errors, Corruptions and Partialities, which are incident to any
One Man: also to avoid Tyranny, which becomes no Christians, least of all
Churchmen. Besides, it will be a means to take away that burden and odium of
affairs, which may lie too heavy on one Man's shoulders, as indeed I think it
did formerly on the Bishops here. The good Doctor thought, that the Judgment of
the King's afflicted and inquiring Father would have been of great moment to
incline him to that temperament: but the King presently replied, All that is in
that Book is not Gospel. My Lord Chancellor prudently moderated in that matter,
that the Bishops, in weighty Causes, should have the assistance of the
Presbyters.

Mr. Baxter considering the state of our affairs in that time, was well pleased
with that Declaration: He was of Calvin's mind, who judiciously observes, upon
our Savior's words, That the Son of Man shall send forth his Angels, and they
shall gather out of his Kingdom all things that offend: Qui ad extirpandum
quicquid displicet praepostere festinant, antevertant Christi judicium, and
ereptum Angelis officium sibi temere usurpant. They that make too much haste to
redress at once all things that are amiss, anticipate the Judgment of Christ,
and rashly usurp the Office of the Angels. Besides, that Declaration granted
such a freedom to Conscientious Ministers, that were unsatisfied as to the Old
Conformity, that if it had been observed, it had prevented the doleful
Division succeeded afterward. But when there was a motion made in the House of
Commons, that the Declaration might pass into an Act, it was opposed by one of
the Secretarys of State, which was a sufficient Indication of the King's
averseness to it.

After the Declaration there were many Conferences at the Savoy between the
Bishops and some Doctors of their Party, with Mr. Baxter and some other
Ministers, for an Agreement, wherein his Zeal for Peace was most conspicuous:
but all was in vain. Of the Particulars that were debated, he has given an
account in Print.

Mr. Baxter, after his coming to London, during the time of Liberty, did not
neglect that which was the principal Exercise of his Life, the preaching the
Gospel, being always sensible of his duty of saving Souls. He Preached at St.
Dunstans on the Lord's-days in the Afternoon. I remember one instance of his
firm Faith in the Divine Providence, and his Fortitude when he was engaged in
his Ministry there. The Church was Old, and the People were apprehensive of
some danger in meeting in it: and while Mr. Baxter was Preaching, something in
the Steeple fell down, and the noise struck such a terror into the People, they
presently, in a wild disorder, run out of the Church: their eagerness to haste
away, put all into a tumult: Mr. Baxter, without visible disturbance, sat down
in the Pulpit: after the hurry was over, he resumed his Discourse, and said, to
compose their Minds; We are in the Service of God to prepare our selves, that
we may be fearless at the great noise of the dissolving World, when the Heavens
shall pass away, and the Elements melt in fervent heat; the Earth also, and the
Works therein shall be burnt up.

After the Church of St. Dunstans was pulled down in order to its re-building,
he removed to Black-Fryars, and continued his preaching there to a vast
Concourse of Hearers, till the fatal Bartholomew.

In the Year 1661, a Parliament was called, wherein was past the Act of
Uniformity, that expelled from their public Places about two thousand
Ministers. I will only take notice concerning the Causes of that Proceeding,
that the Old Clergy from Wrath and Revenge, and the young Gentry from their
servile Compliance with the Court, and their Distaste of serious Religion, were
very active to carry on and complete that Act. That this is no rash Imputation
upon the ruling Clergy then is evident, not only from their Concurrence in
passing that Law, for Actions have a Language as convincing as that of Words,
but from Dr. Sheldon then Bishop of London their great Leader; who when the
Lord Chamberlain Manchester, told the King, while the Act of Uniformity was
under debate, that he was afraid the Terms of it were so rigid, that many of
the Ministers would not comply with it; he replied, I am afraid they will. This
Act was past after the King had engaged his Faith and Honor in his Declaration
from Breda, to preserve the Liberty of Conscience inviolate, which promise
opened the way for his Restorat^on; and after the Royalists here, had given
public Assurance, that all former Animosities should be buried, as Rubbish
under the Foundation of a Universal Concord. Mr. Baxter was involved with so
many Ministers in this Calamity, who was their brightest Ornament, and the best
Defense of their righteous, though oppressed Cause: Two Observations he made
upon that Act and our Ejection.

The one was, that the Ministers were turned and kept out from the public
Exercise of their Office, in that time of their Lives, that was most fit to be
dedicated end employed for the Service and Glory of God, that is between thirty
and sixty Years, when their intellectual and instrumental Faculties were in
their Vigor. The other was in a Letter to me after the Death of several
Bishops who were concurrent in passing that Act, and expressed no Sorrow for it:
his words were, for ought I see, the Bishops will own the turning of us out, at
the Tribunal of Christ, and thither we appeal.

After the Act of Uniformity had taken its effect, in the Ejection of so many
Ministers, there was sometimes a Connivance at the private Exercise of their
Ministry, sometime public Indulgence granted, and often a severe Prosecution
of them, as the Popish and Politic Interest of the Court varied. When there
was Liberty, Mr. Baxter applied himself to his delightful Work, to the great
Advantage of those who enjoyed his Ministry. But the Church-Party opposed
vehemently the Liberty that was granted. Indeed such was their Fierceness, that
if the Dissenting Ministers had been as wise as Serpents, and as innocent as
Doves, they could not escape their deep Censures. The Pulpit represented them
as seditiously disaffected to the State, as obstinate Schismatics, and often
the Name of God was not only taken in vain, but in violence, to authorize
their hard Speeches, and harder Actions against them. Some drops of that Storm
fell upon Mr. Baxter, who calmly submitted to their injurious dealings. I shall
speak of that afterward.

In the Interval, between his Deprivation and his Death, he wrote and published
the most of his Books, of which I shall give some account.

His Books, for their number and variety of Matter in them, make a Library.
They contain a Treasure of Controversial, Casuistical, Positive and Practical
Divinity. Of them I shall relate the Words of one, whose exact Judgment, joined
with his Moderation, will give a great value to his Testimony; they are of the
very Reverend Dr. Wilkins, afterward Bishop of Chester: he said that Mr.
Baxter had cultivated every Subject he handled; and if he had lived in the
Primitive Times, he had been one of the Fathers of the Church. I shall add what
he said with admiration of him another time, That it was enough for one Age to
produce such a Person as Mr. Baxter. Indeed, he had such an amplitude in his
Thoughts, such vivacity of Imagination, and such solidity and depth of
Judgment, as rarely meet together. His inquiring Mind was freed from the
servile dejection and bondage of an implicit Faith. He adhered to the
Scriptures as the perfect Rule of Faith, and searched whether the Doctrines
received and taught were Consonant to it. This is the duty of every Christian
according to his capacity, especially of Ministers, and the necessary means to
open the Mind for Divine Knowledge, and for the advancement of the Truth. He
published several Books against the Papists with that clearness and strength, as
will Confound, if not Convince them. He said, he only desired Armies and
Antiquity against the Papists: Armies, he cause of their bloody Religion so
often exemplified in England, Ireland, France and other Countries. However they
may appear on the Stage, they are always the same persons in the Tyring-room:
their Religion binds them to extirpate Heretics, and often overrules the
milder inclinations of their nature: Antiquity, because they are inveigled with
a fond pretense to it, as if it were favorable to their Cause: but it has been
demonstrated by many learned Protestants, that the Argument of Antiquity is
directly against the principal Doctrines of Popery, as that of the Supremacy,
of Transubstantiation, of Image Worship, and others.

His Books of the Reasonableness of the Christian Religion.
He has wrote several excellent Books against the impudent Atheism of this loose
Age. In them he establishes the fundamental Principle, upon which the whole
Fabric of Christianity is built; that after this short uncertain life, there
is a future state of happiness or misery equally Eternal, and that Death is the
last irrevocable step into that unchangeable state. From hence it follows by
infallible Consequence, that the reasonable Creature should prefer the interest
of the Soul before that of the Body, and secure Eternal life. This being laid,
he proves the Christian Religion to be the only way of fallen Man's being
restored to the favor of God, and obtaining a blessed Immortality. This great
Argument he manages with that clearness and strength, that none can refuse
assent unto it, without denying the infallible Principles of Faith, and the
evident Principles of Nature.

He also published some warm Discourses, to Apologize for the Preaching of
Dissenting Ministers, and to excite them to do their Duty. He did not think
that Act of Uniformity could disoblige them from the Exercise of their Office.
It Is true, Magistrates are Titular-Gods by their Deputation and Vicegerency,
but subordinate and accountable to God above. Their Laws have no binding force
upon the Conscience, but from his Command; and if contrary to his Law, are to
be disobeyed. The Ministers Consecrated to the Service of God are under a moral
perpetual Obligation of Preaching the saving Truths of the Gospel, as they have
opportunity. There needs no miraculous Testimony of their Commission from
Heaven, to authorize the doing their ordinary Duty.

In some points of modern Controversy he judiciously chose the middle way, and
advised young Divines to follow it. His reverence of the Divine Purity, made
him very shy and jealous of any Doctrine that seemed to reflect a blemish and
stain upon it. He was a clear asserter of the sovereign Freeness, and
infallible Efficacy of Divine Grace in the Conversion of Souls. In a Sermon
reciting the Words of the Covenant of Grace, I will put my fear into their
hearts, and they shall not depart from me; he observed the Tenor of it was, I
will, and you shall. Divine Grace makes the rebellious Will obedient, but does
not make the Will to be no Will. By the Illumination of the Mind, the Will is
inclined to Obedience, according to the Words of our Savior, All that have
heard and learned of the Father come to me. He preached that the Death of
Christ was certainly effectual for all the Elect to make them partakers of
Grace and Glory, and that it was so far beneficial to all Men, that they are
not left in the same desperate State with the fallen Angels, but are made
capable of Salvation by the Grace of the Gospel: not capable of Efficience to
convert themselves, but as Subjects to receive saving Grace. He did so honor
the sincerity of God, as entirely to believe his Will declared in his Word: he
would not interpret the Promises of the Gospel in a less gracious sense than
God intended them: Therefore if Men finally perish, it is not for want of Mercy
in God, nor Merits in Christ, but for their wilful refusing Salvation.

His Books of Practical Divinity have been effectual for more numerous
Conversions of Sinners to God, than any printed in our time: and while the
Church remains on Earth, will be of continual Efficacy to recover lost Souls.
There is a vigorous Pulse in them that keeps the Reader awake and attentive.
His Book of the Saints Everlasting Rest, was written by him when languishing in
the suspense of Life and Death, but has the Signatures of his holy and vigorous
Mind. To allure our Desires, he unvails the Sanctuary above, and discovers the
Glory and Joys of the Blessed in the Divine Presence, by a Light so strong and
lively, that all the glittering Vanities of this World vanish in that
Comparison, and a sincere Believer will despise them, as one of mature Age does
the Toys and Baubles of Children. To excite our fear he removes the Skreen, and
makes the Everlasting Fire of Hell so visible, and represents the tormenting
Passions of the Damned in those dreadful Colors, that if duly considered,
would check and control the unbridled licentious Appetites of the most sensual
Wretches.

His Call to the Unconverted; how small in bulk, but how powerful in virtue?
Truth speaks in it with that authority and efficacy, that it makes the Reader
to lay his hand upon his heart, and find he has a Soul and a Conscience, though
he lived before as if he had none. He told some friends, that six Brothers were
Converted by reading that Call; and that every Week he received Letters of some
Converted by his Books. This he spoke with most humble thankfulness, that God
was pleased to use him as an instrument for the Salvation of Souls.

He that was so solicitous for the Salvation of others, was not negligent of
his own; but as regular Love requires, his first Care was to prepare himself
for Heaven. In him the Virtues of the Contemplative and Active Life were
eminently united. His time was spent in Communion with God, and in Charity to
Men. He lived above the sensible World, and in solitude and silence conversed
with God. The frequent and serious Meditation of Eternal things was the
powerful means to make his Heart holy and heavenly, and from thence his
Conversation. His Life was a practical Sermon, a drawing Example. There was an
Air of Humility and Sanctity in his mortified Countenance; and his Deportment
was becoming a Stranger upon Earth, and a Citizen of Heaven.

Though all Divine Graces, the fruit of the Spirit, were visible in his
Conversation, yet some were more eminent.

Humility is to other Graces, as the Morning Star is to the Sun, that goes
before it, and follows it in the Evening: Humility prepares us for the
receiving of Grace, God gives Grace to the humble: and it follows the Exercise
of Grace; Not I, says the Apostle, but the Grace of God in me. In Mr. Baxter
there was a rare Union of sublime Knowledge, and other spiritual Excellencies,
with the lowest opinion of himself. He wrote to one that sent a Letter to him
full of Expressions of Honor and Esteem, You do admire one you do not know;
Knowledge will cure your Error. The more we know God, the more reason we see to
admire him; but our knowledge of the Creature discovers its imperfections, and
lessens our esteem. To the same person expressing his Veneration of him for his
excellent Gifts and Graces, he replied with heat, I have the remainders of
pride in me, how dare you blow up the sparks of it? He desired some Ministers,
his chosen friends, to meet at his House, and spend a day in Prayer for his
direction in a matter of moment: before the Duty was begun, he said, I have
desired your assistance at this time, because I believe God will sooner hear
your Prayers than mine. He imitated St. Austin both in his Penitential
Confessions, and Retractations. In conjunction with Humility, he had great
Candor for others. He could willingly bear with persons of differing
Sentiments: he would not prostitute his own judgment, nor ravish another. He
did not over-esteem himself, nor under-value others. He would give liberal
Encomiums of many Conforming Divines. He was severe to himself, but candid in
excusing the faults of others. Whereas, the busy Inquirer and Censurer of the
faults of others, is usually the easy Neglecter of his own.

Self-denial and Contempt of the World were shining Graces in him. I never knew
any person less indulgent to himself, and more indifferent to his Temporal
interest. The offer of a Bishopric was no temptation to him: for his exalted
Soul despised the Pleasures and Profits which others so earnestly desire; he
valued not an empty Title upon his Tomb.

His Patience was truly Christian. God does often try his Children by
Afflictions, to exercise their Graces, to occasion their Victory, and to
entitle them to a triumphant Felicity.

This Saint was tried by many Afflictions. We are very tender of our
Reputation: his Name was obscured under a Cloud of detraction. Many slanderous
Darts were thrown at him. He was charged with Schism and Sedition. He was
accused for his Paraphrase upon the New Testament, as guilty of disloyal
Aspersions upon the Government, and Condemned, unheard, to a Prison, where he
remain^d for some years. But he was so far from being moved at the unrighteous
prosecution, that he joyfully said to a constant friend, What could I desire
more of God, than after having served him to my power, I should now be called
to suffer for him. One who had been a fierce Dissenter, was afterward rankled
with an opposite heat, and very contumeliously in his Writings reflected upon
Mr. Baxter, who calmly endured his Contempt: and when the same person published
a learned Discourse in Defense of Christianity, Mr. Baxter said, I forgive him
all for his Writing that Book. Indeed he was so much the more truly honorable,
as he was thought worthy of the hatred of those persons.

It Is true, the Censures and Reproaches of others whom he esteemed and loved,
touched him in the tender part. But he, with the great Apostle, counted it a
small thing to be judged by Men's day. He was entire to his Conscience, and
independent upon the opinion of others. But his Patience was more eminently
tried by his continual pains and languishing. Martyrdom is a more easy way of
dying, when the Combat and the Victory are finished at once, than to dye by
degrees every day. His Complaints were frequent, but who ever heard an
unsubmissive word drop from his lips? He was not put out of his Patience, nor
out of the possession of himself. In his sharp Pains, he said, I have a
rational Patience, and a believing Patience, though sense would recoil.

His pacifick Spirit was a clear Character of his being a Child of God. How
ardently he endeavored to cement the breaches among us, which others widen and
keep open, is publicly known. He said to a friend, I can as willingly be a
Martyr for Love, as for any Article of the Creed. It Is strange to astonishment,
that those who agree in the substantial and great Points of the Reformed
Religion, and are of differing Sentiments only in things not so clear, nor of
that moment as those wherein they consent, should still be opposite Parties.
Methinks the remembrance how our Divisions lately exposed us to our watchful
Adversary, and were almost fatal to the interest of Religion, should conciliate
our Affections. Our common danger and common deliverance, should prepare our
Spirits for a sincere and firm Union. When our Sky was so dark without a
glimmering Horizon, then by a new dawning of God's wonderful Providence, a
Deliverer appeared, our gracious Sovereign, who has the Honor of establishing
our Religion at home, and gives us hopes of restoring it abroad, in places from
whence it has been so unrighteously and cruelly expelled. May the Union of his
Protestant Subjects in religious things so desired by wise and good Men, be
accomplished by his princely Counsel and Authority. Integrity with Charity would
remove those things that have so long disunited us. I return from this
Digression.

Love to the Souls of Men was the peculiar Character of Mr. Baxter's Spirit. In
this he imitated and honored our Savior, who prayed, dyed, and lives for the
Salvation of Souls. All his natural and supernatural Endowments were
subservient to this blessed End. It was his Meat and Drink, the Life and Joy of
his Life to do good to Souls. His Industry was almost incredible in his
Studies: he had a sensitive nature desirous of ease as others have, and saint
Faculties, yet such was the continual Application of himself to his great Work,
as if the Labor of one Day had supplied strength for another, and the
willingness of the Spirit had supported the Weakness of the Flesh. In his usual
Conversation, his serious, frequent and delightful Discourse was of Divine
things, to inflame his Friends with the Love of Heaven. He received with tender
Compassion and condescending Kindness, the meanest that came to him for Council
and Consolation. He gave in one year a hundred Pounds to buy Bibles for the
poor. He has in his Will disposed of all that remains of his Estate after the
Legacies to his Kindred, for the benefit of the Souls and Bodies of the Poor.
He continued to preach so long notwithstanding his wasted languishing Body,
that the last time, he almost died in the Pulpit. It would have been his joy to
have been transfigured in the Mount.

Not long after his last Sermon, he felt the Approaches of Death, and was
confined to his sick Bed. Death reveals the Secrets of the Heart, then words
are spoken with most feeling and least Affectation. This excellent Saint was
the same in his Life and Death: his last Hours were spent in preparing others
and himself to appear before God. He said to his Friends that visited him, You
come hither to learn to dye, I am not the only Person that must go this way, I
can assure you, that your whole Life be it never so long is little enough to
prepare for Death. Have a care of this vain deceitful World, and the Lusts of
the Flesh: be sure you choose God for your portion, Heaven for your home, God's
Glory for your end, His word for your rule, and then you need never fear but we
shall meet with Comfort.

Never was a Sinner more humble and debasing himself, never was a sincere
Believer more calm and comfortable. He acknowledged himself to be the vilest
Dunghilworm ('it was his usual Expression) that ever went to Heaven. He admired
the Divine Condescension to us, often saying, Lord what is Man, what am I vile
Worm to the great God? Many times he prayed, God be merciful to me a Sinner,
and blessed God, that that was left upon record in the Gospel as an effectual
Prayer. He said, God may justly condemn me for the best Duty I ever did: and
all my hopes are from the free Mercy of God in Christ, which he often prayed
for.

After a slumber he waked and said, I shall rest from my Labor: a Minister
then present said, And your Works follow you: to whom he replied, No Works, I
will leave out Works, if God will grant me the other. When a Friend was
comforting him with the remembrance of the good many had received by his
preaching and Writings, he said, I was but a Pen in God's hand, and what praise
is due to a Pen.

His resigned Submission to the Will of God in his sharp Sickness, was eminent.
When extremity of pain constrained him earnestly to pray to God for his release
by Death, he would check himself; It is not fit for me to prescribe, and said,
when thou will, what thou will, how thou will.

Being in great Anguish, he said, O how unsearchable are his ways and his paths
past finding out! the reaches of his Providence we cannot fathom: and to his
Friends, Do not think the worse of Religion for what you see me suffer.

Being often asked by his Friends, how it was with his inward Man, he replied,
I bless God I have a well-grounded Assurance of my Eternal Happiness, and great
Peace and Comfort within; but it was his trouble he could not triumphantly
express it, by reason of his extreme pains. He said, Flesh must perish, and we
must feel the perishing of it: and that though his Judgment submitted, yet
sense would still make him groan.

Being asked by a Person of Quality, whether he had not great Joy from his
believing Apprehensions of the invisible State, he replied: What else think you
Christianity serves for? He said, The Consideration of the Deity in his Glory
and Greatness was too high for our Thoughts; but the Consideration of the Son
of God in our Nature, and of the Saints in Heaven, whom he knew and loved, did
much sweeten and familiarize Heaven to him. The description of Heaven in the
12. to the Heb. and the 22. was most comfortable to him: That he was going to
the innumerable company of Angels, and to the general Assembly and Church of
the firstborn, whose Names are written in Heaven; and to God the Judge of all,
and to the spirits of just men made perfect; And to Jesus the Mediator of the
new Covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling that speaks better things than the
blood of Abel. That Scripture, he said, deserved a thousand thousand thoughts:
He said, O how comfortable is that promise, Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard,
neither has it entered into the heart of Man to conceive the things God has
laid up for those who love him.

At another time he said, That he found great comfort and sweetness in
repeating the words of the Lord's Prayer, and was sorry that some good people
were prejudiced against the use of it; for there were all necessary Petitions
for Soul and Body contained in it.

At other times he gave excellent Counsel to young Ministers that visited him,
and earnestly prayed to God to bless their labors, and make them very
successful in Converting many Souls to Christ: And expressed great joy in the
hopes that God would do a great deal of good by them; and that they were of
moderate peaceful Spirits.

He did often pray that God would be merciful to this miserable distracted
World: and that he would preserve his Church and Interest in it.

He advised his Friends to beware of self-conceitedness, as a Sin that was
likely to ruin this Nation: and said, I have written a Book against it, which
I am afraid has done little good.

Being askd whether he had altered his mind in Controversial Points, he said,
Those that please may know my mind in my Writings: and what he had done was not
for his own Reputation, but the Glory of God.

I went to him with a very worthy Friend, Mr. Mather of New England, the day
before he died, and speaking some comforting Words to him, he replied, I have
pain, there is no arguing against sense, but I have peace, I have peace. I told
him you are now approaching to your long-desir'd home, he answered, I believe,
I believe. He, said to Mr. Mather, I bless God that you have accomplished your
business, the Lord prolong your Life.

He expressed a great willingness to dye, and during his Sickness, when the
Question was asked, how he did, his reply was, almost well. His joy was most
remarkable, when in his own apprehensions Death was nearest: and his Spiritual
Joy at length was consummate in Eternal Joy.

Thus lived and dyed that blessed Saint. I have without any artificial Fiction
of words, given a sincere short Account of him. All our Tears are below the
just grief for such an unvaluable Loss. It is the Comfort of his Friends, that
he enjoys a blessed Reward in Heaven, and has left a precious Remembrance on
the Earth.

Now blessed be the gracious God, that he was pleased to prolong the Life of
his Servant, so useful and beneficial to the World to a full Age: that he has
brought him slowly and safely to Heaven. I shall conclude this Account with my
own deliberate Wish: May I live the short remainder of my Life, as entirely to
the Glory of God, as he lived; and when I shall come to the Period of my Life,
may I dye in the same blessed Peace wherein he died; may I be with him in the
Kingdom of Light and Love for ever.

POSTSCRIPT.
I Shall annex two Passages declaratory, the one of his Humility, the other of
his Excellent Abilities. He had such an Abhorrence of himself for his Sins,
that he said to a Minister, I can more easily believe, that God will forgive
me, than I can forgive my self. The other was being in the Pulpit to preach, he
found that he had forgot to put his Notes into his Bible: he prayed to God for
his Assistance, and took the first Text that occurred to his View in opening
the Bible: and preached an Excellent Sermon for the Matter and Order of it upon
the Priesthood of Christ. After he was come down, he inquired of a Minister
present, whether he had not tired him, who replied, No; but with several others
declared they were exceedingly satisfied with his Discourse: he said, It was
necessary to have a Body of Divinity in ones Head.

FINIS.
BOOKS writ by William Bates, D. D. and sold by B. Aylmer.
THE Harmony of the Divine Attributes, in the Contrivance and Accomplishment of
Man's Redemption by the Lord Jesus Christ: Or Discourses, wherein is showed,
how the Wisdom, Mercy, Justice, Holiness, Power, and Truth of God are glorified
in that great and blessed Work, In Octavo.

Considerations of the Existence of God, and of the Immortality of the Soul,
with the Recompense of the Future State. To which is added the Divinity of the
Christian Religion, proved by the Evidence of Reason, and Divine Revelation,
for the Cure of Infidelity, the Hectic Evil of the Times. In Octavo.

The Sovereign and Final Happiness of Man, with the effectual Means to obtain
it. In Octavo.

The Four Last Things, Death and Judgment, Heaven and Hell, practically
considered and applied, in several Discourses. In Octavo, and Duodecimo.

The Danger of Prosperity discovered, in several Sermons, upon Prove. 1.17. In
Octavo.

The great Duty of Resignation in Times of Affliction, etc. In Octavo.

A Funeral Sermon preached upon the Death of the Reverend and Excellent Divine,
Dr. Thomas Manton, who deceased October 18, 1677. To which is added, the last
public Sermon Dr. Manton preached. In Octavo.

The Sure Trial of Vprightness, opened in several Sermons, upon Psalm. 18. v.
23. In Octavo.

A Description of the Blessed Place and State of the Saints above, in a
Discourse on John 14.2. Preached at the Funeral of Mr. Clarkson.

The Way to the highest Honor, on John 12.26. Preached at the Funeral of Dr.
Jacomb.

The Speedy Coming of Christ to Judgment, on Rev. 22.12. Preached at the
Funeral of Mr. Benj. Ashurst.

A Funeral Sermon for the Reverend, Holy and Excellent Divine, Mr. Richard
Baxter, who Deceased December the 8th. 1691. With an Account of his Life.

ADVERTISEMENT.
NEwly printed, The Holy Bible, containing the Old Testament and the New: With
Annotations and Parallel Scriptures. To which is annexed, The Harmony of the
Gospels: As also, the Reduction of the Jewish Weights, Coins and Measures, to
our English Standards. And a Table of the Promises in Scripture. By Samuel
Clark, Minister of the Gospel. Printed in Folio of a very fair Letter; the like
never before in one Volume. Printed for Brabazon Aylmer in Cornhill.


