The Great Duty OF RESIGNATION TO THE DIVINE WILL IN Afflictions, Enforced from
the Example of our Suffering SAVIOR.

By William Bates, D. D.

Nihil fit visibiliter and sensibiliter, quod non de interiori, invisibili, and
intelligibili aula summi Imperatoris, aut jubeatur, aut permittatur in ista
totius Creaturae amplissima quadam immensaque Republica. Aug. lib. tert. de
Trin.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. for Brabazon Aylmer, at the three Pigeons over
against the Royal Exchange in Cornhil, 1684.

Gulielmus Batesius, S. S. Theol: Prof: Aetat: 57. Nov: 1682.


THE PREFACE.
THE first Man by Rebellion against his Maker, lost his Innocence and Felicity,
and conveyed a sad inheritance of Sin and Misery to his Universal Progeny: Ever
since it has been esteemed a principal part of Wisdom to prepare the Minds of
Men to encounter with innumerable Evils that surround them, and to preserve a
well-ordered, contented state of Soul, when actually under the greatest
Afflictions. All the famous Sophy's of the World, the most celebrated
Professors of Patience, could not attain to this Skill. Their consolatory
Discourses composed with Wit and Eloquence, are like artificial fruits of Wax,
that seem to surpass the productions of Nature, but can only please the sight,
and afford no real refreshment to the taste. Or, like Rings of Steel that are
joined by the attractive virtue of the Lodestone, that make a Chain fair to
the Eye, but of no strength and use. It was inexcusable Ignorance, their not
resolving Temporal Evils to their proper Original, the righteous Providence of
God. They erected a blind and foolish Power under the title of Fortune, to
preside in this Sphere of mutability; they always Plin. l. 2. c. 7.
boast of their playing a Prize with Fortune, and triumph Sed tantum cum
fortuna se digladiari momentis omnibus gloriantur. Lact lib. 3.
over a Phantome of their own Fiction. This Conceit was both impious and
uncomfortable; impious, to take the Scepter of Government from God's hand, and
attribute to that foolish Pleasure of Fortune, what is ordered by his
Providence: and uncomfortable, for they fancied their Deity to be blind,
without discerning between the worthy and unworthy, and inexorable to the
complaints of the injured, and the Prayers of the miserable. The common Topics
from whence they hardened themselves are, That none are exempted in this open
state from Afflicting accidents, the common tribute of Mankind; that it is in
vain to struggle with what is irresistible, that Death is the balm and close of
all Evils. And the best of their moral Arguments for Patience under Sufferings,
such as the dignity of the reasonable Soul; and that nothing inferior to it
should have power, or is worthy to put it into confusion; that Virtue is the
noblest Perfection, and is increased by the most difficult Exercise; that it is
best to yield up our selves to the Divine disposal. These Arguments are with
infinite more advantage propounded in the Sacred Scriptures: and for Christians
to attend to the instructions of natural Reason, and neglect the Divine
Revelations of the Gospel, is a folly like that of the silly Indians of Mexico,
who having plenty of Wax, the natural work of the Bees; yet (...) made use of
Fire brands to light them in the Night that afforded a little Light mixed with a
great deal of Smoke. Briefly, they had but wavering conjectures of the future
State; and the recompenses thereof, from whence are derived the most powerful
Motives of Active and Passive Obedience to the commanding and disposing Will of
God; But in the Scripture are laid down in the clearest manner, and with
infallible assurance, such Principles as are effectual to compose the Mind to
patient Suffering, and to meet with valiant Resolution all the terrible
contrarieties in the way to Heaven. It declares, that Sin opened an entrance
unto all the current adversities in the World, which are the evident signs of
God's displeasure against it. In anguish we are apt to dispute with Providence,
and an imagination of Innocence kindles Discontent: Of this impatience, some
even of the best Moral Heathens were guilty; Titus and Germanicus charged the
Gods with their untimely, and in their apprehension undeserved Deaths; but the
due sense of Sin will humble and quiet the Mind under Sufferings, it directs us
to consecrate our Sorrows, to turn the flowing Stream into the Channel of
Repentance. And thus the Passion of Grief, which, if terminated on external
Troubles, is barren and unprofitable, it can neither retrieve our lost
Comforts, nor remove any oppressing Evil; if it be employed for our offenses,
prepares us for Divine Mercy, and is infinitely beneficial to us. And thus by
curing the Cause of Afflictions, our Guilt that deserves them, we take away the
malignity and poison of them. The Word of God assures us, that all the
perturbations and discords in the passages of our Lives are ordered by his
Wisdom and Will, so that without extinguishing the two eyes of Reason and
Faith, we must acknowledge his Providence, and observe his design in all, which
is either to excite us when guilty of a careless neglect, or remiss performance
of our Duty, or to reclaim us from our excursions and deviations from the
narrow way that leads to Life. Indeed there is nothing more common nor more
fatal, than for afflicted persons to seek by carnal diversions and contemptible
comforts to overcome their Melancholy, and the sense of Divine Judgments; and
hereby they add new Guilt, and provoke new displeasures. Isa. 22. 12, 13, 14.
This presages and accelerates final Ruin; for such whom Afflictions do not
reform, are left as incorrigible.

But above all encouragements, the Gospel sets before us the Sufferings of our
Redeemer, and directs all his Disciples in sincerity to accustom themselves to
the contemplation and expectation of Troubles on Earth; it tells them it is a
branch of their Religion, to Suffer with him that they may Reign with him. And
what is more reasonable, than if our Savior endured superlative Sufferings to
purchase Eternal Glory for us, that we should with the same Mind bear lighter
Afflictions to prepare us for it? If this Principle be alive and active in our
Breasts, that our present Afflictions shall determine in our future Happiness,
when Time shall cease and Eternity succeed; this will encourage us to serve God
with our best affections when our days are overcast with Sorrow, as in a bright
Prosperity: this will secure our passage through a stormy, tempestuous World,
as if it were a truly Pacifick Sea, knowing that Divine Providence always
guides us to the Port of eternal Tranquillity. This is the substance of what is
amplified in the following Treatise. And whilst there are Miseries in the
World, no Discourses are more seasonable and useful than those that lighten our
oppressing Sorrows, and that enable us with uniformity and constancy in all the
changes of this mortal Life, to pursue our eminent End. The Holy Spirit, the
great Comforter apply these Truths to the Hearts of the Afflicted.

William Bates.

Errata.
PAge 24. l. 1. for as objects are greater, r. appear greater. Page 116. l. 11.
for their subtilty, r. stability. Page 120. l. 10. for now Joseph, r. now that
Joseph.

THE GREAT DUTY OF Resignation:
Matthew. 26. 39. And he went a little further, and fell on his face, and prayed,
saying, O my Father, if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me;
Nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will.


THE Words are our Savior's Prayer at his private Passion in the Garden. In
Paradise was the first Scene of Man's Sin, and in a Garden the first Scene of
Christ's Sorrows.

He was now in the near view of his extreme Sufferings; the fatal hour
approached when he was to die with all the concurrent circumstances of Shame
and Cruelty. His Nature was Humane and Holy, and therefore apprehensive of
Misery and the Wrath of God. In this Exigency He fell on his Face, a posture of
humble Reverence, and with earnestness prayed, saying, O my Father, an
expression of his steadfast Trust in the Love of God: If it be possible, not
with respect to his Absolute Power, for by that he could easily have preserved
him; but with respect to his Sovereign Pleasure, and Eternal Decree: Let this
Cup pass from me, that implies a complete Deliverance from the rage of the
Powers of Darkness, and of the perverted World in conjunction with them. He
suffered innocent Nature to act as Nature, for he submitted to our Infirmities,
but without our Imperfections. Nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will:
His Petition was qualified with an Act of Submission; the desire of his Nature,
that recoiled from such Sufferings, was overruled by the resignation of Grace.
There was no repugnancy, but a subordination between the Sensitive Will and the
rational Will, directed by his Mind, that foresaw the blessed effects of his
Sufferings, the Glory of God, with the Salvation of lost Mankind. And that just
horror, with the strong aversion of his Nature from such a terrible Death,
renders his willingness more conspicuous and meritorious. As Man, the
apprehension of it put him into an Agony; but as Mediator, by a firm
resolution and clear choice he submitted to it.

Now, the example of our suffering Savior, lays an obligation on us to
transcribe his Copy; his Titles in Scripture declare both his Eminency and
Exemplariness. He is our Head, and our Leader, the Captain of our Salvation,
whom we are bound to follow in taking up our Cross: His Sufferings were
designed not only for our Redemption, but for our Instruction and Imitation.
What he commands as God, he performed as Man, that we might voluntarily yield
up our selves to the Holiness and Equity of his Law. Thus from the pattern of
our Savior's Deportment, the point of Doctrine is this:

The entire resignation of our Wills to the disposing Will of God, is the
indispensible Duty of Christians under the sharpest Afflictions.

In the explication and proof of this Point, I shall

I. Consider what is consistent with this Resignation.

II. What is implied in it.

III. The Reasons to convince us of this Duty of resigning of our selves, and
all our Interests to God; and then apply it.

I will, first, Consider what is 1.
consistent with this voluntary Resignation. That will appear in the following
particulars.

First; an earnest deprecation of an impending Judgment, is 1.
reconcilable with our Submission to the pleasure of God, declared by the
Event. Our Savior with humility and importunity desired the removing of the
Cup of Bitterness. We must distinguish between God's Law, and his Decree and
Counsel; The Law is the Rule of our Duty, and requires an entire exact
subjection in all our Faculties, even in our internal Desires, in the first
motions of the Will; the least velleity, or rising of the Heart against the
Divine Command, is irregular and culpable; for not only the acts of Sin are
forbidden in every Command respectively, but all the incitations of
Concupiscence, before the deliberate judgment of the Mind, or the actual
consent of the Will. But the Decree of God is not the Rule of our Duty, and
Secret, till manifested by the event of things. This being premised, the
Reasons are evident why we may pray against an Affliction that threatens us,
without violating our Duty.

First; Because Afflictions are Evils which the Will naturally declines, and
are not desirable things in themselves. They are not beneficial and productive
of our good by any proper efficacy and operation, but by the overruling
Providence of God, and the gracious assistance of his Spirit. When Aaron's Rod
was put into the Sanctuary, and became green and flourishing with Blossoms and
Almonds, 'twas not from any inherent virtue of its own, but from the special
influence of the Divine Power; for the other Rods remained dead and dry: thus
the happy effects of the Afflicting Rod are from Divine Grace.

Secondly; There are proper Temptations that attend the afflicted State. Many
are encompassed in a sad Circle, their Sins procure Afflictions, and their
Afflictions occasion many Sins. Indeed, Tribulation that is sanctified, by a
happy gradation works Patience; Romans 5. 3, 4, 5.
and Patience, Experience of the Divine Mercy; and Experience, Hope, and Hope
makes not ashamed. But when it meets with a stubborn Spirit, there are fearful
descents of Sin: Tribulation excites Impatience, and Impatience causes
Perplexity, and that Despair, and Despair Confusion. The Devil lays his trains
in every condition, and sometimes by immoderate Sorrow, sometimes by inordinate
Joy, does mischief to the Soul. And as more perish by Surfeits than Abstinence,
yet the Diseases that are caused by emptiness, are more dangerous and incurable
than those that proceed from fullness: So more are ruined by Prosperity than
Adversity: But the guilty Passions that ferment and rage in Adversity, are more
pernicious, and more hardly tempered and subdued, than the Luxurious Appetites
that are fomented and drawn forth by Prosperity. We are directed by our Savior
to pray, that we may not be led into Temptation, and to be delivered from all
Evil.

Secondly; a mournful sense of Afflictions sent from God is 2.
consistent with a dutiful resignation of our selves to his Will. 'Twas the
vain boast of the Philosophers, that their Instructions would fortify Men with
such magnanimous Principles, and generous Spirits, as with an equal calm
tranquillity of Mind to encounter all the fierce and sorrowful Accidents to
which they might be exposed here: They speak high against Fortune and Fate, and
resolve stubbornly, that no misery, whether Poverty or Disgrace, Torments or
Death, should extort from them a confession that it was Misery. 'Twas one of
their Axioms, That a Nihil agis dolor, quamvis sis molestus, nunquam te esse
confitebor malum. Possidomus.
Wise Man is not subject to the vicissitudes and instability of things here
below; That he suffers no conflict of contrary Passions in his Breast; that he
is always above in the Talis est sapientis animus qualis Mundi status super
lunam, sem per illic serenum. Seneca.
Serene, where no Tempests can disturb, no Eclipse can darken his Mind: But
these proud pretensions were empty of reality. Indeed such a perfect exemption
from all afflicting Passions is neither possible nor regular in our present
state: not possible, for the best Men are not all Spirit, but united to Flesh;
and when the Body is under strong pains, the Soul suffers in its sufferings;
and while we are thus compounded, the loss of those Comforts that support and
sweeten the present Life, must cause Grief. It Is easy to utter brave
Expressions, and lay down severe Precepts in contempt of Evils Magna verba
excidunt, cum Mors proprius accessit, cum tortor manum poposcit, possis illi
dicere, facile provocabas mala absentia. Seneca.
when they are at a distance, but hard to sustain the Spirit under the actual
feeling of them; it is one thing to discourse of a Battle, and another to be
engaged in the heat of it. But supposing by a Philosophical Charm the Heart
were so hardened as to be proof against the most piercing afflictions, such a
forced insensibility is not regular, but proceeds from the extinction of
Humanity and Piety, and that will appear by considering Afflictions in a
natural or moral respect.

First, in a natural respect, for so they are destructive or oppressive 1.
Evils, and a pensive feeling of them is suitable to the Law of our Creation:
for the Humane Nature is framed with such Senses and Passions, as according to
God's intention should be affected suitably to the quality of their objects;
and if the Soul acts rationally, it is moved accordingly. A Saint on Earth is
not a Saint in Heaven, raised above all Disasters and Troubles, freed from all
hurtful impressions from without, and sorrowful impressions within, but is
liable to afflicting evils: And it is becoming his Duty to have his passions
pliable to his condition, but without excess; the Eyes must not be drowned, nor
dry, but tenderly affected.

Secondly; Considered in a moral respect, as they are sent from 2.
the high and just Providence of God, it is absolutely necessary there should
be an humble resentment of his Displeasure. This is a consequent of the former;
for if our affections are seared up, that we do not feel the stroke, how shall
we regard the hand that smites us? If we are not sensible of Affliction, we are
secure in our Sins. Natural Sorrow is introductive of Godly Sorrow. There are
two extremes to be avoided by the afflicted, according to the direction of
Solomon in the person of Wisdom, and repeated by the Apostle: My Son, despise
not thou the chastening of the Heb. 12. 5.
Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of him. Some are discouraged and
overborn by Afflictions as insupportable: others are stubborn and careless,
and never 2
lay them to heart: they never look upward to the original efficient Cause, an
Offended God; nor inward to the impulsive deserving Cause, their Sins; but
esteem them fortuitous Events that happen in this mutable state, without a
design to correct and reform Sinners; or to proceed from a blind necessity,
things of course; or merely regard the second Causes and Instruments of their
Troubles: accordingly, when they meet with Calamities, all their care is by a
perverse shift to seek for relief only in Temporal Comforts; without serious
applying themselves to God, whose end in sending Troubles, is to reclaim us
from Sin to Holiness, from Earth to Heavens, from the Creatures to himself.

This secret Atheism, like a benumming Opium, stupifies the Conscience; and the
insensibility of God's hand inflicting Evils, is as different from Christian
Patience and Constancy, as a mortal Lethargy is from the quiet, soft Sleep of
Health: Nothing kindles his Anger more than neglecting it; it is equally
provoking with the despising of his Love: It is a symptom of a wretched state
of Soul; if there proceed no sighs and groans, no signs of grief from the sense
of God's displeasure, it is a sad evidence there is no Spiritual Life.
Indolence under the effects of God's Anger, is like the stilness of the Dead
Sea, whose Calm is a Curse. The Jews, tho entitled the People of God, are
deeply charged for this prodigious Madness; O Lord, thou have struck them, but
they have not grieved; thou have consumed them, but they refused to receive
correction: they have made their faces harder than a Rock, they have refused to
return. Jer. 5. 3. We have whole Quarries of such obdurate Wretches amongst us;
this impenitent disregard of God's hand is a dreadful presage of future and
more heavy Judgments. Who ever hardened himself against the Lord, and prospered?
Do we provoke the Lord to Jealousy, are we stronger than he? The most
refractory Sinner he can compel to acknowledge with bitter lamentations his
Wickedness, and weakness, how unable he is to contend with his Judge. But
supposing a respite from Punishment here, there is an Hell prepared for
stubborn Sinners, where is Weeping and Wailing for ever. Whom the Rods do not
awaken, the Scorpions shall.

Secondly; I shall now proceed to explicate what is included in the resignment
of our selves to God in times of Affliction. This will be made evident by
considering the leading powers and faculties which Grace sanctifies and works
in, according to their natural subordination.

The Understanding approves 1.
the severest dispensations of Providence to be good, that is for reasons
though sometimes unsearchable, yet always righteous, and for gracious ends to
the Saints. When Hezekiah heard the heavy Prophecy, that all his Treasures
should be carried to Babylon, and his Royal Progeny should become Slaves there,
he said to Isaiah, Good is the Word of the Lord which thou have spoken. His
Isa. 39. 6, 7, 8.
sanctified Mind acknowledged it to be a just Correction of his vain Pride, and
quietly submitted to it: And as there is a satisfaction of Mind in the
rectitude, so in the graciousness of his Proceedings. The misapprehension and
mis-belief of God's design in afflicting, causes Impatience and Murmuring; but
when the Mind is convinced, that he afflicts us for our Benefit, that Bodily
Diseases are Medicinal Advantages, the remedies of the Soul; that the losses of
Earthly Comforts prepare us for Divine Enjoyments; that the way which is sowed
with Thorns, and watered with Tears, leads to Heaven; the Heart is compliant
with the sharpest methods of Providence. But these things will be more fully
opened under the several heads of Arguments to enforce the Duty.

This Resignment principally consists in the consent and subjection 2.
of the Will to the Orders of Heaven. The Will is an imperious Faculty,
naturally impatient of opposition to its Desires, and we pay the highest honor
to God in the lowest submission of our Wills to his Appointments. It Is true the
Will cannot make a direct choice of Evil, nor love Afflictions, but the Holy
Spirit by a powerful Operation so disposes it, as to renounce its own
inclinations when discordant with the Will of God. And the more humble, ready
and entire the Submission is, the more difficult and harsh the denial of our
natural desire is, the more supernatural Grace shines and is acceptable. It is
the perfection of Holiness to do what God loves, and to love what God does.
There is a rare example of this in David's carriage, when under his greatest
Affliction: 'twas in his flight from his Son Absalom, who endeavored to
deprive him of his Kingdom and Life. And the 2 Samuel 15. 25.
King said unto Zadock the Priest, Carry back the Ark of God into the City: if
I shall find favor in his eyes, he will bring me again, and show me both it
and his Habitation; but if he shall say, I have no delight in thee, behold,
here I am, let him do to me as seems good unto him. O happy frame! his Spirit
was so equally balanced, That if God would suffer a Rebel that violated the
most tender and strict relations of a Son and Subject to a Gracious Father and
Sovereign, the Murderer of his Brother, and a Parricide in his desires, to
usurp his Throne, he humbly submitted to it.

The Duty of Resignation consists in the composure of the Affections 3.
to a just measure and temper, when under the sharpest Discipline. Of the
Passions, some are tender and melting, others are fierce and stormy, and if a
ponderous oppressing Evil happen, or the loss of that good that was very
pleasing, they sometimes join together, as the Clouds at the same time dissolve
in Showers, and break forth in Thunder and Lightning. Now when sanctified
Reason has a due Empire over them, and the Soul possesses it self in
Patience, it is a happy effect of Resignation to the Divine disposal. Of this
we have an eminent instance in the afflicted Saint forementioned. When David
was so wickedly reproached by Shimei, and Abishai fired with Indignation, would
presently have taken exemplary revenge, by stopping his Breath for ever: Should
this dead Dog Curse my Lord the King? Let me 2 Samuel 16. 9. 10.
go over, I pray thee, and take off his Head. How cool and calm was David's
Spirit? he felt no aestuations nor tumults within, expressed no outrageous
complaints, but said, Let him Curse, because the Lord has said to him, Curse
David. There is a twofold excess of the Sorrowful Affections in Troubles:

I. In the degrees of them. II. In the continuance.
First; In the degrees of them, when they exceed their causes. Afflictive
things that deeply wound us, are usually represented by the reflection of
Sorrow, with all the heightning Circumstances, the Loss as unvaluable, the Evil
as intolerable. As objects are greater than their true proportion when seen
through a Mist; so do Evils, apprehended through Grief: and after such a false
judgment the Passions take their violent course, and the Spirit sinks under
overwhelming heaviness. The Soul is disabled from performing what belongs to
it, with respect to the general and particular Calling, and cannot with freedom
wait upon God, but neglects its duty and felicity. 'Twas the complaint of the
afflicted Poet, Hei mihi quod miseros prudentia prima relinquit.
The first effect of misery is black confusion in the thoughts, that the Mind
does not distinctly consider, and apply such things as would be effectual to
mitigate, or remove it. Besides, as when the Stream overflows the Channel, it
runs foul and turbid: so immoderate Sorrow often causes secret Discontent and
Anger at the Almighty, disquieting and tormenting risings of heart against his
Providence. All things are disordered and turbulent in the little and marvelous
Monarchy of the Soul. And such seeds of incitation are in our corrupt Nature,
that in the extremity of Anguish, the furious Passions swell into a Storm, and
break the restraints of Reason and Grace. Job in a hot fit expostulates
strangely with God, Is it good unto thee that thou Job 10. 3.
should oppress? He was a Holy Man, and a Prophet, who in the Paroxism of
his Passion cursed the Jer. 20. 14.
day of his Birth.

Secondly; There is an Excess in the continuance.

Deep Grief does more arrest the Thoughts upon its object, than the Affection
of Joy does. The Mind is not so easily diverted from what afflicts, as from
what delights. The main strain of the Soul is toward the mournful Object; and
in the midst of Comforts to support the fainting Spirts, there still remains a
sad remembrance of that which torments: a swarm of stinging thoughts
continually wound and inflame the Breast: no Counsels prevail, but the Soul is
resolved in its grief, and always restless with a bitter desire of what is
irrecoverable. Thus the Prophet describes the misery of Rachel, weeping for her
Children, and would not be comforted, because they were not. Jer. 31. 15.
As some Venomous Creatures turn all that they eat into Poison: so obstinate
Sorrow takes occasion from every thing to increase it self. This consumes the
strength, and the Mourner lives only to feel his Misery, and thinks Death too
slow for him, that was so precipitate for the person lamented. Thus by the
fixed contemplation of its Trouble, the Soul is distracted from its heavenly
Original, and from pursuing its blessed End, and indulgeth its Sorrow, as if
the loss of a Temporal Comfort were utterly undoing to it. This obstinate grief
is inconsistent with a resigned frame of Spirit. Though in great Afflictions,
there will be a conflict of Nature, and it is Wisdom to let Grief breath forth,
and have a passage, yet Grace will assuage the Fury, and limit the time, by
regarding the Will of God, and by deriving from the Springs of Comfort above
some inward refreshings, when the Streams below totally fail.

I shall now propound the Arguments that will clearly convince us of this Duty
of Resignation; some of which are powerful to silence all rebellious Arguings,
and suppress all the transports of the Passions; others to raise the drooping
Spirits, and incline the Heart to a calm yielding, and complete subjection to
the Divine Will.

The first Argument arises from God's Original Supreme Right in our Persons,
and all things we enjoy. He is the Fountain of Being, and produced us out the
depth of our native nothing, and made us little lower than the Angels. He is
the Author of all our Good, the just and true Proprietor of all his Benefits.
From hence results his Sovereignty and Dominion over us, which is declared in
his Law, and the dispensations of his Providence. His Law is the Rule of our
Lives and Actions, his Governing Providence the Rule of our Sufferings and
Passions. There is indispensibly due, a free and full Obedience to his
Commands, and an entire universal Resignation to the Orders of his Providence.
The enjoyment of all our Blessings is from his pure Goodness, and rich Bounty,
which requires our humble and affectionate Thankfulness; and his resumption of
them should be entertained with a Holy and a Patient Submission. He gives them
freely, and may recall them at his Pleasure. In whatsoever instance his Will is
declared, we must with Humility and Meekness submit; for he has an equal
Empire in disposing all things that are equally his own, and we are bound by an
equal Obedience to acknowledge his Dominion. When Eli received the terrible
message of the ruin of his Family; the final excision of it from the dignity
of the Priesthood, he patiently submits: It is the Lord, let him do what
seems him good. 1 Samuel 3. 17.
The mere desire of exemption from his overruling Will, is a heinous Sin, and
a stubborn uncompliance with it in the issues of things, is direct Rebellion,
mixed with ingratitude, obstructive to our present Peace, and future Happiness.
If the Afflicted would for a while suspend their Tears and Sighs, and with free
Reason consider, that what relation soever they had in their dearest Loss,
whether of a Father, a Son, of a Husband or Wife, or any other amiable and
passionate terms, yet God has a nearer right and juster claim in those
Persons, being his by the best Titles of Creation and Redemption, it would
silence murmurings and impatience, and stop the scope of inordinate Sorrow. Our
Propriety in them was derived from his Favor, and our Possession was depending
on his Will, for his Right in all his Creatures is unalienable. This
consideration was the foundation of Job's Patience; when he was stripped of all
his outward Comforts, how composed was he in his Mind! how considerate in his
words! he reflects upon his Native Poverty, Naked came I into the World, and
Job 1. 21.
naked shall I return thither, and Adores God's Dominion: The Lord has given,
and the Lord has taken, blessed be his Name. Add farther, that which by
immediate connection follows, the consideration of the glorious Majesty of God,
and our natural meanness and unworthiness. The distance and disproportion is so
vast between him and us, that we are not able to conceive the full and just
Idea of his Excellent Greatness: We are fain to assist our Minds in the
Thoughts of God by sensible representations; and to express our Conceptions by
borrowed terms; His Immensity by the Ocean; his Eternity, by the returning of a
Circle into it self; his Power, by Thunder; his Majesty by the Sun in its
Meridian splendours. As the flying Fishes, (Shoals of which are met in sailing
to the Indies,) can fly no longer than their Wings remain moist; when those
Membranes are dry, they cannot move, and are forced to dip themselves again in
the Sea, that by softening them, they may renew their Flight: Thus when we
ascend in our Minds to God, we form no Conceptions but what take their rise
from sensible things, which infinitely fall short of his Perfections. Who can
fully understand the transcendent Excellencies of his Nature? Who can describe
what is ineffable, and most worthy St. Hillary declares of himself, Non sibi
relictum quicquam aliud a natura sua intelligere, in quo majus officium
praestare conditori suo posset quam ut tantum eum esse intelligeret, quantus
and intelligi non potest and potest credi. de Trin. lib. 1.
to be adored with silent admiration and ecstasy of Mind? He dwells in that
Light which is inaccessible; the Angels, the most comprehensive Spirits, vail
their faces in the presence of his Glory. He is his own Original, but without
Beginning; alone, but not solitary; one ever Blessed God, yet communicates his
entire Deity to the Son and Spirit; he is not divided in number, nor confused
in Unity. He is not compelled by Necessity, nor changed by Liberty, nor
measured by Time: If we ascend to the first Fountains of all Ages, then his
Infinite Understanding comprehended in one clear view, the whole compass,
extent and duration of all things. His powerful Word made the visible and
invisible World, and upholds them. That which was spoken with Flattery, of a
Roman Emperor, by Seneca, (who as much degenerated from the dignity of a
Stoical Philosopher, in licking Nero, as in biting Alexander) is absolutely
true of the Sovereign Lord of the World: His Providence Ille est vinculum per
quod res publica cohaeret: Ille spiritus vitalis, quem tot millia trahunt:
nihil ipsa futura nisi onus and praeda si men's illa Imperii sub trahatur lib.
de Clem.
is the Band that unites the parts of the Universal Commonwealth, the Vital
Spirit and Virtue that sustains all: Without his Eye and Hand, his dispositive
Wisdom and Power, the whole frame would disband, and fall into Confusion and
Ruin. He is seated upon the Throne of the Universe. Thousand thousands of
glorious Spirits minister unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stand
before him, in the quality and humility of his Servants, ready to execute his
Commands. He is the Judge of the Living and the Dead, that disposes of Heaven
and Hell for Ever. And what is Man? a little Breathing Dust. He is infinitely
above us, and so strangely condescends, in having a tender care of us, that the
Psalmist was swallowed up in Ecstasy and Amazement at the thoughts of it: Lord,
What is Man that thou art mindful of him? or the Son of Man that thou regardest
Psalm. 8.
him? Nay, we are beneath his Anger, as a Worm is not worthy of the indignation
of an Angel. Now the more we magnify God, and exalt his Authority in our
Judgments, the more our Wills are prepared to yield to him: His Excellency will
make us afraid to oppose his Providence. When the Son of God appeared to Saul,
in his Glory, and commanded in Person, he presently lets fall his Arms of
Defiance; and says, Lord, what will thou have me to do? His Act. 9. 6.
Resignation was absolute; nothing was so hard to do, nothing so formidable to
suffer, but he was ready to accomplish and endure in obedience to Christ. The
more we debase and vilify our selves, the more easy it will be to bear what God
inflicts; Humility disposes to Submission. Our Passions are not excited at the
breaking of an ordinary Glass; but if a Vessel of Crystal be broken, it moves
us: the lower esteem we have of our selves, the less we shall be transported
for any breach that is made upon us. We read in the History of Job, many heavy
Complaints uttered by him of his Sufferings, all the sad Figures of passionate
Eloquence made use of to represent them, and the fruitless Essays of his
Friends, that did rather exasperate than appease his Spirit: And it is very
observable, that when the Lord interposed himself to justify the ways of his
Providence, he did not charge upon him the guilt of his Sins that deserved the
severest Judgments, but appears in his Glory, and reminds himof his original
nothing. Where wast thou when I laid the Job 38. 4
Foundations of the Earth? declare, if thou have Understanding. He opens to him
some of the Excellencies of the Deity in the works of Creation and Providence,
and the present effect was, Job adored with humble Reverence the Divine
Majesty, and acknowledged his own unworthiness. Behold, I am vile, what shall I
answer thee? I will lay my hand upon my mouth; now mine eyes see thee, I abhor
my self, and repent in Dust and Ashes. The thickest smoke by ascending
dissipates and vanishes. If the troubled Soul did ascend to Heaven, and
consider that even the worst Evils are either from the operation or permission
of the Divine Providence, the Cloudy disturbing Thoughts and Passions would be
presently scattered. David had a blessed experiment of this in his distress: I
was dumb, and opened Psalm. 39. 8.
not my mouth, because thou did it. Such an awful apprehension he had of God,
as transcendently superior to him, and unaccountable for his Proceedings. When
any impatient Thoughts arise, we should presently chain them up, for there is
Folly and Fury in them; What am I, that my sullen Spirit should dispute against
the Orders of Heaven? that my Passions should resist the Will of of the highest
Lord? that my Desires should depose him from his Throne? For thus by
implication and consequence they do, who are vexed at his Providence. A Holy
Soul will tremble at the Thoughts of it. Methinks God speaks to the afflicted
and disturbed Soul, in the words of the Psalm, Be still, and know that I am
God. The actual consideration of his Supremacy will be powerful to lay the
growing Storm of Passions. Impatience arises from the ignorance of God and our
selves.

Secondly; The Righteousness of God in all his ways, if duly considered, will
compose the Afflicted Spirit to quiet and humble submission. He is never
injurious to us when he deprives us of our sweetest and most precious comforts,
because we have incurred the forfeiture of all. He is not cruel in laying the
heaviest punishments upon us, for we deserve them. If we were free from actual
Sins, yet our depraved nature, so repugnant to the pure Law of God, involves us
under an Obligation to Punishment. If we had not been attained with the guilt
of Original Sin, yet the Sins committed in the course of our Lives, make us
deeply obnoxious to Divine Justice: How much more the concurrent guilt of
Original and Actual Sins? The acts of Sin are transient and pass away; but the
guilt and stain of Sin, and the Conscience of Sin remain, and no less than
Eternal Punishment is commensurate to the obliquity. From hence there is the
clearest Reason to justify God in all his Proceedings. Righteousness
establishes his Throne. The Prophet says, Thy Righteousness is like the great
Mountains, thy Judgments Psalm. 36. 6.
are a great Deep. The special ends of God in severe dispensations, are
sometimes indiscernible, but never unjust; his Righteousness is obvious to
every eye. The actual consideration of this is powerful to silence the uproar
of the Passions, and to make us lie humbly at his Feet under the sorest
Chastisements. I will bear the Indignation of the Lord (without Mic. 7. 9.
murmuring, says the Afflicted Church) because I have sinned against him. As
disobedience in our Inclinations and Actions, is a tacit reflection upon the
equity of his Law, as if the restraints of it were unreasonable; so Impatience
and fretful Discontent is upon the equity of his Providence, as if the
afflicting dispensations of it were not due to us: And the sense of our
Sinfulness, and God's Righteousness, is an excellent preventive of it. If thou
art in great Afflictions, and feel any tumultuous Thoughts, any rebellious
Risings within thee, Consider thou art a Sinner, guilty of ten Thousand
Provocations, and dare thou appear before his enlightened and terrible
Tribunal, and challenge him for any unrighteous Proceedings? Wherefore does a
living Man complain, Lam. 3. 39.
a Man for the punishment of his Sins? Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I
will not offend any more. Job 34. 31, 32.
That which I know not, teach thou me; and if I have done Iniquity, I will do
no more. Besides, all the Punishments of Men here, are with Merciful allays,
not in just proportion to their Guilt. The Church in its calamitous State,
described in the most doleful Lamentations of Jeremiah, when the greatest
number of the Jews perished by the Sword, or Famine that attended the War,
their City and Temple were laid in Ruins, and the unhappy People that escaped
the fury of the Chaldeans, were the Captives and Triumphs of their Enemies; yet
in that unparalleled Affliction she acknowledges, It is the Lord's Mercies
that Lam. 3. 22.
we are not utterly and totally consumed, and lays her Mouth in the Dust, a
posture of the lowest abasement. And Holy Ezra reflecting upon that dreadful
Calamity, acknowledges their Punishment was beneath their desert, as their
Deliverance was above their expectation: And for Ezra 9. 13.
all that is come upon us for our evil deeds and great trespasses, seeing thou
have punished us less than our iniquities deserve, and given us such a
deliverance as this. Our Deserts are less than the least of God's Mercies, and
our Offenses greater than the greatest of his Judgments. This should make us
not only patiently submit, but humbly accept the punishment of our iniquity,
as far less than what is deserved. If Levit. 26. 41.
the Sentence of Death against a Malefactor be exchanged for Banishment, or
Banishment be remitted for a short Confinement, is there not incomparable more
cause to be thankful for what is pardoned, than to complain for what is
suffered? What Ingratitude is it to be impatient and murmuring for these light
Afflictions that are but for a moment, when we deserve an eternal and
insupportable weight of Misery in Hell? It is infinitely more becoming us and
safe, to argue against our irregular Passions, than to tax his Righteous
Dispensations.

Thirdly; His Power is Immense and uncontrollable, and it is a vain attempt to
contend with him, as if the Eternal Order of his Decrees could be altered or
broken. The Contest between God and the Sinner, is whose Will shall stand. It
is his glorious work to depress the Proud, and subdue the stubborn refractory
Spirits. The Punishment of the first Pride in the Angels, is an Eternal and
terrible example of his powerful Justice; and how intolerable a Crime it is,
that Heaven could not bear, but presently opened, and the Guilty fell into the
bottomless Pit. Now Pride is a seminal Evil, and lies at the root of
Stubborness, and impatience under Judgments. Proud Dust is apt to fly in God's
Face upon every motion of the Afflicting Passions. And by the resistance of
Self-Will he is provoked to more Severity. Woe be to him that strives with his
Maker. Isa. 45. 9.
This is to be like a restive Horse or Mule, without Understanding, that flings
and foams when the Burden is laid upon him, but gets nothing but Blows,
without the removal of the Burden. It is our Duty and Interest to observe the
Blessed Apostles direction: Humble your selves under the 1 Pet. 5. 6.
mighty hand of God, and he shall exalt you. There is a passive humbling by his
irresistible Providence, and an active voluntary humbling, which implies a
subjection to his Law, and a submission to his Providence: This is infinitely
pleasing to him, it is the right disposition that prepares us for Mercy, and is
the certain way of Exaltation; for then God obtains his End. The humble
Prostrating our selves at his Feet to receive his Correction, causes his Bowels
to relent, and stops his Hand: the seeming humiliation of Ahab procured a
respite of those fearful Judgments denounced against his House. It is said of
the generosity of the Lion, that he spares his prostrate Adversary. In short,
our Salvation depends upon our humble demeanor under afflictive Dispensations.
We have had Fathers of our Flesh which corrected us, and we gave them
reverence, shall we not Heb. 12. 9.
much more be in subjection to the Father of Spirits, and live? Unsubmission
induces a deadly guilt upon the Rebellious.

Fourthly; His Paternal Love in sending Afflictions is a sufficient Argument to
win our compliance with his Will. The blessed Apostle applying Lenitives to the
Afflicted, propounds two Divine Truths, that if seriously thought of, and
steadfastly believed, are powerful to mitigate the acerbity of all Sufferings,
and support the Spirit in the greatest Agony. The first is, God scourges every
Son whom he receives: And the other that is Heb. 12. 6.
joined with it is, Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth.

The Rule is general,

First; All his Sons are under the Discipline of the Rod: and who would be so
unhappy as to be exempted from that number for all the prosperity of the World?
Afflictions sanctified, are the conspicuous Seal of their Adoption, and Title
to Heaven. And who would forfeit the honor of that Adoption, and lose the
benefit annexed to it, the eternal Inheritance, rather than patiently bear his
Fatherly Chastisements? Others that enjoy a perpetual Spring of Pleasure here,
are declared Bastards and not Sons: they are indeed within the compass of his
Universal Providence, but not of that peculiar care that belongs to his Sacred
and Select Progeny. His Corrections are an Argument of his Authority as our
Father, and an assurance that we are his Children: this should induce us not
only with submiss temper of Soul, but with thankfulness to receive the sharpest
Correction from the hands of our Heavenly Father. This was the reason of our
Savior's meek yielding himself to the violence and cruelty of his Enemies. The
Cup which my Father has given me, shall I not drink it?

Secondly; Chastisement is the effect of his Paternal Love: He is the Father of
our Spirits, and that Divine Relation carries with it a special Love to the
Spirits of Men, and in that degree of Eminence, as to secure and advance their
happiness, though to the destruction of the Flesh. The Soul is of incomparable
more worth than the Body, as the bright Oriental Pearl than the mean Shell that
contains it: this God most highly values, for this he gave so great a Price,
and on it draws his Image. If Temporal Prosperity were for our best advantage,
how willingly would God bestow it on us? He that spared not his own Son, but
gave him up for us all, Romans 8. 32.
how shall he not with him also freely give us all things? Which words among
all that the Holy Ghost has dictated to the Interpreters of God's Heart to his
People, are most expressive of his love and Bounty* and most for their comfort.
He that gives Grace and (...) ^^^ost real testimonies (...) certainly withholds
no good thing from them. I shall produce one convincing instance of this. St.
Paul, who by an incomparable Privilege was rapt up to the Celestial Paradise,
and heard ineffable things, yet was tormented by the Angel of Satan, and his
earnest repeated Prayer for deliverance, not presently granted. Did not God
love that blessed Apostle, whose internal Love to Christ almost equaled the
Seraphims, those pure everlasting Flames, and was expressed in the invariable
tenor of his Life, by such miraculous Actions and Sufferings for the
propagating and defense of the Faith of Christ, and the Glory of his Name? If
we love him because he first loved us, as St. John testifies, certainly he that
returned such a superlative Affection to Christ, received the greatest Love
from him. Now, if Christ did love Paul, why did he not upon his earnest
repeated Prayer, deliver him from his wounding Trouble, whatsoever it was? That
Permission was a demonstration of the Love of Christ to him, as it is
acknowledged by himself; Lest I should be exalted above measure through the 2
Cor. 13. 7.
abundance of Revelation, there was given to me a Thorn in the Flesh, and the
Messenger of Satan to buffet me. That the Afflictions of the Saints proceed
from God's Love, will be evident, by considering,

I. His gracious Design in sending them.

II. His compassionate Providence over them, and his assisting Power afforded
to his People in their Troubles.

III. The happy issue out of them.

First; His gracious Design in sending them. God does not afflict willingly,
but if need be, not for his own pleasure, but for our profit, that we may be
partakers of his Holiness. The expression is high and emphatical, his Heb. 12.
10.
Holiness, the brightest Glory of his Nature, the divinest Gift of his Love.

The two principal parts of Holiness, are, ceasing from doing Evil, and
learning to do well. And Afflictions are ordained and sent as profitable for
both these effects.

1. For the prevention or cure of Sin, which is an evil incomparably worse in
its nature, and terrible consequents in this and the next World, than all mere
afflicting temporal Evils. Sin defiles and debaseth the Soul, which is the
proper excellency of Man, and separates from God our supreme Good. Your Sins
have separated between you and your God, and have hid his face from you. All
Afflictions that can befall us here Isa. 59. 2.
in our persons or concernments, the most disgraceful Accidents, the most
reproachful contumelious Slanders, the most loathsome contagious Diseases, that
cause our dearest Friends to withdraw from us, yet cannot deprive us of Union
with God by Faith and Love, nor of the fruition of his propitious Presence.
Lazarus when covered with Ulcers, was kissed with the Kisses of his Mouth: But
Sin has this pernicious effect, it separates from his gracious Presence here,
and, if continued in without Repentance, will exclude from his Glorious
Presence for ever. Now Afflictions are Medicinal Applications for the cure of
Sin, the Disease and Death of the Soul, and therefore infinitely worse than the
sharpest Remedies.

The beginnings and progress of Conversion to God, are usually by sanctified
Afflictions. Indeed, considering our folly, and perverse abuse of his
Blessings, they are the most congruous means for our Recovery. The Light of
God's Law does not so powerfully convince us of the Evil of Sin till felt in
the effects of it. Thy own wickedness shall correct thee, and Jer. 2. 19.
thy backslidings shall reprove thee; know therefore and see that it is an evil
thing and a bitter, that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, and that my fear
is not in thee, says the Lord of Hosts. The Instructions of the Rod, are more
sensible than of the Word; as the feeling of a tormenting Disease, produces
another kind of understanding of it than the reading of its nature in Books of
Physic: and they make us more attentive to God's Call, and leave a deeper
impression upon us. It is Elihu his observation, If Sinners be bound in
Fetters, and held in Cords, then he Job 36. 8, 9.
shows them their works, and their transgressions, that they have exceeded.
Affliction clarifies their Sight, makes Sin to be as heinous in the view of
Conscience, as in its own foul nature. It follows, He opens also the Ear to
Discipline, and commands that they return from Ver. 10.
their iniquity. Gentle Methods were lost upon them, but by Judgments he
effectually commands, they relent and return to their Duty. And after
Conversion we need their Discipline, to make us more circumspect and obedient.
The Psalmist declares, It is good for me that I have been afflicted. For before
he was afflicted Psalm. 119
he went astray: He was reduced from the error of his ways by his Troubles:
And 'twas his experimental observation, I know in faithfulness (from the
constancy of Love) thou have afflicted me. Nothing so cools our Zeal to Eternal
things, as the Love of the World. Vital heat declines and languishes, as the
Peaverish heat is inflamed; and till we feel the vexations, we are allured by
the vanities of the World: therefore God is pleased by such bitter means to
make us more Holy and Heavenly. Sometimes he removes with Jealousy those
objects to which our hearts are so entirely engaged, that the enjoyment of them
intercepts the ascending of our Affections to himself. Besides, he will not
suffer us to perish in Prosperity. We are chastened of the Lord for our
amendment, that we may not be condemned 1 Cor. 11.
with the unreformed World. And is not this an infallible testimony of his
Love? David said, Let the Righteous smite me, and it shall Psa. 141. 5.
be a kindness; let him reprove me, and it shall be an excellent oil. If he
valued the Reprehensions that were not contumelious and injurious, not to
upbraid but reform him, as a favor and dear obligation, how much more should
we the corrections of our Heavenly Father? And it will be a greater incitement
to an humble and grateful acceptance of this Discipline; if we consider what a
severe neglect it is, when God suffers the Wicked to lead a Voluptuous Life
without disturbance: They are encircled with Riches and Honors, softened with
Pleasures, charmed with enticing objects, and thus become hardened in Sin: they
are Riotous and Luxurious, and give the Reins to their corrupt, unruly
Appetites without control; the Slaves of Sense, led only by Principles of
Pleasure, and hereby are inexcusable, and made ripe for Perdition, and reserved
for final Vengeance. Others, though not guilty of scandalous enormities, yet
are by continual Prosperity, settled upon their Lees, careless and secure,
neglect the great Salvation, and say in their hearts, It is good to be here;
and their Damnation is as certain, though not so visible, as of those who
commit gross and open Wickedness. Sad Preterition! In the midst of Pleasures
they are truly miserable. They have just reason to be abandoned to Sorrow,
being forsaken of the Love of God. The Bramble is not cut, when the Vine is
pruned till it bleeds in order to its fruitfulness: this letting them alone to
take their fill of Pleasures, is a heavy presage of final ruin. Heb. 4. 14.
When the Patient is desperate, the Physician lays no restraint upon the
Diseased Appetite, but permits him to take what he craves.

Besides, the Intention of God is by Affliction to exercise and illustrate
their Graces. The most excellent Christian Virtues would be comparatively of
little use without hard Trials. Unfeigned Faith in the Truth and Power of God
to accomplish his Promises, Sincere Love to him, humble Self-denial,
Persevering Patience then appear in their radiancy and vigor. What a blessed
advantage is it, by the loss of Temporal Comforts to increase in the Graces of
the Spirit? they are the truest Riches, the fullest Joy, and the highest honor
of a Christian. St. Peter declares, the trial of our Faith is much more
precious than of Gold 1 Pet. 1. 7.
that perishes; it is refined and resplendent by the fire of Affliction, and
will be found unto Praise, and Honor, and Glory, at the appearing of Christ.
It is the advice of St. James, Count it all Joy when ye fall into diverse Jam.
1. 2, 3.
Temptations. Knowing this, that the trial of your Faith works Patience:
Though Afflictions simply considered, may be very grievous, yet if we advisedly
weigh, and rightly compare things, even when our sorrowful Passions are moved,
our Judgments will esteem them matter of Joy, not only in expectation of
Future Happiness, but as Divine Grace is thereby drawn forth in the most noble
Operations. In short, the ultimate design of God in afflicting his People, is
thereby to bring them to Heaven. Affliction mortifies the Lusts of the Flesh,
purifies the Spirit, and makes us fit for the Inheritance of the Saints in
Light. By persevering Patience in Sufferings, they are approved of God, and
obtain a Right and Title to the Kingdom of Glory. For according to the tenor of
the Covenant of Grace, Heaven shall be conferred as a reward to Rev. 22.
those that overcome. If there be no Enemy, there will be no Fight; and if no
Fight, no Victory; if no Victory, no Triumph; only those who Conquer are
Crowned.

The beloved Disciple, with his Brother, though allied to our Savior by
Consanguinity, who expected by special favor to be glorified without a
preparatory Trial, yet he tells them, without drinking of his Cup, they could
not have a share in his Kingdom, and this should reconcile our Spirits to all
our Troubles: for the Apostle declares, who was a competent Judge, having been
thoroughly acquainted with Griefs, and had a Prospect into the Glorious Kingdom,
Ireckon that the Sufferings of this present Life, are not worthy to be Romans 8.
compared to the Glory that shall be revealed in us.

2. God's Love is discovered in his compassionate Providence over them, and
assisting Power afforded to them in their Afflictions: He speaks to the
afflicted and disconsolate, My Son, despise Heb. 12. 5.
not thou the Chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of him:
To sweeten by that tender expression, the rigor of his Discipline; to signify
his dear sympathy with their Anguish and Sufferings.

Heavenly Consolation! God himself bears a share in their Sorrows, is afflicted
in their Afflictions: And the effect of this Love is, that he always tempers
and moderates their Trials, to their Strength; or increases their Strength in
proportion to the Trial. His Corrections are deliberate Dispensations, that
proceed from Judgment, not from Fury, which the Prophet earnestly deprecates.
Jer. 8.
His Rods are bound up with Mercy, his Faithfulness joins with his Affection,
in moderating their Sufferings. It is one Clause of the Covenant of Grace, made
with Christ, typified by David, If his Children break my Statutes, and keep not
my Commandments, Psalm. 89. 31, 32, 33.
then will I visit their transgression with a Rod, to amend, not to destroy
them; but my loving Kindness I will not take away from them, nor suffer my
Faithfulness to fail. The Apostle assures Believers, That God is faithful, who
will not suffer them to be tempted above 1 Cor. 10. 13.
what they are able, but will with the Temptation make a way to escape, that
they may be able to bear it. Our Redeemer in his Agony was relieved by Heavenly
Succor, the presence of an Angel with a message of Comfort: St. Paul found it
verified by his own Experience, That as the Sufferings 2 Cor. 1. 5. 2 Cor. 12.
9.
of Christ abounded in him, so his Consolations abounded by Christ, and the
Divine Power was accomplished, illustriously appeared in supporting his
weakness. How many have enjoyed Comforts of a more precious nature, and more
abundant, in want of Supplies from the World, than in the possession of them?
When there is a total Eclipse below, the blessed Comforter descends with Light,
and fills the Soul with Joy, in Believing.

The Historian tells us of a Acin quamvis de missum Etna nullus frigore ante
vertit. Solin
clear Vein of Water, that springs from Mongibel, (that great Furnace, that
always sends forth Smoke or Flames,) yet is so cool, as if it distilled from a
Snowy Mountain: thus the Saints in the Fiery Trial, have been often refreshed
with Divine Comforts, and such humble Submissions, and gracious Thanksgivings
have proceeded from their Lips, as have been very comfortable to those about
them.

Thirdly; The Issue out of all is the most sensible declaration of God's Love
to them. The continuance is limited by his tender Love, till they are prepared
for Mercy. The Prosperity of the Wicked is Wine in the beginning, and Lees at
the bottom; but the worst and afflicted state of the Saints is first, and will
at length certainly end in Felicity. In the Tragedy of Job, the Devil was the
Author, Chaldeans and Sabaeans were the Actors, but the end was from the Lord.
We are instructed by the Apostle, That although no Chastisement for the present
seems to be Heb. 12. 11.
joyous, but grievous, nevertheless, afterward it yields the peaceable fruit
of righteousness, unto them that are exercised thereby. It is an allusion to
the Rewards in the Olympic Games, when the persons that overcame in those
Exercises, were crowned with Wreaths of Olive Leaves, the Emblem of Peace. Thus
Christians who with unfainting perseverance in their Duty, suffer Affliction,
shall be rewarded with Holiness in conjunction with Peace. This peaceable fruit
of Righteousness is not the natural product of Affliction: Grapes do not spring
from Thorns, nor Figs from Thistles; neither can it be so properly ascribed to
the afflicted person, as to the powerful Virtue and special Grace of the Holy
Spirit, who sanctifies Afflictions, and makes them profitable for effecting
God's intention by them. And when the afflicted person becomes more humble,
more holy, more weaned from the World, more resigned to the Will of God, this
Fruit unto Holiness will compensate all their Pains and Sorrows. And in
conjunction with Holiness, there is a Divine Peace, a Joyful calm and quietness
of Conscience in the sense of God's favor; his answers of Peace are usually a
reward according to the operations of Grace; His Comforts are dispensed, as
encouragements to Obedience. Besides, when the Sinful Corruptions are purged
out, which caused perpetual disturbance, and our Affections and Actions are
correspondent to the Divine Law, there is that clearness and serenity of Mind,
that rest and ease in the Soul, arising from its just and due subordination
unto God, which the disobedient, in all their seeming prosperity, never enjoy.
There is no peace, says my God, to the Wicked. These beginnings of happiness
are obtained here, but the perfection of it is in the next Life. Blessed is the
Man that endures Temptation, Jam. 1. 12.
for when he is tried he shall receive the Crown of Righteousness, which God
has promised to them that love him. The richness and value of the Crown of
Life is so great, that God, the most wise and just esteemer of things, gave the
precious Blood of his Son to purchase it for us. It is a Felicity so
transcendent in its quality, and stable in its duration, that the Blessed God
cannot give us a greater; for what greater good is conceivable than himself?
and what more stable enjoyment of it than Eternity? The hope of this makes a
Christian Blessed in the midst of the greatest miseries. Our light Afflictions
that are but for 2 Cor. 4.
a moment, work for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory.

Fifthly; The infinite Wisdom of God orders all things in the best manner for
his own Glory, and the final good of his People. If he governed by absolute
Empire, none in Heaven or Earth might say to him, What do thou? but there is
an inseparable connection between his Wisdom and his Will; he is the King
Eternal, 1 Timothy 1
and the only Wise God, as the Apostle joins those Divine Titles. In this the
excellence of the Divine Liberty shines, that it is always regulated by Infinite
Wisdom: He works all things according to the Counsel of his Will: Ephesians. 1. 11.
this is spoken according to humane conceptions, but must be understood in a
sense becoming the Perfections of God: for Counsel cannot properly be
attributed to God, whose Understanding is Infinite, and in one view comprehends
all things; but as those things are most complete that are the product of our
deliberate reasonings and deep contrivance; so his work is perfect, for all his
ways are Judgment. When Deuteronomy. 32. 4.
ever we are dissatisfied or displeased with his Proceedings, it is from the
Error of our Minds, and the Viciousness of our Affections. we presume to
correct his Providence, as if it were defective in regulating the affairs of
this lower World; but he is wonderful in Counsel, and excellent in Working. In
the Isa. 28. 29.
Creation, this regular and beautiful World was formed out of Darkness and
Confusion: And his Providence, that is now misterious and veiled to us, will
bring into glorious Order and sweet Agreement, those things in their final
resolution, that now seem so perplexed to our Apprehensions. 'Twas a confounding
reproach from God to Job, Who is Job. 32. 2.
this that darkens Counsel by words without knowledge? His passionate
exclamations were such, as if the Divine Wisdom had not disposed all the
Afflicting circumstances in the series of his Sufferings; and that Holy Man
being convinced of his presumptuous Folly, repeats the Charge against himself
with tears of Confusion: Who is he that hides Counsel without Knowledge? Job.
42. 3. 6.
therefore have I uttered that I understood not, things too wonderful for me,
which I knew not; wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in Dust and Ashes: More
particularly,

First; all things are so wisely ordered, that God shall be glorified in the
event; and it is the noblest disposition of a Christian, to prefer the
advancement of his Glory, before all the Comforts of this Life, and Life it
self. Our Blessed Savior in the Forethoughts of his Sufferings, was in
distress and perturbation of Mind, like the darkening of the Sky before a great
Shower: Now is my Soul troubled, what shall I say? John 12. 27.
Father, save me from this Hour. But the short conflict of Nature was presently
at an end, he willingly yielded up himself to be a Sacrifice to the Divine
Honor, and said, Father, glorify thy Name. Moses and Paul, whose admirable
Zeal, had only a Parallel between themselves in the same degree of Holy heat,
desired the Salvation of the Jews before their own, if God might be more
glorified by it. This is the first Petition in Order and Dignity, in that
complete form of Prayer composed by our Savior, as the Rule of all our
desires. Thy Name be Hallowed and Glorified in us, and by us. The admirable
History of Jephtha's only Daughter, is applicable to this purpose; she joifully
came forth to meet her Father, returning Victorious and Triumphant after his
War with the Ammonites. Judge. 11 36.
He had made a rash Vow, to offer up in Sacrifice to God, who ever should first
meet him after his Victory; and upon the sight of his Daughter, was so deeply
wounded with Sorrow, that his Triumph was converted into Lamentations: but the
Grief was only in the Father; for in that first surprise of such a terrible
Sentence to be executed upon her, she did not answer his Tears with Tears, nor
Lamentations with Lamentations, but said unto him, My Father, if thou have
opened thy mouth unto the Lord, do to me, according to that which has
proceeded out of thy mouth, for as much as the Lord has taken Vengeance for
thee on thine Enemies. Methinks the admirable Love and Generosity in a young
Virgin, to whom her Father's Honor and Exaltation was more dear than her Life,
upbraids us for our unwilling submission to those Providential Dispensations
that are ungrateful to Flesh and Blood, wherein the Glory of God is advanced.
If we were called to Martyrdom for his Truth, and our Lives should bleed forth,
as Sacrifices on the Altar, or our Bodies be consumed as Incense on the Censer;
it were an unjust and ungrateful complaint, to express passionate reluctance
against his Providence. If there were other consequences of our present
Sufferings, but the glorifying God, we should be content. That is the worthiest
end which he proposes to himself, and will accomplish: His Divine excellencies
will be illustrated by the wickedness of Men, that at present obscures the
Glory of his Government; his Wisdom, Power, Holiness, Mercy and Justice will be
acknowledged, admired, and magnified at last.

2. His Wisdom will order all things, even the most afflicting and dolorous,
for the good of his People. This is a fearful Paradox to a carnal Mind, that
judges of Good and Evil, as present things are pleasant or unpleasant to
sense, without regard to what is future. It Is like Sampson's Riddle to the
Philistims, Out of the Devourer came Meat, and out of the Strong came
sweetness; But to the Mind that has spiritual discerning, and judges of Good
and Evil, as things are conducive or destructive to the happiness of the Soul,
it is a clear undoubted Truth. We know, says the Apostle with the greatest
assurance, that all things work together for good Romans 8. 28.
to them that love God. All things the most adverse to their present desires,
are so disposed and overruled by his Providence, as if there were a secret
intelligence and concert between them, to promote the Happiness of the Saints:
thus in mixed Bodies the contrary qualities are reduced to such a just measure
and temperament by the Wisdom of the Divine Maker, that a sound and healthful
constitution results from them. We have a rare instance of this in the History
of Joseph, his envious Brethren were the Instruments of his Exaltation: they
sold him for a Slave into Egypt to frustrate his Prophetic Dreams, and there,
by many admirable turns of Providence, he was advanced to the highest Dignity;
and then was verified in him and his Brethren, that his Sheaf arose and stood
upright, and their Sheaves stood round, and did obeisance to his Sheaf. God had
reserved purposes of greater good for Joseph, than if he had continued under
his Fathers tender Eye and Care; therefore it is said in his History, that they
perfideously sold him but God sent him. He that attentively reads the Journeys
of the Israelites through the Wilderness to Canaan, cannot but wonder at the
Circuits and indirect motions in their tedious Travel for Forty Years; and when
near the Borders of the place, so long and ardently desired, they were often
commanded to retreat in the same Line wherein they had advanced to it: had they
chose the shortest way, and disobeyed the Divine Conducter, they had never
entered into the Land of Promise: but following the Pillar that directed their
March, though they seemed lost in their intricate wanderings, yet they obtained
the joyful possession of it. This was a Type of the Saints passage through a
troublesome World, to the true rest above, and that they are guided through many
cross ways directly to the Kingdom of Heaven. Who knows, says Solomon, what is
good for a Man in this Life, Eccles. 6. 12.
all the days of his vain Life, which he spends as a shadow? That which is
desired with importunity, as tending to his Happiness, often proves his Woe:
Some had not been so wicked, and consequently so miserable, if their Lusts had
not been excited by Riches and Power: others had not been secured from
destructive Temptations, but in a low and afflicted state. It Is therefore both
our Duty and Interest not to pray absolutely for any temporal thing; but when
our Desires are most passionate, to say with the humility and holiness, the
reverence and obedience of our Savior, Not my Will, but thine be done. We
shall find our selves more happy by the Divine disposal of things, than if we
had obtained our dearest Wishes, and most ardent Prayers. And when we shall
come to the top of the Holy Hill, and look down on the various Circuits of
Providence by which we ascended, we shall then understand that Wisdom and Love
conducted us safely to Felicity; we shall approve and admire all the Divine
methods in order to our blessed End. Now the belief of this should compose us
to a patient and cheerful resignation of our selves to God's Providence and
Pleasure. Who would not accept of the Counsel of a Friend that proceeds from
Love, though his Judgment were not so exact as to be relied on? Much more
should we thankfully receive the Appointments of God, whose Knowledge and
Affection are equally superlative, in whom there is united the Wisdom of a
Father's (and the tenderness of a Mother's) Love to his Children. Briefly, as
Jonathan by tasting the Honey at the end of his Rod, had his eyes enlightened,
so the end of the severest Chastisements will convince them, that the
Providence of God was more benign and propitious than they could imagine. His
ways are as far above our ways, and his thoughts above our thoughts, as the
Heavens are above the Earth. This Point is applicable to us.

First; by way of Reproof for Use 1.
our unsubmissive behavior in Afflictions, our uncompliance with the Divine
Disposals. Some are in a secret discontent at God's Afflicting Providence; and
this razeth the memory of former Mercies, and takes away the relish of present
Mercies; as the sweet Showers of Heaven that fall into the Sea are turned into
its brackish taste: such neither enjoy God nor themselves. What egregious folly
and vile ingratitude is this! All we have, is from his most free favor; and
shall we peevishly slight his Benefits, because our Desires are not gratified
in every respect? Others are moved with Anger and Vexation for the Evils that
befall them: as the Red-hot Iron under the blows of the Hammer casts abroad
Fiery Sparks; so their stubborn fierce Spirits, when afflicted, break forth in
expressions of impatience and displeasure. They count it a base abjectness of
Mind, a despicable Pusillanimity to humble themselves under God's Judgments,
and with contrition for their Sins to implore his Clemency. The voice of the
Lord makes the Hinds to calve the timorous and weak creatures: But when the
Heavens roar, the Lions Thunder back again. Thus strong and stubborn Sinners,
when they feel the effects of God's Anger, are raging and furious in their
Passions and Expressions. The foolish Man perverteth his way, his most grievous
sufferings are the fruits Prove. 19 3.
of his Sins, and his Heart fretteth against the Lord as the inflicter of them.
This is a high indignity to God, and an injury to themselves. For a vile
Creature, a base guilty Wretch to murmur and storm against God's righteous
Judgments, argues a Prodigious Forgetfulness, both of its dependence and
obnoxiousness to the Divine Tribunal. It is said of the adherents of
Antichrist, that they were scorched with great heat, and blasphemed Rev. 16. 9.
the name of God, which has power over the Plagues, and they repented not to
give him Glory. Infinite Insolence! Such obstinate Souls the Prince of Darkness
possesses as his peculiar Dominion; they have more need of Conversion than
Consolation. Besides, by impatience and vexatious fretting, they exasperate
their pains, turn the Rod into a Serpent, Vipers into Dragons; and God's mighty
hand is more heavy by their resistance. Bold Expostulations irritate his Anger,
rather than incline his Mercy; the wilful Man never wants Woe. With the
froward, says the Psalmist, thou Psalm. 80.
wilt show thy self froward, or, as it is rendered in the Margent, wrestle. The
strongest Sinner is not a Match for the Almighty; if his Anger excite his
Power, how easily, how suddenly are they destroyed without remedy? Stubborn
impatience under the inflictions of God's righteous Providence, is the nearest
Step to final ruin. Others are so dejected and broken with Afflictions, that
their continuance in the World is but a Living Death: every thing entertains
their Grief, and the best means afforded for their reviving and comfort are
ineffectual. Sorrow flows into Despair, they lament and languish as if their
case were hopeless and remediless. The Fountain of this black Stream, is a
superlative esteem and affection to inferior things, and what is reserved for
the Blessed Creator? If a temporal Loss be the most afflicting Evil, it is a
sign that God was not valued and loved as the chiefest Good. The difficulty of
receiving Consolation, shows the necessity of their being afflicted: the
Language of such resolved Sorrow is, They have taken away my Gods, and what
have I more? The sole objects of their felicity are removed, and they refuse to
be comforted; as if no less Sacrifice were due to the remembrance of their
loss, but Life it self. What a disparagement is this of the Divine
Excellencies? Are the consolations of God small to us? Is not his Love able to
compensate the loss of a frail, mutable, mortal Creature? Cannot he please and
satisfy us without the fruition of one Earthly Comfort? This dejection of
Spirit is equally undutiful as uncomfortable; our Griefs are sometimes as vain
and as guilty as our Joys; there is a tincture of Disobedience in our Tears:
for we are commanded to mourn as if we mourned not, for the fashion of the
World passes away, and we at once break his Law and our own Peace. Our
Disobedience in this is aggravated, as being contrary not only to the Authority
and Sanctity of the Lawgiver, but to his Loving Kindness and Compassion. Ah,
the miserable blindness of Humane Minds! and the more miserable, because
voluntary. Who is more deservedly unhappy than one that sits upon the bank of a
River, and yet is Tormented and Dies with Thirst? the clear, fresh Stream
passes before him, allures and invites him, but he will not stoop to drink;
this is the case of those who neglect and refuse the Spiritual Consolations in
the Gospel, that are compared to the flowing Rivers of Living Water, for their
John 3, 38, 39,
cooling, refreshing quality. They meritoriously and actively bring trouble to
their Souls; their Passions are the Instruments of their Misery. He that is his
own Executioner, has no excuse of Dying; he is justly, because wilfully
miserable. Consider also what a reproach is cast upon Christianity, that so
many virtuous Heathens in great Afflictions, were in some measure supported by
the Precepts of Humane Wisdom; and that Christians, to whom there is revealed
from Heaven, that an Eternal state of Glory and Joy shall be the reward of
their patient Sufferings, remain utterly disconsolate. I will single out one
example. Stilpon the Philosopher, when his City was destroywith his Wife and
Children, and he escaped alone from the Fire, Omnia bona mea mecum sunt.
Justitia, Virtus, Temperantia, Prudentia, hoc ipsum nihil boni put are quod
eripi possit. Seneca Epist. 9.
being asked whether he had lost any thing? replied, All my Treasures are with
me, Justice, Virtue, Temperance, Prudence, and this inviolable Principle, not
to esteem any thing as my proper Good, that can be ravished from me: his Mind
was erect and steadfast under the Ruins of his Country. And others upon lower
and less generous considerations, have born up in their Sufferings. How do such
Examples upbraid us, that their Twilight excells our Noonday Brightness? If
common Cordials raised such courageous Spirits in them, shall not the Waters of
Life, the Divine strong Comforts of the Gospel, fortify us to bear all
Sufferings with a valiant Resignation to the good Will of God? Can the Spirit
of a Man, by rational Principles sustain his Infirmities, and cannot the Spirit
of God, the great Comforter, support us under all Troubles? What a blot is this
to Religion? Those who will not be comforted, will not be Christians; by the
same Holy Spirit who is styled the Comforter, we are the one and the other. If
the precious Promises of the Gospel do not alleviate our Sorrows, it is not from
Infirmity, but from Infidelity. It Is an incredible Miracle, that a person can
be in reality a Christian, and not capable of Consolation; as if Eternal Life
were not purchased by Christ for his People, or the present Sufferings were
comparable to the future Glory? or the possession of it were to be obtained
after a years of hard trial: But if it were delayed so long, that sensible
duration should not sink our Spirits; for the Misery that passes with Time, is
not of moment with respect to the Blessedness that is established for Ever.

Secondly; Let us be excited to transcribe this Divine Lesson Use 2.
(so full of excellency and difficulty) in our Hearts and Lives. It Is easy in
Speculation to consent to the reasonableness of this Duty, but how hard to
practice it, and to bear not too sensibly such Evils as are incurable here? A
deliberate, universal, constant subjection to God's Will, though contrary to
our Carnal desires and interests, how rarely is it to be found among those who
in Title and Profession are his Servants? In Active Obedience, some will
readily perform some particular Commands, but withdraw subjection from the
rest; they seem to make Conscience of the Duties of Piety, but neglect
Righteousness; or else are just in their Dealings, and careless of Devotion.
Some are liberal but irreconcilable; they will give for their Honor, but
forgive no Contempt or Injury; and as the dividing living Twins destroys them,
so the Life and Sincerity of Obedience, that consists in the union and
intireness of its parts, is destroyed by dividing our respects to some
commands, neglecting the rest. And in Passive Obedience, many will submit to
lighter and shorter afflictions, but if an Evil comes that nearly touches the
heart, or that remains long without redress, they become impatient, or so
dejected as to neglect their Duty. I shall therefore superadd to the former
Arguments, wherein the Necessity, the Equity, and the Policy of our Dutiful
Resignation to God's Providence is clearly set forth, some other Motives and
Directions, that may be useful and effectual for this end.

First; Look frequently to Jesus Christ, the Author and finisher of our Faith:
The Divine Wisdom, to reform the World, assumed the Humane Nature, and
expressed in a Holy Conversation upon Earth, a living Copy of his Precepts, to
direct us in the various parts of our Duty; and because the exercise of
Humility, Self Denial, and the rest of the Suffering Graces, is so difficult to
our frail and tender Nature; he ascended the Cross, and instructs us by
Suffering to suffer with his Affections, leaving us his Example, as the best
Lecture of our Duty; His Sufferings concern us not only in point of Merit but
Conformity. We can never enjoy the benefit of his Passion, without following
his Pattern. His example is the Rule of the highest Perfection, and we are under
the greatest obligation to imitate and honor him who is our Sovereign and
Savior, to whom we owe our Redemption from everlasting Misery, and the
Inheritance of Glory. It Is the Apostle's advice to the afflicted, to consider
him that endured such contradiction of Heb. 12. 3.
Sinners against himself, that ye be not wearied, and faint in your minds. This
deduction is with greater force to make us humble and patient; If we consider,

First; the Infinite Dignity of his Person. He was the Eternal and Only Son of
God, and descended from the Throne of his Majesty, divested himself of his
Robes of insupportable Light, that concealed and manifested his Glory to the
Angels, and was obedient to the Death of the Cross: what are the highest and
best of Psa. 104
Men to him? Were it not extremely unbecoming and undutiful for a Subject to
refuse Obedience to a just Law, if the King that made the Law should
voluntarily observe it, and reserve no other advantage to himself, but the
honor of enacting it? Our Savior did not stand upon the dignity and liberty
of his Person being equal with God, and our King, but entirely complied with
the Law, and shall we complain of its rigor?

Secondly; The Greatness of his Sufferings. They were incomparable as to their
value, so in their degrees. He endured the equal extremities of Infamy and
Torment, that are so contrary to the inclinations of Mankind. He was Crowned
with a cruel Diadem of Thorns, Scourged, Spit upon, Derided, Crucified;
Insensible Nature, as if capable of Understanding and Affection, was disordered
in its whole frame at his Death. The Heavens sympathized, in Eclipses of the
Sun, in the darkness of the Air at Midday, as Midnight; the Earth quak't with
deep Tremblings, and the Rocks were rent a sunder. And the Sufferings of his
Soul from the incensed Justice of God were inconceivably great. What is the
worst we suffer either immediately from God, or instrumentally from Men, to his
bitter Passion? Our Sufferings are but superficial shadows of Misery, compared
to his deep Sorrows.

Thirdly; His Sufferings were most undeserved: For he was the Holy One of God,
his Conception without the least taint of Sin, his Life of strictest Purity,
and complete Obedience to the Divine Law. We may read the process of our Sins,
and understand their Guilt in his Passion. He was made Sin for us, (a Sacrifice
to atone the Divine Displeasure) who knew no Sin: As David when Guilty of
Adultery and Murder, was fired with disdain at the relation of an
incompassionate Rich Man, killing the single Lamb of his poor Neighbor, and
sparing his own numerous Flock; and when the Prophet unveiled the Parable, and
surprised him with that piercing reproach, Thou art the Man! he presently by
that Fiction in another, was convinced of his own true guilt, and was extremely
afflicted in the sense of it: Thus we are apt to conceive indignation against
the Murderers of our Savior, the Apostate Apostle, the Malicious Priest, the
Unrighteous Judge, the Bloody Soldiers. But Conscience (as a true Nathan) may
charge us to have been in that wicked Conspiracy against the Lord of Glory, for
our Sins Condemned and Crucified him.

And as our Sins were the impulsive cause of his Sufferings, so our good is the
effect of them. He suffered the Death of the Cross, that his Blood might be our
Ransom, his Ignominy the purchase of our Glory, his Torments the merit of our
Blessedness, his Death the Seed of Immortal Life to us; but we suffer the just
punishment of our own Sins.

Fourthly; His willing Obedience, Divine Patience, and invincible Constancy in
Suffering for us. In his distress, the whole Army of Heaven were in readiness
for his Protection and Rescue, upon the least signification of his Will; If I
prayed to my Father, he would send me twelve Legions of Angels. Nay, he had the
Springs and Keys of the Divine Power in his hands, and could by a Word have
destroyed his Enemies; but he freely gave himself for us, and without
resistance, without complaint took up his Cross. Now our Savior, who had the
fullness of the Spirit, communicates to us the first Fruits of it, Faith and
Love, Humility and Patience, Peace and Joy to support us under Affliction.

Fifthly; Consider the excellent reward of his Sufferings. He was abased below
Men, and is advanced above all the Angelical Orders, and is the Eternal
Argument of their Praises; Never were Sufferings so grievous, never was Issue
so glorious. For the Joy Heb. 12. 2.
that was set before him, he endured the Cross, despised the shame, and is set
down at the right hand of the Majesty on high. Now our Blessed Savior has
promised, To him Rev. 3. 21.
that overcomes, will I grant to sit with me in my Throne, even as I also
overcame, and am set down with my Father in his Throne. Unfainting Perseverance
in our Duty shall be rewarded with the Glory of our Redeemer. And is not the
prospect and expectation of this sufficient to confirm our Minds, and make us
patiently bear the greatest Afflictions?

Secondly; The Consideration of the Suffering Saints in all Ages, is a powerful
persuasive to Patience. Thus the Apostle James directs Christians, Take, my
Brethren Jam. 5. 10.
the Prophets, who have spoken in the Name of the Lord, for an example of
suffering Affliction, and of Patience. And we have great encouragement from
hence, if we consider,

1. That those who are of most precious account with God, and highly favored
by him, are usually exercised with sharp Afflictions. The singularity and
greatness of a Calamity exasperates the Sorrow, when it is apprehended as a
sign of extraordinary Guilt in the Afflicted, and of severe displeasure in God
that sends it; but to prevent Trouble that arises from that apprehension, the
Scripture records the heavy Afflictions that happened to God's chosen Servants
and Favorites. Moses, whom God honored with the most condescending and
familiar Discoveries of himself, was tried by long Afflictions. David, a Man
after God's own Heart, was a long time hurled to and fro by Tempestuous
Persecutions from his unjust and implacable Enemies. Isaiah, who was dignified
with such Heavenly Revelations, that his describing the Sufferings of Christ
seems rather the History of an Evangelist, than the Vision of a Prophet, was
sawn asunder.

2. Their Nature was as frail as ours, their Afflictions as cutting and
sensible, yet how patiently and courageously did they endure the most cruel
Sufferings?

3. We have the same blessed Comforter to assist us, as they had, the Holy
Spirit. He that is styled the Spirit of Power, infuseth a holy Magnanimity to
bear the heaviest Sufferings. Now it is the Apostles Inference from the History
of the Saints under the Old Testament, some of whom died Martyrs, and others
lived Martyrs, by their constant and generous suffering various evils for
Divine Truth. Wherefore seeing we are compassed about with so great Heb. 12. 1.
a Cloud of Witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, and the Sin that does so
easily beset us, and let us run with patience the race that is set before us.
The Metaphorical Expression, a Cloud of Witnesses, imports a numerous Company,
and is by some of the Ancients interpreted as an Allusion to the Benefit we
receive from the Natural Clouds, that refresh the Air, and skreen us from the
scorching heat of the Sun. The Allusion is too subtle and strained, but the
Benefit is real; for the admirable examples of their Patience and Courage are
powerful to refresh sorrowful Spirits; We are encompassed with them as a
Theater: There is no kind of Affliction, and no part of our Duty, whereof there
is not presented to us some example for our Encouragement and Imitation. It is
also worthy of Observation, that Christians have a special Obligation,
Encouragement, and Assistance to bear Afflictions with cheerful Spirits, above
the Believers of the Old Testament. For under the Mosaic Dispensation, outward
Prosperity, Riches, Honor, Victory, long Life were the open Expressions of
God's Favor, promised by the terms of that Covenant, as Rewards to Obedience.
Yet even then, some of the most excellent Saints were illustrious Examples of
patient suffering Afflictions. But in the Gospel God has declared, that his
design is to train up his Children by Sufferings for their future Happiness,
that through many Tribulations they must enter into the Kingdom of God. And we
find the truth of this by manifold Experience, from the first Ages of the
Christian Church. St. John by Revelation, Beheld a great multitude, Rev. 7. 9.
which no Man could number, of all Nations, and Kindreds, and People, and
Tongues, that stood before the Throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white
Robes, and Palms in their Hands: And they all came out of great Tribulation,
and had washed their Robes, and made them white in the Blood of the Lamb. Now
since the Cross is an Appendix to the Gospel, we should with more prepared
Minds submit to it. Besides, if Believers then, who enjoyed only Starlight,
less clear discoveries of the glorious World to come, were so patient and
constant in suffering for the Truth; How much more should we be animated in our
Troubles, to whom the Sun of Righteousness appears, revealing Life and
Immortality by the Gospel? If they who were partakers of the Holy Spirit in
lesser degrees, were supported; should not Christians that receive the Graces
of the Spirit in richer abundance, be more comforted?

Thirdly; All Creatures obey the Will of the Creator: All the lower Rank, Fire
and Hail, Snow and Vapors, and stormy Winds fulfill Psalm. 148. 8.
his Word. The Sun stood still till Joshua had completed his Victory, it
started back to confirm the Faith of Hezekiah. Nay, sensible Creatures will
contradict their own Natures at God's Command. The Ravens fed Elias, and the
Lions spared Daniel. And Creatures of the Superior Order exactly fulfill his
Will. The Angels that excel in strength, do his Commandments: harkening to the
Voice of his Psalm. 103.
Word. They do not usurp upon his Royalty, nor make use of their Power to deny
subjection to his Pleasure. Now if the Inferior Creatures, who are under less
Obligations, and cannot understand their Duty; if Superior Creatures that excel
us in Nobility of Nature, and Dignity of State, perfectly obey God: should not
their example strongly incite us to submit to his Will?

Fourthly; It is our most glorious Perfection to have our Wills united to the
Divine Will. In Heaven Grace is in its exaltation, the Spirits of just Men are
made perfect by their compliance with the Divine Will that absolutely governs
there. A private Will that compounds with God upon sordid Capitulations, that
excepts against doing or suffering what is distasteful and harsh to the carnal
part, How unreasonable, how degenerous and base is it? But when the Will is
obedient, enlarged and uniform with God, it is enobled. If our slow-paced
Thoughts could conceive things as easily, suddenly and clearly as the Angels
do, our Minds would be in the highest Elevation: And Hic est magnus animus qui
se Deo tradidit. Senec.
is it not a more valuable and desirable Perfection to will as God does, than
to understand as the Angels?

Besides, Patience has a special eminence above other Graces, and advances a
Christian to the highest Honor and Perfection that is attainable here. All
Graces are of the same Divine Extraction, and have the same general effect upon
the Soul: They come from God, and produce a God-like Temper and Disposition:
But they are distinguished by their Objects and Operations; some are Heroic,
exercised about great things, and produce more noble Actions: others are humble
and conversant in meaner things, and their Operations are less eminent. As
amongst the Birds, the Eagles fly aloft, and only stoop for a great Prey: The
Bees fly from Flower to Flower, and extract a little Dew, but it is all Honey.
It is the Counsel of St. James to the afflicted, Let Patience have her perfect
Work, in bearing Afflictions though heavy and continued, that you may be
perfect, and entire, wanting nothing. A singular Perfection and Encomium is
attributed to Patience, in that the trial and exercise of it is the most
difficult part of our Duty, and without it we can neither obey the Commands,
nor obtain the Promises of the Gospel. Patience is the truest Fortitude, and
draws forth other Divine Graces in their excellent activity. What the temper is
to material Weapons that are blunted or broken in the Combat without it,
Patience is to other Graces, their stability is derived from it. This was the
most glorious perfection of Christ's Obedience, For it became him for whom are
all things, and by whom are all Heb. 2.
things, in bringing many Sons to Glory, to make the Captain of their Salvation
perfect through Sufferings. Patience is not only defensive Armor, but has
noble Operations. When our Savior was nailed to the Cross, and was the Mark
wherein all the poisoned Arrows of Rage and Malice were received, he seemed
only to Suffer, yet even then performed the most divine Exploits, and obtained
the most glorious Victory; he reconciled God, disarmed the Law, subdued Satan,
broke the Gates of Hell, destroyed Death, and rescued us miserable forlorn
Captives. Upon this account Chrysostom breaks forth in rapturous Expressions,
That our Savior suffering on the Cross, was more glorious than in his creating
the World. Thus the Patience of a Christian, which in appearance is only a
quiet bearing Affliction from God, yet produces many blessed effects: A
Believer, while he feels the weight of God's Hand, uncessantly seeks his Face
with the most ardent Affections. He does not murmur against the Displeasure of
God, but mourns bitterly that he has deserved it. He surrenders himself to the
Divine Pleasure, which is the purest Act of Obedience. He subdues his unruly
Passions, which is a more noble Victory than the Achievements of the most
celebrated Conquerors. It Is true, the power of Grace is very conspicuous in
resisting pleasant Temptations, the pernicious attractives of the Senses and
carnal Appetites; but more in the Battles of Patience, by how much it is more
easy to Nature to be content without unnecessary and superficial Pleasures,
than to endure oppressing and painful Evils. I will produce an instance in both
kinds, recorded in Scripture, for the Veneration and Imitation of all. The
first is that of Joseph, whose unspotted Chastity was discovered by rejecting
the impure desires of his Master's Wife. Three powerful Tempters joined to draw
his Consent, Solitude, Youth, and Solicitation; Solitude with its Silence, is
often more persuasive to the commission of Sin than the strongest Eloquence;
because there being none that sees, takes away the shame of being seen in
guilty and foul Actions. Youth is violent in its Appetites, and needs no
entreaties to induce it to gratify them: The Sensual Fancy reigns, and has such
a ravishing power upon the Will, that to corrupt Nature the Temptation is
irresistible, and without Divine Strength, an instance of overcoming it, would
be as rare as a Phoenix in the World. Besides, Joseph was her Slave, and was
tempted by entreaties mixed with inticements from a Superior, that (like a Bow
that draws Strength from its bending) by making a show of subjection acquires a
double Empire. But he had a reverence of his invisible Observer and Judge: How
shall I do this great Wickedness, and sin against God? Now Joseph in the Flower
of his Age, was not emboldened by Solitude, nor excited by Concupiscence, nor
poisoned by the breath of the Basilisk, was an admirable effect of Divine
Grace. He preserved his sincere and constant Innocence, as the Sun its
undefiled luster in the midst of all the feculent exhalations that ascend from
the Earth.

The other Instance is Job, whose Victorious Grace in the comparison, is more
glorious than that of Joseph; for as the lapses of those who by Terrors and
Torments violate the Law, are less culpable, and more excusable, than of those
who by Sensual Allurements transgress the Divine Commands: The Humane Nature
Mill pia cer non vagliono un tormento.
being capable of such dolorous impressions as infinitely exceed all the
Pleasures of Sense; and consequently the yielding from fear of vehement pains
and extreme evils, is less voluntary than what proceeds from the Love of
Delights; so proportionably that Virtue is more eminent that remains firm, and
preserves us in our Duty, notwithstanding the Batteries of extreme Evils, than
that which preserves us by flight from the deceitful sensitive good.

The Holy Ghost has given us a particular Narrative of Job's Troubles, and his
behavior under them: The loss of a great Estate was but a preparative for
worse Calamities; his Ten Children were all destroyed in a day; his Body was
covered with Ulcers; his Wife, that in this desolate Condition was only left
to alleviate his Sorrows, unspeakably increased them; yet under this heavy
weight of Miseries, he did not express one unbecoming complaint. His Patience
exceeded all the Pains of his Body, and Griefs of his Mind. Who loves God so
ardently in his Prosperity as he did in his Afflictions? Like Flaming Torches,
that reverst, the Flame ascends with more force to Heaven. St. Austin admiring
his Invincible Temper, says, that Job half dead on the Dunghill, was stronger
than Adam, when Immortal in Paradise; for with Indignation he repulsed his
Wife, who was Satan's Instrument to tempt him to Despair and Blasphemy. How
graceful and amiable a Spectacle is a patient Saint? He attracts the Eye and
Heart of God himself. What an honorable Testimony proceeded from his Mouth,
concerning Job, to vindicate his Sincerity from the malice of the Accuser? Have
thou Job 2. 3.
seen my Servant Job, that there is none like him on the Earth? Unparalled
Saint! who endured such a succession of Tragical Events with humility and
submission! The active holiness of his Prosperous Life, is not recorded with
that Note of eminency and admiration, as his Patient Sufferings, for which he
is universally Crowned with the Praises of the Saints in all Ages. Ye have
heard of the Patience of Job! He is a spectacle that draws the regards of all,
more famous for his Patience than his Misery. It Is the saying of the Platonic
Philosopher, Take away from the Life of Hercules, the Tyrants he suppressed, and
the fierce Beasts he slew, his Travels and Combats wherein his Courage was
exercised and appeared, and you lessen his Virtue, the Hero is lost; He that in
the Opinion of the Heathen World deserved a Deity, and is crowned with Stars in
Heaven, will not have a spark of Glory on Earth to preserve his Fame alive in
Memory. Thus, take away from Job the Chaldean and Sabean Robbers, the shower of
Fire that consumed his Estate, the Whirlwind raised by infernal Spirits, that
destroyed his Children, his Diseases, and his cruel Wife, the exercises of his
insuperable Patience; and the honorable remembrance of Job is lost. If the
Prince of Darkness had not tried all his Arts and Strength to overcome him, and
had not been foiled in his Attempts, his Graces had not been so illustrious.
St. Peter declares, that the Spirit of Glory, and of God, rests upon Suffering
Christians. They are the Temples of the Holy Spirit, the Eternal Deity, wherein
he displays his Divine Virtue and Glorious Power. In short, God usually
conducts his People to the sublimest degrees of Grace and Glory by Suffering;
the more they are tried and refined, the brighter their Crown will be.

5. It Is our Felicity quietly to resign our Wills to the Blessed Will of God.
Patience, considered as a Moral Virtue, frees us from many Sorrows and
Vexations that are supervenient to an Affliction, and are caused merely from
the Distemper, and unquiet disorderly agitations of our own Passions Nature
instructs a Dog by licking his Wound to heal it, a lively Emblem of the healing
operation of discreet Patience to the Afflicted Spirit. Patience lines the
Yoke, and makes it softer and more easy to us. Besides, an humble and full
Submission to the Will of God, as the Rule of Goodness, brings down the Peace
and Joy of Paradise into our Souls. The glorified Saints are raised above all
Disasters and Troubles; nothing can disturb the serenity, or stain the purity
of their state: From this Principle of Perfection and Felicity, that God's Will
is always accomplished, to which their Wills are entirely subordinate, in
obedience to his Authority, and by their proper inclination. As the Waters
which in the Creation God transported above the Heavens, are not moved as those
here below by the furious agitation of the Winds, but as if they were of a
Celestial nature, have the same regular motion with the Heavens. The Angels,
whose Zeal for the Honor of God, and Love to the Souls of Men is incomparable,
yet they see the Rebellion of his Subjects, whereby his Glory is obscured, and
the final destruction of Rebellious Sinners, without the least diminution of
their Felicity, because they always acquiesce in the Divine Will, that orders
all things for the best end. And so far as our Wills are complying with the
Divine Will, we enjoy a tranquillity of Mind, which afflictive accidents cannot
disquiet. St. Austin describes Blessedness to consist in the accomplishment of
our desires, and in having only regular Desires: Now a Saint whose Will is
absolutely resigned to God's Will, has a foretaste of Blessedness here; for
whatsoever happens to him here, is from God's Will that approves or permits it,
and herein he finds satisfaction. What a pure undisturbed Pleasure springs from
this Consideration, that the Wisdom and Love of God chooses always what is best
for us? This will make us contented in every state, even when our Condition is
not correspondent with our natural Desires, our Desires are graciously accorded
with our Condition. What expensive Industry has been used to procure the
fancied Philosopher's Stone, that changes all Metals into Gold, which if
obtained cannot make us happy? For as the natural heat of the Body does not
proceed from the Clothes, but from the Body that warms them: We see Persons in
the Fit of an Ague shake with cold, tho covered with Furs; So true Felicity
does not proceed from the outward Condition, but from the Temper of the Mind.
The Rich often want Content in the confluence of all things, and are often
disquieted with the fears of losing their Possessions: But Acquiescence in the
Divine Disposal always brings satisfaction to the Soul. It Is an inviolable
Treasure that cannot by the most violent Evils be taken from us.

I shall annex two Considerations more, to show how our Felicity is promoted by
our patient Sufferings.

First; It Is a blessed Assurance of our Election by the most free and
unchangeable Love of God. The Apostle tells afflicted Christians, That whom he
did foreknow, Romans 8. 29.
he did predestinate to be conformed to the Image of his Son, that he might be
the firstborn among many Brethren. If we suffer with his divine Patience, with
his humble and holy Affections, it is a clear and certain evidence that we are
appointed to reign with him. If we bear the Image of our suffering Savior in
our earthly State, we shall bear his glorious Image in the Heavenly. The
well-grounded Hope of this is very comfortable in the greatest Afflictions, and
will encourage us to persevere in humble Sufferings. For if his sovereign
Pleasure has ordained us to Eternal Life, how just is it that we should with an
entire and resigned Submission yield up our selves to the conduct of his
Wisdom, as to the ways by which we shall obtain it?

Secondly; By a Filial Submission to God's Chastisements we have a blessed
Testimony of our Adoption. It Is the Apostle's comfortable Inference, If ye
endure Chastisements, God deals with you as with Sons; that is, if without
murmuring or fainting, if with that respect and subjection, that is due to the
high and holy Providence of God, then we may be assured of his Paternal
Relation to us, and his Rod comforts us, as the strokes of it are an Argument
of his care and love to us. From hence proceeds inexpressible and peculiar
Consolation to afflicted Christians: The same Affliction as to the matter and
circumstances, may be upon humble meek Sufferers, and refractory stubborn
Sinners that kick against the pricks, but are distinguished by the intention of
God. They are sent to the Humble as Corrections from the wise love of a Father,
who dearly regards their Souls; to the Obdurate as Vengeance from the righteous
severity of a Judge. Upon the Humble they fall as soft as a Shower of Snow;
upon the other as the Storm of fiery Hail upon the Egyptians: and the Issue of
them is as different as Heaven and Hell.

Lastly; This sharp Discipline continues but during our Minority here, when we
arrive at the state of Perfection we shall not need it: And this Life is but a
short transition to the next World. What comparison is there between a few
Years and the Volume of Eternal Ages? It Is the Consolatory of the Apostle, The
time is short, let those that weep be as if they wept not. Within a little
while afflicted Saints shall ascend to the Region of Blessedness, and no Cloud
of Sorrow, no Shadow of Fear, no Darkness of Anxiety, can reach so high to
darken and disturb their Felicity: Weeping can endure but for a Night, and Joy
comes in the Morning of the everlasting Day. For a moment have I hid my Face
from thee, Isa. 5.
but with everlasting kindness will I receive thee, says the Lord. Death is
the last step out of Mortality and Misery. Be ye also patient, stablish Jam. 5.
your Hearts, for the coming of the Lord draws nigh.

Secondly; To these Motives I shall add some Directions, for the performance of
this hard Duty.

Direct. 1. A steadfast Faith in the Divine Providence and Promises, will
compose the Soul to a quiet submission to God's Pleasure in the sharpest
Troubles.

All things are under the intimate Inspection, the wise Conduct, the powerful
Influence of his Providence. This is one of those prime, universal rich Truths,
from whence so many practical Consequences are derived. By virtue of it, we may
infallibly conclude, that all things that come to pass, are disposed in the
best season, and best manner, for the best ends. If we were admitted to the
Council of State above, and understood the immediate reasons of every
particular Decree, we could not be more infallibly assured of the Wisdom and
Goodness, the Rectitude and Equity of his Dispensations, then by this universal
Principle that is applicable to all Events, as Light to every Color; that what
God appoints is best. That we may feel the blessed influence of it more
effectually, let us consider that divine Providence extends to the whole
Creation: It Is infinite, and overruling all things. God is pleased to
represent it in Scripture according to the narrowness of our Capacity: As
Elisha contracted 2 King. 4.
himself to the stature of the Shunamites Child, applying his Mouth to his
Mouth, and his Hands to his Hands. Thus it is said, He rides upon the Heavens,
to signify his absolute power in ordering all the motions of the most high,
vast and glorious part of the visible Universe. He tells the number of the
Stars; he calls them all by their Names. The Stars are the brightest and most
active parts of the vast Region above us, and are called the Host of Heaven
with respect to their Number and Order. God is their General; and tho they seem
innumerable to our Senses, yet the multitude is exactly known to him, and
yields ready and entire Obedience to his Pleasure. From whence the Psalmist
infers, Great is the Lord, and of great Power, his Understanding is Psalm. 147.
5.
infinite.

There is nothing in the lower World exempted from the Empire and Activity of
God's Providence. He is unmovable, and moves all; invisible, yet appears in
all. The most casual things are not without his Guidance. A 1 Kings 22. 34.
Man drew a Bow at a venture, without express Aim, but God directed the Arrow
through the Joints of Ahab's Armor, that penetrated to the Springs of Life.
The minutest and least considerable things are ordered by him. A Sparrow does
not fly or fall without his Disposal. It Is not an Hyperbolical Expression of
our Savior, but an absolute Truth, That all the Hairs of our Head are Mat. 10.
numbered, and not one falls to the Ground without his License. The voluntary
and most indetermin'd causes of things are under his Conduct. The Hearts of
Men, even of Kings that are most absolute and unconfined, are in the Hand of
the Lord, he turns them according to his Pleasure; as the streams of Water are
by several Trenches conveyed to refresh a Garden by the Skilful Husbandman.

Sin, that is the most disorderly thing in the World, is not only within the
compass of his Permission, but is limited and disposed by his Providence: And
such is his Goodness, that he would not permit it, if his Power could not
overruled that Evil, for a Good that preponderates the Evil. And all afflictive
Evils, by his own Declaration, are the effects of his just and powerful
Providence. Is there any evil in the City, and I have not done it? His
Providence is comprehensive and complete: no unforeseen Accidents in the freest
and most contingent things, no unvoluntary obstruction in the most necessary
things, can break the intireness, or discompose the order of his Providence.
The Lord is in Heaven, he does whatsoever he pleases in Heaven and in Earth,
in the Sea and all the deep places. How exactly and easily does he manage and
overruled all things? The whole World is his House, and all the successive
Generations of Men his Family; some are his Sons, and by voluntary subjection;
others his Slaves, and by just constraint fulfill his Pleasure. 'Twas the saying
of a Wise King instructed by Experience, that the Art of Government, was like
the laborious Travel of a Weaver, that requires the attention of the Mind, and
the activity of the Body; the Eyes, Hands and Feet are all in exercise: And how
often is the contexture of Human Counsels, though woven with great care, yet
unexpectedly broke? So many cross Accidents interpose, so many emergencies
beyond all prevention start up, that frustrate the Designs and Hopes of the
most Potent Rulers of this World. But God disposes all things with more
facility than one of us can move a grain of Sand: the Government of the World
has a less proportion to his Infinite Wisdom, and uncontrollable Power, than a
grain of Sand has to the strength of a Man. His Counsel shall always stand;
all second Causes depend upon him in their Beings, their agency and influences.
Nothing is executed in this visible Kingdom below, but by express Order from
his invisible Court; and all Occurrences are made use of for the accomplishing
the designs of his Electing Mercy, in the glorification of his Saints. Now all
that is comfortable and reviving, is contained in this Principle. If his
Providence reaches to the Birds of the Air, and the Lillies of the Field, much
more to the Saints, in whom he has a propriety; and such is his condescending
Love, and inconceivable benignity, that he styles himself by the most endearing
relation, their God. They are the prime part of his vigilant care. It Is St.
Austin's affectionate ejaculation, O Omnipotent Goodness, that O bone
Omnipotens, qui sic unumquemque nostrum tanquam solum cures, and sic omnes
tanquam singulos! Aug. Conf. lib. 13.
so particularly regardest every one of us, as if the sole objects of thy
tender care, and all of us as single persons! The Sun applies its quickening
influences for the production and growth of a single Plant as particularly as
if there were no other things in the World to receive them; yet at the same
time it passes from Sign to Sign in the Heavens, changes the Scenes of the
Elements, produces new Seasons, and its active and prolifick heat forms and
transforms whatsoever is changed in Nature. This is a fit resemblance of the
universal and special operations of Divine Providence; what a strong security
does this give to a Christian in the midst of all Trouble in this corrupt and
changeable World? How will it clear the mind from those miserable perplexities,
and quiet those improvident, precipitant Passions that so often afflict the
afflicted? Whatever Evils befall the Saints, are with the Knowledge, the Will,
and by the efficiency of God, materially considered; and is he defective in
Wisdom, Power, or Goodness, that what he does, either might or ought to be
better otherwise? Indeed, sometimes the special ends of his Afflicting
Providence are in such deep obscurity, that our Line is too short to fathom,
and the manner how good shall result from Evil is unknown, but then we may
conclude with evidence, it is for the best. When Caesarius a Primitive Saint was
arguing in himself, how that Scripture could be true, that the Earth was
founded on the Waters; how the more weighty Element should not sink, and be
overwhelmed by the other: he stopped the course of his Thoughts by this
reflection, I forgot my self when I said to God, how can this be? and admires
that which Dial. 1.
he could not comprehend. For inferior reasons we often pray, that particular
Evils that are near, may be prevented; but if they overtake us, we may be
satisfied that they are appointed by his supreme Reason and Everlasting
Counsel. As in a Consort of Music, the parts are not formed when they are
sung, but were composed before by the skill of the Musician, and every part
assigned convenient to the Voices of the Persons. Thus the various conditions
and passages of our lives were so disposed by the Sovereign Wisdom of God from
Eternity, and as most fit for us. Whether the Evils proceed more immediately
and entirely from his hand, or by the intercurrence of second causes; it is
equally certain they come by the determinate Counsel and foreknowledg of God.
Our Savior answers Pilate, Thou could have no power at all against me,
except it were given thee from above. All the afflictive Evils that proceed
from the malice of Men, and increase their Guilt and Judgment, are ordered by
his Providence, for the Spiritual and Eternal Good of his People; this
consideration will prevent much Sin and Trouble that the best Men are liable to
in their perturbations and passions. There is nothing more exasperates an
afflicted Mind than the apprehension that one unjustly suffers, Leniter ex
merito quicquid patiare ferendum est:
-- Quae venit indigne poena dolenda venit.
A righteous punishment even Nature consents is to be received with meek
submission; but to be patient under unjust Persecutions, not to be provoked by
Injuries and Enemies, is one of the hardest things in the World. If by a flash
of Lightning, or by a shower of Rain, we are blasted or wet, we endure it
patiently; but if one throw Wildfire or Water on us, we resent the indignity
with Anger and Vexation. Now, if we in our deliberate Thoughts consider, that
God not only permits, but sends all the Evils we most unworthily suffer from
Men, and that he commands our quiet, humble behavior under them, nay, that he
will overruled all so as the issue shall be blessed, what tranquillity and
acquiescence will it produce in the sharpest Dispensations of his Providence?
But on the contrary, exclude Providence out of the World, and the Mind is
involved in Darkness with all its Terrors. Atheism is the Gulf of Impiety and
Infelicity. None says, where is God, my Maker, that gives Songs in the Night,
that converts Poisons into Remedies, the saddest Evils into means of the best
Good, and our Afflictions into Consolations. He that lives without God in the
World, if he loses what he superlatively loves, or falls under an incurable
Evil, has no other remedy but a resolution to endure it as well as he can: And
he is extremely miserable that has no Joy here, nor hopes of it hereafter, nor
the encouragement of a happy Issue to bear it patiently.

In conjunction with the belief of God's Providence, our belief of his
Promises, that his Truth is unchangeable; for the performance of them, is
requisite to preserve the afflicted Spirit in a calm and submissive state. A
present Evil strikes the imagination and senses in another manner than a future
Spiritual Good. Now Faith is the substance of things Heb. 11. 1.
hoped for, etc. it makes invisible things to be the greatest realities to the
Soul; the steady reliance upon the Divine Attributes engaged them to fulfill his
Promises, and is of an invincible efficacy to strengthen the Soul in every
distress. O Lord of Hosts, blessed is the Man that trusts in thee. His Psalm.
84.
uncontrollable power governs all the Orders of Creatures, and the Honor of
his Truth is so Sacred, that Heaven and Earth shall pass away without the
failing of any good thing promised to his People. Faith assists Patience; as
the Blood that is a natural Balsam, flows to the wounded part to heal and
consolidate it. These Graces are inseparable, and are recorded with special
observation, as the Fountains of Courage under Sufferings. Here is the Faith
and Patience of the Rev. 13. 10.
Saints; and we are directed to follow them who through Faith and Patience have
inherited the Promises. Other Graces are engaged in the Christian Combat, and
strive for Victory, but Faith and Patience are Crowned. And to support us in
great Troubles, a firm affiance in the Divine Promises as belonging to us is of
infinite Moment. I will greatly rejoice, and trust in the Lord, Isa. 61. 10.
my Soul shall be joiful in my God. The general apprehension of God's Mercy is
ineffectual to support us: and to claim a Title in him without a real Evidence,
is vain. But a regular Trust, an applicative Faith, in conjunction with our
sincere performing the Conditions of the Promises, is to a Christian, like the
sacred locks of Sampson's hair, whilst they remained, he was invincible; but
when cut off, he became weak as other Men. Our Comforts rise and fall according
to the stronger or weaker degrees of our Faith: Peter walked firm upon the
Waves till he doubted, and then began to sink. One of the sorest and most
dangerous Temptations of the Afflicted is, that they are out of God's Favor.
The Mourning Veil darkens the Eyes of their minds, that they cannot see his
compassionate Countenance, they cannot reconcile his Gracious Promises with his
Providential Dispensations; the good things he has prepared for hereafter,
with the Evils he sends here. As Gideon complained to the Angel, If God be with
us, how comes all this Evil to us? And the Spirit of Darkness takes the
advantage of great Troubles to tempt sad Souls to despondency, as if they were
utterly forsaken of God. If this Temptation prevail, if the Heavens be as
Brass, and the Earth as Iron, if no Influences descend from above, and there be
no Springs below, if Divine and Human Comforts fail, there remains nothing but
desperate Sorrow. S. Austin, to repel this Temptation, introduces Respondit
tibi Deus, Haeccine est fides tua? haec tibi promisi! Ad haec Christianus
factus es ut in Seculo floreres?
God answering the Afflicted and Discomforted: Is this thy Faith? Did I promise
Temporal Prosperity to you? Were you made a Christian for this, that you might
flourish in this World? The Faith of our Adoption is confirmed by his
Corrections. If they are profitable to us, if we are refined, not hardened by
the Fiery Trial, we have a clear Testimony of our Interest in him. I will bring
them through the Fire, and Zech. 13
they shall be refined as Silver and Gold is tried; and they shall say the Lord
is my God.

Briefly, Let us strengthen our Faith of the glorious State, and our Title to
it, and it will make us firm against all the violent Impressions of Adversity;
it will produce a joyful exultation even in the afflicted State. The Christian
that with steadfast Faith, and attentive Consideration, looks on the
inestimable, infinite Felicity, is regardless of all things in the World in
comparison with it. Sacred History reports of Saul the Persecutor, who was
transformed into an Apostle, that a sudden Light from Heaven of that excessive
brightness encompassed him, that he was struck blind, and saw no Man: This may
be easily and justly applied to every sincere Believer in a moral sense; the
first effect of the spiritual Light that shines in the Eyes of his Mind, and
discovers unseen eternal things, is to darken his sight of the things that are
temporal: Even the greatest things here are not of such moment as to allure or
terrify him from profecuting his blessed End. St. Peter declares of persecuted
Christians, That believing they rejoice 1 Pet. 1. 8.
with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory. The Martyrs dearly embraced the Cross
of Christ, and prized the Thorns of his Crown, more than all the Roses of
Pleasure, than all the Diadems of earthly Dignity, in expectation of the
blessed Reward. Tertullian wrote to the noble Confessors of Christ that were
imprisoned in Africa, How willingly would we change our Prosperity with your
precious Miseries? If weak nature be sensible of your hard Restraint and
Sufferings, take flight by your Thoughts to Paradise. The Persecutors cannot
lay Fetters Omnia Spiritui patent vagare spiritu, spatiare spiritu. Nihil crus
sent it in nervo cum animus in coelo est. Ad Martyr.
upon your Spirits, but when you please you may ascend to the Kingdom of God,
where you shall reign for ever. In the mean time counterpoise the Darkness, and
Straitness, the Loathsomness and Sufferings of your Prison, with the Light and
Amplitude, the Riches and Abundance, the Joy and Glory of the Celestial
Kingdom, which no Words are significant enough or worthy to express. A Nullus
iis dolor est de incursatione malorum praesentium, quibus siducia est futurorum
bonorum: Quid hoc ad Christianos, quid ad Dei Servos? quos Paradisus invitat,
quos gratia omnis and copia Regni coelestis expectat? Cypr. cont. Demet.
Saint whose Blessedness is in Heaven, cannot be made utterly unhappy by
Afflictions on Earth. He will serve God with as much Love and as good a Will,
when poor, despised, disconsolate, as in a flourishing condition, and with this
peculiar satisfaction, that his sincerity is then most evident: For the Service
that is without respect to a present Sallary, is not base and mercenary for a
temporal Interest. Besides, that Obedience is more eminent and acceptable that
is with Sufferings, and the Reward shall be answerable to our Obedience. One
Draught of the River that makes glad the City of God above, can sweeten all the
bitterness of the World. In short, the Christians Hope is in the Apostle's
Expression, The Anchor of the Soul sure and steadfast, that enters within the
Veil, it is fastened in Heaven, confirmed by the fidelity of God's Promises,
and the prevailing Intercession of Christ, and secured us in the midst of all
the turbulent Agitations in the wide Sea below. Hope makes us not only patient
but joyful in all our Sufferings. A Christian encouraged by the blessed Hope,
comes with joy to Death, as the Door that opens to the Kingdom of Glory, and
immortal blessedness.

Direct. 2. Let God be the supreme Object of our Esteem and Affections; and
whatsoever Evils we sustain, will be made light and easy to us. The Apostle
assures us, That all things, even the most afflicting, work for the good of
Romans 8. 28.
those that love God. That Heavenly Affection is not only the condition that
intitles us to that Promise, that by special privilege makes all the Evils of
this World advantageous to the Saints, but it is the qualification by which it is
accomplished. By Love we enjoy God, and Love will make us willing to do or
suffer what he pleases, that we may have fuller Communion with him. In God all
perfections are in transcendent eminence, they are always the same and always
new. He gives all things without any diminution of his Treasures: He receives
the Praises and Services of the Angels without any advantage or increase of his
Felicity. By possessing him, all that is amiable and excellent in the
Creatures, may be enjoyed in a manner incomparably better than in the Creatures
themselves. His infinite Goodness can supply all our wants, satisfy all our
desires, allay all our Sorrows, conquer all our Fears. One Beam of his
Countenance can revive the Spirit dead in Sorrow, and buried in Despair. The
Prophet Jeremy in the Desolation of his Country, supports himself with his
Interest in God. The Lord is my Portion, says my Soul. Lam. 3. 24.
The Expression signifies the Truth and Strength of his affectionate choice of
God as his chiefest Good. What Loss can make a Christian poor, whose Treasure
is above? What Danger anxious, whose Heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord? What
Disaster unhappy, whose Blessedness is in Heaven? What Death can destroy him,
whose Life is hid with Christ in God? Deprive him of all the contents of this
World, yet by communion with God, Heaven descends to him, or he ascends to
Heaven, where God is all in all: The blessed Reward is not reserved wholly till
hereafter. Divine Joy is not deferred till our entrance into the Celestial
Kingdom: There it is a refined Joy from all mixture of Sorrow, it is infinitely
increased; there spiritual Joy meets eternal Joy; but it begins here: The
gracious Soul has a taste and sight how good the Lord is, as an earnest of the
fullness of Joy in Heaven. Hope brings some Leaves of the Tree of Life to
refresh us with their fragrancy; but Love, of its Fruits to strengthen us. As
transplanted Fruits, where the Soil is defective, and the Sun less favorable,
are not of that Beauty and Goodness as in their Original Country; so heavenly
Joys in this Life are inferior in their degree to those of the blessed above,
but they are very reviving. In the multitude of my Thoughts within Psalm. 94. 19.
me, thy Comforts delight my Soul. It Is the triumphant Exultation of the
Prophet, Although the Figtree shall not blossom, neither shall Fruit be in Hab.
3. 17, 18.
the Vines, the labor of the Olive shall fail, and the Fields shall yield no
Meat, the Flock shall be cut off from the Fold, and there shall be no Herd in
the Stalls: Yet will I rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my
Salvation. He supposes himself in Extremity, utterly destitute not only of the
Refreshments, but Supports of Life; yet he knows how not only to be patient and
contented, but joyful in the most forlorn Condition. Joy is an Affection proper
to the happy State. In the day of Prosperity, rejoice. And in his deepest
Affliction he had such a Felicity in the favor of God, that no external want
could diminish. The Tree of Life brought forth Fruits for every Month; Our
blessed Redeemer typified by it, has Consolations for the most deplorable and
desolate Condition. If he says to the afflicted Soul, I am thy Salvation, and
within a little while thou shall be with me for ever in Glory, it suffices.
Rejoice in the Lord always; again, I say, rejoice. It is the most affectionate
counsel of the Apostle. These are not inaccessible heights of Religion, and
points of Perfection, to which none can arrive unless extraordinary Saints; but
are the experimental practice of humble sincere Christians, that say with the
Psalmist, Whom have we in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon Earth we
desire besides thee. The guilty principle of vexatious discontents and
immoderate griefs, under outward losses and troubles, is a false Judgment; that
God without the World is not sufficient for our complete Felicity: Who, unless
a Person distracted and foolish, would say that the magnificent Feast of
Ahasuerus, that was prepared to show the Riches and Glory of his Kingdom, was
mean and poor, because there was not set before the numerous Guests in Dishes
of Gold, Grass and Acorns, the Food of Brutes? It Is equal folly to imagine that
God, who is an infinite Good, suitable to the spiritual immortal nature of the
Soul, and all-sufficient to fill the vast capacity and desires of our angelical
Faculties, the Understanding and Will, by his glorious Perfections; that God, I
say, cannot make us happy in his Love, because our lower animal Faculties, our
Senses, have not in our Communion with him what is pleasing to their carnal
Appetites. The Spouse in the Canticles is represented as a Lilly among Thorns,
encompassed and oppressed with injurious Enemies, yet she breaks forth in
triumphant Joy, I am my Beloved's, and he is mine; by an irrevocable donation
she gave her Heart to Christ, and reciprocally he gave himself to her; she
despised all inferior things, and rested in his Love as her sole Felicity. In
short, none are concerned to lose the weak light of a Candle at Noonday, when
the Sun pours forth a deluge of Light to illustrate all things; and the Soul
that enjoys the propitious Presence of God, is satisfied therewith when lower
Comforts fail.

Direct. 3. Let us moderate our Valuations and Affections to things below.

This is a Consequence of the former; for if the Heart be full of God, it will
not admit any inferior Object to rival him in his Throne. If we consider the
vast distance between the Perfections of the Creator, and the faint Reflections
of them in the Creature, our Respects and Love should be accordingly. Reason,
Authority, Example, Experience convince us that all things below are empty
Vanities; it is restless folly to seek for Happiness here, and to borrow the
Language of the Angel, to seek the living among the dead. If our Felicity be
from the Light and Warmth of Creatures, how easily is it quenched, and we are
in irrecoverable Darkness? When there is exorbitant Love, and dissolute Joy in
the possessing, there will be extreme and desperate Sorrow in losing. One
irregular Passion feeds and maintains another. The Heart is disposed to
contrary Extremities, and passes from the Fire to the Frost: The unequal Spirit
swells or sinks according to the outward Condition. It is the wise advice of
the Apostle, that we rejoice as if we rejoiced Poenam de adversis mundi ille
sentit, cui laetitia and gloria omnis in mundo est. Cyp. ad Demet.
not, and then, we shall weep as if we wept not: Afflictions are intolerable or
light, according to our apprehension of them; an indifferency of temper to the
things of this World disposes to Self-denial universally, as God is pleased to
try us. This was the holy and happy temper of David, Surely I behaved and
quieted my self as a Child that is weaned of his Mother, my Soul Psalm. 131.
is even as a weaned Child; indifferent to manage a Scepter or a Sheephook,
according to God's Pleasure. If we can deny our selves, we shall humbly yield
to God. If we can sincerely say, Not our Wills, we shall readily repeat our
Savior's Submission, But thy Will be done.

Direct. 4. A prudent forecast of possible Evils as future to us, arms us with
Patience to sustain them. Since Man was expelled from the terrestrial Paradise,
and is below the celestial, he is liable to innumerable afflicting Accidents.
His condition here is like an open Sea, so voluble and inconstant, so violent
and furious: Sometimes the Ships are raised upon the top of the Waves, as if
they sailed in the Air; and sometimes plunged into the Waters and ready to be
swallowed up: Such frequent changes happen in our passage to Eternity, and it
is mercifully ordered so by the Divine Wisdom, that we may so use the World, as
not to abuse it, and our selves by over-waluing and affecting it. It is a
contemplation of Theodoret, that the Sun and Moon, the most glorious Luminaries
of Heaven, and so beneficial to the Earth, would be honored as Deities, if
they always appeared with the same invariable tenor of Light: And therefore
God wisely disposed of their Motions, that at the revolution of certain
Periods, they should suffer an Eclipse, that the ignorant World might be
convinced they were but parts of Nature appointed for the Service of Man, and
are not worthy of divine Honor. Thus we see, that often the brightest and
fullest Prosperity is eclipsed, to convince us by the miserable changes in this
World, that the best estate of Man is altogether Vanity, and that these things
are utterly insufficient to make us happy, and are not worthy of the chief
Regard and Affection of our immortal Souls. To set our Hearts on them is to
build on the Sand, and to expose our selves to ruinous Falls by every Storm. A
sudden blast overthrows the Fabric of Fancy, our conceited Happiness in the
enjoyment of perishing things. Our greatest Comforts may occasion our greatest
Afflictions: The Glory of a Family may occasion the Grief of it. Now the
consideration of the mutable nature of things here below, keeps the Heart loose
from them, fortifies us with proper Thoughts to bear Evils that happen, and
prevents Disappointments, that is an aggravating circumstance of our Troubles,
and a great vexation to the Mind. The Israelites when transported from the Land
of Canaan to Babylon, felt the rigors of their Captivity the more sensibly, in
that they were confident in their term and state in that Land, as their
permanent Inheritance: to be expelled from so rich a Country wherein they
promised themselves Rest, was a high degree of their Misery.

There is indeed a prevision of Evils that may befall us, that has Torment, that
anticipates and exasperates Misery. Fear, that gives the Signal of approaching
Evils, often brings more terror than caution, and like a timorous Sentinel by
a false Allarm, astonishes rather than prepares the Mind to encounter with
Danger. Our Savior strictly forbids such perplexing apprehensions of future
Evils, as most unbecoming Christians, who are under the perpetual Providence of
their heavenly Father. Take no thought for the Morrow, the Morrow shall take
Mat. 6. 34
thought for the things of it self. But on the contrary, to be secure in our
Prosperity, as if we should always enjoy a favorable course of things, as if
our most flourishing Comforts did not spring from an earthly Original, and
might be suddenly blasted, or easily cut down, is to lay our selves open to
surprising Disorders and Perplexities when Evils befall us. It Is the wise
Counsel of St. Peter to Believers, Think it not strange concerning 1 Pet. 4. 12.
the fiery Trial, which is to try you, as if some strange thing happened to
you: For unexpected Adversity falls upon the Soul in its full weight, and
suddenly overthrows it. Uncomfortable Accidents strike to the Heart, when it is
not armed to receive the Blow: Whereas the remembrance of our frail and fickle
State, makes us less troubled in afflictive changes, because prepared for what
may happen to us.

Direct. 5. Serious and mournful Reflections upon our Guilt, and what we
deserve from divine Justice, is both a Motive and a Means to suppress
Impatience and Indignation, and to allay inordinate grief in our Sufferings. We
are directed by the wise Preacher, In the Day of Adversity consider: It is a
proper season to review Conscience, to search and try our ways, to take a sad
and serious examination of our Lives. If God should exact the rigid score of
our Debts, and make us as miserable as we are sinful, yet there is the greatest
reason to justify him, and accuse our selves; much more when our Punishment is
far below our Deserts.

Humility is the Mother of Meekness, they are Graces of the same Complexion and
Features. Our Savior in the order of the Beatitudes, first declared, Blessed
are the poor in Spirit, that have a low conceit of themselves, as nothing in
Spirituals, and worse
than nothing in Sin; as empty of all that is Holy and Good, and compounded of
all Evil: And Blessed are those that mourn, in a sense of their Sins: And then,
Blessed are the Meek: And these are very congruously joined, for Meekness is a
Disposition inseparable from the other. He that duly considers himself to be a
wretched Creature, a worthless Rebel, and is humbly and sorrowfully affected
for his unworthiness, his Passions will be subdued; and as melted Metal
receives any form, so he patiently suffers what God inflicts. A broken Heart is
an acceptable Sacrifice to Psalm. 51.
God, and implies a tender sense of Sin, as the Offense and Dishonor of the
holy and gracious God, in allusion to a broken Bone, that has an exquisite
sense of any hurt: And it may be extended to signify a Heart that is compliant
and submissive to God's Will, in allusion to a Horse that is broken, and easily
managed by the Reins of the Rider. Contrition for Sin is always joined with
Resignation to the chastizing Providence of God.

Besides, Godly Sorrow will lessen natural Sorrow. Sin first deserves our
Grief, and the sharpest accents of our Lamentation should be placed upon it,
and the more sensible we are of it, the lighter will Affliction be to us. As
the opening a Vein stops by Revulsion, a flux of Blood in another part; so the
turning the Stream of Sorrow, from Affliction to Sin, is a powerful means to
make it cease: There is Health in the bitterness of Physic, and Joy in the
depth of this Sadness. Briefly, Repentance inclines the Heart of God, and opens
his tender compassions to the Afflicted. We have an admirable example of this
in the case of afflicted Ephraim; upon his Penitential complaint, the
expression of his Grief and shame for his Sin, God graciously answers, Is
Ephraim my dear Son? Is Jer. 31. 20.
he a pleasant Child? for since I spoke against him, I do earnestly remember
him still: therefore my Bowels are troubled for him; I will surely have Mercy
on him, says the Lord. When the relenting Sinner is covered with Tears, the
great Comforter descends, and brings healing to the troubled Waters: this
advice is more necessary for the Afflicted, because usually the strokes of
Providence are properly a Reproof and Correction for Sin: the application of a
Corrosive, implies, that some corrupt matter is to be discharged; God is
provoked by their neglects, and though Love cannot hate, it may be angry, and
without renewing their Repentance, and recovering his Favor, their Afflictions
are very uncomfortable. It Is extremely sad to feel the sting of a guilty
Conscience within, and the displeasure of God without. The Burden is heavy and
oppressing that is laid upon a wounded Back. It is therefore our best Wisdom
and Duty to search our Hearts and try our Ways, that we may discover what is
the procuring cause of our Troubles, and turn unfeignedly to the Lord. This
will endear Afflicted Souls to God, and incline him to afford gracious supports
to them. It is true, sometimes our Sufferings are designed for Trial,
especially, when they are for Righteousness sake. Counterfeit Coin, though with
a fair Stamp and Inscription, is discovered by the Fire; thus mere titular
Christians, specious Hypocrites, are made known by Persecutions: but true
substantial Gold endures the Fire without loss, and the more it is tried, the
more it is refined. Thus the true Christian, whom neither the gain of the World,
nor the loss of Life can remove from the steadfast owning of the Holy Truth, has
a clear manifestation of his Sincerity. And it is a peculiar favor and honor,
when God calls forth his Servants to the hardest Trials for his Names sake;
it is the noblest way of Service, a special Conformity to the Son of God, more
glorious than the resembling his power in doing Miracles: In this the Saints
here have a capacity of serving God above the Angels; for the obedience of the
Angels is always joined with their Happiness, but the obedience of the Saints
here, is often attended with Adversity, and is more valuable to them upon that
account: As a Soldier of Courage and Generosity, when he is chosen from the
rest of the Army for some bold Exploit, values the choice of the General, as a
signal mark of the esteem of his Valor and Fidelity. To you it is given, not
only to believe, but to suffer for Christ's sake. This is just matter of Joy.
Innocence with the faithful companion of it, a good Conscience, makes our
Sufferings from the rage and violence of Men, to be comfortable. There may be a
Feast within the House, when a Storm of Hail rattles upon the Tiles. But it is
sometimes so ordered by Divine Providence, that the Evils we suffer are of a
mixed nature, partly Chastisements, and partly Trials. This was the case of the
Believing Hebrews, to whom the Apostle Heb. 12.
directs his Counsel; their Persecution was from the unrighteous Pagans for a
cause purely Religious, but 'twas permitted by the righteous God, as a
punishment for their Sins. And here the Divine Wisdom and Goodness is
admirable, that the same Affliction is instrumental for the purifying of his
Servants from Sin, and the advancement of his glorious Gospel. The first and
most immediate effect of his Discipline, is the humbling and sanctifying them
to prepare them for his Love, by which they are fortified to bear courageously
the worst Evils for his sake.

Direct. 6. Apply the Mind to consider the Blessings we receive, as well as the
Evils we endure. Whilst the intence Thoughts are fixed upon the Cross, the Soul
is rackt with inward Tortures, but did we turn our Eyes upon our Enjoyments,
and the Comforts that are interwoven with our Troubles, it would be a means not
only to compose us to Patience but Thankfulness. The Apostle directs us to
trust in the Living God, who gives all things 1 Timothy 6. 17.
richly to enjoy. In the poorest and lowest state of Life, we have many Favors
and effects of his rich Bounty, and it is the ignorance of our deservings and
of our enjoyments that causes Discontent and Murmuring under our Troubles.
Particularly, this Consideration will be effectual to repress the Discontent
that is apt to kindle in our Breasts, upon the sight of the different
Dispensations of Providence; that some are exempted from the current
Adversities of the World, and live in ease and pleasure, whilst we are deprived
of many outward Comforts. Suppose a Sick person in extreme Poverty, were
received by a rich and liberal Lord into his House, and convenient Food, and
precious Medicines were provided for him, without his desert or possibility of
retribution; Would he be so foolish and insolent, as to complain of unkind and
unworthy usage, because some others in the Family have a more plentiful Table
and richer Habit allowed them? On the contrary, let us look down to those who
are below us: How many are poor and miserable in the want of all things needful
for the support of Life? How many are under tormenting pains, or in desperate
sadness, and have no taste and comfort in their abundance? How many are fallen
into deep Misery, and that aggravated by the afflicting Memory of former
Happiness? How many are surrounded by their cruel Enemies, and see no refuge,
no sanctuary for their escape, but a necessity of perishing? And can we pretend
a better title to the Mercies of God than our fellow-Worms? Our Original is
from nothing, and our Works are sinful; that we are not so desolately miserable
as others, when equally Guilty, is from the rich goodness of God, and should
make us thankful.

Add further; Let the most afflicted Saint in the World compare his Condition
with that of the most prosperous wicked Persons, and the comparison will be
effectual to endear God to him, and quiet his Passions under Sufferings.

The good things of this World in their abundance, variety, and excellence,
cannot make a Sinner truly happy: the Miseries of this Life in all kinds and
degrees, cannot make a good Man utterly miserable; nay they are inestimably
more happy in their Sufferings than the Wicked in their Prosperity. Manna rains
from Heaven while they are in the Wilderness, supports and comforts are from
the Love of God shed abroad in their Hearts; and their present Afflictions are
a Seed of Eternal Joy, qualify and prepare them for the Joy of Heaven. Our
Savior, from whose Judgment we receive the true Weights and Measures of
things, to regulate our Esteem and Affections, declares his Disciples when
under the sharpest Persecutions of the Tongues or Hands of their Enemies, under
Disgrace, Calumnies, Tortures and Death, even then he declares them Blessed,
for the Kingdom of Heaven belongs to them; and Heaven is such a transcendent
Blessedness, that the lively hope of it as the reward and end of our
Afflictions makes us Blessed here. And the most prosperous Sinners, are by the
same infallible Rule, miserable here; for the irresistible, irremediable Misery
that is ordained and prepared for them in Hell. They would deceive themselves
with the Paintings of Happiness, with an aerie imaginary happiness; whilst the
Senses are filled, the Soul is empty; but they shall not long enjoy the ease of
their ignorance and security; the World can do no more to make them happy, than
if one should compound and temper a draught, and give it to the Poor and
Miserable, that induces Sleep and pleasant Dreams for a few hours, but when
they awake they are still poor and miserable. Our Savior pronounces a Woe to
the rich and full, to those that laugh now, for they shall weep and mourn:
their false deceitful felicity will end in real Misery. It is Si duo istae
proponantur ridere vis aut flere? Quis est qui respondeat nisi ridere? Sed
tantum praevalet invictissima veritas ut eligat homo sanamente flere, qua^
mente alienata ridere. August. Tract. de Epict.
S. Austin's Question, Who would not prefer Grief with a sober Mind before the
Jollity of a Phrenzy? Who would be a merry Mad Man? for he is only happy in his
Fancy, and fancies himself so, only because he is Distracted; and according to
the Rules of true Wisdom, the worst estate of a Saint, when lamenting and
languishing under Troubles, is more eligible than the best estate of a Sinner
when triumphing in Prosperity.

Direct. 7. Lastly; Frequent and fervent Prayer to the Father of Mercies, and
God of all Consolation, is a blessed means to support the Spirit, and make it
humble and obedient to the Afflicting Providence of God. It Is Divine Counsel,
Is any Afflicted? let him Pray. It Is Prayer opens the Heart, and carnal Grief
breaths out; Prayer opens Heaven, and Divine Joy flows into the Soul; the King
of Glory keeps no State, there is always easy access to his Throne, and his
Ears are always open to his humble Suppliants. His most gracious Nature
inclines him to sustain us in our dejections. We have a powerful Plea from his
Compassions to encourage our Prayers in great Troubles. He will regard the
Prayer of the destitute, and not despise their Prayer. The most glorious
Attribute of the Spirit, the Comforter, is most useful and beneficial to
afflicted Suppliants; Affliction is the Season, and Prayer the Sphere of his
Activity. That our Prayers may prevail, these following Rules must be observed.

1. They must be addressed with an humble trust on the Mercies of God, that
incline him to relieve and sustain the afflicted. Thus St. James directs the
Afflicted, to ask Jam. 1. 6.
in Faith, nothing wavering. We read in Scripture of his Bowels, the light of
his Countenance, his melting Eye, the soft, serene, compassionate Expresses of
his most gracious Nature toward his suffering People. He does not esteem
himself more honored with the glorious Titles of our Creator and King, than
with the amiable endearing Name of our Father; and with a confidence becoming
that relation, we are directed by his Divine Son to make our requests to him.
It Is recorded Videris obolum porrigere elephanti. Macrob.
of Augustus the Emperor, that when one presented a Petition to him in a
timorous and shy manner, that generous Prince, whose Humanity was equal to his
Dignity, was moved with displeasure, as if it had been a tacit reproach that he
was of an untractable fierce Nature. Thus it is a disparagement of God's
benignity and clemency, when we pray to him in a diffident manner: He is more
pleased in doing of us good, than we can be in receiving it. Indeed, if the
Promises of God did not encourage our Hopes, we should not presume so much of
his affection, as to lay the burden of our Cares and Sorrows on his Arms; but
Heaven is not fuller of Stars to enlighten the darkness of the Night, than the
Scripture is of precious Promises for the refreshing the disconsolate. When the
Church complained, The Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me;
Isa. 49. 14, 15, 16.
What assurance does he give of his most tender and unchangeable Love to her;
Can a Woman forget her sucking Child, that she should not have compassion on
the Son of her Womb? yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee. Behold,
I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands: If he cannot forget himself, he
cannot forget his People. It Is his dear Title, God that comforts 2 Cor. 7.
those who are cast down.

Add to this, the interest of the Saints in Jesus Christ, who ever lives to
make Intercession for them. None is more tenderly inclined to Mercy, than he
that has suffered Misery: And he felt our Sorrows that he might afford relief
and succor to us. Whilst our Savior was upon the Earth, and was followed by a
multitude of diseased miserable Persons, Virtue went out of him and healed them
all: And since his Ascent to Heaven, has he withdrawn that universal Healing
Virtue, and left us under irremediable and unmitigable Sorrows? Did his
compassionate Eye regard all that were afflicted, and are we now out of his
sight? Then such was his indulgent Humility, that although he could have performed
the Cure by a Word, yet he readily offered to attend a sick Servant, I will
come and heal him; and now he is raised from his humble state on Earth to the
Throne of Heaven, does he disdain to extend his merciful Hand for our Relief?
No, his Heart and Love is the same in Heaven as upon the Earth. It Is true he is
exempted from all passionate Frailties, all afflicting Affections that are
inconsistent with the Felicity and Glory of his Kingdom: But he still retains
the same solid Love, the same God-like Compassion, the same ready Will to
support and deliver his People in Misery. Nay, if the change of his state could
have made any in him, it could be no other than what is recorded to the
immortal Honor of Vespatian, by one that had experience of his royal Bounty:
That the raising him to the Imperial Throne made no alteration Nec quicquam in
te mutavit fortunae amplitudo, nisi ut prodesse tantundem posses and velles.
Plin.
in his Breast, but that his Power was enlarged equal to his Will of doing
Good. Our Savior in his exaltation at the right Hand of God, has all Power
equal to his infinite Love that is suitable to the permanent relation between
him and the Saints: He is their Head, and they his Members: And was there ever
such a Miracle, or rather Monster in Nature, that the Head the most eminent
part, the Seat of all the Senses, did not resent a Wound made in the Foot, the
lowest and most servile part of the Body? Does it not presently express its
real Complaints? For the natural union of the parts, communicates the sense of
the pain suffered by any to the whole. And such is the spiritual Union, between
the divine Head and his Members, that from Heaven he rebuked the cruel
Persecutor of the Saints, in language expressing the connection of Charity
between himself and them, Saul, Why persecutest thou me? He does Non dicit quid
sanctos meos, quid servos meos, sed quid me persequeris? Aug.
not say why persecutest thou my Saints, why my Servants, but Why me? Tho he is
not capable of any sorrowful sense, yet his Affections are quick and vigorous
to his People. If it were possible that his Joy, wherewith he is infinitely
blessed, should be increased, it would be in the effusions of his Goodness to
afflicted Christians. Let us therefore come boldly unto the Throne of Grace,
that we may obtain Mercy, and find Grace to help in time of need. How heavy
soever the Calamities are, let them not sink our Spirits into Despair, but
raise them to nearer approaches to the God of Consolation.

2. The Prayers of the afflicted must be always with submissive deference to
the Will and Wisdom of God, as to the manner, the degrees, and time of his
delivering them. Afflictions are not peremptory and immutable Dispensations,
but conditional for holy and good Ends, and we may humbly pray for their
removal. It Is no resisting of Providence, to address to the divine Majesty with
frequent and fervent Requests, that he would please to take his chastizing Hand
off from us. Upon David's humble Prayer, the destroying Angel was commanded to
cease; in the midst of Judgment Mercy interposed, It is enough. But we are apt
to be impatient in our Troubles, and by hasty impetuous desires of Ease and
Deliverance, disturb our tranquillity, and offend God. As those who are diseased
with a Rheumatism, being worse in the Night than the Day, impatiently long for
the rising Sun to dispel the oppressing Humors, and cheer their Spirits: So in
our Afflictions we impatiently renew our Requests, Lord, How long? Lord, make
haste, not reposing our selves on his Wisdom and Goodness, who will do what is
best for us. God is both our Father and Physician, and when the corrupt Humors
are purged away, will give Cordials and Restoratives to his afflicted Children.
The Prophet tells us, He that believes makes not haste, he does not by undue
means seek to remedy his Evils, nor passionately and unquietly solicit the
accomplishment of the Promises before the season appointed by the divine
Decree, for that is to desire that his Mercy should be displayed to the
prejudice of his Immutability, but humbly waits God's Pleasure.

3. Let the main desires of the Afflicted be for Divine Grace, (which is never
more necessary and useful than in Troubles) that they may glorify God, and
obtain their eminent End, the Salvation of their Souls by them. We are often
very ardent in our Prayers for trivial things, neglecting the most necessary
and important. As if a Prisoner laden with Irons should passionately entreat,
that his Chains should be gilded, not loosed. How many spend their zealous
Affections in praying for temporal things, wherein their Happiness does not
consist. One of the reasons why God heaps upon rebellious Sinners the good
things of this Life, is to instruct us how despicable they are in his account,
things to be thrown away, as he seems to do. And he often refuses the Petitions
of his Servants concerning temporal Non audit Deus nisi quod dignum ducit suis
beneficiis. Arab.
things: When Pelopidus interceded with Epaminondas the wise Governor of the
Thebans, for the freedom of a base Fellow that for some Crime was committed to
Prison, he denied his Request; and presently released him upon the desire of a
vile Harlot: And gave this reason, it was a favor not worthy the dignity of
Pelopidas, but suitable to the quality of such a Petitioner.

And sometimes we pray for things dangerous and hurtful to our Souls; and it is
becoming the Providence and Love of our heavenly Father to deny our
ill-counselled desires. Let us therefore be more intent and importunate in our
Petitions, that our Afflictions may be sanctified, then removed. We have
neither Understanding nor Strength, how to order our selves, how to bear and
improve great Afflictions. St. Paul declares, I have learned in every Condition
to be content? By the Revelation of the Gospel, and the Holy Spirits teaching
that all his earthly troubles should end in the heavenly glory, he was
instructed in that Science of the Saints. We are therefore directed, If any Man
want Wisdom, that is, how to manage himself patiently under Afflictions, let
him ask it of God, who Jam. 1.
gives to all liberally, and upbraids not. If Afflictions are sore and sudden,
it is very hard to compose and support the Spirit. The Passions are Servants of
Sense, rather than obedient to Reason, and by their first violent Motions
surprise the Mind, and overcome it before it perceives the Assault; he that is
not a Master, isa Slave to them. Or suppose no angry Resistance, no impetuous
Passions in the afflicted Breast, yet the Heart bleeds inwardly, and faints
away. David had natural courage to encounter a Lion, yet he was so disconsolate
in his troubles that he was fain to argue against his Sadness: Why art thou
cast down O my Soul, why art thou Psalm. 42.
disquieted within me? And having raised his drooping Spirits, yet he relapsed
to his first Faintness, till by supplies from God he was confirmed in hope of
Deliverance. The Apostle implores the glorious Power of God, That the
Colossians might be strengthened with all Might, unto all Patience, and
Longsuffering Col. 1.
with joyfulness. We should sink under heavy Sufferings, or be tired with the
length of Miseries, without his immortal Strength. But if the Power of God
assist a weak Spirit, it will be finally victorious over all the Evils of the
World. How many Martyrs of the tender Sex, who would naturally tremble at a
drawn Sword; yet by divine Support despised the Tormentors, and all the
Instruments of Cruelty. In them was an imitation of that Miracle of divine
Power, when the three Children walked in the midst of the flaming Furnace,
untouched by the Fire. God is styled the God of Patience and Consolation. It is
his sole Prerogative to comfort the afflicted. I, even I, am he that comforts
you. The Woman in the Gospel that had a bloody Issue, no human Art could afford
her aid and relief: And when her Estate was wasted on the Physicians, and her
Strength by her Disease, she came to our Savior, and by touching the Hem of
his Garment was presently healed. Thus the afflicted Spirit, whom no worldly
things are able to support and make joyful, finds everlasting comfort in God.
He satisfies the Soul with his Love, and establishes this Persuasion, That all
things shall turn for the best to his People. Now by Prayer the divine Power
and Favor is engaged for our support and deliverance. How many Psalms of David
begin in Tears, and end in Triumph? In his great Exigency, when ready to be
swallowed up by his Enemies, he dispatched a flying Prayer to Heaven for
relief; Lord, take bold of Shield, and Buckler, and stand up for my help: And
the Almighty appeared in Arms for his Rescue. And he recounts another blessed
experience of the efficacy of Prayer, In the Psalm. 138.
day when I cried, thou answered'st me: and strengthenest me with strength in
my Soul. The Affliction was still incumbent, but did not overwhelm him: which
was a more gracious testimony of God's love, than if it had merely been taken
away. It is said of the distressed, They looked to him and were lightened. It is
the Perfection and Propriety Psalm. 34. 5.
of the Saints in Heaven to see the glorious Face of God without Veil or
Shadow; but here some Rays of his quickening Countenance comfort his afflicted
Servants, while they lift up their Eyes and Hearts to his Sanctuary, a joyful
Light breaks forth, that leads them out of the dark Labyrinth of their troubled
Thoughts. If the Saints remain disconsolate, it is not for want of Mercy and
Power in God to refresh their Sorrows, but from neglecting to improve their
Interest in him, and deriving Spiritual Comforts from his fullness by humble
believing Prayer. When the Disciples were surprised with a Storm in the Sea of
Tiberias, they toiled with hard labor to save the Ship that was like to be
overwhelmed by the Waves: but all in vain, till by their Cries they waked our
Savior who was asleep in the Ship. He lifts up his Head, and the proud Waves
presently sink; he speaks a word of Command, and the boisterous Winds are
silent; and a great Tempest is changed into a great Calm. This may fitly
represent the afflicted state of a Si non dormiret in te Christus, tempestates
istas non patereris. Ideo fluctuabat Navis quia Christus dormiebat: Navis tua
cor tuum. Aug.
Christian, their Passions swell into a Storm, they are ready to be overwhelmed
with Troubles, but it is because Christ sleeps in them; they have his Presence
as if they had it not, but earnest constant Prayer will awake him, and his
propitious Presence will secure them from Shipwreck, and make their Breasts the
true Pacifick Sea, and bring them safely to the Blessed Eternal Shore.

Briefly; God teaches us to profit by our Afflictions, and this affords matter
of Joy and Thanksgiving. The Psalmist declares, Blessed is the Man whom thou
chastenest and instructest out of thy Law. The Divine Teacher gives a right
understanding of Sufferings, for what end they are sent, and teaches by the
voice of the Rod to obey his Word, He instructs us in our Duty with the
clearest Convictions, and infuseth gracious dispositions suitable to his
Doctrine. He gives directing Light, and a seeing Eye to perceive it; he
presents Heavenly Encouragements, and prepares the Heart to receive them. Now
what Paul speaks of the Cross of Christ, is applicable to the Crosses of the
Saints: God forbid that I should glory but in the Cross of Christ, by which the
World is crucified to me, and I to it. The Cross of Christ made the Jews and
Pagans to despise and reject the Gospel, esteeming it to be gross folly to
expect a glorious Immortal Life from one who was ignominiously put to Death;
yet that was the great Argument of the Apostles triumphant Joy, because he felt
the Virtue of it to unbind the charms of the World, so admired by carnal Eyes.
He looked upon it with the same disaffection and disregard, as one that is near
expiring: it appeared in his Eyes rather as a loathsome object, than with
amiable qualities.

And if the Cross of a Christian be the means of internal Mortification, if
thereby this vain deceiving World be rendered contemptible to him, and his
Affections are inflamed to things above, he will find cause to glory in
Tribulation. To conclude this Argument;

There is no Affliction how great soever, though with respect to natural means
unremovable and unmitigable, yet if it be sanctified by Divine Grace, a
Christian even while he is so afflicted, has more cause of Joy than Grief, more
reason to bless God for it than to repine and complain. In every thing give
Thanks, for this is the Will of God in Christ Jesus concerning 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5.
you. He turns Afflictions into Benefits, and our affectionate Praises are due
upon that account.

FINIS.

