THE Ancient LIBERTY OF THE Britannick Church, AND THE Legitimate Exemption
thereof from the Roman Patriarchate, Discoursed on four Positions, and asserted

By Isaac Basier, D.D. and Chaplain in ordinary to His late Majesty of Great
Britain, CHARLES the First.

Three Chapters concerning the Privileges of the Britannick Church, etc.
Selected out of a Latin Manuscript, entitled, Catholico-Romanus Pacificus,

Written by F. I. Barnes, of the Order of St. Benedict, yet living [as is said]
in the Roman Inquisition.

Translated, and published, for Vulgar instruction, By RI. WATSON.

London, Printed for John Mileson, to be sold by Elisha Wallis, at the
Horse-shooe in the Great Old-Bayley, 1661.

TO My Worthy good Friend Mr. Richard Watson, etc. At Caen.
Sir,
THe cause why the abundant satisfaction I inwardly conceived, at the receipt
of your most obliging Letter, and reading of that excellent Diatribe of Doctor
Basiers, which accompanied it (by Mr. Coventrie's favor) according to your
direction, has no sooner thus dilated it self on Paper, has been that
ingenious young Gentleman's absence these Holy Days, as he himself will (I
doubt not) for my further justification, testify; I do therefore, Sir, with
all gratitude, acknowledge both Dr. Basier's, and your ample favors, in this
whole design, no less relating to what is already so worthily performed, than
to what is also so meritoriously projected and intended, as that I should do my
self great wrong to refuse the annex of my name; where it should rather be my
ambition to have it appear; But, on the other side, give me leave, Sir, to
suggest one caution, that you take heed (since you intend it should pass
current in England) the stamp of my name do not, in regard of my Relation to my
Royal Master, (I will not say, adulterate the coin, or abate the intrinseck
value, but) make it less welcome to praeoccupated and misperswaded Readers. The
Doctor's English Letter, to me, I hold not only fit for the Press, as a
testimony of the Authors eminent industry and merit, but also as it is useful
to the public, indeed, such a one, written with so Apostolical a spirit, as
that I have been often heard to say, that I could never read it, but as a kind
of nine-and-twentieth of the Acts; Use therefore I beseech you, Sir, my name
with all freedom, as you think good, you cannot entitle me to any thing of
this kind, which does not add, as to my honor, so to my obligation to you;
whose prone, and undeserved, favor herein I shall, upon all occasions,
ambitiously endeavor to requite by some more solid acknowledgement, than this
bare signing my self, Most Worthy Sir,

Paris, this first day of the year, 1658. which I heartily wish you most happy.
Your most humble and obliged servant Richard Brown.

To the Honorable, Sir Richard Brown, Clerk of the Right Honorable
Privy Council TO His Majesty of Great Britain, etc.
Sir,
THough I took the liberty, some years since, to publish the Latin Diatribe of
the worthy Doctor, which I found in my Lord Hopton.
Lords Cabinet, after his decease; yet I could not so well presume to address
it, as, I am confident, intended by the Learned Author, unto your noble self;
By my adventure in the Translation I have somewhat improved my Title, to a
degree of propriety, and can so far justify yours, at least to what is mine,
if you please to own a Patronage of the work, under so much disadvantage, as
the change of Language puts upon it. Your approbation of it in the design gives
me no full assurance of your satisfaction at sight and reading; but your
ability to judge the difficulty of Englishing such matters, in such a style as
they require, and your encouragement of all that aims at the public good,
yield me hopes of your acceptance, and dispensation with whatsoever
unavoidable defects; That it was presented to you no sooner, you in part know
the reason; until of late it has been as hard to find a Press for any
Treatise that vindicated our Church, as for a Dedicatory Epistle to any
Resident of our King: But my long frustrated attendance for a Supplement from
Mr. Justell was the first Dilatory it had, and very lately, I think, it has
been discountenanced by an aversion, if no more, of some private Inquisitours,
where you are, from all that hangs the Church of England on this hinge of
Primitive Antiquity, or the Authority of Ancient Councils. It waits on you now,
accompanied with somewhat I communicated not before, obtained by the friendly
industry of that Mr. Thomas Coventry.
ingenious Gentleman, who sent me F. Barnes's Manuscript, whence I selected
what (and more than what) the Doctor directs us to, though he survives not to
entertain the duplicate of my thanks, nor to take pleasure in the effect of his
own pains, or mine, and to actuate further the most commendable quality, which
happily discoverd it self very early in him, a singular complacency in
accommodating a private friend, and a generous promptitude to advance any thing
wherein public interest was concerned. I must needs, in gratitude, do him the
honor of laying this leaf of Laurel on his Hearse, which has passed through
several hands of our Reverend Clergy, and Gentry, Paris.
where he died, recommended, Sir, with your own serious condolence unto mine,
That he acquired the character of a prudent exemplary young Gentleman in his
life, and a very pious Christian in the self-discerned approaches to his death.

Sir, for printing the Doctors Letter, I should apologize (unto him) if you
lent me not yours to countenance it; as your permitting it before to be read
and copied, had signified your inclination to have some such right done to our
Church, and him, which could not better be than in company with another work of
his own, and what his approves. The advertisement you further gave me, that
his additional Relations were addressed to Sir George Radcliffe, came too late
for me to recover them, by the means I used, out of his Papers; as the notice
of his death did for some other Letters that had passed, to my knowledge,
between my Lord, and Sir George, upon Theological points of controversy,
wherein they differed, and which they discussed with some little earnestness,
yet (...); If the former be not irrecoverably disposed of, Sir, you have now a
fair opportunity to secure them; though, if the good Doctor himself be living,
the late misfortune befallen the Country learned Dr. Basier Dr. Duncon
Travelers, not to exercise their function where the duty of praying for the
King should be prohibited; And a signal instance it was of Christian courage in
our Reverend Author, when an Exile, to refuse the offer of a plentiful support,
where that would not be allowed; yet it had been worth his journey to Smyrna,
to convert the Consul, who now, I hope, has more than the Merchants argument
(which many times is more prevalent with men of business, than the Divines) I
mean, that of Interest, to convince him.

Sir, The benediction the Doctor gives to you and yours, in allusion to that
which issued from the Ark to Obed Edoms house, I have a very particular
obligation to suffrage in, though so long after the date of his; It was
testimonium Dei faventis, says Grotius; and (...), says Philo, of the
Propitiatory, or cover to it, a testimony or symbol of Gods favorable and
powerful Mercy to the good man; not so restrained to the presence, but, even
after its removal to the City of David, no doubt, he and his family were
blessed by it. Sir, the public exercise of our Liturgy, is the Antitype we
reflect upon, which, by Gods singular indulgence to you, has, when chased out
of the Temple, took refuge in your House, so that we have been forced many
times to argue from your Oratory for a visibility of our Church; Your easy
admission of me to officiate in it for some months, and your endeavors to
have such an establishment made for me, as whereby, in the most difficult of
times, I might have had a comfortable subsistence, and a safe protection under
your sacred roof, beside the other graces and civilities I had from you, exact
this open retribution of my thanks; as the character of my holy Order,
impressed on me in your Chapel, may have consigned me, somewhat peculiarly,
to be your Priest, when any emergent may require the Canonical performance of
my Ministry within your walls; However, Sir, I shall not offer the holy
Sacrifice at any of Gods Altars (which are now again erecting by a most
miraculous mercy to his King and People) but I shall commemorate, in your
behalf, the little emblem you preserved of them, when they lay in their dust
and ruins; nor shall the cloud of sacred incense ascend in the Sanctuary
without the mixture of my breath, while I have it, to ask a return from Heaven,
in showers of blessings to you, and your posterity, whose name, and memory,
must be ever venerable to the English Clergy, as your person has been most
obliging to many of us, among whom, though the unworthiest of them, I pray
assist and honor with the continuance of your patronage,

Noble Sir, Your most grateful, and very humble servant, RI. WATSON.
Caen, Aug. 12. 1660.
POSITIONS.
I Position.
THe rights of Patriarchates. Custom introduced; Councils confirmed; Emperors
established.

II Position.
The Britannick Church, as being always placed without the Suburbicaries of
the Italick Diaecese, in the time of the Nicene Council, was in no case subject
to the Roman Patriarchate, but enjoyed a Patriarchate of its own (as to the
substance of the thing) so as did the other Churches placed in the rest of the
free Diaeceses.

III Position.
The Britannick Church was, with very good right, restored by her Sovereign, to
her ancient Ecclesiastical liberty, and that according to the Rule of the
ancient Catholic Canons, by which

the word) The Metropolitick Rights Custom has introduced, appears from the
very words in the sixth Canon of the first great Nicen Council, wherein the
confines of the three chief Patriarchs are determined, and the Origin of the
Roman Metropolitan, as also the Alexandrian, Antiochian, and those of other
Provinces (which at that time did alike enjoy, each its own.) I say, the Origin
of every one of these, is referred by the Council ad (...), to Custom; And
moreover the Synod does decree a Religious Observation of that Custom in these
solemn words, which the Church truly Catholic did perpetually reverence as an
Oracle, viz. (...). Let Ancient Customs be in force; commanding likewise
(...). That Churches should have their privileges preserved. The same is
clearly evident from the words in the second Canon of the first
Constantinopolitan Council, which most expressly commands each Church in every
Diocese to be governed according to that Custom of the Fathers which had
prevailed, the privileges being preserved which by the Nicen Canons have been
granted to the Churches.

The second part of the Position ( viz. That Councils have confirmed the Rights
of Patriarchates) is manifest both by the former Paragraph, and principally by
that Illustrious Canon, which is the last save one of the Oecumenick Council at
Chalcedon (that is the 206 Canon of the Universal Church) This very 28th. Canon
appears in all Greek Copies, and although controverted by Pope Leo, whom it
seemed to concern, yet we have seen, and read the very same Canon likewise in
an excellent Latin Copy, the quadrate Characters whereof, and other marks of
Antiquity, argue the Book to be about one thousand years old. This Copy is in
the rich Library of the famous ^ustell, who heretofore gave me the liberty of
seeing it. There is also another ancient Latin Copy in the famous Library of
the Noble Th^^^nus, wherein yet the same Canon is to be read; so that we may
justly question the fidelity of the later Roman Copies, which have it expunged.
neither the truth nor validity whereof has any one questioned, unless
carried away violently with an affection to the Roman party. The words of the
said Canon are most emphatical. Behold the very marrow and vigor of it
expressed.

First, The Catholic Ancients do assert, that they in this decree, (...), and
every where follow the definitions of the Holy Fathers.

Secondly, That the Privileges of the Elder Rome, they say not (are founded by
Christ, or by Peter, or by Paul, but) are indulged by the Fathers, (...).

Thirdly, They adjust the reason of this Prerogative, and that not divine, nor
indeed so much as Ecclesiastical, but merely secular, to wit (as we shall
demonstrate in the third Paragraph) the Imperial Authority, (...), because that
City was Emperesse of the rest.

Fourthly, The Fathers, moved by the same consideration, declare, That they (as
much as lies in them) (...), will communicate equal Privileges to the most
holy Throne of New Rome. Rightly judging (they are the words of the very Canon)
that Constantinople, which they call New Rome, being honored both with Empire
and Senate, may enjoy equal Privileges with the Elder Rome; and in
Ecclesiastical affairs, no less than she, be extolled and magnified, as her
second, or next unto her: hitherto the Canon, second, to wit, in order, but no
way obnoxious in jurisdiction to Rome, as is plain by her equality with Rome,
every way asserted in the Canon, and will afterward more clearly appear both
out of the 8th. Canon of the first Ephesine Council, as also the ninth Canon of
the Council of Chalcedon; both which Canons are cited and illustrated in the
following Position.

The third part of the Position, viz. The Rights of Patriarchates Emperors
have established, is confirmed both by reason and by practice; and that first
general, then special likewise.

The general Reason, being as it were the foundation of this whole discourse
deeper laid, is farther to be reached.

First, Therefore we say, That Fathers of Families were at first both Princes
and Priests. Moreover, as the supplicate of the whole Gallick people, to Acta
inter Philip. Pulch. and Bonifac. 8.
King Philip the Fair, almost four hundred years since, very rightly observes
against Pope Boniface, Melchisedec is expressly said to be King before Priest,
and consequently the King takes not from the Priest, nor ought to acknowledge
that he owes unto the Priest his Crown, or the rights thereof (such as the
external Regiment of the Church is proved to be afterward.)

Secondly, We say, That by propagation of Families, and their amplification
into Cities, and Communities, the Oeconomick Authority in process of time,
became politic.

Thirdly, We assert, That in the first institution of the Priesthood, Moses
took away no part of the supreme jurisdiction from the Politic Authority;
Therefore the Royal Power remained the same it was before, both Legislative and
Judiciary, as well in Sacred as Civil Affairs. For Moses, as Deuter. 3^.5.
King in Iesurun, was constituted by God himself, the keeper as well of Numb.
10.1.
both Trumpets, as Tables; now what pertained to Moses as King, is every Kings
due. This very comparative Argument, as rightly consequent from Moses to
Constantine the Great, after the revolutions of so many ages, Eusebius five or
six times applies to establish the Imperial Authority about the Convocation and
confirmation of the first Nicene Council.

Fourthly, As Moses, not Aaron, delivered the Ceremonial Law: so, long after
Moses, King David instituted the courses of the Priest, and Solomon thrust out
Abiathar the High Priest.

Fifthly, When Christ inaugurated his Apostles, he furnished them with great
powers of his own, such as are the Administration of Sacraments, and power of
the Keys; but all that Christ bestowed on his Apostles cumulatively, naught at
all privatively: for indeed our Lord Christ would neither by the Evangelical
Priesthood, nor his whole first Advent, have any thing detracted from the
Jurisdiction or Authority of the Civil Powers; nor that Kings, because
Christians, should have their Prerogative abated.

Sixthly, We say, That Kings, as Kings, ought to be the Liturgick Officers of
Christ; Romans 13.6.
and so far Kings in their degree may, yea ought to be Ministers of the Church,
and, as it were, External Bishops of the Ecclesiastic Government, (as You are
Bishops as to the interior, I, as to the exterior.
Constantine the Great said wisely of himself) That same the magnificent Title
of Christ himself, Prince of the Kings of the earth, seems to erect for all
Kings of right, although in fact most of Kings are not, yet by virtue of this
title they are obliged all to be Christians.

Seventhly, We say, That there are very many things pertaining to the external
Polity of the Church, which although they belong properly and primarily to the
King alone, yet in case of necessity, as they say, and secondarily are out of
course devolved upon the Clergy. For instance, To call Synods; ordain Fasts or
Festivals; distinguish Parishes into Diocesses, or Provinces; to fix and
ratify the Hierarchical degrees of Bishops, so as this man is a Bishop, that a
Primate, the third a Metropolitan; that this Bishop should be under the
jurisdiction of that Metropolitan, and contrarily, upon some weighty or lawful
either occasion, necessity, or public commodity of the Church, that this
should be exempt from the other under whom he was before. These, and very many
of like sort, according to the various state of the Church, pertain both to the
King and Priest. For those two most different times of the Church's condition
ought not to be confounded, I mean of persecution, and peace. Because in time
of persecution under Infidel Kings, so long as Princes are altogether and every
way dis-joyned from the Church, and the Church from Princes, the divine order
cease, and the Royal Succession suffer's necessarily interruption (I say
interruption, not abolition) For so long the case is plainly extraordinary,
and, while so, the Woman is in the Desert, and the Church supplies this defect
of Princes as she can. As when the Husband is absent or sick, the Matron
governs the Family. But the divine Positive Order re-entring, the ordinary
state of the Church returns also; so soon as Kings resume the Christian
Religion, the partition wall presently falls down, and then by due right Kings
take again their exterior power over the Christian Church. Otherwise we should
say, that in order to the Government of the Church, there ought to be no
difference between Pharaoh and Moses, between Nero and Constantine; nor, as to
dominion in sacred Affairs and the right use thereof, that this Emperor
communicates any more with the Church, than the other; which would be
dissonant, not only from right Reason, but also from holy Scripture. Therefore
the Emperor, Isa. 49.23.
so soon as he becomes Christian, ought to obtain his restitution entire. And
this in this Argument is the matter of right, or general Reason, which we lay
down as the Base of that right which belongs to the Emperor in establishing
the external limits of the Ecclesiastical Government.

As to the matter of fact, or practice, that is both general or Catholic, and
also special.

The general practice (beside the assumption of the second Argument which was
proved before) consists in an induction of Councils, as well General as
Provincial, all which as they supplicate from the Emperor himself the very
convocation of councils: so do they submit to the same Emperor every one of
their decrees, even those in matters of Faith, which although, as to their
intrinsec Authority, they depend only on the Word of God, and Truth it self;
yet, as to their extrinsec Authority, they depend on the Imperial Sentence: but
if those of Faith, how much more those which are only of the bare Regiment of
the Church, such as is the establishment of Patriarchates, lie all under the
Imperial decrees? to wit, in this sense, That the Canon of the Church may have
the force of a Law, that wholly proceeds from the Authority of the Prince.
Thence is it, that every one of the Ancient Councils, all the Ancient Catholic
Bishops (even the Bishop of Rome himself) present them always to the Emperor
to be supplied, amended, perfected; and so humbly petition from the Emperor,
not a naked protection, or late execution; but an entire ratification and
confirmation of every Council, without which, as to the external effect, they
are to become unattired, void, and plainly of no force. Concerning this Truth,
I appeal not only to the Councils of Cavalion, Mentz and Toures, with the rest
of the less sort; but I produce the very four general Councils, concerning the
first of which, viz. that of Nice, Eusebius expressly relates, that the Emperor
(...), confirming the decrees of the Synod, did fortify them, as it were with
his seal. I appeal also to the first Council of Constantinople, and the very
Epistle of the Council to the Emperor Theodosius, wherein all the holy Fathers
petition the Emperor (...), etc. to have the Suffrage of the Synod confirmed.
Yea, I appeal to Leo himself Pope of Rome, (whom I believe not to have been of
the most abject spirit among those in that Pontificate) who in every one of his
Let. 23, 24, 25.
Letters to three Emperors, humbly petitions (not commands, much less decrees*
but) beseeches, supplicates, that the Emperor would command, etc. But it may
suffice to have declared these things, though somewhat at large, yet but by the
way, to the evincing (by a general rule from the whole to the part) That the
rights of Patriarchates introduced by Custom* confirmed by Councils, were
established by Emperors, (...), which was the last lemme of our Position.

The same will appear more evidently in the special practice of the Catholic
Emperors. For by what Authority Justinian the Emperor erected Iustiniana
prima to a new Patriarchate, Achrida, now Ochrida.
and indulged unto the same (they are the words of his eleventh Novel) the
highest Priesthood, the highest authority, and ordained that that should have
the place (not only Vicegerency, Novel. 131. c. 3.
but place) of the Apostolical See, so as it should be, says Nicephorus, a
Free Church, and Head unto it self, with full power, etc. (what could be said
more amply, what more magnificently of Rome her self?) so likewise by the same
Imperial Authority, the very same Emperor Justinian, Novel. 131. chapter 1.
restored the African Diocese to its Ancient Patriarchal Prerogative (which the
invasion of the Vandals had interrupted) And so by his Imperial writ did he
constitute the Bishop of Carthage absolute Primate of whole Africa.

Lastly, This is the very thing which in the last age the Emperor of Britain
King Henry the eighth by the like right imitated in his Diocese, viz. not by
erecting it anew (which yet in the case of Iustiniana prima Justinian did) but
only restoring the same Britannick Diocese unto the Ancient Liberty it enjoyed
in the Primitive times of the Ancient Oecumenick Councils, viz. the Nicene Can.
6. Constantinop. can. 2. Ephesin. can. ult.
Nicene, Constantinopolitane, and Ephesine (concerning which more hereafter)
And thus much more than needs, of our first Position, because that is, as it
were, the foundation laid for the rest that follow.

The Second Position.
1 The Britannick Church 2 as being always placed without the Suburbicaries of
the Italick Diocese, 3 in the time of the Nicene Council, was in no case
subject to the Roman Patriarchate, but enjoyed a Patriarchate of its own (as
to the substance of the thing) so as did the other Churches, placed in the rest
of the free Diocesses.

The Structure, or Proof.
TO the first we must observe, that the Britannick Diocese was one of the
thirteen, into which, according to the computation of some, the whole Roman
Empire, Hierocl. Notit. Provinciar. Occidental. in Append. Geogr. Sacr. Carol.
a S. Paul. edit. Paris. 1641.
but the very Praefecture of Rome it self, was anciently The ordinary
jurisdiction of the Praefecture over the City was concluded within the
hundredth mile from the City.
distributed. We must also observe that the Britannick Diocese had been one of
the six Diocesses of the Western Empire, among which it appears to have
excelled out of Tacitus, Spartian, and the other more famous Roman Historians.

To the second, we must mark, that by the Nicene Council every Province had
its Metropolitick bounds set. Certain it is, I say, that therein were fixed the
Ecclesiastic limits to the three chief Metropolitanes, that is, to the Roman,
Alexandrian, and Antiochian, the right always of the other Provinces being
preserved, which were no way subject to these Metropolitanes. This difference
seems to be between Patriarchs and Primates; They [that is, the Patriarchs] had
ever the preference and precedence in Councils, when as out of the Councils was
little other than an identity of their Offices. There are they who, in a strict
way of speaking, will haw rather the rights of Metropolitans fixed in the
Council of Nice; but those of the Patriarchs after the Dioceses designed in the
following Councils, and namely in the Council of Chalcedon. However that be, it
nothing retards our opinion concerning the ancient exemtion of the Britannick,
whether Metropolitan, or Patriarch.
It matters not whether we call them Patriarchs, or Primates (the Origin of
which terms, as the amplitude of their office, we owe rather to the following
ages) whether we call them Exarchs, as the Council of Chalcedon, Can. 9. or
Archbishops, as Justinian promiscuously, or Metropolitans, or only Bishops,
as this very Nicen Council, all is one, so long as it effectually appears, That
by Patriarchs, we understand them to whose both ordination and jurisdiction
the Provinces of entire Dioceses were attributed, and who had the hearing and
judging of all Ecclesiastic causes in the last reference, so that, according
to The Exarchs of Dioceses are Patriarchs, to whom entire Dioceses were
attributed. That Zonaras testifies upon this Canon. (...). Further, the
definition of this Canon, concerning the order of Judgments Justinian
confirms. l. 46. C. De Episc. Et Cler. Et l. 2. C. de Episc. Audi Et Novel.
123. cap. 22. These things Chr. Iustell; the most famous searcher of
Ecclesiastic Antiquities, learnedly observes, ad Can. 187. Council. Chalcedon.
Justinian the Emperor, yea according to the very Oecumenick Council of
Chalcedon from the Patriarchal sentence out of Council was allowed no regular
appeal. We call, with the Lawyers, those Suburbicary Provinces, which were
concluded in one Diocese, the Law term, because of the manifest coextension of
both, being translated from the Republic to the Church.

Thirdly, Let us grant (which yet is undetermined) that the Roman Patriarch had
obtained an extraordinary or Patriarchal Jurisdiction over all the Provinces of
the Italick Diocese, as his Suburbicaries, and that they were those ten in
number, viz. the three Islands of Sicilie, Corsica, and Sardinia, and the seven
other placed on the Continent. Which ten Provinces some do assign to the same
Diocese, induced by that ancient Observation, from which it appears, that the
Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction of the Dioceses, both for the beauty and benefit of
order and unity, as also to insinuate a mutual harmony (which ought, as much as
may be, to be cherished between the Church and Republic) in a certain accurate
imitation, was so coextended with, and adjusted to, the temporal Regiment of
the secular Vicars, that the Ecclesiastic Patriarchates or Primacies were not
enlarged farther than the temporal Jurisdiction of the Vicars, that is, to the
limits of those Dioceses, the Cities whereof, in which resided the Vicars, were
Metropolies, where was fixed the Praetory it self, which was the highest
Tribunal of all causes, and all appeals likewise in the Provinces subject
thereunto. The very same government of the Church was retained for the
conservation of Ecclesiastic Unity, unto which was had special regard by that
singular and excellent subordination of the lesser Clerks to their Bishops in
every City; of the Bishops unto their Metropolitanes in every Province; and of
the Metropolitanes to their Patriarchs in every Diocese. But in case either of
Heresy or Schism, the Church was succored by Councils, either Provincial,
which were rightly called by the Metropolitan, or Patriarchal, which by the
Patriarch, or lastly general, which by the Emperor himself. Now as this
premised general coextension of the Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction with the Civil
Government appears by comparing the second Canon of the Constantinopolitan
Council with the very Code of the Provinces: so that particular definition of
the Italick Diocese may be fetched out of Ruffinus An Ancient Translation of
these Canons has mentioned those Suburbicaries expressly in a Latin Copy about
eight hundred years old, which is also extant in the Library of the famous
Iustell. The words of the Translation are, Ut Episcopus Romanus Suburbicaria
loca gubernet.
the best Interpreter of that very sixth Nicene Canon, who expressly mentions
the Suburbicaries in that place, where he professedly interprets the said
Canon; who being both an Italian, and near the age of the Nicene Council, was
able clearly to distinguish the proper limits (as then fixed) of the Italick
Patriarchate. Howsoever it is evident to any man, that even in this sense, from
the Jurisdiction of all those ten Italick Provinces, as -- Penitus loto divisos
orb Britannos.

From the whole world the Britains were divided.

To the fourth, viz. That in the time of the Nicene Council the Britannick
Diocese was subject neither to the Roman Patriarchate (as some of yesterday,
grossly suppose) nor yet to any foreign Jurisdiction; shall presently appear,
when we shall show, That the Britannick Churches enjoyed their own Primate or
Patriarch. That being all matter of fact, is to be fetched out of the
Britannick history it self, which is written by Venerable Bede, the chief
Historiographer of the said Britain, and a Catholic Priest too. In him
therefore we may read the huge difference of the Britannick Church (howsoever
That the British Nation had been converted to Christian Religion many ages
before Augustine the Monk was sent into Britain by Gregory the Great, appears
out of the Holy Fathers, as well Greek, as Latin, the chief of whom are
Athanasius in secunda Epist. contra Arian. Tertul. advers. Iudaeos, number. 43.
apud Pamel. It appears likewise out of the ancient Gildas de Exidio Britanniae;
for he refers the birth of Christianism in Britain to the highest time of
Tiberius, that is, about the year 135. according to the computation of
Baronius, who confesses that Britain was nine years elder than Rome, in her
Christianism, Vid. Eusebius. Pamphil. in Chronico. Moreover Augustine the Monk
himself acknowledges the Bishops of the Britains for truly Catholic,
notwithstanding their difference in Rites from the Romans, yea, and that when
they refused to subject themselves to the Roman Bishop. Beda lib. secundo Hist.
cap. secundo.
most Catholic in other things) from (that I say, not with the same Bid,
contrariety to) the Roman Church, both in the different observation of Easter,
wherein the Britains following the use of Anatolius the Constantinopolitane
Patriarch, and not that of the Bishop of Rome, conformed themselves to the
Eastern, not Western Churches, as also in the different administration of holy
Baptism, and in many other things (witness Augustine himself, who was Legate of
Gregory the Roman Bishop) The same also appears out of the constancy of the
Britains in their rejection of the said Augustine, whom although sent Express by
the Roman Pontifie, that he might preside over the Britains; yet, says Bid,
All the Britain Bishops refused to acknowledge him for their Archbishop, as
who had an Archbishop of their own; whosoever he then was, whom it would not
be hard to know from the prerogatives of his Metropoly, and privilege of his
seat in Councils. As for the state of the Britannick Churches, and their
partition, it will be worth our pains to search it in the undoubted Records of
the British Antiquity.

From the very time therefore of Constantine the Great, and so of the Nicene
Council, all Britany was in times past cantoned into three only Provinces,
Beda Antiq. Britan. p. 11. and passim.
over which were, after the Roman manner, in temporal affairs, three Roman
Proconsuls or Praesidents; as likewise in spiritual there praesided as many
Archbishops commonly called Metropolitans from their Metropolies, or principal
Cities wherein were resident both the secular and sacred Provost, or
Metropolitan. The first of these three Provinces was called Maxima
Caesariensis, the Greatest Caesarian [or inverted if either way to be
Englished] the Metropolitan whereof was the Bishop of York. The second was
called Britannia primo, the first Britain, the Metropolitan, of which was the
Bishop of London. The third was Britannia secunda, the second Britain, called
the Legionary Metropoly, and thereof the Is^ane Bishop, or Bishop of Ca^ruske
in the Tract or County of Monmouth. That was the state of this Metropoly from
Lucius unto King Arthur, in whose time the Metropolitical dignity was
transferred to the Bishop of St. David's, to whom were subject, as Suffragans,
the Welsh Bishops, until in the time of Henry the first, or as some will have
it, Henry the third, the same Metropolitan was reduced under the obedience of
the Archbishop of Canterbury.

Now whatsoever either in the Provinces themselves, or Churches, was afterward
irregularly parjeted from abroad, that cannot prejudice the Imperial authority,
to which belongs, as we have before showed, both to dispense the external
Government of the Church, and to establish the jurisdictions which it limits.
Much less can a Usurpation, advanced by force or fraud, derogate from the
Oecumenick decrees of the Ancient Fathers, or frustrate so many most grave
Canons, venerable for their age, published thereupon, such as is the premised
6th Canon of the Nicene Council for the Ancient Prerogatives, and the second
Canon of the Constantinopolitan, by which is charged, That no Bishop approach
any Churches situate without his bounds (which most grave Canon I wish the
Bishop of Rome had religiously observed, the Peace of the Church had been
better assured) the Council goes on, commanding, that all be kept according to
what was defined at Nice. And that these may not seem too remote from our
Britain, the Canon concludes in a general Sanction, That all things ought to be
done according to that custom of the Fathers in force. But that such had been
the custom of the Britains, as to have all weighty affairs Synodically
disputed within themselves, appears out of Bid. Bed. Hist. l. 2. c. 2.
Moreover, to have been in use, that the Bishops of that Nation were
consecrated by one Bishop, Baronius himself somewhere observes.

At that time truly so beautiful was the state of affairs in Britain, until
some ages after the Council of Nice, Augustine the Monk was sent by Gregory,
who, what he could not by right, first by fraud, then by the armed assistance
of Ethelbert, and his new-converted Anglo-Saxons, endeavored to force the
Catholic Bishops of Britain to acknowledge and receive him for their
Archbishop; but they courageously replied, That they could not abandon their
ancient Privileges, and subject themselves to the mandates of strangers. There
are not wanting very ancient Historians, who impute the slaughter of the
Britains to Augustine, by whose instigation they say Ethelbert slew one
thousand two hundred of them, because they would not obey Augustine in the
Council. Essebicus. Monach. in Merlin. Comment. Nicolaus Trivet. citat. a Do*
Henr. Spelman. Council. p. 111. Galfrid. Monumet.
That any other custom had been in the sacred Government of the British
Church, no man can ever evince out of genuine Antiquity. And so much concerning
the second Position.

The third Position bearing proportion to the second.
The Britannick Church was 1 with very good right 2 restored by her Sovereign
to her Ancient Ecclesiastical Liberty, 3 and that according to the Rule of the
Ancient Catholic Canons, by which was confirmed for the future the entire
Liberty of the Churches.

TO the first, whatsoever the Rebels at this day on either side falsely allege
to the contrary, it appears out of very many Histories, and the Authentic
Chronicles, that the Kingdom of England has been an Empire, and so accounted
in the world, which was governed by one supreme Head, or King, both in
Spirituals and Temporals, and that wholly independent of any foreign Prince or
Supremacy whatsoever on earth.

This is the very marrow expressed from the formal words of a statute at large
set out to this purpose by the Assembly of Parliament, that is, of the whole
Kingdom in the 24th. year of King Henry the eighth, chap. 12. At which time
the three Estates of England, to wit, the Clergy, Nobility and Commons, willing
to recall the Ancient Rights of the Kingdom, taken away rather by force and
power, than any Rule of the Canons, decreed to have controversies ended within
the bounds of the Kingdom, without any appeal to foreiners (which indeed is
one principal prerogative of a Patriarchal Jurisdiction.)

But upon this whole Britannick affair, the thing most worthy our observation
is, That this decree, for the liberty of the Britannick Churches was not
introductive of a new Law, as in spite to the Kings of Britain new upstarts
calumniate, who are either ignorant of, or opposite to, the Britannick
privilege: but the said decree was only declarative of an Ancient Custom,
which had constantly prevailed in England, eight hundred years since, and so
many ages before: yea and was entirely renewed as often as occasion required.
Concerning this most 1. The King is a mixed person with the Priest, because he
has as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal Jurisdiction Statut. Anno decimo H. 7.
fol. 8.

2. Anno Christi 755. King Kenulphus exempteth the Abbot of Abbington from
Episcopal Jurisdiction; and the fact of the Kings was judged for legitimate. 1.
H. 7. fol. 23, 25.

3. Among the Laws of Edward the Confessor, chap* 19 It is said, That the King
is constituted Chief Vicar, that he may rule the Kingdom and People of the
Lord, and, above all, the Holy Church.

4. In the time of Edward the First, one had brought a Bull, derogatory to this
right of the Crown, for which he was condemned to exile, and it was judged,
that his crime had the nature of Treason.

5. 4 Ed 1. The King in Parliament (as they speak) himself expounded the Canon
made at the Council of Lions, De Bigamis.

6. 16. Ed. 3. The Excommunication of the Archbishop of Canterbury was judged
valid, notwithstanding the contrary sentence of the Roman Pontifie.

7. 17. Ed. 3.23. The King by his Supremacy exexempts the Archdeacon of
Richmond from Episcopal Jurisdiction, as also all Ecclesiastic Colleges, and
even Monasteries, which the King founded, were exempt by the same right.

8. 27. Ed. 3.84. The King and supreme Ordinary present by lapse.

9. 33. Ed. 3. Aid du Roy. 103. Kings anointed with sacred Oil are capable of
spiritual Jurisdiction.

10. 11. H. 4 37. The Pope cannot change the Laws of England.

11. 12. Ed. 4.16. A Legate, coming into England, ought to take an oath, That
he will attempt nothing in derogation to the rights of King and Crown.

12. 2. Rich. 3.22. The Excommunications and Judgments of the Roman Pontifie
are of no force in England.

13. 1. H. 7.20. The Pope cannot erect the prviledge of a Sanctuary in England.

14. 25. Ed. 3. It is determined, That the Pope has no right in England of
conferring Archbishopricks or Bishoprics.

15. 27. Ed. 3. Whosoever, by Summons or Suit, shall trouble any of the
subjects of the King of England, without the Realm of England, shall incur the
loss of all his goods (which the Law of England calls Praemunire.)

16. 16. Rich. 2. cap. 5. It is provided by Law, That because the King of
England holds his Crown immediately from God, therefore if any one shall
pursue in the Court of Rome any translation whatsoever of process or
excommunication, etc. he shall incur the same forfeiture of his goods, being
beside put out of the Kings protection.

17. 2. H. 4. It is decreed, That the Popes Collectours, by virtue of his
Bulls, have no authority nor jurisdiction in England; but that the Archbishops
and Bishops of England are the Kings spiritual Judges.

18. 11. H. 4.69.76. The Commission of Judges pronounces with one mouth, That
the premised Statutes are only affirmative of the Common Custom of England,
but not introductive of a new Law. It were an easy thing to accumulate six
hundred more of this sort, but these will be enough for the Reader nor
prejudicate, yet hitherto perchance ignorant of these Statutes.


just assertion, we attest the ample Margin filled with a long train of the
Ancient Britannick Statutes, which the ingenuous Reader may be pleased at
leisure to view and consider. Whence by induction of parts will appear, that
this was no new enterprise, nor a single irregular act of Henry the eighth
alone; but that long before the time of Henry the eighth, this had been the
ancient Supremacy of all the Kings of England, over all persons, and in all
causes whatsoever, so well Ecclesiastic as Temporal.

We proceed to the second, and prove the Ancient state of the Church to have
been such, out of the undoubted Monuments of the Britannick Church; where first
we may collect out of the forecited Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 27. Et 2. c. 4. ad
annum 883.
Venerable Bede, as also Hist. l. 36.
Henry of Huntington no less than the rest, That Augustine the Monk stirred up
Ethelbert King of Kent against the Bishops of the Britains, because they in
behalf of the Ancient Britannick Liberty denied to subject themselves and their
Churches unto the Roman Legate. Yet further, Huntington adds, that neither the
Britains nor Scots (that is the Irish) would therefore communicate with the
English, and Hence is that sad complaint [ apud Bed. l. 1. c. 27.] of Gregory
himself in his Epistle to Augustine. In Anglia, inqut, tu solus Episcopus, etc.
In England, says he, thou art the only Bishop. How the only? since out of
the Historical context [ Bed l. 2. c. 2.] it appears clearer than the Midday
light, that there were at that time other Bishops in Britain beside Augustine;
but yet in very deed Augustine was alone, because neither the Britains, nor the
Scots, would communicate with Augustine, as who accounted him a notorious
violatour of the Ancient Ecclesiastic Liberties of the Britannick Island.
Augustine their Bishop, more than with Pagans; the reason was, because
Augustine did seem to deal uncanonically with them, by constraining them to
receive him for their Archbishop, and subject themselves to the mandates of
strangers; when as the Ancient manners of the Britannick Church required, that
all things should be synodically transacted within themselves. Hence is it,
that the Britains did always celebrate their Ordinations within themselves,
and this is also another honorary privilege of the Patriarchal Jurisdiction,
and concerning this we again appeal unto Bed. Histor. Eccl. l. 3. c. 3.
Bid in his history of Aidan the Bishop; yea to Baronius himself, where quoted
before, who relates, out of Lanfranke, the custom of the Kingdom to have
been, that the Bishops thereof were consecrated by one single Bishop; but that
these ancient Customs of Britain were abrogated by the force rather, and power
of the Anglo-Saxons, than by any Synodical consent. The said Lib. 3. c. 36.
Bid testifies the same, where he relates that Colman the Bishop (Finanus's
Successor in the Pontificate of the Northymbrians) with his fellows, chose
rather to desert Episcopate and Monastery, than their Ancient Manners. Which
fact of Bishop Colman is worth observation, lest, what some falsely pretend,
only the Monks of Bangor may seem to have rejected Augustine, against whom,
charged upon them, this was the Legitimate defense of the ancient Britains,
these being their very words out of Lib. 2. c. 2.
Beda before, That they could not abandon their ancient manners, without the
consent and license of their own Bishops. And truly this answer of the Britains
was grounded on very irrefragable, very Catholic reason, and that because this
unwonted subjection had contradicted the sixth Oecumenick Canon of the Council
of Nice, which expressly commands the Ancient Manners to be kept. This had also
destroyed the eighth Canon of the first Ephesine Council, by which first such
usurpation, to wit, in the case of the Cyprian Church, is called in Hypothesis,
a thing innovated beside Ecclesiastic Constitutions and Canons of the Holy
Fathers, which, as common diseases, therefore needs a greater remedy, because
the damage is greater which it brings. Secondly, Therefore the Holy Synod (in
Thesi, as they say, or in general) commands, that that should be observed in
all Dioceses and Provinces wheresoever (Behold the Authentic Charter of the
Britannick Liberty.) Thirdly, That no Bishop (the Roman not excepted) (...)
should invade any other Province, which from the beginning has not been under
his, or his predecessors jurisdiction (as, for instance, did Augustine the
Monk.) Fourthly, The Oecumenick Canon goes on, and a hundred and fifty years,
more or less, before Augustins invasion of the Britannick Church, as it were
foreseeing it, by provision declares it to be void, in these most weighty
words. That if any one shall invade it, and make it his own by force, he shall
restore it. Fifthly, Yet further (for the following words are most emphatical,
and which, as by and by shall appear, seem chiefly to regard the Roman Bishop
himself.) The Holy Synod warns, that the Canons of the Holy Fathers be not
passed by, nor that the pride of secular power creep in under the specious
pretense of administering sacred Affairs, and by little and little unawares we
lose that Liberty which our Lord Jesus Christ, the deliverer of all men, has
purchased for us by his blood. Yea the Holy Ecumenical Synod, for the greater
enforcement, yet again repeats the decree. It has therefore pleased the Holy
and Universal Synod [to decree] that to every Province be preserved pure, and
inviolate, the rights which it had from the very beginning, according to
ancient Custom, every Metropolitan (and so the Britannick) having liberty to
take Copies of the Act for his Security. Yet the Holy Synod concludes according
to its Ecumenical Authority: If any one shall bring any Sanction (every word
is most general) repugnant to those which now are defined, it has pleased
entirely the Holy and Universal Synod, that it be void. Hitherto for the
Liberty of the Churches [extends] the most express Canon of the Catholic
Church, which after the matter of fact first declared, completes the matter of
right in favor as well of the Britannick, as Cyprian Church. For since, as out
of the praemises appears, the Britannick Church in the West enjoyed the same
privilege wherewith the Cyprian Church was honored in the East, why may not
she lawfully resume what is her own, in time of peace, which was taken from
her, by tumult and force, in a turbulent time of the wars?

The sum of the whole most Inculent Canon is this; The ancient and truly
Catholic Church would have the rights of every Church preserved, not taken
away, and if they be taken away by force or fraud, what Patriarch soever does
it, his fact is declared void, and moreover he is commanded to restore that
Province which he has made his own.

Now that this Canon was established in a tacit opposition to the Roman Bishop
himself, is, not obscurely, to be collected out of the Tom. 2. Ephesin. Synod.
append. 1. cap. 4. Ep. 18.
Acts of that Council; for it is evident from them, that the Canon prevailed,
notwithstanding the Epistle of Innocent the first to Alexander, wherein the
Roman Bishop declared, that the Cyprians were not wise according to Faith, if
they subjected not themselves to the Patriarch of Antioch, when as,
notwithstanding, we see the decree of the Universal Synod plainly contrary to
the Papal sentence, wherein namely it was judged that this was attempted by the
Antiochian, beside the Canons, and that therefore all the letters brought by
him against the Cyprians were of no effect. Hitherto the third Position. The
last follows.

The Fourth and last Position.
The Britannick Church persevering in its Primitive Exemption from the Roman
Patriarchate, so far is it from that it ought, or can be therefore called
Schismatical, that rather in the very same respect (before truly Catholic
Judges) that Church appears both to have been, and yet really to be, by so
much the more every way Catholic, by how much that Church, more than others,
is an Assertour of the whole Ancient Catholic Liberty, which by so many sacred
Canons of four General Councils, the Nicene, Constantinopolitan, Ephesine and
Chalcedonian, the Catholic Fathers have decreed, and antecedently declared to
remain ratified for ever against all future usurpations.

SInce the time that the ancient Liberty of the Britannick Church, was by right
resumed (as before) with the solemn consent of the whole Kingdom, the Let the
Reader see if he can get Barnes's Manuscript, the title whereof is,
Catholico-Romanus Pacificus chap. 3. This Chapter is one of the three
translated out of the said Manuscript, and herewith published.
De Insulae Magnae Brittanniae Privilegiis; for which his sober work that good
Irenaeus, although he were of an unblameable life, and entire fame, yet some
years since was, as they say, carried out of the midst of Paris by force,
divested of his habit, and like a four-footed Brute, in a barbarous manner,
tied to the horse, and so violently hurried away, first into Flanders,
afterward to Rome, where being first thrust into a dungeon of the Inquisition,
and then into the prison for Madmen, Some of his own Order suppose him to be
still living.
he died. Yet those fierce people not content with his death, have endeavored
to extinguish his fame, boldly publishing, that he died distracted.
Britannick Church (now truly Catholic in the rest) can by a like right retain
the same without the loss of her Catholicism, without any brand of Schism, much
less of Heresy. We do willingly owe the proof of this assertion to Barns, a
most learned and peaceable man, at the same time [when he writ it] a Roman
Priest; a Monk in the order of the Benedictins, a Britain, and therefore no
unfit Arbiter of this Britannick Cause.

First, Therefore, whether the causes of our withdrawing were sufficient, is no
way a matter of Faith, but wholly matter of fact, whereto the Roman Bishop
himself (that I may speak the truth as gently as may be) was at least
accessory, and therefore can be no competent Judge of the cause, but rather, if
the business would bear a controversy, it were to be presented to a truly
Ecumenical or general free Council, rightly and legitimately called. Now so
far is it from that the Britannick Church even refused to present her self, or
her cause, before the Tribunal of such a Council, that the Britannick Church
rather holds a general Council to be above any Patriarch (even the Roman
himself) according to that pair of Councils held at Basil, and Constance. This
the Britannick holds together with the Gallican Church, a renewing of the
ancient concord with which Church (...), so far as conscience permits, were
even at this time much to be wished, it being Hence is it, That Wini being
ordained by the Gallick Bishops, is received by the Britains, even then when
they rejected Augustine the Roman Bishop. Witness Bid. Lib. 3. c. 7.
manifest that above a thousand years since, much friendship passed between the
Gallican and the Britannick Church, even at that time when the Britannick
Church did not communicate with the Roman: and certainly if both parties would
mutually understand one the other, without prejudice, and that of the two,
which is in the extreme, would remit of its rigor, that consent of the
Britannick Church with the Gallican would not be so improbable as it seems at
the first aspect to them that are ignorant of both, or either. But this only
by the way. To our purpose again. We say the Britannick Church does so
reverence the General Councils, that she has provided by a special Statute,
That not any one endued with spiritual jurisdiction, shall declare or
administer his Ecclesiastical censures, or adjudge any matter or cause to be
heresy, but only such as before had been determined, ordered, or adjudged to
be heresy by the authority of the Canonical Scriptures, or by the first four
General Councils, or any of them, or by any other General Council.

This was in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth the very Catholic sense of the
Britannick Church, and her due esteem of General Councils, which the old
Parliament openly testified in the solemn Assembly of that whole Kingdom, for
we disdain to make mention in this place of the Cabals or Conventicles now
adays, which reign in the turbulent rebellious State of that Church and
Republic: for those swarms of Sects are only the Cancers and Impostemes of
that lately famous Church, which no more belong to the sacred body of the
Britannick Church, than a wenn does to the body natural: And truly if
heretofore the great Mother of us all, the Catholic Church seemed almost
universally to be utterly swallowed by a sudden deluge of So that G. Nazianzens
Church was called (...) Noah's Ark; and St. Hierom breaks out into these horrid
words; Ingemuit orbis, and se Arrianum factum esse miratus est. The world
groaned, and wondered, that she was become Arrian.
Arrianism, what wonder is it if the Britannick Church, but one of her
daughters, lie under the same fate for a time? This for the first point.

Concerning the second, it is to be very much observed, That the Britannick
Church, at the time of her withdrawing, was not truly in fact, much less by
right, subject to the Bishop of Rome, having been -- years before her
reformation under Edward 6. altogether exempt from the Roman Patriarchate, to
wit, by the Imperial Authority, and by that of Prince Henry the eighth, whom to
have been empowered to do it by right appears before in the first Position.

But what occasion soever of the withdrawing at that time shall be pretended,
it cannot prejudice the Royal Right, or any way derogate from the ancient
Custom of the Britannick Church. Nay, the British Nation could not have
opposed either of the two, without being hainously guilty both of Rebellion and
Schism, especially since that whole business of the Church's restitution was
transacted with the express consent of the Britannick Clergy (then Roman) a
Provincial Council of which alone, in defect of a General* was at that time the
supreme merely Ecclesiastic tribunal of the Britannick Nation, whereunto,
only, the Britannick Church ought to be, or indeed could be subject, because
in that article of time, no Council, truly general, sat. As for that of Trent,
which afterward followed, it was at highest only Patriarchal, to which
consequently the Britannick Church, before exempt by lawful authority from the
Roman Patriarchate, was no way subject. Whereas therefore the Britannick
Church can be said to have opposed it self to no lawful Ecclesiastic Authority
at all, which notwithstanding inseparably is of the essence of Schism, certain
it is, that Church is no way Schismatical, but, on the contrary side, the
Britannick Church, according to the singular moderation and Christian love she
perpetually shows toward all Christians, as she keeps off from her external
Communion no Christian of what ever communion he be (so that he hold the
foundation entire) but (unless a most just excommunication put a bar) opens her
Catholic bosom, and draws forth her holy breasts to any genuine Nursling of
the Catholic Church; so as well in Faith, as the internal Communion of
Charity, as likewise in the external Communion of the Catholic Hierarchy and
Liturgy, yea and Ceremonies also, she yet cherishes and professes an
undivided peace and consent with the Catholic Church, from which the
Britannick Church never did, nor ever will separate her self, as being always
most tenacious of the whole truly Catholic foundation. For one thing it is (on
the hinge of which just distinction is the whole state of this great
controversy turned) one thing, I say, it is, to separate her self from the
Catholic or Universal Church, and to form to her self a Congregation or
Religion apart different from the Catholic Church, as in times past the
Donatists did; another, not to communicate in all with some one particular
Church (as for instance, the Latin) or rather to abstain from the external
worship which is used by some persons, in some places, under an express
Protestation (for thence is sprung the modest and innocent title of
Protestants) under Protestation, I say, so soon as the occasion of scandal
should be taken away, of reconciliation, and under a vow (not so much out of
any absolute necessity, as for public peace, and Catholic unity's sake) of
returning to the Communion of that particular Church, from which that the
Protestants were estranged, yea in the latter age violently driven away by
thunder, and sword, and fire, is better known out of history, than to want any
proof, or further amplification.

It appears therefore out of the Premises, that the Britannick Church
constituted in this, as I may say, her passive state of separation from the
communion of the Bishop of Rome, is wholly free from all blemish of Schism, by
reason that the For full ten years after the Reformation, under Queen
Elizabeth, the Roman Catholics, without scruple, communicated with the
Protestants, until Pius the sixth by his interdictory Bull disturbed all.
Bishop of Rome himself first of all interrupted Christian communion with the
Britannick Church, and yet further inderdicteth the Britannick Church his
communion, and in that again the Pope extolleth himself above a General Council
lawfully called (unto which the Britannick Church has ever attributed the
decisive judgment) while in his How well this new Interdiction agrees with
the ancient Oath of the Pope, the Reader may judge, when (as Cardinal
Deus-dedit very well notes in his Collection of the Canons) the ancient form of
the Popes Oath, which is yet extant, Canon. Sanct. Did. XVI. quia Papa
jurabat, se 4. Concilia servaturum usque ad unum apicem, was that wherein the
Pope sweared, He would observe the four Councils to a title. Whence the most
learned Laschasserius very wittily infers, In Consult. Venet. thus, Non potest
igitur Pontifex Romanus jure contendere, etc. The Roman Pontifie cannot
therefore by right contend that he is superior to those Canons of the
Councils, unless he will arrogate a power unto himself over the four Evangels.
To this Oath of the Pope agrees the ancient Profession of Pope Zozimus, Can.
Conc. Statut. 5. q. 5. To decree, or change any thing contrary to the Statutes
of the Fathers, is not in the power or authority of this See. See more at large
concerning this subject That Chapter is likewise herewith printed.
Barnes's Manuscript, quo supra, Paralipomen. ad ss. 2. De Conciliis, Papa,
Schismate.
Bull of the Lords Supper, he forbids an appeal from himself to a general
Council.

To all these add (what in conclusion is principally necessary) to wit, that
the Britannick Church, after the very sacred Canon of the Scriptures (such as
is defined in the Conc. Laodic. Can. ult.
ancient Councils) adheres closely unto tradition truly universal, as well
Ecclesiastic as Apostolical, both which lean on the testimony or authority of
the truly Catholic Church, according to that in Vincentius of Lirinum, his
famed (...), or essay of ancient Catholicism, Quod ubique, quod semper, quod ab
omnibus, etc. That which every where, which always, which by all, etc. It
appears that the Britannick Church bears upon these two Catholic principles,
to wit, Holy Scripture, before and above all; and then Universal Tradition; not
only because the general Council of Nice, wherein (...), ancient Customs are
underset and established; but also the Britannick Church, in a The first Synod.
after her Articles of Religion were fixed. An. 13. Regin. Elizab.
Provincial Council of her own, has most expressly ordained by a special Canon.

We conclude therefore, That the Britannick Church, such as she was lately
under Episcopacy rightly constituted, was no way Schismatical, neither
materially, nor formally, since that she neither erected unto her self Chair
against Chair, which is the foul brand of Schismatics, in St. Cyprian; Nor did
that Church cut her self off from Episcopacy, or made a Congregation at any
time unto her self against her Canonical Bishops (which ever is the formal
character of Schismatics, by the definition of the Council. Constantinop. 1.
Can. 6. vel. 8. (...), etc. Woe call them Heretics which rend themselves from,
and set up Synagogues, or Conventicles against, our Canonical Bishops, etc.
Constantinopolitan Council) much less did she shake off her Bishops, and with
the continued succession of Bishops, by consequence, the succession of her
Priests, not interrupted (as I may say) from the very cradle of her
Christianism. And as for lawful ordination (as well in the material part, the
imposition of hands, as in the formal, wherein signally, by a set form of
words, both praerogative of Ordination, and also jurisdiction is conferred on
the Bishops) this her ordination, I say, rightly and canonically performed by
the Catholic Bishops, she proves out of the very Records or Monuments of
Consecrations: So that no man can by deserved right charge upon the Britannick
Churches, that ancient reproach of Schismatics in Matthew Parler, a godly and
learned man, etc. who was Chaplain to Henry the eighth, etc. being duly elected
to the Archbishopric of Canterbury, after a Sermon preached, the Holy Spirit
invoked, and the Eucharist celebrated, by the imposition of hands of three
Bishops in former times, William Barloe of Bathe, John Scory of Chichester,
Miles Coverdale of Exceter, and John Suffragan of Bedford, was consecrated at
Lambeth; He afterward consecrated Edmund Grindal, an excellent Divine, to be
Bishop of London, etc. See Camdens Annals of the Affairs of England, part. 1.
ad an. 1559.
Tertullian, Vos ex vobis nati est is; You are new Upstarts, born yesterday of
your selves. Nay so tenacious are the genuine Britains of the ancient Religion,
and by consequence of her Catholic Discipline, that for the entire restitution
of their Bishops, their most Gracious King himself Charles, Emperor of Great
Britain, chooses rather to suffer so many, and so most undeserved injuries
(even which is horrid to be spoken, to death it self, which in dishonor and
contempt of all In good earnest, this heinous fact so strikes at all Monarchs
through the side of one King of Great Britain, that unless it incense all Kings
and Princes whatsoever, as to a most just indignation, so to a serious revenge*
it may be feared that the contagion of such a damnable example, will diffuse
its infection into Neighbour-Kingdomes, it so threatens and menaceth the
destruction and ruin of Monarchy it self; since that in the most seditious
Epilogue of the perfidious Covenant, in most express words, they exhort and
animate other Christian Churches, as they love to speak, which either groan
under the yoke of Antichristian Tyranny, or that only are in danger of it,
that they would join in the same, or like Association, and Covenant, with them,
forsooth, to the enlargement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, etc. You hear the
words, ye Christian Princes, yea, and you see their deeds. It is the affair of
you all that is acted, but of such among you especially, whom particularly they
will seem to have marked out with that black character of Antichristianism,
which in the sense of these Traitors, is not so common to every meridian, but
that it seems to threaten some Region before other, with its malignity. God
avert all of that nature portended by it.
Christian Monarchs, those most desperate Rebels threaten to their King, and
not long since potent Monarch) then abolish Episcopacy, as mindful of that At
the Coronation of the King of England, the Archbishop consecrating, in the
name of the whole Clergy, twice adjures the King in these words. ss. 1. This is
translated out of the Latin Copy.
My Liege, Will you grant, conserve, and by your oath confirm the Laws,
Customs, and Liberties, given unto your Clergy by the Glorious King, St.
Edward your Predecessor? The King answers, I do grant, and take upon me to
keep them. Also. ss. 5. The Archbishop advertiseth the King in these words. My
Lord, the King, We beseech you, that you will conserve to us and the Churches
committed to our trust, all Canonical Privileges -- and that you will protect
and defend us, so as every good King ought to be a Protector and Defender of
Bishops, and Churches put under his Government. The King, almost in the same
words promises, That he, to the uttermost of his power, God helping him, will
keep the Canonical privileges of the Churches, and that he will defend the
Bishops themselves. Afterward the King being lead to the Altar, there touching
with his hand the Holy Bible, solemnly swears, That he will perform all these
things, adding moreover this Imprecation to be trembled at. So help me God,
and the contents of this holy Book. I thought fit to insert here this form of
the Kings Oath, taken out of the Royal Records themselves, that it may be made
manifest to the whole Christian world, That His Majesty's magnanimity and
constancy hitherto, is to be imputed not to pertinacy, but Religion, whatsoever
otherwise is said by such as blaspheme, or reproach him with their (...)
language.
Oath, to be trembled at, whereby he religiously bound himself to God and the
Church at his Coronation.

The Clergy, and likewise better part of the Nobility, as also the Britannick
people, dispersed here and there (Rivals with their King in this part of his
Religion) refuse not to undergo the loss of all their estates, persecutions,
banishments, yea are ready to endure all kinds of extremity, to their very
last breath, rather than consent to the Schismatics, in the extermination of
Catholic Episcopacy, which under a most false pretense of Religion, stubborn
traitorous persons, sworn enemies of the whole Catholic Church, of Religion it
self, and Christian Truth, as also of all Empire and Monarchy, attempt by force
of arms, abandoning the whole Royal Authority: Whom, the Best and Greatest God,
the severe assertour of Catholic Unity, vouchsafe to disperse in his own time,
and recollect at length the Britannick Church, heretofore a very illustrious
part of the Christian world, yea, the whole Christian Universe it self, as one
flock under one Shepherd. Amen.

S. D. G. Can. VI. Council. Nicaen. I. (...).
A LETTER TO THE Right Honorable, THE Lord Hopton, Importing the Occasion of
writing the foregoing TREATISE.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE LORD HOPTON, Baron of Straton, etc.
My Lord,
THe enclosed from Dr. Basier was left with me when he took his journey toward
Italy; He acquainted me with part of the Contents, which may put your
Lordship in present expectation of two Manuscripts, one of which is intended to
Sir George Radcliffe; I shall avoid all occasions, I can, of detaining them,
being loath to deprive your Lordship, for an hour, of the benefit which may be
assuredly reaped by two Tracts, so good in their several natures; but the
Doctors commands, imposed upon another Gentleman and my self, to search, and
secure, diverse quotations in his own, and the liberty he granted of the other
to be communicated for a time, necessitate me to crave your Lordships pardon,
and forbearance a little while, one of the Books cited by him, being not yet to
be met with, and the transcription not to be done in haste. The occasion of the
Doctors setting pen to Paper, was taken from a Work which Mr. Chr. Iustell (he
who put out the Greek and Latin Councils your Lordship has) is about, which
he means to entitle Geographia Sacro-Politica, making clear the distinctions of
several Dioceses, etc. and asserting the privileges of some Churches, exempted
from the Supremacy of the Roman. The Doctor has importuned him to enlarge
somewhat about our Church, and I think (in my hearing) prevailed with him for a
promise. This Diatribe has prepared the way a little for him, and given him a
sight of what he did not so particularly understand, in reference to us. The
main business is, the parallel of our, with the Cyprian privilege, which I
wish they may sufficiently prove, to the satisfaction of the World. I shall be
very glad to hear your Lordships approbation of what the learned Doctor has
done toward it, in the reading whose Book, if any scruple retard you, I may
chance to remove it, knowing the Authors meaning by the daily conversation and
conference I had with him. If I thought your Lordship had not the Lord
Montrosse's History, and Sr. Balthazar Iarbiers Vindication of the King (as he
pretends) already dispatched to you by another hand, I would use all diligence
to procure, and send you them, by the first, being very ready, wherein I may,
to express my self,

My Lord Your Lordships very faithful, and most obsequious servant, RI. WATSON.
Paris, March 17. 1648.

