AN ANSWER To (Vindicate the Cause of the Nicknamed Quakers of such scandalls
and untruths as is falsely cast upon them in a lying Pamphlet, otherwise called)
A Discourse concerning the Quakers; set out by T. L. or as I understand the
signification of the Letters Tho: Ledger.

By GEO: BAITEMAN.

A Word to the Reader of this Book.
IT is common among the sonns of men, every one to vindicate his own cause,
whether he be in the right or wrong; For Solomon says, Every man seems to be
just in his own cause: And the truth is, every one will speak the best he can
in his own behalf. But Christian friend, whatever thou art that Reads these
ensuing Lines, I would have thee to understand, that I have not written these
Lines in my own defense, or to vindicate my self of any aspersions that any
can cast upon me in any kind whatsoever; for though I am a man who have
undergone, and at this day do undergo the heavy burden of false aspersions,
cast upon me by the fools of the times, who neither know me nor themselves, yet
to me they are no more then the barking of curs, the which may affright
children, for my back is broad enough to bear all the weight of these
burdens, and am possessed with a Spirit, that makes me easily pass by all
the censures of men; and had the cause been my own, which is included in these
Lines, I think they had never come to the beholding* but my Spirit is such,
that it leads me out rather to justify others then my self; for I would
have thee to know, that my Sect or Profession, Tenets or Religion, call it what
thou will, is neither of that sort of People called Quakers, neither am I
Papist, Prelacyan, Presbyterian, Independent, Anabaptist, Famelist, Brownist,
Arryan, Atheist, Free-willer, Free gracian, Raunter, Saduccy, or Lihertine,
etc. then make of me what thou pleases; yet such a one I am as knows my
right hand from my left, and that is enough for any man to know; and by that
light in me, I am made in some measure to see what is of God, and what is of
man, and what is of the spirit of darkness: I profess unto thee, I am not
the Enemy of any man, neither does any man's Form, or Religion trouble me, but
wish all men well in their way: yet I must tell thee, that I am not
unacquainted with the wyles of Satan, in Forms, and out of Forms, and
likewise of Gods working, both in Forms, and out of Forms; and what I have
found by experience, I wish that all men had found the same, and a^ hundred
times more. And I must tell thee, I am led out to own the truth of God, where
ever I see it, in a Form, or out of a Form; but the purest truths is not
manifested in Forms, though Forms may have their time, and in their time is
tolerable, if not Idolized. And to give thee a true Reason why I was led out
to draw these Lines, it is to vindicate the truth in its appearing in some
people in these days, the which is disposed to the scandal and reproach of
most people in these times, some by wrong imprisonment, some by beating, some
by threatening, some by false accusations and scandalls, some by Petitions, and
some by writing lying Pamphlets, all of these arising from the very malice and
instigation of the Devil, who would have these poor people destroyed; for he
well knows, that if these go on, his kingdom will fall. Amongst those whom
the devil moves to act and speak against these people, one T. L. or Tho:
Ledger, has written a lying Pamphlet, the which I have here answered in some
of his false accusations therein; and if time would but have permitted, I would
have answered them more fully: but what is here spoken, I hope may serve to
give thee satisfaction of the truth in these people; and if thou have but any
light of God in thee, thou will see, and may easily judge, that these people
are no other, then such as God has marvailously called to himself, to make
the riches of his goodness known in their souls; and what ever, either
Formalists, or other say against these people take thou heed thou be not as one
of them, for better were it for thee to have a Millstone hung about thy neck,
and thrown into the midst of the Sea, then that thou should offend one of
these that believe in God, in whom Christ lives, and they in him. And for thy
better information in the truth, I have drawn these Lines, the which I freely
commit to thy Christian consideration; and the Lord give thee a good
understanding, that thou may learn to have a good opinion of any People in
whom the truth of God does appear. And my desire is, that the God of Truth may
make his Truth known to thee, whereby thou may be made to know what evil is
in thy self, and the emptiness of all things acted and created, let thy Form
be what it will. This is the worst I wish thee,

Geo: Baiteman.

An Answer to (vindicate the cause of the nicknamed Quakers, etc.
THere is two great monsterous evils in the world, and they are common among
the sonns of men; and from these two evils, arises all other sins and
wickedness whatsoever, acted, spoken, or thought, either against God himself,
or against any appearance of God in his creature Man; and by the venom which
arises from these two evils, one man is set against another in bitter
envyings, evil wishings, evil speeches, evil actings, etc. Now these two
great evils, is the very ground and original Rice of all other evil, as is
before-said; the one of these has its proper being in one of the chief
faculties of the soul, viz. the Reason, and by the operations from thence
proceeding the sons of men becomes much deprived of the pure understanding
of the truth as it is in Jesus. And the other great evil has its proper being
in another chief faculty of the soul, viz. the Will; from the operations of
which evil, arises all disobedience and rebellion against the Truth, as it is
in Jesus; yet the difference between the sins arising from these grounds is
great, though nothing that arises from either be good; the evil effect
proceeding from the ground, or cause, in the Reasonable part, will be found
inferior to these which arises out of the Will; Yet wise Solomon says,
Without Knowledge, the Soul is not good, Prove. 19. 2. And God complains by
the Prophet, That his People perished for want of knowledge, Hos. 4. 6. And
Solomon, who knew how wicked the sonns of men were without knowledge (and how
dark and blind they were in the understanding the dictates of God, without
Knowledge) how often does he counsel men to seek W. sedome, and prize her above
Gold? But who is that wise man that can truly distinguish between the Wisdom
of God, and the light which is in Reason (which may be much increased by man's
own industry) which seemingly may be of God, the light which is in Reason*
though never so much augmented by man's industry, in Reading, Hearing, Studying,
or examination, cannot find out the darkness of it self: yet man in that
light may walk very zealously, and yet therein be the greatest enemy that God
has in the world, and do more mischief against Christ and the Truth* then
those who have no illumination at all, neither act any thing in obedience to
such light. Witness the Apostle Paul, who from the obedience to such light,
Persecuted the Saints. And many of the Scribes and Pharisees, who upon the same
account, put Christ to death. Yea, from the time that God has been pleased to
come near the sonns of men (by the (...) of his Son in Flesh) has this
ignorant zeal manifested it self; and the Prophecy of Christ has been in
fulfilling till now, and as yet is not out of date, nor shall be, so long as
men is hide-bound under Forms, which is the creatures own actings; nor so
long as men is heart* bound to any created thing whatsoever; so long as these
have residence in men, the men who is inveigled in them, shall always be
enemies of the Truth, when, or wheresoever the same becomes truly to be
manifest; and yet none shall be greater pretenders of Truth, no^ greater
contenders for Truth, then those, who be the greatest opposites thereof: And he
that was the Truth it*selfe, bears witness hereof in his Prophecy, where he
says, The time shall come, that those that Kill you, shall think they do God
service* John* 6. 2. But some may say at this day, there is no Persecuting of
men for their judgment in matter of Worship, seeing that Liberty of Conscience
is countenanced by the present Authority; To which I say, there is a
Persecution, and Killing in a twofold manner; The one being acted by the
Ignorant zeal of Papists, Prelacians, and Presbyterians, and that Persecution
was acted upon the bodies and states of men, who would not Worship God in their
way; but that I confess, is much abated. But the second Persecution, or
Killing, is yet untaken away, but is in as full force and vigor, as ever; and
that is the Persecution of the Tongue, and Hand, both being set on work by the
ignorant zeal of the hellish fire, that is in the heart, from which burning
flame, the Tongue is made to utter scandelizings, and calumnious speeches,
against such persons as God does marvailously make his truth to appear in
their souls, because such souls is not made partakers of the truth under
their good thinking rules, and fair seeming Forms: and from the zeal of that
fire, their hands is set on work to write ridiculous Pamphlets, in villifying
the names, and actions, and intentions, and manifestations of such persons as
have had a clearer sight of the truth, (and fuller possession of the same, yea
and live more in the power thereof) then any person who is so glewed and
hinde-bound to any Form, though never so seeming holy in the same.

And I wish that the Author of that Pamphlet, called, the Discourse concerning
the Quakers, be not one of these good thinking Proselytes, who thinks they
have God hard tied to them in the chains of a faire-seeming Form, and through
that great light he may imagine himself to have, may become captived under a
judgment, whose gates may prove as narrow as the eye of a Needle; and then it
is no marvel to me, to see, or hear such persons throw dirt in the face of
God, or in the face of any in whom God does more abundantly manifest himself
to, then he has done to them.

Yet however, I will understand the Author of that Discourse in the better
sense, and will not say that he has put out that Pamphlet by the power of the
ground of the evil that is in his will, but rather say (and make it good to)
that he has put it out from or by the power of the evil in his reason; and
these sins may happily be pardoned, before these which arises out of the evil
ground in the will; for the Apostle Paul himself was received to mercy, in as
much as what he had done, he did it in ignorance. But now I proceed to what is
intended.

The Author begins his discourse with interpreting the words of such
Scriptures, as show what great deceivers shall be in the last days, and does
make his applications according as his good thinking inspireth him (in the
understanding of th^se Scriptures quoted by him) but that spirit that is his
guide herein, I believe will not let him make the application of these
Scriptures to himself, nor any of his order; but if judgment were but laid to
the line, and righteousness to the plummet, and that the tempest of hayle had
but swept away the lying refuge; and if he would but weigh his own heart in the
balance of the Sanctuary, I make no doubt but he might have made a truer
application nearer home, for who is the greatest deceivers in the world, but
such as have a fair seeming Form of godliness, and yet live not in the power
of God himself; and these are the greatest hypocrites amongst men, for amongst
such the white-devill has his habitation, and the well-favoured harlot has
her bed of whoredom most daintily decked, whereon her lovers and she take
their fill of pleasure; O how well and subtly does she work, when once she
gets her self covered over with the habit of Saint-like walkings, in the
outward form of a litterall Religion, which seems to be the worship of God,
because of its newness, and well regulated, according as goodthinking has
invented, carrying men into Scripture without them, and yet unacquainted with
the Scripture of truth which is within them. And from hence it is, that the
mother of harlots becomes well decked, and bravely mounted upon her
searlet-coloured beast, and drunk with the blood of the saints; let all
Formalists in England (of what Form soever, Brotherhood or Kirk-fellowship,
though their Form may be the best in all the world, and come to the very point
of example and command of Scripture in its outward requirings) take heed* for
though they may bless themselves in a fools Paradise, and think because they
have got at a great distance from the Pope, and his fictions, therefore they be
sure that they have nothing to do with the Mother of Harlots, nor she with
them; yet they are but cheated, for she cannot delight her self, nor be more
secure, then where Forms is in fashion: For where there is not a Form, this
Harlot may be entertained, but yet not with such suptuousnesse as in a fair
seeming Form* for where there is no Form, she is forced to go on Foot: but
in a Form she becomes well-mounted. Our Savior knew the truth of this,
which made him pronounce so many woes against the Formalists in his days, and
told them it should be more tolerable for Sodom then for them* for the truth
is, those be the greatest enemies of God and his Truth that possible can be,
and the greatest deceivers in the world; and an hypocrite is not to be found
any where, but in a fair seeming Form.

And where the Author (of the Discourse concerning the Quakers) is speaking of
Atheists and Apostates; it will be found that the greatest Atheists in the
world, is where there is a God most confessed with the Tongue, and yet the
heart walks contrary to the Tongue: It is not the confessing (and
acknowledging) of a God with the Mouth, that frees men from Atheism; no, no,
the greatest Atheism is in the Heart, and there it is; and it mattereth not
what any talk of God, or of Religion (or of fantastic in coms of Christ into
the soul) so long as men have not found out an Atheism in his own Heart, and
out of that be brought to have the true Knowledge of a God: that God which men
come to know no other way but by Scripture relation, will but prove a phanta
stick god; for the fancy of Formalists shapeth him out in so many several
fashions, that ost-times they fall out amongst themselves, about the fashion of
their relative god; but when they can agree about the fashion of their god
found out in Scripture, then do they busy themselves to patch up a fair
seeming Form, and therein they worship their God, with hand and foot, tongue
and eye, and all the rest of the members, at sometime. But yet I would know
where the Heart is, and what is the god thereof, I much fear that its god, is
a creature, not much unlike the gods of the Heathen (in the time of the Jews)
who was made of gold silver, wood and stone; Let but the Saint likest Formalist
in England mind the truth of this, and I believe he shall find, that such god
are the gods of his heart; let him or them, but well consider, and ponder, but
one day to mind seriously the ways and outgoings of their heart* and they
will find, that a creature of some kind is the god thereof* and whatsoever
they shall find the heart to be led out to, take it for granted that its god:
For our Savior says, Where your treasure is, there is your heart; and no man
can any way know his own heart, but by its thoughts, inelinations, desires,
and intents, etc. which be the effects thereof: And if the creature have the
thoughts, cares, fears, loves, and desires, that is its god for sure; and look
what god the heart confesses, and worshippeth, and lives in, that god shall
be the help of man, or else his destroyer. It is no hard matter for men to
conform to any kind of Kirke-fellowship, and in the same to talk of God, and
walk in the literal obedience of that Form, (^^ what Scripture requires)
and yet for all that, deny the God of Truth with their heart; let but the
Author of that Discourse look well about him, or rather to within himself, and
he need not go far to find Atheism and Athests to purpose.

But where he is speaking os Apostates, I would have him to know, that none can
justly be so called, except they have been first made partakers of the Truth,
and love of God, and from that have turned away, to love the world; but man
cannot be an Apostate, in turning from one Form to another; neither if a man
turn himself out of all Forms, for it is not the falling from Forms, that
make an Apostate, but a falling from the Truth and love of God, that makes man
an Apostate; and a man cannot fall from, or turn from that he never was
possessed of: and if any have been made partakers of the love of God, and yet
have turned therefrom, and so become an Apostate; yet such a one must be saved,
or else that Author must race out many Scriptures, or else learn to understand
them otherwise, then they be understood amongst Formalists. For they say, Whom
God once loves, he loves him to the end; and if the Author do not befoole
his own judgment, and the judgments of his Fellows, he cannot gainesay it,
but that Apostates must go to Heaven. But I believe the Author must go to
some other then himself (and to others then those amongst whom he has his
Fellowship) to seek out Apostates, for I assure him he is none himself, and I
believe they are very scarce where he lives. I much doubt, that neither
himself, nor his Fellow-worshippers as yet have been true partakers of Truth,
and then it is impossible for him or them, to fall from* or turn from the
thing they never had* so I will clear both the Author and his Fellows of the
sin of Apostasy. But what better are they that believe a Lie in stead of
Truth, then those who have known the Truth, and yet turned from it.

Seeing the Author has taken pains to quote Scriptures, and time to apply
these Scriptures, for the aspercing of a people more simple then himself, (or
any of his Fellowship) I would wish him to have a care, that he be not like
those, that as yet have the Beam in their eye, whereby they be blinded in
beholding of themselves, and so can quickly condemn others, and yet justify
themselves. But I say, Happy is he that is not condemned in the things he
allows.

Its true, the Scripture speaks of such Deceivers as should come, and in the
time of the Apostles (began such Deceivers to arise) but after their death,
they much more increased, till at last, the truth it self was over-shaddowed;
and in all Generations since that time, until these days, the truth, as may
be said, has laid under Clods of Earth; but now, when it begins to shut up
it self, (and begin to spring) how wonderful madd is the Foxes, (Bears and
Lions, Wolves and Owls, Dogs and Swine) at the very appearance of it; but it
mattereth not for all their madness, for a Stone cut out of the Mountain,
without Hands, shall dash in pieces all the fair Images of Humane Worship; and
a North Wind with a Tempest shall arise, and rent asunder the Harlots Robes,
for the Lord himself will bring the same to pass; For he has said, that in
the last days, He will power out his Spirit upon all Flesh, etc. And in the
last days, the Mountain of the Lord shall be established upon the top of the
Mountains, etc. When this comes to pass, as sure it will, then let all
blind Priests* and good-thinking Formalists look to themselves, for the day of
their visitation is at hand.

But to proceed, I come to the Authors words in his Discourse, where he
singleth out two sorts of People* to be the objects of his applied Scriptures,
and especially the one of these be the very subject of his Discourse; and these
he calls: Quakers, which, says he, is either counterfeit, or comes from the
power of the Devil, etc. If this Author himself, have not undergone the
pouring out of the justice of God upon his soul, in such a measute, as has
made all his bones to quake, let him not judge those who have been so dealt
withal; for before any soul be truly brought to live in the power of the
life of God, he shall undoubtedly pass through the justice of God in such a
measure, as shall make both his bones, and all his fair prosession quake; and
though the Author have not known this by experience; yet I marvel that such
a one as he, who cries up Scripture so high, as to make it no less then God
himseife (as shall be showed afterward) should be so unacquainted with Gods
dealing with some of his people in former time; For sure if he had lived in
those days, he would have called Moses a Quaker, and that his trembling
proceeded from the Devil, when the appearance of the Majesty of God (in the
terrible giving out of the Law) was manifested to him, Heb. 12. 21. And sure he
would have said that Ezekiel was a Quaker, and his trembling was of the Devil*
when he eat his bread with quaking, Ezekiel. 12. 18. And of Daniel, and those
with him, would he have said the same, when the Majesty of God was manifested
to to them, Dan. 10. 7. And if this Author had been beside the Camp of the
Israelites, before the giving out of the Law, he might have seen Quakers great
store, Exodus 19. 16. And if he had lived in Ezraes time, he might have seen
Quakers enough, Ezra 9. 4. What would this Author have said, if he had seen
Habakkuk tremble at the appearance of the Majesty of God, Hab. 3. 16.

What does this Author think of Mary, James, and Salome, who trembled at the
rising of Jesus, Mark 16. 8. Or of David, when his Flesh trembled for the
fear of God, Psalm. 119. 120. And of Foelix, who trembled at the words of Paul,
A and s 24. 25. And of Job, who trembled at Gods dealing with him, Job. 4. 14.
and 21. 6. And is not trembling an evident symptom of the souls undergoing
the wrath of God for sin, as may be seen in Esaias 51. 17. 22. Was not Ephraim
exalted, when he spoke trembling, Hos. 13. 1. What was Paul, when he was
converted to the Truth, Acts 9. 6. From what spirit came the Jaylours
trembling, when he fell at the feet of the Apostles? Is quaking such a strange
thing, and of such an evil nature, when the Apostle commanded the People, to
work out their Salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2. 12. It were too
tedious to rehearse all presidents in Scripture which is of like nature, which
bears witness of the truth of quaking: but this Author lays not to heart
what People the Scripture says should arise in the last time, such as should
be false accusers and mockers at the workings of God. But I would have this
Author, and all other of his Fellow Formalists, to consider the Word of the
Lord spoken by Esaias, in the 66. Chapter, for there are you all Pictured out,
and spoken to. And so are the poor despised People also, whom you call
Quakers; I will not rehearse the words, but wi^^ you, and all other accusers
and mockers, to read the same, and the Lord give you the true understanding of
it; and I wish, that that Author, may be better informed in his judgment
concerning the workings of God in his creatures; and I wish him to Pray, that
his lies, and the evil thought of his heart may be pardoned.

Further, this Author says, That these People are possessed with an aussere
Devil, because they take no more of the creatures then will serve necessity.
And in opposition to them, he is speaking of a People called Raunters, who
exceeds in these things; but as for such, I have nothing to say for what they
do, cxcept God let such a People rise, to be a^ signs of the pride and rich
deckings of the Harlot, in those, and by those* who have a Form of godliness,
and yet live not in the power of God. But as for these whom he calls Quakers,
my spirit is led out to justify them in what they do, as concerning the
bringing down their pride of heart, and mortifying the senses; but such work
as this, is not tolerable amongst Formalists, who can have the liberty to feed
their senses, and uphold their pride, and keep reputation amongst men, and
run after profit as greedily as any in the world; nay, is not almost all
knavery in the world, masked with a Form of Religion in these days. Forms of
Religion is the fashion of the times; and now adays Priests, and witty men,
and Tailors is all hard put to it; the one to invent the finest Form, and the
other to invent new Fashion of Apparel for these Formalists to wear. And when
God is pleased to raise up a People of his own accord, to forsake the folly of
these things, and to cry out against the evil in these things, O how does the
Harlot in the Formalist, begin to stir her self, and by all means possible,
seek to scandalize, or root out such people, as would have her skirts turned
over her Face, that her nakedness* and naughtiness might appear. But this is
no strange thing to me, for it has always been the fashion of the Sonns of
the Bondwoman, to persecute the Freeborn Sons; and I make no doubt but if
Christ and John Baptist were both in Person among us* but that the one would be
called a friend of the Publicans, and the other that he had to do with a
Devil. For wheresoever there is a Form of godliness, and the power awanting,
these people cannot choose but be the enemies of God, and the greatest opposers
of his Work, when he Works or brings any thing to pass, contrary to the
order they have limited for him.

The Author in his proceeding, takes it for a strange delution, that these
People live above Ordinances, and that they should have a light in them equal
to Scripture, and that that light should be the holy Ghost, and that they need
not Scripture to be taught by, because the same is fulfilled in them, and what
they speak or write, is equal to Scripture: And then brings in a saying of
Christ's, to admonish People to take heed of such light; the which he applies
as truly, as quaking and trembling comes by the Devil: the which is clearly
confuted before:

As to the first of these, viz. That People should be led to live above
Ordinances; I would know of the Author what Ordinances he means of; whether
the Ordinance of God, or the Ordinances of men; and I would have him to know
what an Ordinance is, and for what end Ordinances was ordained; and I would
have him to know a difference between an Ordinance of God, and that which is
but the Ordinance of men; but I fear he cannot as yet see a difference between
them, and therefore makes a humble jumble of both together. But for the
clearing of the same* I would have both this Author, and all other of his
order, to understand what shall be said concerning Ordinances. As for that
which is an Ordinance of God, we have commands for the observing of the same.
And one of his chief and greatest Ordinances, is his Son Christ, one with
himself, Acts 10. 42. and in as much at he would have us obedient to that
Ordinance, he has given out his Command, To love the Lord our God with all our
heart, etc. and believe in his Son Jesus Christ whom he has sent. Now the
fulfilling of these commands in being obedient to that Ordinance, it is out of
the compass of the power of every man; and therefore God in stouping to the
weakness of men* has given out other inferior Ordinances, as Rules for men
while they are in their weakness; and those Ordinances are within the power
of the creature man, to be observed; as Reading, Hearing, Praying, Baptizing,
Breaking of Bread, etc. Yet in these inferior Ordinances, I would have men to
be so wise, as to understand the ground, and intent; or the cause, and effect
of these Ordinances. It will be found, that sin is the cause or ground of all
Laws, or Ordinances; For the Law was added because of transgression, Gal. 3.
19. And the Law is made for the ungodly. 1. Tim. 1. 9. And Gods intent in
giving out Laws and Ordinances, is, to be as a Line or Rule, until the effect
be brought to pass, viz. that a man be brought into that condition (by walking
by these Rules) of the knowledge of himself, and his own weakness, and the
weakness of all those Laws and Ordinances, that so the Soul may be made ^it
to close with that which is the chief Ordinance of all; and the soul once
being truly brought to live under obedience of the chief Ordinance, all those
inferior Ordinances is of little use: For there is a time for every thing; a
time to Plant, and a time to pluck up that which was Planted For the Law was
added because of transgressions; so is all Ordinances: But the Law makes
nothing perfect, Heb. 7. 29. no more does the inferior Ordinances. But when
the Promised Seed is come, the Law has no more jurisdiction over man; and when
that which is perfect is come, then that which is imperfect is done away; The
Law and Ordinances are not perfect, but imperfect; and yet not imperfect, but
perfect: But mark well what I say in defining my self, for the Law, or any of
Gods Ordinances, has a perfection in them; but their perfection tends to
death, by reason of the sin that is in us; and the greatest perfection that
is in any Law or Ordinance, is but to bring man to be perfectly made senceable
of the sin and selfenesse that is in him. And when man is brought thus far,
Laws and Ordinances is but of little use, for further man cannot be brought by
them, and so their perfection is at an end; and what soul soever finds not
this to be true in observing of Ordinances, may take it for granted, that he
has not been faithful in walking close by the rule of the Ordinances; or
otherwise, the Angel of darkness has played that soul a trick of which it
is little capable, and so raises some certain sweetness in the soul out of
the walking in these Ordinances; and the false fiend makes the soul to
believe that to be in comes of Christ, when it is nothing else but a life
raised out of that whose nature is always to produce death; and when the false
fiend has got power to work this work, no marvel if such souls cry up
Ordinances so fast, and cry down any appearance of God in others who are let
see, and led out, from such delusions: but I let such pass with the saying of
the Prophet, Thou have wearied thy self in the greatness of thy ways, yet
saidest thou not, there is no hope; thou have found the life of thine hands,
and therefore thou art not grieved, Isay 57. 10.

In every soul (which is rightly carried on into that which is the chief
good) it will be truly made appear, that the perfection of Laws and
Ordinances is fulfilled in bringing it into a perfect death: and the
imperfection of Laws and Ordinances will appear, in that they cannot restore
the pure life to the soul; but that proceeds from another Fountain, viz.
the chief Ordinance; and when that which is chief and supreme, is come, that
which is inferior is out of date with that soul, and so it is made to live in
that which is chief, above that which is inferior; for these inferior
Ordinances are but Childrens Tutors in their minority, until the time
appointed of the Father; though Children may sometimes, for want of knowledge,
be led out to love their tutors better then their Father; yea, and think both
their Fathers, and all other enemies that would seem to separate them, and
their Tutors* though it were to carry them to live in the bosom of their
natural Fathers; but these are but the foolish thoughts of Children, and the
Apostle was such a one at sometime himself; but when he grew up to be a man,
he put away childish things; meaning, whatsoever was inferior to the living,
in that which was the chief Ordinance, even the love of God in Christ, or
Christ made truly known to his soul; and was the Apostle condemned for
saying so, or dare any judge, or question his light that led him into that
condition, or who dare say that he was in an error, when he counted all his
religious walking by the rules as dung and dross? Phil. 3. or who dare say
that he was guided by a false light, when he counted Ordinances, but as
shadows, and reproved the people for being subject to such things? Col. 2.
20. But you may say, That these was Ordinances Instituted in the time of the
Law, but now we live under Gospel Ordinances, and therefore none may live above
them. To which I say, The Ordinances under the Law had their time, and pointed
out that which was the end, viz. Christ appearing in the Flesh, and there they
ended: and the Ordinances under the Gospel has their time, and their end also;
and that is, when Christ appears in the spirits of men, for he is the end of
all Ordinances whatsoever, to them who live in him, and he in them.

But you may say, That Believers in the Primitive time, made use of
Gospel Ordinances, whose Example it behooveth all men to follow. To which I
say, it was meet they should do so, at sometime especially, when they were in
their minority in believing* and so for all young Christians: For as I said
before, there is a time for every thing; but even in the Primitive time there
was degrees of Christians; some Children, some young men, some old-men, or
Fathers; and it was the wisdom of the Apostle, to frame his discourse and
behavior to every ones condition, and to feed Children with Childrens meat,
and to give to the stronger such as was suitable for them. And while the People
was so contending about Orders and Ordinances, the Apostle judged them but as
carnal, and was but to be fed with Childrens meat* 1 Cor. 3. 1. 2. 3. and
while they were to be fed with such food, they were not in a capacity of living
of any other thing; and such were these, who could not see beyond the
Ordinances; which was but the first Principals of Religion, Heb. 5. 12. And who
dare say that the Apostle was led with a false light, when he seemed to slight
Gospel Ordinances, and leave them, as low things (being but as the Alphabet of
Christians) and so reach out to higher, even to that which is the substance of
all things, wherein perfection was to be attained? Phil. 3. 13. 15. for though
the Apostle had to do with Children in his time; yet he had to do with men,
who was more excellent, and was not in bondage to weak and beggarly rudyments,
nor lived upon shadows, nor was fed with Childrens meat of Ordinances, or
busying themselves with the Principles of Religion; but was men of full age,
who through the great mortification and selfedenyall, was brought to understand
what was good, and what was evil, and would not take things for good because
they seemed to be so, Heb. 5. 13. And amongst such, the Apostle could be
understood, when he spoke of the mystery of the Wisdom of God, 1 Corinthians
2. 6. and these were of like spirit with him, led out, and beyond, or above
Ordinances, Laws, and inferior Rules, and aimed at nothing, but the price of
the high calling, and the attaining to the Resurrection of the Dead; and to him
there was but one Rule to walk by, and that was the Rule of the Cross of
Christ, by which the world became Crucified to him, and he to it; and those
that were perfect, and aimed at perfection, was to walk by the same Rule,
Phil. 3. 15. But now perfection is cried down, and a man may almost as well
speak blasphemy, as speak of perfection, and any rule or ordinance is highly
esteemed, bu^ the chief Ordinance, and the rule and imitation of that
Ordinance, viz. the Cross of Christ: Nay, the very appearance of this, scareth
all men in a Form, or out of a Form; For this rule of the Cross is that
which will try all hypocrites in the world, for they are not able to abide it,
for it destroys all fair seeming holiness, and all worldly mindedness, and
all pleasure, praise and reputation; and therefore no marvel if there be so
few who dare take up that Cross, and walk by that Rule; and that those who
have closed with it, should be the reproach of all men. The Apostle himself
was not a little troubled with Professors, who was the very Enemies of the
Cross of Christ, and with weeping Tears told his beloved Hearers that sad
story; but if he were alive in these days, he might have weeping enough, for
such Professors, as are the enemies of the Cross of Christ, whose God is their
belly, who glory in that which should be their shame. who mind earthly things,
Phil. 3. 17. And I make no doubt if the Apostle Paul, and those to whom he
spoke the Mystery of the Wisdom of God unto, were amongst us, but that these
Professors who pretend ordinances so much (and yet in these ordinances the very
Enemies of the Cross) would call them deluded men, and carried away by a false
light. But I hope the Author will know hereafter, what it is to live under
ordinances, and what life that is that is led above ordinances.

But I am somewhat afraid, that the Author is somewhat mistaken about the
ordinances of God; and that he takes the ordinances of men, for the ordinances
of God: but at present I will not stand upon defining every ordinance, whether
it be of God or Man, but one only, and by that let him and all other judge the
rest: I doubt he takes the Priests of these times for Gods Ministers* and so
may call them an ordinance of God; nay, and amongst Fools, they are accounted
one of the chief ordinances, and so they call themselves; but if the Author
thinks so, he is mistaken, and so are all other that take them so, for they are
none of the ordinances of God, for he never sent them neither have they any
Commission from him; but they are an ordinance of men, and by men were they
sent out, and of men have they learned their Ministry, and of men they have
their Commission, and for gain it is they seek, and for prosit it is they
Preach, and run as greedily after it, as the hungry dog does after his prey;
and if hire were but taken away from them, all the world might see who ordained
them; and these have been the greatest enemies of the Cross of Christ in all
the world, and by them has the eyes of men been blinded from the true
beholding of the Truth; but let but the Free borne Sonns have patience a while,
and they shall see that brought to pass, which all the Preaching, Praying
Consultations and Petitions of all the Priests in England shall not be able to
turn away; their fear is upon them already, and their fall is not far off,
for God has born fourteen hundred years with them, but his patience is
wellnigh at a period* their guilt begins to stir, and their fear is such
that they think every bush is a boggle, this is truly apparent amongst them,
^or the very name of these simple despised people, called Quakers, does scare
them, and make them run together as so many Wolves, which is scared by the
bark of a dog; and all their Consultations is, how to get these poor people
destroyed for their heart tells them* if these increase, their Kingdom will be
destroyed: but of that no more at present.

The Author of that Discourse, takes it in high disdain, that these people
should say, they have a light in them equal to Scripture, and that that light
should be the holy Ghost, and so need not Scripture, because the same is
fulfilled in them, etc. If this Author had but taken good notice of the
Scripture, he need not have slighted these sayings; for in saying so, they do
not vary from the truth of God declared in Scripture, nor from the promise of
Christ made out to those that are his followers* as may plainly appear in
these sayings, When the spirit of truth is come, he will guide you into all
truth, etc. John 16. 13. and further, his promise was, that when he was
departed, He would send the Comforter* even the spirit of truth, which
proceeded from the Father, which should testify of him, John 15. 26. And
moreover, our Savior says again, When the Comforter* which is the holy Ghost
is come, whom the Father will send in my name; he shall teach you all truth,
and bring all things to your remembrance, etc. John 14. 26. I hope the Author
will not deny the truth of these Scriptures; and if these promises be fulfilled
in any man* what need has such of Scripture reaching without them, when they
have received the same spirit within them, by which all true Scripture was
written: and how much is the words, proceeding from that spirit, inferior to
Scripture, except the holy Ghost have changed its nature, and be not what it
was formerly; for it is not time and persons that make men's words differ, or
not be in equallity to the word in Scripture, but the spirit from whence they
flow? And does not all ordinances point out, or lead to that very end, that
God and Man should be united in one spirit, that he that sanctifies, and they
who are sanctified, may be one? And if any soul be so made one with God, who
dare deny but all true Scripture is fulfilled in them, and that such souls
have no need of any to teach them, because that anointing which they have
received* is able to teach them all things, 1 John 2. 27. But I say no more to
that, because the truth of what they say herein is so largely amplified in
Scripture, except it be to poor blind iddeots, whose envy against others, have
shut their eyes from seeing, and their hearts from understanding the Truth of
Scripture.

The Author of that Discourse, proceeds still in questioning the light which
is in these people; and amongst the rest of his scandals east upon them, would
make people believe, that these people deny the Scriptures, the which is a most
false aspersion; for there is not a people in England that is more conformable
to the very outward requiring of Scripture, then these people, and that light
within them does lead them, and causes them to act according to what the
Scripture requires in the practical part thereof in their obedience, to which
their very outward practice does condemn all men in the Land, both religious
and irreligious; for they follow the words of our Savior, where he says, Take
no thought for to morrow: And having Food and Raiment, therewith be content,
etc. Mat. 6. 26. 27. And in mortifying their Senses and Members, they follow
the command of the Apostle, to diverse of the people he taught, which Rule he
followed himself, 1 Cor. 9. 27. and yet this Author says, They are possessed
with an austere Devil, and denies Scripture for so doing; but let but a wise
man judge, whether those who pretend Scripture, and talk of Scripture; or
those that practice Scripture, deny it most; for every one that cries up
Scripture with their Tongue, are not those that confess Scripture; but those
are they that truly confess it, that in their practice is conformable to it:
for every one shall not enter into Heaven for talking of Scripture, and making
discourses of God out of Scripture. nor that says Lord, Lord; but they that
do the Will of the Father.

But it is no marvel to me if these people be so cried out against with all
people, for their very outward life is a Witness against all sorts, both
Formalists, and others; For there is no difference between the Formalists, and
men who are not conformed, for both are alike for pride and sensuality, and for
the love of the world, and for reputation amongst men, all of them having
hearts alike, in the worship of the god of the World; only the Formalists
differ from the other in their head, by which they are carried beyond the other
into a fair seeming Form, in which they worship God according to their
good-thinking; but yet their Form will admit their hearts to worship the gods
of the Heathen; I may speak it with sadness of heart, seeing the truth hereof
so clearly, and cannot deny, but all Formalists and unconformed* are but
horns springing out of the same head of the Beast which John saw in his
Revelation.

Further, the light that is in these people, is not at all contrary to what the
Scripture holds out in the Mystery, but the same being truly fulfilled in
them they are made able to witness the truth in the Scripture, and no other
way can any soul be a true witness of the truth of Scripture, but by having
the same truly fulfilled in them; for all other are but false witnesses, and
speaks but of it from what they have heard or received from others; and these
people is made able by the light which is in them, to witness the truth of the
love of God made known to their souls, and of other of Gods dealing with
them, and will not vary from Scripture, but own it, and take it to witness
the truth of what they do declare to others. And I am sure, that many of the
Priests in England can witness the truth of what I say, if their malice would
but let them; for the time has been (and not long since) that some of the
Priests made trial of them, thinking to confute them, and make them appear as
erroneous; but it proved the contrary way: for not long had they dissoursed
with them, but the Priests was stricken dumb before them, and had not a word
to say, but was forced to fly, like beaten Cocks; in so much that the very
vulgar people, shouted at the beaten Priests; and some did aver, that they
conceived, that no fewer then an hundred souls was convinced of the truth at
that time: And yet these beaten Priests devises all ways possible, to root
out these people; but they are but like the people, with whom Steven conversed,
who was not able to resist the spirit he spoke from, yet they stoned him to
death, Acts 7. ^7. etc.

The Author of that Discourse, proceeds about the exhaltation of Scripture,
and says, whatsoever is essential to God, the same is appropriated to
Scripture: the which saying, if well considered, is no less then blasphemy;
Whether was it God, or the Scripture, that Created the World, and all other
things? Or whether was it Scripture, or Christ, that suffered for the sin of
man? or whether is it Scripture, or Christ, that reconcileth God to man? or
whether is it Scripture, or God, that makes the Wind blow where it lists,
and the Rain to fall in its appointed season? etc. If that be true which he
says, why is not every one sanctified, and made holy, that Hears or Reads
Scripture? Alas, when men have no other light, but the light of reason, to
bear witness to the truth of Scripture, what soul mistakes do they light on
in meddling with Scripture; for as some being led by their wild wandering wit,
make less of the Scripture then it is; so this Author is carried by that
light, to make more of the Scripture then it is; and to make good what he
affirms, he quoteth Gal. 3. 8. where the Apostle is speaking of things in the
days of Abraham, which was before any Scripture was Written; and because the
Apostle says, The Scripture foreseei^g such things; therefore it is like God,
who fore-seeth all things. But I would have the Author, and all others, to
understand themselves better, and then they shall understand Scripture better.
I would know of the Author, what Scripture it was that the Apostle means of,
when the Scripture which we have at this day, was not written many a year
after the time of Abraham: but if the Author cannot tell, I will declare to him
what Scripture that was; The Word Scripture is twofold, and to be understood
in a twofold sense; the one Essencyall, the other Declarative: Now the
Scripture Declarative, is written in Paper by men, and had a time for its
beginning, and so there is a time for it to end; but the Scripture Essenciall,
has its being in it self, and is Eternal, and shall have no end; and this
Scriture is the true Essenciall Word of God, or his Son Christ, by whom all
things were Created; and this Word was in the beginning, and this Word was God,
and nothing was made or brought to pass, but by this Word, John 1. 1. 2. and
this Word was the Wisdom of God by which he spoke, and acted, and fore-seeth
things to come: and it was this Word, or Scripture that foresaw, by which God
foretold Abraham things to come; and this Word, or Scripture, and God, is all
one. And the Apostle who knew the truth hereof* diverse times uses the Word
Scripture; for the Word God, when he is speaking of Gods foreseeing, speaking,
or acting, as may plainly appear, where he says, The Scripture has
concluded all under unbeleife, Gal. 3. 22. the which act, the Scripture
Declarative never could do; but the Scripture or Word Essenciall, which is
God: the truth of which is cleared by the same Apostle, speaking of the same
subject, where he says, That God had concluded all under unbeleife, etc. Romans
11. 32. And further, in speaking of what the Scripture said to Pharaoh, Even
for this purpose have I raised thee up, etc, Romans 9. 17. which saying was not
spoken to Pharaoh, nor which work was wrought upon him, by the Scripture
Declarative; but by the Scripture, or Word Essential, which was God himself,
as may be seen in Exodus, 9. 16. where it was plainly held out, that it was God
that spoke these words, and wrought that worke*upon Pharaoh.

Now I would have that Author, and all other, to understand the true
distinction between the Scripture, or Word Essential, and the Scripture or
word Declarative; for if they do not, it is possible they will add to the
one, and diminish the other; and then let them take heed of the curse that John
speaks of, at the end of the Revelation.

But the Author goes on in his Discourse in his blindness* and all along
attributes that to the word Declarative, which is the proper work of the word
Essenciall; and so brings to prove, what he ^aies the saying of the Apostle, in
Heb. 4. 12. where it is said, The Word of God is quick and powerful, and
sharper then any two edged Sword, etc. the which he falsely applies to the
Scripture Declarative, which in it self is as dead as a stone, except the
Essenciall word first move in the heart of man; otherwise how is it, that all
men's thoughts and intents is not discovered by Hearing, or Reading it? but what
the Apostle speaks there, is the very work of the Essenciall word, or God
himself, as the following verse of the same Chapter will truly witness,
where the Apostle does more illustrate and lay open the property of the
Essenciall word, and says, Neither is there any creature that is not
manifested in his sight, but all things are naked, and laid open before the
eyes of him with whom we have to do. And does not God plainly declare by the
Prophet, That it is he himself that searches the heart, and tries the
reins, Jer. 17. 9. 10. O what blindness is amongst men (yea amongst
Professors also) that they cannot see, nor be made believe what is the word of
God, but in their blindness, takes the Scripture Declarative, for the word of
God* for which they have neither example, nor command in that Scripture they
do so much Idolize, but only as they have received that word by Tradition
from their Forefathers, who was blinded in their understanding, and could not
know any other word of God, and so gave that name to the Scriptures, because
they were not acquainted with the Essenciall word within them, therefore their
wit carried them to Scripture without them; and finding some saying in it which
suited with their reason as such sayings as these* They spoke the Word of God
with boldness, Acts 4 31. But the Word of God grew and multiplied, Acts 12.
24. Not handling the Word of God deceitfully, Romans 4. 2. Take the Word of God,
which is the Sword of the Spirit, Ephesians. 6. 17. It is sanctified by the Word of
God and Prayer, 1 Timothy 4. 5. and diverse other speaking in Scripture to that
purpose, which all of them is the proper effects of the Eternal Word the Son
of God, the which but few of our wise, learned Rabbis have known; and
therefore have they understood, that these sayings which held out the property
of the Eternal, with its effects, to be the property of the Scripture and its
effects. But when our Savior (who was the Word it self) had occasion to use
Scripture, he gave no such title to Scripture, but said, It is Written in such
a Book; or Is it not Written in your Law, John 10. 34. And when the Apostles
had occasion to speak out of the Scripture, did they not follow the same
rules. And when the Apostle Peter would pronounce the Scripture by another
name, he calls it, A sure Word of Prophecy. But this epithet, the Word of
God, was not at all given to it, until the Eternal Word was hid, and man
wanted the life, and power thereof, within him; and then his wit found the Word
of God without him; and to these days our wise Rabbis understand it so* and
makes Fools believe that what they say is true; and under this pretense, they
take to themselves the name of the Ministers of God, and that which they Preach
is the Word of God; when as they know not what the word of God is, but what
they gather out of the Scriptures, which is nothing else but a Declaration of
the word of God without a man; but as for that which is the Word it self (the
which should live in them, and they in it, and what that word spoke in them, to
declare to others) alas, they know not what it means, but busyeth themselves
to perfecute and scandalize these, in whom the Essenciall word lives, and they
in it: And that Author being of the Disciples of thief Rabbis, does play his
part on their side, and in his Discourse runns himself stone blind about
advancing Ordinances, and Scripture, to that end, for which they were never
intended; but if the blind lead the blind, they had best take heed of ditches.
It would be too tedious, and draw out too long a Volume to answer that Author
in every particular of his blind Discourse, therefore I will pass by many
things, the which if time would have permitted, I would have answered in order;
but what I have said already, though in brief, will satisfy the wise; and for
the foolish, there is too much said already, for beat him in a mortar, and his
folly will not depart from him: But before I conclude, I cannot choose but take
notice of somewhat more he says concerning these People called Quakers; where
he telling of coming to these People in the power and evidence of Gods Word,
and tells them of admiring Christ, holy walking with God* subjection to
Ordinances, Baptism, Kirkefellowship* etc. and they will tell you, (or as he
says) that unclean spirit in them, will cry out, and witness against you,
that you be but yet in the spirit of the world, and under the power of carnal
reason, etc. Its true, they will do so to some people, and wise men cannot but
admire to see such a spirit of discerning in many of these people, for an
hypocrite can hardly beguile them, though he may come with never so fair
pretenses to try them; and let an hyhocrite arm himself as strongly with the
Scripture (and his worship of God in Ordinances) as possibly he can, and that
light, or eternal word in them, will find them out, and discover these to the
very bottom: And I know for a truth, that no hypocrite is able to stand before
them; and I believe an hypocrite that once has had discourse with them, dare
not appear before them the second time; and indeed, they may the easilier
discern an hypocrite, when they themselves are delivered from that great
evil, the which no doubt but many of them had in them, while they were in
their pretended close walking with God, and in their admirings of a Christ
without them, and hide-bound under a fair seeming Form; and the truth is,
while men live in such a condition, they are not able to see how the Harlot is
decked in them.

And this Author seems to take it for a strange (and delusive) saying, That
the people should say, that they pray always; and that they have the Baptism
of Fire* and that they eat the Flesh and Blood of Christ continually, etc.
Indeed I do not marvel at the Author for thinking so for I believe he little
knows, or is acquainted with the mystery of these things, for I doubt he is
too busy about these things without him, so that he is but little acquainted
with the mystery of these things within him: But at one thing I marvel in the
Author, that he worshipping and idolizing the Scripture so much, and yet should
be unacquainted with what is written in it; or otherwise why is it, that the
Scripture that he makes no less then God should not reveal the truth of
these sayings to him; for if he do but remember the Scripture, it commands us
to Pray always; but no command in it for set times, and set Forms of Prayer.
And for the Baptism with Fire, it was the Promise of Christ, and was foretold
by John Baptist, Mat. 3. 11. And for eating and drinking the Body and Blood of
Christ continually, that soul that does not so, is in the captivity of death,
and has no life in it; and there is no abiding or living in the word of God or
Christ, but by eating his Flesh and drinking his Blood after that manner; for
he that eats his Flesh, and drinks his Blood in this manner, abides in
Christ, and Christ in him, John 6. 56. It is not the outward act of Baptism,
or the Bread and Wine, eating and drinking, that makes a Christian, or brings
the soul to live in Christ, and Christ in it: no, no, these are typpicall
things under this dispensation in which we live; and they hold it out in the
mystery, the dying with Christ, and the living with Christ: For as in the time
of the Law, there was several Ceremonies which poynted at the appearing of
Christ in the Flesh; so when he was in the Flesh, he left types of another
nature, and these pointed at Christ's appearing in spirit; and as the types
under the Law ended when Christ appeared in the Flesh; so the types under the
Gospel end, when Christ appears in the spirit. But none will believe the
great Mystery herein, but such as have found the same truly fulfilled in them;
and yet those who have attained this Mystery, and speaks thereof to the
world, or to the out*side religious, shall be accounted no less then
Blasphemers because this crosses their humane wisdom, by which they
understand God and his way; and many of those people is able to make good the
truth of this Mystery in them, and witness the same by Scripture to; yea* and
some of them will witness the same by signs and wonders to, if they be put to
it: And yet this Author does falsely accuse these people, saying. That they can
give no Scripture account for what they hold out; and does falsely say, That
they deny Scripture, when no people in the world does answer the Scripture (in
its requiring) more then they. Other false accusations I omit, because time
will not give way to answer them; for as he says, The mary absurd, ridiculous
practices of these Fantastickes (as he calls them) would be too much to relate;
so I say, to answer all his false accusations, would be too tedious.

But as he goes on in his discourse, he lights on a great hole in their
Coat, as he thinks, viz. That they will not put off their Hats to any, no
not to a Magistrate; and where does this Author find in Scripture any command
for so doing; but if he mind Scripture well, he shall find something to the
contrary* and that was a command of our Saviors; who bad his Disciples, That
they should salute no man by the way, Luke 10. 4. and for a Magistrate, or
other men in Authority, what are they more then other men; for if they would
but well consider the original root of Authority, they shall find, that they
have no just cause to look for more respect then other men; for if sin had not
bin brought out in the world, one man had not ruled over another: And the
Scripture says, the Devil brought sin into the world, and sin brought out
Laws, and Laws brought out Authority; but as for Magistrates, and men in
Authority that are good men, these look but for little honor of men, though
there be an honor that is due to such; but that honor consists not in
putting off Hats to them, for if it had, the Scripture would have commanded
such honor in some place of it.

Likewise that Author finds other great defects amongst these people, because
they will not call men Rabbis and Sirs, and because they speak and write men
Thou and Thee.

I would know of the Author if he find any command in Scripture for such
Names, or to give such epithites to men; Nay, is not the command of Scripture
quite contrary; For when our Savior said, Call no man Father upon Earth, how
can a man justly call another Master or Sir? What man, but Heathen or Fools;
dare take that name to him, seeing Christ gave in charge to his Disciples, that
they should not take the name Master upon them, Mat. 23. 8. And what grounds or
reasons can that Author show, that men should be called Ye and You, seeing all
examples in Scripture, New and Old, calls men by the name Thou and Thee; yea,
if he were never so great a one; and if the word You or Ye be any honor, or
respect, why will not that Author, and others, let God have that honor and
respect also? Nay, are not all these traditionall complements crept in amongst
men in the time of darkness? and how is the hearts of Fools glewed to these
Traditions? yea, the very examples and commands in Scripture, is made void by
vain Traditions; and yet these men who leave Traditions, and follow the
example and command in Scripture, how are they mocked and scandalized for it*
and as this Author does falsely accuse them, that they walk not according to
Scripture; but may not even a very Idiot be judge, whether they, or the Author
and his Fellows be the greater denyers of Scriptures: Nay, it is too plainly
apparent, that the Author and his Fellows are the denyers of Scripture, though
they pretend or*cry Scripture, Scripture, Scripture, but they will own no more
in Scripture, then will suit and serve to please their good-thinking, to patch
up a Form of Worship to their God, under which they may hide all their pride,
and hypocrisy, and coveteous practices; but where the example and command in
Scripture is against these things, how little do they heed it: O how well is
Scripture liked, and how swiftly is the worship carried on, when it suits with
sense and reason! but, O how harsh is Scripture, and the worship of spirit in
the way of bearing the Cross, of self-denial: nay, away with that Scripture
and Worship, that will part a man and his self, for that, for sure, shall have
the name of madness, and delusion,

The Author is judging these people, That they think the observing of these
things, is a great Badge of their Profession; but let (...) thoughts be what
they will of these things* yet I will plainly tell that Author, or any other
of his Fellows, that to be brought to the profession of such things, will be
found an hundred times more harder work, then to be brought into Brother*hood,
or Kirke-fellowship, or to perform all holy duties (so called) in the same
Fellowship; for in Brother*hood and Kirke-fellowship, and in the performing of
all holy duties (so called) included therein, a man may keep his honor,
praise, pride, and reputation amongst men; but the profession of the other will
kill these; and therefore no marvel if Forms have so many favorites, and the
other so few friends.

Another thing I observe in the Authors Discourse is, where he is saying, That
some of these people, through Gods mercy, have bin reduced, and turned again
into Church Communion, who have confessed, while they were in that way, they
had no sense of God, etc. I would have the Author, and others, to know the
truth of that, viz* That those that joyneth with these people, with an
hypocrites heart, cannot long continue in their way; for there they find but
little to please their pride, or sensuality, or their wit and reason; and God
does justly answer those, in not showing his countenance to an hypocritical
heart; and when such hypocrites can find nothing amongst them that will please
pride, and sensuality, then do they start back from them, for they know well
enough where to be entertained, and get liberty for their senses, and keep up
their pride, etc. And where they may warm themselves at the fire of their own
kindling, and walk in the light of these sparks, and have these to be called
in*comes of Christ into the soul, and where they may be Canonized with the
name Saint, etc. may not the Author hereby see the great blindness of
himself, and the rest of his formal Fellows, that an hypocrite falling from
these people, should amongst them be accounted a Saint; for the truth is,
Forms and Church Fellowship, is the very refuge of hypocrites; but amongst the
other, an hypocrite cannot long continue. It cannot be denied, but at this day
there is hypocrites amongst them; but time will discover them, and they will
fall off from amongst them; but it makes no matter, for those that fall off
will help to make Church Fellowship up well enough.

That Author proceeds on in his Discourse, with an Advertisement to his
Fellows to bless God for their fair Form and holy performances; I make no
doubt, but it would have pleased him well, if his Fellows had met together
upon his Advertisement, for two hours, and praised God for the goodness of
their fair Form, much like the people, who cried for two hours together,
Great art thou O Diana of the Ephesians. The Author containing still his spirit
of scandal and railing, calls these people Owls, and says, they dare not
appear where Church Fellowship is; the which the very Priests and people in
their naturalls will confute; for they have appeared in open Congregations, and
have confuted, and confounded the Priests in Preaching untruths to the people;
for which doing, it is not unknown, that they have undergone long and tedious
Imprisonments. Yea, these people dare appear, and has appeared in Public
Market Places, to declare against the sins of the people in these times; for
which doing, some of them have put their life in danger. And for other
Church Fellowship, viz. the Congregaeed way, I I know not how one should devise
to come to have the opportunity to appear amongst them, they keep so secret;
except a man have got on the hypocrites habit, and make a friend of some of
their Order to be admitted to appear amongst them.

He likewise says, they are bred in dark places; what these dark places is
he means of, I cannot tell, except he means in some place of the Land which
is Hills or Dales, remote from the body of the Land, where often times the worst
of the Priests of Baall has their habitations, and where Church Fellowship is
not in fashion; If these be the dark places he means of, I would have him to
know, it is no hard thing for God to raise up light in darkness, and to make
more of his goodness and truth appear to some in such places, then to those
who live in Cities, great Towns, and Corporations, where oft-times, the great,
or chief Priests of Baall, have their Places, because of fat Benefits, and
have the good-thinking policy of making Congregations: But I would have the
Author to remember, that when Christ appeared in the Flesh, that his natural
Parents, and the most upright People, lived the farthest off the Priests, and
the Temple, and lived not in Cities and Corporations, or in the body of the
Country, but in the Mountains and Hilly part of the Country, and in little
by-Places and Villages.

The Author runns on still in his censorious scandalls, and says, These people
have been either slighters of Ordinances, or slight under them; great
Duty-mungers, yet wanted the spirit of their Duties, etc. Its true, a man may
live under Ordinances and be slight, and too loose under them; but I warrant
that soul for leaving the Ordinances, and such slight duties, for taking up
that which is an hundred times of more weight in the performing: And for
slighting of Ordinances, I know, when the spirit of judgment is come, which
reproves man of sin, Righteousness and Judgment (under which man is made
truly to know himself) it will make that soul truly to know the weakness
of Ordinances, and outward Forms, and what Knavery lay in his heart hid under
these; and of how little help there is for him in these Ordinanees and Duties;
and when man is truly brought to know this, I believe he will but stay
himself a little upon Ordinances and Duties, for there is no other work for
him to go about; and little will that soul care for the reproachful speeches
of Formalists.

This Author is speaking of wanting the spirit of Duty, I would he were so wise
as to know what spirit it is that is most frequent in duty, and I believe he
should perceive it to be a Devil, hiding himself under the habit of an
Angel, who can cunningly bring Promises to remembrance, and has power to
raise false joy in the soul, out of these Promises; and he can make Fools
believe, these be the in*comes of Christ into the soul, and the souls leading
out to Christ in the Promises; and if any under Ordinanees and Duty once, be
possessed with this spirit, it is hard for any to make them believe otherwise;
and these I believe will not be sloathfull in Duty, or slight Ordinances,
because of such good feeding, as they imagine they get thereby; for their Urim
and their Thummim* answers them as they would have it. I will meddle no more at
present with answering the rest of his scandalls, but leave the thing to God,
who I hope in his time will clear his own truth, and make it to flourish in
despite of all opposers. Yet one thing I commend in that Author, viz. That he
wishes his Fellows, to work out their salvation with fear and trembling; If
he have understood the truth of that saying, I know he cannot but confess,
that he has wished all his Fellows to become Quakers, for no People in the
Land has had that saying more fully fulfilled in them, then these People, whom
all Formalists, and almost all People else, despise: But let the Author, and
all others, take it for granted, that they shall see the time, that they shall
be made to tremble and quake, and that they shall not evade it, though at
present they bless themselves from such a thing; and then fair Forms, and
fine Apparel, and holy duty (so called) riches, praise, and reputation,
sensuality, pleasures, etc. shall but little prevail, but be dashed in pieces,
and the men who is found alive in these things; but happy is that soul that is
made truly acquainted with the evil that is in himself, and who has taken
up the Cross of Christ, and follows after him in the daily denying and
forsaking himself; and who ever thou art that does that, I wish the God, even
the God of Gods, to be with thee in thy work, that thou may be strengthened
both inward and outward, until thy self be Crucified, and made dead upon that
Cro se, so that thy soul may attain to the perfection of the Resurrection of
the Dead.

July the 16. 1653. Geo: Baiteman.

FINIS.

