THE UTTER ROUTING of the whole Army of all the INDEPENDENTS and SECTARIES,
with the Total overthrow of their Hierarchy that New Babble, more groundless
than that of the Prelates.

OR INDEPENDENCY not Gods ORDINANCE, in which all the frontires of the
PRESBYTERY, with all the quarters of the same are Defended, against all Enemies.

And all the Forces of the three Generals and Commanders of the / Sectaries,
Hanserde Knollys, J. S. and Henry B Burton are all dissipated, with all / their
whibling Reserves, and the field of Truth still kept, viz. /

That the Presbyterian Government Dependent is Gods Or- / dinance, and not the
Presbyterian Government* Independent. /

Unto which is annexed an Appendix in way of answer to Henry / Burton Clerk,
one of his quondam fellow sufferers, in the which all his ca- / lumnies are
wiped away by the sponge of innocence, and the Postscript Vin- / dicated; the
honor also of all our renouned Generals and Commanders / is Vindicated; the
honor of the City of London; the honor of our brethren / the Scots; the
honor likewise of all the Presbyters through the Kingdom / are Vindicated
from the obloquie of all the Independents and Sectaries; / and their due
praises given unto them in their several ranks and or- / ders, as next under
God to have been the principal and primary / Repairers of our breach, and the
Restorers of our paths to / dwell in: the honor of all which the Sectaries /
wholly and solely ascribe to their Party. /

By JOHN BASTVVICK Captain in the Presbyterian Army, / Dr in Physic and
Physician in Ordinary to all the Ill-dependents and / Sectaries to sweat them
with Arguments twice a year gratis, spring and / fall, who discovering their
distempers and malidies finds by the several / symptoms of their diseases
that they are very unsound, root and branch, / and therefore ought (with their
venomous and intolerable Toleration / of all Religions) to be shunned and
avoided as a company of infected per- / sons by all such as are sound in the
faith. /

Mat. 7. 15. Beware...but / inwardly...wolves. /

London, Printed by John Macock, and are to be sold by Michael Spark, / at the
sign of the blue Bible in Green Arbor. 1646. /

TO My dear friend Dr Bastwick, on the Frontispeice of his Book Entitled, The
Utter Routing of all the Independent Army etc.
TO be a Captain in an holy War,
Does well become a man of peace so far,
As he contending, on Gods glory looks,
Which is the cause, maintained in all thy books.
And now in this, by Gods great might and power,
Thou wagest War against high Babels Tower.
The whole armor of God thou'st thee upon,
Thy Loins are girt with Truth; the breast plate on
Of righteousness Thou have; thy feet are shod
With Gospell-Peace, prepared by thy God.
And above all, the shield of faith in to hand,
All fiery darts of Satan to withstand.
TO helmet of salvation, the spirits sword,
Thou fightest with, which is Gods holy Word.
A weapon, that all battles will abide.
March on: brave Captain, God is on thy side.
S. B.

TO My worthy and learned friend Doctor Bastwick, on his book entitled, The
Utter Routing of all the Independent Army, etc.
THY former works I'ave read, and truly say,
They were a means I wandered not astray
From Truth to Error; But did pry into
The new opinions, which some say, and do
Pretend to be according to Christ's mind,
But searching Scripture no such way I find.
The paths which Independents do walk in,
Gods Word showed me, to be a way of sin.
And not the only way, as they depone,
Christ to advance, and set upon his Throne.
For they thereby Christ's seamlesse Coat do rend,
And precious time in jangling quaeries spend.
Framing their notions, only to make fraction,
To Christ's dishonor, and the increase of faction.
By their means, blasphemies are spread about;
All sorts of Sectaries, the Land throughout,
Do preach up Error, and so bold they grow,
To threaten such as will not let them fow
Their tares amongst them, nor let them mislead
People from Truth, who readily give heed
To new opinions, ways of Liberty,
Being pleasing Doctrine to delude them by,
And to make many follow them, because
It Is natural to reject Gods holy Laws.
Grief overwhelmed my heart when I did see
Poor souls seduced, yet men so silent be.
At length I heard, as thou have heretofore
Discovered Error, out of thy rich store
Of heavenly wisdom, which the Lord gave thee,
Thou plead'st Truths cause, that All her worth may see
In this thy Book. To the Press I therefore went,
Perused so much as gave me such content,
That whilst I read, my spirits revived again,
Seeing Error vanquished, and the Truth made plain
Unto all men, God so assisting Thee,
That those who read it over, resolved may be.
Thy Arguments being proved by holy Writ,
None can deny, but such who use their wit
To wrest the Scripture, reason to deride,
Thereby to gain [Proselytes] on their side.
For thou have laid down Truth so clear, I see,
That sincere souls will bless the Lord for thee.
Of all false Doctrines, I do now desire
Good people to beware, and this Book read;
What satisfaction any can require,
They will find here who love the Truth indeed.
Read, meditate, of God ask wisdom then,
Truth to discern from all false ways of men.
S. B.

ON The approved and transcendent worth of my dear and faithful friend Dr
Bastwick,
Which the Independents and Sectaries of our times do labor to obscure, with
their black mouthed railings, false accusings, sinful reproachings,
self-conceited slightings, proud scornings, unworthy and unchristian vilifyings
of him.

TO set forth all thy parts, Learning and skill,
It were a work too hard for Homers Quill:
And Virgils Poem excellent in Verse
Would come far short thy virtues to rehearse.
Were they alive, and should it take in hand,
Thy worth's above their muse to understand.
For why? in thee divine and heavenly grace,
To be admired, do challenge the first place.
But they such precious graces never learned,
Nor could perceive, b'ing sp'rit'ally discerned.
To speak thy praises fully, they would find
A task not easy, though both were combined
To make a Record, only to declare
Thy moral virtues, eminent and rare;
As Justice, Fortitude, Wisdom, (Charity)
Temperance, Patience, Love, Humility.
Thy knowledge They in Tongues might then commend,
And without doubt their muses would contend
Thine Eloquence and Rhet'rick to set forth,
Yet could they never make known all thy worth,
Which they would see, and so conclude thy praise,
By setting on thy head a wreath of bays.
And yet all this were to eclipse thy glory,
Thy graces rare transcend so mean a story.
In moral virtues, true, Thou Ex'lent art,
But here is thy praise, thou have an upright heart
To God thy maker, hating every sin,
Thou art a man all glorious within.
Let Sectaries rail, raise Lies; Yet without fear,
Truth speaks thee one of Gods choice Jewels dear;
As having been most faithful to her cause,
When men presumed to make their will their Laws.
And this thy Book does show, for all their talk,
That in Truths paths thou persever'st to walk.
Thy blameless life and godly conversation
They cannot stain with slandrous exclamation.
Fight still the fight of faith; most certainly
There is laid up, for Thee, in heaven on high,
A Crown of righteousness, which at that day,
The Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give, and say
To Thee, Come blessed of my Father, take
The kingdom I prepared for thy sake,
From the foundation of the world; and shall
Then, Crown thy head with glory immortal.
S. B.

TO The Victorious Worthy Mr John Bastwick, Dr in Physic, and Captain in the
Presbyterian Army, upon His industrious and learned Book entitled The Utter
Routing of all the Independent Army, etc.
TRiumphant Victor, Thou have won the day,
And Routed Legions too, without a fray
Or shedding blood: Thy deep mysterious skill
Has been always to Cure, and not to kill.
Thou'st purged their melancholy, that began
To make all Zeal their own complexion.
Their Il-dependent Choler's cooled by thee,
And Spleen, and Sanguine may Religious be,
While they take leave to rage, and rail upon
Thee, as thou were the Whore of Babylon.
Then thou courageous Captain, undertake
To vanquish Error, for Christ's Churches sake.
Arm Thee, with Samsons strength, or David's, thus
Like Paul, fight Thou, with beasts of Ephesus.
Then sound a charge, utterly Rout all those
Peace-Church-disturbers, Separates that expose
Our Zion like to Sodom! what they are able,
Raze down Christ's Churches, to erect their Babel.
On Thee a furious Rabbie foully falls,
Beats up Thy Quarters: All their Generals
Hanserdo Knollys, namelesse I. S. Burton,
Have not a Scripture weapon that can hurt, One
Armed as Thou art, (their fury to abide)
With Arguments, by Gods Word justified.
The Scriptures Thou unvail'st, we can behold
Their sacred Truths, Thy works do plain unfold
Their mysteries: Thou with the Apostles keys
Unlockst Christ's Churches hidden Treasuries.
In this, Thou have all Sectaries overthrown;
Now they will cry out of Persecution.
To whom the dissenting brethren do accord,
Who, with Hugh Peter's keys, Paul Hobsons sword
Advance they will, boldly, (march madly on)
For all Religions, -- a Toleration.
Which to Christ's faithful Spous does bring great scandal;
Such wasting New Lights show Thieves in the candle,
Who from Christ's fold, His Church, the fat sheep steal,
Saints, Converts, Zealots, Rich-men, in our Weal.
It Is better grow in grace, like thriving Lambs,
Then in short time, become such hurtful Rams.
But Thou well prove'st their sacrilegious theft,
Christ, nor His blessed Apostles ever left
Them such a Pattern: the issues of thy pen,
Shows their false Lights, to all enlightened men.
And in their new ways, thou have them pursued
So close, that Thou their Champions have subdued;
Routed their Army; all their force and might
They have's to rail, They are too weak to fight.
George Lindsey.

THE ERRATA.
In the Epistle to the Reader.
PAge 1. line 14. expression read expressions. P. 2. l. 3. election r.
affection and ibid. l. 9. new r. knew. P. 3. l. 31. Independent r.
Independents. P. 15. l. 29. unihilate r. annihilate.

In the Book.
PAge 6. line 7. papisticiae read papisticae, and ibid. l. 15. Hrivie r.
Privy. P. 9. in some copies in diverse lines Pounties, Porporations, Pompanies,
read Counties, Corporations, Companies. P. 20. l. 20. his time r. in his time,
and ibid. l. 26. in some copies how says God r. how says he. P. 129. l. 18.
Syllogism r. Syllogisms. P. 256. l. 18. given, or them r. given them, or. P.
373. l. ult. Punies r. Ninnies. P. 374. alribiadian r. Alcibiadian. P. 635. l.
19. hollownes read holiness.

The Reader in his wisdom will both discern and pardon the other literal
escapes in the printing.

To the Ingenuous READER.
Christian Reader,
WHEN it was but noysed abroad, after my return from my last imprisonment,
that I was writing against Independency, it would exceed belief if. I should
relate the indignation of all that party, and their several expressions of the
same against me, so that at that time there were no less nor fewer ignominious
calumnies cast upon me, nor more variety of virulent censures given out
against me, then were uttered by them all to my disparagement, upon the late
coming forth, but of the Title and Frontispice of the ensuing Discourse, many
of them affirming, that I was a vain glorious wicked fellow, that I was mad,
that I was a base rogue, and that I deserved hanging, and that I would never be
quiet till I were hanged, with innumerable other unchristian expression of like
nature. So that it seems, it is a greater piaculum by far now to write
against the Independents and Sectaries then scandalum magnatum was a few years
since.

Truly at that time, I could scarce pass by any of them (as I cannot at this
day) without some contumely or other, all which I bear with patience. And
amongst others, I could never meet my Brother Burton, but he would always
after his salutation, in a deriding and scornful manner, ask me, when my
Book came forth, telling me that he expected some Monster.

It seems, he thought I was bringing forth such a prodigious brat as he not
long after laid at my door, which though it were a Monster indeed borne with
teeth and nails, and did nothing but scratch and bite me, yet coming from his
loins my Brother and quondam Fellow-sufferer, I gave it entertainment, and for
the love I bear to him, I have ever since danled it upon the knee of my
election: Now as soon as I had satisfied his expectation, and sent him my
Book so long looked for, he very liberally expressed his thanks for it, and
his opinion concerning both it and my self, and that with many opprobrious
words; amidst others he asserted, I was crased in my brain, and that I had
need of some hellebore, and spoke of me as an Apostate and a Persecutor, who
before he new my differing opinion from him, both prayed for me, and
immoderately praised me, such is the uncertainty of all that is under the
Sun, there being no stability in any creature; and withal, he triumphed
that he would give me a speedy answer, making nothing of what I had written (as
it is usual with all the Independents to vilipend and slight whatsoever the
Presbyterians either speak or write) and meeting with an other Independent not
many days after, he told me that there were twenty pens at work against me,
and that I should have my hands full. And howsoever it was some months before
I heard from any of them in print, yet all that interim they whetted their
tongues against me like so many Razors, Swords and Arrows to wound me in my
reputation; yea, there was scarce a weapon in all the arsenall of calumny that
they used not against me.

Now after some months one Hanserdo Knollys coming to me, told me he had writ
a moderate Answer unto my Book, complaining that the Presses were all shut
against them (though the whole Kingdom know, and their daily scriblings in
print can witness the contrary; whereupon, to take away (if it were possible)
all occasion of their calumnious tongues, I writ unto Reverend and Learned
Master Cranford, entreating him that he would for the stopping of all their
mouths license his Book, which he willingly, to pleasure me condescended unto,
giving his reason withal in writing under his own hand why he made such a
transgression, the which Master Knollys concealed, wherein he dealt not
heartily, for it gave great occasion to the Sectaries to traduce Master
Cranford not a little. And after this was printed, came forth an other Pamphlet
by one I. S. called Flagellum Flagolli, or Doctor Bastwicks quarters beaten up,
which was the cause of the Title and Inscription of this Book; and I being not
many weeks after at Westminster, some asking me there why I had not yet replied
unto them, I answered not in a triumphing manner (as my brother Burton
relates) but merrily, yet in respectful terms, that I understood my Brother
Burtons Book was coming forth against me, and when once that appeared I would
answer them altogether. This is all as I remember was spoke by me.

Now they having their Emissaries and Lisners in all corners, it seems some of
them overheard that which was spoken by me, which they related to my Brother
Burton in other language then I uttered it, the which provoked him a fresh (as
he says, page 1.) in ar^nam descendere, and to take both my books in hand,
and so una fidelia duos parietes; and although he was dissuaded from fowling
his fingers with my Postscript (as he confesses) yet being (as he says)
bound by a double engagement, the one for the cause, the other for his person,
he hasted at length as fast as before he was slow to give me an answer to them
both; and howsoever I had not so much as named him in either of my Books, but
only sent him them (he having desired it) yet he being not capable of the good
counsel that was given him by his friend, fouled not only his fingers with me,
but the whole man, soul and body, picking a groundless quarrel with me,
telling me though I named him not, that I had vellicated him, and plucked him by
the very beard; and as the Prelate of Canterbury said once, that when I writ
against the Pope I meant him; so my Brother Burton imagined I meant him,
because in my Postscript, page 44. I had these words, that not only the
Novices, Younkers, and Fresh Water soldiers, but grave men in their great
white-basket-hilted Beards with their swords in their hands came out to fight
against their brethren for their Independency, etc. which merry expression of
mine, though I spoke in the number of multitude, he applying unto himself,
affirms, that I meant him, as if there had been none amongst the Independent
in white-basket-hilted*beards but himself, which moved him to great choler and
indignation against me, and so enraged him, that he shows nothing but
passion through his whole Book (as will easily appear to every one that
reads it) in the which he tells me that the Wise man says, Prove. 20. ver.
29. and 16. 31. the beauty of old men is their gray head, yea a crown of Glory
being found in the way of Righteousness, which I shall ever assent unto; but
if a gray head be found in the way of error, Schism and Unrighteousness; then
that place is not for his purpose. Now I shall refer these two Questions or
Queries to the judgment of all solid Christians.

First, Whether or no my Brother Burton be found in the way of Righteousness?

Secondly, Whether Independency be the way of Righteousness?

And to begin with the first; in the second page of his Book he promises me,
that I shall not find with him so much as a white staff to lift up against me,
and yet in the seventh page he comes out against me with Phocions black
Hatchet, which is his Pole-axe, with which he falls upon me soul and body,
cleaving both my head and heart, sparing no part of me; and in the same second
page he promises me that he will answer me in the words of truth and
soberness, and in the spirit of meekness and love.

These are his words; who would not think, that should hear him speak, but
that he herad the sweet voice of Jacob? yet if he look but into his Book,
before he comes half way to the conclusion, he will soon see the rough
hands of Esau, and well perceive that he answers me in the words of error and
passion; and in the spirit of bitterness, insolency, and hatred, and that he
has learned that Lesson well Calumniare audacter, aliquid haerebit, calumniate
boldly, something will stick, which he has done with as much acrimony, as I
think any man ever did against a Brother, and quondam Fellow-sufferer, all
which (...) hard and harsh terms; I can no less then spread before the Lord,
the Righteous judge ever remembering Regium est male audire cum been feceris.
Now whether or no my Brother Burton in breaking thus his promise with me in all
respects, and dealing so unrighteously and injuriously with me, though he come
out in his beautiful Gray Head, be found in the way of Righteousness, and be
one of those men Solomon speaks of, I refer it to the judgment of the
Learned.

But before I pass on to my second Querie, I shall take liberty to make use of
some of Reverend and Learned Master Calamies words for the more corroborating
the judgment of the Reader concerning this first question: He in his just and
necessary Apology against my Brother Burtons unjuct invective concerning Truth
shut out of doors, page 2. has this expression concerning my brother Burton.
His words (says he) are swords and spears, rather then words. He fights with
his heels, rather then with his head, and kicks rather then argues, and whips
rather then answers. Scarce any man since Montagues Appeal has written with
more bitterness. I may say of him as Dr Rivet does of Bishop Montague, Non
potest vir ille sine convitiis quenquam a quo dissentit vel in levissimis
nominare, Rivet. Apol. this man cannot so much as mention any one from whom he
differs in opinion, though it be but in the slightest matters, without
reproach. And as Plato said to Diogenes, when he trod upon the pride of
Plato, thou treadest upon my pride with a greater pride: So (says Master
Calamy) does Mr Burton tread upon me, and whatsoever is blameworthy in me,
with a pride more then episcopal; and surely if to be railed upon and reviled
be sufficient to bring a man into discredit, then I must be esteemed as the
dung, off*scouring, and filth of the world, etc.

Thus that learned man truly spoke of my brother Burton, whose faculty chiefly
lies in abusing most men that differ from him, though but in the least things.

But what Mr Calamy says of him, may also truly be said of Cretensis and all
those of that fraternity, whose words are swords and spears, who all fight
rather with their heels, then with their heads, and kick rather then argue, and
whip rather then answer. Whether therefore such men as my brother Burton and his
accomplices, though they come to us in gray heads, be found in the way of
righteousness, when their dealings are so palpably unjust, and their opinions
so schismatic, heretical and erroneous, I leave it to the judgment of all
such as know what the way of righteousness is.

And now I come to my second quaerie: viz. Whether the way of Independency be
the way of righteousness?

My brother Burton writing in the name of all the Independents, pretends unto
the people, and would make the world believe, that they are all Dependent upon
Gods Word for all their proceedings, and affirms moreover in the fifth page,
that all their new gathered Churches and several Congregations are all
Dependent one upon another, both which assertions of his are most false, as
will evidently appear to all those that know their practices and will vouchsafe
but to read the ensuing discourse, where they shall find, that they have
neither precept nor president for their way of Independency in all Gods holy
Word, and that there is not so much as one example in all the sacred Scriptures
for any of their new practices* wherein they differ from us; and which is more
that they all of them withhold the truth from the people in unrighteousness:
How then can the way of Independency be the way of righteousness, when it is
a deviation from that way, as by their practices will be evidenced; therefore
for the confirmation of what I have now said, I will briefly examine some of
their proceedings, and first whereas my brother Burton affirms that all their
Churches are Dependent one upon another.

This I say is most false. For all their proceedings in their several
congregations are carried on in an arbitrary way; whatsoever they publish in
their writings and pretend to the people (as all the learned and those that are
acquainted with their method well know); So that it lies in any one of their
Churches breasts, and is at their pleasure, whether they will so much as confer
or consult with each other; and if they do at any time vouchsafe one another
that courtesy, yet it is still voluntary whether they will give each other an
account of either their censures or proceedings (for they all pretend as
absolute a sovereignty and jurisdiction within themselves severally as any
free-states or commonwealths) and have no authority one over another, neither
can they appeal for any relief if wronged, one to or from another: And if any
Member in any one of those Churches, or any one of those Churches divided
amongst themselves, or upon some eminent received wrong should fondly complain
to another neighbor Church, that Church has no power to relieve them no more
then one private man can relieve another if he should be appealed to by
another; And if that Church should desire an account of the other Churches
proceedings, that Church may refuse it, if it please them. But if to gratify
their desire, that Church should vouchsafe to condescend so far unto the other
Church, as to give them a reason of their proceedings; all this is but gratis,
and out of their good nature; they have still no power to call that Church in
question that has done the wrong, if that Church stands upon its points and
privileges, and says that they have nothing to do with them. And what then is
to be done in this case? Then forsooth, they will withdraw communion from that
Church, which, say they, is the highest censure any one Church can proceed to
against another Church. Is not this, I pray, fine Dependency? What more
unrighteous dealing can be found in the world then this of the Independents, to
profess themselves Independents, and yet to pretend a Dependency? And when
that comes to the trial, they have no more real Dependency one upon another,
then we have with them? Yea, what a great unrighteousness is this to pretend a
Dependency one upon another and a communion amongst their new gathered
Churches, when it is well known there is no more union and communion, nor true
friendship amongst them then was between Herod and Pilate, they refusing the
right hand of fellowship each to other in many of them? Yea they are deadly
enemies one to another, as can sufficiently be proved (although they all agree
together to persecute the Presbyterians, as Herod and Pilate did well accord to
persecute Christ); For I my self have heard the Independents protest against
the Brownists, Anabaptists, Antinomians, and Seekers, and many other of the new
fraternities, proclaming them all Sectaries: And on the other side, I have
heard those several societies rail against all the Independents, especially
those Homothumadon dissenting brethren in the reverend Assembly, saying, that
they had a better and a more charitable esteem of any of the Presbyterian
Ministers then of them, and they do unanimously accuse all the Ministers of
New England of as great tyranny as the Prelates: And it is well known, that
many of the Independent congregations here amongst us have their different laws
and customs, every one of them dissenting more or less from each other in
their several new gathered Churches; yea they are ignorant of each others
practices: For my Brother Burton and I. S. know not that the women in some of
their congregations have their voices there; and yet it can be proved, that
they also have Peter's keys at their girdles as well as any of their
Presbyters: And therefore their new Churches are not Dependent one upon
another, as my brother Burton asserteth Page the fifth, when as they all of
them exercise an absolute sovereignty amongst themselves Independent: What
unrighteousness then is this in my brother Burton and in all the Independents
to affirm that in all their Churches there is a Dependent Independency, or an
Independent Dependency, which is but a contradictory bull at best, at the
baiting whereof a man, if he regarded not mispending his time, might make far
better sport, then he did some years since, in baiting the Popes Bull.

The truth is, as their Religion is but a mere Babell, so all their language is
confounded, and they are divided in their opinions, principles and practices,
they being all really Independent: And therefore whether the way of
Independency be the way of righteousness, where they are so unrighteous in all
their proceedings, and when they say one thing and do and practice another, and
when they withhold the truth from the people in unrighteousness, as all the
Independent Predicants do, I refer it to the wisdom and judgment of the godly
and conscientious Reader. But the unrighteousness of their way will yet more
perspicuously appear if we but look into some other of their practices, which I
shall by and by instance, the very consideration of the which (the better to
stir up thy attention) makes me boldly to conclude of them all, That
whatsoever they pretend and whatsoever shows of seeming holiness they hold out
to the world, they are unsound, root and branch; and neither the godly party,
nor the praying people, nor the only Saints, but the most pharisaicall brood
that ever yet appeared in the world, and more injurious to Christ the King of
his Church and to his royalty, and to all his holy, faithful Ministers and
Servants, then ever the Pope or any of the Prelaticall party were, and more
malicious and treacherous to the Saints, and truly godly and precious ones, and
more opposers of all Reformation, then ever the Cavaliers were; and many of
them greater enemies to Church and State, and the welfare of both, then either
Strafford or the Prelate of Canterbury.

And as for the Independent government, as it is most certain it has neither
precept nor president for it in all Gods holy Word, so it is far more
tyrannical and lordly then that of the Pope or Prelates tending to nothing but
an Anarchy and confusion in Church and State: And therefore that they with all
their trumperies and desperate practices, with all their unrighteous dealing,
ought to be abhorred and abominated, whatsoever seeming sanctimony they make
show of, by all such as truly fear God and wish the peace of Zion and the good
of the State and Kingdoms in which they live.

Now they that have a desire to see this charg made good against them, shall
find it with the whole impeachment fully proved and made evident in the
following discourse.

But in the interim it will not be amiss to produce some few instances more of
their practices for the proving of their Independency not to be the way of
righteousness.

If a man but look upon their superlative pride, especially the conceit they
all of them have of their own holiness and sanctity we shall find that it
exceeds that of the very Scribes and Pharisees, for all the Independents and
Sectaries style themselves the holy people, the godly party, the praying
people, the generation of the just, the Saints; yea esteeming the very
retrimentitious part of them (to speak in their own dialect) Saints, calling
their most blasphemous opinions and practices, the infirmities of the Saints,
in the mean time excluding the most godly Presbyterians from those titles,
calling them the Antichristian brood, the enemies of Jesus Christ and his
Kingdom, the sons of Beliall, and what not? all which dealing with their
brethren is not the way of righteousness: yea in their very prayers to God,
they like the Pharisees boast of their own knowledge, slighting and vilifying
all their Presbyterian brethren, disdaining so much as to pray for them; yea in
their public Assemblies, and in their public prayers they have been heard
contemptuously to speak of those in authority asserting that they were not
worthy of the prayers of the Saints, and it is well known that many of them
will neither publicly nor privately join with their Presbyterian brethren in
any duty of piety accounting them all as an Antichristian and unsanctified
generation of men, and all this out of a strong and confident persuasion of
their own holiness and out of an uncharitable opinion of their brethrens
impurity, then the which strain of pride, the very Pharisees never exercised a
greater; all which practices of theirs sufficiently declare, that the way of
Independency is not the way of righteousness: for greater unrighteousness
there cannot be then this, as will by and by appear.

But I will now come to some instances.

Not long since at a great entertainment and festivity on the Lords day, when
they were all met together, one of the Homothumadon brethren, a great man
amongst them, beginning the duty of the day, in his Prayer before his Sermon,
speaking unto God by way of complaint against the Presbyterians, said unto Him
with many tears, Lord, they (meaning the Presbyterians) hate us because we know
more of thee then they do; but we beseech thee Lord give us still to know more
of thee, and let them hate us more, if they will.

But before I come to speak of this their prayer, and of some other passages of
their other good prayers, I shall take the liberty here to say something of the
difference between these men's practices, and the old Puritans of ENGLAND; and
so much the rather I do it, because they would persuade the world that there is
little difference between them and the old Puritans; yea one of their Itinerary
Predicants not long since preaching in a public Assembly, affirmed that there
was no other difference between the Independents at this day and the old
Puritans of ENGLAND but that the Independents were overgrown Puritans; which I
conceive, he meant in this sense, that the Independents outstripped them in all
duties of piety and charity, and in all comely, seemly, orderly, and temperate
walking in an unblameable conversation before God and men: This, I say, I
conceive to be his meaning by the word overgrown: for I would not willingly put
a worse interpretation upon his expression, and understand by overgrown, that
he meant they were become monstrous (Which notwithstanding too too many of them
are); therefore if his words be taken in the better sense, by overgrown he
understands that the Independents have attained unto a higher degree of
perfection then ever the old Puritans had attained unto, and that they now
walk more closely in the way of righteousness then ever they did.

I will first therefore set down some of the practices of the old Puritans,
with the paths and ways of righteousness they walked in, omitting many things
for brevity sake though worthy of eternal memory and our everlasting imitation.

For the old Puritants of ENGLAND, as those that have read their writings and
knew their practices and were familiarly acquainted with them, they can
testify of them, that they were an humble, self-denying people, ever groaning
under that burden of the remnant of sin, crying out with the Apostle Paul Romans
7. Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death?
they never dreamed of a perfect holiness, nor never thought themselves more
holy then others; or presumed to call themselves Saints; and if that title had
at any time been given unto any of them by such as truly honored them for
their singular graces, you should ever hear them complain of their
imperfections, and with the Apostle, Phil. 3. ver. 8, 9. counting all things
loss for the excellent knowledge of Jesus Christ, esteeming all their
righteousness but dung, that they might win Christ and be found in him not
having their own righteousness, etc.

Now they that are acquainted with the Independents doctrine, words, and
practices, hear them talk of nothing but of their own sanctity, and of their
perfection, saying God can see no sin in them; and although some of them do not
profess so much in words, yet in deeds they allow of that doctrine, proclaming
themselves to be the only Saints, the holy people, and the godly party, the
generation of the just, and separate from their brethren as impure creatures:
Therefore the Independents do not walk in that old way of righteousness the
old Puritans of ENGLAND walked in, who made no separation in the worst times
from the public Assemblies, or ever refused to pray with their Christian
brethren; and therefore in this point they have not outstripped them nor
overgrown them; from which I boldly conclude, that herein that Predicant did
abuse the world, in saying that there is no difference between the Independents
and the old Puritants of ENGLAND; For the old Puritans were humble, self
denying men, and the Independents are pharisaicall boasters of their own
holiness and sanctity; and therefore in this, their way is not the way of
righteousness, but a great aberration from it.

Again, the old Puritans of England, though never so learned, and never so
sufficiently furnished with all accomplished abilities of divine knowledge,
which many of them by their indefatigable pains, study, and industry, and by
their prayers unto God night and day, and by their continual waiting upon the
Ordinances, and Gods blessing upon all their endeavors, had attained unto, so
that they were taken notice of by all men, both in the Universities and amongst
all the learned, to be incomparable men, many of the which I could name, yet
not any one of them ever preached either in public or private without great
study and prayer, yea and without a special call; and they always with Saint
Paul, exercised their Ministry in fear and much trembling, 1 Cor. 2. ver. 3.
saying with him, 2 Cor. 2. 16. Who is sufficient for these things? Those holy
and godly Puritans, though transcendently learned, yet were always conversant
in all holy duties, especially in preaching and prayer with fear and trembling,
thinking themselves never sufficiently enough provided for, for those duties.
And truly Saint Paul's example is worthy always to be looked upon, who though
he were immediately inspired by God himself and had always the assistance of
his spirit, and ten thousand times more learning then all the Independents put
together, yet he preached always with fear and trembling, and cried out who is
sufficient for these things?

Now if we compare the Independents and their Predicants with the old Puritans
of England, we shall find the old Puritans always and in all things imitating
the example of holy Paul and the other Apostles in their Ministry, which they
had a command to follow, Phil. 3. ver. 17. who intruded not themselves rashly
upon the Ministry, as the false Apostles and Seducers usually did, and as all
the Independents and Sectaries daily do; they cried out who is sufficient for
these things? and how can any preach except he be sent? Romans 10. saying No man
takes this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God, as Aaron, Hebr.
2. 4. Those old Puritans were all men of Saint Paul's spirit, they durst do
nothing without a call, nothing without great study, nothing without their
parchments and books, imitating Saint Paul in this, who would always have his
parchments with him (that is his books) bring me my parchments, says he; they
preached not without fear and trembling; this was the continual practice of
the old Puritans, they could never be seen in a Pulpit before they had some
days prepared themselves by prayer and study; and yet after all this, they
would then cry out, Who is sufficient for these things? Whereas all the
Independents and Sectaries assert, that every man may preach, and every man of
them is sufficient, and many also hold that women may preach; yea and to
manifest that they are all sufficient for these things, and for the dispensing
of the great mysteries of Heaven, which the very Angels desired to pry into,
they run through Town and Country, and wheresoever they come get up into the
Pulpits and preach with such impudency, impiety and blasphemy, as it is not
lawful to name, their very doctrines being so destructive to all piety,
goodness, and good manners, and Ruffian*like they go in their hair and
apparel, and so insolent and proud they are, that one would rather take them
for Luciferians then Saints; and such unbeseeming expressions they have in
their prayers to God, as would terrify a truly conscientious and godly man to
hear them, as not long since one of them in London publicly speaking unto God
in his prayer, said, Right Honorable Lord God, which kind of expressions as
they are blasphemous, so ridiculous exposing Religion and the sacred Ordinances
of God to ludibry and derision. But yet this is the daily practice of the
Sectaries through the Kingdom, far different from that of the old Puritans of
England, and therefore in this point of fear and reverence, and of an holy awe
of Gods divine Majesty and a reverend adoring of the ministry and mystery of
the Gospel, the way of the Independents is not that either of the holy
Apostles or of the old Puritans, there being as vast a difference between them,
as between light and darkness; and therefore the way of Independency in this
particular also is not the way of righteousness, but the way of rebellion and
impudency.

Again, the old Puritans of England had all of them a reverend opinion of all
in authority, and did ever believe that there was no power but of God, and that
all powers were ordained of God, Romans 13. and they believed that every soul
ought to be subject to the higher power, and that whosoever resisted the power
resisted the Ordinance of God, and for that their Rebellion they should receive
to themselves damnation, and they ever believed that every soul ought to be
subject unto authority, not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake; this
was the Doctrine of the old Puritans of England; and their practice in yielding
continual obedience to them, and praying for them is known to all men; yea,
they did acknowledge, that as all power was given unto Jesus Christ in Heaven
and Earth, Matthew. 28. Psalm. 2. so they did believe that all power in Church and
State was derived from him, as the head of all Principality and power, who had
said, Prove. 8. 15. 16. By me Kings reign, and Princes decree justice; by me
Princes rule and Nobles, yea, all the Judges of the earth, etc. this doctrine
the old Puritans of England had learned and taught and were obedient unto, as
having precept upon precept for it, as from the words above quoted out of the
thirteenth of the Romans, so out of 1. Pet. chap. 2. verse 13, 14. who said
submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be
to the King as supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him
for the punishment of evil Doers, and for the praise of them that do well;
for so is the w^ll of God, that with well doing, yet may put to silence the
ignorance of foolish men. The old Puritans of England had fully learned this
Lesson of obedience to all authority, both civil and Ecclesiastical, being
commanded to obey them that have the rule over them, and to submit themselves
unto them, as who watched over their souls, as those that were to give
account, etc. Hebr. 13. 17. and this doctrine they did inculcate incessantly
unto the people; and for the government Ecclesi^sticall the old Puritans of
England did believe it was that Presbyterian Government that is now contended
for by all the Presbyterians, as is to be seen at large in the learned Works
of that ever to be honored Master Cartwright in his disputations against
Bishop Whitgift, who for his zeal to that government was called the Father of
all the Puritans. They also did believe that all government, both
Ecclesiastical and Civil, was radically, originally, and inherently in God,
and Christ, and from them derived to the Kings, Princes, Nobles and Judges of
the earth, and to all the true Ministers of the Gospel in his Church, who all
have their authorities immediately from God, and by whom alone according to the
Holy Scripture they rule and command; they never durst be so blasphemous as to
rob God of his honor and glory, and the Kings, Nobles, and Judges of the
earth, and the Ministers of the Gospel of their several powers, saying, that
Kings and Nobles, and the Rulers of the earth, and Ministers in Christ's Church
and Kingdom were the creatures of the people, and that the people were the
sovereign Lord, both of Kings, Nobles, Parliaments, and Ministers, and that
the authority which they exercised was inherently in the people, and that they
might give it and deposite it into whose hands they pleased, and where they
lusted, and call any of their Rulers and Governors to an account, and appoint
them their times and seasons when they should meet, and tell them what they
should do, and displace them at pleasure as they shall think fit; all these
Lessons of Blasphemy the old Puritans of England were ignorant of, which
learned nescience of theirs is commendable: They had been better taught from
all the Holy Prophets, and blessed Apostles, who both by precept and example
have instructed the people of God in all ages to yield obedience to those that
were Governors over them, as we may read through all the Holy Scripture of
the Old Testament, where we find what reverence even Father Abraham, the Father
of the faithful, showed unto all Kings, under whose government he lived in the
time of his Peregrination, and where we read also what reverence Joseph
yielded unto Pharaoh, and how Jacob his Father demeaned himself with all the
Patriarks to Pharaoh, and those that were over them in authority, and how
Jeremiah behaved himself to the King in his time, and how the three Children
and Daniel carried themselves to the very Kings of Babylon, though heathen
Princes, never speaking unto them, nor coming before them but with all
reverence, deprecating all evil from them upon all occasions, and praying for
their welfare; yea, Christ's example ought to be for our imitation, who opened
not his mouth; the same we find in all the Apostles, whenever they were
brought before authority, with what sweetness of language they carried
themselves toward them, and what reverent expressions they used to all in
authority, though never so wicked, when they were brought before them; yea, if
they had failed but in the least expression, how soon they would recall
themselves; for when Ananias commanded them that stood by Paul to smite him on
the mouth, Act. 23. and he in passion beholding his injustice, said, God shall
smite thee thou painted wall, when it was replied unto him, revilest thou Gods
High Priest? Paul stands not upon the justification of his words, but meekly
answers, I wist not brethren that it was the High Priest; for it is written
(says he) Exodus 22. 27. thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of the
people; Paul had learned his Lesson well, and soon recollected himself,
acknowledging his error that he had deviated from the rule which is there
recorded for all men's imitation in after times to the end of the world, to
square their lives and obedience by; they are not by that to speak evil of
the Ruler of the people, whether he be Ecclesiastical or civil; and if they
may not speak evil, then they may not resist their authority, and unihilate
their power, which is the extremity of evil and rebellion; yea, all men are
forbid so much as in their Bedchamber to curse or think evil of those in
authority; how much more are those then blame*worthy, that not only think
evil, but speak evil; yea, write and publish evil against Kings, Nobles, and
Judges of all sorts, both civil and Ecclesiastical, and divest them all of
their authority, speaking evil of Dignities, and assuming the Sovereignty of
them all to themselves, and that from God himself, calling themselves the
sovereign Lords of them all, giving them Laws to rule by, and denying them
their due reverence in the face of the Kingdom, as lately some of the
Independents and Sectari^s have done, both to the House of Lords and Commons?
Surely such men's damnation sleeps not, whatsoever they pretend, and how highly
soever they carry themselves, and by whom soever in these their evil doings
they are supported, backed, and seconded: For Saint Peter in his second
Epistle, that knew very well the mind of God concerning such men, in the second
chapter says this of all the wicked, verse 9, 10* 11, 12. etc. The Lord
knows how to deliver the Godly out of temptations, and to reserve the unjust
unto the day of judgment to be punished, but chiefly them that walk after the
flesh, and despise Dominion and Government, whom he calls presumptuous,
selfe-willed, that are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities, which the very
Angels (says he) though they were greater in power and might, would not do
against the Devil being in authority, though it were usurped; but those as
natural brute beasts made to be taken, and destroyed, speak evil of things
they understand not, and shall utterly perish in their own corruption, and
shall receive the reward of unrighteousness. Here is a fearful Doom
pronounced against all such people as spoke evil of Dignities; and Saint Jude
likewise in his Epistle seconds Saint Peter, verse 8* 9, 10, etc. calling such
men as despise authority, and speak evil of Dignities, filthy Dreamers; and
compares them to brute beasts, and unto Cain, and unto Balaam, and unto Corah,
Dathan and Abiram, pronouncing woe unto them all, and proclaiming them spots
and deformities in all companies and societies, calling them moreover clouds
without water, creatures empty of all goodness, trees whose fruit withers,
yea, without fruit, twice dead, here in this world in their sins and
trespasses, and eternally in the world to come, and as if he could never have
spoke enough of such men as despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities,
he calls them raging waves of the Sea, foming out their own shame, wandering
stars, to whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever, against whom
he says, the Lord will execute judgment for all their ungodly deeds, and for
all their hard speeches, stiling them Murmurers, complayners, whose mouths
speak great swelling words, having men's persons in admiration because of
advantage, desiring all men to remember the words of the Holy Apostles, and of
our Lord Jesus Christ, who foretold the people of God, that there should be
such Mockers in the last times, who should walk after their ungodly lusts, and
that they might the better take notice of them and know who these men both
Christ and the Apostles spoke of, he says they were such as should separate
themselves, sensual, not having the spirit; he describes them to be an
unsanctified race of men, whatsoever seeming holiness they make a show of, and
such as ought to be avoided and shunned of all such as desire to please God and
avoid that condemnation that was denounced against all such as despised
dignities and resisted authority; and even as the Lord by his servants
commanded the people to separate from the company of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram,
and to go from their tents lest they were involved in the same miseries and
calamities that were coming upon them for their rebellion against Moses: so
ought all the people that indeed do truly fear God decline the companies and
societies of all such as now oppose authority and make themselves the sovereign
Lords of the Kings and Rulers and Judges that God has appointed over them: for
surely a greater unrighteousness cannot be perpetrated against God, then thus
superciliously to trample upon authority, and to despise those that are over
them, which is the daily practice of the Independents and Sectaries; all which
unrighteousness the old Puritans of England were not guilty of having been
better taught; and therefore in this part of duty the Independents are
different from the old Puritans of England, who walked not in this way of
unrighteousness; and therefore the Sactaries have not outstripped them in this
point of obedience to authority, but they are indeed overgrown, and are become
monstrous in their rebellious practices: Yea, so far they are from reverencing
those in authority, as they are grown to that height of pride and
unrighteousness, as many of them will not so much as pray for the very
Parliament or the Assembly either privately or publicly, as can sufficiently
be proved by such as are acquainted with them and their practices: for not long
since in a great Assembly and Congregation of Independents; one of their
Predicants being in prayer, after he had put up many petitions and requests in
behalf of their fraternity, thus expressed himself, speaking unto God, Now
Lord (says he) we should come to pray for the Parliament and Assembly, but
they are not worthy the prayers of the Saints; and so with disdain he passed
them by as unworthy of their prayers, then the which what could be spoke more
wickedly and contrary to the practice of all the old Puritans of England, who
in all their prayers and supplications private and public, ever with tears
prayed for all in authority; I affirm that this practice of the Independents
is not only one of the highest strains of all unrighteousness, and contrary
to the practice of all the old Puritans of England, but contrary to all the
practice of all the Saints that ever yet lived in the world, and contrary to
all the commands of God both in the Old and New Testament. For we have read how
earnestly Moses prayed for the rebellious Israelites, wishing himself rather
to be blotted out of the book of life then that the Lord should destroy them;
and so did Paul wish for his Countrymen the Jews: Samuel also when the people
desired him to pray for them, 1 Samuel 12. v. 23. God forbid (says he) that I
should sin against the Lord in ceasing to pray for you etc. So that the holy
Prophet makes it a sin in either Ministers or people not to pray for their
brethren, and especially those in authority: for this was the practice of all
the Prophets; the Lord told a heathen King that Abraham his servant should pray
for him; yea father Abraham prayed for the very Sodomites, and the Kingdoms in
which they dwelt, Genesis 18. And the people of Israel when they were in captivity
in Babylon, had a command from God himself to pray for the welfare of very
Babylon and the Princes of the same; and we have read what supplications
Daniel, Ezra, and Nehemiah put up in behalf of those heathen Princes under
which they lived, as well as for their own Countrymen. And Saint Paul gives it
in charge to all Ministers and people, 1 Timothy 2. to pray for all men, ver. 1,
2. I exhort (says he) that first of all supplications, prayers, and
intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men: For Kings, and all
that are in authority, that we may lead a peaceable and quiet life in all
godliness and honesty: For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our
Savior. So that here there is not only an exhortation to all Christians in
general, but in special to Ministers to pray for all men: but primarily for
those in authority; and reasons and grounds are also given by the Apostle of
encouragement to this duty: viz. because that it is a good and acceptable thing
in the sight of God, tending also for the peace, quiet, and tranquillity of
them all; and which is more, to all godliness, which is the glory of all
peace; and therefore that they ought to pray for those in authority.

And this exhortation of the Apostle, all the old Puritans of England did ever
most diligently observe and follow, praying for them that were in authority
night and day; whereas the Sectaries were never in private heard pray for
either King, or Parliament, or the Scots, or Assembly. How wicked a thing
therefore is it in the Independents and Sectaries, and what a part of
unrighteousness is it in them, daily to omit this duty, who will neither pray
with their brethren nor for them, but separate from all their societies as from
a people unholy? yea how impious and rebellious a thing is it in them, against
both God and all authority, to say, and that in a disdainful manner, even in
their public meeting places and congregations, that neither the Parliament nor
Assembly are worthy their prayers? yea it is well known and can be proved, that
they pray against them and the King himself, and that not only privately, but
in their congregations publicly.

Surely if either the Parliament, or Assembly, or the Presbyterians were as bad
as the Kings of Babylon, or the persecuting Jews, yet they ought to be prayed
for; For we have a command to pray for all men, yea for our enemies, and those
that persecute us and revile us; and we have Christ's example for it, who said,
Father forgive them, they know not what they do, speaking of those that
persecuted him, which Saint Stephen imitating, said, Lord lay not this sin to
their charge; supplicating likewise for his enemies. And so Saint Paul prayed
for all those that forsook him when he appeared before Nero.

Now when the Independents and Sectaries transgress thus against precept upon
precept, and against the example of all the holy Prophets, and Christ himself,
and his blessed Apostles and Martyrs, and daily by these their practices fight
against God himself, and are in every thing so unlike the old Puritans of
England, it is manifest that they have not outgrown them in this point of duty,
and that the way of Independency is not the way of righteousness, but the way
of error and open rebellion against God; so that those glorious titles they
assume unto themselves, of being the only holy and praying people, and the
Saints, and but the old Puritans of England overgrown, do not belong unto the
Independents and Sectaries when they are so like the devil in all their
practices: For it is sufficiently known and can be abundantly proved, that many
of the Independents and Sectaries will neither pray with the Presbyterians nor
for them, no nor for King and Parliament, nor for the Assembly, nor for the
Scots; yea if need be, it can be proved, that they have prayed, and that
publicly, against them all: yea their daily Pamphlets witness what good
affection they have toward them all, whose chief employment it is (except it
be now and then by the way of slattery when they coaks the Parliament a little
to gain their favor, that by their party in the house they may do the more
mischief against the Presbyterians); I say, except it be at such a nick of
time, the whole employment of all the Sectaries generally is abominably to
abuse them and to rail and revile both the House of LORDS and COMMONS and the
Assembly, and the Scots, and the City, and for the King they cannot hear of his
very name with patience; I can say thus much of them, and men also of good rank
and reputation, that I never have heard more reviling speeches in my life
against any men then they have uttered in my hearing, and in the audience of
many, and that at the Parliament door; affirming openly, that they were more
tyrannical then either Strafford or the Prelate, and greater persecutors then
those of the High Commission Court, and this was the general language of all
the Sectaries through the Kingdom, within this twelve Months, indeed since
the recruiting of the House and since by that means they have strengthened their
party, and they have of late showed less favor to the Presbytery and the
City, they have not been altogether publicly so boisterous in their
expressions, yet notwithstanding privately amongst themselves they can speak
daggers both against many worthy Members in the House of Commons, and against
many of the Lords, and against the City, and against the Scots, and especially
against the Assembly; all the which they traduce at pleasure, with most of the
proceedings of the House of Commons, if at least they do not humor them to
their desires and designs; yea many of their printed Pamphlets can witness
for me that I wrong them not, and amongst others those that were writ by John
Lilburne, who is but the mouth of the rest, who dares speak out what the other
Sectaries dare but mutter, and therefore he is adored and exceedingly animated
and countenanced by them all, and superlatively cried up as the only man of
courage and animosity amongst all those of that fraternity, and he makes all
the Lords but Prerogative and King creatures, and the very House of Commons but
the creature of the people, who may call them to an account when they please,
and therefore (for all their flattery in their Petition) it highly concerns
the Great Council and the whole kingdom, timely to look into their proceedings,
and their clandestine machinations, lest that in recruting of the Parliament
they do so strengthen their faction, that in fine they destroy not only the
Parliament it self, but the whole Kindome, and make themselves sovereign
Lords indeed (as they pretend they are) over both the King and Parliament, and
all the people, and so become really our Lords and Masters, so that whereas
formerly this nation was called the Popes and Prelates Asses, we may now justly
be called and termed the Independents Mules, a monstrous brood indeed; for it
is sufficiently known, and can be proved, and that by good witness that it is
their maxim, that the Saints only ought to rule the world, and to have the
sword in their hand, and they prove this their Doctrine out of the 149. Psame,
where the Prophet says, v. 5, 6, 7. etc. Let the Saints be jeyfull in glory,
let them sing abroad upon their beds; let the high praises of God be in their
mouth: and a two edged sword in their hand to execute vengeanee upon the
Heathen, and punishments upon the people, to bind their Kings with chains, and
their Nobles with fetters of Iron, to execute upon them the judgment written;
this honor have all his Saints; praise ye the Lord.

Upon this place of Holy Scripture they ground their opinion, that the Saints
only ought to rule the Earth; now they account none Saints but themselves, and
all the Presbyterians enemies of Jesus Christ; yea, they have been heard say
when they are amongst themselves, where they may speak freely, that they see
no reason why the Saints may not compel any nation by the sword to come under
obedience to Christ's Kingdom. So that howsoever they challenge liberty of
conscience now, saying that conscience is a tender thing, and that it ought not
be forced; yet if they but once get the day, they will give no toleration I
believe to any Presbyterians; yea, I am most assured, had but the Parliament
voted for Independency as they did for the Presbytery, they would have found
Scripture enough then by which they would have proved that the Christian
Magistrate might have forced any to come under obedience to Christ's yoke, and
then the example of Nehemiah would have been exceedingly urged by them all,
who seeking a through Reformation, would not suffer so much as the language of
Ashdod to be spoke within his jurisdiction, but constrained them all to embrace
the true Religion, and swear by God, that is to set up Gods true worship; this
example of Nehemiah I am confident would have been urged, and that eagerly by
them all, who at their first coming over from their pretended banishment (I
mean the Homothumadon Brethren, and those of New England) as long as they had
any hopes of setting up their Independency were very frequently heard speak of
a through Reformation, and always commend noble Nehemiah for his zeal that
he would not suffer any false worship in Jerusalem; but since they perceive
their hopes are frustrate, now they labor for a toleration of all Religions,
which both God, noble Nehemiah, and Joshua, and all the Holy Prophets, Christ
and his blessed Apostles continually were displeased with, and denounced
judgments against; all which holy Laws now they desire may be dispensed with
to gratify them with a full toleration of all religions, or at least with an
indulgence for their newfangled Independency, which by all their endeavors
they make way apace for: and howsoever it was thought a thing worthy of death
in Strafford and the Prelate of Canterbury, that they but labored to alter the
Laws of the Land, and the Religion that was established by public authority,
and for the which they both suffered, the very Sectaries and Independents
themselves being the principal Agents to bring them both to their end, who by
their tumultuous and disorderly running up daily to Westminster, were never
satisfied in craving justice at the Parliament against them, saying, that as
resolution was the life of action, so execution was the life of the Law and
justice, and would never be contented and appeased till they had obtained their
desires against them, and only for this very cause as they pretended, that they
endeavored to alter the Laws of the Land, and the Religion established by
public authority; and many of our Fugitives were as eager in that business as
any of the rest, some of them standing upon the Scaffold to see the execution
of them, and rejoicing at the justice done upon them; and yet behold the very
same men, are all of them guilty of the very same crime that they dyed for;
yea, of a far greater; for the Prelate and the Earl of Strafford were
adjudged for but endeavoring to alter the Religion and Laws established in
the Kingdom; but all the Sectaries and Independents they have really altered
Religion, and have set up many new Religions, and that without any authority;
yea, they have altered both Law and Gospel, rejecting all the Holy Scriptures,
and making nothing of the glorious Word of God, as can be proved, and they have
not only established by their sole authority diverse Religions amongst us that
were never known before, but they proclaim all the Presbyterians enemies of
the Lord Jesus Christ, and the sons of Belial, and esteem of them as so many
Infidels in no wise to be communicated with in holy things. And for the
fundamental Laws of the Land, they not only speak against them as a yoke of
tyranny and bondage unsupportable to be borne, but they write whole books
against them, desiring they may be altered, notwithstanding all men enjoy their
lives and estates by them; yea, they write not only in general against all the
laws of the land, but against the very Ordinances of Parliament, daily
publishing Pamphlets against all their proceedings, and especially they have
taken great pains to dismount the Ordinance of Tithes established both by Law
and a particular Ordinance of Parliament, they would feign starve the
Presbyterians, preaching and practicing hourly against the Covenant, and many
known Ordinances: for whereas it was by Ordinances enjoined that none should
preach publicly, but such as were authorized, and thought fit for the
soundness of their Doctrine, and for the sufficiency of their parts and
abilities; and that nothing should be printed but by authority; notwithstanding
these Ordinances, the Sectaries and Independents both preach and print
whatsoever they please to the seducing of the people, and for the perverting
and corrupting of religion, and disturbance both of Church and State; and
whereas by an Ordinance of Parliament, the manner of government consisting of
the three States, King, Peers and Commons, has been again and again
confirmed, and established with the sitting of the Reverend Assembly of
Divines, and the ratifying of the Directory, and for the establishing of the
Presbyterian government, nevertheless they write against them all, especially
the King, Peers, and Assembly, making nothing of them; no nor of the ^ouse of
Commons it self, if at any time they displease them, but they dash them all a
pieces, subverting the whole government at once, proclaming the people the
sovereign Lords of them all; and some of them have been so temerarious, as
they have abused the whole Parliament to their faces; first the King, then the
House of Commons, and then the House of Lords, slighting their authority and
power, affirming that they could not so much as commit any freeborne subject to
prison which every Justice of peace or Constable may do; yea, it is well
known that in insolency they have exceeded all Delinquents that ever appeared
before the great Council of the Kingdom; so that it may be spoke to the
honor both of Strafford and the Prelate of Canterbury, that they both of them
behaved themselves with far greater modesty and reverence toward both Houses
then many of the Sectaries have done, for they ever yielded due honor and
reverenciall respect unto them all, both with bowed knees, and graceful and
seeming language; which those paultry Fellows out of an insulting impudency
denied them, despising Dignities and Dominions; and these creatures have had
their accomplices to applaud them in these their Rebelliouspractises, yea some of
them have been so bold as to petition the Parliament in their behalf, though
they could not be ignorant how unchristianly, unreverently, and undutifully
they behaved themselves before them, which was the greatest affront that was
ever offered to any Parliament, and the greatest breach of the privilege of
Parliament that has been known in any nation; and yet all these things have
been perpetrated by the Independents and Sectaries, all which graceless
proceedings the old Puritans of England abhorred, as the way of
unrighteousness. This also can be proved that many of their Independent
itinerary preachers run from place to place, preaching against the Nobility and
Gentry, against the City, and against the Reverend Assembly, against the
Directory, against Tithes, against the Presbytery; yea against all that is
called authority, and against all our gallant, renowned, and valiant
presbyterian soldiers, saying in their Sermons, come out ye old base drunken
whoremasterly rogues, show what you have done for the safety of the Kingdom,
ascribing all the glory of those noble victories to their own party. Truly if
I should make but a repetition of the very contents of their prayers, Sermons
and diabolical practices, and set down but the very heads of them, it would
fill a mighty volume, by all which it would evidently appear that they are
greater Delinquents against the Religion and Laws established by public
authority, then ever Strafford and the Prelate were, and greater Malignants to
the State then ever the Cavaliers were, yea, greater enemies to all Reformation
in Religion then ever appeared in the world before they were hatched, and which
is not the least thing of admiration and wonder in all these creatures, they
are fledge in wickedness as soon as they are disclosed. Truly, these their
practices manifest unto the whole world that they are not the only Saints, nor
the old Puritans of England over-growne; for it is notorious that all of them
abhorred all these their ungodly proceedings, and therefore the way of
Independency is not the way of righteousness, but the open way of sin,
heresy, and apparent Rebellion.

But I will yet in a few things more compare the old Puritans of England, and
the Sectaries and Independents together, before I come to speak of the prayer
of that Homothumadon brother, I first made mention of. It is well known, that
the old Puritans of England were all of them very zealous for the sanctifying
of the Lords day, and their whole employments on that day sufficiently declared
to all those that were familiarly acquainted with them, that they were heavenly
minded men, and such as were truly mortified, and dead unto the world, who
denied unto themselves usually those ordinary necessaries on that day, that at
other times they would more freely partake in; they dressed but little meat on
that day, no more then very necessity called for, not out of any
penuriousnesse, but for this end, that their servants might be eased from all
toyling works, that they might the better attend upon the duties of the day;
and they were especially careful, that both they and their children, with the
strangers that were within their gates, should sanctify that day; they left
none of them to ramble whether they pleased, they had well learned that Lesson,
that they and their menservants and maidservants, with the stranger within
their walls should keep holy the Sabbath day, and did both by themselves and
with their families take order, that no duty of the day should be omitted, the
whole day being taken up either in prayer or meditation, or reading of the holy
Scriptures, or hearing the Word, or repeating of Sermons, or singing of
Psalms, or instructing and catechizing their Families, or in the works of
charity, or visiting the sick, or in holy conference, or in reading godly
books, or in performing of some duty or other that might bring glory to God,
and honor to their holy profession, and their houses were generally so well
ordered, and all things carried in such comeliness and decency, as he that
had been brought up in profane company, and had accidentally lighted into own
of their houses, would as much have wondered to see the excellent carriage of
all things there, as the Queen of Sheba did to behold the ordering of Solomon's
house. I may truly speak this to their immortal praise, that I never saw in
their Families the least disorder on those days; nor never saw a Feast on that
day, though at other times they were very free in their entertainments, and
much given to Hospitality, and nigardly in nothing, and commonly they caused
their Table-cloath to be spread on the Saturday before they went to bed, and
they were careful that all that were well in the Family should go to Church
with them, and they had a singular care that all their servants might have no
hindrances or impediments by any worldly employments that might in the least
disturb them or dictract them from the duties of the day; all these things I
can witness with thousands more besides my self, were the practices of the
old Puritans of England, and this was the way of Righteousness that they
walked in, for the sanctifying of the Lords day.

Now if the practice of the Independents and Sectaries about this business and
point of obedience be looked into, there will be found a vast difference
between them and the old Puritans of England; for it is well known that they
ordinarily make all their greatest entertainments on that day, as that I spoke
of before for instance, (and many more that I could mention) where the whole
Church was feasted to no small distraction to their poor and godly servants,
that were taken up with more attendance that day, then Martha was on an
ordinary day in entertaining of Christ himself, which not withstanding he
then blamed in very godly and believing Martha, who had learned to give Christ
an honorable confession of her faith concerning her belief in him; and
doubtless if Martha were then blamed by Christ, and had from him a reproof
for her too much care about many things in entertaining himself; I beleevee
the Independents and Sectaries will receive but little thanks at his hand for
profaning his own day, and causing others to do the same, and for their thus
breaking and violating his holy Laws, and hindering of his servants by their
needless entertainments, from the duties of piety and holiness that he
requires at their hands on those days, and he will say to them at the last
judgment, as for these their disorderly walkings, so for their new and
needless traditions, who required these things at your hands? nay, did I not
forbid these things will the Lord say? Truly it is most notorious that the
Sectaries and Independents are very loose in the sanctifying of the Lords day;
and although many of them before they fell into the way of Independencie were
very conscionable observers of that day, and were greatly displeased with the
King for granting but a toleration for sports on that day, and could then say,
that very sin alone had been enough to bring down the judgments of God
upon the whole Land, yet since they turned Sectaries, they can now not only
feast and riot on that day, but if need be work on the same in their ordinary
employments, as can be proved, and many of them that were then great zealots
for the performances of all duties of holiness that day with all their
Families, now regard not that day no more then an other, nay, they let their
servants and children go whether they please, leaving them all to the liberty
(as they speak) of their own consciences, and it is ordinarily observed, that
all the Independents and Sectaries in the Army, and through the whole Kingdom
will frequently journey on that day, and for the Homothumadon Predicants, they
are trundled about on the Lords day in their Coaches with four Horses,
needlessely disquieting both men and beasts that they have a command to give
rest unto. A Tumbrell or a Dung-cart were fitter for these proud and profane
Fellows to be carried about in; and if they will not leave these their
licentious courses, and surcease thus to profane the Lords day, I see no reason
but that the Magistrate should take some order with them, and punish them for
profaning it, it being not only against the Laws of God, but contrary unto the
Laws of the Land. It may be that is one of the Laws that the Sectaries would
have abrogated and made null; for most certain it is their practices are both
contrary to that Law, and the known Law of God, and the practice of all the
old Puritans of England, and therefore the way of Independency in this point
also is not the way of Righteousness, but of profanesse and licentiousness,
neither are they overgrowne Puritans in this.

But seeing I have upon this occasion, began to compare the old Puritans of
England with the Independents and Sectaries, who their Predicants assert are
but the old Puritans over-growne, that is, Christians in all respects,
transcending them in all duties of piety and godliness, and in all offices of
Love and Charity toward others, and in the whole frame of their lives and
conversations, and for their uprightness and honesty in their dealings, and
for their sincerity in all their actions, and for their moderation in the
temperate use of all the creatures, and for their humble walking toward
others. I shall briefly here set down the practices of the old Puritans
concerning some of these particulars, and parallel them with the proceedings of
the Independents and Sectaries of our times.

It is sufficiently known, that the old Puritans of England ever loved and
honored all the Orthodox, faithful, painful, and diligent Preachers of the
Word of God through the Land, whether Conformists or non-Conformists, and they
never thought they could yield them reverence enough, and were willing at any
time to the uttermost of their abilities to relieve and supply them with all
necessary accomodations, for the support of themselves, and their Families, and
they were so far from taking from them any thing, or hindering them of their
dues, either in respect of honor, or maintenance; that they would run and ride
in their behalf for the maintaining of their reputations and livelyhoods, and
if at any time they had been oppressed by the power and tyranny of the
Prelates in any Court, or by any wicked enemies of the Church, they had the
assistance, and ever the good word of the old Puritans, and their prayers, and
their purses to support them, and sustain both them and their Families; they
were never known to desert them, or to give them an ill word; and this was the
carriage of the old Puritans of England toward their godly and painful
Ministers of all sorts, and they never favored any heretical, and
schismatic Teachers, and this was that way of Righteousness they walked in.

Now if we look upon the practices of the Independents and Sectaries they are
chiefest enemies of all the painful and godly Ministers through the Kingdom,
and the only friends of all Seducers, schismatic and heretical Preachers,
so that it is well known, they do not only reproach, and abuse them in words,
calling them Baals Priests, the limbs of Antichrist, and the Devils Ministers,
and a thousand such ignominious names, but so persecute them in word and deeds
that they cannot safely dwell by them where there is any number of the
Sectaries; yea, there is scarce a Committee through the Kingdom where they
have not persecuted their most faithful Ministers, yea it is their chief
design to take away their Tithes from them, and to deprive them of their
Livings, by which they should support themselves, and their poor Families, and
they have made the lives of many of them so irksome unto them, and so wearied
them with their calumnies and carriage toward them, that though they highly
honored them before they turned Sectaries, yet after that, they became their
mortal enemies, and for no other reason but that they continued still to
preach those orthodox doctrines they had formerly taught, and inveighed against
the dangerous and blasphemous opinions that were now preached up every where by
the Seducers of these times, and for this cause alone, and for no other ground
they have wearied many of them out of their very lives, and forced others to
leave their places of their habitations; many presidents of this kind I could
produce, but one I cannot but instance, and that is of one Master Beton of Rye,
in Sussex, a most painful, orthodox, and laborious Preacher, and a man of no
small fame, as well for his godly life, and diligence in his Ministry, as for
his singular knowledge in Hebrew, and all the oriental tongues, and yet this
man every way so unblameable and accomplished, did the Sectaries joining with
all the Malignants of that place, drive from his habitation there. The full
story of that particular business would make a pretty larg book, which would
sad the hearts of all such as are truly godly, to hear that any that pretend
unto Christian Religion should practice so contrary unto all Christian
principles and the practice of the old Puritans of ENGLAND; and yet what those
Sectaries of Rye with their accomplices have done against that godly and learned
Minister, is generally practiced by all the other Sectaries and Independents
through the Kingdom, as can sufficiently be proved, who generally implacably
hate those that they have formerly loved, and have still a cause to honor; as
who next under God have been a means of their conversion, if ever they were
really converted: So that in these their proceedings, they are not the old
Puritans of ENGLAND overgrown, which walked in the way of righteousness in
honoring their faithful Ministers according to Gods command, 1 Thessalonians. 5. and
Heb. 13. Which way the Independents do not walk in, but in the contrary way of
malice and hatred toward them, as all their practices proclaim: Therefore
inthis respect also the way of Independency is not the way of Righteousness.

And as for their charity and practice of love, and their integrity and sincere
dealing toward their brethren, the old Puritans of ENGLAND were famous for
their re^dinesse to pleasure them in any thing, who would at any time ride,
^un, or go, to do any neighbor that dwelt peaceably by them a good turn, yea
though they differed some thing from them in judgment; whereas it can be
proved that the Independents will take great and dangerous journeys to do any
of their Presbyterian brethen m^^chi^fe, to defame and traduce them, and to
hinder their preferment; yea and they will do it to such also as they seem to
be very loving, and show an outward kindness to: And yet at that very infrant
of time they most faune upon them, they will fearfully betray them; yea it is
well known, that some of the Independents have betrayed their own fathers,
their masters, their most familiar friends and acquaintance after they have
turned from the Tresbyterian way to that faction, especially they use
exceedingly to hate such as they professed greatly to love, if they have found
them rigid, as they speak, or unmovable in their Religion, and would not
connive at their Independent ways.

I could say much upon my own experience, how many of the Sectaries seemed not
a little to honor me, and spoke as well of me as of any man living, before
they saw they could not prevail with me to be of their mind, nor to favor
them in their erroneous opinions; but as soon as they perceived that I was
immovable in my resolution, their love turned into implacable hatred, as it is
well known. And I am confident there might be thousands of presidents produced
of the like nature, many of which I know; yea I may truly say this, that I have
not known any Presbyterian now living that was formerly familiarly acquainted
with any that afterward turned Sectary or Independent (notwithstanding
whatsoever courtesies they had formerly received from them) that have not
either betrayed him or done him some ill office afterward, or at least would
never do him the least kindness, though he were in need, or show him any
favor; So that in this point of love and charity, they walk not in the way of
the old Puritans, who were kind to all men and sincere toward those they had
familiarly conversed with, it never being known that they betrayed any of them
or did them any ill offices; and therefore in this point also, the way of
Independency is not the way of righteousness nor the way of the old Puritans
of ENGLAND, but the way of treachery, unthankfulness and unrighteousness.

But to instance the practices and ways of the old Puritans in a few things
more, and then to compare them with the ways of the Independents and Sectaries.

The old Puritans of ENGLAND, as all can witness that knew them, were all of
them generally men no way addicted to the pleasures of the world, and in their
apparel and outward garb commonly they were ever out of fashion: It was, to
my knowledge, counted a great sin amongst them, to exceed in apparel, or to be
fashionably clad, or to go with long hair, or Rufsian*like, or to be seen in
gorgeous attire; You should rarely or seldom behold any gold or silver lace on
any of their apparel, except they had been of noble Parentage, or of some
very great and rich Families, or in some eminent place of authority, and that
was always very sparing; and for cuffs at their hands, not one of a thousand
of the old Puritans were ever seen in any; and if they at any time upon any
festivity, or at any solemn entertainment, or upon such like occasion appeared
in any, they were commonly such little sucking ones as a man could scarce
discern them.

Now if you look upon all the Independents generally through Town and Country,
though they were never born to any estates, nor were of any repute, till that
out of the ruins of the Kingdom by their Sectarisme and indirect dealings
they have attained to some wealth; You shall find them the only gallants of the
world, so that one that should meet them would take them for Roarers and
Ruffians rather then Saints; Yea you shall find them with cuffs, and those
great ones, at their very heels, and with more silver and gold upon their
clothes, and at their heels (for those upstarts must now be in their silver
spurs) then many great and honorable personages have in their purses; so that
those that behold them, if they knew them not, would take them to be the Gentry
and Peers of the Kingdom rather then a company of obscure fellows, in so much
that some taking notice of the great change in this Kingdom said not long
since, that Gentlemen and Noblemen were become beggars, and beggars were become
Lords and Gentlemen.

Truly the like pride in apparel was never seen amongst such as made
profession of Religion before these our times; Whereas the old Puritans of
ENGLAND, both men and women, were all modestly cladd and attired, and went very
plain, and thought it rather a scandal to Religion to be attired or cladd in
the least manner after the fashion of the Court, then for an honor to their
profession; and I have known them blame those that abhorred all pride as much
as any men did, and only for that they went handsomely cladd and apparrelled,
although it were only for the gracing of their profession, as they then told
them, for the which they were at that time sufferers.

So that if those people were now alive, those old Puritans, and should see our
Sectaries and Independents who predicate themselves to be the only Saints,
those good old Puritans would lift up their hands with admiration, and say, as
one of New England said not long since seeing a brother of his coming over
thither very gallant whom he had known live in a meaner condition, that in
beholding him he thought he saw one of the seven wonders of the world, and
professed that he believed they would ere long grow mad with pride in Old
ENGLAND, saying moreover that in his time (he having then been but ten years in
New England) he that should have been seen go in those fashions the Sectaries
and Independents usually and daily now go in, would have been thought to have
had little Religion in him, and he exceedingly marvelled at the liberty all
those of the Congregationall way now take, saying, that he much suspected their
sincerity that now made that a virtue and counted that an honor to Religion
which the old Puritans of England deemed a dishonor to God, and a disgrace and
dishonor to their holy profession. So that in this point also, the practices
and way of the Sectaries is not the way of the old Puritans of England and the
way of righteousness, it being the way of vanity and the world, and contrary
unto the command of the Apostle Saint Paul Romans 12. ver. 2, 3, 4.

Again whereas the old Puritans of ENGLAND had their fare, diet, and
houshold*stuffe, how rich in estate soever they were, according to their
several degrees, were it a Yeoman or but an ordinary Gentleman, or a Knight,
they ever observed their rank; whatsoever, I say, or how great soever the
estates of each of them were; the Yeoman had his house furnished and fared like
a Yeoman and not like a Gentleman; the Gentleman he also fared like a
Gentleman, and had his house furnished accordingly, and not like a Knight; the
Knight in like manner fared like a Knight, and had his house furnished
according to his rank, and not like a Lord; All the old Puritans of ENGLAND
every one of them out of conscience observed and kept their rank, and lived and
fared according to that degree and order God had placed them in this world, and
used their superfluity for the clothing of the naked, and feeding of the
necessitated, and relieving of the poor, many of the which rich Yeomen,
Gentlemen, and Knights I could name, some of the which to my knowledge laid by
yearly out of their estates and revenues some two hundred pounds, some three
hundred, yea some five hundred pounds all their life time, which they sent to
the godly Ministers here and there dispersed through the Kingdom to be
distributed amongst the poor and necessitated Christians in those parts, and
this was the practice of the old rich Puritans of ENGLAND; yea, many of them
maintained a preaching orthodox Minister in some blind corner of the Kingdom
at their own charges; others of them always entertained one silenced Minister
or other, or took poor necessitated Christians children into their Families and
bred them as their own: I can speak much to the praise of God and to many of
their immortal honors upon my own experience concerning the charity of the
old Puritans of ENGLAND, who ever kept their ranks, whatsoever their wealth and
riches were, and would never exceed in household stuff, in fare, or diet,
whatsoever their hospitality was; which notwithstanding was many times very
great; and this order and decency they observed out of conscience, and that
they might the better relieve the necessities of others; and this was the way
the old Puritans of ENGLAND, to my knowledge, walked in, and this was the way
of righteousness as approved on and commanded by God himself, and yet the old
Puritans of ENGLAND knew their Christian liberty and what right they had to the
creature, as well as any Sectary or Independent in our times.

Now if we compare the Independents and Sectaries, in respect of this custom,
with the old Puritans of ENGLAND, we shall not find them the old Puritans of
ENGLAND overgrown, that is, to exceed them in all these graces of charity,
wisdom, moderation, frugality, and orderly walking every one according to that
rank and station God has placed them in: for the Sectaries have all of them
changed this ancient custom and way of righteousness, and are all run, as in
their opinions, into the way of error, so in this, into the by*path of luxury
and sensuality: So that the Sectaries generally, although the greatest part of
them through the Kingdom as it is well known, are such as are but newly sprung
up out of the ruins of the State, and that were never borne to any thing, yea
many of them, before the troubles of the Kingdom, having scarce bread to put
in their mouths; yet now are grown to such a height of pride and luxury and
sumptuosity, that you shall find their houses furnished rather like Noblemen
and Peers, then ordinary men; and ye shall see more plate in their dwellings,
and all things with more bravery and elegancy, then in the palaces of the
Grandees of the Earth; and their fare and dietis so delicious, and set out with
such curiosity of cookery and all things correspondent to it, in respect of all
sorts of wines and dilicacies and whatsoever rarities the seasons and time of
the year will afford, as they exceed the very Princes of the world, by report
of those that have been at their entertainments; so that Dives in all his glory
exceeded them not. Yea, it is well known and can be proved, that many of them
that were never born to three halfpence a year of inheritance, nor never were
worth any thing but what they have got in these troublesome times by the ruins
and miseries of others, that these very fellows are tasters to all the Noblemen
and Peers of the Kingdom: And their very Predicants are grown so dainty that
they must be served before the Lords and mighty rich men in all markets; for
they will outbid the greatest of them for the satisfying of their pallates: So
that whatsoever rarities, according to the several seasons of the year,
whether from sea or land, are stirring, they are ordinarily the men that have
the first gusto of them; So that they exceed the daintyest and most delicate
Dames and Ladies, by the relation of those that are acquainted with their
diets; so that all fine things are tasted and eat in their houses before they
are so much as heard of in Noblemens Families, whereas the old Puritans of
ENGLAND denied themselves all these things, who were usually, according to the
proverb, the first that were last served.

This I have heard affirmed by great Gentlemen and travelers, very gallant
men, that were sometime very intimate with the Sectaries and Independents,
whose familiarity they made use of only to pry into their several humors,
and whom the Sectaries had some hope to have gained to their party; and
therefore spared not in their entertainments; these very Gentlemen, I say, have
asserted unto me, that whatsoever things were thought some ten years since to
be rarities in all Princes, Dukes, Marquesses, and Noblemens houses, and were
rarely to be found in any other places, they met daily with them in every
ordinary Independent and Sectaries house upon all occasions; So that they vowed
unto me, they thought them the only Helieogabalists in the world, and the
greatest Sensualists; and they observed that generally there was more luxurious
entertainments now amongst them in these times that called for mourning and
fasting, then ever were in the richest Subjects houses in the times of the
Kingdoms prosperity; So that if ever there were a generation of men in the
world that in their fullness of bread and in their felicity forgot the
afflictions of Joseph, they were the Independents and Sectaries who are always
feasting, which was one of the principal causes, as they professed unto me, that
made them believe they were not the only Saints, their actions being so
unsaint-like; which made them also pry farther into their dealings and
proceedings, which they found to be altogether contrary unto the royal law of
Love: for as they said, all their charity was ever limited within the confines
of their own fraternity, and to such only as were either of their party or
they had hopes to gain; in all which things they are different from the old
Puritans of ENGLAND, who walked in that way of righteousness which teaches
every man a moderation and right use of the creature, and to keep within their
bounds, and to extend their charity toward all, especially toward the poor
and indigent; and not to spend all upon themselves in luxury and vanity, and
that at such times as call for mourning and fasting, and when there are such
multitudes of distressed godly families as are drove from house and home and
have been made a prey to the spoilers, whom the Sectaries will see lie
famishing in the streets, rather then they shall receive the least relief from
them, unless they will become of their fraternity, which many of them to my
knowledge out of mere necessity were forced to be, or else they could not have
had the least relief from them, which is not the way of righteousness, and
that way God has chalked out through his holy Word for all his Saints and
Servants to walk in, saying, that they should always have the poor amongst
them, and that their charity should be extended to all; and therefore commands
all his servants Mat. 5. ver. 48. to be perfect as their heavenly father is
perfect, and ver. 44, 45, 46, 47. injoyning them, That they should love their
enemies, and bless them that curse them, and do good to them that hate them,
and pray for them that despightfully use them and persecute them. And telling
all his servants, That by their so doing, they shall show themselves to be
children indeed of their heavenly father, who makes his Sun to rise on the
evil and on the good, and sends rain on the just and on the unjust; saying,
If you love them only that love you, what reward have you? Do not even the
Publicans the same? And if you salute your brethren only, what do you more then
others? Do not even the Publicans so? And then the Lord set before all his
people his own example for their imitation, to teach them to do good unto all;
and this was the way of righteousness the old Puritans of ENGLAND walked in,
doing good to all; which the Sectaries have quite forsaken: For it can
sufficiently be proved, that all their charity is confined to those of their
several sects: So that if at any time they have been sent unto and solicited
by such as knew how wealthy they were, and able to relieve others, and how
ready also and open*hearted and handed they had formerly been (which was their
praise and honor) to the relieving of any that were in necessity, especially
if they were godly; those men, I say, having no ability to relieve them, they
being themselves poor, yet with special recommendations, as perfectly knowing
them to be such as feared God, sent them to such of the Sectaries as they knew
were very able, and at that time very free to all those that were necessitated
of their own party, yet could not obtain the least relief from them in the
behalf of others, though withal they made known unto them, that those they
commended unto their charity had formerly relieved many, and were now brought
to that great poverty, that they had not bread to put in their own mouths nor
their childrens bellies, through the cruelty and robbery of their barbarous
enemies, and were escaped only with their lives; I say, notwithstanding all the
importunity of those that solicited those Sectaries, and notwithstanding the
great indigency and present necessity they were all in, they could not extort
the least relief from them, it being replied and answered, that they had
enough to relieve of their own, telling them, that they should go to those that
were of their own party, and to the Collectors in every parish; saying, that
they must have a care of such as were in Church fellowship with them; and thus
they have shut up all bowels of compassion to all those that are of a different
opinion from themselves, especially to all those that are of the Presbyterian
way, as can be proved by innumerable witnesses. Yea, they are come to such a
height of indignation against the Presbyterians, and so far they are from
relieving any of them, as they will wish their ruin, and this is the way the
Sectaries now walk in, which is not the way of righteousness nor of the old
Puritans of ENGLAND; for the way of righteousness is, that they should love
their enemies, and do good to them that hate them.

Now all the Independents say that the Presbyterians hate them, for so in their
very prayers they intimate to God himself, that I may now return to that
prayer I formerly mentioned made by the Homothumadon Brother at the great
Venison Feast on the Lords day in one of the grand Sectaries houses, where all
their Church was entertained: He in his prayer spoke unto God in this manner,
Lord (says he) they (meaning the Presbyterians) hate us, because we know more
of thee then they do; we beseech thee Lord give us to know yet more of thee,
and then let them hate us more if they will, etc. Here we see they complain
unto God himself (though falsely) that we hate them; now if they walked in the
way of Righteousness that God has appointed them to walk in, they should do
us good and pray for us, and not be so uncharitable as to pray against us, and
to requite evil for evil, which is the way they walk in, and which was not
the way of the old Puritans of England, who had better learned their Lesson of
love and charity. But now to consider this prayer a little, and some other of
their expressions, and the high praises that upon all occasions they give of
themselves, by all which it will yet the better appear that they are not the
old Puritans of England overgrown in goodness, and exceeding them in
self-denial, and in all points of piety, godliness, and charity, and in
truth and righteousness; for this very prayer of theirs, with their other
speeches and practices, proclaim to the world the quite contrary; for I
affirm, first that the old Puritans never magnified their own graces: And
secondly, that both this prayer and many of their other prayers to God, and
praises of themselves, are both untrue, Pharisaicall and uncharitable; for the
Presbyterians do not hate them, as they falsely accuse them, but it is they
that hate the Presbyterians, as all their words and actions, and Pamphlets can
testify. The Presbyterians as they are bound, hate all false ways, but they
hate not the persons of any, that is the practice of all the Sectaries, as it
is well known. But whereas this Homothumadon Brother said, that they knew more
of God then the Presbyterians, it is most false; for all the works and
writings of the Presbyterians in all the Reformed Churches can prove and
witness the contrary, so that the Sectaries are all of them beholding to the
learned Works and Writings of the Presbyterians for all that is in any of them
worthy the name of knowledge, out of whose learned Books they have stole it;
and I undertake it, and shall ever by the grace of God be able to make it good,
that in all their preachments they deliver nothing that can deservedly be
called truth, but it has been taught by the Presbyterians before they were
borne, and that far better then any of them can teach it; and it is most
certain that there is more knowledge in some one of Calvin's Works, as that of
his Institutions, then is in all the Independents and Sectaries put together,
which very Book alone, with the Holy Scripture had it been diligently read
and studied by the people, the Independents and Sectaries, with all their plots
and devices could never have gained an hundred Proselytes. Yea, if young
Divines would but well read and study learned Mr. Calvin's Works, and but
Gualter Tigurinus his Writings, with Peter Martyrs, and Zanchius, passing by
thousands of other most learned and orthodox Divines, I say if they would but
diligently read and study these I have now named, the Independents would never
be able with all their skill to seduce any one of them. Or did but ordinary
Christians now adays, read but Calvin's Institutions, and but Master Perkins
upon Jude, with the Holy Scripture, they would quickly relinquish all their
Independent companies, and their new gathered Churches, and would soon
perceive that the Sectaries know not more of God, and of Jesus Christ then the
Presbyterians do; and if poor deluded souls would but carefully and
seriously read the learned Writings of our own country men, as the Works of
Reverend Master Richard Rogers, of Master Dod, Master John Rogers of Dedham,
Master George Walker, Master Bolton, Master Iackson of Woodstreet, Master
Scudder, Master Bal, or any one of a thousand of our godly Divines that have
writ before these Sectaries appeared in the world, they would find that for all
both Theoricall and Practical Divinity, they knew as much of God, yea far
more then any Independents and Sectaries in the world: And yet this is the
daily language of the Sectaries, both in their prayers and in their prattle,
that any one of their congregationall way, knows more then a thousand
Presbyterians; yea, they have been often heard say, that every boy and woman
in their society can confute any Presbyterian; and upon all occasions they say
that they never heard so much of Jesus Christ before these Sectaries appeared,
affirming, that free grace was never so richly taught, as it is now by the
Independents, when notwithstanding it is most certain that for all saving
knowledge whatsoever can be taught or spoke concerning the knowledge of God,
and of Jesus Christ, wherein consists life eternal, John 17, it has been a
thousand times better taught, and far more orthodoxly by the Presbyterians
then the Sectaries can teach it; and therefore when they say, that never so
much of Jesus Christ and of free grace was taught before these times, it is not
only injurious to all the Protestant Divines at home and abroad, and
exceedingly derogatory to them all; but to all the holy Prophets and blessed
Apostles which have taught us as much concerning God and Jesus Christ, as in
the wisdom of God himself was thought fit for mortal men to know of God and
Christ, whether we speak either of the divine Essence of God, or of the
persons of the blessed Trinity, or of the glorious Works, names, titles and
attributes of God, or whether we speak of both the natures of Jesus Christ,
the divine and humane nature, or of the hypostaticall union of them both, or of
what Christ has either done or suffered for us, or of his offices, either
Kingly, Priestly, or Prophetical, or of whatsoever is necessarily to be
known for our salvation: I say and affirm, that whatsoever is requisite for
our learning, is abundantly and clearly set down in the Holy Word of God, by
the holy Prophets and blessed Apostles, and has faithfully and orthodoxly
been taught and delivered by our holy, godly, painful, and learned
Presbyterian Ministers in all the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, and in
these Churches of England, Scotland and Ireland, and that far better, and more
soundly and solidly then ever it was or can be taught by any Sectaries; for it
is well known, that our religious Presbyterian Ministers had as much of the
assistance of the holy Spirit, as ever any Sectaries had, and far more learning
then they are either capable of, or can attain unto; and therefore it is not
truly nor humbly spoke by the Independents, continually to say they know more
of God then they, and to assert that Jesus Christ, and free grace was never so
much, and so well taught, as by the Sectaries; and yet these are their daily
brags and boasts, and by the which they withdraw multitudes of simple people
to their Predicants and Tub-men, and then under pretense of preaching Jesus
Christ and free grace, they teach their errors and heresies, and vent all their
blasphemous doctrines, and destructive opinions amongst them to the destroying
of their poor souls. But should I grant unto these men (which were
wickedness in me to do) that they did truly and indeed preach Jesus Christ
and free grace, yet to say that they preached them more clearly, more fully,
and better then ever they were formerly taught, is not far from blasphemy,
and exceedingly injurious and derogatory to the holy Scripture; for all
knowledge that we are to take notice of concerning God and Christ, is shut up
and contained in the holy Scriptures, out of whose confines we are not to seek
for any knowledge concerning either God or Christ; for we have a special
command given us by Christ himself, John 5. to search the Scriptures, and we
are sent to Moses and the Prophets by Father Abraham, Luke 16. 29. and in the
8. of Isaiah, we are sent to the Law and the testimony, so that they that
speak not according to that word, it is because there is no light in them; and
Saint Paul in the 1. of the Galat. 8, 9. says that if an Angel from Heaven
should teach us any other doctrine concerning Jesus Christ then that which we
have heard, and learned in the holy Scriptures, we should count him accursed;
and therefore if the Sectaries and Independents teach but according to the holy
Scripture, then all they teach concerning Christ and free grace was taught long
before any of the Sectaries were borne, and all they say boastingly vaunting of
this their own knowledge and preaching, and of these their new ways, they are
not the way of Righteousness, which teaches all men meanly and humbly to think
of themselves, and in honor to prefer others before themselves, Romans 12, ver.
10. and in lowliness of mind, to esteem others better then themselves, Phil.
2. verse 3, 4. and this is the way of Righteousness God has appointed his
people to walk in, and this was the way the old Puritans of England kept in,
who never boasted they knew more of God and Jesus Christ then their Christian
Brethren, as the Independents and Sectaries daily do, which is the very height
of Pharisaicall pride in them to assume these Prerogativesunto themselves, and
to receive them from others as to be the only Teachers and Preachers of Jesus
Christ and free grace, and to be the most illuminated and eminent Saints and
servants of Christ, and the most excellent lights, which titles are given
lately to the Homothumadon dissenting brethren by one of the Sectaries in a
frothy Pamphlet, called Independency no Schism, in a pretended answer to
Master John Vicars, who has writ nothing concerning them but what is Vox
populi, and most of it known to all men to be true: Yea, they are grown to
that height of pride and impudency that they vent their singular knowledge of
divine mysteries above others, as we may see in Saint Dels Epistle to the
Reader before his Sermon, (where he speaks) of the great familiarity he has
with Jesus Christ, and of some rare knowledge that he has received from him
of the mind and bosom of the Father, etc. these are his own words, and he
esteems of his Presbyterian brethren as of the offscouring of the world,
saying, that he was counted worthy to be taken into some Fellowship with Christ
in his sufferings, and to endure the contradictions of sinners, and often times
to encounter the rage and madness of men, yea and to fight with men after the
manner of beasts, altogether brutish and furious. This high esteem S. Del has
of himself, and counts all his Presbyterian brethren, though in all men's
judgments that know them he writes against, far more pious and orthodox then
himself, but brute beasts. Now because these men talk so much of their
singular knowledge before their Presbyterian Brethren, and of that great
familiarity they have with Christ, and what transcendent knowledge they have
received from the mind and bosom of the Father, it will not be amiss here to
recite some passages of that seraphicall Doctors Sermons, he preaches in the
Army. I will take them out of the book called the Vindication of certain
Citizens, where page 9. they set down certain points of doctrine that Saint
Dell taught in the Army in their hearing, viz.

1. That there are no more of a Church of God in a Kingdom, then there be such
as have the Spirit of God in that Kingdom.

2. Neither Old nor New Testament do hold forth a whole nation to be a Church.

3. Whatsoever a State, an Assembly, or Council shall say, ought not to bind
the Saints, further then the judgment of those Saints shall lead them.

4. The Saints are those that are now styled Anabaptists, Familists,
Antinomians, Independents, Sectaries, and the like.

5. The power is in you the people, keep it, part not with it.

6. The first party that arose against you, namely the profane ones of the
Land, are already fallen under you; and now there is an other party, Formalists
and carnal Gospellers rising up against you; but I am confident they shall all
fall under you.

7. They are willing to become subjects, to make the Saints slaves, nay, they
are all willing to become slaves themselves, that they may tread upon the necks
of the Saints.

These points of sublimated doctrine I find set forth publicly, and published
by authority, as delivered by Saint Dell in one of his sermons at the Army,
which I had not put in to this my Epistle to the Reader, had I not some days
after the publication of them inquired whether Saint Dell had answered to this
accusation against him, and understanding that he had replied nothing to it
(which he might have done in two hours, if he had been innocent and not
guilty) I took it pro confesso, knowing that the Presses are open for all men's
just Apologies and defense, especially when I find them open to all wicked and
impious Pamphlets, and this as not all that made me believe the charge is true
against him, but because I have heard, and that from men of reputation, and
worthy of belief, that it is ordinary with him and his accomplices to preach
such doctrines as these are, publicly and privately, and to maintain them
wheresoever he comes; all the which I shall ever be able God assisting me to
prove he never had nor received from the mind and bosom of God the Father, nor
from Jesus Christ, though he boasts much of the Familiarity he has with Jesus
Christ.

If this be the knowledge the Sectaries vaunt so much of, and if these be the
things they pretend they have received from the mind and bosom of the Father,
I must confess in these their notions they outstrip the knowledge of the
Saints of old, and of all the holy Prophets and Apostles, and of the old
Puritans of England, who were ignorant of them all, which was a learned
ignorance in them, knowing that God the Father taught a far different doctrine
to his people, as I showed a little before, and shall more fully declare in the
ensuing Discourse. But this I will again and again assert, that neither the
old Puritans of England, nor our godly Presbyterians now, are inferior to any
of the Sectaries for an holy and conscionable outward walking in all manner of
conversation, or in the knowledge of God or of Jesus Christ, or in any kind of
knowledge that may truly be called learning or science, whatsoever the
Independents and Sectaries may glory and boast of themselves; and I do farther
assert that all the godly Presbyters in the church of England do preach Jesus
Christ, faith and repentance, and free grace, and that in every Congregation
upon all occasions more orthodoxly, solidly, sincerely and learnedly, with all
practical divinity, then ever any of the Sectaries did or can do; and
therefore they do not know more of God then the Presbyterians do, as that
Homothumadon Brother pharisaically and falsely gloried, and all the Sectaries
with him vaunt. So that I see no reason why we may not here make use of the
Apostle Saint Paul's words concerning this business, who in the second of the
Cor. 10. v. 7. 12. 18. Do you look on things after the outward appearance
(says he)? if any man trusts to himself that he is Christ's, let him of
himself think this again, that as he is Christ's, even so are we Christ's.
For we do not make our selves of the number, or compare our selves with some
that commend themselves, but they measuring themselves by themselves, and
comparing themselves amongst themselves are not wise (or understand not) for
not he that commends himself is approved, but whom the Lord commends. So
that it seems by Saint Paul's words, not only in this Epistle but in others,
that the false Apostles and Seducers of his time had some high esteem of
themselves, and of their own holiness, knowledge and abilities above others,
yea above the Apostles themselves, as the Independents and Sectaries of our
times have of their great piety and sufficiency above their brethren, as all
their words, Pamphlets and Vindications daily witness, in which they slight
all that oppose their novelties, and style them vain men, and such as neither
know what to say, norhow to hold their peace, vilifying them all as the
offscouring, and things of naught, which practice of theirs when it was blamed
in the false Apostles as sinful, it cannot be prayse-worthy in the Sectaries
now in our times, who walk in that way of unrighteousness those false
Teachers then did, and contrary to that rule prescribed by God, which is to
prefer others before themselves in honor, which way the old Puritans of
England walked in, and not in the way of the false Apostles, and the Sectaries
of our times; for they kept the road way, and the royal way of righteousness,
esteeming of their brethren better then of themselves. But the world was never
without such a sort of men: for Solomon speaks of the like, There is a
generation of men (says he) and how lofty are their eyes, and their eyelids
lifted up? and of such creatures Saint Paul speaks, 2 Cor. 11, ver. 22 which
made him compare himself with them after this manner; are they Hebrews? (says
he) so am I; are they Israelites? so am I; are they the seed of Abraham? so am
I; are they the Ministers of Christ? I speak (says he) as a fool, I am more,
etc. Thus the holy Apostle laughs at these seducers and vain boasters, and to
make them more ashamed, he compares himself with them, not fearing to be
counted a Jeerer and scorner of piety and religion, though he made himself
merry with them, whom he knew very well for all the shows they made of being
the Ministers of righteousness, that they were a company of Impostors, and
therefore assimilates and likens them to the Devil; for the which if he had
lived in our times he would have been termed a boisterous and froward spirited
man, shameless, deserving the name of Cretensis, against whom there would have
come out many vindications, telling him that it became not the gravity and
wisdom of old age, and an old professor of Religion to charge, and that
publicly, his brethren of unworthy double dealing, and unfaithfulness, though
they were all guilty of those crimes. And therefore I see no reason why any
godly conscientious man should now fear to use the same method with the
deceivers and seducers of these our times, that Paul did with those in his
days, and to laugh at them; for it would be an abuse of gravity to spend it
upon them who continually glory of their parts, knowledge and sanctity, as the
seducers did in Paul's time, as by the Apostles expressions through all his
Epistles is manifest, seeing it is well known that the Independents and
Sectaries of our times in their words and very prayers, and in all their
vindications and Pamphlets confess, that they separate from us as an unholy
people, and that they know more of God then the Presbyterians, and that all
their brethren are the only protious and holy people, and the godly party, the
Saints; and for their Ministers and Pastors they account them the only
Preachers of Jesus Christ and of free grace, the most illuminated and eminent
Saints and servants of Christ, and the most excellent Lights, all which their
expressions move me without fear of being counted a jeerer and scorner of
piety and religion (which from my soul I reverence and honor in all in whom I
truly see and discern those graces) to make use of the Apostles example, and
to laugh at their grolleries, and imitate him in comparing the Presbyterians
with the Independents and Sectaries, which I am confident I may do without any
just offense, and therefore with Saint Paul I say unto all the Sectaries and
Independents, whether people or Ministers, do any of them look on things
after the outward appearance? if they trust to themselves that they are in
Christ, let them also think this again, that as they are in Christ, even so
are the Presbyterians Christ's; are they believers? so are the Presbyterians;
are they Israelites? the people that wrestle with God day and night by prayers
and supplications, and by groans of the spirit, and tears prevail with God?
so do the Presbyterians; are they the seed of Abraham? the children of the
faithful, and do they walk in Abraham's steps? so are the Presbyterians as
well the children of the faithful as they, and walk as carefully,
conscienciously, and unblamably in all manner of conversation before God and
toward all men; and therefore in nothing inferior to them, if the Sectaries
and Independents be really and indeed such as they pretend to be; are the
Independent Predicants and Pastors, Ministers of Christ? I may truly say the
Presbyterian Ministers are more, as having had the honor of the conversion of
them all, the seal of true Ministers, if they were ever truly converted, and
of many hundred thousands besides, and they are more orthodox Ministers; yea,
such as stood to their Ministry faithfully, and endured the heat and brunt of
the day, when all the Ministers of the Sectaries for the most part either ran
away, or hid their heads, or most basely temporized, as the whole Kingdom
knows. So that whatsoever they can speak of themselves, in respect either of
knowledge, graces, or privileges, or in regard of gifts or indowments, the
Presbyterians with far greater reason, and with far better right, and without
any vain gloriation (giving the praise of all they have unto God) may
challenge unto themselves, and may truly ever say, do the Independents and
Sectaries hope to be saved? The Presbyterians believe, that through the grace
of our Lord Jesus Christ, they also shall be saved, Act. 15. 15. God having put
no difference between them and his chosen people the Jews, purifying their
hearts by faith, verse 9. So that I say, whatsoever the Independents and
Sectaries can vainly glory in, or boast, of the Presbyterians can truly in all
humility, and with far better reason speak of themselves, yea and truly apply
it unto themselves; so that there is no just ground why all the Sectaries
should thus daily brag of their gifts and graces, and of the singularity of
their parts, and privileges, and of their familiarity with Jesus Christ, and
of their holiness and piety, appropriating all those prerogatives to
themselves, and excluding all their Presbyterian brethren from partaking in
them, making them all no sharers in them, proclaming them all the enemies of
Jesus Christ, and the sons of Belial. I say and assert, that I can see no
reason why they should thus make impropriations of all the privileges and
immunities of the true Saints unto themselves, and confine all the graces of
God to their own party, and rob all their brethren of all their Christian
excellencies, as they in the Army spoil and rob all the Presbyterian soldiers
of their due honor and praises in all those glorious victories God had crowned
that whole Army with, and ascribing all the glory and honor of them all to
themselves, which they call the godly party.

I say, I cansee no good reason of all these their practices; for thus did not
the Saints of old, thus did not the old Puritans of England assume to
themselves to be the only people of God, preferring themselves before their
brethren upon all occasions; they walked all of them in the way of
righteousness that God had appointed them to walk in, which was, to give every
one their due, and to love as brethren, Romans 12, which was not to separate from
the Assemblies of their brethren, counting themselves more holy then they, for
the which they have neither precept nor allowable president in all Gods holy
Word; and therefore I may truly conclude of them they are not in this their
practice the old Puritans of ENGLAND overgrown, exceeding them in virtue or in
the way of righteousness they went in, though they come to us in gray heads,
and appear unto us in most glorious gravity and in the beauty of old men. For
in all these proceedings that I have now named, and in many more that I could
enumerate, they are not in the way of righteousness, and in the paths of the
Saints of old, and in the way of the old Puritans of ENGLAND and like them, but
they may be truly compared, whatsoever they glory of themselves, to the enemies
of the true Saints, I mean the Seducers in all ages, and with the Jesuits and
all Popelins, whose actions and examples they better know how to imitate, then
the actions and lives of the Saints of old, and the old Puritant of ENGLAND,
for they tread rather in the steps of the Jesuits, as the following
particulars and practices of all those juglers and impostors will manifest.

For first, as the Jesuits and Papists separate from all our Assemblies
counting themselves the only Catholics, and all our Congregations Heretical
and all us Heretics. Even so do the Sectaries deal with us, they separate
from our Churches as profane societies, esteeming themselves the only Saints,
and their new Congregations the only Churches in which Christ is set up as King
upon his Throne. And as the Jesuits and Papists magnify themselves and their
Masters for the only seraphicall Doctors, and in all their writings boast of
their eminent learning, and slight and contemn all the Protestant writers as
nothing; so do the Independents and Sectaries highly magnify themselves, and
esteem of all the Presbyterians as the offscouring of the earth, making them,
the sillyest creatures of the world in comparison of themselves, as in all
their Vindications and forthy Pamphle s daily appears; yea, they write
against them with more then an episcopal pride; So that in all these their
dealings they are l^ke the Jesuits and Papists.

Again, as the Jesuits and Priests amongst the Papists make all the Protestant
Ministers with the Presbyterian government odious and hateful to the people,
even so do all the Independents and Sectaries incense the people against all
our godly Ministers and Presbyters, and the Presbyterian Government, falsely
persuading them, that children killed, Exodus 1. ver. 16. 22. that he might
weaken the people of God, so the Independents and Sectaries labor to deal
with us, for if amongst the Presbyterians any masculine spirits come forth with
Christian manly courage to discover the evil of their ways, having piety,
wisdom, l^arning, abilities, gifts, and parts wherewith they are able to
oppose their errors, these they endeavor to have suppressed and to kill in their
good names (which is better then life); and for the accomplishing of this they
have their agents besides their scurrilous and reviling pamphlets) to ride from
City to Country, and to go from house to and to cast all the males (that
knowingly and conscienciously appear of a contrary judgment unto them) into
the deep rivers of Calumnies, laying on their backs such loads of falls
defamations as may for ever drown them in their credits and reputations in the
torrents of this troublesome world, and by this their Egyptian policy they
suppose in a short time to weaken the Presbyterians, making them by their
reproaches unfit for any employment in Church and State, as if they were dead
men, by which means they bring in their own party, and so think to increase and
strengthen themselves; but those their diabolical practices with all their
Agents God will in his due time fully discover and certainly destroy and down
them all in the sea of his indignation, they being all contrary unto his holy
Word and royal Commands; and therefore although they come to us in their gray
heads, yet they are not in the way of righteousness, nor in the way of the old
Puritans of ENGLAND.

And t^uly if we look into the whole proceedings of the Independents and
Sectaries of our times, we shall find them most agreeable to all the practices
both of the Jesuits and Egyptians and the Pharisees of old, those cruel
enemies of God and his people and dear servants; for the Pharisees would ever
oppose Christ and interrupt him in his Ministry; and their weapons they deal
with are all carnal, as those I have now mentioned, and that weapon my brother
Burton comes out against me with, viz, his Phocions hatchet, which I cannot
but speak something of before I conclude this my Epistle to the Reader.

In the seventh Page of his book he has these words.

You bring (says he) the Scripture for you; Come on brother, let you and me
try it by the dint of this Sword. And truly, I shall by the help of my God
make no long work of it. You spend about eleven sheets, wherein you have woven
sundry long threaden arguments, to measure out your Dependent Presbytery, as
holding parallel with the line of Scripture. Now you m^nst pardon me (says he)
if I shall assay, according to an old Proverb, with one stroke of Phocions
hatchet, to cut in two the long thread of your Alcibiadian fluent and luxuriant
Rhetorications. Thus he.

Here my brother Burton seems to desire that he and I may try out the truth of
what I have written by the dint of the sword of the Scripture: and I say as
David did in another sense, 1 Samuel 21. 9.) There is none like that; but he
immediately forsakes that weapon and betakes himself to Phocions hatchet, and
that is his Pole-ax. Truly I exceedingly pity him, who strives to maintain a
way that brings him into such a straight that he cannot cut in two the
arguments brought against him without a hatchet: whereas the Sword of the holy
Scripture is sharp enough to cut in two with one stroke any erroneous
arguments: For the Word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper then any
two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and
of the joints and marrow, and is a discoverer of the thoughts and intents of
the heart, Heb. 4. 12. But he knowing very well, that with the sword of the
spirit (which is the Word of God Gal. 6. 17.) though it be a two-edged sword,
etc. that he could never cut in two with that weapon my arguments, the truth
and strength of them being drawn out of the Word of God upon which I have
grounded all my assertions, which is a sure unmovable and impregnable
foundation; therefore laying aside the sword of the Scripture, he vapors with
an unknown hatchet (a desperate carnal weapon) and to please himself he assays
to chop, hack and mangle my arguments, which he is never able to cut in two
with all his strength and strokes. Surely none but a bad cause, and an
unwarrantable way had need to make use of such a weapon.

Now for the Presbyterians, as their way is warrantable being grounded on the
holy Scripture, the good Word of God, the practice of the Apostles, and all the
Churches constituted by them; so the weapons of their warfare are not carnal,
but mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds, 2 Cor. 10. 4. And
for my part, I am resolved never to use any other but that heavenly weapon (the
sharp sword of the spirit) for the hewing and pulling down of all the strong
holds of the Independents and Sectaries, and for the dividing and cutting in
two all their erroneous opinions, and by the help of my God and through the
power of his might and by his assisting grace I shall never doubt, but by the
dint of that sword ever be able to try it out with my brother Burton and all
those of his fraternity, and to oppose any adversaries of the truth, and to
make no long work of it, and always to be sufficiently armed to maintain it
and all the ways of God which I have formerly suffered for, and still continue
to hold forth and persevere to walk in.

Now before I conclude, I cannot but speak something upon this occasion
concerning Phocion whom my brother Burton makes mention of, that I may inform
the Reader a little of the truth of that story, and to show that he is mistaken
concerning that Proverbiall speech; but how fitly it belongs unto my brother
Burton the sequel of the discourse will declare. Now he represents this
Phocion to the world as if he had bin such another creatures as Hercules was,
and that as he had his club by which he did many pretty feals, so he speaks of
Phocion as if he had had his hatchet likewise. But Erasmus a man better skilled
in all Histories and in the Annals of the times, then my brother Burton or any
of his way, who are for the most part strangers and enemies to all good
litterature, out of Demosthenes setting down the truth of that story, describes
Phocion to have been some Sectary in Philosophy, but yet such a trivial and
worthless one, that Demosthenes speaking of him, says, That Phocions
Arguments were so far from having any strength or validity in them to persuade
any man to embrace his doctrine and opinion, that by the weakness of them and
the contradicting of himself and the fond handling of the controversy, he
affirms, that Phocion was his own executioner, and the only hatchet of his
own Arguments, and who opposed, yea overthrew his own principles: Phocion
(says Demosthenes) is his own hatchet to destroy and cut in sunder his own
Arguments. The words of Erasmus relating that story are these, In adagiis
Erasmi printed Hanoviae M. D. C. XVII. fol. 485. Demosthenes (says he)
Phocionem appellare solet suorum Argumentorum securim. Thus Erasmus expresses
him self touching that business. And this is the true story concerning that
matter in Demosthenes, who makes Phocion the hatchet and destroyer of his own
Arguments. Now my brother Burton speaks of Phocion, as if indeed he had been
armed with such a weapon to encounter his enemies withal, which was nothing
so. But the story may truly be verified in my brother Burton, who is indeed
like Phocion and is his own executioner and the very hatchet of his own
arguments, that really divides the head and heart of all his own and of all the
Independents doctrine; so that I may truly say of him, that he has not only
sorely and desperately wounded his own cause, but absolutely murdered and
taken away the life of Independency; Yea, whiles with this hatchet he came out
against me to cut in two the long thread (as he speaks) of my Alcibiadian fluent
and luxuriant Rhetorications, and to wound me soul and body, he has wounded
himself and all his brethren under the fifth ribb; and that when he seemed in
love to take them all by their great white basket-hilted beards to kiss them;
and that which I now say of him, I am confident that all those that shall
vouchsafe to read the ensuing discourse without prejudice, and see what I have
answered to him and all those of his society, will say.

It is usual with all the Independents to say of any Presbyterians that write
against their wicked practices and novelties, although they do it with most
singular reason, wisdom, and moderation, and with all evidence of
demonstration, that by their writing against their ways they not only wronged
themselves and the Presbyterian cause, and that very much, but that they have
been a great occasion of increasing Independents and advancing their party,
when notwithstanding it is well known to the judicious and learned that they
have given the Sectaries a fatal blow by discovering the vanities and errors
of their ways to all men. But what the Independents and Sectaries falsely vaunt
in this point, (as they do of their graces and virtues) may truly be said of
Master Knollys, I. S. and my brother Burton, that if ever any men have wronged
their cause, and advanced their adverse party, they have done it; as I am
confident all they will say that shall deliberately read the following
discourse; for there they shall see how they not only upon all occasions
contradict themselves, and through their ignorance and temerity overthrow their
own principles, and are enemies to their own cause; but how they like the
Midianites destroy one another with their own swords, and at that time when
they think mortally to wound their adversaries and utterly to vanquish them
and to obtain the victory.

All that I have more in this place to add, is this, That it concerns all men
seriously to look about them: and as they will not be deterred by any art of
persuasion when either their lands or estates are questioned from searching
into their evidences and the last wills and testaments of their fathers,
Parents, and friends that gave them their inheritances, so they ought not by
any persuasions of men to be dissuaded now to search the good will and
testament of their heavenly father and all the evidences of holy Writ, and to
see what all their adversaries can pretend against their right and just title
to them. Let them ever make those living Oracles Act. 7. their Counselors,
they will advise them for their present good and show them the right way to
their eternal and everlasting Patrimony the kingdom of glory. Now that they
may be all made more studious and diligent in the scrutiny of those heavenly
records when as so many Sectaries and Independents lay false claim to their
caelestial inheritance and pretend that the Presbyterians have no just title
and claim to the way that leads thereto, shall ever be the prayer of him who
from his soul wishes that all men may grow in grace, and in the knowledge of
our Lord and Savior Jesus: to him be glory both now and for ever, 2 Pet. 3. 17.

John Bastwick.

To all the Homothumadon Jndependents, assembled, and not assembled, with all
the Sectaries and Straglers under their several commands, and to all the
Burtonians, Valere and sapere.
Gentlemen,
A Godly conscientious Christian not long since being in company with one of
the chiefest of your society, and bewailing unto him the sad condition of the
times, in regard of the many dangerous opinions and blasphemous heresies that
have within these few years sprung up since your New Lights appeared on our
Horizon to the destroying of the souls of many, yea, tending to the ruin of
Church and State, and to the bringing down of the judgments of God upon the
whole nation, if not timely prevented, he demanded of him, what he thought now
was the fittest course to be taken for the hindering of the over-spreading of
them, seeing men generally began to leave the public Assemblies, and to
decline those ways God has appointed in his holy Word, (viz. the preaching of
the everlasting Gospel by his faithful and orthodox Ministers) for the saving
of their souls, and for the right information of their judgments, and the
rectifying of their manners; to whom that Gentleman of your party replied, that
no other means ought or could lawfully be used but sweating them with
Arguments.

Whereupon, I being very desirous of all men's saving healths, but especially of
yours, in regard of the particular acquaintance I have formerly had with some
of you, and in regard also I have been often accused of great ingratitude
toward you all (though I may truly assert* that not any one of you, did ever
show me the least courtesy under that notion you now show your love to any;
for whiles ye were my familiars ye went on in that way I now walk in; and if
ye then showed me any humanity, ye ought not now to upbraid me with it; for I
am not changed but ye) I say in consideration of these things, and in regard
likewise, I find by many symptoms the minds of many of you are exceedingly
exulcerated and affected with that malady in morality ye make so loathsome in
others, ye being surcharged with superfluity of choler and malice, and not
able to contain your selves, but break forth into distemper of words, and
pour it out in unsavory language, so that ye may well be left to a miserere
mei: (I pray excuse me that I use your own dialect) in all these regards I
say, but chiefly for your souls good, and that all the world may see how
grateful a man I am to you for any former courtesies under whatsoever notion
you showed them me; I being a Phisician, and very well acquainted with all
your distempers, and being very willing also to yield my best help for the
restoring of any of you to your former sanity and soundness of mind offer my
self to be your Phisician in ordinary, and to follow the method prescribed by
one of your brethren (who it seemsknows the best way of curing your several
maladies) and I shall upon all occasions, as I have at this time, sweat you
with Arguments, but chiefly a^ the times appointed; and because it shall not be
said I do it out of a desire of gain and for lucre sake, that I may the
better testify my gratitude to you all, I will according to my promise give
you my counsel gratis, only you must pay my Apothecary for the Physic, who
shall use you very reasonably. Now I have made good provision of it, because
some of your way not many weeks since, being in Westminster Hall speaking to a
Reverend Presbyterian Minister in a vapouring manner, said, that the
Independents were exceedingly beholding to me and Reverend Mr. Edwards,
affirming, that we bred more Indpendents then any two of the Kingdom besides;
and this I believe to be true, not only because I know the honesty of the man,
but because I find it printed by one of your brethren, that Bishop Wren was not
more mischievous to the Prelacy, then Master Edwards has been to the
Presbytery, and because Master Weld a wonderful learned man writ unto me not
long since, wondering who hired me to make so many Independents, (whose worthy
Epistles may happily within these few weeks see the light) and in this regard I
do persuade my self that those Independents did use such words as these to
that Minister in Westminster Hall.

The same Minister also related unto me moreover that they said that they
understood that I was preparing some physic for them, which they doubted not
but would be very operative for the breeding and increasing of Independents,
and for the strengthening of more, and therefore they said they were resolved as
soon as ever it was made ready for use, they would bestow an hundred pounds
upon that and Master Edward's Books, for to send through the country for the
breeding of Independents, and contented not themselves barely to speak the
words, but bound themselves by a solemn protestation, that they would do it;
and therefore that I^might farther make them beholding to me, which is also
some requital for all your former courtesies, I have provided physic in a
very great quantity, and challenge your promise; for I presume that they were
but the mouth of their brethren, there being one of your Sagamours in the
company at that time, a man that cannot deny what was promised. Now if you be
honest men indeed, and men of your word, I expect performance according to your
promise; I will see you shall have reasonable penny worths only I must tell
you, that I will take order, that the physic be faithfully distributed, and
sent through the Kingdom into all parts according to your engagement for the
breeding of Independents, that it be not embezeled; I will undertake that it
shall carefully be sent to whatsoever places you shall appoint; therefore if
ye be Saints indeed as ye pretend, stand to your word; for I have good
witness of it, and do not you pretend excuses for the declining of the buying
of my physic; for then I will conclude you are but a company of Bragadochoes,
neither would I have you as formerly you use, to disparage it, finding fault
with it, and my method, and manner of dispensation, saying, that it is
nauseous, and that in my rules and directions I am full of tautologies and
extravagancies, and that it is poor stuff procuring rather vomiting then
sweating, and that their tender stomachs and conscences cannot digest such
physic, complaining moreover that it is very dear; I would not have you now
pretend any of these things, I say it is not for your honor, seeing you have
passed your promise to buy it, and to send it through the country, for the
breeding of Independents; for you should have considered all these things
before your engagements, which being passed you cannot now with honesty revoke.

But as for the tautologies and often repetitions you so blame in my method,
and so much speak of, you of all men ought to excuse them, you your selves so
often using them, having little else in all your writings but tautologies, and
vain repetitions; especially you ought not to blame them in me, when those of
your party have occasioned them by your frequent objecting the same things
from several mouths and pens; for I had to deal with your whole Army, and
with three of your Generals at once, who had read without doubt what each other
had writ against me, and therefore they picking and choosing through my book
what they thought they could best deal with, they might have set upon those
parts of my Book that the others had said nothing against, but they making the
same cavils that the others had done, they put me upon several answers. But
were it so that they had none of them seen what each other had writ, yet they
treading in the same steps, and answering after their manner to the several
Arguments they opposed, I was severally to reply to all their cavils, that are
materially made to the several Arguments, which I have faithfully done; and
for my part* I thought it no burden, being ever willing, yea resolved is often
and as frequently as I find poison laid by any destructive creature, to
prescribe an Antitode to it in the same place; and for farther answer to your
meager and slender detractions, take notice, that I value not what you or any
Adversaries can say concerning my tautologies, if handling the same thing often
be thought a tautologie with you; for this is my resolution, that wheresoever,
and as often as I find an adversary has a tongue to speak against the truth,
or a pen to write against it, were it an hundred times in the same place, or in
the same page, I will (God assisting me) answer them upon the place I find
them, and that instant, I will never refer the Reader to what I have said
before in any other place concerning that point; for I for my part think it a
kind of laziness to spare any pains in so weighty businesses and things of so
high concernment as these are; yea, I think there is but little zeal in that
man that shall hear the truth, either often blasphemed or spoke against, that
will not as often stand up in defense of it, and contend for it (according to
command, Iud. 3.) to his uttermost ability, yea it would be a means to persuade
unstable men, that there were some strength in the Arguments of the enemies, or
that they are more diligent to sow errors and tares, then I should be diligent
to root them out and oppose them, if I should not as often reply as they cavil,
and object; and therefore for my particular it never troubles me what any of
youcan say to me about my tautologies, which are not vain repetitions to any
that love often to hear the same truth well confirmed; for allthis will but
witness and declare to all men, that I am a careful man to uphold the truth,
and to resist gainsayers; besides, any man may sooner read a reply many
times, then turn to an other place, where it was formerly spoke of, and
answered to; withal, there will in a several answer to the same objection in
an other place be found some variety, both for argument and language, which
many times begets other excellent notions, which more and more confirms men in
any truth.

Besides, this has ever been Gods own method, which they that are taught of
him, John 6. ought to imitate, often to repeat one and the same Law; as what
he taught his people in Exodus, he often reiterates in the same Book, and not
in that only, but in Leviticus and Numbers, and repeats the whole Law again in
Deuteronomy, and that often, to the end they might remember it, and the same
may be saidof all the holy Prophets through the whole Bible, who often reiterate
and repeat the same things that the people may not pretend ignorance; and this
I say is Gods own method, and therefore worthy of our imitation; yea and Christ
himself used this method in his preaching, and dictating unto his Apostles by
his Holy Spirit, who writ four Evangels of what he has both done and suffered
for us, often repeating the same thing; yea, all the holy Apostles and pen men
of holy Writ used the same method, as is to be seen through the Acts, and all
their holy Epistles, repeating the same things according to their several
occasions, as when either the same errors sprang up in other places, or began
to increase where they were so wen, and started up; yea, Paul professes of
himself, Phil. 3. verse 1. that to him it is not grievous, but for them safe,
to write the same things. The same method did Saint Peter use, as ye may see
in his second Epistle; and therefore it is no error in me often to repeat the
same things, and to inculcate and reinforce the same Arguments, especially if
it be occasioned by your selves, that by this means the truth for which I
contend may be the more confirmed, and errors may be the more confuted, and
overthrown. But withal let me say thus much unto you by the way, that
although I am constrained through your vain tautologies often to handle the
same truths; yet it is with such variety, and in so diverse a way, manner and
style, as it will not be grievous or tedious to all those that shall read it
with honest hearts, where they will well perceive that what I have answered
more briefly in one place I have more fully handled in an other; that (if it be
possible) I might give full satisfaction to all docible and ingenuous men that
will be satisfied, either with Scripture or reasons.

Now if in this dispute there be any expressions that may displease any of you,
you of all men may well excuse them, knowing how great your provocations of me
have been; especially, if you consider that all this contention is for the
defense of the truth of God, which ye all have sought to corrupt, and
adulterate with your traditions; in whose quarrel, and for the maintenance of
whose honor it becomes every man to be more zealous, and fuller of animosity
then for his own; and therefore if I take liberty to speak more freely in
showing the vanity, impiety and wickedness of the Deceivers and Impostors of
these times in which we live, it is but to use the same method the holy
Prophets and blessed Apostles have used against the false teachers of their
times, who have expressed themselves in language equivalent to whatsoever they
shall find in any part of my Book. Yea, you your selves if you but look upon
my Brother Burtons Vindication, or upon any of his Pamphlets, or indeed upon
any of your own scriblers in maintenance of your own vain errors and
novelties, or upon John Goodwyn, your famous Cretensis, or the last Vindication
that came out against Reverend Master Edwards, you shall find them as full of
unsavory expressions, as ever people writ against any men withal, writing
also with such elated spirits, and with so course language, as is possible for
any men to vent themselves withal, they ordinarily beginning and continuing
their Pamphlets with pride, and ending them with cursing, as in that late
Vindication appears, where the Author page the first, says, I thought it
might not be amiss (speaking of learned Master Edwards) to spend an hour or
two upon this vain man. Here we find the height of pride, insolency and
disdain, and in the 30. page he has these words concerning the same man. The
Lord rebuke turbulent and violent spirits; here he ends with cursing
causelessely, whereas there is no more turbulent and violent spirits now upon
the earth then this of that Author, and all those of your fraternity, as all
their practices, and noisome, fruitless, and vilipending scriblings can
witness, who daily write against their Christian Brethren for their zeal to
the truth, with a greater spirit of pride, insolency and elation, and with more
contempt and disdain, and that out of self conceitednesse then ever the
Prelates did, continually slighting, under-valuing and contemning those men
they are not worthy for any merit or true learning to be compared with, or
named the same day they are mentioned; and therefore if I in Gods quarrel and
cause be a little more earnest, and use a little more tartness (which I shall
ever wave in my own) it may with any good nature easily plead excuse.

But before I conclude my Epistle, I shall desire you all to consider three
passages, omitting many; I shall here set before your eyes the one out of
Master Knollys his Answer, the other out of I. S. his Flagellum, the third out
of my Brother Burtons Vindiciae; that you may take notice of the vanity and
futility of these men, and how much they have wronged your cause before you
read the ensuing Discourse. Master Knollys thus speaks, upon the Frontispice
of his Book: A moderate Answer unto Doctor Bastwicks Book, wherein the manner
how some Churches in this City were gathered, and upon what terms their
Members were admitted, that so both the Doctor and the Reader may judge, how
near some `Beleevers who walk together in the Fellow-ship of the Gospel, do
come in their practice to these Apostolical rules, which are propounded by the
Doctor, as Gods method in gathering Churches, and admitting Members. These are
Master Knollys his own words, and in the nineteenth and twentieth page he more
fully there testifies his good liking of that method for gathering of Churches
that I out of the Word of God propounded, and would persuade the world that
their Congregations were gathered after that method or manner, or came very
nigh unto it; by all which his expressions, and by that their practice he
declares, that in his judgment I have writ nothing but what is agreeable to
Gods Word. I appeal now therefore unto you all, whether this man deserves not
condign punishment, that will go about, undertake and endeavor to confute
that Book which he in his judgment allows of, and according to which he
pretends he practices, andall this for the deluding and misleading of
unstable souls, to the trouble both of Church and State. I am most assured,
that those that are rational amongst you, and not blinded with passion, will
say that Master Knollys is not only an unworthy trifler, but that he goes
contrary unto his own Principles, and ought deservedly to be severely punished
for his thus wickedly mispending his precious time and abusing the simple
people: For if I have writ nothing concerning the gathering of Churches, but
what he in his conscience believes and practices; then how unexcusable is
that in this man that will speak against what his own soul dictates unto him
to be according to GODS holy Word? By all which it is manifest, that he is not
only a vain jangler, but has lost the day, and wronged that your cause, the
defense of which, notwithstanding, he entered into the field to vindicate and
maintain against all the Presbyterians. And that which I have said of him, may
deservedly be spoke of I. S. and my brother Burton. For I. S. in the 13. Page
of his Flagelli, has these words, If it were granted (says he) that many
Churches did aggregate and unite in the beginning, yet would not this example
be bindingly presidential, etc. and seems there to prove it by arguments; and
my brother Burton in the 9. and 10. pages of his Pamphlet assenteth unto I. S.
his doctrine, as you may see at large if you look into it, in which you shall
find also, that he acknowledges there were many congregations of believers in
the Church of Jerusalem, and at that time, when according to his own reckoning,
there were but three thousand believers in that Church.

His words are these, saying, that though they wanted a convenient place so
spacious as wherein to break bread, or to receive the Lords Supper altogether,
so as they were constrained to sever themselves into diverse companies in
several private houses to communicate, etc. So that by the learning of all
these your great Champions you will in the sequel of this discourse evidently
perceive, that they have utterly overthrown your doctrine of Independency and
of the Congregational way, and that whiles they all came out to maintain it:
For Mr Knollys, as I said even now, he fights against the light of his own
understanding, and opposes that truth which he in his judgment allows of.
And for I. S. and my brother Burton they have ignorantly murdered your cause:
For all the contention hitherto, both in the Synod, between the reverend
Presbyters there and the Homothumadon dissenting brethren, and between all the
Independents and Presbyterians through the Kingdom, has been concerning the
Church of Jerusalem and the number of believers in that Church, which the
dissenting brethren with all the Independents in England hold were never at
first and last more then could all meet in one place or Congregation to partake
in all acts of worship; and they assert moreover that that Church ought to be a
pattern for all Churches to the end of the world in respect of its government;
and do peremptorily affirm, that the example of that Church is bindingly
presidentiall to all succeeding ages for imitation, which is the opinion not
only of the Homothumadon dissenting brethren but of all the Sectaries that I
know, yea the orthodox Presbyterians do all believe, that the Church of
Jerusalem the Mother Church is to be a pattern of Government to all Churches in
all succeeding ages to the end of the World.

Now I. S. says, that the example of the Church of Jerusalem is not bindingly
presidential, wickedly comparing it to the confused chaos that indigested moles
in the first creation, so that he makes the church of Jerusalem an imperfect
pattern. So that by his doctrine, it is left arbitrary for any Church or State
to set up what kind of Church government they please. Now whether or no this
opinion of his be not contrary to all divinity and the judgment of all
orthodox Divines, yea to the very tenent of all the Independents, I leave it to
the consideration of all those amongst you that can judge of things that
differ: So that you may see that this Champion also of yours has absolutely
overthrown your own principles when he came out to maintain and defend your
cause.

My brother Burton also has given a fatal blow to that cause he came out so
desperately to maintain: For all the Independents through the world, that ever
I heard of, with all the Homothumadon brethren in the Assembly, by all their
arguments have hitherto labored to evince, that there were no more believers
in the Church of Jerusalem then could all meet in one place or Congregation to
communicate in all ordinances, acknowledging, that if it could be proved there
were more Assemblies and Congregations of believers in that Church, that then
they would yield the cause; and they spoke according to reason. For if there
were many Congregations of believers in Jerusalem, and all those made up but
one Church, and were all under one Presbytery, as they must of necessity be if
they made all but one entire Church, then the doctrine of the Congregationall
way falls to the ground or vanishes: for if there were many and several
Congregations there that had not an absolute authority and jurisdiction
Independent within themselves respectively, but were subordinate and subject to
another authority above them, then of necessity that tenent of the
Congregationall way is but a mere chimera or whimsy of your own heads, as all
the learned of your tribe do acknowledge.

Now when my brother Burton has not only granted there were many
Congregations of believers in that Church, but by arguments proved it; he has
utterly, I say, lost the field before he entered into the combat, as will yet
more perspicuously appear in the following discourse: but by that I have now
said, you may see how unhappy you are in all these your Champions and Generals
that give as great wounds unto your cause as any adversaries you have in the
world now living ever gave.

That which I have now to say in the first place to all your leaders and
guides, is, earnestly to entreat them as they look for true comfort in life and
death, and as they desire the peace of the Church, and quiet of this distracted
State and Kingdom, they would now no longer withhold the truth from the people
in unrighteousness, which hitherto they have done; but that they would
unfainedly bewail the errors of their ways; and repent of their seducing and
misleading of the poor people; let it be enough that they have so highly
provoked God and caused the enemies to blaspheme our Christian Religion.

And in the second place I desire all you that have hitherto been misled and
carried about with every wind of their new doctrine, that now you would more
seriously prove and examine all things (according to the Apostles rule, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12.) and hold fast that which is good. Lay not out your time and
moneys for that which will profit you nothing, but whiles it is called to day,
set your selves seriously upon the work of examining all those new doctrines
that have been taught you: set before your eyes the example of the noble
Bereans, search the Scriptures whether things be as they have taught you, and
if you please diligently to read what I have writ out of a zeal of the glory of
God, and out of love to your selves, and a true desire of your eternal
felicity, If any of you that have erred from the truth shall be converted by
it, let him know, that he that converteth the sinner from the error of his way,
shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins, James 5. 19.
20.

John Bastwick.

THE ANTILOQVIE.
SOLOMON the Wisest of men and one beloved of God, gives this counsel to all
the sons and daughters of God, and to the universality of all mankind, saying
unto them all, Prove. 23. ver. 23. Buy the truth and sell it not, also wisdom,
instruction and understanding. He counsels them all to prise truth with
wisdom, instruction and understanding above all things, as the only means of
making men happy, not in this life alone, but eternally: for so Solomon that
wise man asserteth Prove. 3. ver. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. saying, Happy is the
man that finds wisdom, and the man that gets understanding. For the
merchandise of it is better then the merchandise of silver, and the gain
thereof then fine gold. She is more precious then rubies: and all the things
thou can desire are not to be compared unto her. Length of days is in her
right hand, and in her left hand riches and honor. Her ways are ways of
pleasantness: and all her paths are peace. She is a tree of life to them that
lay hold upon her: and happy is every one that retains her. If all the
Orators of the World had been gathered together (...) they could not with so
illustrious a brevity have set forth the excellency of wisdom and
understanding, nor with more glorious encomiums and ellogies have deciphered
the amability of them for the making of them specious and lovely, and for the
inviting of all men to the ready and willing embracing of them: for if either
life, profit, pleasure, honor, or any delectable content, or any thing indeed
desirable in the world can invite any creature to be inamored with any object
of love, all that can be said in way of the praise thereof is contained in this
description of wisdom and understanding delivered by Solomon. And yet truth
has the preeminency before them all, the first place for dignity being given
and assigned unto her, and by a special command from God himself who spoke by
his servant Solomon, all men are enjoined to buy the truth, and that upon any
terms, and not to bartell it away, or sell it, or to part with it, though it
might be with never so much worldly emolument unto them. Buy the truth, says
God, and sell it not, keep it for ever: For by the truth thou shall perfectly
attain unto liberty, which is the life of life, yea which is better then life,
liberty being that the whole world contends for, every man not only desiring
it, but fighting for it.

Now the truth will make every man free, so says Christ, John 8. ver. 32. The
truth shall make you free from all error, and from the fear of Hell and Death,
and from the very terror of both: And lest any man should seriously doubt what
truth is, as Pilate scornfully did, Christ himself has taught us John 17. v.
17. saying, Thy Word is Truth, and that Truth that sanctifies his people: For
every thing is sanctified by the the Word and Prayer, 1 Timothy 4. v. 5. This
precious good Word of God, and the faith once delivered unto the Saints, Jude
3. contained in it, is that that all men are exhorted earnestly to contend for:
And therefore more especially in these our times every one ought vigorously to
stand up and contend for it, yea upon any terms or at any rate to buy it, when
it is become such a rarity as it is scarce to be met with, being almost lost in
the thickets, meanders, and labyrinths of so many errors; so that the faith
once delivered unto the Saints is very rarely to be found amongst the sons of
men through the involutions and intanglements of writhing and restless
spirits, whose whole work and design it is (as by their daily practices it
does appear) either wholly to eclipse or darken it, or totally to take it away,
that by this means Truth and Light being once removed, the deceivers and
impostors may the better put off their corrupt and putrid wares and
commodities, and the poor deluded people may the more facilly and readily be
deluded, cheated, and consened, and those that are wayfaring men for the want
of its direction may wander in the bypath of darkness to their own eternal
perdition. And the verity is, too too many, by their needless, vain, and
unnecessary janglings about the truth and the way have lost them both and are
now turned Seekers to the dishonor of God and their eternal shame and misery
too, if they speedily repent not. For God in the 30. of Deuteronomy. ver. 11. says
there: This commandment which I command thee this day, is not hidden from
thee, neither is it far of; it is not in heaven that thou should say who
shall go up for us to heaven, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it and do
it. Neither is it beyond the sea, that thou should say, who shall go over
the sea for us, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it and do it: But the
Word is very nigh unto thee, in thy mouth and in thy heart that thou may do
it. See (says the Lord) I have set before thee this day life and good, and
death and evil.

Now if in the days of Moses the truth was so near unto them that the Lord
says there unto his people, that he had set it before their eyes, yea that it
was in their hearts; so that they had then no need to run from land to sea, and
from sea to land to find it: how much more obvious is it now, may every
rational man conclude when it is so gloriously set forth, and that through the
whole Scripture of the New Testament? And how inexcusable will all such be
found that complain the truth is not yet clear unto them? So that it may be an
astonishment to all men to hear any that have read the holy Word of God say
that they are yet in the dark and the truth does not appear unto them: And yet
such men there are who declare unto the world and profess it, that they are
expectants and seekers: and many have often said unto me when I have been in
familiar discourse with them, That as yet the truth was not made out unto them
concerning the Presbyterian way, and therefore they could neither communicate
with our Assemblies nor yet join with those of the new gathered churches. Now
that all those who have wandered and strayed from the old way, and those that
are at a loss and seek it, may find it and the truth, which they have a
command from God to buy and purchase, and that they may all clearly perceive
that they are in the by-path of error that are still Scepticks and doubting
about the way: I shall at this time endeavor to be their guide, nothing
doubting but by the grace of God and his special assistance if they will bring
docible hearts and willing minds to follow the thread of his Word, and be
directed by that unerring line of the same, they may speedily be led and come
into the right way, and find the truth and with it peace and comfort to their
own souls in life and death.

I will first therefore dissipate and scatter those mists that have been cast
before their eyes, by which the truth has been clouded, and remove all those
stumbling blocks that have been put before them, and then I doubt not
(howsoever it be thought a difficult work, yea an unpossible thing) but to make
the truth evidently appear unto them, and bring them into the right way from
which some have wandered and strayed and others yet doubt of; And I hope so to
clear up the light of the truth, that the way of it shall not only be plain to
them, but to every man and woman that have not lost the eyesight of their
reason or have not sacrificed themselves to error and vanity. And therefore
that the truth concerning the Presbyterian way may the more elucidately appear
to every intelligible man, I will here briesly state the question which is
fully handled in the following discourse, and show What has been the
principal cause of putting so many out of the way, and keeping and deterring
others from it, and withal I will set down the ground and rise of the
Independent tenent, and show upon what as a foundation they lay the whole
Fabric of this their new Babell; which I hope to make evident to be nothing
but a mere chimera and fancy in their own brain, and that there is not the
least warrant for it in the whole book of God. And all that I now say, I am
confident (...) to discover to all those whom the god of this world has not
blinded their eyes that they should not see the clear sunshine of the Gospel
of Truth.

Those that call themselves by the name of Independents and have separated
themselves from our Congregations and Assemblies, counting us such Saints as
Job would not set with the dogs of his flock, calling us the sons of Belial,
proclaming us to be the enemies the Lord Jesus Christ and his Kingdom (for
this is their language concerning us all) those I say pretend that they have
both the Word of God and the example of the Primitive Churches, especially that
of Jerusalem for the maintenance of their Independency and for these their
unbrotherly proceedings, whose opinion and doctrine is this:

That the Church of Jerusalem that Mother Church consisted of of no more
believers at any time then did ordinarily meet altogether in one place and
Congregation to partake in all acts of worship; and they teach withal, that
this Church consisting of no more, had an absolute sovereignty within it self
Independent without reference to any other Church, and from the which there
might be no appeal for the redress of any conceived wrong; and they moreover
affirm that the constitution of this conceited form of government, is the true
Gospel form of Church government, and is for ever to be a pattern to all
Churches in all succeeding ages to do the same and to exercise the same
authority within themselves severally that they imagine this Church did, though
they consist but of twenty or thirty Members apeece, yea fewer.

This is the opinion of all the Independents, saving my Brother Burton, who in
this differs from all his brethren, believing, yea acknowledging that there
were many Assemblies of Believers in the Church at Jerusalem, by which he has
overthrown their opinion, whiles notwithstanding he labors with all his
might to maintain it, as will appear in its due place; whereas all the other
Independents, (as I said before) confidently assert, that there were no more
Believers in that Church, at first and last, then could all meet in one
Congregation to communicate in all the Ordinances.

Now the Presbyterians on the other side, and that upon very good grounds, as
will in the sequel of this discourse appear, hold and believe that there were
many Congregations and Assemblies of Believers in the Church of Jerusalem, and
that all those several Congregations made but one Church within its pracincts,
and were all under one Presbytery; and that the government of this Church
consisting of many Congregations combined together under the government of a
College of Presbyters is a pattern of government to all Churches in succeeding
ages to the and of the world. And this I thought fit to speak concerning the
first question or controversy between the Presbyterians and the Independents.

The second is concerning the gathering of Churches and admitting of Members
into Church fellow-ship and communion, which the Independents hold and teach
must be upon these conditions.

First that they that are to be admitted, and before they can be received into
the Church, they must walk sometime with them. In New England they make some
walk seven years before they can be received, and this is their first
condition.

Secondly, before their admission, they must make every one of them a
particular and public confession of their faith.

Thirdly, they must bring in the evidences of their conversion, declaring the
time when, the place where, and the occasion how they were converted.

Fourthly, they must all and every one of them enter into a particular
explicit Covenant.

Fifthly, they must come in and be admitted by the consent of the whole Church,
Nemine contradicente; so that the refusing of any of these hinders their
admission, and the gathering of Churches after so fashion (as the French men
use to speak when they learn English) is the only way as they all affirm of
setting up Christ as King upon his Throne, and this is the opinion and doctrine
of all the Independents concerning the gathering of Churches, pretending
withal that they have the Church of Jerusalem for this their pattern and
plat-forme, which is nothing else but to abuse the Scripture, as will
afterward appear.

The Presbyterians on the contrary side hold and believe, that for the
gathering of Churches, and for the making of any Members of any Church, and for
the admitting of them into Church Followship and Communion, no other conditions
are to be propounded to them by the Ministers for their reception into the
society of the Church, or to be required at any peoples hands, but those that
Christ the King of his Church (whose voice is only in Church matters to be
listened unto and heard) has propounded, viz. Repentance, Faith and Baptism.
And this is the belief and opinion of the Presbyterians concerning the
admission of Members, and gathering of Churches, affirming that the
Independents have neither Precept nor President for all their new conditions in
the whole Book of God, and therefore that they ought to be rejected as their
own inventions, and as the vain and wicked traditions of their own brain,
as will clearly in the following discourse be evidenced to all men. And this
is briefly the state of the question and difference between us.

Now before I set down the ground, and seeming warrant they pretend for this
their fond opinion of Independency, by which they have brought trouble and
confusion upon this whole Church and Kingdom; I think it fit I say before the
handling of the whole business to say something concerning the sorts of
Independents I have to deal with, and against the which all my following
Arguments do militate; and I find two sorts of Independents; the first are
those which for distinction sake I call Homothumadons; the other Burtonians.
Now the Homothumadon Independents, that at this day swarm through the whole
Kingdom (if their own brags may be believed) are the universality of all the
Sectaries, who generally hold that, There were no more believers in the Church
of Jerusalem, and in all other the primitive Churches within their respective
Precincts, then could all ordinarily meet in one Congregation to partake in all
Acts of worship; and from thence out of this their imaginary opinion they form
all their several Churches, calling their Assemblies the Churches of the
Congregationall way, and to this their opinion they stick and cleave
immoveably. The Burtonian Independents, of which my Brother Burton is the
Corypheus, and Antesignanus, and from whom they have received their doctrine,
they hold and believe that there were many Congregations and Assemblies of
believers in the Church of Jerusalem, but deny that those several
Congregations were Churches properly so called.

This I say is the opinion of my Brother Burton, and his disciples.

So that my first Brigade of Arguments and Forces that I have drawn out of
Saint John the Baptists, Christ's and his blessed Apostles and seventy Disciples
quarters, and that before Christ's death, with all those I have taken out of the
strong garrison of Jerusalem after Christ's ascension, and have brought into the
field to dispute this controversy and question they militate against the whole
Army of the Homothumadon Sectaries, that under the command of Hanserdo Knollys
and I. S. their Generals indeavored to maintain and keep this ground: viz.
That there were no more Believers in the Church of Jerusalem at first and last,
then could and did ordinarily all meet together in one place or Congregation to
partake in all acts of worship.

The other companies that I have taken out of the Apostles quarters after
Christ's death, resurrection, and ascension militate against all the Burtonian
Independents, in the head of which Army he himself comes out into the field as
their General maintaining, that those several Assemblies in the Church of
Jerusalem were not Churches properly so called: And he Goliah-like appears
armed with his sword and Phocions hatchet which is his pol-ax, bidding defiance
to the whole host of Presbyterians, presuming to make good this ground against
them all: viz. That those several Assemblies of Believers in the Church at
Jerusalem were not Churches properly so called, challenging me by name, saying
Page 7. Come on Brother, let you and I try it out by the dint of this swo^d:
adding moreover these words, and truly I shall by the help of my Godmake no
long work of it. I shall (says he) assay with one stroke of Phocions Hatchet,
to cut in two, the long thread of your Alcibiadian fluent and luxuriant
Rhetorications. Thus valiant old Harry tryumphs before the victory, and even
conjures it out. And in this dispute between my Forces and all the Independent
Army after a few skirmishes, they shall see not only a private Duel fought
between General Burton and my self, but the fall of that their Champion with
their total rout, and see their whole Army to fly and leave the field, and
that most cowardly, though they were three to one; howsoever their scattered
Forces now and then make some false alarums, and speak big words, what
reserves they yet have, and what great things they will do, and how they will
rally again and come upon me, and break through and through to the total
routing of all my Forces. They that are acquainted with the feats of Arms, and
expert soldiers in this Militia, will well perceive that it is but self
confidence in them all, and that all their swelling words will tend to their
own dishonor. I have three Generals to encounter with in the Independent
Army, two under the name of all the Homothumadons, Hanserdo Knollys, and I. S.
and Henry Burton in the name of all those of his party, besides some whibling
reserves.

Now as I have showed you the controversy between the two parties, and the
cause of this dispute, and set down the occasion of bringing all these Armies
into the field with the words of their challenge, and declared also the two
sorts of enemies I have to deal with; I will according to my promise, ad aram
veritatis, briefly lay down the title by which they all pretend a right to
Independency, and show the ground and foundation of the congregationall way,
for the which they do all of them now as pro aris and focis dimicare against
their Christian Brethren, whom they ordinary style Presbytyrants. But by the
way I must say thus much, that before there was any breaking out to open
Hostility all things in the beginning were carried in an amicable and lovely
way, and the controversy was disputed con and pro in a legal manner, every
one bringing in their evidences for their way and cause, and that in for^
^onscienti^ before Judges of the spiritual Law, where all the Advocates for
the Independent cause were fully heard speak and plead for themselves, and for
their party, whatsoever they now pretend to the contrary, and they had all of
them liberty granted unto them freely to bring in their witnesses, which were
fully likewise heard. Now they had but one witness to speak of that made for
their cause, and he being found doubtful in his expressions, and the truth
also of his testimony being fully examined it was abundantly made appear by
the Advocates of the contrary party, that should his Affidavit be allowed of as
clear in every particular and punctilio of it, as they would have it, yet it
would not be a sufficient witness to prove any just title they had to their
Independency, nay though they had many such; whereupon the Court could neither
in justice or equity admit of that witness his testimony; and all those that
have any understanding in causes of this nature, when they shall hear the
debate fully on both sides, will I am most confident conclude, that should the
Judges have allowed of their witnesses testimony, and so have granted the
Independents their cause, that they had been unrighteous Judges, and there had
been then just cause of appeal to some higher Court and Tribunal; but the
Judges in conscience having given sentence according to Law and justice against
the Independent party, and they notwithstanding still challenging a right and
title to Independency, although I say it was made apparently evident to all
men, that they could not justly challenge or claim any right thereunto by the
Charter of the great King of his Church, they still persisting in their
obstinacy and groundless challenge, and being resolved that they would be
either soli aut nulli, would admit of no fair accommodation, as can
sufficiently be proved by a cloud of witness, brake out into open Hostility,
and war against their brethren, (and all this contrary unto Covenant and
Agreement, as is briefly set down in the Schismaticke sifted, set forth by Mr.
John Vicar^) and let fly their arrows and quils at us, and with the poison and
venom of them wounded and slew not a few, invading our Frontiers and
Territories, beating up our quarters, plundering and spoiling of us of our best
and fattest sheep and lambs, making ever and anon false alarums upon us, and
upon every occasion sending us challenges to the terrifying of many, in so much
as they forced some to run into the rivers and Jordans round about stark naked
over head and ears, like mad men, and that in the midst of winter, to the
killing and murdering of certain of them; yea, they began to rob us of our
wives, of our children, and of our servants, and indeed of our very substance:
so that the Presbyterians were constrained in their own defense to come out to
meet them for the preserving of themselves, and their souls and bodies, both
which would be destroyed, and that speedily, if these Rovers might go on
without control and resistance, and yet in all this combat the Presbyterians
hitherto have used no other weapon but the sword of the spirit, which is the
word of God. But before I come to the main battle, I shall here set down the
ground and warrant, by which they challenge a title and right to Independency,
and withal I will set down the manner of their pleading before they came to
Hostility, with the names of some of their chief Advocates and Patrons, who
lived sometimes in the Low Countries amongst the Country Courtiers there,
where they became excellent Proficients in their art, and where they learned
this Lesson perfectly well, viz. how to spread their bread with the
Independents butter, which is the chiefest part of their skill and learning,
which made their tongues in all their pleadings run very glib; and these being
all very well feed, pleaded their cause in manner and form, as follows. The
Court being set, the chief Judge or Prolocutor, after the hearing of the
debate and cause desired the Advocates for farther satisfaction, and for
farrher proof of the soundness of their plea, to bring in their witnesses and
evidences, with their reasons out of the holy Scripture the great Charter of
heaven, by which they would prove their title and right to the Church of
Jerusalem, and by which they labored to evince, there were no more Believers
in that Church then could all meet in any one place or congregation, to partake
in all the Ordinances, and that this Church consisting of no more then one
Congregation was independent, promising, and that faithfully withal the other
Judges, that if they could by sufficient evidence, witnesses and testimonies
out of the holy Word of God, the Charter of the great King, make it appear,
that the controversy then should speedily be decided between them, and that
they would yield the Cause, then the which nothing could be spoke more honestly.

Whereupon first Thomas Goodwin a sturdy Advocate produces for witness the
first v. of the 2. chapter of the Acts in these words, when the day of
Pentecost was fully come, they were al (says he) (...) with one accord in one
place, Ergo, says he* the Church of Jerusalem consisted of no more Believers
then could all meet in one place. Thus did he plead and evidence.

Now before I come to tell how the other Advocates argued their cause, I will
set down the Greek words in Roman characters, that the most unlearned may
read them, and I will afterward give the true and genuine interpretation, and
sense of them, and show how both these Advocates, and all the Independents and
Sectaries are mistaken in that witness and testimony which indeed is the only
evidence they build their whole new Babel upon, and show withal how they with
violence force that witness to speak otherwise then he means, and that the
words taken according to the original, and according to all solid reason bring
in no such evidence, nor carry no such sense or meaning as they put upon them;
for the words in the original make not so much as mention of a place,
howsoever it crept in, in our Translation. All this by Gods assistance I
undertake to make good, and to evince this also, that they lay that foundation
of their new Fabric only in the air or chimera of their own brain. But for
the words in Roman characters, they are Homothumadon epi to auto. And now I
will relate how Philip Nigh a very busy Advocate pleaded the cause of
Independency, and what his testimony was, who being desired by the Prolocutor
to bring in his witness out of the holy word of God, for the proving of their
assertion, he flies to the same place of Scripture, saying, they were all with
one accord (...) Ergo, says he, there were no more Believers in the Church of
Jerusalem then could all meet in one place. Then after him comes in Jeremy
Buroughs, a stout Advocate, who being demanded to bring in his witnesses for
the making of Affidavit to what they had pleaded, he also betakes himself to
the same text of Scripture, and with a great outice says, and they were all
(...) Ergo, there were no more Believers in the Church of Jerusalem then could
all meet in one place. Then comes in Sydrack Sympson, a brave burly and well
spread Advocate, who being by the Prolocutor requested to bring in his witness
produces the very same text of Scripture alleged before, crying out pleno ore
and pingui ore voce, that they were altogether (...) Ergo, there were no more
Believers in Jerusalem then could all meet in one place and congregation. I
will not mention the other Advocates, for they were all at their Homothumadon,
and had nothing else to the purpose. And thus did these brave Pleaders all and
every one of them argue their cause, giving in their reason also into the Court
for the corroborating of their witness, saying, that the Holy Ghost had from
first to last as on purpose showed this, as if his scope had been before, to
prevent and preclude all reasonings to the contrary. Thus they: This place of
Scripture with this their reason to speak the truth, is all the ground, and
warrant for substance, that all those restless spirited Rabbis have for this
great war and contention between us, and for the proving of their doctrine
of Independency, and that their tenent of the congregationall way, by which
they have brought this distraction and confusion into the whole Church and
State, to the seducing and misleading of many thousand poor souls, to the
utter ruining of many of them, and for the setting of the three Kingdoms on
fire, which with all their tears, if ever the Lord should give them repentance
not to be repented of they could never quench: and for the better deceiving of
the people they have so accustomed their mouths to Homothumadon epi to auto,
that very Sagomour Will that has no more Greek in him then a Horse, upon every
occasion comes out with his Homothumadon epi to auto, and all of them in this
great and weighty business which concerns not only the peace of the Land, but
is of everlasting concernment to us all, they continually triffle and abuse the
holy Scripture, dealing with us as Cats usually do one with an other, who when
they have spent all their strength with fighting, and when they can neither
scratch nor bite any longer, then they spit one at another, and make ugly
faces; even so do these men with us, when they have tormented themselves, and
spent their Forces in wrangling, having never an Argument left to maintain
their groundless, wicked and dividing opinion, then they stand staring on us,
and as a last refuge come out with their homothumadon epi to auto and thus spit
a little Greek in our faces which the deluded people not understanding,
believe that it is an absolute conquest gotten on the Independents side.

Now in regard the whole strength of their cause, ye^, of their whole Army lies
here and depends upon this Fort, I mean these words of the heavenly Charter, I
will take the more pains for finding out of the true meaning of them, that so
I may the better discover unto the world the wickedness and vanity (for it is
no better) of all these Homothumadon imposters; and so much the more willing I
am to make some stay in explayning the mind and true sense of the same, because
they are as it were the Key and inlet for the opening, and the better making
way for the understanding of the whole Dispute; so that every man that is but
of ordinary capacity, by the very light of his natural reason may from the
unfolding of them be sufficiently able to discern the juglings of these
ungodly men.

But first I shall give you in the answer of those reverend Judges sitting in
the Court, I mean the reverend Assembly, where this cause was fully heard and
debated, where the Homothumadons had liberty fully to speak for themselves, and
to bring in whatsoever made for their cause, howsoever they have falsely given
out to the contrary

Now for answer to their reason above mentioned, the Reverend Assembly replied,
that they inclined to believe that the Holy Ghost intended rather to show the
early accomplishment of the promise, Ier. 32. 39. of giving one heart, and one
way by his so frequent mentioning Homothumadon and epi to auto as adjuncts of
the first Christian Church meetings; then (as our brethren suggest) to prevent
and preclude all reasonings against this assertion of theirs, viz. that the
believers in Jerusalem were no more then could meet in one place: and there is
most excellent reason for this reply and answer of the reverend and learned
Assembly to their wicked cavil, for so I may truly call it, for it is nothing
else but to abuse the Holy Scripture, and for no other end but to deceive the
people, that they may the better make merchandise of them, which is one of the
horridst impieties in the world, which all the homothumadon Ministers and
Predicants, and Itinerary Preacers are most deeply guilty of, who make a prey
of the people where ever they come, and most abominably cheat them, especially
the silly women.

Now if we do duly examine the words of the Text and consider them in their
native sense and true meaning, it will most manifestly appear that the Answer
of the learned and reverend Assembly was grounded upon most excellent and solid
reason, which all the slight of all the Homothumadons and their cunning
craftiness whereby they lie in wait to deceive simple souls, will be made more
oriently appear in all its colors.

First therefore I will set down the Text it self in its original language,
and then give the true interpretation of it in our tongue, Acts the second v.
1. (...), (...). The Translation is this, When the day of Pentecost was fully
come, they were all with one accord upon that, viz. occasion or design: For
this is as much as the words (...) do signify, being taken both adjectively
and relatively in that place, and therefore under reformation be it spoken, it
is not rightly translated in our bibles; for unless we do consider the words
(...) with reference to some substantive or some thing going before, there can
no sense be made of them, nor no man mortal can tell the meaning of them, no
more then any man can divine or judge what one that comes abruptly into his
company and having interchanged no discourse with him does mean and understand,
if he should barely say upon this or upon that. Now all the contestation is
about these words (...), as for the word (...) we all agree it signifies with
one accord. Now the Independents by (...) understand in one place, which epi to
auto never signified in the world: for if we will stand upon the words, they
have a far other meaning then the Homothumadon brethren give of them, as will
by and by appear: for as for the word (...) taking it not as a preposition in
the Greek tongue, as all the learned in that language know, it often signifies
time, and of this I could produce many examples; as if one speaking or writing
Greek should say, such a thing happened in my time, or in my days, he would
express it by epi and say (...), tempore meo, or mea aetate, it was done in my
time: So that (...) may with far better ground and by far far greater reason be
interpreted for time in that text then for place, in regard there was no
mention made of place before, but of time; for it is in terminis said, When the
day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all together with one accord (...):
viz. at that instant of time or upon that very day; this interpretation I say
does far better come up to the sense and meaning of that text then the other
in one place: for both (...) in that text are relatively and adjectively taken
(as I said before) having reference to something going before; for otherwise
they cannot possibly be understood So that there being mention of time before,
they are to be interpreted rather of time then place: but that is not the true
meaning of the words (...) in that text; for the true interpretation therefore
of them, we must have recourse to other places of holy Scripture, and primarily
to that portion of Scripture from whence these words are taken, and that is out
of the Septuagints translation upon the second Psalm ver. 2. which Saint Luke
follows, which in the Greek runs thus, (...), which is rendered by the latin
interpreters thus astiterunt reges terrae and principes convenerunt in unum
adversus dominum and adversum Christum ejus. In our bibles the words are thus
translated: The Kings of the earth set themselves and the Rulers take counsel
together against the Lord and against his anointed. So that (...) in that place
must necessarily be taken for an evil design, purpose, counsel, machination,
or resolution: and indeed if we duly consider the words (...) wheresoever we
meet with them they do for the most part signify some design, purpose or
resolution, whether it be taken in a good sense or a bad; as (...) in the Psalm
is taken for a conspiracy and an evil design of the Kings and Rulers; but in
the second chapter of the Acts ver. 1. it is taken for a good design in the
Disciples; for when the day of Pentecost was fully come says the Scripture,
they were with one accord (...): viz. upon this occasion they were met together
with this design, purpose and resolution to consecrate the day to Gods service
and to celebrate the feast to his name; and this is the true and genuine
meaning of the place: viz. that the disciples were all met together upon the
day of Pentecost upon this design with full purpose and with an unanimous
consent and resolution to keep that day and celebrate the feast unto the glory
of God: and this was a good design and purpose in them which is signified by
the words (...) which are not to be understood in one place as the Independents
would have it and as it is translated: and that it may yet be more evident that
by (...) is signified a design, and not in one place, very reason and common
understanding will make it out and clear to every man if we will compare
Scripture with Scripture, and in the first place duly consider the words in the
2 Psa. where it is said, that the Kings of the earth set themselves, and the
Rulers took counsel together (...); which words there do not imply a convention
or meeting together of the persons of all the Kings and Princes in the world in
any one place; for that they never did nor could do, there being an
impossibility of it both in respect of time and place: no place being able to
contain them all, so that I say by (...) there, is only signified a wicked
design and purpose, or a deliberate counsel and resolution agreed upon and
consented unto in all their wicked and rebellious hearts to shake off the sweet
yoke of Christ and of casting away from themselves those bands of love, and of
breaking those cords of his affection toward them.

For whereas God the father had appointed Christ to be King over the Nations to
govern them by the Scepter of his Spirit and by the Rod of his Word, they all
conspired with one accord to resist his spiritual government over their souls,
and would not have him to rule over them; And therefore the holy Ghost
expresses this their conspiracy, wicked design and evil purpose by the words
(...), which intimate as much as if the spirit of God had said this was the
design resolution and the determinate counsel of all those wicked Kings and
Rulers to reject the government of Christ over them, not meaning or
understanding there by (...) that they in all their persons ever either came
together or could meet in any one place. So that by (...) there, is meant a
design only and not a meeting of all the persons of all Rulers and Kings in
one place. The same expression we find Acts 4. ver. 26, 27. where it is said,
That Herod, Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and people of Israel were
gathered together (...) which expression is borrowed out of the second Psalm,
the which words there likewise cannot with any reason be understood, That Herod
and Pontius Pilate with all the Gentiles and the people of Israel did all meet
in any one place: for all understanding forbids men so to argue or conceive or
believe; for they well know that there was no place could have contained them
all together, no not the thousand part of them: besides they were all in their
several Countries and aboads, and it is well known that before this time Herod
and Pilate were not so loving one to another as to come together: but it is
related they were altogether (...) to signify that wheresoever they dwelt or
in what coasts or regions soever their habitations were, they all agreed upon
one and the same wicked design to be enemies of Christ, and in this wicked
resolution they were epi to auto that is, they all well accorded and assented
together to put the Lord of life to death and to cast of his government: So
that by (...) we are to understand a mental meeting together, and not a
topicall local and bodily meeting or convening of all those Kings in any one
place, by which in all their consultations they were resolved to carry on their
wicked design and unlawful business, and in that regard they were said to be
gathered together (...) in unum, though they did it in several places; and
this is the true meaning of epi to auto there; as when any men do carry on a
good design, though they be in dive^s and several places, they may be said to
be gathered together (...), as now with us the Lords and Commons and diverse
Committees in both Houses, assemble themselves daily epi to auto, and are but
one Parliament, though they meet in two several rooms, and more; and so a
thousand Congregations and Assemblies may be said to meet Homothumadon epi to
auto every Lords day, though they be in never so many distinct places, in
regard of their common design to serve God on that day: So that all reason to
any intelligible man from that I have said will clearly evince, that by epi to
auto is meant nothing else, but that the Apostles were met together with one
accord upon the occasion of the feast of Pentecost with this deliberate design,
and for this very end and purpose to celebrate that feast unto the Lord which
was the work of that day; the Jews also through all Indaea and from the regions
round about being come up to Jerusalem to that f^ast to worship God in it* and
to offer up that service that was due unto his Name, and the which were taken
up in the Temple and in their several Synagogues and meeting places in the
same employment the Apostles were; of all the which I affirm it may be as
really and truly said that they all met Homothumadon epi to auto, as of the
hundred and twenty Names: And yet no rational man would from thence conclude
that all the people did or could meet in one place: No more can any
understanding creature or well grounded solid Christian gather, that because it
is said the hundred and twenty names were all Homothumadon with one accord epi
to auto, that therefore there should be no more believers in Jerusalem then did
or could all meet in any one place or congregation to partake in all
Ordinances. as the Independents all gather from the words. I assert that such a
kind of arguing in any man would argue that he had little brains in his head;
and therefore I shall be ever able by Gods assistance to maintain against all
the Sectaries and Homothumadon Independents that by epi to auto is to be
understood either some design, whether it be taken in a good sense or a bad,
which the holy Scripture apparently holds out unto us; or if otherwise, that
epi to auto in the verse of the second chapter of the Acts is rather to be
understood of the time of their meeting, then of the place: All this I say I
undertake by Gods gracious assistance to make good against all the Independents
and Sectaries, and to prove withal that they do all of them most wickedly for
the deluding of the people, to gather and conclude from epi to auto that there
were no more believers then or at any time after, in the Church of Jerusalem,
then could all meet in any one place or Congregation: for indeed to make such a
conclusion as this from epi to auto is not only to fight against all the light
of sound reason, but to give the holy Ghost the lie and to resist the spirit of
God, and to withhold the truth from the people in unrighteousness: All which I
shall by and by God willing briefly make appear.

But before I come to that, should I for disputation sake grant unto the
brethren that by epi to auto in that text were meant in one place, as they
would have it; because we cannot conceive if there be a meeting or convening of
the persons of any people together, but it must be in a place or at a place as
we usually speak: would it therefore follow that because any one place or room
will hold a hundred and twenty names, for they say there were then no more in
that company, to partake in all acts of worship, that it will hold hundreds of
thousands, or that all the believers in Jerusalem did then meet there, or that
there were no more believers then in that Church then could meet in one
Congregation, or that for ever after there were no more Christians in Jerusalem
then did ordinarily meet in one Congregation? I am most assured that there is
not any intelligible Independent but upon due deliberation would say, that he
that should so conclude speaks against the very light of all understanding that
dictates the contrary: and therefore he would not make that inference the
Homothumadon brethren make: viz. that there were neither then in Jerusalem nor
at any time after, more believers in that Church then could all meet in any one
Congregation to partake in all acts of worship.

But now to show the vanity and wickedness of these men and that it may appear
they in this may be rightly called Homothumadons, in that they do with one
accord and with one unanimous consent conspire together to trouble and disquiet
the whole Church of God, and to disturb the peace of the three Kingdoms, and
are resolved to persist epi to auto in that their wicked design and that with
one accord; I shall here lay down some reasons, which all that will vouchsafe
to read the ensuing discourse, shall see more fully set down afterward.

I say therefore they extremely show their vanity and wicked purpose in this
that they all conclude from epi to auto, there were no more believers at that
time nor ever after in Jerusalem then could all meet in any one place or
Congregation. For it is most certain that the believers that were in Jerusalem
at that time were innumerable, and those inhabitants; for the Scripture is
clear in this point: for to say nothing of those that cried Hosanna and cut
down branches at Christ's coming into Jerusalem which all made profession of him
with the little children that cried Hosanna also to the highest, whose Parents
were all inhabitants in Jerusalem, and without doubt had taught all their
children their lesson which they thought they might better show publicly then
themselves: The Scripture in the third of Matthew and in the first of Mark and
in the third of Luke says in express terms, That all Jerusalem, (which being
taken Synecdochically must needs signify an innumerable company of all sorts
of men) came out to the Baptism of John and were all baptized by him in Jordan
confessing their sins, and all these were inhabitants: And in the fourth of
John it is expressed there, that Christ made more Disciples then John, and that
his Disciples baptized more, so that necessarily there were infinites of
believers then in Jerusalem, yea it is expressed in the twelfth of John ver.
19. that the world went after Christ, that is, believed in him; therefore there
was a numberless company of believers in Jerusalem and all inhabitants there,
and all these were good Christians and true believers, though I. S. most
impiously affirms the contrary, and page 8. 9. of his Pamphlet asserteth,
That they were not Christians, to whom my brother Burton in the 16 page of his
brief answer assenteth.

Now that they were all good Christians and true believers that were baptized
by John and Christ's Disciples, all good Christians are bound to believe it, if
any credit be to be given unto Christ's words whose testimony I conceive is
rather to be credited in this controversy then that of I. S. and my brother
Burton; for his witness is infallible who knew not only their outward
conversation but their very hearts also, and therefore could give a true
testimony of them; and yet he concludes of all those that were baptized by the
Baptist, that they were all very good Christians and true believers. Our
Saviors words are these, Luke 7. ver. 29, 30. And all the people, mark I pray
his expression, All the people (says Christ) that heard him, and the Publicans
justified God, being baptized with the baptism of John. But the Pharisees and
Lawyers rejected the Counsel of God against themselves being not baptized of
him, which words of our blessed Savior are to be believed before the words of
men and angels, though they should all speak the contrary, as wicked I. S. and
my brother Burton both do. Now our Savior in those words proclames all those
that heard John the Baptist and were baptized by him, to be good Christians,
and the Scripture says, that Jerusalem, and they of Jerusalem came out to his
baptism and were baptized by him in Jordan, Matthew. 3. And in Ae^on near to
Salim there was much water, John 3. 23. So that all these were inhabitants of
Jerusalem and such as had their abode in that City; yea our blessed Lord and
Savior that true witness, who out of his bare word ought ever to be believed,
does not only say they were good Christians and true believers, but proves it
by many arguments: The first of the which is this, that they justified God,
that is, they acknowledged that God was a most just righteous and a merciful
God, forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin, and keeping promise unto his
people, which was, 2 Chronicles. 7. ver. 14. that if his people which are called by
his name shall humble themselves and pray and seek his face, and turn from
their wicked ways; that then he would hear from heaven and forgive their sin
and heal their land. This promise of God and all his other gracious promises,
those that were baptized by John did believe: for, says o^r Savior, they
justified God; declaring unto the world by their profession, that they believed
in him and embraced his promises; which is yet farther manifest from Christ's
second argument which is this, they rejected not (says he) the counsel of God
against themselves as the Pharisees and Lawyers did*

Now if we consider but what the counsel of God was to the people in the
ministry of John the Baptist we shall find it in the third of Matthew where
the Baptist preaching unto all Jerusalem that came out unto his baptism, as it
is also clear in the third of Luke, he says there, repent, for the Kingdom of
heaven is at hand, warning them to fly from the wrath to come, exhorting them
all to bring forth fruits meet for repentance, telling them of the danger that
would otherwise ensue if they did not repent and believe in the Messiah who was
to come shortly after him with his fan in his hand, who would thoroughly purge
his floor and gather his Wheat into his garner, but burn up the chafe with
unquenchable fire; and therefore he exhorted them all again and again to repent
and believe in the Messiah; this good counsel did John the Baptist give to all
those that came out of Jerusalem to his Baptism, and our Savior affirms and
witnesses of them all, that they rejected not his counsel as the Pharisees did
to their own destruction, but embraced it to their salvation, and therefore
they were all true believers if our Savior knew who were believers, which yet
he proves by a third argument, saying, that they were all baptized of him
confessing their sins; in token of their repentance, and of their faith in the
Messiah they were all baptized by John, says Christ; and therefore they were
all very good Christians and true believers: all these arguments for brevity
sake may be reduced into one argument after this manner, All those that
justify God and embrace the counsel of God, that do repent, confess and
forsake their sins, and believe in Jesus Christ, and in token of their faith
and obedience are baptized into him, they are all good Christians and true
believers; but all these, says Christ, that heard John the Baptist with the
Publicans, except the Pharisees and Lawyers, were such: Ergo, they were all
good Christians and believers, and all Jerusalem consisted of such; for
Jerusalem went out to Jo^n the Baptist and were baptized by him in Jordan
confessing their sins: and yet more then these were converted by Christ, his
Apostles and seventy Disciples ministry, and all inhabitants in Jerusalem: And
therefore all these could not possibly be contained in any one place or a few,
and all these were then in Jerusalem as well as the hundred and twenty names,
and therefore all the believers at that time in Jerusalem, though they were all
epi to auto as well as the Apostles, yet they were not all in one place as the
Homothumadon brethren would infer; for those that the first chapter of the Acts
speaks of ver. 15. those hundred and twenty names which met together in the
second Chapter and first Verse, were Christ's apostles and Disciples and such as
had followed him from the beginning of John's baptism, and were indeed all
Ministers of the Gospel and preachers of the Word and men of great eminency
and fame and renoun, and therefore by a great elegancy are called Names, the
number of the Names (says the Holy Ghost) which kind of expression in the Holy
Scripture, is ever used for to express men only of transcendent excellency
and desert for their rare virtues and endowments, as is manifest out of the
Revel. 3. 4. and all these were taken up in holy duties, as the occasion
required, and were by themselves; but may any rational man conclude from
thence, that there were no more Believers in Jerusalem? would not this be
thought an odd kind of arguing, if one should thus dispute against the
Independents, those Homothumadon brethren, all the Independent Predicants, and
their Itinerary Preachers, those eminent and learned men, those names are all
(...) in the City of London on one of their Feast days: Ergo, there is no
more Independents in the City of London then can meet at all times in any one
Congregation to partake in all their Ordinances; would not all the Independents
laugh at any Presbyterian that should thus dispute? when they themselves boast
that there be millions of them in London.

Now by the holy Scripture we are truly informed there were millions of true
believers in the Church of Jerusalem at that very time, and that they were the
Ministers only that were present together on the day of Pentecost, and that the
other Believers were in their other meeting places: yea, besides those that I
have now named, it is said in the same Chapter, verse 5. that (at that instant
of time) there were dwelling at Jerusalem, Jews, devout men out of every
nation under heaven, that is true Worshippers, and Believers: here therefore
must needs be an innumerable company of these, and all these were then
Inhabitants in Jerusalem: so that the Holy Scripture does by many witnesses
prove there were more then a hundred and twenty Believers, or more then a
hundred thousand in Jerusalem at that time, how therefore with any honesty can
the Independents conclude from Epi to auto, that there were no more Believers
then in Jerusalem, nor ever after, then could all meet in one Congregation? If
this be not to fight against God, there was never any fighting against him. But
should I yield unto them, which I cannot do for many reasons, that there were
no more Believers at that time in Jerusalem, then did or could all meet in any
one place; will it follow in any sound understanding that they could ever after
all still meet in one Congregation, when they were infinitely daily increased? I
trow not; for so to speak, and so to argue and conclude, would be but to prove
fighters against all reason; yea against God himself (as I said before) and to
deny the express Scriptures, as will forthwith appear; for in the same
Chapter when there were but three thousand new Converts added to the Church, it
is said that then that company could not all meet in any one place to
communicate in all acts of worship, but for want of a place spacious enough for
to break bread in, they were forced then to meet in diverse places, and to
divide themselves into several Assemblies and Congregations, and that in
several houses; for so says the Scripture, verse 46. and they continued daily
with one accord in the Temple, and breaking bread from house to house; that is,
in many several houses, they had their meetings to communicate in; therefore
at that very time there were many Congregations of Believers, so that they
could not possibly meet altogether in one place. And here by the way it is good
to take notice, not only that there were many Congregations of Believers in
the Church of Jerusalem, which the Independents confess to be the first formed
Church, and that when there were but three thousand new Converts added to the
Disciples, but that all these were speedily and readily received into
Church Fellowship, and that by the sole and alone authority of the Apostles, so
that it was not required at their hands, that they should first walk sometime
with the Church before their admission, or that they should make a particular
confession of their faith, or bring in the evidences of their conversion, or
that they should enter into any particular explicit Covenant, or that they
must have the consent of the Church before they could be received into
Church Fellowship; nothing I say of all this was either practiced in this
Mother Church, or any Daughter-church in the Primitive and purest times; but
these two truths are most certainly evident out of the Scripture.

The first, that all Christians in the church of Jerusalem were admitted into
Church Fellowship upon their repenting, believing and being baptized, without
any other conditions, and that upon offering themselves.

The second truth is this, that there were many congregations and Assemblies of
Believers in the Church of Jerusalem at that instant time, which is abundantly
proved out of the testimonies and reasons above specified, and those express
words, where it is said that they brake bread from house to house; therefore
there were many Congregations then.

But it will farther more illustriously yet appear, if we consider the diverse
other additions of Believers, and that daily unto the Church of Jerusalem: for
in the last verse of this chapter it is said that the Lord added daily unto the
Church such as should be saved; here we find additions upon additions of
Believers, and that daily, indefinitly set down, as if they could not easily
have been told, which adds no small Emphasis unto the expression; and all
these were admitted into Church Fellowship without any of those conditions the
Independents require of all their Members in these our times; for it is said
the Lord added daily unto the Church such as should be saved; and therefore he
did it only upon his own terms of Repentance, Faith and Baptism. Now what
understanding man can easily believe that when there was such daily increase of
Believers made, that they could all still meet in any one place or Congregation
to partake in all Ordinances? But if we look into the fourth chapter, we
shall find an other new Addition, and that of five thousand men more, besides
women; for so says the Scripture, verse 4. Howbeit, many of them which heard
the word believed, and the number of the men was about five thousand. Now if
when there were but three thousand, they were then forced for want of a
convenient place spacious enough to communicate in, to divide themselves into
diverse several houses; how impossible a thing was it for them all daily then
to meet together in any one place or congregation, may any one imagine, when
there were not only daily additions of Believers, but five thousand men more
added unto the Church at one time? without all controversy it was impossible
that they could all then meet together in any one place; and for farther
confirmation of this truth, and for the putting of this controversy for ever
out of doubt, the Holy Ghost says in the fifth chapter, verse 14. And
Believers were more added unto the Church, multitudes both of men and women.
Mark I pray the expression, multitudes: Now by multitude, all men know is to
be understood, and that in all Languages, a very great Assembly or
congregation, or company; whereupon the Scripture says, follow not a multitude
to do evil, so that by multitude is ever understood some vast Assembly or
Congregation of people; and here the Scripture says, speaking in the plural
number that multitudes, and that both of men and women were added to the Lord,
that is to say many great Congregations and Assemblies were added to the
Church; yea, the expression does as it were intimate that they came in so fast
that they could not now any longer be counted as it were by retayle or
enumerate companies, as when they came in by small numbers, as three thousand
and five thousand at a time which might easily be told and reckoned, but that
now they came into the Church in such great bodies, as they were forced to set
them down by whole sale; and therefore the Holy Ghost says, that Believers
were added unto the Lord, multitudes both of men and women, that is to say many
great Congregations of Believers of both sexes; yea, and that there might yet
be no mistake in this business, the Scripture says in the last verse of this
chapter, for the great multitudes of them, that the Apostles daily in the
Temple, and in every house ceased not to teach and preach Jesus Christ. So that
here by the testimony of the Holy Ghost we are ascertained there were diverse
and several Congregations of Believers at that time in the Church of
Jerusalem; for they had their meetings not only in the Temple, but in every
house, or from house to house, which is all one that is to say, they had many
Congregations and Assemblies of Believers at that time in several private
houses, as well as in the Temple; so that this truth being confirmed unto us
not only by reason, but by the mouth of so many infallible witnesses, as that
out of the second chapter, where it is said they brake bread daily from house
to house, and two more witnesses also in this fifth chapter, where it is
recorded, verse 14. that multitudes both of men and women, that is to say many
great Congregations of Believers of both sexes were added to the Lord, and in
the last verse, that there might be yet no scruple made of the business, the
places of their meetings are also expressed, viz. in the Temple and in every
house; so that all good Christians are bound to believe that there were many
Congregations and Assemblies of Believers at that time in the Church of
Jerusalem, and therefore more then could all possibly meet in any one place or
congregation.

So that if I should say no more, the truth concerning this point is so
evidently apparent to all judicious and understanding men, that they cannot
doubt of it, except they will deny the Scripture it self; yet that the truth
concerning this controversy may yet more fully be cleared, I shall for the
farther coroborrating of it and for confirmation of the same, produce a few
testimonies more.

In the sixth chapter, verse 7. The word of the Lord increased, (says the Holy
Ghost) and the number of Disciples multiplied in Jerusalem greatly, and a great
company of the Priests were obedient to the faith. Here we find multiplication
upon multiplication of Believers, and more additions of them, and that in
Jerusalem, and amongst these multitudes there was a great company of Priests,
that is a great company of their Ministers and learned Rabbis were converted,
and all these several admissions of Believers into this Church of Jerusalem
were without any of the conditions those of the congregationall way require now
of their new Members; for it is not said, that they demanded of them that they
should walk some time with them before their admission, or that they should
make any public confession of their faith, or bring in the evidences of their
conversion, or enter into any particular explicit Covenant, or come in by the
consent of the people before their admission; nothing of all these things were
required at their hands in this Mother Church; and therefore all the practice
of this kind of admission in our new Congregations is without any president or
example; and therefore those of the congregationall way do most wickedly to
pretend they have the Church of Jerusalem for an example for their practice of
admitting of Members.

But I say the thing chiefly to be observed here is the multiplication and the
increase of many more Disciples to the former, adding withal, that amongst
those Disciples and Converts that were added to the Lord there was a great
company of the Priests: now what an increase of Believers may any man suppose
there must then needs follow, when so many of their Ministers were converted?
without doubt when the people saw their Priests turn Christians, and heard
them also in their preachings give in their reasons for their embracing of the
Gospel, and saw withal the daily miracles of the Apostles for the confirmation
of this their doctrine they did infinitely multiply; so that if there had been
no conversion of men before spak of, yet the conversion of these very Priests
in a short time would have procured the conversion of many more then could have
met in any one place or a few; and this all reason will persuade; for we find
it by hourly experience, how many hundreds are daily mislead, and seduced by
the error of a few temporising unstable Presbyters, who are turned
Independents, and what a deal of mischief they have done here amongst us, so
that not a few places can contain their Proselytes, and all this without the
help of any miracles; and we see daily, if but any rich and crased
Gentlewoman, or any confounded Lady turn Independent, or if but any unstable
man of any eminency revolt from the Presbyterian way, what a noise there is by
and by made at it, and how many giddy headed men, and women especially, are
seduced by it, and that without any prodigies: Now I say all reason will
persuade any intelligible man that truth should much more prevail then error,
and that in the hands of so great a multitude, and of such learned Rabbis, and
those also in so great honor and esteem amongst the people, having withal
the help of Miracles amongst them, and that to the speedy conversion of many
thousands; yea, the Scripture says, that the Word of God increased, that is to
say converted many, and that the number of Disciples multiplied in Jerusalem
greatly, not in a small manner; and that a great company of the Priests were
also added unto the Lord; so that if there were a great Congregation and
Assembly of the Priests, as the Word of God relates; there must necessarily be
many more Congregations of the ordinary people, and all these are to be yet
reckoned upon a new account, and upon a new List, so that there were
numberless Congregations of Believers in the Church of Jerusalem, if any
credit may be given to the Holy Scripture, and that in the very infancy of the
Church: so that I am most confident, that this truth is now evident and
perspicuous to all those that have but ordinary understanding.

But because this is the only business, as the Independents say, and that will
put an end to this controversy between us; for they have often said, prove
once but clearly unto us out of the Word of God that there were many
Congregations of Believers in the Church of Jerusalem, and then we will grant
you the day; I say in this regard I shall briefly add some other Arguments to
prove there were more Believers in the Church of Jerusalem then could all
possibly meet in any one Congregation or a few: for to these that were daily
converted and added to the Church, we hear upon all occasions of additions
upon additions, and of increase upon increase of many more Believers: for in
the ninth chapter, verse 31. it is recorded, that the Churches having rest
through all Judea and Galilee, and Samaria, they were multiplied, for so it is
in the O^iginall. Now Jerusalem was the chief Church in Iudaea, and therefore
she also multiplied and increased in Disciples daily, which being added to the
former spoke of, it makes it an impossible thing that they could all meet
together in any one place or a few. And in the 12. chapter upon the miraculous
death of Herod, it is said verse 24. that the Word of God grew and multiplied
in Jerusalem, that is, brought forth great increase of 'Beleevers, and made
them exceedingly daily to multiply, so that all these additions upon additions
of Believers made it an impossible thing that the hundredth part of them could
meet in any one place.

But omitting many Arguments that I could produce from the multitudes of their
Preachers, and the diversity of the nations, and the infinite number of the
Inhabitants, and from the Miracles in Jerusalem that necessarily called for
many Congregations and Assemblies; that one place in the 21. of the Acts may
for ever silence all Gainsayers, and abundanly prove unto rational men, that
there were many, if not numberless congregations of Believers then in the
church of Jerusalem. If we will but take notice what Saint James, and all the
Presbyters of Jerusalem spoke unto Saint Paul, who being all Inhabitants there,
and the Ministers and Preachers of the Word in that Church, must all
necessarily know not only the condition of the Believers there, but for the
most part the number of them; now I say it will be worth our pains and
attention, to observe and take notice what is there confirmed by the testimony
of many witnesses, yea, a cloud of witnesses, and all of them without
exception, there was James the Apostle by name, and all the Presbyters of
Jerusalem, all Synodians, whose witness was true, and for ever to be believed,
and yet they give in this evidence to Saint Paul, concerning the Believers in
Jerusalem, that there were many ten thousands of weak Brethren here; how many
ten thousands more may we suppose were there then of strong Brethren in the
Church of Jerusalem? seeing for the most part in all Churches where there are
able and learned Ministers it is ever observed, that there are three strong
brethren to one weak one, at least more strong brethren then weak ones: Now
when there was a whole College of Apostles for the most part resident in that
Church, and a whole college of Presbyters, fixed Ministers there and able
Preachers, besides a multitude of Priests, and all painful, and laborious,
that preached unto them night and day, and instructed them all in their
Christian Liberty, and confirmed them in it with miracles; and when they had
also for a farther strengthening of them in that their Christian Liberty, called
a Council and Synod in Jerusalem, and ratified the abrogation of the legal
Ceremonies, and that from the Holy Scripture, and the Spirit of God, and did
daily preach unto them all this their Christian Liberty; we are bound by the
Law of charity to believe there were many more thousands of strong Christians
then weak in that Church; yea, our daily experience will persuade any man to
believe this Doctrine; Now let us hear what Saint James, and all the
Presbyters witness unto Saint Paul concerning this point, verse 20. Thou see
Brother Paul (say they) how many ten thousands (for so it is in the Original
(...) of the Jews there are which believe, and they are all zealous of the
Law; out of the which words we may observe that those Saint James and the
Presbyters speak of were all Inhabitants in Jerusalem, for they could witness
nothing of strangers, those that dwelt in other places, neither could they have
said thou see them, if they had not been Inhabitants, or if they had been
here to day and gone to morrow; for then they could not have been taken notice
of; but they speak of Inhabitants, as by many Arguments may be proved, and of
all these they asser^ these things.

First, for the number of them, that they were many ten thousands.

Secondly, that they were all Believers, Disciples, and very good Christians,
yea very zealous ones.

Thirdly, they do witness, that all these many ten thousands were but weak
Brethren, and therefore gave Saint Paul counsel, yea an order, somewhat to
connive at their weakness for a time, that he might the better ingratiate
himself into their favor; the story is there fully set down.

Now I say if there were many ten thousands of weak Brethren in the Church of
Jerusalem, how many more ten thousands of strong Believers may any rational
men suppose were then there in that church, where there were a college of
Apostles forth most part, and a standing College of able Presbyters, all
miraculous Teachers, and assisted immediately by the spirit of God? Surely a few
hundred of houses or places could not possibly have held their very bodies,
much less could a few hundred of houses have held them to partake in all the
Ordinances; so that all men that have not absolutely resolved to give the
Spirit of God the lie, yea, to wage war against Heaven, must acknowledge,
that there were many Congregations and Assemblies of Believers in the Church of
Jerusalem, especially when it comes confirmed by so many witnesses of divine
authority. By which it appears that there were many Congregations of
Believers there, as in every house one. So that for this point, I am most
assured it is now without controversy, that there were many Congregations and
Assemblies of Believers in the Church of Jerusalem; and yet all these as the
Holy Scripture asserteth in many places, made all but one Church; and the
Independents themselves acknowledge, there was but one Church in Jerusalem.

Now how in any ordinary man's understanding can many congregations be one
political ministerial Church, except only because they are united and
associated under one Presbyteriall government? that is to say, under the
government of a whole college of Presbyters which the Church of Jerusalem was?
for there was many Presbyters there as this 21. chapter testifies and the 15.
chap. and many other places of holy writ, all which had the government over
that Church committed to them in common; So that it may be a wonder to all
rational men that there should any appear in the world, notwithstanding the
abundant evidence out of the holy Word of God, that should yet assert, there
were no more believers in the Church of Jerusalem then could all meet in one
Congregation: which assertion of theirs, besides the Scripture, very common
reason overthrows; for if we consider Jerusalem, it is said to be the city of
the great King in which there were never less then seven or eight hundred
thousand inhabitants, who daily expected the Messiah; who it is well known when
he came had twelve Apostles and seventy Disciples at his command to go and come
at pleasure, whose powerful preaching was such, that it is related that Satan
was seen fall down like iightning from heaven, that is to say, whose Kingdom
was overthrown by their ministry, and by all whose efficacious preaching and
miracles we have this testimony that at one of their Miracles and Sermons there
were three thousand converted at one time, besides daily additions added unto
that Church by the Lord, and five thousand men besides women at another, and
multitudes of believers both of men and women at another, and that there was
daily increase of believers upon increase with a multitude of Priests, besides
a whole college of Presbyters settled Ministers amongst them, and that all
these should yet prevail to convert no more in future time then could all meet
in one Congregation, it seems a thing very incredible: and truly for any to
persevere in this error against all reason and against the evident testimonies
of holy Scripture, where we have it recorded there were many ten thousands of
very weak believers in that one Church besides the strong, it is an open and
wilful fighting against God and a resisting of his spirit, which is a fearful
sin: for all these are convincing arguments to prove the numberless multitudes
and congregations of believers in the Church of Jerusalem: And all th^s brigade
of arguments militate against the whole Army of the Homothumadon Sectaries, and
shall I hope for ever serve to vanquish them all and to make good this field of
truth, That there were many Congregations and Assemblies of believers in the
Church of Jerusalem, and yet they were not every one a Church or Churches
severally considered by themselves, exercising an absolute sovereignty
Independent within themselves respectively, as all our new gathered Churches do
now here in London: but all those congregations in Jerusalem were all
subordinate, and being combined together made all of them but one Church, and
were all under a common Counsel or College of Presbyters within that Precinct;
the example of which Mother Church is left upon record to all posterity for
imitation: and therefore that tenent of the Homothumadon Independents
concerning the congregationall way, has no ground for it in the whole Word of
God, but is a mere whimsy of their own brain, and has its foundation only in
the air, and will soon vanish or be speedily blown away by the blast and
breath of truth.

Now my other companies drawn out of the Apostles quarters after Christ's death
and ascension, they militate against all the Burtonian Independents, who
acknowledge that there were many Assemblies of believers in the Church of
Jerusalem, but deny they were Churches properly so called; now though by their
grant they have lost the day (as in the following skirmishes will appear) yet
that all men may see that this sconse of error to which they have betaken
themselves, cannot defend their cause; I shall with one company at this time
beat them out of that hold, and fully vanquish them in the pitched field: It is
recorded Act. 2. v. 42. of all those new converts which were in many assemblies
and in many houses, that they continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine and
fellowship, and in breaking of bread and in prayers. This very troop alone
serves for the beating of them all out of what bulwark soever they can betake
themselves to for shelter: for if all these congregations and Assemblies of
believers were equal in all privileges and immunities with any Churches that
ever were on earth, and had in them severally whatsoever did make the whole
Church of Jerusalem the first formed Church, then they were all and every one
of them Churches properly so called: But the antecedent is true: Ergo, the
consequent; so that to any rational man this question is also out of
controversy: for let any man but duly examine, what it was in the whole church
of Jerusalem that made it the first formed church and a church properly so
called, and he shall find the same in every one of those particular
congregations and assemblies for the making of them churches properly so
called; so that they each of them severally may as truly challenge the name of
Church, as the whole Church can, they communicating in whatsoever is essential
for the making of any church a complete church or a church properly so called,
if partaking in all Ordinances by lawful Ministers can make any assembly or
congregation a church properly so called: So that by this one company and by
this very argument all the whibling reserves of all the Burtonian Independents
are dissipated and scattered, and that place of truth maintained against them
all: viz. that every one of those Assemblies in Jerusalem were churches
properly so called, and yet all of them made up but one entire Church, and they
were not every of them severally considered by themselves and apart Independent
and exercising an absolute sovereignty within themselves: And therefore this
truth shall for ever stand good against all sorts of Independents That many
congregations combined together and subordinate to some one college of
Presbyters make all of them within their precincts but one entire Church: and
that this is Gods Ordinance, and not that tenent of the congregationall way
which has neither precept or president for it in all Gods holy Word: So that
by all these encounters and frequent skirmishes and by the mighty power and
assistance of the great Lord of Hosts the General of all the Armies of heaven
and earth, I have vanquished all the forces both of the Homothumadon
Independents and all the Burtonian Sectaries, and maintained and kept not only
the field of truth, but these two sconses and bulwarks of the same: viz.

The first, that there were many congregations and assemblies of believers in
the church of Jerusalem.

The second, that all those several congregations and assemblies were churches
properly so called: which when it comes to the main battle, will be fully made
good, and withal it will be maintained, that all those several congregations
made all of them but one Church, and were all of them combined together and
subordinate to one Presbytery, that is, to a College of Presbyters, who by Gods
own appointment had the rule over them committed to them in common: by all
which the doctrine of the Congregationall way is utterly overthrown, whose
tenent and opinion it is, that every Congregation of believers, be it greater
or smaller, ought to be a distinct Church or body by it self exercising all
Church power and authority within it self Independent; and ought not to have
reference or relation to any other church or congregation for matter of
government, no farther then pleases themselves; and this they affirm to be
Gods Ordinance and Constitution, whereas in the Church at Jerusalem the
Mother Church, there were innumerable Congregations and Assemblies of
believers, and yet all of them made up but one Church: For those several
congregations, as the Burtonian Independents do affirm, were but branches of
that one entire Church; these are their words.

By all which it now appears that it is Gods Ordinance and his Appointment
that many congregations combined together in any city or vicinity within some
Precinct, should all of them within that jurisdiction make up but one Church
and be under a College of Presbyters to be governed by them in common, which is
indeed a mere ecclesiastical Corporation; and therefore this kind of
government might without any offense or diviation from the holy Word of God be
compared by me to any civil Corporation, as that of London or the like: For
though I. S. and my brother Burton spend much time and many words to no purpose
about my simile, yet it will stand for ever immovable and serve to all
intelligible Christians for that very end I propound it: viz. to declare the
state of the question; yea by I. S. his own words page* the fourth of his
Pamphlet it is authorized; for he there after much babble thus expresses
himself concerning this point, when (says he) we know the true nature of
spiritual things, of the devices of God, as I may call them, we may find a
resemblance of them in things here below, which are made after them, but we
cannot fetch the knowledge of heavenly composures from these earthly things.
Thus J. S. speaks there.

So that I having from the holy Word of God and from the constitution of the
Church at Jerusalem the first true formed Church and original Church found out
the true nature of that spiritual and ecclesiastical government, that
heavenly composure and that device of God (as he grollishly calls it) it was
then no sin in me (in I. S. his opinion) to find a resemblance of it in things
below. And therefore both he himself and my brother Burton might have saved
all that labor they needlessly spent about that simile, which will ever stand
good against whatsoever they shall be able to say against it, for the
elucidating and clearing of the point of difference between the Presbyterians
and the Independents, which was the only end I made use of it for; and there
fore all the pudder they made about that simile, was but to beat the air and
to vent their own vanity.

But from all this dispute (that I may now speak something concerning National
Churches, which the Independents deny) I farther gather, That if many hundred
Congregations being combined together under one Presbytery in any great City or
Vicinity within any large Jurisdiction, may all of them make up but one Church
within that Precinct, and may take its name or denomination from the City or
place in which it is: I see no reason why a thousand Parishes, yea ten
thousand, all of them embracing the Gospel and making profession of the true
Christian Religion, in what Kingdom, Nation, Province, Country, or
Commonwealth soever they be, may not all of them in those several Countries,
being all of them combined together and under some grand Presbyteries, take
their several names and denominations either from those respective nations or
languages, and be called either the Greek Church, or the Hebrew Church, or the
Latin Church, or the French Church, or the Dutch Church, etc. or be called the
Church of England, Scotland, Ireland, or or such a Provincial Church, or such
a National Church; I say I see no reason why, if all those several Nations
coming in at the sound of the Gospel, and all of them giving up their names to
the profession of the Christian faith, may not as well from those several
Nations take the name of the Church from the Nation as they may take it from
Jerusalem or from any other City as that of Corinth, Ephesus, etc. and so
become National churches: I desire therefore any man to give me a good and
solid reason to the contrary; for this I am sure of, that it was promised unto
Abraham that he should be a Father of many Nations, which he was not in respect
of his natural posterity: for he was only in that regard a Father of the
Hebrews who challenged Abraham to be their Father; and therefore it must
necessarily be in respect of their faith and spiritual parentage in that they
are all of them his children in regard of their common faith and belief in the
Messiah, whose day Abraham by faith saw and rejoiced in it, which all the
Nations of believers do, and therefore they likewise in that respect are called
the children, sons and daughters of Abraham, and may therefore be truly called
National Churches, which all the Independents with my brother Burton and I. S.
deny; for Christ is called the light of the Gentiles, yea there are many
glorious promises concerning the calling of the Nations and Gentiles; as that
in Isaiah 19. ver. 23, 24. where it is said, In that day shall there be a
highway out of Egypt to Assyria, and the Assyrian shall come into Egypt, and
the Egyptian into Assyria, and the Egyptians shall serve with the Assyrians.
In that day shall Israel be the third with Egypt, and with Assyria, even a
blessing in the midst of the Land. Here all these three Nations are called
three sister Churches, if we mark the coherence. And for farther proof of
National Churches under the Gospel it is said, Isaiah 55. 5. Thou shall call
a Nation which thou know not, and Nations which knew not thee shall run unto
thee, which words are spoke of Christ under the Gospel, in the which is set
down both Gods Call of a Nation, and the Nations Answer to that Call, and there
can be no more required to make a Church. And it is prophesied of Gospel
times, Psalm. 22. 27. And all the ends of the world shall remember and turn unto
the Lord, and all the kindreds of the Nations shall worship before thee. And
Psalm. 72. it is said All Kings shall fall down before him, and all Nations
shall serve him. And Psalm. 86. 9. All Nations whom thou have made shall come
and worship before thee, O Lord, and shall glorify thy name: Innumerable
places to this purpose might be produced for the proving of National Churches;
for all Nations are Christ's by donation, Psalm. 2. 8. Ask of me (says the Lord
speaking to Christ) and I shall give thee the heathen for thine inheritance,
and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession: Yea they are his by
conquest who has vanquished the strong man and disarmed him and vindicated the
Nations into his own possession; yea they are his by purchase also: viz. all
the elect of them, for he has redeemed them with his precious blood, 1 Pet. 1.
Acts 20. Yea they are his by call, for he sent his Apostles into all nations to
invite them to come in, Matthew. 28. Mark 16. And many of them obeyed the call
and are his by covenant, as we may see it Revel. 11. v. 15. where it is said
The Kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his
Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever. And Paul in the 11. of the ROMANS
speaking unto all the Gentiles, in as much as he was the Apostle of the
Gentiles, says ver. 17. That some of the natural branches being broken off,
the Gentiles which were the wild Olive tree were graffed in amongst them and
with them did partake of the root and fatness of the Olive tree; So that now
all the Nations were equal in privileges with the Jews in all respects, so
that as that was a national Church, so are they, and yet all make but one
Church, for there is but one shepherd and one sheep fold, one Church consisting
of Jews and Gentiles; now as the Church of the Jews is said to be but one
National church, because all the tribes in that Family or Nation, and all the
visible and public assemblies of the same being parts of the catholic
church, and living under one ecclesiastical and civil government, were by the
profession of the same faith and fellowship and communion of the same worship
and government united into one body ecclesiastic or ecclesiastical
commonwealth: So for ought I know all those Kingdoms, Nations, Countries and
Provinces that shall embrace the Gospel (as I said before) and come under the
government of Jesus Christ the great high Priest and King of his church which
was typified by the legal high Priest and the Kings of Judah and do yield
obedience unto him and that government he has appointed in his church, may all
of them, being joined in a particular consociation and community in any country
Nation or Province or Kingdom, receive their denomination from the several
countries and nations in which they are. For the Church eatholick being an
homogenial and similar body retains the name of church, into what cities,
countries, nations or Kingdoms soever it be divided into; for as those many
Congregations in the Church at Jerusalem made all of them but one church within
its precincts, and had its name from thence; so may the many Parishes and
Villages, which being met together in their several bounds, in the profession
of the same Christian faith, make but one Church, being all of them through
that country combined together under one government, both Ecclesiastical and
civil; for as for the division of the nations, it is not to be considered,
merely as an humane and politic Ordinance, as many conceive, and therefore
would make Provincial Churches, and Parish Churches a humane invention; for in
the 32. of Deuteronomy. v. 8. it is said there when the most high divided to the
nations their inheritance; so that God was the Author of this division, and
gave their several names unto them, and set all their bounds and limits; yea,
he has set the bounds of every man, as it is sufficiently proved by the
Apostle, Acts 17. where he says, verse 26. that God has made of one blood
all nations of men, for to dwell on all the face of the earth, and has
determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitations; so
that the division of the whole world into diverse nations, and those nations
into several Provinces and Counties, and those counties into so many hundreds,
and Wapentakes, or Rapes, or Tribes, and all these into so many several
Parishes, is said to be Gods own appointment; for he is said to have divided
the nations, and tohave set them their bounds; and therefore I can conceive no
reason why Parish Churches amongst us may not as well be accounted Gods
Ordinance, as Parish Synagogues amongst the Jews; and why city Churches
amongst us may not as well be Gods Ordinance now, as it was then; for so by
divine institution they were then in the Apostles times esteemed; and it is
well known that in New England all their several Towns, as that of Plymouth,
Bostorne, Cambridge, etc. have all their bounds and limits prescribed unto
them, and all the people within that precinct, and no farther, that submit
themselves to that their government, are said to be Members of each several
Church, and of no other; and yet* all this is as much politic, as the division
of our Parishes and Cities; and those Churches constituted by the Apostles in
every city, village and country, were as much politic as ours, and yet are
called Gods Ordinances: and truly I know no good reason why our parish churches
should not far rather, and with far greater reason be of divine
institution, then those churches of the congregationall way: for it is well
known that all the Members in our several Parishes dwell within such and such
limits, and for the most part are all well and familiarly known one to an
other; and every week, once at least see all one an others faces, and can
daily meet together for to watch over one another; whereas those of the
congregationall way dwell many of them twenty miles one from another, and some
threescore miles one from another, and all for the most part a great distance
one from another, scattered here and there, so that they cannot possibly one
watch over an other, as is pretended, and behold one an others conversation,
for that is impossible; and therefore for my particular I know that the
parochial or parishionall assembling of themselves together for the enjoying
of the Ordinances has presidents for it in holy Writ, and that many, both in
cities and villages; but we have not one president of such congregations as
are now in our new Churches in all the whole Book of God; and therefore I
conclude that all our parochial meetings are far more of divine institution,
and Churches properly so called then the Assemblies of the congregationall way:
And by the same Argument I may gather that the Christian Churches now through
the world, at least all the reformed Churches may as well be called national
Churches, as the Jewish Church was, especially if we look unto the requisites
that make a national Church; for two things are required for the making of a
national Church; first a national agreement in the same faith and worship.
Secondly, a national union in one Ecclesiastical body in the same community
of Ecclesiastical government; as now the Church of England, Scotland and
Ireland, have all by covenant bound themselves to maintain the same faith and
worship, and by a national union and agreement they have accorded to be under
a Presbyteriall government, and this they all acknowledge to be Gods Ordinance,
and a way appointed by him of governing his church; and that the Presbyterian
government is Gods Ordinance, the Independents themselves do acknowledge, but
they hold only a congregationall Presbytery, and we hold, and that from all
reason, and from the good word of God, and from many presidents, both City,
classical, provincial and national Presbyteries, and oecumenicall also upon
occasions; for of these kinds of Presbyteries, both the Word of God, and many
Ecclesiastical Histories do furnish us with some presidents: and therefore
for the one we have divine institution for it, and many examples in the Book
of God; but we have neither precept nor example of that of the congregationall
way, and therefore it is none of Gods institutions, nor none of his devices nor
composures, that I may use some of I. S. his Rhetoric, but a mere figment of
their own brain.

But now I am to answer to something my Brother Burton has to say concerning
the Presbyters of the Church of England, who page 6. 7. of his Book, If you
(says he) have not a good Presbytery, where shall he, viz. that is
scandalized or offended, go to complain? He may go and appeal higher you
will say, and what if the higher the worse? Good Brother (says he) either
provide the people of the Land an honest godly Presbytery, that may be as so
many Angels to gather out of Christ's Kingdom every thing that offends; or else
let there be a tender care of tender consciences, and some provision made for
them, that they may not be scandalized by being forced to be the companions of
the scandalous. Thus my Brother Burton.

Here is a double If propounded merely to amuse the people: for it is not
unknown to all men that the Parliament, the great Council of the Kingdom,
endeavors to cast out all scandalous Ministers, so far as their power
extends through the Kingdom, if by information and sufficient witnesses they
can be proved to be such; so that every conscientious and intelligible man may
see there is very small ground for the doubts and fears, either of my Brother
Burton, or any of that Fraternity, that there will not be a good Presbytery set
up, and as little (when they cannot deny but the godly if offended may go and
appeal higher) for either he himself or they to make such a supposition; what
if the higher the worse? If I should conclude, that these doubts were
conceived, nourished, and brought forth out of the womb of faction, my Brother
Burton with his accomplices would call it railing; therefore to avoid (ifit be
possible) their unjust censures I only say thus much, that both he and all
his brethren use an uncharitable way of arguing (which is the best construction
can be made of it) for thus they may traduce any man, yea, any government, or
any way of God at pleasure, with a detracting if. But here lies the mystery;
the only way my Brother Burton and his associats have to advance Independency,
is to cloud the truth of God under dark expressions, and to eclypse those
shining Lights, the faithful godly Ministers throughout the kingdom, that the
Lord has set up in his Church, that so the people may not hear the voice of
God speaking in them, by which means the understandings of many are wrapped up
in error, obscurity and darkness, as in a mantle, and the ungrounded and
unwarrantable notions of Independency are received by them as new Lights, they
being very pleasing to flesh and blood: for man naturally has an ambitious,
boundless spirit, and from the beginning would not be limited by God himself,
and the Independent doctrine being without bounds, teaching that it is free for
men to believe, practice and preach abroad their several opinions (calling it
liberty of conscience) this is such a Light that all the sons and daughters of
darkness will willingly walk in. But should the Independents obtain their
desire, wherever this new Light were set up, it would prove no other liberty
then that which our first Parents Adam and Eve gained for their Rebellion
against Gods command, which was to inslave themselves, and all their posterity
to sin and Satan; and most certain it is, that such a liberty as the
Independents do teach, seek, and (joining with all sort of Sectaries and
Libertines) plead and stand for, would bring confusion, and an irrevocable
curse on those Kingdoms and countries as shall tolerate so great abominations,
and cause the Lord who hates Laodicean Lukewarmenesse in Religion, to spue them
out of his mouth, Revel. 3. 15. 16. But before I pass on, I will take this
liberty to say unto my Brother Burton, that whatsoever with his Ifs he can
plead against our Presbyters, may be said with much more, and with far better
reason against the independent Presbyters, if they be wicked or heretical; for
from them there is no appeal for relief by any amongst them never so much
wronged; and therefore all such kinds of arguing against our Presbyters, is as
altogether uncharitable, so but trifling. But my Brother Burton calls upon me to
provide the people of the Land an honest and godly Presbytery; from whence it
appears that in his and his brethrens account all the Orthodox, faithful and
godly Presbyters in the Land at this day, who differ from the opinions they
have lately received, are neither honest nor godly: for if there be (as most
certain it is there are many) honest and godly Presbyters provided for the
people of the Land, it is strange he should speak in such a manner, as if they
were altogether wanting, for so his words do intimate; for why otherwise
should he make such a request to me of providing an honest and godly
Presbytery, if he or they believed we had a godly Presbytery already, who
notwithstanding he knows has no power to perform it? Truly all his
Argumentations are very uncharitable, and no way beseeming a Brother; for
charity is kind, and thinks no evil, 1 Cor. 13. 4. 5. But were it so, that it
might be taken pro confesso, that there were not any such set up in this land,
which were to deny the Suns shining at noonday, did he and the Independents
indeed and in truth unfainedly desire such a Presbytery should be set up and
established, why do they not, as they falsely accuse them, first prove them to
be enemies of Jesus Christ and his Kingdom, and not a godly and an honest
Presbytery, and then as in duty they are all bound earnestly in the first
place seek to God, that he would send faithful Laborers into his Vineyard,
and secondly to authority, that they would set up an honest and a godly
Presbytery, and give unto them full power that they may be as so many Angels
to gather out of Christ's Kingdom every thing that offends according to the Word
of God, which all the knowing godly Presbyterians (Ministers and people) do
heartilydesire, that so no truly tender consciences may be scandalized? this I
say were the duty of them all, and not to make suppositions and needless
requests to those that have neither power nor authority to do it. But the
Independents are so far from this, that they have made it their design
hitherto, to hinder the work of Reformation by raising up questions
continually, as being always unsatisfied (and by seeking to stir up the
people in their preachings and Pamphlets against the Presbyterians) and that
merely to oppose, retard and keep off a settled government in the Church of God
(saying) what haste is there of that? and in the mean time they fish in our
troubled waters, and yet their strongest and most effectual baits wherewith
they allure and catch the poor silly fishes, I mean the simple and unstable
people, is this, to tell them that there is not any Church*government settled,
and that as they have waited many years already, so they may wait as many
more, and be as far off from Discipline, and a through Reformation as they
now are, saying withal, if they do wait to have a Presbytery set up, what
if it be not a good one? and what if they have not power to gather out of
Christ's Kingdom every thing that offends? affirming, that as it is
uncomfortable, so it is absolutely sinful, to live without the Ordinances,
which amongst the Saints, and none but Believers in their Congregations they
may enjoy. Thus whiles the Independents do labor and endeavor with all their
might to oppose the settling of Church*government, they make the want thereof
the most powerful and prevalent Engine and Argument to draw the people into
their way; and upon the occasion of these Interrogatories or queries, and of
these Ifs and Ands of my Brother Burton, and his confedertes, I shall set down
some of their Independent practices well known to many thousands in this
Kingdom besides my self, by which their ingratitude, both to God and men, and
the rest^esnesse of these men's spirits will the better appear to all such as
are not blinded with a previous or prejudicated opinion. So that all men of
discerning spirits by beholding their juglings and unwarrantable proceedings,
may learn to shun them, and to take heed of them, and all their by-ways. It
is well known that in the time of the Prelates power, the removal of a very
few things would have given great content unto the most scrupulous consciences:
for I my self can speak thus much, not only concerning the conscientious
Professors here in England, but the most rigid Separatists beyond the Seas,
with many of which I had familiar acquaintance at home and abroad, and amongst
all that ever I conversed with, I never heard them till within these twenty
years desire any other thing in Reformation, but that the Ceremonies might be
removed with their Innovations, and that Episcopacy might be regulated, and
their boundless power and authority taken from them, and that the
extravagances of the High Commission Court might be annihilated, and made void,
and that there might through the Kingdom be a preaching Ministry every where
set up. This was all that the most that I was then acquainted with desired in
the Reformation of Church matters. Indeed within this sixteen years I met
with some that desired a more full Reformation, and yet if they might have
enjoyed but that I now mentioned, they would have been very thankful to God
and authority, and have sat down quietly. But yet I say the extremest extent
of their desires, reached but to the removal of all the Ceremonies and
Innovations, the taking away of the Service Book, and the putting down of the
High Commission Court, (which was called the court Christian, though it was
rather Pagan) and the removal of the Hierarchy, root and branch, and the
setting up, and establishing of a godly Presbytery through the Kingdom; this
was I say all and the uttermost Reformation that was required by the most
scrupulous men then living that I knew; yea, I can speak thus much in the
presence of God, that Master Robinson of Leiden, the Pastor of the Brownist
Church, there told me and others, who are yet living to witness the truth of
what I now say, that if he might in England have enjoyed but the liberty of
his Ministry there, with an immunity but from the very Ceremonies, and that
they had not forced him to a subscription to them, and imposed upon him the
observation of them, that he had never separated from it, or left that Church.
This I can depose; so that all men may see, the very dispensing with the
ceremonies would then have given great content to the most austere professors;
how much more may any man suppose would they have sat down satisfied, if but
the very ceremonies then might have bin removed?

Surely if the Prelates had not been infatuated, and had they but in those
things a little connived, and would have abated somewhat of their rigor, for
ought I know, they might have never been questioned, but they might have
enjoyed all their honors and greatness, and whatsoever they could have
desired, and that with the good liking of all the people; had they I say but
dispensed with those needless vanities, and had they but favored honest and
godly Ministers, and set up Lights, I mean good Preachers in the dark places
and corners of the Kingdom, they would have been beloved and reverenced of
all men, and no man would have envied their Magnificence: yea, I am most
assured had they but favored good and godly men, the whole Kingdom would have
been their friends; and whereas they all at last petitioned against them, they
would have supplicated in their behalf, that they might still have continued
in their authority. But through their own pride, and from an ambition of
Lording it over their brethren, and by their tyrannical practices, and
licentious living they have brought confusion upon themselves, and been one of
the principal causes of all the miseries and distractions, and of all the
bloodshed that the three Kingdoms are now involved with; and for ought I can
discern our Independent Predicants now treading in their steps, and seeking to
be the sole and only men, and to set up their new government, which is more
groundless then that of the Prelates, if the Lord of his infinite power and
goodness prevent not their design, they are in a way to bring a greater
confusion upon both Church and State, and the three Kingdoms then that which
were are all now imbroyled with: For I have heard them peremptorily conclude
amongst themselves, making use of that saying of the Prophet, that they shall
come to thee, and not thou to them, intimating by those words that they would
never submit themselves to the Presbyterian classical Government, but that all
the Presbyters must come in, and yield to their Independency, so that if they
persist in this their groundless Resolution, we may never promise unto our
selves any peace or quiet, unless they may have what they aspire to, and what
they desire; and for ought I know there will be no end of their demands, nor no
limits or bounds to their requests and prayers: for they look every day for
new Discoveries, and expect yet more new Lights, saying, that all truths are
not yet fully revealed, and therefore according to those they say they must act
and be moved; so that by this their doctrine, there will never be a period of
their Grolleries.

And all men may well perceive what an endless work they that shall satisfy
the Independents will have by their very beginnings: for to my knowledge the
chiefest of them, and those that are now in highest esteem in that Fraternity,
and the chiefest men and women amongst them at the beginning of this
Parliament, desired only the removal of the Ceremonies, and all Innovations,
the removal of the Service Book, the putting down of the High Commission
Court, and the taking away of the Hierarchy root and branch, and the setting up
of the Presbyterian government as it was in other Reformed Churches, and
especially in that of Scotland, and that was all they then desired; and there
were then none in all the City of London that more honored the Scots to my
knowledge then they: None that entertained them more nobly and freely (which
was the honor of our nation, and for their own reputation) none that
frequented the ministry of the Scots more, and that more zealously attended
upon it every Lords day whiles they were lodged by London-Stone then they: so
that I do not know at this time an Independent in London, especially of the
principallest of them, that were not then great Lovers of the Scots, and very
desirous of that Church Government here in England, that is now amongst them,
and which they have since covenanted for; yea, they were the only people that
brought in the Scots; and yet behold now the vanity and instability of all
these men, there are not any, neither in City or Country that more malign
them, and are now greater enemies to them and the Presbyterian government then
these very Independents, which makes me think that it will be as impossible a
work for the Parliament, or any authority to satisfy them, as it is
impossible for the whole world to satisfy the avarice of a covetous man, one
story of the which comes now to my mind, which I shall at this time relate upon
my own knowledge, which somewhat suteth with these times in which we live.

I being one day some twenty years since at a great Festivity in a Doctor of
physics house here in London, he in a merry way related unto his guests how
poor he came into this City, professing unto them all, that he was not worth
six pounds in the world, books and all at his first coming, and that being
entertained into the Family of one of Queen Elizabeth's Doctors of Physic to
her person, for to teach his children, he so pleased the humor of the Doctor,
that he let him have the use of his Library, and communicated unto him the way
of his practice, and gave him many excellent receipts, and he remaining with
him some five years, it pleased God to take away the Doctor, and his
Apothecary taking a very good liking to him, persuaded him now to practice
physic in his place, wishing him withal to take some convenient house by
him, promising him that he would further him what he could, saying moreover
that he doubted not but by the praise, and the goodreport he would give of
him, to make all those noble personages that were the Doctors Patients, to make
use of him, and he would do all this upon condition that he would use no other
Apothecary but himself, to which the Doctor willingly condescended: whereupon
the Apothecary so bestirred himself that he made good his promise and brought
him into the greatest practice of any Physician then in London.

But said he, when I first began to practice, being very poor, I thought with
my self that if I could with all my pains and industry get but an hundred
pounds a year to live upon when I am old, or leave to my Family, I would never
aspire to greater riches: and truly, said he, within the space of one year I
got above two thousand pounds and purchased an hundred pounds a year, and then
I thought with my self if I could but make it up two hundred, I would rest
contented without any farther ambition, and I within less then one years space
made it up two hundred pounds per annum, and then I thought if I could but make
it up five hundred pound a year, I would never desire any more, and within a
few years (said he) I made it up five hundred pound a year; and then I thought
with my self if I could now but make it a thousand pound a year, I would then
be content, and within a few years I had my desire: And then I thought with my
self if I could make it up but two thousand pound a year, I would never desire
any more wealth; and before I was fifty years of age I had, says he, purchased
two thousand pound per annum: And then I thought with my self if I could make
it up but three thousand pound per annum, I would then go build Hospitalls and
rest abundantly satisfied; and truly, says he, within a few years I made it up
above three thousand pound by the year and by my troth, said he, I am now as
covetous as ever I was.

This story did I hear that Doctor tell in way of gloriation to many: but it
may very fitly be applied to all the Independents, who are as boundless in
their desires as this Doctor was in his covetousness; Oh, said they a few
years since, were but the Ceremonies removed with the Innovations of the
Prelates, we would be satisfied; and when they were gone, if now the service
book were but cast out of the Church, we would be content; and when that was
cast out, now if the High Commission Court were put down we should then be
satisfied; and when that was put down, then if the Hierarchy were also taken
away root and branch, then they should be satisfied; now when that was gone, if
we could have but the Presbytery established, and that it might be with us as
in the other Reformed Churches, and especially that of SCOTLAND, then we should
be abundantly thankful to God and to the Parliament, and we would rest
satisfied for ever.

This, to my knowledge, was the language of all the Independents, and all that
I now say can be proved by a cloud of witnesses.

Now I desire all men to take notice how these men are satisfied with that
Reformation which they so ambitiously desired, and that is now established
amongst us, when God and the Parliament has granted them all they could or did
then desire and crave for, they are yet as unsatisfied and as covetous for more
things as that Doctor was of more money, and so for ought I can conceive no
state in the world will ever be able to satisfy their vast and unlimited
wishes. I may truly say of them that an unthankfuller generation both to God
and authority never appeared in the world, then these Sectaries are; but
withal I shall ever believe that their Teachers and Itinerary Predicants have
been the principallest cause of all their unsatisfiednesse and of all their
destractions, and especially those Homothumadon brethren, those fugitives that
ran into Holland and New England, that cowardly left the cause and since have
brought over their New Lights here amongst us, to the darkning of the truth it
self, and disordering of all things, and hindering of Reformation: for they
chiefly and those that have followed those ignes fatuos that they set up, have
occasioned these miserable distractions and divisions that are now every where
through the Land, which if they be not speedily looked unto, will bring
desolation upon the three Kingdoms, all the which giddyheaded unstable men I
can compare to nothing more fitly then to the Turkish Drums, Trumpets and
Whissels, and that in two respects: They that have read but the History of the
holy War shall find that when the Christian Princes went up to fight for the
Sepulcher, that many thousands of them found graves there for themselves, which
happened unto them not from any want of valor in the Christian Army, but by
the disordering of their ranks and files: which gave occasion to the Saracens
and those barbarous people to break in upon them, and to cut off many thousands
of them, which disorder happened unto them upon this occasion. The European
horses being only acquainted with the warlike music of their own holy Army,
never having heard so much as the very sound either of the Turkish drums,
trumpets, or whiffels those unsanctified instruments, when the Christians and
Infidels came to join battle, and that the Armies approached one to another,
the Turkish drums, trumpets and whiffels made such a barbarous noise in the
European horses ears, that they were so scared and affrighted that they began
to run like madd, and brake through all their own ranks and files and so
disordered the whole Army that it was a thousand to one they had not been all
cut apieces at the first encounter. And even after the same manner have the
Homothumadon brethren and all their disciples those their I tinerary Tub*men
like so many drums, trumpets and whiffels with their barbarous noises out of
their several Tubs in the ears of poor creatures both men and women that were
acquainted with no such music as is exercised by those of this new militia, as
that of the Congregationall way, and Church fellowship, and the Church way, and
the way of the Saints, and of new Lights, and newborn Truths, and of the
great things of eternity which come only out of the womb of God and from
between his legs, from Gods immediate hand, by providence not to be explained,
just as a lot, etc. For these with many such are the noises they have now made
in the ears of the poor silly creatures that they have made them all run madd
to the disordering of all things and disturbing of the whole Christian Army
that might by the power of God if we had been well ordered, without these
divisions and distractions they have made amongst us, been able to have
encountered with the whole host of Antichrist; but there is this difference
only between the Turkish drums and whiffels and these our whiffellers, that
they only scared a few horses and made them madd, but these have made men and
women madd amongst us with these their new and barbarous sounds of those their
new ways, and this is the first thing wherein they are like the Turkish drumms
and whiffels.

Now as those Turkish instruments though they made a terrible noise, yet there
was nothing in them but wind and ventosity; so these our whiffellers, and
Tubmen, for the most part, if they be but looked into, there is nothing in them
but mere vapor and frothy windiness which they spread and blow abroad in the
ears of simple creatures, persuading them that the Presbyterians will be more
tyrannical and lordly then ever the Prelates were, and that they are an
Antichristian brood, the sons of Belial, the enemies of Jesus Christ and his
Kingdom, and that the people ought not nor cannot lawfully hear them or read
any thing they write or publish to the world, persuading them that all they
write or preach tends to nothing but the disthroning of Christ and the
setting him up as a Pageant King; but indeed all their endeavor is but while
they cry hail Master, to crucify him, as the wicked Jews did, and with such
uncouth and barbarous noises as these they have put the people generally into
such a heat, fury and distemper against all the Presbyterians, as they have
deterred many thousands from so much as hearing them or coming into their
presence, yea if at any time any of them but accidentally happen into their
company they find them more barbarous toward them then the very Turks were
toward many Christians even when they had them at their mercy; and I am
confident were the Presbyterians at their mercy, they would find less
courtesy from them then from the very Saricens; and I have very good grounds
for this my persuasion from that insolent behavior I my self have seen them
exercise toward all sorts of Presbyterians, but principally toward the
Ministers who^ they affront often and that in an unseemly manner in the very
Churches whiles they are in their Ministry, and when they go and pass along
the streets and when they pass but through the Towns where there are any store
or company of them; for they cannot ride by any of them without some
reproachful calumny or other or without some uncivil behavior which would not
be tolerated in very barbarous Nations. And as for my self it is well known
that neither mywife nor my poor children can pass quietly by the streets for
them without some contumelious disgraceful language from them: and for my own
particular though I never wronged them, I can truly say and can also prove it,
that I have and that often, after they heard I differed from them in opinion,
suffered such inhumanity from many of them, as scarce ever any man did from the
most uncivilized people living, they usually railing of me to my face, and such
of them as I know not nor never to my remembrance saw before their assaulting
of me: and they that carry themselves fairest toward me, either puff in my
face as they pass by me, thinking to provoke me, or else make odd faces at me,
or stare on me as I pass by them like a hare in a form, and they have often
professed unto many that they had as leive meet the devil as me, and said that
I was a devil and that I looked like the devil and like Cain, and a thousand
more such expressions they have upon all occasions in their mouths concerning
me, besides whatsoever they have published in their Pamphlets, and besides all
their filthy and infamous language they daily use to the defaming of me and
mine.

But this is not my condition alone, but so they deal with all those faithful
and godly Presbyterian Ministers, all which confirms me in my opinion, calling
them ugly fellows, and bland asses, and Presbytyrants, and loading them with
all manner of reproaches, so that they have made them all through the Kingdom
so hateful and infamous as they cannot dwell safely in their houses where
there is any increase of them; and all that I now write can sufficiently be
proved by many witnesses, which passages of theirs toward all, corroborates me
in my persuasion: So that by these barbarous practices of all the Sectaries and
by these their uncouth sounds they have so scared and terrified the people that
now the name of a Presbyterian is formidable to many, and it is enough to
hinder any from preferment that they can but blast with the name of a
Presbyterian; and this also has been generally observed, that there is scarce
a man found to have been familiar at any time with any of the Sectaries, that
if he once come to declare himself to stand for the Presbytery, that ever they
could endure after, whatsoever love they seemed to show toward him before that
time; yea it is farther observed, that scarce ever any man of what rank or
fashion soever he were that familiarly conversed amongst them, that they have
not afterward betrayed or blasted their in honor and reputation, yea I could
tell many a sad story to the deterring of any Presbyterian for ever being
familiar with any of that brood, and I shall ever be able to prove that when
some of them that were poor unlearned and obscure men, yet for their seeming
holiness have by great Parsonages been entertained in their families, and whom
they made their principal companions, these most ungrateful and treacherous
fellows have made use of this their noble courtesy and humanity but to find
how they stood affected to Independency, and when they perceived that they were
not for their purpose, though otherwise they were very moderate men, yet they
raised many infamous reports of them, yea they so blasted them in their honors
as they could never after recover their reputation: So that it is a wonder to
me that any cordial real and solid Presbyterian will familiarly converse with
them, when they have daily so many sad presidents of their treachery before
their eyes. And for my part I wonder how any truly godly people dare come in
their company, much less hear them preach, especially when they pray they may
not be led into temptation, and when they have a special command to take heed
of all seducers, and are so frequently in holy Scripture forewarned to decline
all society with them; which they according to Gods command ever ought to
avoid: For Saint Paul speaking of false teachers in the fifth of the Galatians,
wishes that they were cut off, and in the first chapter of the same Epistle v.
8. 9. he faith there, that if an Angel from heaven should preach unto them
otherwise then he had taught them, that they should account him accursed,
therefore surely he would not have any of Christ's Disciples and Scholars
familiar with false teachers and such as teach the people otherwise then Paul
had taught them, which all the Sectaries do, and much more ought all those that
know the doctrines and practices of the Sectaries of our times, and how
dangerous a generation of men they are in all respects, and how many have bin
utterly ruined and undone in their souls and in their estates and reputations
by their familiarity with them, to shun them. Surely it is a great provoking of
God when they know his blessed Will, who has said, Matthew. 15. 7. Beware of
false Prophets which come to you in sheeps clothing, but inwardly are ravening
wolves, that yet they will not take heed of them but run after their
preachments; for this is indeed to thrust themselves into temptation and put
themselves upon needless danger to the ruining of their own souls and the
souls of those that are commit^ed to their charg in their families whom they
are by Gods command to bring up in the nurture and fear of the Lord, and to
instruct in the way of truth and righteousness, which the Sectaries do not
walk in, (as I have sufficiently proved both in my Epistle to the Reader, and
through my whole Book) and therefore ought to be shunned and declined whatsoever
seeming holiness and sanctimony they pretend to the World. Without doubt the
deceivers in Paul's times were as seemingly holy as any of our Itinerary and
Independent Praedicants; for he says of them that like the devil they
transformed themselves into angels of light and appeared like the Ministers of
righteousness; and the Pharisees in Christ's time seemed very glorious
outwardly as our Savior speaks of them, and yet he commanded all his
followers to beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and of the leaven of Herod,
he would have none of his Disciples fam^liar with them, but injoyns them all to
take heed of their doctrines: And Saint Paul 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3, 4. says, that
the last times will be perilous and dangerous times in regard of the false
teachers that should then arise, and after he had made a description of them
that they might know them, which in every thing agrees with the Sectaries of
our times, he says of those seducers, that they shall be lovers of themselves,
covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to Parents, unthankful,
unholy, without natural affection, covenant breakers, false accusers, that is
in the Original, devils, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are
good, treacherous, heady, high minded, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of
God, having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof. Now after he
has deciphered them he gives all men a special command to avoid their
society, saying, from such turn away, he injoynes all men not so much as to
hear them: And compares them to Jannes and Jambres those sorcerers who
withstood Moses, and says of those seducers that they also like them would
resist the truth, they being men of corrupt minds and reprobate concerning the
faith. Truly if ever the Scripture were fulfilled in any age of the world, it
is now fulfilled in these our times, there being not any part in this whole
description of those dangerous* seducers that does not in every branch of it
agree with the Seducers and Sectaries of ours the most dangerous times in that
regard that ever were in the world: And therefore it concerns all men that
desire the peace of Zion and the welfare of their own souls, to take heed of
them all, least they be found fighters against God: for we have precept upon
precept to this very end given by all his holy Prophets, Christ and his blessed
Apostles to shun them; and Saint John in his second Epistle v. 10, 11. says
there, speaking to all Christians, If there come any unto you that bring not
the doctrine of Christ, entertain him not into your house, neither bid him God
speed: for he that bids him God speed is partaker of his evil deeds. Now we
know the Sectaries of our times teach such doctrines as were never taught by
Christ nor any of his blessed Apostles; how then dare any that have the name of
Christians be familiar* with such and entertain them in their houses?
especially when Saint Paul says 2 Timothy chapter 2. verse 19. Let every one that
names the name of Christ depart from iniquity or evil.

And what greater iniquity and evil can there be, then to live in the open
violation of Gods Commands? for in the very same chapter he exhorted them,
ver. 16. 17. to shun profane and vain bablings, (which is the practice of the
Sectaries) saying they would increase to more ungodliness, and that their
words will eat as does a canker, of whom is Hymeneus and Philetus, who
concerning the truth have erred, saying, that the Resurrection is past already,
and overthrow the faith of some; he names some of the Sectaries there. Now
here also we are commanded again to avoid all evil, whether it be the evil
of Doctrine, or manners, or evil company, and especially to avoid and shun all
false Teachers, whose doctrines eat as a Gangrene, such as are the new
Doctrines of our times, which are inferior to none for evil, impiety and
wickedness that were ever yet taught in the world, as ye may see in Learned
Master Edward's Gangrena, and therefore it concerns all to shun the evil of
all Sectaries company and fellowship; and in the 6, chapter of his 1. Epistle
to Tim. verse 3. as if he could never have given caution enough, he says
there, If any man teach otherwise, (then he and Christ had instructed Timothy
to teach) and consent not to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to Godliness, from such with
draw thy self. If Timothy which was a well grounded Christian, an Evangelist
by his place, if he were again and again by the Holy Apostle commanded to shun
and decline the company and familiarity of all false Teachers and Seducers, how
much more ought all other Christians that are so much inferior to Timothy in
all respects to take heed of all Sectaries, especially when we by our daily
experience find how many they have misled and seduced?

Truly it has been the great Rebellion of both Ministers and people in these
our times, contrary to the command of God, to follow them, and to lend them not
only their ears, but their Pulpits and Churches to preach in; and doubtless
whatsoever they may think, they have both of them much to answer for before
God, as being the principal causes of the ruin, and misleading of so many
souls, and if the State do not speedily take order for the suppressing of all
those wicked Deceivers, the times will grow more dangerous and perilous, not
only in regard of the precious souls of many, but in respect also of the peace
and quiet of the Land, for all things will speedily run to confusion, and the
Sectaries will bring down Gods judgments upon the Land, by their damnable and
desperate Doctrines, and ruin upon the very Parliament, and the States of the
Kingdom; and there will one Jack Straw, or other, or one Wat Tyl^r, or some
worshipful Knipper or other be raised up to be a deliverer of their Sovereign
Lord the people, out of the hands of all Prerogative, and King-creatures, and
out of the hands of their own creature the Parliament: The Lord awaken the
Parliament, the Lords and Peers of the Kingdom, and all the Governors
through the same to stand now all upon their Guards, they having had so many
Warning-Peeces, both in the Army, and in the City, both in Pulpits and
Pamphlets what the Independents and Sectaries intend to do. Were there no
other Books but John Lilburns, who knows the mind of his brethren, and the
great concourse of people that follow him, and countenance him in his wicked
practices, it were enough to awaken the whole Kingdom. But when we daily hear
and read what Peter's, Salt-marsh, Dell etc. those worthy Saints both preach
and print, and what gallant Fellows they have now with the sword in their
hands, and what privileges they claim unto themselves, it is a matter of
wonder and astonishment to me, that they are not all of them timely looked
unto, and it stranges me most of all, that there should be any of those
Sectaries permitted through the Kingdom to bear any office of charge
committed unto them, or to have any other weapon offensive or defensive in
their hands, then a bodkin or a thimble, which were the only iron many of them
wore before these times; for it is well known that all the Sectaries in the
Kingdom within these six years, were as much afraid of the Artillery Guarden,
and of the Military Yard, as they were afraid of a Cathedral Church; and the
roaring of the Ordnance and Canons, and the noise of a volley of shot, the
sound of a Trumpet, and the beating of a Drum were as formidable Music in
their ears, as the noise of a pair of Organs or Sackbuts, or the singing of
the Choristers in Paul's, Westminster-Abb^y, or in the Kings Chapel, and yet
now they can begin to talk of the sword in their hands. It is not good that
such children as these are should be suffered to have such dangerous weapons in
their fingers. It was not thought fit by our Forefathers, who were commended
for their wisdom, that any Papists should sit in the Parliament, and our ever
to be honored Worthies now sitting in that great Conncell did not think it
for the Kingdoms safety, that any Papist should be of the Kings Council; and
at the first sitting of the Parliament no Monopolists, or Gatherers of
Ship Money, or Pattentees, or any such creatures, though they were lawfully
chosen by the people were suffered to sit in Parliament, but were thrust out as
being suspected they would prove bad instruments to the State; and therefore I
say notwithstanding the peoples election they were immediately dismissed the
great Council, and the people were to make a new choice. For my own particular
I will speak my conscience in this point, and leave it to the judgment of all
intelligible and wise men, such as love their Religion and Country, I see no
reason that any Sectary whatsoever, whether Independent, Antinomian,
Anabaptist, Seeker, etc. or any Fugitives that have ran over into Holland, or
New England to set up new Churches there, should be suffered to sit in the
Great Council of the Kingdom, which without doubt will with all their ability
and power labor to maintain their several factions, all which tend to the
ruine^of this State and Kingdom, and to the destruction of all our liberties;
and therefore I conceive they are as dangerous as ever the Papists were; yea,
the tenants of many of them are more destructive to all Government then ever
those of the Jesuits were, or the most inveterate Papist that ever yet put pen
to paper, and if the Papists were not suffered to sit in Parliament, I shall
ever believe it will not consist with the safety of the Land, that any Sectary
what ever should sit in the great Council, especially it being daily perceived
that all the Sectaries through the land have their encouragement from some of
them to do mischief every where, but if the people through the Kingdom will
not humbly perition the Parliament, that all such with all Minors and Novices
should be put out of the Parliament, it being proclaimed by God himself as a
curse to that people who have children for their Princes, Isa. 3. whether they
be children in respect of years or discretion, then it is a sad presage of that
kingdoms and countries ruin, where the people are not only divided amongst
themselves, but their councels also, which they are through the whole land in
all their Committees by reason of these Sectaries and Independents on all
sides, who are the only fomenters of factions and divisions, and by this means
have got all the wealth and riches of the Land into their own hands, with most
of the strength* with the ruin and miseries of many. The Lord open the eyes of
all the people that they may timely see into their danger, and petition the
Great Council, that all the Sectaries may be removed out ofall offices, and
Committees, and places of trust through the Kingdom. But if any of them shall
brag of any service done for the State, it is well known they were not the
only Actors in that employment, but ten to one better Christians then
themselves did the work, though they have got all the honor from them, and
have been ever well paid for it, when the other wanted their moneys, and
therefore they having bin so well regarded already above others they may hold
their peace, and be latisfied; for it is well known that not one of a thousand
of them before the wars begun was worth any thing, yet now they are known to
be very rich and wealthy, when such as were borne to great estates, and were as
serviceable to the Parliament, and faithfuller to it, with fewer self ends
then they have been, are many of them destitute of Livelihood, and many more
of them by the calumnies and lies of the Independents and Sectaries, are now in
disgrace, and all their service is forgotten, all the which things, besides the
dangerousnesse of these men's Doctrines, should teach all men to avoid and shun
both their teachings, and teachers, and accomplices, and abetters.

This I thought fit out of my love to my country, and out of my desire of all
men's salvation to speak. If my words shall find any esteem, or any shall for
sake the errors of their new ways, by seeing the truth, I shall rejoice and
count my self happy; but if men resolve to persist in their erroneous opinions
and bypath of ignorance, I will say with the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14. 38. He that
is ignorant let him be ignorant still.

THE Utter Routing of the whole Army of all the INDEPENDENTS and Sectaries,
with the total overthrow of their Hirarchy, that new Babell, more groundless
than that of the Prelates.
THe Apostle Saint Paul in the fourth of the Ephesians, exhorting all
Christians to walk worthy of the Vocation whereunto they were called, and to
behave themselves as beseemed Brethren; wishes them with all lowliness and
meekness, with long suffering and patience, to bear one with another in love:
And uses a forceable Argument, to move them to brotherly kindness, Because,
says he, there is but one body and one spirit and one hope of Salvation: We
all worship one God, we are all consecrated to him with one Baptism, and we
all hope for one and the self-same glory: Therefore as there is but one Lord,
one faith, one Baptism; so be ye also of one mind, live in love, and keep
the unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace. If ever there was need of this
exhortation, there is now singular use of it, especially in this distracted
Nation wherein we live. For the division of a Kingdom is the ruin of it: the
division of a family destroys it: the division between brethren brings a
confusion amongst them. It has ever bin observed, That diversity of judgment
and opinion has made a difference in affection. The difference between the
Jews and the Samaritans in points of Religion, made the Disciples desire, That
fire might come down from heaven to end that controversy. The difference
between us and the Papists, and the diversity of opinions between us, made
them, because they could not bring down fire from heaven, fetch it out of hell,
to blow up the Parliament; and because that had not the desired effect, and the
diversity of opinion still remaining, makes the difference of their affection
from us so great, that nothing can expiate their indignation against us, but
the utter internetion and destruction of us all; and this and this only, next
unto our own sins, is the cause of all those fatal calamities this miserable
kingdom is now imbroyled with. And therefore, all care and diligence among
brethren, should be used to get a right understanding one of another, and to
move them to bear one with another, and ever to call to mind the saying of
Abraham to Lot, Genesis 13. Let not us contend together for we are brethren. I am
most assured, if there were a right understanding of the differences that are
now among brethren, there could not be such bitter expressions one against
another, and such alienation of affection as is now too frequent and too well
known to the common enemy. We are commanded, If it be possible, as much as lies
in us, to be in in peace with all men, Romans 12. 18. And the fruits of discord
are set down in the 5th of the Galathians verse 15. If says the Apostle ye
bite and devour one another, take heed ye be not consumed one with another,
and in the 20. verse. Hatred says the Apostle, varience, emulation, strife,
heresies etc. and envyings are of the flesh, and they that do such things shall
not enter into the Kingdom of God. A double misery follows those that do these
things, misery here, and misery hereafter, it excludes men out of heaven. The
contemplation of the sad condition, that will inevitably come upon that Land,
Kingdom, and Church, where those variances and heart-burnings are, and where
there is such diversity of opinions, and by reason of them, such difference in
affection, put me chiefly upon this employment, to see and try, if by any
possible means, I could, by showing wherein the difference between the
brethren lies, be an instrument of a good accord amongst them: resolving with
my self by Gods assistance whatsoever others do, to observe to the uttermost of
my abilities, the royal Law, Jan. 2. 8. I do conceive, that if there were a
right understanding one of another opinions, the world would wonder there
should be such invectives in every pamphlet one against another, and such
varience among those that are joined together and that with nighest relations.
The truth is, the misunderstanding of each others opinions and the mis-prisian
of each others intentions, is the only cause of this diversity of affection
which to the dishonor of God and of our holy profession, and indeed to the
disgrace of Christian Religion, every where too much venteth it self. And
therefore as Abraham said unto Lot, so say I to all those that love the truth
in sincerity and wish the Peace of Zion; Let not us contend, especially with
evil language, for we are brethren; we have one father, we worship one God, we
have one light, one truth, one way. And this I profess to all the world, That
I contend not for victory, but for that ancient light, the faith once delivered
unto the Saints, Jude 3. For that truth which we have heard from the beginning,
1 John 2. ver. 14. for the old way, verse 6. The way the truth and the life,
Ioh. 14. and for the honor of that Church against which the gates of hell can
never prevail; in the which there are all those undeceiveable marks, as are
able for ever to declare her to be built upon the foundation of Peter, in which
the Gospel of Jesus Christ is purely and sincerely both preached and believed,
and where the Sacraments are rightly administered, and in the which there is the
true invocation of God, and all other requisites that make her a true Church;
and from which there is no just cause of separation. That I have dedicated this
Treatise to no man, nor sought the patronage of any Authority, no mortal
creature I presume, will blame me, knowing my Reasons. For writing in defense
of the Prerogative Royal of Kings, against Papal Usurpation; I dedicated my
book unto the King of great Britain, France, and Ireland, supposing my self
safe under his protection, whose honor and imperial dignity I maintain: but
all men know, what misery to the ruin of me, my wife, and many small children
came upon me by it, through the power and exorbitant authority of the Prelates:
so that for my duty and Loyalty to the King, I had a prison for my reward, and
the scorns and contumelies of the world to comfort me in it. And when I most
humbly petitioned his highness, complaining against the injustice done me, and
most submissively supplicated his Majesty (who was the Caesar to whom only I
could then appeal) that he would be pleased to grant me one of these humble
requests, either That his Majesty would be pleased, but for one hour to give
me a hearing of my just defense; or if that could not be granted, That at lest
he would then grant me that liberty in his Kingdom, that he denied not to
Crows and Kites and other Vermin, that I might provide for my young ones; and
if his highness would not be pleased to condescend unto either of the former
just demands, That then he would give me leave to depart the Kingdom, and to go
into any other Country where I might enjoy my Liberty and provide for my poor
distressed family. I am most assured there was never a more equal Petition put
up to any Prince in the world, yet his Majesty vouchsafed not to yield unto
any of these my requests, nor to any other Petition put up either by my poor
distressed wife or calamitous children; so that without any wrong unto his
Majesty, I may truly say, That Paul found more favor from a Heathen Roman
Caesar, then I had from a Christian King, the defender of the faith. After I
saw all possibility of relief was now taken from me, I writ my Apology to the
Bishops themselves, discovering unto them their unjust proceedings in their
Courts, and their unrighteous dealings toward my self, and gave them my
reasons of all I spoke, without any offensive language and without any
perturbation of Spirit; and Dedicated this my Book to the Lords of his
Majesty's Privy Council, expecting aid and relief from them, and indeed I
had no hope of succor from any other, nor knew none to whom I could better
apply my self, earnestly imploring their patronage; but they, as it is well
known, of Patrons became my unjust Judges, and after they had made me a
spectacle to Men and Angels, and exposed me to the scorn and ludibry of the
world, sent me into banishment, where I lived a living death and a dying life,
and suffered such intolerable misery of all sorts, as would exceed belief to
relate; and I am most confident, if all the particulars were truly known, the
world never heard the like, and there I had ended my doleful life, had not God
of his infinite mercy called this Parliament, and put into their hearts to
redeem me from my captivity; for the which incomparable favor, I do, as of
duty I am ever bound, profess my self to the last drop of my blood to be
their servant in the Lord, and in all their most just and honorable
employments; I hope, with all fidelity to answer to the expectation of the
world, and shall in life and death show my self to be one, that without all
by-respects shall ever aim at the glory of God* the honor of them and my
Country, and the common good of all: and shall never by Gods assistance do any
thing in their concernment, that shall be unbeseeming a Man and a Christian.
Now because by my sad experience, I found that I could neither from King nor
Nobles have protection, I resolved never any more in Gods matters, to shroud my
self under any covert but Divine Providence, and that, I with an assured
confidence promise my self, especially when I now maintain the prerogative
royal of the King of Saints, and King of Kings, the Lord Jesus Christ, Who is
our Lawgiver, upon whose shoulders the government of his Church is laid, who is
the wonderful Counselor, the Prince of peace; whose dignity and royalty in
all this dispute between me and Mr. Walter Mountague, I have to the uttermost
of my power maintained, under the shadow of whose wings I have ever found there
is only safety; whose blessed assistance, in all calamities, they that trust in
him, may be most assi^ed of. His patronage now and his defense, is my shield,
whose cause and the honor of whose kingdom at this time I contend for. And
howsoever, in all my life, in all humane learning, I was never so wedded to my
own resolves, but* upon better reason I could easily be divorced from them, yet
in Gods matters, if an Angel should come from Heaven and teach me, that, that
there were another way to happiness, then by that new and living way, the
blood of Jesus Christ, who was the Lambeslaine from the beginning of the world,
I would count him Anathema. Or if an Angel should tell me there were a new way
of worshipping God, and serving him, then that which God himself has set down
in his holy Word, I would account him accursed; for I have learned to believe
God and Faith upon their word and bond, without any either Angelical or Humane
reason, or the authority of Coun^els and Fathers: and whatsoever I find a
warrant in Gods Word for, I have learned to cleave close to it against all
humane reason, supposing such men none of Gods, nor Faiths, truest friends that
will not believe them upon their own word and bond, except they have reason,
humane authority, Councels, and Fathers, and ^aine traditions joined with them
for sureties. Again, if any man should go about to persuade me, that there were
any other government established in the Church of God, then an Aristocraticall
and a Presbyterian one, I should notwithstanding all humane reason to the
contrary, submit my self to that kind of government, as being most confidently
assured that it is warranted in Gods Word; which all Christians are bound for
ever to make the Rule and Square, both of our faith, manners and government.
And here I must mind all those that shall read this Book, that this is no new
opinion of mine, but that which I have once and again suffered for* and if ever
they have read my Elenchus religionis papisticiae, or my Flagellum pontificis,
or my Apology, or any of my Latin Books, in all those they will find, that
the cause of all my sufferings was this, and this only, That I maintained that
all Churches were to be governed by an Aristocraticall and Presbyterian
government, which in those Books I have clearly and fully (through Gods
assistance) made good. Yea, in in my answer to the Bill of Information put up
against me in the Star Chamber, they shall have some reasons I gave there, of
this my tenent, to the Lords of his Majesty's Hrivie Council, and Judges in
the Star Chamber; so that I stand to my principles and am no starter. And if
then amongst Gods people it was thought an opinion worthy the suffering for,
and my Christian brethren deemed me worthy of honor for it, and afforded me
their prayers, and showed me and mine in all our distresses, many courtesies,
when we found little favor from our own brethren (which their humanity I must
never forget, but with all due thankfulness for ever acknowledge) I say, if
then this my opinion was thought Orthodox, and worthy of their applause, I see
no good reason why a truth then should not be counted a truth now; for the Word
of God out of which I had it, is the same, and if it were good then, it is good
now: for the change of men's minds cannot change the truth, but it must be ever
truth: but this my opinion I learned out of Gods Word then which shall be for
ever, by his gracious assistance the warrant of my belief and practice. This
Word therefore, I desire all my Christian Brethren, in the deciding of this
question now agitated, amongst Gods people and his faithful servants,
concerning Church Government, to take into their hands, and with those noble
B^reans to sit down and examine whatsoever shall be said on either side
according to the holy Scrigtures: and I entreat them also to lay aside all
passion (which Religion has no need of) and all vainglory and bitterness,
which is a dishonor to our holy calling, and in the spirit of meekness, and
with a Virgin judgment, not ravished with any previous or anticipated opinion,
to come and approach to the Altar of truth, and so consider and examine, which
of those two opinions the Brethren on both sides now sacrifice themselves unto,
be the offering that will best endure the firy-tryall, 1 Cor. 3. 13, 14, 15.
viz. Whether the Presbyterian government Dependent, or a Presbyterian
government Independent, both now laid upon the Altar, be the acceptablest
service, and best pleasing sacrifice. This is granted on all sides, and of
necessity it must be yielded unto, that that Oblation is the best and most
acceptable that is offered up by faith, without which it is impossible to
please God, and that sacrifice only is offered up by faith, which is according
to his Word, and has its warrant from his revealed will, which is the rule both
for worship and the government of his Church we are to be guided by. The
Brethren on both sides agree about the rule in deciding of this Coutroversie
and make the written word the rule. They agree also about the materials, both
acknowledging a Presbytery, the difference between them is only, about the
mould and manner of the offering. I will therefore state the questions between
us, and show wherein we differ, and then set* down my own opinion with my
reasons, and after endeavor to be a Moderator for the determining of this
unhappy difference, which has been an occasion of so much rejoicing to the
common Enemy.

There is a twofold question between us, they call the Presbyterians, and our
Brethren they term Independents. The first is concerning the government of
the Church, vi^. whether it be Presbyterian Dependent, or Presbyterian
Independent. The second question is, concerning the gathering of Churches: but
of that in its due place. The first question is whether many Congregations or
Christian Assemblies (commonly called Churches in our dialect) in the which
there are all the acts of worship, or all Ordinances, as the pure preaching of
the Gospel, the due and right administration of the Sacraments, the true
invocation of God, Discipline rightly executed, and all other performances,
which make for the essence and form of a true Church, and in the which
assemblies likewise, they have all such officers and helps of Government* as in
their several places being rightly employed, may serve for the edification of
the same, and mutual comfort and benefit of each other, and the preservation
ofall, as Presbyters, does preaching and ruling and Deacons, and all other
Officers; I say the question between us and the brethren is, Whether all these
several Congregations and Assemblies, may be accounted but one Church, or make
but one Church within their Precincts; and be to be under the government and
rule of one Presbytery, or a Council or College of many Presbyters together,
upon which, all the Congregations and several Assemblies under it are to
depend; and to which in all weighty businesses they are to appeal, for any
injury or conceived wrong, or scandal; or for redress of any abuses in
Doctrine or manners, and for the exercising of Church Discipline upon
incorrigable and scandalous offenders; as admonition for giving offense,
suspension from the Ordinances till amendment and reformation; or if obstinate,
Excommunion? Or whether every one of those particular Congregations, or
Assemblies be they never so small, severally or considered a part, and by
themselves be Independent; that is to say, have full and plenary authority
within themselves, without reference to this, or any other great Council or
Presbytery, for transacting or determining all differences about faith or
manners amongst themselves, or for the redressing of any grievances or abuses,
or the exercising of the power of Discipline or jurisdiction, and from the
which there is no appeal for relief, though the parties offended conceive they
have never so much injury or wrong done them? In a word, whether two Presbyters
with a slender Congregation, have an absolute kind of Spiritual Sovereignty
among themselves, in their own Congregation, and as ample authority as was
given to the whole College of the Apostles, Mat. 18. and to the whole
Presbytery in the Church of Jerusalem? And this is the first Question: Which
that it may the better be understood, I will propound it in a simile, and that
in a matter well known unto all men: The government of this famous City of
London, and of many other great Cities through the Kingdom, are called
Corporations, that is to say, majestracies; and have in them a Secular or
Civil Signory or Presbytry, who are invested with Anthority to exercise all
acts of Government amongst themselves, as if they were an absolute
Principality; and this Government, by which all Citizens and inhabitants within
their Precincts and liberties, are to be ruled and ordered, as occasion and
necessity shall require, is committed to the Lord Mayors, Aldermen, and
Common Council, who only by such other Officers as they shall elect and
choose, are to manage and exercise this government so, that all particular
Citizens, and all the Companies of several Tradesmen, are in their particular
Wards, Precincts, and Fellowships, by their constitutions and Charter, to
depend upon the determination of that Counsel, and are to make their addresses
unto them upon any urgent occasion, or conceived wrong, or when it concerns the
common good, and for the time to stand unto their arbitrament. Now then, the
question between us and our Brethren is, as if there should arise a
controversy in these several Corporations; Whether the Companies in each City
where they all have their several Halls, and their several assemblies and
meetings upon all occasions, and have all their Officers, and exercise also a
power of ruling and jurisdiction among themselves be independent, that is to
say, have plenary authority within themselves without reference to the Lord
Mayor or Aldermen or Common-counsell, to determine of all things among their
several Companies, and from the which there is no appeal for relief; though
one be never so much injured and damnified by any unjust act; and whether these
several Companies and several Assemblies be each of them a several
Corporation or Magistracy, or all of them put together make but one
Corporation, under one civil Presbytery consisting of the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and Common-counsell? This I thought fit to propound, that every one
may the better understand the question. Now, as this kingdom of England has
its several Porporations through all Pounties, and the which Porporations,
although they have their several Pompanies in them, yet are all dependent upon
a civil Presbytery and Common-counsell, and every Company in them makes not a
several Porporation or Magistracy, or a several City, but are all dependent
upon the Common-counsell or Presbytery, for the better ordering and governing
of them in all their common affairs, and for the redressing of abuses, and
taking away and removing of common grievances, and have their several appeals
to the Common-counsell, the Lord Mayor, and Aldermen; and if they find no
justice there nor satisfaction, have their redress and appeal to some general
Court, or some supreme judicature, as to the Parliament of the Kingdom, who
redress and determine all things according to the laws and constitutions of
the whole Kingdom. So in the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ, which is his
Church, all these several Churches which we read of in the holy Scrupture of
the New Testament, are so many several Corporations and Associations, all the
several congregations and assemblies as so many several Companies in them,
depending upon a Presbytery or Common-counsell and College of Pastors and
Rulers, all making up but one Church in every one of their jurisdictions and
several Precincts, though they be consistent of never so many several
Assemblies, according to the greatness of the Cities or Towns wherein they
are, or according to the several Hundreds or Divisions assigned to each
Presbytery, and all these several associations to be groverned by their
several Presbyteries for the better ordering and preserving of the same, to
the which every particular man, as well as any Assembly or Congregation, may
have their appeal for the redress of any abuses or enormities, and if they
find themselves wronged there, then they have appeals to some other higher
Presbytery or Counsel of Divines for relief and justice; and both they and all
other of the several Corporations to be governed and regulated by the Laws and
Statutes given by Christ himself, the only Head and King of his Church,
according only to whose laws they are to be governed and ruled for the common
good and preservation of the whole Church, divided into those several
Jurisdictions, Corporations or Precincts, in imitation as near now as may be of
the Churches of Jerusalem, Ephesus, Corinth, and Galatia, etc. and whose laws
alone must be the rule for the ordering of all their government, doctrine, and
manners.

I have premised this I have now said, that all men may the better understand
the state of the Question and controversy in hand. Now then, if it shall be
made appear out of the holy Scripture, That all the several Churches we have
mention of in the New Testament, were all particular corporations or
associations, and governed by a Common Council of Presbyters, or by a
Presbyteriall government in each of them; and that there were many assemblies
and congregations in those several Churches, and all of them had their
distinct Officers amongst themselves, in the which likewise they had all the
Acts of Worship amongst themselves, and did partake in all ordinances of
Church Fellowship, especially in the preaching of the Word, Prayer, and in the
Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper, and yet made but one Church, and
were all governed by a common-counsell of Presbyters, or by a common
Presbytery within their Precincts, then it must of necessity follow, that as
the Mother-churches were first governed, all the Daughter-churches to the end
of the world must be so governed, and according to that rule that is set down
in the Word of God. So then, the question in hand between us and our Brethren
is, Whether, there were many Congregations and Assemblies in any of those
primitive Churches, as in that of Jerusalem the Mother Church, and many Elders
or Presbyters in that Church, and all other Officers; and whether all those
Congregations and Assemblies were one Church, and those Presbyters and Officers
all of them Elders and Officers of that one Church, and whether all those
Congregations and Assemblies were under one Presbytery? Which is the opinion of
the Presbyterians, and the contrary that of the Independents. This I say is the
question between us and our Brethren. Now then if it can be proved, that there
were more Believers in the Church of Jerusalem then could all meet in one
place, or in one congregation for all acts of worship; and if it can be
evidently elucidated, that there were several assemblies and congregations in
the Church of Jerusalem, and yet so, as they made but one church for
government; then our Brethren must of necessity acknowledge that the church of
Jerusalem, was governed by a common council of Presbyters, or was
presbyterially governed. Neither did our Brethren ever yet undertake to prove,
that in case there were many Assemblies in Jerusalem, they had several and
independent presbyteries, neither it they should go about to prove, could they
do it. And therefore we may conclude, and that with very good reason and
warrantable authority, that as the Mother Church, the church of Jerusalem, in
her greatest glory was governed, so all other Churches must likewise be
regulated to the end of the world; For out of Zion shall go forth the Law, and
the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem, Isay 2. v. 3. We must have both our Law
from thence, and our pattern of government. And out Brethren do make the Church
of Jerusalem the pattern of their proceedings.

Now that all things may be handled in good order and in a methodicall way, I
will reduce the whole Disputation concerning the first Question into these
four Propositions, and prove them in order. The first, That there were many
Congregations and several Assemblies of Believers in the Church of Jerusalem,
in the which they enjoyed all acts of worship, and all the Ordinances amongst
themselves, and did partake of all acts of Church Fellowship, especially of
preaching, and in the administration of the Sacraments and Prayer, and that
before the Persecution we read of, Acts 8. v. 1. The second, That all these
Congregations and several Assemblies made but one Church. The third, That the
Apostles and Elders governed, ordered, and ruled this Church, jointly and by a
Commoncounsell and Presbytery. The fourth, That this Church of Jerusalem and
the government of the same, is to be a pattern for all several congregations
and assemblies in any City or vicinity to unite into one Church; and for the
Officers of those congregations to govern that Church jointly in a College or
Presbytery.

But before I come to the proof of these particulars, it will not be amiss in
general to take notice that all the Churches we read of in the New Testament,
were Aristocratically and Presbyterially governed, and were all dependent upon
their several Presbyteries; and that the ordering and managing of that
government lay only upon the Presbytery; and was their peculiar who had the
power of the Keys. Now Christ gave the Keys to the Apostles and Presbyters
only, and whatsoever the Apostles did in ordering and settling the government of
the Church, they did by Christ's command; and that order and constitution they
set down in the Church, was to be perpetuated and continued to the end of the
world. And the violating of this order and divine constitution, was the
occasion of the rise and growth of Antichrist, and the very cause of all those
confusions that the Christian world has for these many generations been
wearied and annoyed with; and the occasion of all those Schisms, Sects, and
Heresies the world has ever swarmed with: and the re-establishing and reducing
of it to its pristine constitution, will be a means not only of removing all
scandal, and taking away of all division amongst Brethren, and be a singular
means also of establishing a flourishing government in Church and State, and
for the procuring of the blessings of God upon the three Kingdoms, but a way
also of ruining that Man of Sin, and of making an absolute Reformation
through the whole world.

Let us therefore first take notice what government was established by God in
all the Primitive Churches, Acts 14. 23. And when they had ordained them
Presbyters (for so it is in the original) in every Church, and had prayed with
fasting, they commended them to the Lord, on whom they believed. Here are two
things observable. The first that the government of the Church was committed to
the Presbyters. The second, that the Presbyteriall government was that
government that was established in every Church; for so says the Holy Ghost,
when they had ordained them Presbyters in every Church. This was Gods
ordinance, Acts 20. 17. And from Miletus he sent to Ephesus, and called the
Presbyters of the Church. Here we see there were many Presbyters in one Church.
And Verse 28. Take heed therefore unto your selves, says the Apostle, and to
all the flock over which the Holy Ghost has made you Bishops, to feed the
Church of God which he has purchased with his own blood. Here, as we may
observe, that in Gods Dialect, Presbyters and Bishops were all one, so likewise
is evident that the Church was committed to their government: this Church
therefore of Ephesus was under a Presbytery, and was to be regulated jointly by
them by a common council of Presbyters. And Paul to Titus, chap. 1. verse. 5.
For this cause, says he, life I thee in Creet, that thou should put in
order the things that are wanting, and ordain Presbyters in every City, as I
appointed thee. If any man be blameless, etc. for a Bishop must be blameless
as the Steward of God, etc. From this place likewise we may take notice of the
parity between Presbyter and Bishop, and that the Presbyterian government was
that way of ruling that God appointed, not in one City only, but in every
City, and that these Presbyters were the Stewards in Gods house, which is his
Church, 1 Timothy 3. and had the government of those Churches in every City laid
upon them, which they were jointly to govern and order by the common-counsell
of Presbyters. And Paul in his first Epistle to Timothy, chap. 5. v. 17. Let
the Presbyters, says he, that rule well, be counted worthy of double honor,
especially they who labor in word and doctrine. Still we ever observe, that
the rule and government of the Church was in the Presbyters hands. And the
Author to the Epistle to the Hebrews, chapter 13. 7. Remember, says he, them that
have the rule over you, who have spoke unto you the Word of God, whose faith
follow, considering the end of their conversation. And verse. 17. Obey, says
he, them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch
for your souls, as they that must give an account, etc. And in verse. 24.
Salute all them, says he, that have the rule over you, and all the Saints.
Here again he injoynes all the Churches to yield obedience, and to submit
themselves unto the government of the Presbytery, showing them that it is
their place to obey, and for their Ministers to rule; and that so long as they
command in the Lord, they out of conscience ought to obey them, and that for a
double reason; For they watch, says he, for your souls, and they must also
give an account of their stewardship. And in 1 Peter 5, 1, 2, 3. The Presbyters
that are among you, says Saint Peter, I exhort, who am also a Presbyter, and a
witness of the sufferings of Christ, and also a partaker of the glory that
shall be revealed; feed the flock of God which is among you, taking the over
sight thereof, not by constraint, but willingly, etc. neither as being Lords
over Gods heritage, but being examples to the flock. And Saint James chap. 5.
ver. 14. Is any among you sick? says he, let him call for the Presbyters of
the Church. He does not say of the Churches, but of the Church. So that the
Presbyterian government was in every Church, and every Church was to submit it
self unto the Presbytery. And in Acts 15. it is said, that Paul and Barnabas
went up to the Apostles and Presbyters, etc. And when they came to Jerusalem
they were received of the Church (it is not said of the Churches, but of the
Church) and of the Apostles and Presbyters, etc. and Verse 6. And the Apostles
and Presbyters came together to consider of the matter, etc. and Verse. 22. Then
pleased it the Apostles and Presbyters with the whole Church, etc. and wrote
Letters by them after this manner. The Apostles, and Presbyters, and Brethren.
And Acts 21. 17. And when we were come to Jerusalem, says Saint Luke, the
Brethren received us gladly. And the day following Paul went in with us in to
James, and all the Presbyters were present. From all which places, and many
more which might be produced, it is most clear and evident, that in all Cities
there was a Presbytery, and that the Presbyters had the power of order, namely,
of preaching, and the power of jurisdiction, that is of ruling, which was ever
to be exercised with others, and not alone; and that consisted in admitting of
members, and in conventing men before them upon occasion, in admonishing if any
offended, in suspending them from the holy Communion till reformation or
amendment; and if they continued obstinate and incorrigble, in excommunicating
and casting of them out of the Church, and upon repentance, in receiving of
them in again, and in ordaining of Officers, and in appointing the times of
meeting, and the places where.

And within these limits, as I conceive, is all the power given to the
Presbyters terminated, and this they are by Gods Ordinance jointly and by the
common-counsell of Presbyters to exercise, and it peculiarly belongs unto
them; and therefore the Presbyterian government was the order of ruling and
governing all Churches, that God himself established, and is to be continued
unto the end of the world; neither do I ever read, that the people or the
congregations were joined with them in their commission, or had any power given
them of ruling. For Saint Paul professes of himself in 1 Cor. 14. 37. that
whatsoever he writ in his Epistles Were the Commands of the Lord. And the same
may be said of all the other Apostles. Now Paul writ to Titus, that the
Churches in all Cities should be governed by a Presbytery. And in the first
Epistle to Timothy he commands Timothy again and again in chap. 5. verse. 21.
and in chap. 6. v. 12, 13. I give thee charge in the sight of God, says he,
That thou keep this Command without spot, unblameable till the appearing of our
Lord Jesus Christ. Here Timothy and all Ministers in him, are to the end of the
world bound to maintain that government unblameable that was appointed by the
Apostles; and that was the Presbyterian government, and the ruling of all
Churches by joint consent, and a common counsel or College of Presbyters; so
that nothing ought to be done or transacted of public concernment without
their joint and mutual accord or agreement and common consent of the
Presbytery. And therefore when Diotrephes assumed unto himself and his
particular congregation a power and authority to rule according to his will and
pleasure, without the consent of the Presbytory, and opposed John the
Presbyter, he sharply reproves his proceedings and signifies to the Church
Epist. 3. That when he came he would remember his words, and teach him how to
prate against the Presbytery with malicious words; For he (says S. John)
contenteth not himself only to prate maliciously against us, but he will not
receive his brethren, nor suffer others, but casts them out of the Church;
which is an evil thing in him; says Saint John: But for you, says he,
speaking to the Church, follow not that which is evil but that which is good.
It was evil in him to assume unto himself alone, and his particular
Congregation, that power that belonged unto the college or council of
Presbyters, and was to be moderated and exercised only by the conjoynt and
common consent of the Presbytery. For God had appointed, that his Church should
be governed by a Presbytery; and Diotrephes would have his Congregation
Independent, and have an absolute jurisdiction within it self, Which, says
Saint John, is an evil thing. So that I cannot but wonder our brethren the
Independents should call Diotrephes the Patriarch of the Presbyterians, as one
of them did to me not long since; whereas if the place be du^ly weighed and
considered; it will appear that he was the first that opposed the Presbyterian
Govenment, and for the which he was by Saint John sharply reproved, and in him,
all that follow his steps, and will not submit themselves to the Presbytery
which is Gods Ordinance, and that will not receive the brethren into the
Churches, but upon their own terms and conditions. But of this business when
I come to the second Question.

In the mean time I must here make reply to what Mr Knollys by way of Answer
has to say to this Argument drawn from Diotrephes his practice which was
occasioned as I related before, by reason of a discourse between me and an
Independent, who affirmed, That Diotriphes was the patriarch of all the
Presbyterians: which opinion of his Mr Knollys does seem to favor, as by his
words may appear, but I hope to make the contrary more evident then yet it has
been, viz. That Diotrephes was the primate of the Independents, and of all
those of the congregationall way. But first I will set down Mr Knollys his
words at large, to take away all occasions of their calumniating tongues, who
ordinarily use to say, That we keep from the world their Arguments, that we may
the better delude the people, and hold them in ignorance. His words therefore
by way of answer to that Argument are these.

Now let the reader judge (says he) whether the Doctor be not much mistaken in
his commentary exposition and application of this place of Scripture. And let
me give you to understand, that Saint John says verse the 9. I wrote unto the
Church. But seeing no mention is made of any particular congregation, how can
the Doctor so confidently affirm that it was his particular congregation? Now
the reader may see plainly, that the Doctor can expound those brethren and
their Elders or Presbyters, which the Scripture calls a Church, to be a
particular congregation. And what it was which Saint John had written to the
Church is not in this Epistle, nor in any other Scripture delcared, except it
was, to receive those brethren which he says ver. 8 ought to be received, and
ver. 10 whom Diotrephes would not receive, how then does the Doctor say that
Diotrephes assumed that power to himself, which belonged unto the College and
Council of Presbyters, without whose joint and mutual agreement, and common
consent nothing ought to be done or transacted of public concernment? is the
receiving of brethren, or casting out of brethren a power which belongs to a
college of Presbyters, and neither the one nor the other may be transacted by
the Elders and Brethren of a particular congregation unless the Court or
common council of Presbyters conjoyntly consent unto it? Let it be also
considered, that D otrephes opposed the brethren and forbad them that would
have received those who Saint John says verse. the 8. we ought to receive, yea
and cast them out verse 10. of the Church, to wit, excommunicate them. Does it
hereby appear that Diotrephes would have his congregation Independent, and have
an absolute jurisdiction within it self? No, but Diotrephes would lord it over
the Church, and have the preeminency above his brethren, whether fellow-Elders
or fellow Saints. Diotrephes loving the primacy amongst them, he would be the
Primate and Metropolitan of the Church, and have the preeminency of all the
Presbyters in it, and brethren of it. The Doctor could have urged this
Scripture against the domineering Prelates, and why should he marvel, that his
brethren should now urge it against the Court of Presbyters. It is confessed that
Diotrephes did that which was evil in usurping authority over the Church and
those brethren he cast out of the Church; But that he was the first that
opposed the Presbyterian government, or that he did affront a Court or
common*councell of Presbyters, it is more then I know, or the Doctor can prove.
For had Diotrephes done so, why was he not convented before them? Surely the
Apostle Saint John would rather have written to the college of Presbyters (if
there were any such) then to the Church, or in writing to the Church, would
tather have sent him a summons to appear at some consistory before the Court
and common council of Presbyters, then to warn them to take heed of hi^
evil, that they did not follow it. And doubtless St John would have written
thus: Diotrephes loves to be a Primate amongst you, wherefore when the
Presbytry, that is to say, the Magistracy or Signiory of grave, solid, learned,
religious, and wise Divines and Ministers come to keep order, and meet together
in a Court and common council, I will remember his deeds, and inform, or
complain to the Court and common council of Presbyters, that he prates against
us (the Presbyters) with malicious words. But the Apostle Saint John (did not
know any Court or Common Council of Presbyters, neither Classical nor
Synodicall, to appeal unto) Nor can the Doctor make good those appeals he
mentions page 10* to be according to the Scripture of truth, to wit, that
every particular man, as well as any assembly or congregation, may have their
appeals to the Presbytry of their Precinct, hundred, or division under whose
jurisdictions they were, and if they found themselves wronged there, that they
have appeals to some other higher Presbytry or Council of Divines for relief
and justice. I only ask the Doctor how he can prove those appeals by
Scripture; and if he could, whether that higher Presbytry or council of
Divines (especially if they may say the Holy Ghost and we) be not as
Independent as these brethren and their churches, against whom the Doctor has
written. And if so, then such a high Presbytry or council of Divines, is not
Gods Ordinance by the Doctors own confession and affirmation. Therefore the
Apostle writes to the Church or particular congregation whereof Diotrephes was
a Member and an Elder, whom he knew had power to judge him as well as the
Church or particular congregation of Corinth had power to judge them that were
members therein, 1 Cor. 5. 12. 13. and therefore might as warantably admonish
Diotrephes as the Church of Colosse might Archipus: Coloss. 4. 17. And if
nothing of public concernment ought to be done or transacted without the joint
and mutual accord or agreement, and common consent of the Presbytry; John the
Presbyter would not have transgressed so far, as to take upon himself this
authority over Diotrephes to tell the Church of his faults, and to say, he
would remember him and sharply reprove him, and teach him to prate against the
Presbytry with malicious words, which belonged unto the Court and
common council of Presbyters. But I shall have a just occasion to say more
touching this matter, in the answer unto the third question, and therefore
passing by the objection with his answer mentioned page 19. to the 29. unto its
due place. I shall desire seriously to consider the Doctors proof of his first
proposition, which he labors first by producing such Scriptures, as he
conceives make for the manifestation of the truth, and from thence frames and
forms his arguments. Thus Mr Knollys in way of reply speaks to my argument
concerning Diotrephes and of his intention what he will do in the ensuing
discourse to all the other arguments.

I have here set down his words at large, omitting only the greek and latin
texts which he School-boy-like scribleth, to little other purpose than to show
his own vanity, and to persuade the ignorant people, that he is somebody in
the Greek and Latin tongue (which kind of learning notwithstanding the most
of his fraternity generally despise and contemn) I have therefore omitted
them, especially having learned this lesson from Saint Paul, 1 Cor. chap. 13.
verse. 19. rather to speak five words to the understanding of the people, that I
might teach others, then ten thousand words in an unknown tongue. And truly
unless there be some controversy concerning the Interpretation or about the
text (as there is not here) I conceive it the greatest folly in the world;
writing in the vulgar tongue and for the common benefit of all men, to insert
sentences either of Greek or Latin, except very varly; for it but pudders the
reader that is not skilled in the languages, neither do we find that it was
the custom either of the holy Prophets, or any of the ancient Greek or Roman
fathers in all their Writings or Sermons, to use any, but their vulgar tongue
without it were very seldom and that with interpretation. I say therefore,
those flashes being excepted I have punctually set down all that he had to say
against any of my arguments both here and every where, that neither he nor any
of his party may complain, that I had not set down their words in their full
strength, and so might fall into the same condemnation with him, who hacketh
and minseth my arguments at pleasure, picking and choosing what he thinks
himself best able to deal with, either wholly omitting the other or slighting
of them which is the ordinary method both of Mr Knollys, J. S. and my brother
Burton and all the Independents, wherein they deal not fairly with me, nor
ingenuously nor heartily with the people: for in so doing they delude them and
merely play the juglers.

This large discourse of Master Knollys, if it be well weighed, has but little
substance in it, it consisting of absurdities and contraditions and flat
denyalls of that which he often grants. In breife, if the reader will but
duly consider every passage of his answer, with whathe grants in the third and
the 11. pages of his pamplet, he will speedily perceive, that whiles he labors
to confute others, he gives a fatal blow to his own cause, and overthrowes
that opinion which both he and all those of the congregationall way labor to
maintain, and withal by the examination of the particulars he will the better
discern into the futility of Master Knollys and the vanity of those of his
party, that believe and take every word of his, for an Oracle though it be
never so distructive totheir own cause. The sum of this his answer is this,
that I am mistaken in my comentary exposition and application of this place of
Scripture. These are his words.

It will not be amiss therefore, in the first place to take notice what he
denies in his answer, and what he affirms, with the reasons of both, that
the reader may the more easily perceive the vanity of error and the force and
efficacy of truth. First he denies that Diotrephes would have had an absolvte
jurisdiction within himself and have had his Congregation independent, and that
he was the first that opposed the Presbyterian Government, or that he had any
particular congregation: He deneyeth also that Saint John knew any Court or
Common counsel of Presbyters either Classical or Synodicall to appeal to his
time. The reasons of his denyals are these. First, because says he, there is
no mention made of any particular congregation Diotrephes had. Secondly, it is
not declared what it was that Saint John had writ unto the Church in his
Epistle nor in any other Scripture, except it were to receive those brethren
which Diotrephes would not receive and therefore, how says God can the D^
affirm that Diotrephes asmed theypower to himself which belonged unto the
College and council of Presbyters etc? and to prove that Diotrephes was not
the first that opposed the Presbyterian government, he says, had he done so,
then he should have been convented before them, which he was not; and therefore
he did not oppose a Court or common Council of Presbyters. Besides Saint John
would then have wrote rather to the College of Presbyters (if they had been any
such) than to the Church, or in writing to the Church would rather have sent
him a summons to appear at some Consistory, than to warn them to take heed
of his evil, that they did not follow it, and doubtless he would have written
thus. Diotrephes loves to be a Primate amongst you: therefore when the
Presbytery comes to keep order, and to meet together in a Court common
Council, I will remember his deeds, and inform and complain to the Court
that he prats against us with malicious words. Now when neither of this was
done by the Presbytry, nor by Saint* John, it is manifest that Diotrephes did
not oppose the Presbytry, and that Saint John then knew not of any Court or
common council of Presbyters either Classical or Synodicall to appeal to in
his time. And then in the third place he puts me upon the proof of those
appeals I made mention of page 10. affirming that I cannot make them good: And
in the last place, he afferteth that Saint John w^it to the Church and
particular congregation whereof Diotrephes was a member, and that, that
congregation had power to judge of him, and the reason of this his assertion,
is, because says he, this Church had the same power over Diotrephes, that the
Church of Corinth and that of Colosse had over their members.

Having thus briefly set down what Master Knollys both denies and affirms with
the reasons of each, I shall now answer to every several branch in order; and
if I be the more large in my reply, I crave pardon, in regard it is not only a
business of public concernment and about the principle question now in
debate, but that it will give the more light to the wholo following discourse.

For answer therefore to his reason of my mistake, in my commentary exposition
and application of that place of Scripture viz: that there is no mention made
of any particular congregation that Diotrephes had, I say, there was no need
of making any mention of it: For if there were many Presbyters in all the
Primative and Apostolical churches, and in that Church by name in which
Diotrephes was Presbyter as it is evident out of all the places above quoted as
out of the 14. of the Acts and the 15. and 20. and 21. of the same book and
the Epistle of Paul to Tit. Chap. 1. ver. 5. and the 1. Epist. o^ Pet. chap 5.
ver. 1. 2. 3. and the 13. of the Heb. and Saint James the 5. and the 3. Epistle
of Saint John which Master Knollys himself acknowledges and if it be also
apparently evident from all those several Scriptures, (as it is) that those
Presbyters were fixed with in their particular jurisdictions, with a special
charge given them in common, to look unto the flocks committed unto their
charge, and to feed the Church of God which he had redeemed with his precious
blood, which word feed includes the Keys, to wit, the power of order and
preaching and the authority of jurisdiction and rule, and from the which charge
they were not to depart, as too too many of the Independent Ministers now
amongst us daily do, leaving the poor sheep in the wilderness: I say when
all these things are evident out of the holy Scripture it necessarily
follows, when Diotrephes was an Elder and Presbyter in that Church Saint John
writ unto, which Master Knollys confesses, that he had there his particular
congregation, and therefore there was no need of making any mention of it: for
very common reason will dictate thus much, to any man, that if any great
grasier have ten or twelve thousand sheep and many several walks and places
of pasturage to feed them in, and has several pastors to look unto them
all, as not a few Shephards can feed ten or twelve thousands sheep, and gives
them all a charge in common of looking to his sheep and feeding them, although
all those several pastors are to have a general care of all those sheep that
have his mark upon them, and that are within the limits of his several walks
and grasing places, yet it is to be understood, that every one of them has his
several flock committed to him in special for he must not be idle, over the
which he is to have the particular inspection and care for the well ordering of
it, with this limitation, that he may not wrong the flock, or do any thing
contrary unto his Masters pleasure, or to the damage or prejudice of his other
fellow Pastors or their flock: All this I say, good reason will dictate to
any rational man, and daily experience will confirm it.

In the same manner things were ordered, in the primitive and Apostolical
Churches, all whose Elders and Pastors in them, had the charge of the several
flocks committed to them in common, all the which they were to govern communi
consilio presbyterorum as it is by all the Independents themselves confessed: for
all those Churches were Aristocratically and Presbyterianly governed: and
therefore according to the wisdom and common council of their Elders, this
Presbyter had the charge of the sheep of such a ward or walk committed unto
his care; and that Elder had such a Circuit committed unto his charge, and a
third Elder had such a precinct committed to his cure, and so of the rest, with
this proviso always, that all things of public concernment, and that tended
to the common good both of sheep and Pastors should be ordered by the joint
and common council of the several and respective Presbyters in an orderly and
well regulated way: for all things in the Church were to be done in order and
decency and uniformitie which could never have been, if every Pastor and
Presbyter and every particular congregation under them severally would have
governed as pleased themselves, without any reference to the College or common
counsel of all the Presbyters, which was the failing of Diotrephes here, for
which he was greatly blamed by Saint John. And that all those Churches were to
be governed by their several Presbytries, and that the people were not to
intermeddle with the government of them Master Knollys himself in the third
page of his pamphlet and in the eleventh of the same does accord, who citing my
words in my introduction to my book deduceth from them four conclusions,
which I shall by and by set down after I have related the grounds of them.

Before (says he) the Doctor comes to prove his four particular Propositions,
he says it will not be amiss in general to take notice that all the Churches
we read of in the new testament were aristocratically and Presbyterially
Governed, and were all Dependent upon the several Presbyters, and produces
diverse places of Scripture to prove the same, and two sheets are spent wholly
in proving thereof, from the 12 page to the 29. These words Mr Knollys quoteth
out of my book. Now hear his answer. All which (says he) should it be granted,
only proves. First, that in every City or Church there was a Presbytery, For
they Ordained them Elders in every Church, Act. 14. That thou Ordain Elders
City by City, Tit. 1. v. 5. Secondly, that as there were Apostles and Elders in
the church of Jerusalem, so there were Elders, in the church of Ephesus Acts
the 20. ver. 25. and in the church of Corinth and in the church of Galatia and
Philippy, etc. Thirdly, that those several churches were dependent, upon their
several Presbyteries, and they were to obey them who had the rule over them,
Hebr. 13. 7. 17. 24. Who were their guids, obey your guids. Fourthly, that this
Presbyterian church Government God has appointed as his Ordinance to be
continued to the end of the World, the which whosoever resists, resists the
Ordinance of God. These are the four conclusions Master Knolleys gathers out
of my arguments, but with all adds, saying, that all this does not prove, that
this Presbyterian Church government is dependent upon a supreme judicature, to
the Decrees of which they must submit themselves and their churches. This says
Mr. Knollys does not follow; but of that in its due place.

In the mean time it will be much to the purpose, a little to consider his
expressions. All which says he) should it be granted proves: First, etc. to
wit, the four conclusions now laid down in this place, I entreat the Reader to
behold the vanity of the man, in so speaking, all which should ^t be granted,
as if he did me a great courtesy and favor to yield unto me, that which the
holy Scripture in ex^resse wo^ds declares o be the will and pleasure of God
and that which I had out of the blessed word of truth sufficiently ev need, and
which no man can deny, except he will deny the Scripture and Word of God which
has perspicuously and in fo mall terms set own, that there was a College and
Presbyte ie of Elders, orda ned and constituted in very Church or City who were
to have the rule over the people in their several congre^ations, within their
^r^cin ^s which M Knollys himself consents unto, as is evident by his 4
conclusions. So that if ever there had been any time of denying or not
granting, that all the Churches of the New Iestament were all Ar^stocratically
and Presbyterianly to be governed, and were so many several Eccle a^^icall
Corpo ations, and that all those Scriptures I had produced for the proof of the
same, had not been rightly applied and alleged, now had been the time (when
this business was in question and agitation) for Mr Knollys to have shown his
skill and to have produced the reasons of his dislike and gainsaying, but when
he confirmed what I proved, as is manifest from his four conclusions it is a
great folly in the man, to say, all which should it be granted, when he
himself acknowledges as much, and in express terms in the eleventh page of
his book has these words; It is not denied (says he) by the brethren,
(meaning the Independents) that the Presbyters in all Churches, were the men in
the Government of the Churches, in which they were Elders: These are his own
words, by which he consen^s to that I had written to be true, to wit, that all
the Churches of the New Testament were all Aristocratically to be governed,
that is, that all the particular congregations under the several Presbyters
were to be moderated and regulated Communi consilio Presbyteram: so that if
every Congregat on and particular assembly, then the pastor and Elder also of
that congregation, as being but a chie^e member of it, is to be ordered and
governed by the joint and common council of the whole college of Presbyters,
and that by Mr Knollys his own concession from which grant of his, I shall now
likewise deduce these ensuing conclusions, which will necessarily follow out of
his words, and all of them fatal to his own principles, and to the opinion of
those of the congregationall way.

The first, that the people are wholly excluded from Government in the Church;
for says he, It is not denied by the brethren, that the Presbyters in all
Churches, were the men in Government of the Churches, in which they were
Elders: So that the people and Church though presbyterated (as they speak) have
not the government in their hands, as indeed they have not, as never having
received the Keys, nor never having been made stewards of the Church, nor
joined in Commission with the Elders, and therefore they can never either
receive in members, or cast out offenders; for all these are acts of Government
and belong only to the Rulers of the Church, whom the people are ever to obey
in the Lord, as he grants, and by this he overthrows all that which afterward
he affirms, that the Church or Congregation of which Diotrephes was an Elder,
had power over him; and this is the first conclusion, that of necessity
follows out of Mr Knollys his words; but more of this in the sequel of this
discourse.

The second conclusion that follows out of his words is this That the
Government was not put into the hands of any one Elder with his Congregation,
but into the hands of many Elders, that is, into the hands of the whole
Presbytery, to wit, the Court or College of Presbyters; so that they, and they
only, jointly and together, had the power, both to question, convent and
censure; for M. Knollys says, It is not denied by the brethren, but that the
Presbyters in all churches were the men in the government: according to that of
S. John If I come, I will remember his deeds which he does prating against us.
So that whosoever shall, Diotrephes like, endeavor to alter this government,
and assume it to themselves from the other Elders and from the Presbyters, or
to invest the people with it, or join them in commission with the Elders, or to
arrogate unto themselves or to their particular congregations, an absolute
jurisdiction within themselves, and an Independency from them; and shall go
about to disgrace and prate against the Presbyters, and labor to bring them
into the hatred of the people, and shall take this liberty at pleasure, to cast
out whom they will out of their congregations, or to bring in whom they please
upon their own terms and conditions, and exercise an absolute Lordly
Dominion amongst themselves over their congregations and the several members
in them, all such are guilty of Diotrephes his sin, and offend in like
manner, and are equally to be blamed as assumers unto themselves of that power
which only belongs to the presbytery; now when all the Independents are
guilty of this crime, they may justly with Diotrephes be censurd: and this is
the second conclusion that necessarily follows from Mr. Knollys his words.

The third is this, that there were many congregations in all the primitive
churches, and yet made all of them within their several precincts and
jurisdictions but one church; for so it was here in the church that Saint John
writes unto, where there were many Elders as Master Knollys confesses, in the
which every Elder had his particular congregation as well as Diotrephes, for
they were no way inferior to him; so that, if he had his particular
congregation they each of them severally had their congregations likewise, and
yet they were all of them to be governed and ruled communi consilio
presbyterorum, which kind of government Diotrephes opposing, or refusing
obedience unto, and affecting a Supremacy and jurisdiction to himself and his
congregation independent from the presbytery, was justly blamed by the Apostle
Saint John, in that he prated against the presbyters with malicious words. So
that by all that I have now said, these three positions are clearly manifest
which Master Knollys denies, viz: the first, That Diotrephes had a particular
congregation. The second that he affected an absolute jurisdicton within
himself and to have his congregation independent, and that he was the first
that opposed the presbyterian government; for we never read of any that prated
malicious words against the Presbytery before. The third that the church that
Saint John writ unto, was governed by the common counsel of the Presbytery at
that time, and that Saint John did then acknowledge a Court and common council
of Presbyters both Classical and Synodicall to appeal unto, all which Master
Knollys notwithstanding does peremptorily deny. But for the fuller elucidation
of the truth, I will first make all these propositions good from Master Knollys
his own words in this his answer, and then I will prove those several appeals
I made mention of page 10. and after that, evidently evince that the people and
congregation in any Church have not power to judge their Ministers, and that it
is a meare babble in M. Knollys to say, that if nothing of public concernment
were to be done without the joint consent of the Presbytery, that then Saint
John the Presbyter would not have transgressed so far as to take upon him
this authority over Diotrephes, to tell the Church of his faults etc. all these
things I will methodically handle, and then go on to answer whatsoever Master
Knollys has to say to all my other arguments in their due places.

And for proof, that Diotrephes had a particular congregation, which Master
Knollys says there was no mention of, waving the reasons above specified, from
that nigh relation that is between a Pastor and a flock, which is so much
urged by all the Independents, I say waving all those reasons, I will make use
of Master Knollys his own words, for it may be, he will believe himself, and
perhaps his Disciples and followers and those of the congregationall way will
give more credit to him, whom they account very learned, then to any thing I
can produce out of the holy Scripture: and if they will duly consider and
ponder his expression they will then perceive not only his errors, but how
palpably he everywhere contradicts himself and wounds their cause, and
everteth their opinion, whiles he labors with all his power to maintain and
defend it.

Diotrephes (says he) opposed the brethren and forbad them that would have
received them, yea and cast them out (ver. 10.) of the Church; to wit,
excommunicated them; but does it hereby appear (says he) that Diotrephes would
have his congregation independent? and have an absolute jurisdiction within it
self? N^ (says he) but, Diotrephes would lord it over the Church, and have
the Preeminency above his brethren, whether fellow Elders or fellow Saints. By
the way, take notice, that in Master Knollys his opinion, Diotrephes was a
Saint, Saint Diotrephes therefore let him be even such another Saint as himself
and his brethren are. Diotrephes (says he) loving the primacy amongst them,
would be the Primate and Metropolitan of the Church, and have the preeminency
of all the Presbyters in it, and brethren of it. And why therefore should the
Doctor marvel that his brethren should now urge this place against the Court
of Preshyters? Thus Master Knollys while he seems to answer, most maliciously
and wickedly calumniates his brethren and labors to persuade the world that
the presbyters of our times are like Diotrephes, in affecting Supremacy over
their fellow Presbyters and over the churches; and all this to inrage the
people against them, when it is they themselves, that would bring all men under
their slavery, and have an absolute authority and jurisdiction Independent in
their several congregations within themselves, which was the sin of
Diotrephes. But out of Master Knollys his words, it appears that Diotrephes
had a particular congregation: For Church and congregation are Synonimaes in
his Dialect, which is yet more clearly evident from his words page the 7.
which are these: Therefore (says he) the Apostle writs to the Church or
particular congregation, whereof Diotrephes was a member and an Elder, who he
knew had power to judge him. These are Master Knollys formal expressions; out
of all which it does now evidently appear, that there were many Presbyters and
many congregations in that Church Saint John writes unto, and that Diotrophes
had his particular congregation amongst them; for so Master Knollys does in
express terms acknowledge, and in so speaking contradicts himself, and
vindicates me from the error he accused me of, who affirmed, I was much
mistaken in my commentary exposition and application of that place, saying
there was no mention made of any particular congregation Diotrephes had, And
yet here he asserteth that Saint John writ to the church or particular
congregation, whereof Diotrephes was a member and an Elder: so that he has
done my work for me once and again, and made himself guilty of that fault he
charged me with page 6 and page 7. By which all men may see not only the
contentiousnesse and restlesnesse of the creatures spirit, and the folly of the
man who contradicts himself at every hand, but may also gather that that
Church consisted of many congregations, all the which made but one Church
within its precinct, and was to be governed by the joint consent and common
counsel of the Presbytery; and that Diotrephes aspiring to the primacy
amongst them and seeking to stand singular by himself with his congregation,
and to be Independent, and to have no relation or reference to the Presbyters
of that Church, became an offender by it, and was therefore severely reproved
by Saint John for his so doing, in opposing his brethren in taking in and
casting out of what members he pleased, by his sole and absolute authority; all
which Mr Knollys accords to: whether therefore this were not to make his
congregation Independent, and whether Diotrephes was not the first that opposed
the Presbyterian government, and affronted a Court and common*councell of
Presbyters (seeing we read of none that did these things before him) and
whether those that now seek to establish an absolute jurisdiction in every
congregation within themselves Independent, be not rather like Diotrephes than
those godly Ministers that desire the government in common according to Gods
holy word, I leave it to the judgment of the learned to consider; and whether
or no Mr Knollys does not palpably contradict himself in all this his
discourse: for he acknowledges that Diotrephes had his particular congregation
and opposed the Presbyters in it, and that he did evil in usurping authority
over the church and those brethren he cast out: and yet notwithstanding he said
it was more then he knew, or I could prove. Whether this therefore be not to
contradict himself and to say and unsay and merely to trifle, I leave to the
judgment of all intelligible men.

I conceive that all men that are but of ordinary capacity, when they shall
well consider my argument and Mr Knollys his reply unto it, will say* that
Diotrephes assumed that power to himself, which belonged to the College and
council of Presbyters; for if he had not bin a transgressour, and an offender
against Saint John and the other Presbyters, the Apostle would never have said,
Wherefore if I come* I will remember his deeds which he does, prating against
us with malicious words, etc. so that by us there, must necessarily be
understood, Saint John himself and the other Presbyters; for he includes
himself in the number of those that Diotrephes prated against and opposed. Now
Saint John was an Elder, for so he calls himself, and Mr Knollys
acknowledges it, and confesses also that there were many more Elders in that
Church, and against all those did Diotrephes prate with malicious words in
opposition to their authority, which Mr Knollys does not gainsay, yea he
affirmrth it, that Diotrephes would lord it over the Church, and have the
preeminency above his brethren, whether fellow-Elders or fellow-Saints, he
would be Primate, says he, and Metropolitan of the Church, and have the
preeminency of all the Presbyters in it, and Brethren of it. Does it not then
sufficiently appear from Mr Knollys his own words, that Diotrephes assumed that
power to himself, that belonged to the College and council of Presbyters,
and that he was the first that opposed the Presbyterian government, and that
affronted the common council of Presbyters? without speaking of malicious
words against them, and lording it over the Church and taking in and casting
out of members and ruling after an arbitrary way, and with a sole power and
authority within himself in his congregation, and violating that order of
government God had established in that Church, be not in Mr Knollys* and those
of his parties judgment, to assume that authority to himself that belonged
unto the council of Presbyters, and openly to oppose the Presbyterian
government, and to affront all the Presbyters which were ridiculous in any man
to affirm? I am confident all intelligible Christians will say, there was
never any opposition of any court or council of Presbyters, if this were not;
and yet Mr Knollys says it is more then he knows or I can prove, that
Diotrephes assumed that power to himself that belonged unto the College of
Presbyters, or that he opposed the Presbyterian government, and yet
acknowledges the thing in formal words; whether therefore he does not again
and again contradict himself and confirm my argument and fight against his
own opinion, I leave it to the judgment of the learned.

I shall also desire the reader seriously to consider with himself, whether
these words of Saint John, Wherefore if I come, says he, I will remember his
deeds which he does, prating against us with malicious words, do not
necessarily infer, that there was a Court and common council of Presbyters
in that Church to appeal, unto in Saint John's time? For to what purpose
otherwise should St. John have said, If I come, I will remember his deeds, if
there had bin no power and authority in that Church to have called Diotrephes
to an account and to have punished and censured him? But, says Mr Knollys; If
Diotrephes had affronted the Court and common council of Presbyters, why was
he not convented before them? Surely the Apostle and Elder Saint John, would
rather have writ to the College of Presbyters (if there had bin any such) than
to the Church, and would rather have sent him a summons to appear at some
Consistory, and would have writ thus, Diotrephes loves to be a Primate among
you; wherefore when the Presbytry come to keep order and to meet together in a
council, I will remember his deeds and inform against him that he pra^e^
against us with malicious words; but the Apostle did not know of any such Court
or council of Presbyters to appeal unto. Thus Mr Knollys triflingly cavilleth:
As if Saint John and the Presbyters had been all ignorant of their duty, and as
if in writing unto the Church, Saint John did not in that write to the
Presbyters in it also, as well as Christ writing unto the seven Churches and in
sending unto them did not also write unto the Angels and Presbyters in them,
when we learn from all those Epistles and from the holy Scripture that the
government of all those seven churches, as of all the Apostolical churches
through the world, lay only on the Presbyters shoulders, which Mr Knollys also
assenteth unto, saying page 11. That it is not denied by the brethren, that the
Presbyters in all Churches, were the men in the government of the Churches in
which they were Elders. So that it cannot be denied but in his writting to the
Church, he writ unto the Presbyters principally who were the Officers in it and
the chief members of it, and knew very well that there was a Court of
Presbyters in that Church, who would in convenient time have called Diotrephes
to an account, though Saint John had never come thither; but he signifying that
when he came he would remember his deeds, made them retard their proceeding
against him, for a time, that he being a fellow-Presbyter with them (as Peter
was, with those Presbyters he writs unto 1 Epistle Pet. chap. 5.) might have
the hearing of the cause amongst the other Presbyters; all which sufficiently
confirms that Saint John did acknowledge a common council of presbyters in
that Church to appeal unto. And therefore all Master Knollys his whibling
questions are vain and merely to delude the people: for what man is there so
stupid or so unexperienced in matters of government, or but understands the
practice of our times in every corporation, or Committee, through the Kingdom,
that knows not if any Alderman of any Corporation, or any Commissioner of any
Committee should affect a particular domination to himself over his
fellow-Aldermen or Commissioners, or over the people that were under their
charge, whenas they are by their charters and Commissions, to govern their
several corporations, Hundreds, Rapes, Ridings or Wapentaks by the common
consent, and joint counsel and aggreement of them all, so that no order made
without their combined authority or the joint consent of them all, or the major
part of them, should be binding and of force, I say, who does not know, that if
any of those Aldermen or Commissioners contrary unto their Charter or
Commission should not only assume unto himself a particular power of ruling
and ordering things by himself, and of giving Laws unto others and in
bringing in or putting out, either in the Corporation or Committee, whom they
pleased; and should also use disgraceful words against their fellow-Aldermen
or Commissioners, that any either Alderman or Commissioner doing any of these
things, does not oppose the Corporation and Committee with the commissioners in
them, and by that offend against their government, and deserves thereby
severely to be punished? And who does not likewise know, that if either any of
the Aldermen or any of the Commissioners should understand of this their
disorderly carriage, and should inform the Corporation or Committee of it by
letters, and say, that when he came he would remember his deeds, by these his
expressions does not acknowledge likewise that there is both in the corporation
and committee a standing court, in which there was power at all times for the
punishing and censuring of any such offender? I am most assured that he will so
conclude that there is a court there, and withal will say, that this or that
commissioners information does no way impeach or hinder the proceedings of that
court, or minorise its power, but that it may go on to censure such as shall
offend against their authority, if it can be proved by others, though that
commissioner that informed against him should not be present. And even so it
was in the Church Saint John writ unto, it had a court, and power within it
self of proceeding against Diotrephes, and would have used it against him,
whether S. John had come or no, although we may suppose that they did not
proceed against him till Saint John came: yea, I shall make it good out of Mr
Knollys his words that there was a court in that church. But by this, I say, it
appears that Saint John knew very well that there was a court or council of
Presbyters to appeal unto in his time, in that church, though Mr Knollys
affirms the contrary, peremptorily asserting that S. John knew no such Court
to appeal to, and that I cannot prove any such appeals. But it is ordinary with
M. Knollys to confute the holy Scriptures, and to contradict himself as he does
both here and in all other of his answers, as in their due places we shall see.
For what Christian ever with deliberation did read the Scripture, that can
believe that St. John could be ignorant that there was a court and Presbytry in
every church, when M. Knollys himself acknowledges it? Without doubt Saint
John knew the government that was then established in all churches, as well as
Mr Knollys. He could not be ignorant what government God had appointed and
established in every church which was a Presbytery (as appears from all the
places above quoted) which was a Court, to wit, a company of officers in every
church armed with power and authority from God himself within their several
Presbytries to order, rule and govern the people under them, and to convent any
offender before them and to proceed against him by censure and punishment: If
the crime laid against him were sufficiently proved, and that the people under
them were to yield obedience unto them in the Lord, such a power was every
Presbytery invested with through all the Apostolical churches; and this Mr
Knollys has acknowledged in diverse places in this his Pamphlet, and in this
his very answer concerning Diotrephes, as we shall see by and by. And all this
S. John could not be ignorant of, and that in the Church of Jerusalem, in which
he was both a Pastor and a Member, that the Presbytery ruled there, and that
all the people made their addresses (as well for the good of their souls, as
for the better rectifying of abuses) to the Apostles and Presbyters of that
Church, and appealed always unto them, and never applied themselves unto the
people or the multitude, as we may see in these particulars: as,

First, when they were pricked in their hearts, they applied themselves unto
the Apostles for direction, saying, men and brethren what shall we do? Acts 2.
they went not to the church or people, but to the Apostles, knowing that the
Ministers were their guides, and that they were to be directed by them, and
that they were bound to obey them. And so in the fact of Ananias and Saphira
his wife, when they had purloyned the goods of the Church; for whereas it was
ordered and agreed upon by common consent that the price of those possessions
that were sold should be laid down at the Apostles feet, and that distribution
should be made unto every man according as he had need; contrary to this order
Ananias kept back part of the price, Saphira his wife also being privy to it:
Hereupon the people appeal unto the Apostles in whose hands the government then
lay, and who had power to censure and punish them, as they did for that their
delinquency, as it is to be seen Acts the 5. they went not to the people and
Church, but applied themselves to the Presbytery; and of this proceeding Saint
John was not ignorant.

Again when the widows were neglected in the daily ministration, for the
taking away of this abuse, they appealed unto the Apostles, as we may see in
the sixth of the Acts (and not unto the Church or people) who ordered that
business, and determined the controversy amongst them, to which the people
assented. This also Saint John was not ignorant of: And he knew very well that
the Presbytery in Jerusalem and all other Churches had power to send any of the
Apostles or their other Ministers into any other place to preach, or upon any
message, as we may see it Acts the 8* and Acts 14, and 15. For the Presbytery
of Jerusalem sent Peter and John to the City of Samaria to preach amongst the
people there, which they could not have done except the Presbitry had had power
and authority in their hands over the^; we see also the same in the Church of
Antioch, where they sent Paul and Barnabas and their ministers to the Presbitry
at Jerusalem, and the Presbitry of Jerusalem they likewise sent their decrees
by their Ministers through all Cities and Churches, which they could not have
done, had they not had authority over the Ministers. Again S. John knew very
well that the power of admitting of members lay not in the peoples hands; for
we read Acts the 9. When Paul came to Jerusalem and assayed to join himself to
the Disciples, and that they being afraid of him, and believing not that he
was a Disciple, St Paul appeals from them to the Presbytery of the Apostles in
whose hands the government lay; and declaring unto them how matters were, they
admitted him into fellowship with them, without the consent of the people and
their good liking, for the government did not belong unto them. All these
proceedings Saint John knew very well, and therefore could not be ignorant that
there was a Court and Council to appeal to in all Churches: Yea Saint John
knew also that the Presbytry of Jerusalem had power and authority over any of
the Apostles, and did upon any occasion convent them before them as we may see
in the 11. chap. and 21. where Peter was called before the Presbytery for going
in to the Gentiles, and was therefore to give an account of his actions there,
which he did; all with shows there was there a standing Court: and so in the
21. chapter the Presbytry gave Saint Paul an order and direction how to behave
himself toward the weak ones; which he followed; all which shows that they
only had the power in their hands, and that there was a court there, and that
it belonged not to the people; all these things, I say, S. John was not
ignorant of, and therefore knew very well that in that Church also where
Diotrephes was a Presbyter, there was a Court and Common Council of Presbyters
to appeal unto, or else he would never have said, If I come I will remember his
deeds. But why should I spend time in proving that which to any understanding
man is as evident a nd clear as almost any other truth in the holy Scripture?
especially when Mr Knollys has proved it himself in formal words in many
places in this his answer; for he confesses that there was a Presbytery
established in every Church, and that the government of those Churches was put
into the Presbyters hands, and that the people were to obey those Presbyters as
their guides; and in express terms page the seventh says, Therefore the
Apostle writes to the Church or particular congregation whereof Diotrephes was
a Member and an Elder, who he knew had power to judge him, as well as the
Church or particular Congregation of Corinth had power to judge them that were
Members therein, 1 Cor. 5. 12. 13. And therefore might as warrantably admonish
Diotrephes, as the Church of Colosse might Archippus Coloss. 4. verse 17. in
these words, He confesses that Saint John knew that the Church whereof
Diotrephes was a Member and Presbyter, had power to judge him; which does
necessarily infer that there was at that time a court there; for judgment and
censure and inflicting of punishment is the act of a court or Magistracy and of
those that are in authority and armed with power; besides for further
illustration of his meaning, he says that the church Saint John writ unto, had
the same power over its Members that the church of Corinth had over its
Members: Now all men that have read the first and second E^istle of Paul to the
Corinthians, know very well that there was a court in the church of Corinth
with plenary authority from Christ himself, both to convent and censure, and
that with the severest punishment those that did publicly scandalize the
Gospel, as is evident by the excommunication of the incestuous person; now if
that church that St. John writ unto were equal in power to that of Corinth,
and that of Colosse, and to all the other Apostolical churches, as Mr Knollys
confesses and labors to prove; then these conclusions will necessarily
follow from his argumentations. The first, that Saint John could not be
ignorant that there was a court and common council of Presbyters in that
church to appeal unto; for Mr Knollys says, that Saint John knew that that
Church had power to judge Diotrephes, and therefore in this contradicts
himself; for in the sixth page he affirmed that Saint John knew not any such
court.

2ly, it follows that there was an Uniformity of government in all the
Apostolical and Primitive churches: Which wholly overthrows the tenent of many
of the Independents who hold the contrary; so that one church had not one
manner of government, and another church another manner of government peculiar
unto it self, and distinct from the other; but they were all governed alike by
their several Presbyteryes, and had equal authority and power within their
several precincts, as the church at Jerusalem, Ephesus, Corinth, in all which
there were many congregations, and yet all of them made but each of them a
particular church within their respective jurisdictions, and were all to be
governed by the joint consent of there several Presbytries.

And lastly, that this order of government was to be perpetuated to the end of
the world, which when Saint Diotrephes labored to violate in assuming it to
himself and his congregation, both he and all these that follow his steps,
deserve severely to be punished for it, as prevaricators against both precept
and example of all well ordered churches and Christians. And this shall suffice
to have replied by way of answer to what Mr Knollys had to say for proof that
Saint John knew not of any Court or Common Council of Presbyters, either
classical or synodicall, to appeal unto in his time.

And now I come to make good those appeals I made mention of page 10. which Mr
Knollys thinks a thing impossible for me to do; to wit, That every particular
man, as well as any assembly or congregation, may have their appeal to the
Presbytery of their Precinct, Hundred or Division under whose jurisdiction they
were; and if they find themselves wronged there, then they have appeals to
some other higher Presbytery or Council of Divines for relief and justice.

These appeals Master Knollys says I cannot make good to be according to the
Scripture of truth, although the having recourse by appeals, from Inferiors to
Superiors and from one Court to another, is so evident by the very light of
nature, and approved of by the practice of all Nations and Churches in all
ages, and is also so apparent by the holy Scriptures both of the old and new
testament, as there is scarce any truth more obvious to all understanding men;
yet Master Knollys peremptorily asserteth, that they cannot be made good out of
the Scriptures of truth; so that it is manifest, to all men, that be there any
truth never so perspicuous, he is resolved to believe nothing but what he
conceives to be according to the Scripture of truth.

Therefore for the gratifying of Master Knollys, and all such as with candor
and ingenuity and without any prejudice shall read the ensuing lines, I shall
in this place add something more fully and distinctly to that which I spoke in
the foregoing page for the proof of those appeals I mentioned page 10. and
sufficiently evince, they are warranted by the Word of truth: and for that
purpose, I shall first produce the authority of holy Scriptures and bring forth
some Presidents out of the unerring word for the confirmation of the same; and
then I shall also ratify the use of appeals by reasons and from the practice
of all ages in all Nations. And all this I shall the more willingly do in this
place, although it is done again and again in this treatise; and only
because Master Knollys affirms that I cannot make good that appeals be
according to the Scripture of truth. And for proof ofthis, I will begin with
that of our Savior Matthew. 13 verse. 15. Wherefore (says he) if thy brother
shall trespass against thee, go and tell him of his fault between thee and
him alone, etc. But if he hear thee not, appeal higher to two or three more:
And if he shall neglect to hear them, appeal yet higher, tell it then unto
the Church, that is to the Court of Presbyters in that precinct. So that from
this place it is evident, that appeals are warranted by the Word of truth; for
truth it self, has taught us the Doctrine of appeals. And for Presidents of
appeals there are many in the New Testament, to say nothing of the Old. To
begin with that in the 5. of the Acts which we find recorded after Christ's
ascension in the questioning of Ananias and Saphira, whereas by conjoynt
argrement it was appointed and ordered amongst them, that all things should be
common, and that selling their possessions, they should bring the price of them
and lay it also at the Apostles feet; which very expression signifies and
denotes what great authority and power the Apostles and Presbyters in the
Church of Jerusalem were then in, and sufficiently declares that there was a
Court there, as all the carriage of that business does abundantly prove. I say
therefore, when they had made such an order by common consent, and when it was
found out that Ananias and Saphira his wife had not dealt faithfully in that
business, nor according to public agreement, but had consented together to
deceive their brethren, and by that had scandalized the Gospel, the Church or
people for the redressing of this abuse, take not the matter into their own
hands, nor challenge not any power unto themselves for the punishing of Ananias
and Saphira, as well knowing their place then, and that the government did not
belong unto them, but to the Elders and Rulers over them; they appeal
therefore unto the Apostles and make their complaint unto them, and exhibit
their Articles against Ananias and Saphira, as both guilty of the same crime,
whereupon they were convented before the Apostles as Delinquents; Peter then
being there president and chief judge, and finding them guilty* sentenced them
both, from God himself, and punished them for their sin with death; by which
we may take notice not only of an appeal, but that there was a standing Court
of Presbyters in Jerusalem and that they had in it plenary power from Christ
for the trial and punishing of all offenders and of casting them out of the
Church, if Scandalous, as well as the Church of Corinth; and it stands with all
reason; for Jerusalem was the mother Church, and therefore was inferior to none
of the Daughter-Churches and to this Court of Presbyters were all appeals ever
to be made by the people of that precinct; as this one instance does
sufficiently declare. And that other president in the 6. of the Acts where we
have a second appeal upon an other public scandal, which was the neglect of
their widows in the daily Ministration where they applied themselves unto the
Apostles; for the particular congregations assumed not the authority into their
hands of redressing the abuse, nor challenged not any right to the government,
but appealed unto the Apostles for remedy, who ordered that whole business by
joint consent, to which all the people willingly submitted themselves as it is
at large to be seen in the sixth Chapter of the Acts. The third appeal we
find Acts the ninth, where Paul assaying to join himself to the Disciples,
and they being afraid of him, and doubting whether he were a believer, Saint
Paul forth with appeals from them to the Apostles, who he knew had the
authority in their hands, and making known his cause unto them, they forthwith
admitted him into Church-fellow-ship with them without the consent of the
people, who indeed had nothing to do, either in the admitting of members of
casting of them out; and therefore they allowed of the appeal of Saint Paul,
to teach all men whether to fly, to wit the to Presbytery, if they be injured
by the people or debard from any Church-priviledge by them, for they only are
the stewards of the Church and have the Keys of the kingdom of heaven to open
and shut the doors to whom they shall think fit, or unworthy; and this is the
place of the Presbyters, and not of the people: for they are enjoined to obey
their guids and to submit themselves in the Lord to what they order and appoint
according to the Word of God. Here we have three presidents of appeals in the
mother church of Jerusalem to the Presbytery upon any abuse, so that by the
mouth of their witnesses out of the word of truth this truth of appeals is
sufficiently confirmed; And that the Presbytery at Jerusalem had plenary power
over the very Apostles and could call them at any time to an account, is
manifest from the eleventh of the Acts where Peter was convented and
questionedbefore them and was forced to give an account of his going in to the
Gentiles and Preaching unto them, which he willingly y^elded unto, knowing it
was their place to question any; yea the Presbytery in every Church could send
the very Apostles and Ministers to Preach in any place or city or upon any
Message, as we see they sent Peter and John to Samaria, and the Church of
Antioch sent Paul and Barnabas with other Ministers to the Presbytery of
Jerusalem, as is evident Acts the 14. and Acts 15. and therefore all these
examples sufficiently prove that all the people of every Church made their
appeals to their several Presbyteries, if there arose any controversies and
abuses among themselves: and if there arose any difference between Church, and
Church, or between Presbytery and Presbytery about any points of Doctrine or
Religion, then they made their appeals for the determining of those
controversies to Counsels and Synods, as we may see it Acts the 15. and this
is one of Gods Ordinances as the Independents themselves do acknowledge. So
that for the Doctrine of appeals it is so clear that all the learned and
judicious cannot doubt of it; and I am most assured that those that shall but
with due deliberation seriously examine the Scriptures above quoted and those
that follow in this discourse, for the confirmation of the same truth, will
wonder that any man that pretends to learning as Master Knollys does, should
ever dare say, that appeals cannot be made good to be according to the
Scripture of truth, whereas there is almost no truth in the holy Scripture more
clear and evident than this of appeals.

Yea this method of dealing and manner of handling of businesses of public
offenses and scandals, and for the redressing of them, is ratified by the very
light and Law of nature, as we may read in all the governments under the very
Heathens, and Paul made use of it, by appealing from inferior Courts to
Caesar's tribunal. And I shall never be brought by all the art and wit of man
to believe, that Christ has left his Church under the New Testament in a worse
condition then it was under the old, where we know they had appeals from one
Court to another. Nay if Christians now, had not the liberty of appeals in
matters of conscience and Religion, they should be inferior to the Pagan
nations; and surely Christ has not left his Church which is his Kingdom, in a
worse condition then either the Jewish or Ethnicke Kingdoms were, and
therefore by all reason besides the Testimony of Christ Matthew. the 13. and
besides the Presidents I produced out of the Word of God to confirm appeals,
the lawfulness of appeals is sufficiently established and ratified. So that I
hope that which I have now briefly set down, may satisfy any rational man.
But before I go on to prove that the people or Church have not power to judge
their Ministers, which is the last thing I undertake to make good. I must say
something by way of answer to a vain and frivolous cavil of Master Knollys,
which is this. If the Doctor can prove these appeals, (says he) I ask him
whether that higher Presbytery or Council of Divines, be not as Independent as
the brethren and their Churches against whom the Doctor has written: and if
so, then such a high Presbytery or Council of Divines, is not Gods Ordinance
by the Doctors own confession and affirmation. The very reading of this fond
cavil had been enough for the confutation of it to any solid man: and truly
had not I to deal with such a trifling creature as he is in serious business,
who compts every word he scribleth an oracle, I would have passed by it with
silence, as being nothing to the question between us, and as little to his
purpose as all his other wrangling is, except it be to declare to all men, that
he knows not his own principles nor no good learning. But for answer, all
such as know any thing in the controversy between us and the Independents,
know that it is my opinion and settled belief, that all Churches and Councels
are to depend upon the Word of God, and to be ruled and ordered in all their
proceedings and Governments according to the direction of the same: an Angel
from Heaven is not be heard that speaks not according to the written Word Gal.
1. and this Word has directed us to the law and to the testimony, Isay 8. and
proclaimed all men that speak not according to that, to be in darkness; and
therefore according to this my opinion, no Church or Council in the world is
Independent; and therefore all such Churches and Councels as have not either
precept or example for their proceedings in the ordering and governing of them,
out of the Word of God, but follow their own vain and idle fantasies and
affect Independency, in my opinion they in so ordering their Churches do not
according to Gods Ordinances. Now when the Independent Governments are such,
they are their own inventions; and that government only of the Presbyters, is
Gods Ordinance, as having both precept and Presidents for it in Gods Word, upon
which they depend; and this is my opinion, and not that which Master Knollys
would grollishly put upon me; and this shall suffice for answer to that piece
of nonsense of his. And now I come to the last branch of his answer, and that
which I undertook to make Good and prove, viz. that the people and
congregation in any Church have not power to judge their Ministers, which
Master Knollys affirms they have, and for instance produces the Church of
Corinth and that of Colosse, understanding by Church the people, who he says
had power over the members, miserably mistaking himself and abusing the
ignorant and simple souls by it, as will by and by appear to those that can
discern things that differ or are but a little acquainted in matters of
government, either Ecclesiastical or civil. For if men do once but rightly
understand what a Church is according to the description of a Church as it is
laid down in the New Testament, and consider withal of the parts and members
of that Church which by Saint Paul is compared to the body of a man: they will
easily perceive, that the governors and rulers are compared unto the head and
all the noble parts of the body, as to the eyes, ears hands etc. which are to
guide and govern all the other members in the body, and that all the other
members under them are to be ordered and ruled by the head and other more noble
parts, and are to follow their direction; so that it is in the Church of God,
as it is in the body of man, some are to rule, and others to be ruled in it and
whose place it is ever to obey: For none of the members of the body leave their
stations, unless they by violence be cut off, as all rational creatures do
very well know. For the head is ever the head, the eye is ever the eye, the
ear is ever the ear, and the hand is ever the hand, etc. For Saint Paul says
1 Cor. 12. verse. 27. Now ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular.
And God has set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondly Prophets, thirdly
Teachers, after that miracles, then gifts of healing, helps in Government,
diversities of tongues; are all Apostles? are all Prophets? are all Teachers?
etc intimating that the Apostles, and Prophets and Teachers, and helps in
Government in the Church, every of them keeps their stations, to wit, they
that are once Apostles, Teachers or Governors, do continue in the Church in
their several places, ever so to be, and never lose their places, but always
to the day of their death, remain and continue still to be Apostles, Prophets,
Teachers and Rulers, according to that in the fourth of the Ephesians verse. 11.
Where Saint Paul says* He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists and some Pastors and Teachers for the perfecting of the Saints, and
for the work of the Ministry and the edifying of the body of Christ, till we
come all into the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the son of God,
unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.
We find not in all the holy Scripture that any of those true Ministers were at
any time degraded, or lost any thing either of their Titles or of their
authority, but as God had put the rule and Government of the Church into their
hands, and had given them the power of the Keys, and made them Stewards in the
Church which is his body, so they were ever to be the head, eyes, ears and
hands for the governing and well ordering of the Church. We find likewise that
in every several Church of the New Testament there was a Presbytery ordained,
as Acts the 14. etc. and that the Presbyters had the Government of those
several Churches put into their hands, that the people and members of those
Churches were commanded to obey their Presbyters as their guides whom God had
set over them, Heb. 13. as Master Knollys and all the learned of the
Independents do acknowledge. We find likewise by the practice of the Church of
Jerusalem the President of all other Churches, that the people there for the
redressing of any abuse amongst themselves, assumed not the power into their
own hands, but applied themselves and made their addresses and appeals to the
Presbytery, and that they ordered every thing according as they thought good,
and that the people willingly submitted themselves to the order. We find
further that for all acts of government, as questioning any offendo^s for the
censuring and punishing of them, for ordination of Officers, and
excommunication, it was done either by the sole power and authority of the
Apostles, or by the Presbyteries of the Church and those that were in office,
and not by the multitude, as is manifest by that in the 2. of the Cor. chap. 2.
ver. 6. a place so much abused by the Independents; sufficient (says the
Apostle) to such a man is the censure which was inflicted of many. So that it
was not inflicted by all the people, but by such only in whose hands the power
lay, which was the Presbytery, and therefore the Apostle says by many or of
many. And truly if we would but duly read the Epistles of Saint Paul to
Timothy and Titus which were writ to them, and in them to all the Ministers of
the New Testament in all ages to come, and observe the rules set down in them,
which are to continue to the end of the World, we shall find that for all
Acts of government and for the well ordering of the Church, it is only
committed into the hands of the Ministers and presbyters of the several
Churches through all Nations, and that to them only belonged the managing of
the Government, as the rulers and Stewards of the same* and that all power and
authority of Government peculiarly belonged unto them, and that the people had
nothing to do with it but to obey. Again if we look but into the seven Churches
of Asia, Revel. 2. and 2. We shall find that all the Epistles Christ writes
unto them are directed to the Angels and Ministers of those several Churches,
as upon whom the Government of those Churches lay, and who had both the praise
of well doing and blame of any evil either committed or tolerated by them; for
seeing they were appointed by Christ himself to be the Stewards and Guides of
those Churches and to be the Governors of the same, all the blame of the
malversation of any of the members in them, is imputed unto them, as if they
themselves had been the cause of it, as not using their Authority for the
redressing of those abuses. So that it is apparently evident through the whole
New Testament, That the Ministers and Presbyters, and they only, in every
Church had the rule of the people committed unto them, as the head, eyes, ears,
and hands, the more noble members; and that the people as the other members
under them, were to yield obedience unto them in the Lord. And we find that in
the holy Scripture, every man is to look unto that Office that is committed
unto him, and that every one is to keep himself in that Station God has
placed him in, as we may see it at large, Romans 12. ver. 6. Having gifts
differing according to the grace given unto us, says Saint Paul, whether
prophecy, let us prophecy according to the proportion of faith, or ministry,
let us wait on our ministry etc. He that rules, with diligence etc. Here we
find that every man according to his place and office, he is enjoined to wait
upon it and not to desert it; they that are appointed to rule, they are ever to
rule; and the others that are under them, are ever to obey; every Member is to
keep his station in this mystical body; the Magistrates and Parents and
Masters whether ecclesiastical or civil, are to continue in their several
places and to keep their ranks as long as they are in those places; and all
those that are under them, whether Subjects, children, or servants, they are
likewise to keep their places, and to obey all those that are over them in the
Lord; and that is their place; for so the holy Scripture everywhere teaches
us, and especially in the 7. of the 1 of the Corinth. ver. 19, 20, 21, 22.
Circumcision (says the Apostle) is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing, but
the keeping of the commandments of God; That is, the yielding of obedience to
the commandments of God, and the obeying of those God has set over us, and the
honoring of those that are in authority and doing the will of God in every
thing to our power, is that that commends any men unto God, especially the
honoring of God himself and the reverencing of our godly Ministers and
painful Pastors, according to that of Saint Paul 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12. Know them
which are over you in the Lord, and esteem them very highly in love for their
works sake: For God has made them Pastors, and all the people their flock;
them fathers, and the people children begotten by their Ministry; them
builders, and the people the stones laid by them in the building; them
Stewards, and the people Domestiques under them and their conduct: So that
every one in the Church of God is to continue in that Station God has placed
them in, until they by their gifts and graces and eminent abilities be removed
to a higher calling, or else for their misdemeanors are cast out; and
therefore Saint Paul says, 1 Cor. 7. ver. 20. Let every man abide in the same
calling wherein he was called; and as if it had not bin sufficient to have once
specified his mind in this business, in the 24 verse, he reiterateth this
precept saying, Brethren, let every man wherein he is called therein abide with
God. So that for the Ministers and Presbyters of the Church, or for the
Magistrates of the Commonwealth, or for Masters or Parents of Families, for
either of them, I say, to leave their calling in their particular places of
ruling: and for either the flocks under the Pastors, or subjects under the
Magistrates, or servants and children in the several Families under their
Parents and Masters, to offer to take the Government into their own hands, or
to join themselves in Commission with them, and to take the rule in either
Church, State, or Families upon them, is to leave their callings, and so to
transgress against the commandments of God who, has enjoined the
Magistrates, Ministers and Pastors both in Church and State to command, and all
the people under them to obey, and in their so doing they each of them abide in
the same calling and station wherein they are called: otherwise, they will be
found transgressors of the Laws of God and Violaters of that Order God has
appointed in Church and State, and bring confusion in both; Now, God is the God
of Order, and has enjoined all men to keep his commandments, and the
commandment given to the Magistrates, is to rule; and the commandment given
to the people in every Church is to obey their guides and yield double honor
unto them; the honor of reverence and subjection, and the honor of
maintenance; they are ever bound to obey them in the Lord: And this is the
Order God appointed in all the Primitive Churches, That the Presbyters only
should rule in them, and that the people should obey and not intermeddle in the
government; for that is not to keep themselves in their several Stations, and
to abide in the same calling wherein they were called.

And to speak the truth, the ignorance of this doctrine and the pride of too
too many has bin the only cause of all those confusions that now the Church
and State are imbroyled with; for if every man had learned but this lesson, To
keep himself in the same calling wherein he was called, he would know that the
Magistrates place whether civil or ecclersiasticall, is to command, and that
the subjects and peoples place under them in their several aboads and
habitations, is to obey.

They would understand likewise, that in every kingdom, commonwelth,
corporation, or in any Province and Country or church, that howsoever business
of public concernment belongs unto the whole body in each of those
governments, yet the managing of them and ruling and ordering of them
respectively, belongs and pertains only to those in authority, as in a
kingdom or Republique, howsoever the embasladours of other nations are sent
into such a Kingdom and Commonwealth about business that may concern the
whole Country, yet none but the King and his Council or the State have the
ordering and managing of the business, and the people and subjects under them
intermeddle not in those high affairs, for they are Arcana Regni and appertain
not unto them. And so it is in every Corporation, howsoever the Letters or
Mandates from either King, Parliament or State, are directed unto the several
Counties, Hundreds or Corporations or Cities, yet the Lieutenants, Governors,
Sherifes, Mayors, Aldermen and Common-councells in each of them are to manage
the business and to put in execution what they are commanded and enjoined by
either Letters or Mandates, and the people under them severally are to yield
obedience to what they order and command according to the several exigences of
the times, as daily experience teaches all men; so that the directing of their
Letters to the several Counties or Hundreds or Corporations in general, does
not invest all the people with power or join them in commission with the
Magistrates of those respective places, but leaves the transacting of all
things to those only in those several jurisdictions that are in authority and
armed with power, which the people are not. Yea this truth is so well known and
perceived by all such as will not wilfully blind themselves, as it cannot be
denied; hourly experience furnishing men with Presidents of it.

For if any Delinquents be found out, they are not hailed before the people,
but before such as are in authority; there is not an ordinary Hew and Cry that
is sent to any Parish, but it is carried to the Constable or his Deputy and to
such in that Town or Village as are in place or authority, so that the people
trouble not themselves with it; yea they will ordinarily say it concerns them
not, it is not their place to intermeddle in the business of State, that they
affirm belonges to those that are in authority. And as it is in the affairs
secular and in the State, so it is in the affairs of the Church, those in
authority in the Church are to manage the affairs and businesses of the
Church and not the people: for God had appointed in all Churches in the New
Testament (which were but so many Corporations) a standing Presbytery, and
Order of Ministers and Rulers in each of them, in whose hands the government of
them all, within their several Precincts and Jurisdictions lay, the which
Government they were ever to manage and order by common consent and joint
agreement, with which the people had nothing to do, and with the which they
ought not intermeddle; for that had been to confound that Order God had
established in each Church; and this all well-instructed Christians knew; and
therefore in the Apostles times, not any that I ever read of opposed that
Government before Diotrephes, who is blamed for this his temerity by St. John,
to teach all men not to do the like left they fall into the same condemnation;
so that they knew very well that howsoever all the Epistles of Sant Paul and
the other Apostles were directed to the several Churches of their times, yet
the managing of the affairs of those Churches belonged only unto the Presbyters
Stewards and Angels of those respective Churches, as we may see in those seven
Churches of Asia, where the Letters and the Epistles are directed to the Angels
and Ministers of those Churches as those that had the Government of them in
their hands, and not to the people: And so it was in the Church of Corinth, a
place that the Independents so much abuse.

Howsoever Paul's Epistles were directed to the whole Church, yet the officers
only and Presbyters of that Church had the managing of the whole business
concerning the incestuous person, both for the casting of him out and the
taking of him in again, upon his repentance, as is evident from the 2 Epistle
and the second chapter where the Apostle says sufficient to such a man is the
punishment inflicted of many. So that all the people did not censure him, or
inflict that punishment upon him; but many, to wit the Presbyters and those in
authority in that Church. And this agreeable to all reason: and therefore
Master Knollys is mightily mistaken in his Commentary exposition of this place
and that of the Epistle to the Colossians, in saying that as the Church or
particular congregation of Corinth had power to judge them that were members
therein. 1 Cor. 5. 12. 13. and as the Church of Colosse had power to admonish
Archippus. Coloss. 4. 17. so the Church whereof Diotrephes was a member, might
as warrantably admonish him. These are his words, in which there is a double
yea a treble fallacy: for first he takes the word Church in another sense then
the Scripture speaks of it; which in all the Epistles of the holy Apostles
for the most part, is taken collectively for a combination of many
congregations under one Presbytery within such a precinct, and he only
understands it for a particular congregation and assembly, and by this he
deceives the reader. 2ly By Church he understands the people, the Presbyters
excluded, and says that they had power to judge their Ministers, whereas
indeed though in all those churches there was a power, yet it lay soely in the
Presbyters hands, and they only were invested with it, and the people were ever
to stand to their orders, so long as they commanded in the Lord; and the place
of the people was to obey; and therefore all that he says about this business
is a mere non sequitur^unc; and this is the third error that insueth from
groundless principles; for this is not a good consequence, Paul writing unto
the Church of Colosse has these words, say unto Archippus that he take heed to
his Ministry, and writing unto the Church of Corinth the 1. and 5. says verse.
5. Deliver such a man unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh etc. Ergo the
people have the power in their hands over all the members of those Churches
both Ministers and people. This I assert does not follow in all good reason; No
more then it will follow that if any Ambassador should be directed to the
kingdom of England now, or if any Message should be sent unto any corporation
of the Kingdom commanding such service from it to the State, that the people
in this Kingdom, or the people in those corporations should intermedle in the
affairs of public concernment, but all sound understanding men will say, It
belongs to the great and grave Council of the Kingdom to manage public
affairs, and to the Major and Aldermen, and the Common Council of each
Corporation to transact and order the public business, and affairs, and for
this only reason, because they are the men in those several places that God
and the people have invested with authority over them and it only belongs
unto them to order all affairs of public concernment, who God and the people
have called and appointed to this end and purpose. And so it was in all the
primitive and Apostolical Churches, the Epistles were writ to the churches,
but directed to the Angels and Ministers in them, as whose place it was to
watch over them for their good and who only had the power of the Keys, to bind
and loose, to cast out and take in, according to Divine authority. Yea all the
world knows, that God never gave the Keys to the people in any Church, but to
the Ministers, therefore the authority of order and jurisdiction only belongs
to the Ministers and presbyters in every Church: now when Master Knollys by
Church understands a particular congregation or assembly and the people in it
and not the Presbyteries in every Church; he is much mistaken in his Commentary
exposition and abuses not only himself but all those poor deluded people that
follow him.

Yea, he destroys his own principles and those of the congregationall way,
for both he himself and I. S. do acknowledge, That the Government lay in the
Presbyters hands in every church. Master Knollys his words to this purpose I
have often ci^ed before and I. S. his words are these page 11. in asserting
that the Persbyters did rule the Church at Jerusalem, and ordinarily other
Churches, whom do you hit? (says he in his answer to me) Sure not the
Independents, as you call them, we grant it is their part to rule; thus he: but
of these words in their due place.

In the mean time, we may take notice, that they acknowledge that the
government of those several Churches lay in the Presbyters hands, who only had
the ordering of the affairs of those Churches as the Stewards over them, and
whose place it was, to receive any accusations, and examine matters of scandal
and to proceed against offenders by cens^res and punishments upon evidence and
proof made against them, as the Epistles of Paul to Timothy and Titus do
sufficiently evince. And therefore it is not only against the Word of God, but
their own principles, to invest the people with power and authority over their
Ministers and their fellow members, as to censure them, or* to exercise any Act
of Government over them. Neither does Saint Paul in writing unto the Colossians
and bidding them say to Archippus, that he take heed to his ministry, and in
writing unto the Corinthians that they should cast out the incestuous person,
investe the people in either of those Churches with power and authority over
either Presbyters or their fellow members. For the power of reproof and
censure with authority belongs primarily and principally to the Pastors and
Presbyters, in every Church, as the Epistles of Paul to Timothy and Titus show,
in the which all Ministers are taught their duty in their several places, who
to admonish, and how, who to ordain, and who to cast out, and how to exercise
all other Acts of government, as those of ordination, excommunication and
censure etc. and all Ministers are to perform their offices judicially, and
authoritatively, not by way of charity which any Christian upon just occasion
observing all the vital circumstances, of a well ordered reproof and action,
as of time place and persons may do; for there is a very great difference
between the admonition of the Ministers and that of the people which lies in
this, that the Ministers do what they do in the Church as Officers and
Magistrates and men in place and power; and the people do it by way of charity
and love and only out of Christian duty, and not with any authority they have
over the people; and if their brethren will not hear them, they can go no
farther then to take one or two more with them, and if they will not hear
them, then to refer it unto the Church, to tell and inform their several
Presbyteri^s of it, the people are confined within these limets only, and are
not to exceed and go out of these bounds. Whereas the Pr^sbyters and Ministers
by their place have the power in their hands, to order them and censure them,
which the people have not. Neither with any good reason will it follow, if any
private Christian may admonish a Minister failing in his duty, that he has
power and authority over him, for this one Member and Brother has not over
another, as having nothing to do with another man's servant, as Saint Paul
sufficiently declares in the fourteenth chapter of his Epistle to the Romans;
and although all Christians are commanded, Coloss. the 3. and in diverse other
places, to admonish one another, yet this proves not that they have rule, power
and authority over them, because the Scripture witnesses the contrary. But the
Ministers and Preachers of the Word, they are to rebuke, to exhort, and
admonish, and censure, as Ambassadors, Stewards, and Governors appointed by
God himself over them for this very purpose and end, not only to beseech and
entreat them, but if they be refractory and disorderly to punish and censure
them, and that by their place as they are officers and as they have received
the Keys, whereas other Christians do their duty only out of love as Brethren
and not as Magistrates; So that what the people do, either in admonishing or
exhorting it is out of charity; or what they do in choosing of officers, or
casting out of offenders out of the Church, it is either by denomination of
them, or in approving and assenting unto what the Presbytery does; as the
Saints shall judge the earth so that it is not in the peoples power to hinder
the casting out of any offender, if he be proved scandalous; or of receiving
any into the Church or into any office of the same, if they be thought fit and
worthy of it for their gifts and graces; for they have no power to do any of
these things, for these are all actions of such as are in authority and have
the power of ordering things in their hands, which I affirm was never given to
the people.

And therefore those places quoted by Mr Knollys, to prove the authority of the
people over either their Ministers or Fellow Members, are not for his purpose,
as b^ing misapplyed and abused, as they are daily by the Independent Brethren;
So that to all rational and understanding men from this reproof of Diotrephes
given by S. John and this his censuring of him, For usurping sole authority to
himself and prating malicious words against Saint John and the Presbyters of
that Church he writes to: These two conclusions do necessarily follow.

The first; That all such as affect an absolute jurisdiction in every
particular congregation within it self Independent, without any reference or
relation to a Council or College of Presbyters, and do speak malicious words
against their Fellow-ministers and Presbyters, and do cast out whom they
please, and bring in whom they will at pleasure upon their own terms, and do
rule after an arbitrary way all such violate the Ordinance of God and oppose
that Government that he has established in all churches by his blessed word,
and are guilty of the same crime that Diotrephes was, and if they repent not
will be severely punished for it: but all the Brethren of the Congregationall
way are such.

The second is this: That all such Ministers and Congregations as give the
authority and power of ruling and ordering the affairs of the Church into the
hands of the people, either wholly excluding the Ministers, or joining the
people with them in the Government of the Church, they thus leaving their
station and calling wherein they were called, are prevaricators and offenders
against divine institution: For God has given the keys, the power of order
and jurisdiction to the Ministers and Presbyters only, and enjoined the people
to obey them: But such are all the Ministers and Assemblies of the
congregationall way, as leaving their station and calling wherein they were
called: Ergo, they are all prevaricators and offenders against divine
institution.

And thus much I thought fit by way of answer, to reply unto all that Mr
Knollys had to say, against my argument drawn from Diotrephes, and in defense
of their congregationall practices* There yet remains one whibling cavil more
in this his answer, that I may not pass by lest he should glory I could not
answer it; I will therefore say something to that and conclude this point and
then go on to all his other fond answers to such arguments as he thought
himself best able to encounter with. His words are these in the conclusion of
his Babble.

If (says he) nothing of public concernment ought to be done and transacted
without the joint and mutual agreement, and common consent of the Presbytery,
John the Presbyter would not have transgressed so far, as to take upon
himself this authority over Diotrephes, to tell the Church of his faults, and
to say he would remember him and sharply reprove him, and teach him to prate
against the Presbytery with malicious words, which belonged to the Court and
Common Council of Presbyters.

Thus Mr Knollys rather chatters than disputes, in making such an inference
from his own conceit. And therefore for Answer let Mr Knollys know, that there
was no transgression in Saint John against the Presbyters in taking such
authority upon himself: for S. John was an Apostle, and an universal Pastor,
tied to no one place or flock, but had the same power and authority that Paul
and all the other Apostles had over all the Churches, the care of which lay
primarily and principally upon them, who were immediately inspired by God, and
in all their preachings and writings followed the dictates of his holy Spirit,
who spoke in and by them; so that whatsoever they taught or writ was to be the
rule of all men's thoughts, words, actions, and governments, and it was their
place to give Laws unto all Churches and Ministers in them, what they should do
in the ordering and governing of the same; and therefore S. John had no less
authority and power over this Church, wherein Diotrephes was an Elder, and in
and over all other Churches, then S. Paul and all the other Apostles had in all
Churches: Now if S. Paul, could give a Law unto the Church of Corinth, For the
casting out of the Incestuous person, and for the carrying of themselves with
Order and Decency, in their Assemblies and sharply reproove offenders in that
Church, and if all the other Apostles did the like, and took such Authority
upon them over all the members of those several Churches; and that without any
transgression of any divine institution, but with the very good liking and
allowance of God himself, who writ the Commandments of the Lord to all the
Churches, then I say, Saint John transgressed not at all in using his authority
and power given him of God over Diotrephes, in telling the Church of his
faults, and saying He would remember him, and sharply reprove him; for this he
might well do by his sole Authority, without any offense, as he was an Apostle,
for what he did, he did by immediate Revelation and had a warrant for it from
Christ himself, who sent his spirit to lead him into all truth.

And therefore it is a ridiculous if not an impious thing in Master Knollys, to
draw such an inference from a fantasy of his own brain, in that he makes no
difference between Saint John and another ordinary Presbyter and Minister, and
would make that an offense which was none, and infer that Saint John took more
upon him than he ought. Besides it had been no transgression in any other
Presbyter, if he had writ so to any Presbytery, under which he had been a
fellow Presbyter, to inform them of any miscarriage in either Pastor or member
of that Church wherein he was an Elder, and if he had said, If I come I will
remember his deeds, etc. For in his so speaking, he would assume no more
authority to himself, then became a Presbyter to take upon him, as both to
witness to a truth, and to give in evidence of what he knew of such a man to
his fellow judges, and then to leave it to the judgment of the Presbytery and
Common Council of Elders, which Saint John did, whose place it was to censure
such an offender, and in his so doing he should no way impeach the power and
authority of the Court or Common*councell of Presbyters, but rather ratify and
confirm it as all learned men will gather; For by such words, he declares
that there is a standing Court or Council there, where offenders are both to
be questioned and censured; for such an expression, If I come I will remember
his deeds, sufficiently declares, that there was power in their hands, and
manifests, that he was a judge there among the rest, who with others had the
hearing of all causes there, and that all businesses of public concernment
ought to be done and transacted by the mutual and joint accord and agreement
of the Presbytery, and not to be managed by any one singly by himself, or by
the people whom God had never given the Keys unto, nor the power of rule and
Government: This I affirm will necessarily ensue and follow, and not that
which Mr Knollys vainly intimates. And I am confident that any judicious
Christian upon due deliberation will say the same, and will conclude, That
Saint John in his so writing was no offender, though all things of public
concernment in the Church were ever to be transacted by the joint agreement and
common consent of the Presbytery. So that all men that are judicious may
plainly behold the futility in both the answers and cavills of this man, and
well perceive that he was never cut out for a disputant, or ever fitted for
Government in church or State; who if he might have his own mind would bring
in a confusion in both, and violate all order divine and humane, and make the
head the foot, and the foot the head.

And truly if a man would but consider the manner of Government in their seven
new Churches or rather seventy (for every ten or twelve of them prove a Church)
he should find in them all, so much disorder and discrepancy amongst them, and
yet every one of them pretending Divine authority for its particular
government, as he would advisedly conclude, That God was never the author of
them, for God is a God of order and not of confusion: for never since the world
began was there such practice^ in any Christian Churches, as are to be found in
theirs: And to speak the truth, they are a mere mockery of all government:
for every one of those several Churches be they never so slender and small,
assumes an absolute soveranity unto themselves Independent, from all other
Churches and Presbytries, from the which there is no appeal, be one never so
much wronged. And they are as so many free States, and republics, every one of
them ruling within themselves as absolute Magistracies. And therefore upon all
occasions, if any difference arise between member and member in those
Churches, or between Church and Church as often they do, as other Countries
and Commonweales send their Ambassadors to each other upon any difference, or
about states affairs; and as the House of Commons sends to the House of Lords,
and the House of Lords to the House of Commons by their Messengers; and as all
businesses are to be done in the Name of the States, and in the name of either
Lords or Commons; so those little sucking congregations and churches; though
they consist but of 10. or twenty a piece and although never an one of them
knows any more what belongs to government then the horse Master Knollys
preaches on when he goes into the Country yet they send their Officers in the
name of the Church to any other of their Churches, upon any difference, or
about any of their Grolleyes, with as great State and Grander, as if they were
very absolute principalities, and they use by the report of those that have
seen the manner of their carriage in their employment in imitation of
greatness, the same garb and gestures that Ambassadors, or those that carry
a Message from the House of Commons, to the House of Lords, usually do; making
their honors and conges, and they are such bunglers at the work as those that
have seen them say, it is one of the ridiculosest spectacles that ever was
beheld; for they make a thousand Jackinaps tricks and act their several parts
with such affectation of State, that experienced men and such as well know what
belonges to the entertainment of Ambassadors, affirm, that they never beheld
any thing so fanaticall. It is reported that John Lilburne my Scholar is
Master of the Ceremonies amongst them, and teaches them their postures of
Court-ship.

If ever there were any people in the world that trampled all government both
Divine and Human under their poluted feet, or ever made a scorn of
authority I may truly say the Independents are the ^en, and yet they applaud
themselves in all their actions and stick not to say, by these their doings,
they set up the Lord Christ upon his throne in his Kingdom, and in their
houses, and count all those that differ from them of their congregationall way,
as enemies of the Lord Jesus, and of his kingdom; and esteem of them as of a
company of Infidels; and yet they have neither precept nor president for their
so doing, but St. Diotrephes in all the holy Word of God, which constituted a
Presbytery in every Church and committed the government of all the
congregations under each Presbytery into the hands of a Common Counsel and
College of Elders, as that Church Saint John write unto can witness, which
was governed by the conjoynt consent of them all, in which Saint John was a
Presbyter, and therefore writ, If he came he would remember Diotrephes deeds:
which abundantly declares that Saint John acknowledged a Court, a settled
government in every church, whether the members might have recourse for
redress of any abuse or scandalls and therefore took no more upon him then
belonged unto his place: and this shall suffice to have answered to Master
Knollys his last whibbling cavil, and to have spoke of this point of
controversy between us in this place.

I shall answer methodically to all his other evasions in their due places
which the reader shall find as they are scattered through the book, for he is
very immethodicall in all his pamphlet, where I will set down Master Knollys
his own words.

But in the mean time it is sufficiently confirmed out of the Word God and out
of all the Scriptures above quoted, that all the churches we read of in the
New Testament, were so many corporations in Christ's kingdom, which were to be
governed by a Common Council of Presbyteries. And so for many years after the
Apostles times they were Governed Communi consilio presbyterorum, as our
brethren the Independents do confess and prove by antiquity and humane
authority; which weapon I wonder they will contend with, in deciding of Gods
matters, which are only out of his holy Word to be proved, which is to be the
rule of our faith.

But it seems Saint Ambrose his authority pleases them well, though if we
look into it, it makes much against them. He lived as the author that cites
him, says, within the fourth Century. His words are these upon the 1. of
Timothy. Synagoga and postea ecclesia seniores habuit, quorum sine consilio
nihil agebatur in Ecclesia. Quod qua negligentia obsoleverit nescio, nisi
doctorum desidia aut magis superbia, dum soli volunt aliquid videri. Take with
it his own interpretation. The Jews Synagogue (says he) and afterward the
Christian church, had Elders, without whose counsel nothing was done in the
church, which, by what neglect it grew out of use, I knew not, unless it were
perhaps the sloth or rather pride of the teachers, whilst alone they would
seem to be some body. However it is acknowledged by their own testimony, that
in the Apostles time and many years after the Apostles, nothing was done in
the church without the Council of the Presbyters.

So that it is evident the Primitive churches were governed by the joint and
common council of the Presbytery, and the people had nothing to do with it. We
may add here unto Saint Ambrose, Saint Ieromes testimony, who in his
Commentaries upon the first chapter of the Epistle of Paul to Titus, largely
declaring himself (as in many other places) concerning the occasion of the
change of that government established by the Apostles, says, Idem est ergo
Presbyter qui and Episcopus and antequam, diaboli instino^u, studia in
religione fi^r^nt, and diceretur in populis, ego sum Pauli, ego Apollo, ego
autem Cephe, communt Presbyterorum consilio Ecclesiae gubernabantur, etc. In
the which words he acknowledges by the first institution, all Churches were
governed by the common council of the Presbyters, and not by the advice of the
people. Yea the very Canons of the Pope in the first part, and the 95.
distinction, giving the reason why the Presbyterian Government came to be
changed, and the Hierarchiall was put in the place; affirms, that it was
through faction, and for the avoiding of further Schisms and rents in the
Church and cities, using the very words before quoted out of Saint Jerome, and
confesses that before that time, the Churches were governed Commum consilio
Presbyterorum, not by the people or any one Prelate, but by the Presbytery and
their council. And if human authority were needful in this business, I
might make a volume with their very expressions, to prove the novelty of the
Hierarchicall government, and that of the peoples jurisdiction assuming the
Authority of governing into their hands, and the Antiquity of the Presbytery,
and that by the enemies own confession. Bet I am resolved to cleave only unto
the Word, and sound reason deduced from thence, for the deciding of this
controversy, being sorry that there was so much as occasion of naming humane
authority in a point of Divinity.

As for the Presbyterian government, in the sense that I understand it, there
is nothing more clear to me in all the holy Scripture, Yea the very word and
name of a Presbytery signifies a Magistracy, or Aristocracy, or Signory, or
Court; that is, a Company, or Senate, or Council of grave wise, and
understanding men, invested with authority and power of ruling, ordering, and
commanding, and in whose hands the government is put. And as the word is taken
in the civil polity and Government, so in the Ecclesiastical; By a Presbytery
we understand, a Religious, Grave, Solid, Learned, and wise council of Divines
and Ministers, or men of inveterate experience; and such as know how to Rule
and Govern those that are under their command, with wisdom and moderation, and
according to the Word of God; and the which men likewise are invested with
Authority and Power for to exercise a jurisdiction over others, and are
hereunto called by such as are able to judge and discern of the sufficiency of
their gifts and abilities for this work, which the ordinary and common people
cannot do. And as in the civil State, the Presbyters and Elders of the people,
were those that had the rule over them for the common good of them all and for
their bodily preservation; So the Presbyters and Elders in the Church are those
that have the rule and government over the Churches for the spiritual good of
their souls. And as Kings and Rulers are by a Metaphorical and borrowed speech
called Pastors and Sheepherds of the people, and are said to feed the flocks
committed to their charge, by which word is understoode the exercise of all
lawful and moderate authority agreeable to the Law of God over them; so the
Presbyters and Ministers are called the Pastors and Sheepherds, yea, and
Stewards over the flocks committed to their charges, and they are commanded to
feed them; by which metaphor they are invested with the authority and power
both of preaching and ruling, and have the Government over those flocks put
into their hands, which they must always exercise according to Gods Word; they
must feed them and rule them in the Lord, and not after their own wills and
pleasures, they may not have dominion over our faith, as Paul says in the 2.
of the Corinthians; chap. 1. verse 24. But that they should be helpers of our
joy; that is, they may not usurp an absolute Sovereignty or power over the
consciences of the people, as if the spiritual state and welfare of their
flocks depended on them, which is only grounded upon their faith in Jesus
Christ; but as they are the Stewards of God, and Ministers and servants of the
Church, so they should comfort them and rejoice their hearts in the Lord, and
establish them in the faith; and use all the care and diligence that is
possible, like good Shepherds, to preserve the flocks committed to their
charge, that they straggle and stray not from Christ's fold, and run not into
the by-ways and thickets of sin and error, and be corrupted with noisome
food, and false Doctrine: And if they have any among them that are unruly, that
they bring and reduce them into order: or if they have any sick, feeble, poor
or weak, that they cure, releeve, comfort, and restore such: and if they have
any that are infected or scabby, that they remove such from the sound, till
they be recovered: or if they have any broken or wounded, that they heal and
recover them with all lenity and humanity; and that they should by
common*councell govern and order their flocks, and take special care that the
particular Pastors and Ministers of the several Congregations and Assemblies
under their Presbytery and charge, assume not any sole and sovereign Authority
to themselves over the flock, to do any thing of public concernment, without
the joint consent of that Presbytery or spiritual Corporation, under whose
commands they are. And it stands with all reason, that a Common council, of
godly, grave, learned, and experienced ministers, should ever be more able to
manage and order a government, then two or three unexperienced men, or two or
three hundred young people, of which most Congregations consist, in whom the
sap of youth is not yet dried up; or if many of them should be of riper years,
yet they know little what belongs to government, and therefore they can never
be so well able to govern, as men both of known learning, ancient experience,
and honesty, and approved judgment and integrity, as a whole College or an
Assembly of learned Presbyters commonly are; who by God himself have the
dispensation of the Word and the ordering and ruling of the Church committed
unto them, and who in the Preaching of the Word, and the administration of the
Sacraments, and in all ordinary acts of worship, and in governing and ruling
the flocks committed to their several charges, are the successors of the holy
Apostles.

But by the way, an objection is here to be answered unto, made by some of the
Independents after this manner.

The Elders and Presbyters of the Apostles times, say they, by the imposition
of their hands, gave the gift of tongues and prophecy, Acts 19. 1, 2, 3, 4 5.
and the 8. 18 and 1 Timothy 4. 14. and healed the sick James 5. 14, 15. according
to our Saviors promise Mark. 16. 18. Let, say they, the Presbyters of our
time, let them impose their hands upon the sick and heal them, let them by
imposing hands upon their disciples enable them on a sudden to speak with
strange tongues, and foretell things to come; and then we will acknowledge them
for a true Presbytery, then will they be a right assembly of Elders, and the
Apostles successors; but, if they cannot give to others, nor yet have for
themselves in store, any of the true Apostles, any of the right Presbyters
gifts and characters, we may not, we dare not acknowledge them as such.

These are their formal words in print. Before I come to my answer, I desire
there may be special notice taken of this Objection, and such like; for, for
ought that I know, if any man will argue afthis manner, all Christian religion
may be called in question, and no man will have any Creed or Belief, except he
may make his own Articles, as Thomas did, who said, Unless I put my hands into
his side and my fingers into the print of the nails, I will not believe. And
as the Jews said unto our blessed Savior, Thou that savedst others, now save
thy self, come down from the Cross and then we will believe in thee, do this
miracle and then thou will persuade us. Here we see, they would make their own
Articles, or else they would have no Creed. The Jews had learned this method
of disputing from the Devil, who at his meeting of our Savior Christ, and at
his first assault, thus disputed, If thou be the Son of God, says he, and
would have the world so believe, and me too, on thee, then command these
stones to be made bread, do this miracle first; but thou can not do it, Ergo.
So in like manner these men argue, except, say they, the Presbyters by the
imposition of their hands upon their Disciples, can enable them on a sudden to
speak with strange tongues, to foretell things to come, and heal the sick,
etc. we will not acknowledge them to be true Elders: but let them do all these
things by the imposition of their hands, and then we will acknowledge them for
a true Presbytery. See the vanity of these men, and the instability of their
faith, by their own confession; miracles will make them believe any thing, if
we may credit their own words, though never so contrary to their judgment and
to the faith once delivered to the Saints. It is well known to the Learned,
that the Apostles and those Primitive christians had extraordinary and
wonderful gifts, that ravished the world then into admiration; and it is
confessed also by all understanding Christians, that those wonder-working
miracles were but temporary, as the miraculous feeding of the people with Manna
in the Wilderness, where they were fellow-commoners with the Angels, and
continued but till they came into the Land that flowed with Milk and Honey. So
those miracles of the Primitive christians continued but for a time, till the
Gospel and the truth of the Christian faith and doctrine was confirmed and
established, which being once done, and the holy Scriptures which were to be
the rule of faith to the end of the world being left to posterity, and to which
we are tied and commanded not to be wise above that which is written, 1 Cor. 4.
6. and forbid in Gal. 1. 8, 9. to believe otherwise then we have been taught,
though the Apostles or an Angel from heaven should teach otherwise; after, I
say, the Doctrine of the Christian Faith and Religion was confirmed, the
ordinary working of Miracles ceased. And it is said of Antichrist in 2 Thessalonians.
chap. 2. That he shall come with strong delusions and lying wonders, and with
all deceiveableness in them that perish, because they received not the love of
the truth, that they might be saved. So that I cannot sufficiently wonder, to
see the dealing of these men, who in these days expect and look for miracles
to confirm their faith, when notwithstanding we are forwarned to take heed of
all false delusions, and commanded to the contrary. Show us some miracles, say
they, and then we will believe you are true Presbyters. So dealt the Jews with
Christ, What sign show thou that we may believe in thee? But when Christ
had showed them sign upon sign, and miracle upon miracle, were they ever the
more convinced? Did those miracles create belief in them? No surely, but
rather hardened them and made them blaspheme. When he cast out Devils, they say
he did it by the Prince of Devils. So without doubt, if the Presbyters had
those gifts of miracles, that they could gratify these men with daily
prodigies and works of wonder, they would then say, they came with lying
wonders, and with the working of Satan, and they would make the world abhor
them the more. There is an old saying, that he must rise early and never go
to bed, that will please all men: and truly it would be not only difficult,
but an impossible thing, for any State or great Council, were it never so
wise, to please all the people under them. God himself, nor Moses, nor Aaron
his servants, could please the Israelites though they saw never such wonders
continually before their eyes, to confirm their authority; yea they told Moses
and Aaron to their faces, that they took too much upon them. And afterward
they cast off Gods own government and God himself, as the Lord complains to
Samuel, in 1 Samuel, and would set up a government after the model of their
own brain, as it is at large set down in that Book. And not long after they
changed the manner of Gods worship, in Ieroboams time, and taught the fear of
God, as the Lord complains, Isay 29. after the precepts of men, and rejected
Gods commandments, as Christ says, Matthew. 15. and Mark 7. So that what they
thought best in their own eyes, that was ever best pleasing unto them. They
would not content themselves with the Written Word, though they were never so
often by Moses, and all the rest of the Prophets, commanded to cleave unto it,
saying, to the Law and to the Testimony, Isay 8. Even so it is now in these
days, they content not themselves with that Ordinance that is set down in the
Written Word, but say, Come show us some miracles, and then we will believe
you are a right Presbytery. Our Savior speaking to the Jews concerning Saint
John the Baptist and Himself, John, says he, came neither eating nor
drinking, and ye say behold he has a Devil; the Son of Man came both
eating and drinking, and ye say, he is a Wine-bibber, a friend of Publicans
and Sinners. So that whatsoever method or way God used to convert them, they
cavil'd against it, and were never satisfied; always resisting the Spirit of
God, as Stephen told them in Act. 7.

So now, in these our times they look for miracles, and a new way of teaching.
But all good Christians are forbid to listen after, or to give heed to
miracles: and are sent unto Moses and the Prophets, Luke 16. and are commanded
to search the Scripture, John 5. Yea our Savior himself in the person of
Abraham, Luke 16. says, That if men will not believe Moses and the Prophets,
they will not be persuaded by miracles: and I am confident, that could the
Presbyters do all those miracles these men desire, they would the more
reproach them, and exclaim against them, and affirm they wrought by the
Devil, as the Jews told our Savior he did. I must confess, I am of a
contrary opinion to these men, not only in the matter of miracles, but in all
external performances; for I am instructed in the holy scriptures, that the
Devil can transform himself into an Angel of light, and that the Deceivers
and false Teachers shall come forth in sheeps clothing, and for outward
appearance shalequalize, if not exceed, the faithfullest and truest Pastors and
Ministers of Christ; and therefore we are in special, commanded to take heed
of such: and for my particular, if any men whatsoever of never such seeming
sanctity, sufficient abilities, unblameable life, should come forth and teach
any other Doctrine of Faith, Manners, or Government, then that I have been
taught in the holy Scripture; and should confirm this their Doctrine with
never so many miracles, I will still continue steadfast in the Doctrine of the
Apostles, and cleave unto the written Word, and will never believe contrary to
that, though I should undergo the greatest misery, or be exposed to the
greatest want by it, that any man ever saw: for I know that all these momentary
trials and afflictions are not worthy that exceeding weight of glory that shall
be revealed. And for this very point of the Presbytery, in that sense I take
it, I am so well assured that it is Gods Ordinance, as I am of any point in
Religion. But as I said before, if men may argue after this way. The Presbyters
in the Apostles times did miracles, and s^ake with strange tongues, and their
Scholars and Disciples did the same; do you likewise, and then we will
acknowledge you to be true Presbyters, otherwise we will not. Thus the Jews
might have argued against all their Prophets, as against Isaiah, Jeremy,
Ezekiel, etc. Moses and Elias fasted forty days and forty nights, and did many
miracles, do you so, and then we will believe you are true Prophets, and sent
to us of God, otherwise we will not believe you to be true Prophets. Yea all
the wicked and ungodly men of these times may argue thus also: God gave unto
his Church Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, etc. and they spoke all strange
tongues and diverse languages, and did many miracles; but you and your
Congregations, have neither Apostles, Prophets, nor Evangelists, nor ye have
not the gifts of Tongues, nor ye can do no Miracle: Ergo, you are not the true
Church. The Primitive Christians and the servants of God in those times, had
the gifts of Tongues and Prophecy, and the holy Ghost came down upon them, and
they spoke by direction from God his infallible truth and Gospel, whose
speeches were not tied to time, and to one speaker, but many spoke one after
another by Interpreters, as it is at large set down in the 1. of the
Corinthians, chap. 14. verse. 27. 28, 29, 30. etc. So that they spoke infallible
truth by direction from God: But you have none in your Congregations so
miraculously inspired with sundry languages, and diverse tongues, nor ye do not
speak infallible truths by direction from God; nor you cannot cure diseases
nor do miracles: Ergo, your religion is not the same Religion; nor your
Congregations the true Church: show us these miracles and then we will believe
you to be the true Church, otherwise we may not, we dare not acknowledge you to
be the true Church.

Again they may argue thus: The Apostles and Primitive Pastors, and Teachers
preached freely, and labored with their own hands, and were helpful to the
necessities of others, and were not burdensome and exacting from others, and
spoke ex tempore, by direction from God: but your Ministers in your
Congregations do not preach freely, nor labor not with their own hands, nor
are not helpful to to others necessities, but are rather burdensome and
exacting from others; nor they do no miracles, nor speak not immediately by
inspiration, and ex tempore; but by Study and out of their Books, and are
confined to time, and speak not in strange tongues and languages, one after
another by Interpreters. Ergo, Your Ministers are not Gods Ministers, nor your
Congregations the true Church, nor your people true Christians; for you want
all those things that the Primitive Christians and the Primitive Churches had.

There is a Pamphlet lately come out, and highly esteemed and prised amongst
many, full of such consequences as these, which if they hold good against the
Presbyters, they may also for ought I know, be of equal validity to overthrow,
not only all Christian Congregations, but indeed all Christian Religion. But
briefly to answer.

We look upon the Apostles and Primitive Presbyters, as men miraculously and
extraordinarily gifted, and as wonder-working men for the confirmation of the
truth of the Gospel to all succeeding ages; and we consider in them and in the
Christians of those times, something extraordinary and temporary, as their
working of miracles, and speaking of strange tongues, and gifts of healing,
etc. And those we conceive were to continue no longer in the church, then for
the confirmation of the truth of the Gospel; Christ himself proclaiming those
blessed, that believe without seeing of miracles, speaking unto Thomas, John
20. 29. Because thou have seen me, says he, thou believe, blessed are they
that have not seen, and have believed. So that miracles now are not ordinary,
and we are tied to the written Word. But we consider likewise in the Apostles
and Primitive Presbyters, that that was permanent and to continue in all
Ministers and Presbyters in succeeding ages to the end of the world, and that
was the power of order and preaching, and the power of jurisdiction, that is of
ruling (which is not denied by the most learned of the Independents themselves)
and this I have proved by the Word of God, to be transacted over to all
Christian Churches, whose Presbyters have that power given unto them; neither
will the Learned Brethren deny it, whatsoever the ignorant may do. Yea, the
very name of a Presbytery (as I said before) if we look through the whole
Scripture, signifies a Magistracy, or Signiory, or Corporation invested with
authority of governing and ruling; and such a counsel and company of men, as
upon whom the government under Christ is laid, and to be extended so far, as
their jurisdiction extends, and as far as by common consent it may make for
the good and edification of the church, and for the safety of the same. And
such was the government of all those churches of the New Testament, which were
as so many Committees, their limits and bounds prefixed them, as at this dayall
Committees through the Kingdom have in their several Hundreds, Rapes,
Wapentakes, and Cities, to whom the ordering and government of those places
that are under them, are committed; so that all that is done or transacted,
must be done by the joint consent, and council of the whole Committee, not any
particular man or any two of them severally considered by themselves, can make
an order; but that order only is binding which is made by the joint consent
and common agreement of them all, or the greatest part of them assembled
together. Even so all those particular Congregations that are within the
compass and jurisdiction of the several Presbyteries, are to be ordered and
governed by the common and joint council of the several Presbyters, or the
greater part of them. For this was the order the Apostles established,
appointing in every City a Presbytery; and when they had so ordered the
Churches, they set them all to their several employments, the Presbyters to
command, and all the people and particular Assemblies and Congregations under
them, to obey; neither is it ever found in the holy Scriptures, that the people
were joined with the Presbyters in their Commission. So that they that oppose
this government, resist Gods Ordinance. And if we look into all the Epistles
writ by the Apostles to the several Churches, we shall find in them, That
they enjoyne all the several Congregations to yield obedience to their Pastors
and Rulers over them, and signify unto them that they owe unto them double
honor, especially such as labor in the Word and Doctrine; that is, they must
yield unto them, not only due reverence and subjection, and obedience to their
council and just commands in the Lord; but that they should also afford them
the honor of maintenance, and take order there be a sufficient and competent,
yea, an honorable allowance for their support; and that as they minister to
them spiritual food for their souls, they should likewise minister unto them
all things necessary for the maintenance of them and their Families, that they
may comfortably and without solicitous care, follow their holy employments and
wait upon their several Ministeries. So that the place and employment of the
Presbyters, is to teach and rule the people; and this is their proper work,
and peculiarly belongs unto them; and the employment and place of the several
congregations under them, is to hear and obey: and therefore if the several
congregations do assume unto themselves the power of ruling, they take more
upon them then by God is allowed them: and the Presbyters in yiedling unto it,
reject their own right, and divest themselves of that authority that God has
put into their hands; and by so doing in time may not only bring confusion
into the Church, but to all those Countries where such usurpations are
tolerated. I cannot but speak my conscience in this point: And truly, very
reason dictates unto a man, that they only should have the authority of
commanding and ruling over the Churches, to whom the power of the Keys is
given. Now it is given only to the Ministers and Presbyters, as we see it in
John 20. 21. and Matthew. 18. 15, 16, 17, 18. Where our Savior Christ
established a standing government, to be continued to the end of the World, the
violating and the overthrowing of the which, was the cause of all those
confusions, both in doctrine and manners that is now come upon the world; and
was the cause, not only of the rise, but the growth of Antichrist. And the
reducing of it again into the Church, and the re*stablishing of it, will be the
confusion of that Man of Sin, and of all the Antichristian-brood, and be a
means of establishing truth and peace through the Christian world. But it will
not be amiss a little to consider that place in Matthew. 18. If thy Brother,
says Christ shall trespass against thee, go and tell him of it between thee
and him alone: if he shall hear thee, thou shall gain thy brother; but if he
will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of
two or three witnesses, every word may be established. And if he shall neglect
to hear them; then tell it unto the Church: but if he neglect to hear the
Church, let him be to thee as a Heathen man and a Publican. Verily, verily I
say unto you, whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, and
whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. In these words
our Savior Christ has respect unto the order and custom of judicature in
those times in censuring men's manners and doctrines, which among the Jews was
ordered and administered by an assembly and counsel of learned, experienced,
and judicious men, and by a Presbytery, Consistory, or College of able men for
government, chose and selected out of the people for this very purpose, by such
as could judge and discern of their abilities: the which assembly and company,
is by Christ himself called a Church, because it did represent the Church, and
in this place Christ did establish the like to be continued in the Christian
church to the end of the world, making his Apostles this representative body,
and their successors all the godly and holy Ministers and Presbyters, and gives
unto them the same power and Authority, to judge and determine of all things
belonging unto faith and manners that was observed in the Jewish church, in all
Ecclesiastical Discipline. For otherwise, the Christian church should be
inferior to that of the Jews, if they had not the same Privileges for the
censuring of manners and Doctrines, and the same power of jurisdiction and
ruling that they had. Now all power of jurisdiction among the Jews, was
exercised not by the promiscuous multitude, or by the whole congregation, nor
by any particular man, nor by two or three (as the place above specifies) but
by an Assembly, Senate, Council, or Presbytery, of understanding men assigned
to that purpose, which our Savior himself calls a Church; and this
government established in the Christian church, are the several Presbyteries,
where all things are transacted by common and joint consent: and this was the
practice of the Apostles at Jerusalem, who did all business of public
concernment, by common and joint consent, as is manifest, in the first chap. of
the Acts, in choosing of an Apostle in Judas his place, and in the 5. chap. in
censuring Annanias and Saphira and in the 6. chap. in choosing Deacons, and in
the 15. chapter in determining the question there in hand, all in a
Presbyterian way and by common consent.

And this is that government, that God has commanded to be perpetuated to the
end of the world, in these words; Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be
bound in heaven, and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in
heaven. So that the Presbyters only have the power of the keys, and it is
their place only to ordain Ministers and Church Officers, (whatsoever Authority
the people may exercise in the choosing of them) as Paul writes unto Timothy and
Titus, and they only are to judge and determine and to censure in matters of
manners and doctrine, and the people are to allow and approve it according to
the Word of God. Yea the very Synagogues of the Jews, which were the same that
our churches are, were governed by a Presbytery, (as our brethren acknowledge)
called by the name of the Rulers of the Synagogue, who governed by joint and
common council; as is evident and manifest, in that there were superior and
inferior Judges* Commanders, and Rulers, according as their years, gravity and
wisdom made them more emninent then others, and venerable to the people: as
may appear in many places as Acts 18. ver. 8. It is said there, That Crispus
the chief Ruler of the Synagogue believed with all his household. So that if
there were a chief Ruler, or Judge, or a President; there must of necessity be
a Council or Segniory of inferior ones, that had Rule and Authority over
others as well as he: and where there is a chief Justice or Judge, there are
other Judges joined with him, as all reason persuades, and there must needs be
a Court of Judicature, where all things are transacted, by conjoynt and common
consent and agreement: and so it was in the Synagogues of the Jews, who were
subject to, and ordered by the determinations and abitrement of their Rulers
and Governors. So that the several Churches or Synagogues under the Jews were
in subjection to those Rulers, and were governed according as by common
council they ordered. And Mat. the 5. verse. 22. And behold there came one of
the Rulers of the Synagogue, whose name was Iairus* here was a special Ecce
added to take notice, that a great man, and one in authority, came unto Christ,
and that in a public way, and one of the Rulers of the Synagogue. So that we
may observe the people in every Synagogue were governed and commanded by their
Rulers, and they were to yield obedience unto them, and were not joined with
them in Commission, but stood to their determination, as all men use to do in
Courts of Judicature, that appeal unto them for justice. And this custom and
manner of government was transacted over to the Christian Churches; and those
that were called Rulers among them, are among Christians sometimes called
Presbyters, sometimes Guides, sometimes Rulers, and by Christ himself and by
his Apostles, are appointed over all Christian Churches as so many
corporations; to which all the Assemblies and Congregations under them, and
committed to their charge, are to yield obedience and submission, in whatsoever
they command in the Lord, and according to his blessed Word; for that must be
the rule both of their commanding and of the peoples obeying. And this
Presbyterian government, is that manner and way of ruling all Assemblies and
particular Congregations under it, that God has appointed in his Church, to be
continued to the end of the world; the which whosoever resists, resists the
Ordinance of God. And this shall suffice to have spoken in general, in way of
proof, That all Churches we have mention of under the New Testament, were
Aristocratically and Presbyterially governed, that is, were under the
Government of a College or Assembly of Presbyters.

And now I come to prove in order the four Propositions or conclusions I
undertook to make good. The first was, That there were many Congregations and
several Assemblies in the Church of Jerusalem, in the which they had all acts
of worship, and did partake in all Ordinances of Church Fellowship; and that
before the persecution we read of Act. 8. and under the persecution, and after
the persecution. And for the proof of this Proposition, and every branch of
it, I will first produce such places of Scripture as make for the manifestation
of the truth, and from thence frame and form my Arguments, Mat. 3. ver. 1, 2.
5, 6. In those days came John the Baptist, preaching in the wilderness of
Iudaea, and saying, Repent ye, for the Kingdom of heaven is at hand. Then went
out to him Jerusalem, and all ^udaea and all the Region round about Jordan, and
were baptized of him in Jordan confessing their sins. The Baptism of John,
as all the learned know, was the same with that of the Apostles, for he
preached the Baptism of Repentance for the Remission of sins, and Baptized
all that came to him* into Jesus Christ, saying unto the people, That they
should believe on him which should come after him, that is, on Christ Jesus,
Act. 19. ver. 4. He had his Commission also from God as well as the Apostles,
and Baptized Christ himself; he preached also the Gospel and the Kingdom of
the Messiah as well as the Apostles; and had many honorable Testimonies from
Christ himself; as, That he was the greatest Prophet that ever was borne of
woman, and That he was a bright shining light, and That he was his witness;
and many other Encomiums and praises did Christ give of him, to ratify his
Authority, and to show that he was sent of God, and that he was that Elias that
was to come before the Messiah: And all the people owned, and took him for a
man sent of God, and Jerusalem went out to him, and all the Region round about,
and were Baptized of him. In these words we find that the people of Jerusalem
were all turned Christians, and made members of the Christian Church, and were
believers. For which way soever the word Jerusalem be taken, it signifies a
numberless multitude of men, or an innumerable company.

For if we consider Jerusalem at this time, she was a most populous City: the
Historians that write of that age, relate, That she had sometimes in her, no
less then eleven or twelve hundred thousand; but let it be taken that these
were but six hundred thousand inhabitants, it is a vast multitude, and yet
seldom was there less inhabitants in Jerusalem, if any belief may be had to
Historians; for at that time it was one of the Metropolis Cities of the world,
and the glory of Nations and the joy of the whole Earth; and besides there was
then great expectation, as we may read, Luke 19. 11. That the Kingdom of God
should immediately appear, and all the Jews out of all Nations where they were
scattered, now repaired to Jerusalem, and returned into their own country,
expecting the Messiah. So that at this time, we cannot conceive but that there
were infinites of people in Jerusalem, and it is said, That Jerusalem went out
and was baptized by John. By Jerusalem, here metonimycally the place is taken
for the people. Now when it is said that a City goes out, it is to be
understood either of the whole people, Man, Woman, and Child, old and young,
with all the inhabitants; as many times it happens, in great Earthquakes, or
some Pestilence or Inundation, that all the Inhabitants are forced to leave a
City, and to seek some other habitation, or of some great part; but we cannot
conceive the going out of Jerusalem to John Baptist in that large sense and
expression; so that in this place it must be taken Synecdochycally, and we are
to understand a great part, or a chief part for the whole: as when a City is
said to entertain a King, or to go out to meet a King, here it is to be
understood principally of the chief Officers, as the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and
the Common Council, and all their several Companies, and chief Captains and
Commanders, with all their magnificence; so that in this notion the common
people and the ordinary Citizens are not thought on, or at least are not
numbered. As when JESUS was borne in Bethlem, and the Wise Men came to
Jerusalem, to enquire where they should find him that was borne King of the
Jews, that they might worship him, for they had seen his Star, it is said,
That when Herod heard these things, He and all Jerusalem was troubled with him.
Here, by all Jerusalem, is to be understood all the chief Officers and
Courtiers; for the common people were glad of it; for that was the day they had
long looked for, and rejoiced at: but Herod being an Usurper and a Tyrant, and
all his Nobles, Peers, and Great men being confederate with him, and adjutors
in his usurpation and tyranny, and conceiving that Christ was an earthly
Monarch; and that after the manner of the Kings of the Earth, he would not
only pull down the Usurper, but likewise call all them in question, as guilty
of High Treason, and cut them of as accomplices and abettors; this made them
tremble and fear; and because it was the general fear of all the great men in
Jerusalem, and of all the Courtiers and Officers under Herod, therefore it is
said, that Herod and all Jerusalem with him was troubled. So that Tyrants and
their accomplices never have any real peace. But in this sense also it cannot be
understood, that Jerusalem went out to John and was baptized; it must therefore
by a Senecdoche be taken for all the common people promiscuously, or for a
mighty multitude of all sorts, and of all ranks of people, and of all
professions, as Publicans, Soldiers, and the ordinary Inhabitants: and in this
sense the word Jerusalem must be taken for a mighty multitude of men in
Jerusalem that were made Christians; for otherwise the Evangelist would have
said, many went out of Jerusalem also, as well as out of other places: but in
saying that all Judea, and all the Regions round about, and Jerusalem went out;
this metaphorical expression does signify, That an infinite number of people
in Jerusalem it self, were made Christians and Members of the Church; and that
it is so to be understood, the places following will evidently evince it: for
in Matthew. 11. 12. our Savior says, That from the days of John the Baptist,
until now, the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it
by force, then the which, there could nothing be spoke more emphatically, to
set forth the growth and increase of Believers, and the multitude of
Christians, as Luke also in chapter 16. v. 16. expresses saying, That the Law and
the Prophets were until John; since that time the kingdom of God is preached,
and every man presses in to it: that is, the generality of the people became
believers, and were baptized: as it is yet more evident from Luke 7. 29, 30. by
the very testimony of our Savior, who says, That all the people that heard
him, and the Publicans, justified God, being baptized with the Baptism of
John; but the P harisees and Lawyers rejected the council of God against
themselves, being not baptized of him. So that by the witness of our Savior
Christ, except the Pharisees and the Priests; all the people, or the generality
of the people in Jerusalem were baptized, and became Christians, and embraced
the Gospel: and this was accounted among the miracles that was wrought in
those days, and as a thing of special observation, and as a matter of wonder;
as we may see in the message our Savior Christ sent unto John the Baptist by
his Disciples, when he bad them relate unto their Master, what they had seen
and heard in the 22. Verse; Tell him says he, That the blind see, the lame
walk, the Leapers are cleansed, the deaf hear, and the dead are raised, and
the poor receive the Gospel; this I say, was among the miracles, that the
generality of the poor embrace the Gospel, and were baptized and made
Believers: which must needs import a mighty multitude, and a great increase, or
else it would not have been a thing of such wonder, and have been sent unto
Saint John as a miraculous thing; and a thing worthy to prove Christ himself to
be the Messiah looked for; for no mere man could have wrought such a work,
asto draw the hearts of the the people to embrace the Gospel, but the Messiah
himself; For Paul may plant, and Apollo may water, 1 Cor. 3. but God only the
Messiah, must give the increase; he must move the heart to embrace the Gospel,
and to believe; for faith is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2. and therefore this was
the wonder that the generality of the people did believe and were baptized, and
this was the sole work and operation of Christ, and therefore proved him to be
the Prophet they looked for. And it stands with all reason that there were
infinites of people in Jerusalem that believed; and that John was greatly
magnified of the people, and publicly followed, because for a time, Herod
himself countenanced John Mark. 6. 20* and feared him, knowing that he was a
just man and an holy, and observed him, and when he heard him, he did many
things, and heard him gladly. And although we read not that he was baptized by
John, yet he highly honored him; till John reproved him, and told him, it was
not lawful for him to have his Brothers Wife. And in this interim of his
seeming favor, we may conceive, that the Courtiers also and the great men
would do as their Master did: for if we observe the manner of all Courts to
this day, what the King does the Courtiers also do; if the King laugh, though
there be perhaps a cause of mourning, they will all laugh; and if he frowns,
though there be a cause of cheerfulness and smiling, they will al frown; and
if the King commends any man, they will all admire him; and if he hears any
Minister gladly, they will all hear him willingly: and if he when he is
reproved, be angry and displeased, and will cut off his head whom he had so
honored but the day before, then all the Courtiers, they will help him, and
further the work: as we may see, not only in the example of John Baptist, but
in Haman; as soon as the King frownd upon him, the Courtiers they covered his
face, and up they trussed him; be it right or wrong it is all one to Courtiers.
But in that interim, I say, that John Baptist was in favor with the King,
without doubt it animated the people greatly to follow him, and by hearing him,
many thousand Saints were converted, and the multitudes of them were numerous,
as is manifest from Matthew. 14. 5. for it is said, That when he would have put
him to death he feared the multitude, because they counted him as a Prophet.
Here are two observables, the one, That he that feared not God, was afraid of
his servants. The second, that it was a mighty multitude of Believers that were
in Jerusalem; for a few could not have awed the King and kept him in fear: and
therefore he was forced to defer the cutting off of his head, till he had got
to him all the strength of Galilee, all his Lords and high Captains, and his
chief Estates and Commanders, Mark 6. 21. And when he thought himself strong
enough, then he exercised his tyranny. Yea, when John was taken away, yet the
multitudes of the people continued steadfast in the faith, as we may see in Luke
20. by the confession of the very enemies: for when our Savior asked them
concerning the baptism of John, Whether it was from Heaven or of Men? And they
reasoned among themselves, saying, if we shall say from Heaven, he will say,
why then believed ye him not? and if we say of Men, all the people will stone
us, for they be persuaded that John was a Prophet. Here by the confession of
the very enemies, all the people, or the generality of them were Believers; and
it must of necessity be a mighty multitude, that kept all the Priests and all
the Elders that had all the power in their hands, in awe, that they durst not
so much as open their mouths against John the Baptist. From all which places,
and many more that might be produced, to prove, That there were so many
Believers in Jerusalem as could not all meet in one place or room, or in one
Congregation, to partake in all acts of worship; I thus argue.

Where there was an infinite multitude, or a mighty City of Believers, there
they could not all meet together in one place or room, or in one Congregation,
for the enjoying of all acts of worship, and for edification (which is required
in the Churches, 1 Cor. 14. 26.) but of necessity must be distributed into
several Congregations and Assemblies, and diverse divisions, that they might be
all edified, and partake in all Ordinances. But in the Church of Jerusalem, by
the very baptism and preaching of John, there were infinite multitudes, and a
very City of Believers. Ergo, they could not all meet together in one place or
room, or in one congregation for the enjoying of all acts of worship, and for
edification (which is required in the Church of God) but of necessity must be
distributed into several congregations and assemblies, and diverse divisions,
that they might all be edified, and partake in all ordinances. For the major,
it is clear, by the very light of nature, and all reason: for there is no one
place or house that can contain a whole City, or infinite multitude of
Believers: and if any great place could contain them, they could not all be
edified and partake of all the acts of worship. For if the very great raw-bon'd
building of Paul's it self were crammed full of people, and had a Preacher of
the strongest lungs in the City, half the people could not hear and be edified,
as daily experience tells us; so that of necessity, if they would be edified,
and partake in all the Ordinances, they must be distributed into diverse
congregations, and several assemblies. I am most assured that there were such
multitudes of Believers in Jerusalem, that five such buildings as Paul's could
not have contained their very bodies within their walls, much less receive
them, or entertain them for edification. So that for the major, I am confident
there is no intelligible man will doubt of it. For the Minor, it is manifest
from the places above produced; for our Savior says, excepting the Pharisees
and the Lawyers (which were but a little handful) all the people, or the
generality of them, justified God, and were baptized, and were Believers. So
that the conclusion from the premises does necessarily follow. But from the
former places I argue yet further after this manner.

Where there was such an infinite company and multitude of Christians and
Believers, as kept a tyrannical King in awe, and all the Magistrates and
Elders in whose hands was all the power and authority; and struck such a fear
and terror into them all, that they durst not exercise their cruelty and
tyranny over them, though they were their inveterate enemies, and desired it:
There of necessity the number of the Believers must be so great, as they could
not all meet together in one place or room, or in one congregation, for the
enjoying and partaking in all the acts of worship; but if they would be
edified, must be distributed into diverse congregations and assemblies. But in
Jerusalem there were such an infinite company and multitude of Christians and
Believers, as kept Herod himself, the tyrant, in awe, all the Magistrates and
Elders, in whose hands was all the power and authority; and struck such a fear
and terror into them, that they durst not exercise their cruelty and tyranny
over them, though they were their inveterate enemies, and desired it. Ergo, of
necessity the number of the Believers was so great, as they could not all meet
together in one place or room, or in one congregation, for the enjoying and
partaking in all acts of worship; but if they would be edified, must be
distributed into diverse Congregations and Assemblies.

For the Major and Minor of this Syllogism, besides the force of reason and
common understanding, which were enough to convince any rational creature of
the truth of them: the holy Scripture it self (as from the places above
specified, is manifest) proves them. So that none can doubt of the truth of the
conclusion, but such as will call in question truth it self. I might out of
the several places above mentioned draw many more Arguments to prove the
conclusion; but because I study brevity, these for the present shall serve, to
prove, That by the very baptism and Ministry of S. John the Baptist, there
were such an infinite company of Believers in the Church of Jerusalem, as they
could not al meet together in one place or congregation, for the enjoying of
all the Ordinances.

To these first arguments of mine, by which I proved that by the very Baptism
of S. John there were more converted and made Christians and believeres in
Jerusalem then could meet in any one place or Congregation, Master Knollys
answers by denying the minor of my Syllogismes, and I. S. by denying they were
Christians as we shall see. I will therefore reply unto them both, in order,
beginning first with Master Knollys, whose words are these page 8. I do deny
the minor proposition of these arguments says he. Neither has the Doctor
proved, that there was an infinite number of believers, nor a very City of
believers in the Church of Jerusalem. The Scriptures quoted by the Doctor speak
no such thing. Those places in Matthew, Mark and Luke, tell us of very many who
were baptized by John, and by Christ's Disciples; but do not declare how many
of those baptized persons were of the Church of Jerusalem; and the Scripture
witnesses, Act. 9. 31. That there were Churches through all Iudaea, as well as
in Jerusalem; and for ought I know, or the Doctor either, many of those
baptized persons might be in those Churches, yea the most of them, and but a
few in Jerusalem; it may be no more but those hundred and twenty mentioned,
Act. 1. 13, 14, 15. to whom were added about three thousand souls, who
continued in the doctrine of the Apostles, and in breaking of bread and
prayers, Acts the 2. 42, 43, 44. This is all Master Knollys has to say by way
of answer for the enervating of the strength of my Arguments and Reasons, by
which I proved there were more converted by John's Ministerythen could meet in
any one place in Jerusalem.

Now here before I come to reply, I refer my self to the judicious Reader,
whether from the forgoing places, which I quoted out of the Holy Word of God,
and from the Reasons and Arguments deduced out of it, it was not sufficiently
evinced, That there were an infinite number of believers, and a very City of
them in the Church of Jerusalem, and therefore more then could meet in any one
place or Congregation: I demand I say of any intelligible Christian, whether
those Scriptures I cited with the Arguments deduced from them do not speak
and persuade such a thing? I am confident all such as know any thing in
learning, will say they do. But for answer, Master Knollys himself, grants
that very many were baptized by John and Christ's disciples, and none were
baptized then but Believers, as he and all the Independents do confess and
acknowledge; but says he, the Scriptures quoted, do not declare how many of
those baptized persons were of the Church of Jerusalem; for the Scriptures
witness that there were Churches through all Iudaea, as well as in Jerusalem,
and for ought (says he) I know or the Doctor either, many of those baptized
persons might be of those Churches, yea the most of them, and but a few in
Jerusalem, it may be no more but those hundred and twenty, mentioned, Acts the
1. verse. 13, 14, 15.

If a bare denial of any Argument with a senseless Reason or two, and an it
may be, were a sufficient conviction of a truth, then Master Knollys would be a
very precious Disputant, and to say Bellarmine thou lie, would be enough to
confute all the Papists: But in matters of this nature and of so high
concernement, there is more required then bare denials, and vain evasions and
maybee's: And therefore I will take this liberty to tell Master Knollis, that
he trifles in Divinity, and deals not like a serious nor learned Christian,
nor to the purpose: for this is not in question between me and the
Independents, how many of those baptized persons through all Iudaea and the
Regions round about were resident in the Church of Jerusalem? This I say was
never controverted between us; for no man that I know of, ever doubted but
that all those that came out of al Iudaea and the Regions round about to the
Ministry and Baptism of John and Christ's Disciples, returned home again to
their several habitations, and there remained and abode, as those that came
out of Jerusalem to John's Preaching and Baptism, after they were baptized,
repaired to their several houses and habitations in that City, and remained
there waiting upon the public Ordinances; this I conceive all men that have
any understanding believe. And the Scripture sufficiently declares, that the
multitudes of Believers that came out of Jerusalem and were baptized by John
the Baptist, (to speak nothing now of the Apostles and seventy Disciples) were
numberless, and therefore were more then the hundred and twenty names; yea
they were innumerable, and therefore more then could meet in any one place or a
few. And if the Reader will but look back to the Scriptures above quoted, out
of which I framed my Arguments, and consider the ensuing Scriptures and Reasons
from them, he will easily perceive that Master Knollys is a mere Quibler, and
a man no way fit for either disputation, or any serious employment.

The Evangelists speaking of the great concourses of people that came from all
quarters to the Preaching and Ministry of John, and to be baptized, to avoid
mistakes, do specify the several places out of which they came, with the
numbers indefinitly set down that came from every place, saying, There went out
to him Jerusalem, and all Iudaea, and all the Regions round about Jordan, and
were baptized of him in Jordan confessing their sins, Mat. the 3. Here it is
abundantly declared that it was an infinite company that came from Jerusalem,
as by the word Jerusalem is sufficiently manifest, being metaphorically set
down and taken in that place (as I said before) synechdochically for a mighty
part and multitude of people that came out of that City. And Saint Mark
confirms this, chap. 1. ver. the 5. who says, there went out unto him all the
land of Judea, and they of Jerusalem, and were all baptized of him in the river
Jordan confessing their sins.

And the same is further ratified by the words of our Savior, Luke 7. 29. 30.
who says, that all the people that heard him, and the Publicans justified God,
being baptized by the Baptism of John, but the Pharisees and Lawyers rejected
the Council of God against themselves, being not baptized. So that now by the
mouth of three witnesses and by the testimony of Christ himself it is
sufficiently proved, That if Jerusalem and all the people of Jerusalem went out
and were baptized by John (except the Pharisees and Lawyers) that there was an
innumerable multitude, and therefore more then could possibly meet in any one
place or a few, and many more then the hundred and twenty names spoke of in the
first of the Acts; which fond conceit of Mr Knollys is yet more evidently
refuted out of the second of the Acts, where it is related that there were at
that time Inhabitants and Dwellers at Jerusalem devout men, that is, true
Worshippers and Believers from out of all the Nations under Heaven. To say
nothing of Nicodemus, and of Joseph of Arimathea and of many other Rulers, and
of all the people and children that cried Hosanna and that received Christ into
the City with all their acclamations and believed in him; the most of which
were Inhabitants and Dwellers in Jerusalem and such as had their abode there,
so that by this I have now said, the folly and vanity of Mr Knollys and his
cavil is apparently manifest, and this truth sufficiently clear to all, that
there was an infinite number and a very City of Believers in the Church of
Jerusalem, besides those that were of the other Churches in Judea, and
therefore could not all meet in one place: For the Scripture says that
Jerusalem and they of Jerusalem went out and were baptized by John the Baptist;
and therefore all good Christians I am confident will ever believe the
Scriptures and give credit unto the word of God rather then unto Mr Knollys;
and if they will believe the Scripture of truth, then they will not only
believe there was an infinite number and a very City of Believers in Jerusalem,
and that by the very ministry and preaching of John, but that Mr Knollys is a
very wicked and blasphemous creature as who gives the spirit of God the lie
and opposes also all good reason: For the spirit says Jerusalem and all they
of Jerusalem, except the Pharisees and Lawyers, were baptized by John, and all
these were inhabitants at Jerusalem; and Mr Knollys affirms the contrary and
confuteth all the Evangelists; whether therefore he be not a very precious
disputant I refer it to the judgment of all sober-minded Christians that love
sincerity, truth and plain dealing.

And this might suffice to show the vanity and wickedness of the man and what
a vain caviller he is, that thus abuses precious time to abuse himself and
miserably to delude ignorant people: But for the farther confirmation of my
Minor, I will produce one or two testimonies more out of the eleventh of Mark,
where there is mention made of two great companies and parties of believers and
those all Inhabitants in Jerusalem, the one of them that followed Christ and
believed in him, at which the Scribes and Pharisees were offended, and sought
how they might destroy him; but says the Scripture, they feared him, because
all the people were astonished at his doctrine, that is, they believed it:
verse 18. another company was those that were the Disciples of John the
Baptist, and they accounted John a Prophet indeed, as all the men of Jerusalem
did, verse 32. and either of these companies were so great and powerful as
they kept all Christ's enemies in awe, so that they were afraid of the people
of either party, and therefore there was then a very City of believers in
Jerusalem and they Inhabitants, and that in Christ's time, and they had been
baptized by Saint John, for all Jerusalem went out and were baptized by him; So
that now I assure my self every but ordinary understanding man will gather
that there was an innumerable multitude of believers in Jerusalem, and more
than could meet in any one place, or a few if they had been put together, when
there were two such potent parties there, as either of them kept the very
enemies of Christ, the Magistrates and Rulers, yea Herod *himself in awe,
which a few thousands could never have done; and all these were Inhabitans of
Jerusalem and well known to the Scribes and Pharisees to be Christ's and John's
Disciples, and all believers, as we shall more abundantly prove in the
following discourse; and therefore my Minor does now stand firm, That there
were more believers in Jerusalem, and that by the very ministry and baptism of
John, then could meet in any one place or a few, and that there w^^ an infinite
number of believers and a very City of believers, which Mr Knollys denies and
in so doing gives the spirit of God the lys and contradicts the holy Scripture
and opposes all sound reason, and all this to maintain the fond opinion of
Independency. And this shall serve to have spoke by way of answer to what Mr
Knollys had to reply to my first arguments concerning the multitudes baptized
by John the Baptist.

I will now give an answer to what I. S. has to say against this argument, of
whom I shall take the liberty by way of preface before I come to my Reply, to
speak something, and yet no more then shall be thought fit and agreeable to
sound reason, and so much the rather I do it, because this man greatly vanteth
himself, and because his answer is highly esteemed of amongst many of the
congregationall way, who I confess are much to be blamed that they suffer
themselves to be deluded with such fellows, never examining their writings,
but taking all for oracles they vent, and thinking it enough that there is any
thing come out against a Presbyterian in way of answer, though there be nothing
more destructive to their own opinion, as I am confident it will appear to all
judicious men, that these answers of Mr Knollys, my Brother Burton and this I.
S. are. And for I. S. I may say thus much of him that he is yet vainer then Mr
Knollys in his answers; for he heartily denies upon all occasions the Minors
of my Syllogismes, and then gives some sucking reasons for this his denial;
but this I. S. has nothing of a Scholar in him; for all good Scholars and
Disputants will set down the arguments of their adversaries in their full
strength and as they are in the Copy, and then either deny the Major or Minor,
or both; or distinguish, and after they have shown the fallacyes of the
arguments, if there be any, then by their art and learning they will show the
weakness of them, and so evade the dinte and force of them; this I say is the
method, not only of all accurate Disputants, but of every ordinary jangler, if
he, at least, pretends any thing to learning: But I. S. has not so much
ingenuity in him as to do any thing of all this; but first sets down my
arguments in an obscure way and to the halves, so that the unlearned Reader
cannot perceive the strength of my reason; and then in a confused manner gives
in his answer in the name of all the Independents, which upon due examination I
am confident will appear to all learned men to be nothing but a pack of
blasphemies and contradictions as being a mere fighting against the truth and a
giving of the spirit of God the lie, as in the sequel will be evidenced.

Our Savior in the 3 of John verse 20. 21. says, That he that does the works
of darkness, shunns the light; but he that does truth, comes to the light,
etc. Truly I may justly accuse I. S. and his fraternity of this sin, that they
not only shun the light themselves but hinder others also from it, and do
whatsoever in them lies to keep men from the knowledge of the truth and from
prying into their errors, that by this means they may atttain unto their own
ends, and therefore they not only disp^rage all the Presbyterians, and with
their calumnies labor to make them odious to the people as so many railors and
persecutors, for so they call us, that they may neither hear their Sermons, nor
read any books written by them, or any thing penned against their Novelties by
those of that party; and all this to abuse the simple people, that by this
their art they may withold the truth from them in unrighteousness: And in
this faculty are all the Independents very expert who cunningly either pick
and choose or curtalize and adulterate all a guments that are brought against
them, or else totally pass them over with slightings, when they can no way
with any reason reply unto them. And as they are generally void of all good
learning and sciences, so there is neither ingenuity, candor or honesty amongst
the most of them, these excellent graces and virtues being now strangers to
those of the congregationall way, amongst the which fraud and juglings and all
manner of dissimulation and railing are the only master pieces of their craft,
by which they maintain and uphold their way and foment their errors; for should
they deal fairly with us and not dissuade the people from reading our books and
hearing our godly and painful Ministers, and would they but set down our
arguments and reasons in their full strength, the people would not only
speedily see their errors but relinquish them. And therefore they all take
special care to keep the people in ignorance; and amongst those Artificers and
Craf^s-men of that new Goddess that Diana of Independency, this J. S. though
in all good learning he be a very novice, yet in this craft of juggling he is
pretily expert. And that all men may see I do not falsely accuse him, I will
first set down the sum of my arguments taken from the multitudes baptized by
John the Baptist, and and then set down in what terms he delivers them, with
his vain and impious answer to them.

The sum of my Arguments is this.

Where there was an infinitemultitude, or a mighty City of believers, there
they could not all meet together in one place or room or in one congregation
to enjoy all acts of worship for edification; but in the Church of Jerusalem,
by the very baptism and preaching of John, there was an infinite multitude and
a very City of believers; ergo they could not all meet together in any one
congregation.

This is the sum of my first Argument. The second is this.

Where there was such an infinite company and multitude of Christians and
believers, as kept a tyrannical King in awe and all the Magistrates and
Elders, in whose hands was all the power and authority; and struck such a
terror into them all, as they durst not exercise their cruelty and tyranny over
them, though they were their inveterate enemies, there of necessity the number
of them must be so great, as they could not all meet together in one place or
congregation to partake in all Acts of worship. But, in the Church of Jerusalem
there was such a company of believers by the very baptism of John; ergo they
could not all meet together in any one place or congregation.

This is the sum of my arguments, which I made good out of the Word of God,
and from sound reason, as they that have read my book with judgment, I am
confident will acknowledge.

Now hear how J. S. sets them down with his answer to them page the 8. and
9. of his book.

The Doctors first proposition is (says he) that there were many Congregations
and several assemblies in the Church of Jerusalem etc. for proof whereof
(says he) he brings the multitudes of Converts to John's Baptism; the people
of Jerusalem, all of them; and all Iudaea etc. whereby (says he) all became
Christians, or members of the Christian Church: for John's baptism was into
Jesus Christ, and the very same with that of the Apostles. Thus I. S. sets
down my Arguments, which I affirm, is not heartily done of him: for the
ignorant Reader cannot see into the strength of my arguments, they being
delivered in such obscure terms, and set down also to the halves, the whole
truth not being specified. For not one of ten thousand had ever seen or read
my book, and I dare say, not one of an hundred of the Independents had ever
vouchsafed so much as to look into it; for I was made so odious unto them by
their blasting language, as they abhorred my very name: with all howsoever they
boasted at the first coming of it out, that there were twenty pens at work in
answering of it, yet not one of them ever appeared, till three months after it
was printed. Now all the Copyes that were printed were all gone in one week,
so that the answers coming out so long after, and my arguments not being known
to the people, and being in this obscure manner and in such dark expressions,
and but to the halves set down, every vulgar understanding can never see into
the weight and strength of them, especially, they having not my book before
them.

And to say the truth, all the Independents ordinarily use this method in their
pretended answers, as first, to let the books they reply unto be forgotten,
and after that to blurte out something against them, concealing the truth, and
then they crow out as victors and conquerers, that they have beat up our
quarters and pulled down the pillars of our discourse, as I S. does vainly in
this his Pamplet, when it will appear to all intelligible men that he has
only cast a squib or two at them, and then as a mere fresh water Soldier
speedily ran away, and left that work to others, as he unaduisedly in the
tenth page and in his wise Epistle confesses, sayning indisposition of body,
when indeed it was his want of wit, learning, honesty, and courage.

As I haveset down the sum of my Arguments, and compared his expressing of my
meaning, with it; I will also set down the sum of his answer to them, which
he gives in the name of all the Independents, saying, we answered to your
reason; and then set down his own words in their full length, that all men may
see my fair dealing with him. For I. S. does not here deny my minor as Master
Knollys did, or accuse me of false Musters as he vainly and impiously does in
his answer to my second Arguments. But plainly denies that those that were
baptized by John Baptist were Christians, to whom my brother Burton assenteth,
page 16. of his book saying that those believers that were baptized by John
Baptist into Christ to come, according to the Papists doctrine, were not formed
into a Christian Church, or Churches, as after Christ's resurrection Christians
were. These are my brother Burtons formal words, who not only assenteth to I.
S. in this his opinion, but also brings in the authority of the Papists to
confirm this their doctrine, and so in this the Independents agree with the
Papists to overthrow the truth, and to maintain their abominable errors.

And this I conceive, was the cause that moved my brother Burton in the ninth
page of his book in the beginning of his answer, to say, `as for your
indefinite enumeration of those multitudes baptized by John the Baptist and
Christ's Disciples, we take no notice of them. This is his expression there,
concerning the which in due place. Surely if my brother Burton had thought them
Christians, he would have demeed them worthy to have been taken notice of: but
in this he agrees with I. S. and the Papists.

Now I will give you the sum of I. S. his Arguments, in way of answer, by
which he denies that those that were baptized by John the Baptist were
Christians.

The first is because (says he) they were baptized into Christ that was to
dye, and not dead; therefore in his dialect they were no Christians.

The second, they were not baptized with the holy Ghost and with fire;
therefore thy were no Chrstians.

The third, they were no more Christians then the Jews that passed through the
red Sea; but they were no Christians; ergo they also that were baptized by John
were no Christians.

The fourth, The baptism of John was not perfect, ergo those that were
baptized by him were no Christians.

The fifth, those that were baptized by John, did not only hasitate, but were
scandalized at the true Messiah, and under the form of John's baptism did
fight against the true baptism and baptiser the Lord Jesus: ergo they were no
Christians.

Sixthly, they that were baptized by John were not cast into a Church mould,
according to the New*testament form, neither were they members of one
Christian Church at Jerusalem, ergo they were not Christians; and this Argument
is brought in by way of a corallary.

This must needs be the scope of his answer, or else he says nothing to the
purpose in denying my Arguments, which were not only to prove, that those that
were baptized by John Baptist were Christians and believers, but also that they
were in such multitudes as they could not all possibly meet in any one place,
or congregation to communicate in all the Ordinances and all Acts of worship to
edification. The dint and force of the which Argument, he thinks he
sufficiently evadeth, by denying that they were Christians at all. So that if
this Answer be well looked into and examined, it will appear that whiles he
boasts and glories that he has beat up my quarters, he beats up Saint
John's quarters, yea Christ's quarters, and all his Disciples quarters before
Christ's death and Ascension, and all the quarters of all Christians that now
live in the world: For if none are well Baptized and made Christians indeed,
but such as are Baptized with the Holy Ghost and with fire, then all those that
were baptized before Christ's Ascension were no true Christians, nor no
Christians in these our times, nor many Generations before us, who were not
baptized by the Holy Ghost and with fire; and by these his fond cavills he
overthrows the Scripture it self and all Divine and humane Authority, and
gives the Spirit of God the lie.

And truly such a piece of impious ignorance with such impudent confidence my
eyes yet never beheld before I. S. and his accomplices came into the World. So
that it stranges me eceedingly that such men as he and they are, should be
suffered by those of the Congregationall way to go unpunished, who may shame
them all, as indeed they are a shame to all Christian Religion: For I appeal
to the judgment of all such as have any knowledge in Religion or love to the
truth, or have any moderation or good temper yet left in them, whether this be
a thing tolerable in any that has the name of a Christian, to play not only the
juglers, to deceive and delude the poor people, but to give the Spirit of God
the lie, and then to vapor and brag of it as of a conquest?

But now I will set down his Arguments in his own words, and give my answer
to them severally. We (says he) answer to your reasons. So that he writes in
the name of all the Independents, as one of the Commanders and Captains in
their Militia, and as one of their Champions, and therefore in the name of them
all, says, We answer to your reasons. Now take notice what he answers in the
name of the whole Fraternity.

1. John's Baptism, was into Christ, but it was in Christum moriturum, not in
Christum mortuum. This is J. S. his first answer. Truly one that should but
look on all his Answers to my Arguments, would wonder what the man meant by
them, and to what purpose he uttered these words: for they are a manifest
fighting against the Scripture of truth; as all the judicious and learned will
well perceive. And I have heard both learned and pious men say, that they did
not believe, that I. S. did well understand himself when he writ this book:
and there is some reason of this their opinion: for he confesses in his wise
Epistle, that he was in a course of Physic at the wels; and who knows but
the man might then be somewhat distemperd in his brain, and so might do the
actions of a man crased? and his very language does in a manner speak as much,
both in this his Answer, and in many other passages of his Book, as in their
due places will appear, yea the very title also, and his Epistle being
senseless, calling his Pamphlet Flagellum flagelli, and the beating up of
Doctor Bastwicks quarters, when he never came nigh them, and the taking hold
and shaking of the Pillars of his discourse, when he never so much as touched
them, with many such other expressions, all which have no correspondency
amongst themselves, and shows that the man is either a very stranger in
Rhetoric, not knowing how to keep himself to his Metaphor, or else that he
is crased indeed; and truly so every one will conceive, if they duly weigh and
consider all passages in his book; especially this answer of his to my
Arguments: by which he labors to prove that those that were baptized by John
the Baptist were no Christians, no Believers; which he does by very senseless
reasons: the first of which I have related, viz. that they were baptized into
Christ to dye and not dead, and therefore in his opinion they were no
Christians. I omit his latin expression, as thinking it a vain thing in him
to insert latin sentences writing in the vulgar tongue, especially in handling
points of divinity, and those of great concernment, which the people should
have set before them in perspicuous and plain terms.

But now take notice how the man contradicts himself in his answer; for the
drift of it is to prove, that those that were baptized by John the Baptist were
no Christians, and yet he says, they were baptized into Christ. Then they
were Christians by his own confession, for Jesus Christ was yesterday, and to
day, and the same for ever, Heb. 13. and He was ever the Messiah, the seed of
the woman that should break the Serpents head, that Rock upon which the
Church was built, against which the gates of Hell should never prevail, Mat.
16. So that they that were baptized into Jesus Christ, whether whiles he was
living or dead, whether before his Nativity, death or ascension, or after, are
all good Christians; therefore he contradicts himself in saying they were
not Christians; for it is not the circumstance of time that makes an alteration
in the substance and essence of any thing: for the Passover in Egypt, was the
same for substance that it was in the Wilderness, and in the land of Canaan;
for otherwise it should follow that the Supper of the Lord celebrated by Christ
himself before his passion, and in memorial of his death, should not be the
same with that it was after Christ's Resurrection and Ascension; and that the
Apostles that received the Lords Supper, were not Christians then as well as
after his death, which I think I. S. will not dare affirm; but if he should,
I am confident all the well grounded Christians in the world would be his
adversaries in this; for the Apostle Saint Paul in the 1. of the Corinth. 11.
23, 24, 25. makes them all one for substance; and as the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper was the same for essence before Christ's death that it was after, so was
the Sacrament of Baptism, to all that were baptized; and he was as good a
Christian that was baptized in to Christ before his death, as he that was
baptized into him after his Ascension, as all good reason will persuade; for
Christ was ever the Messiah and King of his Church; which will yet more
evidently appear, if we compare earthly things with heavenly.

I demand therefore of I. S. or any of the congregationall way, whether all
such subjects as take the oath of allegiance, or swear fealty to any King, who
is owned by the people and whole Kingdom to be their lawful King, as
appointed and set over them of God, and is openly proclaimed through the whose
Realm to be their King, though at that time he be in an other Country, and
but now coming to take the possession of his Kingdom, I say I demand whether
such subjects as take the oath of allegiance and swear fealty unto him, before
he comes and sits visibly upon his Throne, be not by this their oath become
that Kings subjects, as truly and as really, as if the King were bodily
present? I demand further, when he is in person come into his Kingdom, and
visibly amongst them, saluted and entertained and owned by the people for their
King, whether or no those subjects that then take their oath of allegiance, and
promise by that their oath their subjection unto him, be not as really and
truly his subjects, as those that after he is inaugurated and gone into one of
his other Kingdoms, take then the oath of allegiance, and swear subjection
unto him in all his just commands? I am confident that all men that are but a
little skilled in politics, or any good learning, will acknowledge, that
either of the former subjects, are as truly and really subjects unto him though
they never saw him (as many hundred thousands never did their Kings) as those
that took the oath when he was gone in triumph into an other of his
Kingdoms. And thus it was with those that were baptized by John the Baptist,
that great Officer of Christ's kingdom, and the blessed Apostle, those
Stewards, Secretaries, privy Counselors, and Ambassadors of his Royalty,
who all baptized those that came unto them into Jesus Christ the King and
Messiah, as well before his death as after, and all they owned him as well then
for their King as after, crying Hosanna thou son of David, and strowing their
garments in the way, saying, Blessed be the King that comes in the name of the
Lord, peace in Heaven, and glory in the Highest, Luke 19. verse. 4. and
therefore it is a senseless reason, yea contradictory unto it self that I. S.
brings, considering there is no difference for the substance of the matter,
though there be some variety in respect of the circumstance of time; and in
this fond error of I. S. is my brother Burton and the Papists, who think there
was a great difference between the Baptism before Christ's death and that after
his death, when indeed for substance there was none, no more then was between
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper before Christ's death and after. And therefore
all those that received either of those Sacraments or both of them before his
passion, were as good Christians as those that received them after; for he was
owned by them at that time to be the Lamb of God that was to take away the
sins of the world of believers, and to be the King of the Jews, the Savior of
his people, to be the anointed Christ, and they took the Sacraments upon it,
which is as much as the oath of allegiance to any King, which were sufficient
to make them as good Christians as any that should come after them, and
therefore they that were baptized by John the Baptist into Christ to dye, which
I. S. does acknowledge, they were all as good Christians as any now baptized by
the Independents; and therefore that he faith to the contrary and in
opposition to this truth is a mere babble and a contradiction of himself. And
this shall suffice to have spoke to his first answer to prove that those that
were baptized by John the Baptist were as good Christians as any other that
were baptized after Christ's death.

His second is as senseless, which is this. To say (says he) that the
Baptism of John was the same with Christ's and the Apostles, is flat contrary
to the assertion of John himself and the Apostles, Mat. 21. 25. Act. 18. 25. I
baptize you with water (says he) but there comes one after me, who shall
baptize with the Holy Ghost, and with fire. These are the words of his second
argument to prove that those that were baptized by John the Baptist were no
Christians. In the entrance of this his answer he beats the air, and fights
with his own shadow and falsifies my words; for I never said nor thought it,
that the Baptism of John was the same with Christ's; for the Scripture relates
that Christ baptized not at all, John 4. verse. 2. I said indeed, it was the
same with the Apostles, and that is manifest out of many places of the holy
Scriptures, as out of the 3. of Luke, ver. 2. and John the 1. v. 33. where John
himself speaking says, he that sent me to baptize with water, the same said
unto me, etc. Yea one of those places quoted by himself, Matthew. 21. verse. 25.
sufficiently declares that John had his Commission from God himself, (whose
Prophet he was) to baptize with water, and the Apostles themselves before
Christ's death and Ascension baptized but with water, and had no other
Commission but that Saint John the Baptist had, and John baptized with the
Baptism of Repentance, saying unto the people, that they should believe on him
which should come after him that is on Christ Jesus, Act. 19. verse. 4. and the
very Apostles Baptism before Christ's death was no other but the Baptism of
repentance and to believe in Christ; yea faith and repentance was the sum of
all the Preaching, both of John and of all the holy Apostles, both before
Christ's death and after, as we may see, Acts 20. verse. 21. where the Apostle
says, Testifying both to the Jews, and also to the Greeks, repentance toward
God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. Now when the Baptism of Saint
John and the Apostles, both before Christ's death and after was all one for
substance, and all into Christ, as we may yet further see, Acts the 8. 16.
where it is said they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. It was no
error in me to say that the Baptism of John was into Christ Jesus, and the
very same with that of the Apostles, for the Holy Ghost which is the spirit of
truth has so taught me: and therefore all those that were baptized by John
the Baptist were as good Christians and believers as those that were baptized
by the Apostles, if repentance toward God and faith toward our Lord Jesus
Christ, and being baptized into him could make good Christians; which were
blasphemy to gainsay, and nothing else but to give the spirit of God the lie:
and therefore J. S. affirming that there was a difference between the Baptism
of John and that of the Apostles, and denying that those that were baptized by
John were Christians, gives the spirit of God the lie: for the holy word of God
which was penned by his spirit asserteth the contrary: And for that text that
he cites out of the third of Matthew, where John says, I baptize you with
water, but there comes one after me who shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost
and with fire; this is nothing to his purpose nor nothing against my opinion:
For, as I said before, it was never my belief that the baptism of Christ and
John's baptism was all one, seeing Saint John the Baptist has taught the
contrary, as in the words alleged it is sufficiently declared: But I demand of
I. S. whether the Apostles, all whose names were written in heaven, were not as
good Christians and Believers in Jesus Christ by John's baptism, before they
had received the gifts of the Holy Ghost, and were baptized with fire (which we
read of Act. the 2.) as they were after the cloven tongues appeared unto them?
ver. 3. If either he or any of his fraternity shall deny it, then they must
deny the sixteenth chapter of Matthew and the sixth of Saint John, where we
find that honorable confession of all the Apostles where they testify their
faith in Christ into whom they had been baptized before that, yea they must
deny the whole Scriptures of the New Testament which affirm the contrary: And
if the baptizing of any with the Holy Ghost and with fire be that thing only
that makes men Christians and Believers, then none that were not so baptized
were good christians: for the gifts of the Holy Ghost as the diversity of
tongues and working of miracles, were not promiscuous and given to all as Saint
Paul does sufficiently declare, 1 Cor. 12. 30. Have all the gifts of healing?
Do all speak with tongues? So that all the people were not baptized with the
Holy Ghost; and therefore by I. S. his learning were no christians: Neither was
that the work of the Apostles, but it was Christ's work only who first
breathed the spirit upon the Apostles and after his ascen^ion first poured down
those gifts upon them, Acts the 2. and after that at many other times through
the prayer of the Apostles and putting on of their hands upon the Believers
Christ for the confirmation of their Ministry, and to manifest to all those
that were converted by them that they were sent by him, shed down those
miraculous graces upon many, but gave them not to all; and it is also declared
that they first believed and then they were baptized with the Holy Ghost; and
we have but one President that I remember in the holy Scripture, that any
received the gifts of the Holy Ghost, before they were baptized with water, and
that is those of Cornelius his house: but all the rest were baptized with water
before. And therefore those gifts made them not Christians but declared them to
be believers, and were the effects of their faith, which notwithstanding were
not conferred by the Apostles, but were immediately given by the spirit of
Christ: So that those visible gifts were not essential for the making of any
Christians and Believers; for they were always Believers before they received
them; and if those gifts had been essential and absolutely necessary for the
making of any Christians, then all that had received them should have been
saved, which they were not; besides then, many hundred thousands of the
primitive Christians should not have been true Believers and Christians indeed;
for all men generally received them not (as I proved before) and all the
Christians, for ought I know, since the Primitive times, and all that now live
should be no good Christians: for they were not and now are not baptized with
the holy Ghost and with fire. So that al men may see with how little reason
this I. S. speaks in these his argumenta^ions, and how vain and impious he is
in all his cavills: this shall suffice to have spoke concerning his second
answer. And now I come to his third, which is as good as the two former: His
words are these.

3. Therefore now, (says I. S.) by John's baptism they were not all made
Christians no more then the body of the Jews before John were turned
Christians by being baptized in the red Sea etc. For they were baptized into
Christ by their baptism, 1 Cor. 10. 3. I deny not but this baptism of John
was to prepare men for Christ, and did bear a more immediate relation to such
a work, then any Ordinance before, but it did not make them absolute
Christians. It did not absolve and perfect the new Church, I mean not so far as
that Ordinance of baptism was to do afterward.

Thus I. S. blasphemeth rather then disputes: For that he says is impious in
the highest degree; for it is an apparent giving of the spirit of truth the
lie, and a confuting of Christ himself and Saint Paul, and an opposing of the
generality of all the Independents, as every understanding man will easily
gather: for the Scripture everywhere and all the orthodox Divines, yea and all
the Independents that ever I talked with or read of before I. S. and my Brother
Burton, acknowledge that those that were baptized by the Baptist and Christ's
Disciples before Christ's death, were Christians and Believers; for otherwise
they could not have been baptized. Notwithstanding I. S. out of his learning
denies not only that they were Christians, but affirms also that those that
were baptized by Moses in the red Sea were no Christians; whether therefore
this be not to beat up the quarters of John the Baptist, Christ himself and
the quarters of Moses the servant of the Lord, and of all the Independents, and
to pull down the very pillars of the holy Scriptures; and be not a horrid
blasphemy in I. S. I leave to the judgment of the learned! Our savior says
Luke the 7. v. 29. 30. And all the people that heard him, and the Publicans
justified God, being baptized with the baptism of John, but the Pharisees and
and Lawyers rejected the Council of God against themselves being not baptized
of him. Here we have Christ's testimony, who asserteth that (the Lawyers and
Pharisees only excepted) all that heard John of which innumerable multitudes of
them came from Jerusalem, for all Jerusalem went out to him, did justify God
and did not reject his Council, that is to say, they were Believers; for the
council of God in the ministry of Saint John to all the people was, that they
should repent and believe in the Messiah and in token of their faith that they
should be baptized; now this sweet council for the obtaining of free grace and
favor offered unto them by God, in the ministry of John did the Pharisees and
Lawyers reject to their own perdition; for they would not bring forth fruits
meet for repentance, that is they would neither believe in the Messiah nor
repent nor be baptized; and therefore as a company of Infidels and unbeleevers
they despised the council of God and his grace and favor; but all the other
that heard John says Christ, justified God, and did not reject his council,
that is, they acknowledged that God was just, faithful, merciful and
gracious, and therefore believed his promises and repented and were baptized
and were all as good Christians and Believers as any were, if any credit may be
given to Christ's words. Whether therefore we ought rather to believe the words
of Christ and his testimony or I. S. his language, I refer it to the judgment
of the advised reader! Christ declares they were Believers and Christians, for
they justified God and rejected not his council, but embraced his grace and
favor and free mercy; I. S. says the contrary. It is true that the name of
Christian, was not given to believers, till they were called so at Antioch, yet
to believe, in Christ and to be baptized into Christ, made them as well
Christians before his suffering as after; for otherwise Abel, Enoch, Noah,
Moses, Abraham, David and all those Martyrs spoke of Hebrews the eleventh, and
all those baptized by the Apostles before Christ's death, should not have bin
Christians, which were wickedness to think, when the Scripture affirms that
they not only lived by faith, but did all those wonders by virtue of their
faith in Christ, and that they all enjoyed the promises; and therefore it must
necessarily follow they were Christians, as all believing in Christ and living
and dying in that faith. So that howsoever they had not the name of christians
and were not so called which makes nothing against the reality of the thing,
for we contend not about words, yet they were all true christians, they being
all built upon that Corner stone and upon the foundation Jesus Christ, and
differing nothing for the essence and substance or object of their faith from
any that did succeed them in all ages to come.

And therefore I. S. affirming that by the baptism of John the believers then
were not made Christians, and that the Israelits Baptized by Moses in the
cloud were no Christians, overthrowes the holy Scriptures and gives Christ the
lie, and confutes Paul himself who in the 10. of the 1 of the Cor. ver. 1. 2.
3. affirms, that our fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the
Sea and were all baptized by Moses in the cloud and in the Sea, and all eat
the same spiritual meat, and did all drink the same spiritual drink (for
they all drank of the same spiritual Rock that followed them and that Rock was
Christ) by the which testimony of the Apostle they were as good Christians: as
the Corinthians; for he comparing them together, shows that they were equal
to them in privileges, and were as good Christians as they, according to that
of Peter Acts the 15. verse. 9. and put no difference between us and them
purifying their hearts by faith; and as he had proved that the Israelits were
equal in Privileges with the Corinthians, and all other Christians, so he
declares likewise if the Corinthians and all other Christians did offend
against God as the Israelites did, they should likewise be equal to them in
punishments: For God was no respector of persons, but as inevery nation he that
fears God and works righteousness is accepted of him, Acts 10. ver. 35: so
whatsoever Christians, of what Nation so ever, whether Iewer or Gentiles shall
offend as the Israelites did, they shall be equally punished. So that by the
witness and testimony of Paul in this tenth chapter of the 1 of the Cor. and
the 11. of the Hebrews, and from the above cited Scriptures all our fathers
under the cloud and all the Patriarchs, and all those Martyrs, and all those
that were baptized by the Baptist and Christ Disciples, were all as good
Christians as any Baptized after Christ's death or now by those of the
Congregationall way or any Christians in the world; and all that I here say is
most true if any belief may be given to the holy Word of God. And therefore I.
S. affirming the contrary blasphemeth. And now I come to his fourth Argument.
Which is this.

The learned and judicious know (says he) that John was but the Messenger
before Christ Mal. 3. ver. 1. And his baptism was but as the streaming of
light in the Heavens before the day, and he did only bring and restore all
things to their legal perfection by water, the element of the law; but Christ
Jesus he comes and Baptizes with fire, consummats all things with this
transforming powerful element, even his spirit, Thus I. S. speaks.

To examine all the errors in these words, would take up much time, and require
a large discourse, but I study brevity. As for the first part of this his
answer, where he says, the learned and Judicious know, that John was but the
Messenger before Christ, etc. it is a piece of vanity in him to produce the
testimony of men to prove that John was a Messenger of Christ, when the holy
Scripture in many places assertsit, and when Christ himself has declared that
John the Baptist was that Elias that was foretold should prepare the way before
the Lord and make his paths straight: but this I may truly say of I. S. that
he is a mere stranger in all good learning and as ignorant in all Divinity and
in the holy Word of God, as those judicious he speaks of, were singularly
excellent and mighty in the Scriptures and all sound theology, whose works and
godly solid writings, if ever he had read with understanding, he could never
have bin so prodigiously blasphemous as he is in all his discourse and chiefly
in these his answers: for there is not any one of them in which there is not
great impiety to be discovered: as in this to accuse John's Baptism and
Ministry of imperfection, and to say they were but as the streamingsoflight in
the Heavens before the day, when notwithstanding Christ himself has often
given so many honorable testimonies of John, and his Ministry, saying in the
5. of John 32. that he bare witness of him, and that his witness was true,
and in the 35. ver. in express words affirming that he was a burning and
shining light, and that the Jews for a season did rejoice in his light. And yet
I. S. boldly and peremptorily affirms that the Baptism of John was but as
the streamings of light, and that they were not consummate Christians that were
baptized by him. Who shall we believe? I. S. or Jesus Christ? Christ says John
was a burning and shining light. I. S. says he was but as the streaming of
light; if this be not to give Christ the lie, I know not what it is! Christ in
the seventh chapter of Luke and the 28. verse, says, That John the Baptist was
the greatest Prophet that was ever borne of women. Then, he was inferior in his
Ministry to none of them, no not to Moses himself, of whom the author to the
Hebrews chap. 3. verse. 5. says with a verily, that he was faithful in all
the house of God as a servant for a testimony of those things that were to be
spoken after. Now if Moses did his work perfectly, as he did, and baptized
those perfectly in the Cloud and in the sea as Paul asserteth 1 Cor. 10. and
did all he did in perfection and according to the pattern showed him in the
Mount and according to the will of God, and did perfectly consummate his
Ministry, then John the Baptist also did the like, for Christ says that
amongst those that are borne of women, there is not a greater Prophet then John
the Baptist: that is there was not one more faithful and that did his work
more completely and with more perfection: which Christ's own words in the third
of Matthew do yet more fully declare verse. 15. saying suffer it to be so now:
for thus it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness. Now if the Baptist did
fulfill all righteousness in his Ministry, then he did it completely and made
those that were baptized by him perfect, complete and consummated Christians;
for he in his Office, fulfilled all righteousness; if therefore there were any
imperfection (as I. S. says) in the Baptism and Ministry of John, then he did
not fulfill all righteousness, and then Christ's words should not be true,
which is a high point of blasphemy to think, much more to say and print as I.
S. does: for he that fulfills all righteousness in his Office does it
perfectly and completely, but John did so: ergo all those that he baptized were
complete Christians. I demand therefore of I. S. my brother Burton and of all
the Independents, whether Christ was well baptized, or no by John the Baptist?
I presum they will not deny but that he was perfectly baptized. And if Christ
himself was well baptized, then all that were baptized by John were also well
baptized and were perfect and complete Christians, for John was sent of God to
baptize; and he obeyed Gods command in this his Ministry, and in that also
fulfilled all righteousness, and therefore all those that were baptized by
John and by the Apostles before Christ's death and ascension, were as perfect
Christians as any that were baptized after Christ's resurrection; and if they
were not well baptized then Christ was not well baptized, which were high
impiety to affirm; neither will I ever be induced to believe, that John
Baptist did not know as well how to make complete Christians, as I. S. or as
any of the Independent Ministers; for I know John was sent of God for this
work, and that he fulfilled all righteousness in it, and I know also that he
was faithful in his Ministry to the death, and feared not the face of Herod
nor of any Mortal creature: for all this the Scripture ascertanieth unto me;
but that our Independent Ministers were ever sent of God, and bid to set up
their new lights and to preach, up their congregationall way or a toleration of
all Religions, I doubt it. For first I know that they ran back-ward, and
forward, to and fro, before they were ever sent, and that they preach that they
were never commanded from God, and that when they should have preached andstood
to witness the truth, many of them ran away and deserted it and did not stand to
it as John Baptist did, but like those hirelings Christ speaks of, John the
tenth, when they saw the Wolf coming, cowardly ran away, and left their
poor flocks to the fury of those beasts and many of them now have left their
flocks in the wilderness and have deserted their charges contrary to the
command of God Acts 20. verse. 28. who says by the Apostle Take heed therefore
unto your selves, and to all the flock, over which the holy Ghost has made
you Bishops, to feeds the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own
blood. In all these respects, and many more that I could name, I greatly doubt
whether the Independent Ministers were ever sent of God: but for John, I know
he was, and I know in like manner that he fulfilled all righteousness in his
Ministry, and made those he Baptized perfect Christian; I know likewise that
he made innumerable multitudes of them, and that Jerusalem came out and was
Baptized also, which when I. S. denies I assert he is a wicked and blasphemous
fellow, and that if he had his due deserts, he ought to be spued not only out
of their seven new churches here in London, but out of all their several new
fangled congregations through the Kingdom as an Alien and stranger from the
commonwealth of all learning and goodness. And this shall suffice to have
spoke to the fourth learned answer. I now come to the fifth as good as the
rest; his words are these.

So far was it (says he) that all that were Baptized by John, were made
Christians, that even John's own Disciples (who had the best and frequentest
instruction) not only hesitated, but were right down scandalized at the true
Messiah John 3. ver. 26. and others did under the form of John's baptism,
fight against the true baptism and baptizer the Lord Jesus. So that I conceive
(says he) this Argument (were it granted that all the people received John's
baptism) will stand in little stead to prove the conclusion, viz: that they
were made Christians, much less cast into a Church mould, according to the New
Testament form, and least of all that they were all members of one Christian
Church at Jerusalem. These are his formal expressions, by which he labors
to prove, that those that were baptized by John the Baptist were no Christians;
in these his words there is a double Argument by which he endeavors to
unchristian all those that were Baptized by the Baptist. The first is, because
as he falsely supposes they were enemies of Christ. The second is in that they
were not rightly molded. So that in this his last Paragraffe or Section, we
have two Arguments together. Which being added to the former make up six in
all, by which the profound disputant J. S. unchurches and unchristi^ns all
those that were baptized by John. Now because I. S. and his accomplices do place
so much strength in these two last Arguments, I shall desire the reader the
more seriously to weigh and consider them with the conclusions deduced from
them by I. S. and my reply to them.

First whereas he denies that all that were baptized by John were made
Christians, as it is a begging of the question, so in his thus speaking he
overthrows the whole Ministry of John the Baptist, and contradicts the Holy
Scriptures, and all those places I quoted out of them in my former reply; and
which is more, he contradicts himself: for he confesses that John
Baptized in to Christ, and he baptized none, as all the Independents
acknowledge, but believers; therefore they were Christians by his own
confession; and yet here as often formerly he denies they were Christians. But
because I have spoke of this before, I will now come to his reasons. His first
reason, to prove they were not Christians, is, because (says he) John's own
Disciples (who had the best and frequentest instruction) not only hesitated,
that is doubted, but were right down scandalized at the Messiah. The second is
because others did under the form of John's Baptism, fight against the true
baptism and the Baptizer the Lord Jesus. These his reasons, I affirm, are
nothing else but a mere calumny, and a false accusation, and to speak the
truth, are but his own wicked and groundless surmises; and if every man, from
his own fictious and fond conceits, and supposed premises, may take the
liberty thus to vent himself, I know no truth in the whole word of God, but
may be called in question, yea overthrown and I know no Christians nor Saints
but may at any time be unsainted and unchristianed. Our Savior Christ in the
7. of Luke, verse. 32, 33, 34. compares those of his time, unto little children
sitting in the market place, and calling one to another, and saying; we have
piped unto you, and you have not danced; we have mourned unto you, and ye have
not wept; for John the Baptist came neither eating bread, nor drinking wine,
and ye say he has a Devil. The Son of man is come eating and drinking, and
ye say, behold a gluttonous man, and a wine Bibber, afriend of Publicans and
Sinners. But wisdom is justified of all her children. By which words of our
Savior we see nothing could please the Gentlemen of his time.

Now if ever there were an age in the world, or company of men in it, that
might be compared to these little children, then this of ours, and the people
in it, especially the Independents may be, who are pleased with nothing, and
can least of all endure any Uniformity in the Church, against which they
professedly both write and preach, and as those in our Saviors days did
speak against the Ministry of John the Baptist, and against Christ himself; so
at this very day amongst us, there are many that make nothing of the Ministry
of John, professing they take no notice of those that were baptized by him or
Christ's disciples, and I. S. peremptorily affirms, that those that were
baptized by him were no Christians, and that his Ministry was imperfect; and
therefore I conceive all men will judge, that the Independents may well be
compared to those of Christ's time, who unchurch all but themselves. But says
I. S. they were John's own Disciples that both doubted and hesitated, and were
right down scandalized at the true Messiah, and for proof of this his saying
he produces the 3. of John, verse. 26. I will therefore set down the words of
the text with the forgoing verse, which will give some light to the business in
hand, verse 25. Then there arose (says the Evangelist) a question between
some of John's disciples and the Jews about purifying, and they came unto John
and said unto him, Rabbi, he that was with thee beyond Jordan, to whom thou
barest witness, behold the same baptizeth and all men come to him. These are
the words out of which I. S. grounds all his accusation against John's
Disciples, by which he would prove them no Christians. But if men would but
duly weigh and examine the text, they will easily perceive, there is not so
much as a very similitude of the illation and consequence I. S. inferres from
thence. For first the question there started, was not between John's Disciples
and Christ's, but between the Disciples of John and the Jews, that is between
the Scribes and Pharisees and John's Disciples, who were enemies of John the
Baptist as well as of Christ, and therefore questioned all they did, ever and
anon asking John and Christ by what authority they preached and did those
things they did. And so here the Jews, they questioned with John's Disciples
concerning his Ministry, (as by all conjecture it may be gathered) and about
legal purifications, of which they were very studious and great observers, to
which the Pharisees had added many of their own, as we may see, Matthew, the
15. and Mark the 7. and therefore they contended with John's Disciples about
purifying, supposing, that there was no need of John's baptism and washing,
seeing they had so much rinsing and purifying already amongst them. So that it
seems the contention between the Jews and John's Disciples arose upon this,
that John's Disciples much magnified the Baptism of their Master, and the Jews
and Pharisees, they extolled as much their Purifications, thinking them
necessary to salvation, which error of the Jews, notwithstanding, had often by
the Prophets been confuted, as in Isa. 1. and many other places. Now John,
that he might revoke all men from this error, that they should not rest in
corporal vvashings and in outvvard performances, exhorts them to look unto
Christ, who was the truth of which all those ceremonies were but the shadows
and were all fulfilled in him, and therefore that they should by faith wholly
rely upon him for salvation as the sequel of the chapter does sufficiently
show. Now in the heat of this dispute, the Evangelist relates in the 26.
verse, that they came unto John, and said unto him, Rabbi, he that was with
thee beyond Jordan, to whom thou bear witness, behold the same baptizeth,
and all men come to him. Out of which words I see no reason why I. S. should
gather, that John's Disciples not only hesitated, but were right down
scandalized at the true Messiah, but I see very good ground, why the contrary
may be concluded; if they were John's Disciples and that they dearly esteemed
Christ and much honored him rather then that they were offended with him.

But first, it is not said that John's Disciples came unto him, only it is
related that some came unto John, they came unto him says the Scripture: which
they, it is not specified; for John's Disciples and the Jews contended, and the
Jews are put in the last place, so that it may be gathered that they were the
Jews, rather then John's Disciples that came unto him, as being last spoken of
and mentioned: and if they were the Jews, then they were the known and
professed enemies, both of John and of Christ; and therefore were none of John's
Disoiples, as I. S. fondly persuades himself; for they were continual
enemies, and adversaries to them both; so that if they came unto John they came
unto him by way of complaint, and as being scandalized, and then they were not
John's followers and scholars, for they were better taught then to be
scandalized at Christ. But should I grant unto I. S. for disputation sake, that
they were John's own Disciples, which yet cannot clearly be proved. It does not
follow from those words that they either doubted or were scandalized at the
true Messiah, as I. S. vainly and impiously concludes. For if any should hear
some one of the Independent ministers greatly magnify one of his brethren and
fellow ministers, as to be a man sent from heaven, and should say of him, That
he was the rarest preacher one of them in the world, as they do mightily extol
one another: and upon the praises and commendations of this man many thousands
of people should by and by flock after him, wheresoever they should hear he
preaches: and some one or more of his followers should come unto this minister
that so praised him and say, Sir, such a man who you so commended in such a
place, behold he now preaches and all men come to him and follow his ministry!
would such a relation I pray, as this made unto him that had formerly praised
that minister, infer, that those that told him of such concourses of people as
ran after him not only hesitated but were right down scandalized at him? I am
confident that upon mature deliberation no rational creature would make such
an inference. Neither can I see any ground why either I. S. or any of his
associats or any other should so conclude. For the Scripture relates every
where that there was fairer agreement, and much love and amity between John's
Disciples and Christ's, and that they knew one another very well and desired to
imitate one another: so that they did not envy one another masters prosperity,
nor doubted not of one another masters ministry, nor were scandalized one at
another masters happiness: And there is very good reason for it: For they all
knew that John had so honorable an esteem of Christ, as he thought himself not
worthy to carry his shoes Mat. 3. 11. they knew also how highly Christ had
often magnified John, proclaiming him to be the greatest prophet that ever was
borne of women, and how that Christ had commanded John to baptize himself, so
much he honored his ministry. They by their experience likewise knew that
their was great correspondency and continued amity between their masters, and
that they justified each others ministry and that before all the people, John
teaching the people, That he was the Messiah and the Lamb of God, that was to
take away the sins of the world; and Christ upon all occasions making mention
of John with great praises saying, That his ministry was from heaven and that
he was his messenger to prepare his way before him.

So that I say in all these respects and many more that might be specified it
follows that John's Disciples neither hesitated nor were scandalized at the
true Messiah, as I. S. grollishly and wickedly infers. Besides they knew
that at Christ's Baptism Mat. 3. The Holy Ghost discending like a dove lighted
upon him, and a voice came from Heaven saying this is my beloved son in whom
I am well pleased. So that John's Disciples that were daily with their master
and waited upon his ministry, which only preached up the Kingdom of Christ,
could not doubt, much less be scandalized at the true Messiah Jesus Christ.

Again, in the 1. of John it is related there, that John openly among all the
people proclaimed Christ to be the Lamb of God, and says that he knew him
so to be, by the discending of the spirit from Heaven upon him, because, that
God that sent him to baptize with water, said unto him, upon whom thou shall
see the Spirit discending and remaining on him, the same is he which baptizeth
with the Holy Ghost, and I saw (says he) and bare record that this is the
Son of God. And all this was spoke in the hearing of John's Disciples, so that
they could not doubt now of the Messiah, or be scandalized at him, for then
they should have been very untaught Scholars, which the words following,
verse 33. shows they were not: for two of John's Disciples at that time
hearing their Master speak these words, believed and follovved Jesus, and
inquired where he dwelled, who inviting them to come and see, went with him to
his abode and tarried with him that night; and the story and discourse
follovving shows that they were so confirmed in their faith, and were so far
from doubting and being scandalized at the Messiah, as they likewise preached
him and gained Disciples to him. And the same we may say of all John's other
Disciples that they honored Christ very much and predicated his fame unto
their master upon all occasions as in the 7. of Luke when the rumor of Christ
miracles was spread abroad, John's Disciples were always wont to relate it unto
their master. Whereupon John at one time calling unto him two of his Disciples,
sent them unto Jesus saying, art thou he that shall come or look we for
another? which message was not sent by S. John, that either he or his Disciples
doubted or hesitated or were scandalized at the true Messiah, but that they all
also might be as well eye witnesses of his miracles as others, and might say
another day that they had not only heard of his fame, but that they themselves
had seen his wondrous works: For John desired by all manner of ways he could,
to publish the Kingdom of the Messiah, and knew that the more witnesses Christ
had, and them of knowledge of reputation, the more their report and preaching
of him would be credited, especially when they themselves could say, that they
had seen him working miracles, and that Christ bade them go and tell John
what things they had seen and heard, how that the blind see, and the lame
walk, and the Lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, and
the poor receive the Gospel: and for this very end did John send two of his
Disciples to Christ, not that either he or they doubted whether he was the
Messiah or no, but that they might be eye witnesses and relate these things
with the more confidence both unto the people, and to those that should be pen
men of the Holy Scriptures, as St. Luke in the 1 chapter v. 2. Even as they
delivered them unto us, which from the beginning were eye witnesses and
Ministers of the Word: according to that of Saint Peter, Acts the 1. verse 21.
Wherefore of these men which have companied with us, all the time that the Lord
Jesus went in and out amongst us, beginning from the baptism of John unto the
same day he was taken up from us, must one be ordained to be a witness with
us of his resurrection. So that it may well be gathered, that John the Baptist
had a special eye to the future, and desired not only in his own person to
preach up Christ's Kingdom, but that his Disciples after him might relate to
their Auditors and to the holy penmen what they had both heard with their own
ears, and seen with their own eyes, and so might the better witness unto
Christ: neither will any man deny but that John's Disciples, might also be much
strengthened in their faith in beholding those wonderful miracles of Christ,
though they no way doubted or hesitated or were scandalized at the
Messiasbefore, no more then the people in Samaria doubted concerning him, John
4. after the woman had said to the men of that City, Come see a man which told
me all things that ever I did: is not this the Christ? then it is said, they
went out and came unto him, and many of them believed for the saying of the
woman which testified he told me all that ever J did; but many more believed
because of his own word, and said unto the woman, now we believe, not because
of thy saying, but because we have heard him our selves, and know that this is
indeed the Christ the Savior of the world. The Scripture says they believed
before upon the woman's relation, but we now coroborated in their faith, and so
it was with John's Disciples and followers. But shall there be any therefore
from that be so stupid as to think that any of John's Disciples that had the
best and frequentest instruction concerning the Messiah, could either doubt or
be scandalized at him, because the people followed Christ, and John sent his
Disciples to him? No surely, none would so conclude but I. S. and his
Fraternity. Much less would they say, that others did under the form of John's
Baptism, fight against the true Baptism and Baptizer the Lord Jesus; which is
I. S. his second reason, or rather folly and madness; and upon this their
wicked conceit and groundless opinion infer that they were no Christians as
I. S. does. For there is not any one word in all the Holy Scripture, that does
relate that any that were baptized by John, did under the form of that
Baptism, fight against the true Baptism and Baptizer the Lord Jesus: what a
wicked and abominable Fellow then is this I. S. that dares thus at pleasure
traduce the generation of the just, and falsely accuse all John's own
Disciples, and all those that were baptized by him to be enemies of Jesus
Christ the Messiah? and upon this bare opinion of his to unchristian them all?
it may now be no wonder to any good Christian that the whole rout of the
Independents unchurch us, and make no Christians of us, and asperse and speak
all manner of evil of us at pleasure, calling us the professed enemies of Jesus
Christ and his Kingdom seeing upon all occasions they do the same to all those
that were baptized by John and Christ's Disciples all which I. S. proclaims to
be no Christians, as his words do sufficiently speak. But from the testimony
that he produces to prove that John's Disciples were scandalized at Christ: I
gather the contrary for the reasons above specified, and conclude with all, that
there were innumerable multitudes daily converted by Christ's and John's
Ministry, and were all made good Christians; for it is said in the chapter
quoted by him, that all men came to him, and John and they were all baptized;
so that not a few congregations could contain all them that came from
Jerusalem: for all Jerusalem came out to John and our Savior sent this message
unto John in the 7. of Luke as one of the miracles he wrought, that the poor
received the Gospel, that is, not only the poor in spirit, but the multitudes
of people that were poor and indigent in respect of these outward things and
wanted those riches that others abounded with, and he affirms of these that
they received the Gospel and embraced the free grace and favor of God, and
that they were the Pharisees and Lawyers only that rejected the counsel of God
against themselves; but for all the poor says he and all others that heard
John, they embraced the Gospel, and were Gospel Christians and such as believed
aright and as they ought to believe, and therefore if the testimony of Christ
may be credited, they were cast into a Church mould, according to the New
Testament form and were very good Christians, and that in mighty multitudes;
for all Jerusalem and the poor received the Gospel, and therefore they could
not meet in one and a few congregations together at any one time.

But because I S. so peremptorily affirms, that were it granted, that all the
people received John's Baptism, yet it would stand me in little stead to prove
the conclusion: viz that they were made Christians: These are his words, adding
with all, much less, that they were cast into a Church mould according to the
New Testament form, and lest of all that they were all members of one
Christian Church at Jerusalem, which is one of their chief Arguments by which
I. S. and they of his fraternity uphold their opinion of Independency, and by
which they unchurch all other churches but their own at this day. I say in all
these regards I will spend the more time about this argument, the which
howsoever it be brought in by I. S. but as as a corallary, yet it may stand for
his sixth Argument and the best in the bunch, to maintain and uphold there
with their way of Independency, therefore I will first put his words into a
Syllogisticall frame, then consider the weight of the reasons contained in them.

All such as were not cast into a Church mould according to the New testament
form, and lest of all were members of one, Christian church in Jerusalem, they
were not made Christians: but all they of Jerusalem that went out to John's
baptism and were baptized by him, were such as were not cast into a Church
mould according to the New testament form; least of all, were they members of
one Christian Church in Jerusalem; ergo they were not made Christians. This is
I. S. his Argument which he sets down by way of a corallary; the Minor of
which I deny, affirming they were cast into a church mould as the sequel wlil
show. But because by this Argument, the Independents do not only unchurch and
unchristian all those that were baptized by John the Baptist, but indeed
unchurch and unchristian all the Protestant Churches through the world and all
other churches but their own; I shall be something the larger in examining it
with the several terms and expressions of the same, and then show and
discover the futility and vanity of it, by which I am confident the errors of
their ways will the better appear; for by that it will be manifest, that the
Independent doctrine is but an old piece of Popery in new clothes: though
varnished over with fine colors, that it may come forth into the world more
lovely and less suspected, and it is as little prevalent to maintain their
cause as the Papists is to uphold their Babell.

The Papists and the Independents here agree in these two things.

First, They both deny, that those believers that were baptized by John the
Baptist into Christ to come, were formed into a Christian church or churches;
for we have I. S. his formal words in this his answer in the name of all the
Independents confidently denying that they were made Christians; and my brother
Burton in express terms page 9. of his book accords unto him, saying in
the name of all his brethren, we take no notice of them as formed into a church
or churches, and page 16. of his book he produces the Papists doctrine to
prove this their opinion to be legitimate: So that in this point of their
belief the Papists and the Independents agree against all the current and the
whole Schools of all the most Orthodoxe Protestant Divines who hold they were
Christians.

Secondly, they agree in this also that both of them hold that the form of a
church must ever be visible and apparent: So that were their never so many
Assemblies of Christians in a city or country, and all believers, if they be
not cast into such and such a mold and form, then theyare not churches
properly so called, but in their dialect they are either Heritickes or no
Christians, but proclaimed enemies of Jesus Christ and his Kingdom. So that
according to the Papists doctrine, all those Christians that are not within the
limits, compass and bounds that they have circumscribed their church with, and
are not under that visible form of government they have appointed; they
account them all Heritickes and no churches: as all men know. And in the same
manner, do the Independents unchurch all churches in the world but such as in
their opinion are cast into a church mould according to the New Testament
form, and have their distinct Officers and Members, united into one body
respectively. That is to say, speaking in their own language, all such
congregations and assembles, as are fluid and are not joined and united
together by an explcite particular Covenant and fixed in their officers and
Members and having a Presbytery of their own, with absolute Soverainty and
power within themselves Independent, they are no churches, and all those
Christians that are not within the compass and limits of this their new mould
or model, they proclaim them enemies of Jesus Christ and his kingdom, and
account of them as a company of infidels and affirm that they are no true
churches, nor churches properly so called.

So that we see, that both the Papists and Independents agree in this, that
they bound and limit all churches to such and such an external form; so that
wheresoever that is wanting according to their dialect, though otherwise they
have the preaching of the Gospel, the right administration of the Sacraments
and the true invocation of God; they are no churches properly so called. And
both of them farther accord and agree in this, that the form of their
churches consists in the distinction of their Officers and members and the
uniting of them into one body respectively; they must not be fluid as they
speak, but they must be fixed in their Officers and Members, and having a
Presbytery of their own, with absolute soverainty and jurisdiction within
themselves Independent. But in this the Papists deal far more honestly then
the Independents: for they have in many large volumes fully set down the
model of their government, and what it is, and show how they are fixed in
their Officers and Members; and for their chief Officers, they say they are
the Pope and his Presbytery at Rome, the Cardinals, Patriarchs, Primates,
Metropolitans, Archbishops etc. and we know where to find them, and what their
model and government is to a hare: But what the Independents model is or will
be, no man could yet ever learn but by conjecture: which I must confess
seems a wonderful thing to me, that they should thus at pleasure unchurch and
unchristian all churches and Christians as not formed into a church mould after
the New Testament form, and yet never declare what that form and mold is. And
yet this is, their daily wicked practice. So that all men may see, if they will
not put out their eyes, that in this and many other of their tenants and
opinions the Independents are but a company of Mungrell Papists, and would have
all men belieeve with an implicit faith as their Churches believe, and take all
they speak as Oracles, though it be never so groundless. But we have learned
Christ better then so, who is the Prophet and King of his Church and who has
commanded us to hear him Matthew. 17. and to obey his voice John 10. and not to
give ear unto strangers. And from his blessed Word we have learned these two
lessons, the first that wheresoever the Gospel of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ
is faithfully and truly Preached by Ministers sent by him, and where this
Everlasting Gospel is embraced and believed and yielded obedience unto by the
people, and where there is the right Administration of the holy Sacraments and
the true invocation of God, they are a true church or churches, although they
be fluid, and be not fixed in their Officers and members, and have not that
external form either the Papists or the Independents speak of; and for this
our faith, we have warrant from Gods holy Word. Secondly we are taught out of
the holy Scriptures, also that there may be a true church or churhes in many
nations and kingdoms where they enjoy not all the Ordinances in a public
manner: nor where their very meetings together are not allowed unto them by
authority; for all such as confine a church or churches to these external
forms they speak of, they confound the essence and substance of a church with
the adjuncts and Accideuts of it; whereas churches may be true churches, and
yet want the external form of Government, as may by innumerable places of
holy Scripture be proved: as for instances. In Israel where God had set up his
own worship and established a form of Government, and commanded that it
should punctually be observed, yet we read in the 2 of the Chron. chap. 15.
ver. the 3. these words: Now for a long season Israel was without the true God,
and without a teaching Priest, and without law. So that from this place we may
gather, that their did not then appear any external form of a church, no not
in Israel, when the true God was not publicly known amongst them, and yet
notwithstanding God had there his true church amongst them, yea in the greatest
height of Idolatry when all the Prophets were persecuted and lay hid in Caves,
yet at that time also, God had seven thousand that never bowed knee to Baal; So
that it is evident that it is not the external form that is absolutely
required for the making of a true church, but it may be a true church without
that external appearance they speak of: For a church is one thing, and the
outward form and discipline is another.

And truly if a man will not suffer himself willingly to be deluded with
appearances and naked shadows for the truth it self, and will but consider
the great variety and change of the church in respect of the outward alteration
of the government of it in all ages, after God himself had set it up in
Abraham's Family, and consider it in all its peregrinations and pilgrimages, and
that after God had given unto Abraham and his seed such directions for the
setting up of his worship wheresoever he and his posterity should come, and
should also behold the diverse alterations of things in the worship and service
of God, and if he should with all consider that if the church should have been
only to be found where there had been such visible ordinances and forms of
Worship and Government as God had appointed, and no where else; then there
would not have been a church of God any where visibly to appear and be found
many times in the world in those days; and yet the true church always
remained in Abraham's Family and God had his people and a true church amongst
his seed, as will appear by these examples. I will briefly name some.

We know that the Israelites and Hebrews the only people of God and his first
borne, continued many generations as strangers in Egypt, all the which time
they never offered up any outward Sacrifices unto God; for that had been an
abomination to the Egyptians and they would not tolerate and suffer that in
their land; which moved Moses to solicit Pharaoh, to give the people of God
leave that they might go a days journey to sacrifice in the Wilderness, giving
him the reason of his postulation saying, that they could not sacrifice in
Egypt, for that was an abomination to the Egyptians: So that it is apparent
that all the time they remained in Egypt, they had not that public Ordinance
and that external form of worship: And yet all that while they were a true
Church and were visibly known by their Religion to be distinct from the
Egyptians, as who professed the knowledge and worship of the true God whose
name they called upon through all their tribes and whom they served night and
day: and yet I say they had not the use of public sacrifices: only they had
Circumcision amongst them that discriminating Ordinance from other nations. But
if that had been the form of this true Church, then all the time they remained
in the wilderness which was forty years, there was no visible form of a
Church: for they circumcised not their children there, and that reproach was
not taken away till they came to Gilgall, or at lest had passed the red Sea. So
that if the Church had been tied to external forms, we shall for many years
together find no true formed Church in those times. Nay when they were come
into the land of Canaan, how often was the face of the Church in the days of
the Judges so deformed as no man almost could see any form or comeliness in
it; all the external beauty which was the worship, being either wholly
forgotten or so adulterated and polluted with Idolatry as there was not left
any appearance of a true Church amongst them? and yet at that time they were
the people of God and his chosen people and a true Church; but if they had
sought to know it by any external form it could never have bin found: So that
the Church of God may be a true church though it want an outward form and
discipline. Yea after that God had set up his worship in the days of David and
Solomon, and had commanded that that form of Government should be continued
and perpetuated to the coming of the Messiah, how many alterations
notwithstanding were there found both in Judah and Israel, and how did Idolatry
spread it self abroad through both those Kingdoms, So that Idolatry was not
only committed under every green tree and in all groves and upon every mountain
and high place, but even in Jerusalem the holy city yea in the very Temple? So
that now there was no external form of a Church left, and yet then also had
God his Church there, and they were the people of God and dearly beloved of him.

And again when they were carried into captivity into Babylon, we know that all
the time they continued there, they had neither sacrifices nor many other
ordinances that God had appointed amongst them, they could not so much as sing
a song of Sion in that strange land, and we read of no other exercises amongst
them but of the moral worship of prayer and reading the prophets and of
prophesying and comforting of one another in the Lord, and of their resolution
not so much as to bow in the least to worship any Idol of the heathens, or so
much as stooping to reverence any professed enemy of the people of God, as
Mordecay would not to Haman, nor the three children to the idol of
Nebuchadnezer, nor Daniel leave his praying; but all these kind of services
are not accounted the form of a Church amongst the learned, and yet we read
of no other forms of worship the Jews had, neither through all the Provinces
of Ahasuerus and through all Babylon and Assyria and Egypt where they were
scattered; We read indeed that they fasted and prayed upon all occasions, and
that they spoke one to another, and they exercised amongst themselves the
moral worship in all their Synagogues which were all the true Churches of God
then through the world; and yet they had not that visible form that God had
appointed, in any of those Countries whither they were driven and carried
captives; they only made their prayers and supplications toward Jerusalem and
the Temple the holy place.

So that if the Church of God had been at any time tied to external forms
they could not then have been Churches properly so called, as not having any
external form; and yet they were all before the law and under the law and
since the law true Churches, notwithstanding they wanted the external form
and discipline. And the same may be said of the Church of God since the
beginning and growth of Antichrist, that it has been so defaced for many
generations together that none by its external form or discipline could find
a true Church in it; yet God had in this spiritual Babylon a true Church ever;
and therefore the true Church is not confined to external forms and
discipline. But to say nothing of that, if the Christian Church be bounded
within these limits, either the Papists or the Independents encompasse in their
Churches with, then I affirm that the very Church of Jerusalem was not a true
formed Church, which notwithstanding they both acknowledge was a true Church,
and the Independents confess that it was the first formed Church, Acts the
second: For in the Church of Jerusalem there was neither Pope, nor Cardinals,
nor Patriarchs, nor Primates, nor Paultripolitans, nor Archbishops, nor any
Conclave, nor any Masses, nor any of that Service they have set up in their
Romish Church, nor that Form of Church Government they have established:
neither had they any of these fixed officers. And therefore the Church of Rome
having lost that form the Church of Jerusalem had, and being adulterated both
in doctrine discipline and manners, that cannot be a true Church; and then it
will follow, That the true Church is not so tied to any external forms that if
they be failing they cannot be a true Church; for then there should have been
no true Church or Churches in the world all the times of Antichrists reign.
Nay, if the doctrine of the Independents be true and orthodox, the very Church
of Jerusalem, Acts the 2. which they call the first formed church, was no more
a true formed church, nor cast into a Church mould according to the New
Testament form, then those that were baptized by John the Baptist were; for
they describe a Church unto us after the New Testament form to be a company of
Saints or Believers, consisting of no more in number then can all meet together
in one place or congregation, having their distinct officers and members united
together into one body by a particular explicit Covenant: So as that assembly
or church must not be fluid, but fixed in its members and officers; having a
Presbytery of its own with absolute authority and jurisdiction within it self
Independent and enjoying all Gods holy Ordinances. This is the description of
an Independent Church after the New Testament form as they call it, as far as
by their practice and writings we can gather; So that whatsoever Church wants
this form according to their language, is no true formed church, as not being
cast into a church mould after the New Testament form: And by this their
model the church it self of Jerusalem was not a true molded church after the
New Testament form, as I shall here briefly in some particulars show, and more
largely demonstrate when I come to my brother Burton. For it is confessed by the
Independents that at that time there were three thousand souls added to the
church, and five thousand after that, it was then a true formed Church after
the New Testament form* and yet at that time they acknowledge they wanted
Deacons and Presbyters; and they confess withal as we shall see in its due
place, they wanted that part of discipline of casting out corrupt Members, so
that then they had not a Presbytery in the church of Jerusalem; and withal the
Independents affirm that many of the Believers and Saints of Jerusalem were
inhabitants of other churches through Iudaea; for they say there were many
other churches there, and that many of those belonged unto the other churches,
and it is sufficiently proved also out of the holy word of God and acknowledged
by my brother Burton, that there were more assemblies and congregations of
Believers in the church of Jerusalem then one; yea he confesses that in its
infancy the number of them was so great, as they could not all meet in any one
place, and yet they were but one church. Neither do we ever read that they tied
themselves to each other by any particular explicit Covenant or counted such a
Covenant the form of a true church.

From all which I gather, that the difinition or description of the
Independents Church is erroneous, or if it be orthodoxe, then the very Church
of Jerusalem was not a true formed Church after the New Testament formewhen,
they say it was.

For first, there were more Believers in Jerusalem then could all meet in one
congregation, or a few, yet though in several and distinct places and
assemblies, they all made but one Church: which is contrary to the Independents
doctrine.

Secondly, they had no fixed Officers and Members united into one body
respectively nor no Presbitery: for if there were not then Deacons at all, nor
Elders as the Independents do acknowledge, and if many of the Believers in
Jerusalem were strangers, and had their habitations in other cities as they
say, then they were not fixed, neither in their Officers nor Members, an^ yet a
true Church; not in the Elders nor Deacons, for they then had none at all; nor
in their members, for they confess many of them were strangers, and did not
inhabit and dwell there, and therefore no fixed Members: and for the Apostles
they were notfixt, bnt as Noah's Dove was sent out by him and returned with an
olive leaf in her mouth, and at the next time departed and went her way, so
the Apostles they were the universal Messengers of Christ's Kingdom, which
were to be sent out into all nations with an olive leaf in their mouths that
trophie of Peace and glad tidings, they were to preach the Gospel in all
nations, and howsoever for a time they remained in Jerusalem, yet all men know
that was not their abiding place, for they were not fixed Officers there, but
were to go out into all countries to preach and baptize, and when the
persecution came, according to the Independents doctrine, then all the Members
of that Church were scattered, and there were none left in Jerusalem, if their
doctrine be ^ound, but the Apostles: so that it is most certain those Members
were not fixed but fluid when they ran this way and that way to save themselves:
so that the Apostles those great Pastors of the Church remained in Jerusalem,
according to their language all alone without either sheep or Lambs; they also
were not fixed, bnt were afterward sent into all nations to teach and baptize*
as I said before; withal the Independents confess, they had no Discipline in
the Church of Jerusalem, for they want ed that part of it, viz.
excommunication, and therefore they had no Presbytery in it, nor no
jurisdiction within it self, Ergo it was not a true formed Church after the
New Testament form, if their doctrine be true and good, neither could they
then enjoy all the acts of worship; and therefore was no better then those that
were made christians by the Baptismeof John; for in the Church of Jerusalem,
there were more then could meet in any one place, which the Independents will
not admit of by their difinition, and they had neither fixed officers nor
Members nor that part of discipline, Ergo, they did not enjoy all Gods
Ordinances. In a word there was nothing in the Church of Jerusalem that now the
Independents require for the moulding up of a Church after the New Testament
form, no more then was amongst those that were baptized by the Baptist.

And therefore all that I. S. and the Independents babble about the form and
mould of a Church after the New Testament form, is to little purpose, yea
mere vainty: for it is evident out of the holy Scripture, that a Church may be
a true formed Church after the New Testament form, although it want all those
things that either the Papists or the Independents think absolutely necessary
for the moulding up a Church after the New Testament form. For the very Church
of Jerusalem which was the Mother Church, and which was to be a pattern to all
other Churches was a true formed Church, and at that very time according to the
Independents learning; and yet I say then, she had neither fixed Officers nor
Members, nor any external explicit particular covenant, nor discipline, nor
many other requisites that they now require as necessary for the forming of a
true Church, as we shall see more at large in its due place.

But now to return and come more closely to examine I. S. his words that we
may discover yet more fully the fallacious juglings of both himself and all
the Independent Ministers, and that all the people may the better understand
what it is to to be cast into a Church mould after the New Testament form, and
what is absolutely necessary and required of all men to be made a Member of a
Christan Church, and what that form is the Scripture holds out unto all
Christians, to be the mould of a christian Church according to the New
Testament form, all which terms and expressions being well explaned, then
the grollery of those of the congregationall way will the better appear.

I will therefore that those that are the most ignorant may the better
understand the terms these Juglers use, First say something briefly concerning
the government of the Church of the Jews under the Law in Moses his time, and
under the Kings both of Judah and Israel through all their cities, and what it
was that was requisite and thought necessary for the casting off any into a
Church mould after the old Testament form; which being declared, the trifling
of all the Independent Ministers will be more obvious to all men.

For the manner of the government of the Church of the Jews, we are to
consider it under a double nation, as it had a ceremonial service and a moral
worship and both appointed by God; yet the former but temporary, the other for
duration. Now in regard of the manner of the administration it was diverse; for
the ceremonial worship was ordered after a monarchical way; there was a high
Priest that typified Christ* that was to make the atonement between God and
the people, who was in a special manner to mediate with God for the twelve
Tribes of Israel* and he had many Priests under him for the offering up of
daily sacrifices, either of praises or of reconciliation in the material
Temple they were tied; but the High Priest only went once a year into the
Holy of holies, for the making of an atonement for himself and the people,
and this way of administration of the Church continued to the coming of Christ
who was the true high Priest typified, and who through the eternal spirit
having offered himself without spot to God, to purge our consciences from dead
works to serve the living God, Heb. 10. verse 14. and for this cause is the
Mediator of the New Testament; by his death and suffering he has put an end
to that way of administration. But there was an other way of Administration in
respect of the moral worship, which was ever to remain in the Church; and
that was in their several Cities, in their Synagogues and Villages, and all
those Synagogues that were through all Iudaea and Israel, and through the
world, who were all governed by Presbyters and Elders which were called
Rulers; so that all those Synagogues that were in the several Villages or
Hamlets within the jurisdiction and limits of every City were all of them
governed after a classical and collegiate way, and those Synagogues were as
our Parish Churches now at this day are amongst us.

Now these Elders and Rulers in Moses time were first appointed to rule and
govern the people in common, so long as they were in the Wilderness; but
after they were come into the Land of Canaan, then they had their Elders and
Rulers in every City appointed over them, who had the government of the people
committed unto them, and whose care it was that the moral worship and service
of God, as the reading of the Law and the Prophets, and the interpretation of
the same should be every Sabbath day continually preserved in all their
Synagogues, by their Priests and Levites, and Scribes and Lawyers, and they had
also the power in their hands of conventing any before them upon Delinquency,
and of censuring and punishing of them upon proof of the same: And they were
called the Church, as is to be seen Matthew the 18. and there is not any truth
almost in all the new testament that is more evidently clear than this, that
all the Synagogues were governed by a Court or Classis or College of Rulers,
for they had inferior judges and Superior in them yea many chief rulers in
all cities as we may see in Antioch and Pisidia Acts the 13. 14. 15. where Paul
and his company went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath day and sat down, and
after the reading of the Law and the Prophets, the chief Rulers (for so it is
in the original) sent unto them, saying men and brethren, if you have any word
of exhortation for the people, say on. Out of which words these three things
are observable.

First, That there were many Governors and chief Rulers as well as inferior
rulers that governed their Synagogues in every city in common, and that they
had a Court in them to order all the Synagogues and people under their
jurisdiction, and that they were all Aristocratically governd and by the common
counsel of them all, not by any particular Judge or Ruler.

The second observable is, that their whole employment was to uphold and
preserve the true worship of God, and to see that the Holy Scriptures were read
and interpreted, that men women and children might be brought up in the nurture
and fear of the Lord, and that all things should be managed with order and
decency.

The third thing observable, is this, that their people yielded subjection unto
those Rulers, and did not intermeddle with their government, nor did not take
upon them to command any Minister to Preach or appoint any one to exhort: but
it was the place of the Rulers to do this, and they willingly submitted
themselves to this Government without joining themselves in commission with
them, as knowing it was their place to obey.

And this kind of Government, was that that was established in all cities
through the world where the Jews were permitted to exercise their Religion,
and this kind of government was transacted over to the Christian church to be
perpetutated to the end of the world, and therefore there was through all
cities Presbyters ordained as the Scripture says Acts the 14. and Tit. 1. that
were to govern the church by their common council; and this is accorded unto
by all the Independents who acknowledge that in the Apostles times and many
Generations after, all the churches of the New testament were governed communi
consilio presbyterorum; And that the Church of Jerusalem in respect of the
moral worship was governed both in Christ's time and after his death and
ascension, by a college of Elders and Presbyters, all the Evangelists and the
Acts of the Apostles do testify it; and this way of government I say was
transacted over to the Christian church and is that form and mould of church
government that is according to the New Testament form, into the which mould
of government those that were baptized by John were cast which was a
Presbytery. For the Scripture never speaks of that of the congregationall way.
And this shall suffice to have spoke at this time and in this place concerning
the manner of the Administration of the government both in respect of the
Ceremonial service and moral worship under the Law, and what it ought to be
under the Gospel.

And now a word or two concerning the manner of admitting members then into the
church of the Jews and what was reputed necessary for the making of any one a
member and Proselite there after the old testament form; and what is required
now for making of any a member of the Christian church. The whole Scripture of
the old testament and the new declares that all those that were aliens and
strangers unto the commonwealth of Israel, if they desired to be made
partakers of the privileges of the Jews and to be all accounted in the number
of the people of God, they were to be instructed in the Law of Moses, and they
were to yield obedience unto that, and in token that they believed in the true
God, and submitted themselves to his Law and to that discipline he had taught
in the books of Moses and the Prophets, they were to be circumcised, which
when they yielded unto and took the Covenant of Circumcision, they were
forthwith made members of the Church of the Jews, and had as good right to all
the ordinances of God under that government as any other of the Jews; and this
I say is sufficiently confirmed in the holy Scriptures everywhere. Now under
the New testament the Church of God being compared sometimes to a Kingdom and
Empire, and sometimes to a city; and all the members of it being compared to
free Denizons and citizens, where so ever the Gospel of this Kingdom and City
is faithfully preached, and the people by the Ambassadors and Ministers of the
same being invited to come in and yield obedience unto it, if they do believe
and obey, that is, if they do believe and repent and willingly submit unto the
sound of it, and offer themselves to make profession of it, and in sign of
this their obedience and faith receive the seal of this Covenant and are
baptized, they are forthwith to be admitted without any reluctation, and having
once received the seal of this Covenant the seal of Baptism, they are
forthwith made free Denizons of this Kingdom and freemen of this city, and
have as good right to all the privileges of the same as any other, and may
through the whole world of Christians partake in all the Ordinances of that
Kingdom and City as well as any other Christians: as in the Roman Empire and
now in all Corporations through the world, they that were Citizens of Rome or
they that are Freemen in any of them, as they did then partake in all the
privileges of the Romans and might abide and dwell in any place, and
traffic, buy and purchase in what part of it they pleased, enjoying all those
inmmnities that any then did, and so likewise now as those that are Freemen of
any city or corporation do in their several precincts enjoy all the
privileges of each of them, and may set up in any Parish or in any part of the
city or within the jurisdiction of the same, and exercise all their several
trades, and have as much privilege for their so doing as any of the other
Citizens; so I say in the same manner, it is in the Kingdom of Christ and his
city which is his church, Every one that makes profession of the Gospel, that
believes, repents and is Baptized, has as good right to all the Ordinances of
the Church as any Christian in the primitive times or any Independents now in
the world, and that by virtue of the great Charter of this Kingdom and City
the Gospel, and by the practice of John the Baptist and the Apostles, who
required no more of all men and people in their time for the making of them
members of Christ's Church but that they should repent and believe and be
Baptized, as we may see in the third of Matthew. and in the second of the Acts,
and in those of Samaria in the 8. Chapter, and in the Eunuch Paul, Lydia, and
the Jailer, and those of Cornelius his house, of all the which no more was
required for the making of them Christians but to repent and believe and to be
Baptized, by which they were invested with a right to all the privileges
through all Churches in the world and might partake in all the Ordinances of
Christ's Kingdom where so ever they came, as we may see in Paul and those that
accompanied him in his journies. Wheresoever they came they communicated with
them in all Churches, in all the Ordinances as in the breaking of bread and
prayer: So that to repent and believe, and to be baptized, is all that
according to the Gospel of Jesus Christ is required of any man or of any
people to cast them into a Church mould according the New Testament form, and
to make them not only members of the Catholic visible Church, but of any
church in particular, if the Word of God is to be believed and given credit
unto.

Now when all those that came out of Jerusalem unto John, did repent and
believe and were baptized by John the Baptist, they were cast into a Church
mould after the New Testament form and were all made as good members of that
church as any that were baptized after Christ's death and ascension by Peter and
the other Apostles, and might whenever they went from Jerusalem to any other
place where christians dwelt, partake in all the ordinances as those did that
by reason of the persecution were scattered, who we read of that wheresoever
they came they went into their Synagogues and Churches, and they preached and
converted the people, and partaked and communicated in all the ordinances
amongst them without any gainsaying; and so all the Christians that are true
Believers and are baptized, wheresoever they travel or dwell whether in France
or Germany, Italy or the Low Countries, or in any part of the world amongst the
true Protestants, they have as great right to all the ordinances in those
churches as any of the Natives: For they are all free Denizons of Christ's
Kingdom and free men of the city the church of God which is Christ's mystical
body, and therefore as members of the same may partake in all the Privileges
and Benefits that any member may do; I mean in respect of the ordinances, as
breaking of bread, hearing of the word preached and in prayer and all the
essential privileges; for to all those they have right unto by their very
admission into the church by their baptism, and whosoever shall refuse
communion with them that believe, and are baptized and live a godly holy and
pious life, unless they will observe their own traditions, they are
Delinquents and Prevaricators against the King of his church Jesus Christ, and
do no way set him up upon his throne, but by this means they dis-throne him.
And therefore J. S. and all those of his fraternity, that not only unchristian
and unchurch all those that were baptized by John the Baptist and Christ's
Apostles before Christ's death, but at this day unchurch and unchristian all
Christians and Churches but their own, are guilty of high contumacy against the
King of Saints and King of Kings, and are most injurious to all their christian
Brethren: And truly there cannot be found scarce in the world such an example
of temerity and unadvised rashness and want of charity and common wisdom, as
is every day to be observed amongst the Independents who are ever talking of a
Church mould after the New Testament form, and excluding all from being true
Churches that are not so molded, and yet never tell us what it is.

For in the holy Scripture we have never read of any other Church mould or of
any New Testament form, but of publishing the Gospel and of preaching faith
and repentance, and of yielding obedience unto it, and of believing and
repenting and being baptized, which both John the Baptist and all Christ's
Disciples and the blessed Apostles and all the faithful Ministers of the
Gospel had a commission to do, and a command withal, and a blessing annexed
unto it, that whosoever did repent, believe and was baptized, should not only
be admitted a visible member of the catholic visible Church, but should be
saved. The words of our Savior Christ unto his Disciples, Mark 16. ver. 15,
16. are these, Go (says he) into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every
creature; he that believes and is baptized shall be saved; but he that
believes not shall be damned. Out of the which words and commission of our
Savior I evidently gather that when John the Baptist and Christ's Disciples in
their several ministryes went according to their commission preaching from
place to place and from city to city and publishing the glad tidings of the
kingdom of the Messiah and baptizing such as believed, they cast them into a
Church mould after the New Testament form, and therefore made them all members
not only of the Catholic visible Church but of all those several particular
Churches and Synagogues through all the cities of Judaea and through the world
where they preached the Gospel, as well as at Jerusalem, and that as many of
Jerusalem as were baptized by John and Christ's Disciples were all members of
that Church and as truly molded into a Church mould after the New Testament
form and made as real members and free denizons of Christ's Kingdom as any of
the new congregations at this day, unless any will think and believe that John
the Baptist and the blessed Apostles were ignorant how to gather Churches, and
nescient of the right mould and form of the New Testament churches, and had
not learned their lesson so well as our Independent Ministers: which were a
piece of impiety and horrid wickedness to affirm: For then it would follow,
that those that were baptized by John and by the Apostles and Christ's seventy
Disciples, were never saved: For I. S. denies they were Christians and that
they were cast into a church mould after the New Testament form, or members of
the christian church, and therefore by consequent they were in the state of
damnation.

But if all this be wickedness so much as to think, then there is a way yet to
Heaven and that a safe one which the Independents are ignorant of; for they
preach up their way as the narrow way to heaven, proclaiming all those that are
out of it to be enemies of Jesus Christ and his kingdom, and in the state of
perdition; and yet John the Baptist was ignorant of their way and cast not his
Disciples into their mould, and yet they went safely to the Kingdom of heaven,
yea they entered into it by violence as our Savior speaks.

And therefore by this that I have now said by way of answer, all men may see
the futility and impiety of I. S. and how groundless all his arguments are,
and may very well conclude, That all those that were baptized by John the
Baptist and by Christ's Disciples before his death, were members of Christ's
Church and true believers, and that as many of them as came from Jerusalem were
members of that church; and they may also from the foregoing arguments gather,
That those that came out of Jerusalem to his baptism were in such multitudes
(for all Jerusalem went out unto him and were baptized) as they could not all
possibly meet in any one place or congregation or a few; and therefore I am
confident that all those that shall read both what Mr Knollys and I. S. have
fondly and impiously replied to my arguments, and what by way of answer I have
here set down, will adjudge, that such unworthy wranglers and cavillers as
these are ought by their several Churches to be severely censured for this
their ignorance and impiety. And this shall serve to have replied to these
their exceptions against my first arguments concerning the multitudes baptized
by John the Baptist: I shall answer to all their other several cavills in
their due places.

I will now therefore go on to show the increase of believers that were made by
the miracles and preaching both of Christ and his Apostles, and from the
several places out of the holy Scripture frame my arguments as out of the
former to prove the same conclusion. John the 4. ver. 1, 2. Now when the Lord
knew how the Pharisees had heard that Jesus made and baptized more Disciples
then John (though Jesus himself baptized not, but his Disciples:) Here observe
that where there was a mistake in the relation, there the Evangelist forthwith
shows it to rectify men's understandings; as where it was reported that Christ
baptized, he shows it was a mistake, for his Disciples only baptized: but
where it is said, that Jesus made more Disciples then John, that is taken pro
confesso; and it was true; for John himself in the 3. chapter ver. 30. had
said, He must increase, but I must decrease. Christ therefore made many more
Disciples and Believers then John, and added daily to the church, that was then
in Jerusalem, such as should be saved; for he came to save the lost sheep of
the house of Israel, and he received all that came to him, John the 6. 37. And
as many as received him, to them he gave power to become the sons of God,
even to them that believe upon his name, John 1. 12. And these were infinite
multitudes, as we shall see by and by. In John the 7. 31. it is said that many
of the people of Jerusalem believed on him; And verse the 40. they said, of a
truth this is that Prophet: And in the same chapter when the high Priests sent
the officers to apprehend Christ, and returning without him, and the high
Priests demanding the reason why they had not brought him, the officers replied
saying, That never man spoke as this man. ver. 47, 48. Then answered the
Pharisees, are ye also deceived? Does any of the Rulers or the Pharisees
believe in him? But this people that knows not the Law is cursed. Take here
notice of the confession of the very Pharisees; excepting themselves and the
High Priests, they acknowledge that the generality of the people believed in
him. Here was increase upon increase of Christians and Believers, all the
people generally believed in him: certainly one place could not have contained
them all. And which is yet more to be observed; that whereas the Pharisees
said, none but the cursed people believed in him, and none of the Rulers; in
this very chapter we find one Ruler one Nicodemus, Verse. 50. none of the least
of the Rulers. And in John 12. 42. it is affirmed, That among the chief Rulers
many believed on him, but because of the Pharisees they did not confess him,
lest they should be put out the Synagogue. And in Verse 11. of the same
chapter, it is asserted, That many of the Jews went away and believed on
Jesus; here was multiplication upon multiplication of Believers. And in Verse.
19. The Pharisees therefore said among themselves, perceive ye how ye prevail
nothing? behold the world is gone after him. These words the Pharisees spoke in
private among themselves deliberately, and confessed that the world of men were
turned Christians; all Jerusalem swarmed with Believers; without doubt all
these could not meet in one place.

And indeed through all the Evangelists we shall read of infinite multitudes
that believed in him; and the reason is given, Matthew. 7. 29. Because he taught
them as one having authority, and not as the Scribes: and did such works of
wonder, and wrought such miracles, as in John 7. 31. they confessed none could do
but Christ: and in Chap. 12. Verse. 11. it is related, that the raising up
Lazarus from the dead made many believe on him, and was the cause that such
multitudes of people followed him, and did so highly honor him and magnify
him; and did receive him coming into Jerusalem with such an acclamation,
crying, Hosanna, as in this 12 Chapter is specified; and is more largely set
down in Matthew. 21. 8. where it is related, That a great multitude spread their
garments in the way, and others cut down branches, and the people that went
before, and they that came after, cried Hosanna, and said, this is Jesus the
Prophet of Nazareth; they all believed in him, and confessed him before the
world. Now our Savionr says, He that shall confess me, and own me before men,
I will confess and own him before my Father in Heaven. Here is a whole City of
Believers and Confessors. Yes, the very children believed in him* and openly,
and in the Temple cried Hosanna. And Christ himself allowed of their testimony,
and avouched they did well, and accordingly as was written. And in Luke 19. 47,
48. it is said, That he taught daily in the Temple, but the chief Priests and
Scribes, and the Elders of the people sought to destroy him, and could not
find what they might do; for all the people were very attentive to hear him.
The universality therefore of the people by all these places were believers,
and such as followed Christ: So that a man may wonder, how that Jerusalem it
self, though it were a mighty City, could contain such multitudes of people as
believed in Christ: so far improbable it is, that any one place or Congregation
could contain the hundredth part of them. And we may also gather, that the
great miracles at his Suffering, and at his Resurrection, and the apparition of
so many that rose from their graves and went into the holy City, made a great
increase and addition of Disciples and new Believers; so that the number was
daily augmented; we find no diminution: but if some that followed Christ for
bread, that were but Hypocrites, left following him; yet in those places we
read again and again of numberless companies that daily came in, and believed
in him.

And to all this we may add, that John the Baptist and his Disciples, a little
before his death; and Christ and his Disciples, by reason of the increase of
the multitudes of Believers, were forced to baptize in several places. For so
it is in Ioh. 3. 23. After these days came Jesus and his Disciples into the
land of Judea, and there he tarried with them and baptized, and John also was
baptizing in Enon* near Salim, because there was much water there, and they
came and were baptized. And very reason will tell all men, that of necessity
there must be an innumerable multitude of believers, (for none were Baptized
but believers) that must take up an hundred preachers or thereabouts; for our
Savior had twelve Apostles, and 70. Disciples, as we may see in the 9. of
Luke, and in the 10. chapter of the same book: and John had also many
Disciples, though not so many as Christ, and all these were employed in
preaching the Gospel, and many of them in working miracles and wonders; so
that the very Devils were subject unto them, as they rejoycingly confessed to
Christ, when they returned to give him an account of their Ministry. And
without doubt if these miracles wrought so with the very Disciples, they
prevailed much more generally with the people to make them believe; so that
infinite multitudes of people came in and were Baptized, as the Scripture it
self informs us. And of necessity, so many Ministers, must have several
places to Preach in, and several congregations and Assemblies to Preach to,
and several places to Baptize in: for otherwise there would have been great
confusion; for but one of them could speak at once; and all these Disciples
were taken up in their several Ministeries, and had their hands full, as the
Scripture it self sufficiently declares in express words; for it is said,
That Christ's Disciples Baptizedin Indaea: and John in Enon near Salim, because
there was much water there. It seems there was too little water to Baptize
them in, in others places, which expression is worthy to be taken notice of.
And amongst those that came to be Baptized, multitudes of them came from
Jerusalem.

And if we compare times with times, which will make much for the evidencing
of the truth, and consider the diverse passages in the holy Scriptures, we
shall find the like division of the people in those days; some standing for
Christ and John Baptist, and speaking in the justification of them and their
Ministry, and others that were of the Pharisaicall faction, and of the high
Priests company; as is even in these our days, between them they call
Caviliers, and those they call Parliamentiers. Now what twenty or thirty places
in the City of London, can contain all the Parliamentiers to partake in all
acts of Worship? Or what ten places can hold all those of the Prelaticall
Faction, that contend for their Bishops and Service, and all their other
trumpery and accoutrements? And yet, although they be in diverse and sundry
Assemblies, they are still the Prelaticall party, and all of them of the
Malignant Church: and as the diversity of the places changes not their
complexions, so it alters not their faith, nor manners, but they continne
still Malignants and remain all Members of the Malignant Church.

And as in these days all that wish well unto the true Religion through both
city and kingdom, and love their country, stand for the Parliament; so in
those days those that loved Zion and the prosperity of Jerusalem cleaved unto
Christ and the Gospel and stood for him, and all his Ministers; and by all
computations, though all the power and Authority was in the hands of the
malignant Magistrates of those times, who were swayed and guided by the
Scribes, Pharisees, Elders, and the high Priests; yet to one Pharisee or
Malignant Scribe or Ruler, there was ten of those that believed in Christ, and
honored him and all his Ministers and Disciples. Yea the Pharisees themselves
do acknowledge it, not once but many times, as is evident from the places above
cited, and many more that might be produced.

So that if I should frame no Argument out of them, it is apparent, that those
new additions of Believers that were converted by Christ and his Ministry,
considered by themselves a part, from those that Saint John the Baptist
converted, were so great and numerous, that they could not all meet in any one
place for partaking of all acts of worship, but of necessity must be
distributed into several Congregations and Assemblies, if they would all be
edified; much less could they all meet together, being joined to those that
believed through the Baptism and Ministry of John. But out of the former
places above specified I thus argue.

Where there was an innumerable multitude of believers, in a word, the whole
people and City of Jerusalem, whom the Pharisees accounted accursed, there
they could not all meet at any one time, or in any one room or place and in
one Congregation, to partake in all the Ordinances, but of necessity must be
distributed into several assemblies, and diverse Congregations, if they would
all be edified: But in Jerusalem (the Scribes and Pharisees, and Rulers, by
their own confession, being excepted) there was an innumerable multitude of
believers, and in a word, the whole people and City of Jerusalem, whom the
Pharisees accounted accursed. Ergo, they could not all meet together at one
time, and in one place to partake in all the Ordinances, but of necessity must
be distributed into several assemblies and diverse congregations, if they would
all be edified.

For the major, no rational man will deny is, that has but read the
Scriptures, or is but a little acquainted with the Histories of those times.
For the minor, it is evident from the places produced; and therefore the
conclusion does necessarily follow. But I yet further thus argue.

Where there was a world of believers, with many Rulers and men of great place
and office, with infinite multitudes of men and children, and all the people,
they could not al meet together at one time, and in one place and congregation
to partake in all acts of worship; but of necessity must be distributed into
diverse assemblies and several congregations, if they would all be edified. But
in the Church of Jerusalem, there was a world of believers, with many Rulers
and men of great place and office, with multitudes of men and children, and all
the people. Ergo, they could not all meet together at one time and in one
place, to partake in all acts of worship, but of necessity must be distributed
into diverse congregations and assemblies if they would be all edified.

For the Major, it is evident by the very light of nature, neither will any
rational man deny it, that has not resolved to sacrifice himself to
stupidity. For the Minor, the places above specified prove it: for in express
words it is said, that the world followed him; that is, believed in him, and
that great multitudes entertained him with their acclamations, and crying
Hosanna, the very children also seconding them. And that the chief Priests,
Scribes, and Elders, sough^ to destroy him, and could not find what to do, for
all the people were very attentive to hear him. The whole people we see here,
or the generality of them, except the Scribes, Pharisees, Elders, and High
Priests, (which in comparison of them were very few) believed in Jesus Christ,
and were his Disciples, and such as were converted by his Ministry; and such a
multitude there was of them, as for that present, they so awed the High Priests
and Elders, that they durst not destroy Christ, though they desired it; so that
the minor stands firm; and from the premises the conclusion necessarily
follows. But out of the former places I yet further thus argue.

Where there was such an increase of multitudes of Believers, as that there was
not water enough in any one place to baptize them all, nor any one place in the
wilderness capable to contain or receive them all; so that Christ himself,
and his seventy Disciples, and twelve Apostles, and John Baptist and all his
Disciples, were for the numerosity of them, forced in several places to preach
unto them and baptize them; there they could not all meet at any one time, or
in any one place or room, or in one Congregation, to partake or communicate in
all acts of worship; but of necessity were to be distributed into several
congregations or assemblies, if they would all be edified. But in Jerusalem
there was such multitudes of believers that went out to the Baptism of John
and Christ, as that there was not water enough in any one place to baptize them
all, nor any one place in the wilderness capable to contain or receive them
all: so that Christ himself and his seventy Disciples, and his twelve
Apostles, and Saint John Baptist and his Disciples, were for the numerosity of
them forced to divide themselves into several places, and several assemblies
and congregations, that all the people might partake in all acts of worship,
and be edified. Ergo, they could not all meet at any one time, or in any one
place, but were of necessity forced to divide and distribute themselves into
diverse places, and several congregations and assemblies, that they might all
be edified.

For the Major and Minor of the Syllogism, they are so evident, both by
reason, and the holy Scripture, that no man that has not resolved with
himself to remain incredulous, and continue in his obstinacy, can deny the
truth of them; so that the conclusion of necessity must from the premises be
granted. And all these multitudes of people were believers before Christ's
Suffering, Resurrection, and Ascension.

Now before I go on to declare what infinite multitudes of believers were
added to those that were converted by John's and the Disciples Ministry in the
Church of Jerusalem, after Christ's death, and ascension, which makes it an
impossible thing, that they should all meet in one place or a few; I shall
desire the Reader here to consider what Master Knollys, and I. S. have replied
by way of answer to all these Arguments. I will first set down Master Knollys
his Reply with his Reasons, and give my answer to him, and then in order come
to what I. S. that learned Gentleman has to gainesay: Master Knollys denies
all the Minors of these Arguments as his manner is, and gives some slender
reasons, and makes some slight evasions and thinks that enough. His words are
these, page 8. As for the world of believers mentioned in these arguments
drawn from John 12. 19. Behold the world is gone after him, that Scripture
does not say, they believed in him, much less that there was a world of
believers in the Church of Jerusalem.

These are Master Knollys formal words, and all the ground of his denial of
the minor of all my Arguments, yea all that he has to say against them. And it
is wonderful to see, how the people are satisfied with such delusions. But by
this kind of Disputing, if it be sufficient for refutation, to deny any
Arguments grounded upon the holy Scriptures, confirmed and corroborated by
sound reasons: then for ought I know, men may not only confute the whole word
of God, and whatsoever is evidently proved from thence, but indeed deny the
Christian Religion. But that all men may take notice of this man's ignorance,
and blasphemy (for to say the truth, he gives the Spirit of God the lie,
whiles he labors to maintain his erroneous opinion) and that my answer may
be the more satisfactory, I will make these two Propositions evidently appear.

First, that the world here mentioned that went after Christ, were such as
believed in him.

Secondly, that there was a world of believers in the Church of Jerusalem, and
that they were inhabitants there, both which if I make good, then my Arguments
will stand for ever immovable, and it will follow, that there were more
believers in the Church of Jerusalem before Christ's death converted by
himself, and by his Disciples, then could all possibly meet in any one place,
or congregation or a few; besides those that were converted by John's Ministry,
and that this denial of Mr. Knollys is groundless, vain and impious.

For proof therefore of my first Proposition, viz. that the world here
mentioned were believers, it is manifest by the ensuing reasons.

First from the manner of the Scriptures dialect, and that in many places,
which intimate and prove, that to follow Christ with love, affection, and
approbation, is to be his Scholars and Disciples, and to believe in him,
Matthew. the 16. verse. 24. Mark the 8. v. 34. Luke the 9. verse 29. If any man
(says Christ) will come after me let him deny himself and take up his Cross
daily and follow me. So that by these testimonies in Scripture language, to go
after Christ, and to follow him in sincerity, is, to be Christ's Scholar and
Disciple, and to believe in him: For Christ himself has so taught us, in the
12. of John, verse 26. whose words are these, If any man will serve me, let him
follow me, and where I am there shall also my servant be: if any man serve
me, him will my Father honor. So that to serve Christ, and to follow Christ,
in Gods dialect, is to believe in Christ.

Secondly, this is so clear a truth, that the very blind Pharisees, those
Leaders of the blind did well perceive it, and took the multitudes following
of him in this sense, that they believed in him, which their very expression
does sufficiently declare: For say they verse 29. Perceive ye not how you
prevail nothing? Behold the world is gone after him; out of which words of
theirs it is sufficiently evident, that they did not understand, that like a
company of giddy headed people they were gone after him, to gaze and look upon
him, as upon some novelty, but that the multitudes and world that followed him,
were such indeed as adhered to him, and believed in him: for otherwise, it had
not been a matter worthy of admiration and an Ecce, and a behold, for no man
wonders at an ordinary thing, to see a company of people run after an eminent
man, to view him and look upon him: for there is nothing more common, nor of
less admiration* neither would such a spectacle have put them all in fear and
upon a consultation, how they might destroy him, and take him out of the world,
if they had only thought or believed that the world went after him only to take
notice of him, and so to have gone home again; certainly such an opinion in
the Priests and Pharisees as this, would never have so enraged them against
Christ, and have made them all lay their heads together which way to murder
him: Neither would it ever have extorted such words out of their heads, as to
say amongst themselves in private, and that in a rage and out of indignation,
and in a serious way, when they were in a deliberate consultation, behold or
perceive you not how the world is gone after him? but when these words
proceeded from them in private, and when they were in a deep debate and
counsel, it is manifest that they spoke so out of malice and envy, and from
very madness which arose from this, that they well perceived, that they that
followed Christ believed in him; which is yet more confirmed by many places of
holy Scripture that might be produced; but amongst others, those testimonies in
the seventh of John, where in express words it is related, that many of the
people believed on him, and said, when Christ comes, will he do more
miracles then these which this man has done? and in the 40. verse, many of the
people said of a truth this is the Prophet, others said this is the Christ, and
all this was in Jerusalem, and verse. 48. Have any of the Rulers and Pharisees
(say they) believed in him? but this people that knows not the Law is
accursed; out of the which place, it is now abundantly evident, that the world
spoke of, in the 12. chap. were believers: for here the Rulers and Pharisees
make a distribution of the people of Jerusalem, and divide them into two
parties, and then they compare them together, the one that believed in Christ
and followed him, and were his scholars, and the other that professed they
were Abraham's children, and Moses his disciples, yet they were Christ's
professed enemies, and such as declared themselves not to beleeeve in him: now
here what the Rulers and Pharisees judgment was concerning this business which
was one of the parties, who knew very well what they spoke, and the people of
whom they spoke, and of themselves they spoke thus, have any of the Rulers and
Pharisees believed in him? but this people that knows not the Law is
accursed. So that being thus compared together, the unbeleevers are the
Pharisees and Rulers, and their accomplices only; but all the other people of
Jerusalem they believed in him, in their esteem, and therefore they adjudged
them accursed, which they would never have done if they had followed Christ for
no other end, but to have looked upon him: for their words do import as much,
as if they should have said in plain terms, all the people, or the greatest
part of the people in Jerusalem, saving the Rulers and Pharisees believe in
Christ, and there is none oppose him but they, and that this is their very
meaning and sense of the words, as learned men may easily gather.

Thirdly, the same is confirmed by Nicodemus his witness in private also, who
knew very well how the people of Jerusalem stood generally affected toward
Christ, and what opinion they had of him: hear therefore what he says, John
the 3. of whom the Evangelist speaks thus. There was a man of the Pharisees
named Nicodemus, a Ruler of the Jews, the same came to Jesus by night, and
said unto him Rabbi, we know that thou art a Teacher come from God, for no man
can do these miracles except God be with him. Here Nicodemus gives in
testimony, and devidene^ that the generality of those in Jerusalem, and of the
principallest of them as well as of the meanest, that they believed in Jesus,
saying we know, that is to say, all the people know, that thou art a Teacher
come from God; they knew it with the knowledge of Faith and approbation, and
did really believe that he was come from God, and he gives a reason of his and
their faith, saying, that no men can do those miracles except God be with
him, and therefore they believed in him: so that Nicodemus which was a Disciple
of Christ, though in secret and a great honourer of him, would give in no false
verdict, nor make no false Musters, and he knew very well the opinion and the
esteem the people had of him, and he asserteth that both himself and the
people knew that Christ was sent of God, which is as much as to believe in him:
for the same confession did the Apostles make, Matthew. 16. and John the 6.
saying, we know that thou art the Son of the living God. So that to
acknowledge Christ, and to believe in him, is all one in the language of holy
Scripture, and to follow and go after Christ out of sincerity and love and to
believe in him, is the same if the word of God may be judge in this
controversy. So that to go after Christ then, and to follow him cordially and
without worldly ends, both in the language of God and men, is to serve Christ
and to believe in him: and therefore for all the above mentioned reasons, the
world that went after Christ, and the people and multitudes that followed him,
were all believers, and the others that either tarried at home, and followed
their own employments, or opposed him, were unbeleevers.

Now then when a multitulde from Jerusalem followd Christ, and when a world
within Jerusalem went after him, and when all the cursed people (as they called
them) believed in him, not only by the very testimony of the enemies of Christ,
but by the witnesses of the holy Scripture, it is sufficiently apparent that
the World spoke of in the 12. of John, were all believers, amongst the which
also out of same Chapter is proved, That many of the Rulers also believed in
him. So that Master Knollys denying all this, is little better then an
Infidel: For an Infidel can do no more then deny the holy Scripture and the
manifest truths discovered in them; and by this that I have now said, though I
should not add a word more, it is manifest, That there were more believers at
that time in Jerusalem then could all meet in any one place to partake in all
the Ordinances, except a mighty city and a world of believers may all meet
together in one room^ or Congregation to communicate in all Acts of worship to
edification; Which was yet never heard of, nor never believed by any man that
was not bereaved of his senses and all his wit.

But yet for farther Illustration and proof of this truth, that if it be
possible, I may undeceive the poor deluded people, I will add a reason or two
more. The Scripture is so clear in this point, that there were innumerable
believers in Jerusalem, as in the second of the Acts, besides those that were
natives there, it is said there were dwellers in Jerusalem, worshippers, or
devout men, that is to say believers out of all nations under heaven. And all
these says the Scripture had their dwelling there. And without all doubt all
these several Nations, had their several Synagogues in Jerusalem where they
heard the Word of God in their own language, as the Dutch and French and other
Nations, here in London have their churches. And the multitudes of the
inhabitants in Jerusalem at all times, by the relation of the Historians of
those days, were scarce ever less then seven or eight hundred thousands; and
without all controversy the number was now increased* because they daily and
hourly expected the coming of the Messiah whose appearing they every moment
looked for: and therefore all the believing Jews out of all Countries repaired
in multitudes to Jerusalem: So that such numberless numbers, both of the
native Jews and strangers; required a mighty number of Teachers, and a many
places to hear and to be taught in: and that there were above four hundred
Synagogues in Jerusalem, (which are churches in our dialect) the penmen and
Historiographers of those times have recorded it: and all this is probable,
from the numerosity of Preachers and Teachers there, which the holy Scripture
relates, as the Priests and Levits, Scribes, Pharisees, Lawyers, which all
sat in Moses Chair, and all of them diligently taken up in Preaching to the
people and in instructing them, upon whose Ministry by Christ's command all the
multitude and his very followers were to attend Matthew. 23. verse. 1. 2. 3. So
that there was no separation then to be made from the public Assemblies where
the Law and Gospel was taught, nor no gathering of new Churches, under
pretense of easting them into a Church mould according to the New testament
form. Christ and his Disciples were not then so deeply learned as to be in
that high form of Divinity; Christ's followers notwithstanding were all Gospel
Christians, and were all in a Church way, and I am sure of it, in the right way
to heaven, if the way, the truth and the life could teach them the straight way
thither: and yet they all followed the old lights still, Moses and the
Prophets; Christ and his Apostles were all their Masters; we hear then of no
new lights, nor newborn truths, nor of new Church moulds, and yet then the
Kingdom of heaven suffered violence, and the violent took it by force Matthew.
11, 12. they went all well to Heaven, as well and as cheerfully as any of our
Independents with their new lights, and their congregationall way. But this by
the by.

Now I say if there were such multitudes, both of Hearers and Teachers, there
was without all doubt many places for them seveally to hear in, and it stands
withal reason that the several strange Nations had Synagogues by themselves,
and such men to Teach unto them in their own language as they could understand,
or else they could not have been edified, and there is very good ground to
induce men to believe that I now say: For if there was a Synagogue in Jerusalem
of the Libertines, (as there was) that is to say of those that had been slives
and bondmen, but were made free, then can any man believe that all those
several Nations of the freemen, that abounded also with wealth and honor,
(or else if they had not had great riches, they could never have journied so
about from Country to Country and transported their families thither) I say in
all these regardes it stands withal reason that they had their particular
Synagogues also, and therefore that they were in mighty multitudes, so that a
few places could not contain them all to communicate in all Acts of worship,
and therefore of necessity in Christ his time they were distributed into many
and several Congregations; and all this I say besides the holy Scripture very
reason dictats to any man but Master Knollys and I. S. and their fraturnity who
all deny, that there were either in Christ's life time or after his death more
Christians and believers in the church of Jerusalem then could meet in one
place or congregation, notwithstanding the holy Scripture says, that there
was a world of believers there and that all Jerusalem the very City was full of
them.

I refer therefore that which I have now spoke, to the judgment of all the
judicious and learned, whether we ought rather to believe the Holy Scripture of
truth, which was indicted by the Spirit of truth, or Master Knollys who says
and writes the contrary by the spirit of error* And this shall suffice to have
spoke for proof of my first proposion, to wit that the world that went after
Christ were believers, which Master Knollys most fondly and impiously denies.

The second proposition remaining to be proved is this, that there was a world
of believers in the Church of Jerusalem, and that they were inhabitants there:
Now howsoever by the proving of my former proposition, this latter also was
included in it, and proved likewise as all the places above cited do
sufficiently show; for the place, where the word that followed Christ dwelt, is
said to be Jerusalem; and if we but consult with the holy Scripture, especially
the Gospel of Saint John, we shall again and again meet with many testimonies
there besides those I have above quoted to prove the same; so that it may be
thought a needless work in particular to prove this second proposition, seeing
it is already evinced in the former; yet because Mr Knollys has made them two
propositions, and has peremptorily delivered it, that there was not a world of
believers in the Church of Jerusalem: I will, to gratify him and to satisfy
any that will be satisfied, prove this proposition also distinctly and
severally by it self: viz. That there was a world of believers in Jerusalem,
and that they were inhabitants there. For proof of this the 12. chapter of
Saint John and the 29. verse, decla^es it saying, behold the world is gone
after him: This world was at Jerusalem and inhabitants there, and well known to
the Scribes and Pharisees; which is yet farther ratified out of the 7. chapter
ver. 48. where the people that are called accursed had their dwelling, for they
were known to the high Priests, Scribes and Pharisees, which they could not
have been had they not been Inhabitants; which is yet more clear from the 21.
of Matthew; where it is manifest, that not only the men of Jerusalem but that
the very children cried Hosanna to the son of David; and it is well known to all
men what children do ordinarily in a public way, it was well approved of by
their parents who likewise cried, Blessed is he that comes in the name of the
Lord: as it was here in London at the beginning of the parliament, when the king
came into the city to seek for the 5 Members, there was not a woman or a child
that had a head as big as a crab, but cried for the Privileges of Parliament,
and commonly as the cock crows, so crows the hen and the chickens. And by all
probability it was at that time in Jerusalem, in respect of Christ, as it was
then here in respect of the Parliament; the generality of all the inhabitants
believed in him and honored him, as the people generally in the city did the
Parliament; which is yet more evident from the great indignation and wrath of
the Priests and Scribes who were displeased to see the wonderful things he
did, and especially that they heard the children crying in the Temple saying,
Hosanna to the son of David; by which they well perceived that the children
spoke no otherwise then their fathers would have them, and that the whole city
of Inhabitants were such as believed in him. Yea the second of the Acts adds a
great deal of strength to this argument where it is said, That there were
devout men dwellers at Jerusalem out of all the Nations under Heaven besides
the Inhabitants that were Natives. But the eleventh of Mar. puts all out of
doubt, for that chapter speaks plainly of all the Inhabitants and Dwellers in
Jerusalem as well as of the strangers that came to the Feast, where it is said
there were two mighty parties, either of which so awed the Scribes, chief
Priests and all the enemies of Christ, that they durst not meddle with him, and
the one of them was such as adhered unto Christ and believed his doctrine, so
that although Christ's enemies sought to destroy him, yet they feared him,
because, says the Scripture, ver. 17. all the people were astonished at his
doctrine, that is all the people approved of it, and believed in him, for he
taught as one having authority Matthew. 7. The other party were John the Baptists
Disciples all believers too; for it is there asserted, that all men compted
John that he was a prophet indeed, ver. 32. And this party also kept the chief
Priests the Scribes and the Elders, Christ's capital enemies, in such awe, as
they durst not attempt any thing against Christ; and all these were inhabitants
of Jerusalem: For it is said in the 28 verse, that all the people were
astonished at his doctrine: and it is said ver. 32. that all men counted John a
Prophet indeed: Now then if all the people of Jerusalem and all the men of
Jerusalem, these two mighty parties and both believers be put together, and
were inhabitants there as ^he Scripture relates, besides the strangers that
came up to the Feast, then there was a world of believers in the Church of
Jerusalem; and they were inhabitants there: For the place where these Scribes
and high Priests were, and where Christ then was, and where all those people
were, was in Jerusalem, and all the people well known to the Rulers and
Pharisees to be Inhabitants there: So that all men now may see the futility and
vanity of Mr Knollys his denial of my arguments, and may also behold the force
and power of truth which asserteth, That there were more believers in
Jerusalem, then could all meet in any one place, and that in Christ's time,
unless a world of believers and those inhabitants can meet together in any one
place or congregation to enjoy all acts of worship to edification; which is a
grollery, yea madness to suppose or think. And this shall serve for answer to
what Mr Knollys out of his impious ignorance had to reply against my arguments
for the enervating of them. And now I come to I. S. his answer to all my
foregoing arguments, by which he would persuade the poor ignorant people, That
there was not such a number of Believers in Jerusalem, but that they might all
meet in one place: For this must necessarily be the scope of his discourse, or
else it is nothing to the purpose or against my arguments; which were to prove,
There were more believers in Jerusalem and that in Christ's time then could
possibly meet together in any one Congregation to partake in all Ordinances.

The reader may remember that in his former reply, he seemed not to doubt
concerning the number of those that were baptized, only he denied that those
that were baptized by John, were Christians, and that they were cast into a
Church mould after the New Testament form, much less that they were members
of one Christian Church at Jerusalem; these are his own words and by this he
thought to overthrow that argument: Now here he uses another method; tacitly
denying the Minor of all my Syllogismes; and the reason of his denial is,
because as he speaks, I made false musters; he thinks me, it seems, like the
Independents, who would persuade the simple that all are Independent; and
amongst other things he says that I gave the Independents occasion shrewdly to
suspect my ignorance. But I will set down his whole babble at larg and in his
own terms and words, and his full answer to all my last arguments as it is
page 9, 10. of his Pamphlet. His words are these.

But note (says he) an absurdity in the sequel of the discourse, where the
Doctor having got a multiplying glass in his hand, goes on to make strange
discoveryes of the increase of Christian believers. page 36. he tells us, that
Christ made many more Disciples and Believers then John, and added daily unto
the Church, that was then in Jerusalem, such as should be saved. Here Is two
Paradoxes: First that Christ made more Disciples then John: Out of whom should
he make them? when as John had swept all along with him, as you affirm before
page 32. and not taking it Synecdochically (what ever you determine of it
here). Secondly that Christ should add daily to the Church that was in
Jerusalem; is not this a mavelous anticipation and mistake to apply that
which was done by the Disciples after Christ's ascension* Acts 2. last, unto the
ministry of Christ himself? and yet in the sequel you reckon this to the
Apostles also expressly page 56. Judge if here be not false musters* And let me
tell you, you give us occasion shrewdly to suspect your ignorance (to say no
worse) to talk of a Church in Jerusalem, besides the national church of the
Jews in the life time of our Savior. Thus he.

If I should discover all the errors that are in this reply, I might make a
very large volume: but in regard that all learned men will easily perceive the
vanity, childishness and horrid impiety of the man in the very reading of it:
I shall not be so larg in my answer as otherwise I had thought to have been:
and yet before I come to it, I cannot but complain of the dishonesty of the man
that thus curtaileth my arguments every where, not plainly setting them down,
that the people may see my reasons; but this is the ordinary way of his
disputing who conceales the truth from the ignorant and simple that he may the
better poison them with his errors and noveltyes. After the very same manner
deals my brother Burton with me, as we shall see in its due place, who
passing by all my arguments not so much as mentioning any one of them, makes a
rombobombo Syllogism of his own, which as I suppose he fetched out of the
howling wilderness of America, and then with Phocions hatchet, that carnal
weapon, he fights with his own shadow, and vapors like a conqueror as I. S.
does here.

But now for answer briefly, I affirm that I. S. in confuting of my arguments,
by which I proved that there were more converted by Christ and his Disciples
and the Apostles Ministry in Jerusalem then by John the Baptist; and therefore
that they could not all meet in one place or Congregation to enjoy all Acts of
worship, I say in his confuting of my arguments he does not so much dispute
against me, as he does against Saint John the Evangelist and the very
Scripture; for the discoveries I made by my multiplying glass (as he
ridiculously speaks) of the increase of Christian believers, were no false
musters, (as he childishly scibleth) for I discovered only and declare unto all
men that increase of Christian believers in Jerusalem that the holy Word of God
asserteth, John the 4. where it is recorded, verse. 1. 2. That Christ made more
Disciples and believers then John; and therefore added daily to the Church that
was then in Jesusalem, such as should be saved; for Christ came to save the
lost sheep of the house of Israel: Now the making of more Disciples is the
adding of more to the church: and this the Scripture holds out not only to me
but to all intelligible Christians, and therefore it was no error in me to
affirm the same: So that whiles I. S. labors to confute my Arguments, he
fights indeed against the Evangelist that affirms that Christ made mo
Disciples then John.

But says he, here are two Paradoxes. First, that Christ made mo Disciples
then John.

The second, that Christ should add daily to the Church that was then in
Jerusalem.

These in I. S. his opinion are paradoxes, that is matters of Ludibry in his
dialect. Yet both these truths I spoke of, are clear out of the Word of God,
and therefore whiles he wounds me, he vulnerateth Saint John and blasphemeth,
for he gives the Spirit of God the lie, and denies the Scripture that asserts
that Christ made mo Disciples then John, and therefore added more unto the
church: for of unbelievers and of enemies they were made Disciples, Christians
and friends; and therefore taken out of the world and brought into Christ's fold
and church, and by that work of conversion they were added to it; as he that
should this day take any of our Ministers and faithful Pastors sheep out of
their folds and steal them away, (as too too many of the Independent Ministers
daily do) and bring them into their new congregations, may not that Independent
Minister, without any marvilous anticipation or mistake, or without any error,
truly be said to have added so many more to his new church, when the number of
his members is thus increased? And if another Minister be joined with him as a
teacher in that congregation or succed him, if he also shall run plundering
about both city and country, as a gifted brother, and bring in a great many
more poor silly sheep into his fold then the other did, as they are notable
cunning thieves, may not it truly be said of him and that without any marvilous
anticipation, and mistake, that he also added unto the church, when still the
the number is daily increased? I am confident that all men of sound reason will
say there is no error in all this! And therefore I hope by all the judicious I
shall be free from any blame or error, in that I said those that were converted
by Christ and made Disciples by his Ministry, were added to the church and to
those that were formerly converted by the Baptist. But says J. S. how could
Christ make mo Disciples then John? Out of whom should he make them says he,
when John had swept all along with him as the Doctor affirms page 32. Not
taking it Synecdochically? Thus he shows his acumen or rather his vanity in
contradicting the Scripture and abusing me. For he that has ever read my
book, and looks but in the 31 page toward the lower part, shall find these
words, That Jerusalem went out to John and was baptized; it must therefore by a
Synecdoche be taken for all the common people promiscuously, or for a mighty
multitude of all sorts, and of all ranks of people, and of all professions, as
Publicans, Soldiers and the ordinary inhabitants: These were my very words
there. And therefore I. S. saying that I took not the word Synecdochically,
belyeth me, befooleth himself and abuses the reader, and fights with his own
fancy. But for answer to his whibling Cavil, I say Christ converted those he
made his Disciples and Scholars, out of the remmant or remainder of those that
were yet unconverted in Jerusalem, and in that work he added more unto that
church, which though the mother church, as the other were Daughter churches
through all Judah, yet it was but a particular church, in that National church;
for the being a National church does not exclude as this man fondly conceits,
particular churches from bearing the name of church, no more then the Catholic
visible church does deny the name of church to any particular churches, because
they being similar parts do partake both of the name and nature of the whole,
as all the learned and Orthodox Divines do hold. And therefore taking Jerusalem
Synecdochically as I then did, it is also here to be so taken, and then Christ
did make mo Disciples out of the people of Jerusalem that remained yet
unconverted, then John had done before him, and added them unto the church at
Jerusalem, that particular mother church in that National church, which as it
was at that time in respect of moral worship governd by a College of Elders
or Presbyters as the Scripture everywhere relates, which is called a church,
so it was ever after governed by a Presbytery, all those Synagogues and
several churches being all combind together under the rule and government of
that Presbytery, and making all but one church within its precinct, after which
manner all the other city churches throught Judea following the example of this
mother church were ever to be governed to the end of the world; and this is
indeed the true chuch mould, according to the New Testament form, that all
churches ought to be cast into, if we will imitate the government of the mother
church Jerusalem, and all the daughter churches both in Judea and Israel as
that of Samaria and into this mould did the Baptist and Christ cast all they
converted. Therefore when I said that Christ made more Disciples in Jerusalem
then John, and that he added them unto that Church, I speak nothing but that I
have warrant for out of the good Word of God and the Scripture of truth, and
which is sufficiently backed and corroborated also by all sound reason: And
therefore, it is wickedness in I. S. to say that in so speaking it is a
paradox. For if it be a matter of ludibre in me and a paradox to say that
Christ made more Disciples then John, Then likewise it is a paradox and matter
of laughter in the holy Evangelist: For he in formal words says, That Jesus
made and baptized more Disciples then John. I refer my self therefore unto
the judgment of all honest* godly minded men, whether Saint John be not as
well censured and traduced by this vain and wicked fellow as my self, and
whether in his so speaking he does not give the Spirit of God the lie.

And his second paradox is as vain and childish and impious as this, where he
says, is not this a marvelous anticipation and mistake, to apply that which
was done by the Disciples after Christ's ascension unto the ministry of Christ
himself? For answer let I. S. take notice that in saying Christ made ^mo
Disciples then the Baptist, and in making them added them unto the Church at
Jerusalem, There is no marvelous anticipation or mistake, as I. S. unlearnedly
inferrs; for in giving unto Christ his due honor and affirming he added unto
the Church that was then in Jerusalem, I have both the Scripture and reason for
it, and in so speaking I detract nothing from the honor and dignity of the
Disciples; for it is no error in any man, to apply that unto Christ Ministry,
viz. the conversion of men and the adding of them to the church, which work,
properly and primarily belongs unto him, though in a Metaphorical sense it
may also be attributed unto the Apostles and Ministers of the Gospel. And
therefore the mistake is in I. S. and not in me; for he applies that unto the
Disciples which was done by Christ, for it is said the Lord added unto the
Church daily such as should be saved. It was done by Christ, and not the work
of the Apostles, but instrumentally; and therefore I. S. is a prevaricator, in
many respects sinning both against God and man: for here, he gives that honor
which is peculiar unto Christ, unto the Disciples; and then he falsely accuses
me of an error and mistake when there is none, and then would make me guilty of
his own sins, which I am free from, as all they that read my book in the page
quoted by him may see; and this is not all, but in this also he is a great
offender, where by this juggling craft of his, he labors to seduce the poor
people. But for farther answer, I have learned of Christ himself, that the
Disciple is not above his Master; and therefore if I. S. will apply the work
of conversion and adding of Disciples to the Church, unto the Ministry of the
Apostles after Christ's ascension as he does, I do not conceive it any paradox
in me or any mistake or Anticipation to apply that work unto Christ's Ministry
in his life time: for the Master is ever more to be honored then the servant
as all reason will dictate: and therefore there was no paradox in me in giving
that honor unto Christ that belonged unto him who was the Master: for he came
to save the lost sheep of the house of Israel, and so he did, gathering daily
some of them into his fold, and adding many more sheep to those that John the
Baptist had converted: and therefore I do not think it a paradox in me to give
as much honor to the Master, as I. S. does to his Disciples and servants: for
the honor of conversion and adding unto the church is a work primarily
belonging to the Lord and Prince of the Church Jesus Christ. It is great
rashness therefore* and very unchristian dealing in I. S. to make me a
subject of his scorn and ludibry for well doing, and to make that a sin and
error in me, which is a virtue; for to give Christ his due honor is a virtue;
now the honor of converting of men, and adding them unto the Church is his
proper work, and it peculiarly belongs unto him first and last to add unto
the Church such as should be saved: The Apostles were but the Instruments.
Paul may plant, and Apollos may water, but God the Lord of his Church gives
the increase, 1 Cor. 3. He makes the Church grow and multiply into mighty
numbers, and adds daily unto it, by the mighty working of his Spirit, and it is
mavelous in our eyes: And therefore I. S. is severely to be censured and that
deservedly, not only for abusing his brethren, making them offenders when they
are not, but chiefly for anticipating that honor which is only due unto
Christ and God, and giving it and attributing it unto men, as it is the daily
practice of the Independents to give the glory of all victories which only
belongs unto God, to the party which they call the praying army; and so he
ascribes that honor that peculiarly belongs unto God and Christ, unto the
Apostles, which indeed pertains unto them only as they are instruments, and
accuses me as of an anticipation and mistake, saying, I ascribed that unto the
Ministry of Christ himself, which belonged unto the Disciples of Christ after
his ascension. It seems to I. S. that I am a very erroneous man, and very
unjust, that I give that honor unto Christ himself, and ascribe that work unto
him, which says I. S. belonged to the Apostles. But if this be an error, in
saying that Christ added unto the Church as Jerusalem, before his death and
after his death, such as should be saved, I will live and die in this error;
for this is only the work of God; none can come unto God but by Christ, he is
the door, the way, the truth and the life, the author and finisher of our
faith, that begins and ends the work of conversion; the Apostles and all other
Ministers are but his instruments, he is the hand of god, and the arm of the
Lord that does the work in the hearts of the people. Whether therefore I. S.
or my self be the most erroneous in their opinions, and speak most Paradoxes
about this point, I leave it to the censure and judgment of those that have
more skill in Divinity then I. S. or any of his Fra ternity.

But should I grant unto I. S. that the Apostles after Christ's Ascension had of
themselves, and by their own power, without any help from Christ added many
unto the Church, which I yet never did; does this I pray in the opinion of any
wise man exclude Christ's adding unto the Church before his death? or was it
such an obstacle or hindrance to his work of converting men, and adding them
unto the Church, that because it is said of the Apostles after Christ's death
that the Lord by them added to the Church, therefore it is an error or mistake,
to apply that unto the Ministry of Christ that was done to the Disciples? I am
confident none that are not senseless will say there is any error in so
speaking, neither is there such a gulf between these two things, but that
they may well meet, Christ may add and the Apostles also: For the same reason
that made Saint Luke in the second of the Acts say the Lord added unto the
Church daily such as should be saved, confirms me in my opinion, that as it
was the Lords work after his ascension to add men unto the Church, so it was
his work in his life time, for he was yesterday and to day the same for ever*
always the author and finisher of our faith, and therefore it was no
anticipation or mistake in me, nor no Paradox as I. S. fondly says, to
conclude that those that were converted by Christ's Ministry, were added to
those that were converted by John, so that there was addition upon addition,
and it was no sin in me to say that of Christ then that was afterward
ascribed unto him in formal words; for although the very words be not expressed,
^et that is set down that is equivalent unto them; for it is said Christ made
more Disciples then John, it was his work, so that the disputation now is not
about words and terms of expression, but about the substance of things, viz.
about believers and Members of the Church of Jerusalem, which when the
Scripture holds out unto us, affirming that Christ made more disciples then
John, and that at Jerusalem, then any rational man may without any anticipation
or mistake, or any error or Paradox conclude that these new Converts were added
then unto the Church as well as those that were converted after his Ascension
were said to be added to the Church; and he that with the eye of understanding*
should behold what the Scripture says, and shall but duly consider my
Arguments drawn from thence will not gather, that I make false Musters, as
this fresh water soldier I. S. childishly speaks; but on the contrary he
will shrewdly suspect the ignorance, to say no worse (that I may use some of
his Rhetoric) of this novice in Divinity, and will also evidently gather that
the Church at Jerusalem was a particular Church in that National Church of the
Jews, and that in the time of our Savior; and withal he will conclude from
the premises, and all that I have now said by way of answer to Master Knollys,
and this I. S. that there were more believers in Jerusalem then could all meet
in any one place or a few, and that in John the Baptists and Christ's days, and
all this without any mistake or Paradox, but from very good reason, which if
this Puny Divine I. S. had been guilty of, he would never have been so
unadvised as to have opposed the Scripture it self, and all solid and learned
men in speaking so rashly.

And now I refer all that I have hitherto said by way of reply to Master
Knollys and I. S. to the judgment of the learned to consider, whether there is
either honesty or reason in these men, who to maintain their fond errors, will
deny or affirm any thing, though never so repugnant to the Scripture, and to
the very light of reason, and all this only to mislead the ignorant people; and
this is all that I. S. has to say against my Arguments drawn from the Baptism
of John and Christ's and his Apostles Ministry, by which I proved, that in the
very days of John the Baptist and in Christ's time there were then many more
believers in the Church of Jerusalem then could all meet in any one
Congregation.

Now for the following Arguments, by which I proved it was much more impossible
for them to meet together, after there were daily added so many thousands to
the Church after Christ's Ascension by the miracles and Ministry of the blessed
Apostles, and Christ's seventy Disciples, and the other Ministers of those
times: I. S. does not so much as meddle with them, but says page 10. That he
had thought to have bestowd as much time on the rest, but that other
considerations forbad him; and because (as he says) there were those so able
already engaged in the Dispute: these are his words. And in his wise Epistle to
me, he says that his health forbade him. Now what a vain fellow is this to
vapor that he had whipped me out of the field, and beat up my quarters, and
quartered my book, and taken hold of the pillars of my discourse and shaken
them, and overthrown my building, as ye may see at large in the title page,
and in his Epistle to me? and yet in the tenth page of his Book the place
above quoted, and in the same Epistle he confesses, his indisposition of body
and other considerations forbad him to bestow any more time upon the Book, and
says in express terms he left the work to others; whether therefore this be
not a worthless and witless Fellow to brag and glory of a victory, and
beating up of a man's quarters, when he has only flung a squib or two at them
a far off, and then cowardly and basely ran away pretending sickness as
fresh water soldiers commonly use to do, I leave it to the judgment of
others to consider. But of I. S. I may truly say thus much, that he is a mere
quagmire of ignorance, and wicked impudency, and far unfit for any serious or
solid employment, much less to be a Captain or Commander in Christ's Armies. I
do not deny, but he may make a pretty soldier at an Independent Festivity;
and I believe that were it to shake or pull down the pillars of a March-pane,
or to beat up the quarters of a Custard, to break up a Wood-cock, or to storm
a Venison Pastie, or to plunder a Banquet, that in the Militia of good cheer he
would do very well: but notwithstanding I would have I. S. being now in a
course of Physic and of an infirm body, to use some moderation when he comes
where good cheer is stirring; and therefore because he thinks that my
judgment in such matters may be worthy of some account, for so he intimates
in his learned Epistle; I would advise him for a time to feed upon Snayl pyes
and Mushromes, and of those kind of creatures he may find abundance about the
Wels at Tunbridge; that low kind of diet is best for him; and if he follows
this now in the spring but some weeks, and drinks lustily of the waters there,
they will wash him till he be clean and fit for my fingring again, and free
him from his Frenzy, and make him as clean and neat, as he says my
Postscript he left in those waters will be. And this is the counsel I give
unto I. S. gratis, for all his learned pains in beating up my quarters. And so
I have done with him at this time. I have now a few things yet to answer to
what Master Knollys has to say to those Arguments I raise from the Ministry of
the Apostles, and the multitudes converted by them after Christ's Ascension,
which ye shall find punctually set down in their due places.

I will now therefore take a survey of the numbers that were added to the
Church, and to those Believers that were converted by John's and Christ's
Ministry, by the powerful preaching and miracles of the Apostles after Christ's
Ascension; and from the diverse places I shall gather out of the Acts of the
Apostles, frame such arguments as shall make it yet more evident, that there
were such multitudes in the Church of Jerusalem, as they could not all possibly
meet together, at one time, or in one place or room, or in one Congregation,
to enjoy all the Ordinances, and partake in all acts of worship* but must
necessarily be distributed into diverse congregations and assemblies, if they
would all be edified, and that before the persecution we read of in the Acts
3. 1. and in the persecution, and after the persecution. But before I come to
the proof of the particulars, I must answer to some objections made by our
brethren the Independents; the first of the which is, out of the first chapter
of the Acts of the Apostles, from which they endeavor to prove, that the
number and multitude of Believers in the Church of Jerusalem was not so great,
but that they might all meet in one room or place, and in one congregation to
partake in all acts of worship. The words on which they ground their Arguments
are these: and in those days Peter stood up in the midst of the Disciples
and said, (the number of the names together, were about an hundred and twenty)
men and brethren, etc. From whence they conclude, that the whole Church in
Jerusalem, that is to say, all the Believers, did meet in one place; for in
this number of names they would have all the whole Church in Jerusalem included
or confined; which to more is a wonder, that such learned men as many of them
are, should so argue; for this must be the scope of the Argument if they intend
to prove, That the whole Church in Jerusalem and all the Believers there, were
not so numerous, but that they might all meet in one place, and partake in all
acts of worship, and that these in Peter's Company were all that Church, and all
the Believers that were in Jerusalem: this, I say, must of necessity be their
meaning, or else their Argument concludes nothing to the purpose. The
invalidity of the which, I am most confident will by and by evidently appear
(though all the former Arguments to the contrary should not so much as be
thought of) and withal, it will also be obvious to any judicious man, that in
all respects their Argument makes much against themselves. For if I should
grant unto them, That at this instant of time that that place speaks of the
whole Church in Jerusalem, or the number then of Believers were no more but
that one place might have contained them all for the enjoying of all Ordinances
(which I cannot do, for innumerable reasons, and some of them above specified)
yet it does not follow nor evince, that after there were daily such additions
of Believers, and such multitudes of new Converts added unto the Church, that
then also, one place or room could contain them all; and that they might
still meet in one Congregation, and all together partake in all acts of
worship. For there is a vast difference between one hundred and twenty names
(for there was no more in this assembly) and in many ten thousands, which all
the World knows could not be contained in any one place of Jerusalem to
communicate in all the Ordinances, though that place had equalized the most
magnificent Structure that ever the World yet saw; especially, they could not
have all met there to edification, for they could not have all heard and
understood: and we know that in the Church, all must be done to edification,
and this would rather have hindered the mutual edification of the assembly, and
have brought a confusion, rather then any profit or benefit unto them. But the
truth is, the number of names here spoken of, if we will go to the genuine
interpretation of the place, not to speak of the universal consent of all the
learned Interpreters, who gather that in this assembly, the seventy Disciples
the Lord Jesus sent out to preach through all Judes, and all those other
Ministers of the Gospel that had been Christ's, and Saint John the Baptists
Disciples, every one of the which was thought fit for learning and divine
knowledge, to succeed Judas in his Apostleship and to be a Disciple; all these
or most of them, or such like, were those that are included in the number of
names. I say, to omit this Interpretation of all the most Orthodoxe Divines,
and their universal agreement and harmony in their learned Commentaries about
this portion of Scripture, the very words themselves following show they were
select and eminent men, and men of note, and Disciples of longest standing; and
all of them or the most of them Ministers and Preachers themselves; and were
indeed the Presbyters of the Church, to whom with the Apostles, the power of
ruling was committed; and who within themselves, and without the consent of the
common multitude of Beleivers, had power to o^daine their own Officers, and
that by their own authority as we may see, Verse. 21. 22. Wherefore, says S.
Peter, of these men which have companied with us all the time that the Lord
Jesus went in and out among us, beginning from the baptism of John, unto that
same day he was taken up from us, must one be ordained to be a witness with us
of the resurrection. And they appointed two, etc. and they prayed, etc. and
they gave forth the Lots* etc. all businesses here were managed and carried in
an Aristocraticall and Presbyterian way, and all was done by a joint consent
and the common council of them all. Here we find none of the multitude of
the people, though Believers; here were no Women that gave forth their lots.
Neither does the Apostle Peter say, Men, Mothers, and Brethren; or Men, Women,
and Brethren; or Men, Brethren, and Sisters; but Men and Brethren. For
howsoever in the foregoing Verses it is said, that these (meaning the Apostles
and Elders) all continued with one accord in prayer and supplication, with the
women, and Mary the Mother of Jesus, and with his Brethren, by which they
fitted themselves for the Ministry after they should receive the Holy Ghost;
though I say, they joined with them in those duties of humiliation and prayer,
which any women may do, in the society and company of godly Ministers: yet when
they went about other acts of Church government, as choosing of an Apostle,
then the Apostles and Elders only by themselves, to whom the power of the
Keys was given, ordered that business, and left the Women to their private
devotions, and their several employments: for in this action of giving forth
their lots, there is no mention of the Women. And it is manifest from the Text
it self, that this choosing of Matthias was at another time, and without all
doubt, upon a set day for this purpose; for it is said Verse 15. And in those
days Peter stood up in the midst of the Disciples, and said Men and
Brethren. Here was only Disciples, Men and Brethren, and no Sisters. Till Pope
Joans time, and our days, Peter's Keys never hung at any woman's Girdle; and we
hear not in Scripture that they had any voice in choosing of Church*officers,
and admi ting of members into the Church, or casting out of any, till these
unhappy times; an usurpation not beseeming that Sex, as afterward in its due
place I hope to make appear. But this by the way.

Now to the matter in hand, I say it is apparent to any that will not shut
their eyes, that all those, or most of them that were in Peter's company, and at
that time met together, were capable of an Apostleship, and such as were the
most eminent of all Christ's followers, and such as were best instructed in
Christian Religion, as having been bred up in the doctrine of Saint John the
Baptist, and under the Ministry of Christ himself, the Prophet of his Church;
and therefore they were the Teachers of the Church and people, who were their
flock which they all fed in common: And from thence it argues, That the
multitude of Believers in Jerusalem was not only a distinct company from them,
but that it was exceeding great and numerous, that had so many Pastors and
Teachers over them: For if they had been but so small a company as is here
mentioned, and that the whole Church had consisted but of sixscore names, then
the Pastors exceed the number of the flock; which is not only absurd to
think, but against the evident truth of the holy Scriptures, which relate unto
us multitudes upon multitudes that were daily converted by the ministry of
John the Baptist, and of Christ and his Apostles, and added unto the Church
before this their meeting.

So that by this I have now said, it is most clear and evident, that all or
most of these, were the most eminent Ministers of the Gospel, and the
Presbytery of the Church. But in this, that our Brethren do acknowledge, That
this assembly here spoke of were the church, it makes as much against them, and
greatly for us: for it is manifest* from the Text, that they were the Ministers
and Preachers of the Gospel, and in that they give them the name and title of
the Church, it follows that the representative body and Presbytery is a
Church, and that to them only belongs the power and authority of the Keys:
according to that of our Savior in Matthew. 18* 17, 18. Tell it unto the Church,
etc. and whatsoever ye bind on Earth shall be bound in Heaven; and whatsoever
ye loose on Earth shall be loosed in Heaven. By which words, all authority is
put into the true Ministers hands; so that they only have the power and
authority of ordaining Pastors and Presbyters among themselves; as Paul
sufficiently declares in his Epistles to Timothy and Titus: and that they have
not only the title of the Church, but a Charter and Warrant also granted unto
them of ruling and governing the Church, and of ordaining Church*officers, and
that by joint and common consent among themselves, without the help and
assistance of the people and congregations under them, which by God were never
joined in commission with them.

And howsoever Paul in the 1. of the Corinthians, chap. 6. for the taking away
the scandal in going to Law before unbeleevers, gave them liberty to make
choice of somethat were least esteemed in the Church, for the deciding of their
controversies; yet that did not authorize them to make choice of all other
Church Officers; for he limits them to go no farther then to the choice of such
as are of least esteem. And howsoever likewise, the Apostles in the 6. of the
Acts, to free themselves from all impediments, that they might the better
attend upon their Ministeries, and that without interruption they might Preach
the Gospel, gave them liberty to choose their Decons and Deconesses: yet they
prescribe the Rule by which they shall choose them, and keep the authority of
ordaining them still in their own hands: Look you out among you, say they, men
of honest report, full of the holy Ghost, and wisdom, whom we may appoint
over this business, and when they had chose such, says the Scripture, They
put them before the Apostles, and when they had prayed, they laid their hands
on them. So that howsoever they gave unto them a Liberty to choose, yet it was
with limitation, not an absolute liberty; for if they had chose men that had
not been of approved honesty, well gifted, and wise, and qualified as they
appointed, it was arbitrary in the Apostles to reject their choice; for they
keep the power of Ordination still in their own hands, and to them it did
belong to ratify their Election; so that the people had not the power of
Ordination then, nor have not to this day, no not of the meanest Deacon or
Deaconesse, that belongs only unto the Presbytery, much less have they power
of ordaining Presbyters.

Indeed for the deciding of controversies and differences, they have a liberty
given them of making choice of some petty men amongst them* and that they may
do without the Presbytery; but they have no power of Ordination. Neither did I
ever yet read in the Sacred Scriptures that the people or Congregation had any
hand at all in choosing of Ministers and Presbyters, neither were they fit for
that employment; for it is one thing to judge of man's external carriage and
manners, and another thing of his sufficiency for his indowments and abilities
of learning, and that men of learning and knowledge only can do, and the Sons
of the Prophets; and it is in special given in charge to the Presbyters and
Ministers, as it is manifest in the Epistles of Paul to Timothy and Titus, 1 Timothy 4. 14. Tit. 1. And they only know how rightly to examine them, in the
knowledge of the tongues and Sciences, and such Arts as are requisite, besides
the knowledge of the holy Scripture; all which are little enough for the making
of a Minister complete and fit for that Sacred employment. And all the
Primitive Churches in the Apostles times willingly submitted themselves to what
the Presbytery then did, and assented to their choice, as in the 14. of the
Acts verse. 23. it appears.

But I say, in that our brethren do acknowledge this company this hundred and
twenty names, to be a church, and in that it is also sufficiently manifest,
that they are considered in a distinct notion from the people, which also in
the holy Scriptures, when they are joined with their Ministers, are called a
church (as is frequently to be seen through the acts of the Apostles) and in
that it does abundantly appear, by what has formerly been spoken, and will yet
in the following discourse be farther elucidated, that there were many
congregations and Assemblies of believers in the Church of Jerusalem, and that
they were all governed by the joint consent and Common Council of the Apostles
and Presbyters, to whom the Apostles themselves were subject; who were sent
this way and that way by their direction, and to whom they were to give an
account of their Ministry, as we see in diverse places in the Acts, and were
ordered by them, what they should do, and also made their appeals unto the
Apostles and Presbyters in any business of common concernment: I say, in all
these respects, it is evident, That the Church of Jerusalem consisted of many
Congregations and Assemblies, and was yet but one Church, and that governed by
a Presbyterian Government, and by a Common Council of Ministers, to whose
order all the several Congregation were to submit themselves; And therefore
this their Argument makes much against them and greatly for us. And this shall
suffice to have answered to this their first Objection; which, to speak the
truth, is that that carries the most appearance of any Argument they produce
to prove their Assertion and tenent: for all their other Objections raised from
the several meetings of the Apostles and people, and from the multitude
coming to them about the ordaining of Deacons, by which they would persuade
the world, That the company of Believers in the Church of Jerusalem was not so
numerous at any time, but that they might all meet in one congregation, or in
one place, to partake of in acts of worship; they consist most of them in
Homonymies, and mere Paralogismes, which indeed beseem not the gravity of
reverend men, and in the weighty matters of Divinity, would be undecent in a
sucking Sophister; and therefore are much more blameworthy in them, who by such
fallacies labor to amuse the people, to the disturbance of the whole Church
and Kingdom, and alienating the affections of Brethren one from another.

I shall briefly run over them. Acts 2. 46. where it is related, that the
Believers and new Converts continued daily with one accord in the Temple, and
breaking bread from house to house. From these words the Brethren conclude,
That the multitude of Believers was not so great* but that they might all meet
in one congregation, and in one place, to partake in all acts of worship; for
here in express words, the place where they met is specified, and it is said
to be the Temple. I appeal to the wisdom of any learned man, or but of a
rational Christian, whether this be a candid or ingenuous way of arguing; That
because 3000. Christians that were newly converted might meet together in the
Temple of Jerusalem, Ergo, all that believed in Jerusalem that were converted
by John the Baptist, and all that believed by Christ's ministry and miracles,
and all that were converted by the Apostles, and the seventy Disciples before
Christ's sufferings, and all that were after his Resurrection converted for
twenty years together, by the Ministry of all the Apostles, and all the other
Ministers of the Gospel, they might yet all meet in any one place or
Congregation, to partake in all acts of worship, and to edification. I refer
this, I say, to the consideration of any Learned man, or any intelligible
Christian, whether this be an ingenuous way of arguing. I believe if one should
argue against them after the same manner, they would laugh at him.

If one should thus dispute; Within these seven years, all the Independents
continued daily with one accord in such a place, and they all met together in
one congregation: Ergo, there is but one congregation, and but one Church still
of Indeperdents in London, and they all meet together in one congregation.
Would not the Brethren make themselves as merry with such a way of disputing,
as they have made others sad with their way of arguing? yes doublesse.

The truth is, their way of arguing is not to their own honor, to speak but
favorably of it, as will appear. For should I grant unto them, that at that
time this place of Scripture speaks of, there had been no more Believers in
Jerusalem, but those hundred and twenty names specified in the first Chapter of
the Acts, and these three thousand new Converts; and accord also unto them,
that all these did meet together in on place, and in one congregation, and did
partake in all the Ordinances, which notwithstanding I cannot grant them, for
diverse reasons: for in the same place it is said, That although they continued
daily in the Temple, yet they brake bread from house to house; that is to say,
some of them did daily meet to hear the Word in the Temple, and then followed
their several employments, and others in private, and they had the holy
Communion or Sacrament in several houses; from which it is manifestly evident,
that then when there were newly added to the Church but three thousand
Believers, they had many and several congregations and assemblies; and without
all doubt as the multitudes of Believers increased, they were still distributed
into more congregations: for it is said, They brake bread from house to house;
that is, they had their assemblies and meetings in several houses and places,
besides the Temple* and in those several houses, they had not only the
preaching of the Word and Prayer, but the administration of the Sacrament, and
communicated in all the Ordinances; which they could not do in the Temple, as
afterward will appear: and all that I now say is evident from the 41. Verse of
the same Chapter to the 47.

But I say, should I silence my own reason, and suffer it to speak nothing;
and should I grantto our Brethren, that there were but three thousand, and that
these three thousand Believers might all meet in one congregation, and partake
in all the ordinances to edification: would it follow, that when ten thousand
were added unto them, and twenty thousand more to them, and thirty thousand
more to all these; would any may think or believe, that ten thousand men can
meet in one congregation to edify, and to partake in all the Ordinances, much
less when there is so many thousands more added to them, that they could still
meet in any one place or congregation? I think no man that has not abdicated
his understanding will so conclude. So that all men may see, not only the
weakness of this argumentation, but the strength of truth: For this very
weapon with which they had thought to have defended themselves, and wounded the
Truth, they wound themselves, and overthrow their own tenent; as God willing, I
shall more fully by and by make appear.

But out of Chap. 5. our Brethren conceive they have a very strong and
invincible Argument: where it is related, That after Ananias and Saphira were
miraculously taken away, for lying unto the Spirit of God; It is said, That
great fear came upon all the Church, and upon as many as heard these things.
And by the hands of the Apostles were many signs and wonders wrought among the
people, and they were all with one accord in Solomon's Porch. Ergo, say, they,
the number of Believers in Jerusalem, was not so great, but that they might all
meet together in one congregation; for the place where they did meet, is set
down, viz. in Solomon's Porch: and it is further specified, That they were all
with one accord in that place. This is their Argument faithfully and truly set
down, and with the best advantage for their cause. But to speak the truth,
this kind of arguing has no force in it* neither does it beseem grave men, to
trifle thus, in the matters of God and Religion. For should I grant unto them,
that all the Beleivers that then were in Jerusalem, and had been converted by
John the Baptist, and by Christ, and all his Disciples, before the Passion and
Sufferings of the Lord Jesus Christ; and the three thousand converted by the
first Miracle and Sermon of Peter, after they had received the gift of the Holy
Ghost, and the five thousand after by the second Miracle and Sermon, and after
the new additions of so many multitudes of Believers both of men and women, by
reason of the miracle wrought upon Ananias and Saphira his Wife; and the other
miracles that the fifth Chapter speaks of; should I say, grant that all these
might yet have met in one place, and in any one congregation to communicate in
all the Ordinances, which all reason forbids me to yield to; will it follow,
that when there were additions upon additions, and that of multitudes of
Believers, that they might still meet in any one congregation to edification,
and have communicated in all acts of worship? For in all reason we may
conceive, had we no testimony out of the holy Scripture to back it, that if
eight thousand were converted besides multitudes both of Men and Women, with a
few Miracles and Sermons: and if at the first Preaching of the Gospel after
the Resurrection there was such a great increase, and such a multiplication of
Christians; all understanding, I say, persuades, that in the space of twenty
years, there will be innumerable multitudes added daily to the Church, when the
miraculous working of wonders with the same doctrine still continued* and with
all, the same reason will dictate to any man, That then the whole multitude of
all those Believers could not all meet together in one place, and in one
congregation for edification, to communicate in all Ordinances. So that any
judicious man, without the help of any great Schoole-learning, may perceive the
invalidity and vanity of such argumentations.

And truly were it not that they are Brethren, and that I desire in the spirit
of meekness to deal with them, I would have made it appear, that it is so
poor a way of disputing, that it did not beseem men of gravity, much less of
learning; and that there were many ways to evade the dint of such reasoning,
and to prove the nothingnesse of the Argument, and that by the words of the
Text: the people there spoke of, to be in Solomon's Porch, are to be limited and
confined within the number of those that were converted by the last miracle,
and some other new miracles of the Apostles, which they were then working in
Solomon's Porch; for there is the place where the Apostles and they were
together; and I do acknowledge, that as many as were then, and at that time,
in Solomon's Porch with the Apostles, were of one accord. But does this with any
rational man conclude, that every Believer in Jerusalem, both Men and Women
and all the Christians and Disciples in Jerusalem were then together in
Solomon's Porch, and in one Congregation? I am confident that no wise man will
think so; for without all controversy there were then such multitudes of
Believers in the Church of Jerusalem, as neither many Porches nor many Temples
could have contained their bodies, much less could they have all met in any
one congregation to edify. But I say I will not deal with Brethren so rigidly
as I might, and therefore wave many things that I might justly here utter.

But grant it were so, that now in the beginning of the Christian, church and
if I may so speak in the infancy of it, That all the Believers then in
Jerusalem might all meet together in one place; does it follow that they might
ever so do in succeeding times, when there was such infinite increase of
Christians daily added to the church? all reason will contradict that assertion.
Within this seven years, as all men know, one place and congregation would
have contained all the Independents; but will one place now or ten contain
them? And there is no man as I conceive will deny, but that the Apostles and
those Primitive Ministers, had another manner of converting faculty then our
Brethen; for the Apostles as it is well known did not build upon others
foundations; yea, they took it as a disparagement unto them; for so Saint Paul
in the 15. of the Romans v. 20. affirms. Now our Brethren they build upon
others foundations, and gather the sheep, and them the good and the fat sheep,
with good fleeces on their backs; yea, the Velvit-sheep, and the Plush-sheepe,
and the Satin and Taffity-sheep, out of other Sheepheards folds; and while
they seem to gather Churches, they scatter them, and the poorsheep.

But I will proceed to the other Argument out of the sixth of the Acts, where
it is related, That when the number of the Disciples was multiplied (here we
may take notice of multiplication) There arose a murmuring of the Greeks
against the Hebrews, because the widows were neglected in the daily
ministration. And the Apostles called the multitude of the Disciples unto them,
and gave them liberty to choose their Deacons, and it pleased the whole
multitude, says the Scripture. From thence our brethren conclude, That all the
believers in the Church of Jerusalem came here together to the Apostles, and
were then no more then could all meet in one congregation: as if our brethren
should thus argue; As the wheel-barrow goes rumble, rumble, even so is
Prelaticall Episcopacy better then the Presbyterian Government. But to be
serious: Should I grant unto the Brethren, That at this time, all the believers
that were in the Church of Jerusalem, did then come together, and were all in
one place, and might meet in one congregation; does it follow, when there was a
daily increase of more believers, and that of multitudes of them (as this very
chapter signifies) that then also they might all meet together in one place or
in one congregation in succeeding ages? I suppose no man will think or believe
so But I must confess, that I cannot grant unto them, that by the multitude of
believers here spoke of, is to be understood every individual Christian, or
the greatest part of them, much less that all the whole body of them came
together, and that for warrantable reason to the contrary. For the controversy
and murmuring here spoken of, was not among all the Disciples and believers in
Jerusalem, but only between two Nations of them, viz. between the Greeks and
the Hebrews. Now we are informed out of the second of the Acts verse 5. That
there were dwelling in Jerusalem Jews, devout men, out of every Nation under
heaven: for so in express words, it is said, of the which the Greeks were but
one Nation, and the Hebrews another. So that all the Christians and Believers
of all the other Nations, were of one mind, and in good accord among
themselves, as the foregoing Chapters tell, and were at peace one with another,
so that there was no murmuring amongst them, nor no controversy, contention or
variance, and they all continued quiet in their several houses, and lived in
love, and were none of that multitude here spoken of: so that of necessity, by
the multitude in this place, we are to understand the Greeks only and the
Hebrews; for so in express words it is specified: and this every rational man
can easily perceive.

Again, by multitude here is to be understood not a confused company going in
a tumultuous way, but a considerable number of rational men of each differing
and dissenting party, and such as were called and sent for by the Apostles, as
it is commonly seen in those that go by way of complaint to petition to any
council, they send a competent multitude of understanding and able men, to
grace their cause and to manage the business: and not every particular and
individual person, men and women to negotiate it, which could not be without
mighty confusion, which was not in this multitude: and therefore by multitude
and the whole multitude, we are to understand, that both those parties that
came to negotiate this business, were well satisfied with the Apostles Order,
and they obeyed it: but from hence if any man would infer and conclude, That
every one of the believing Hebrews, and every individual believing Greek, that
was then in Jerusalem, and that all the Greek Church and all the Hebrew Church,
both men and women, not one person excepted were all in one place together
before the Apostles; the whole world would judge, that this man thatshould thus
argue, were very much crased in his brain: but much more would it argue a great
imbecility of wit and judgment in any one, to conclude, That all the believers
in the Church of Jerusalem were there: And unless they can so conclude, the
Argument is nothing to the purpose, nor of any validity to evince and prove the
Assertion of our brethren. But if I should yield unto the brethren, these two
things* the first, That all the believing Greeks and all the believing Hebrews,
none excepted, were all before the Apostles in one place: yet still this will
follow, that all the believers of every several Nation were not in this
multitude and number: for they had nothing to do in the business, for they
were no parties; so that the Argument is nothing to the purpose, but a mere
fallacy to delude unstable souls, and to make them believe that bladders are
Lanthorns.

Secondly, should I grant unto the brethren, that by multitude here, and by the
whole multitude, all the believers then in Jerusalem, were to be understood,
and that then they might all meet in one congregation: does it therefore
follow, that many years after, when there was daily such additions of
multitudes of Believers, that they might all still meet together in one place,
and in one congregation for all acts of worship, and to be edified? I believe
our Brethren themselves the Independents will not grant it; yet they must grant
it if they will stand to their principles.

But from this murmuring between the Greeks and the Hebrews, I, with very good
reason, can frame an Argument to overthrow our Brethrens Tenent, and may from
thence gather, That in the Church of Jerusalem there were many and several
Congregations, where they had all acts of worship; and that every several
nation had their several congregations and several assemblies, where they
might hear the Word of God in their own language and to edification, and
communicate in all Ordinances with comfort. For if there should arise a
controversy in London, between the Dutch and the French, about points of
Religion, or about any other matter of practice concerning Religion; and they
should all apply themselves to the grave and learned Assembly for the decision
of it; would not all men gather that there were two distinct congregations of
them in the City? So it may well be concluded against our Brethren, that every
several Nation of Believers in Jerusalem, had their several congregations and
assemblies apart, (as well as the Greeks and the Hebrews) where they might
partake in all Ordinances to edification, and understand their Ministers
Preaching to them in their own language. As for my part, I verily believe it
was so, and from warrantable reasons: and yet all these several congregations
made but one Church, and were under one Presbytery: and for this my belief I
shall give my reasons in the ensuing discourse. But had there been but one
Nation in Jerusalem, so many thousand Believers as the Scripture relates there
was, could not all have met in one place, and in one congregation, as all
reason will persuade. So that all the Arguments of our brethren to the
contrary, are but as so many Squibs which only make a noise, and then vanish
in the air; to say no more.

And these are the most rational objections that as yet I ever heard from
them, to the which I have briefly given my several answers, which I hope by
Gods assistance I shall ever be able to make good against them all.

And now I will go on to prove, That by the ministry of the Apostles, and the
diverse miracles daily wrought by them, after they had received the gifts of the
Holy Ghost, there were such additions of multitudes of Believers to those that
were converted by Saint John the Baptist, and our Savior and his Disciples,
before the death of John and the sufferings of our Savior, that they could not
all meet at any one time and in one place or congregation, to partake in all
Ordinances; no, nor in a few; but were of necessity forced to be distributed
into several assemblies and congregations, and that before the Persecution,
under the Persecution, and after the Persecution. And for proving of what I lay
down, which is still but the first conclusion I undertook to make good, I
will begin with the first eight Chapters of the Acts, and then go forward to
the ensuing story of the same Book in order, to prove my assertion.

In the 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. Chapters of the Acts, it is related how the holy
Apostles employed themselves in their several Ministeries, after they had
received the gifts of the holy Ghost, and were endued with all power of working
miracles, and had received the gifts also of tongues and languages; and the
effects also of their Ministry, preaching, and miracles, are there set down at
large: and it is specified, that by means of that first miracle, when all the
people of several Nations heard the Apostles speak to them, every one in their
several tongues and languages (who were very well known to be Galileans)
that they were amazed to hear the wonderful Works of God, and from their
amazement it is said, they gave attention to the Sermon of Peter; the Sermon it
self being there set down, and the effect of it, which was, That when they
had heard it, they were pricked in their heart, and said unto Peter and the rest
of the Apostles, Men and Brethren, what shall we do? Then Peter said unto them,
Repent and be Baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, for the
remission of sins; and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, etc. Then
they that gladly received his word were baptized: and the same day were added
unto them about three thousand souls. And they continued steadfast in the
Apostles Doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and prayer; And
fear came upon every soul: and many signs and wonders were done by the
Apostles: and all that believed were together, and had all things common: and
they continuing daily with one accord in the Temple, and breaking bread from
house to house, did eat their meat with gladness and singleness of heart,
praising God, and having favor with all the people. And the Lord added to the
Church daily such as should be saved. Here we see, that by virtue of one
Miracle and Sermon (God working with them) were added to the Believers, that
Saint John the Baptist, and Christ and his Disciples had converted, and such as
were formerly baptized, three thousand more; a great Miracle: all which, with
the many other that were converted afterward are called but one Church. For it
is expressly said, that the Lord added to the Church daily such as should be
saved. We heard of the great multitudes, and of a world of such as believed in
Christ, before this Miracle and Sermon. And can any man in reason conceive,
that all these could meet in any one place or congregation, to partake in all
acts of worship? But let us go on. In the 3. and 4. Chapter, by means of that
Miracle that was wrought upon the Impotent Man, who was known to all the
people to have bin a Cripple from his Mothers womb, and through the powerful
preaching of Peter, who exhorted them to repent and to be converted, that their
sins might be blotted out, when the time of refreshing should come from the
presence of the Lord, etc. It is said, that many which heard the word believed;
and the number of those new Believers is there specified to be about five
thousand men, which were also added unto the Church, and joined to all the
former Believers; so that we have here eight thousand new Members added unto
the Church, in a very little time: and this was a greater Miracle then the
former. So that the Prophecy in the 110. Psalm, verse 3. was now fulfilled;
That in the day of Christ's power, his willing people from the womb of the
morning should be multiplied as the Dew upon the Earth. And which is not tobe
passed by without due notice, It is supposed by the best Interpreters, and the
most orthodoxe Writers, (and there is good reason for it) that these new
Converts were Men, not Women and Children. And without doubt, these new
Believers endeavored to convert their Wives, Children, Servants, and
Neighbors: and there is good reason also why we should be induced to believe,
that Truth, with such wonders and miracles annexed to it, should be as
prevalent to convert Women, Children, Servants, and Neighbors, and whole
Families; as errors and novelties, in these our days, are able to misleade
those poor creatures, that are ever learning, and never come to knowledge; and
the which are carried about with every wind of doctrine, and believe every
newborn truth (as they term it) and follow every New Light, and every
newfound way, though it tend to the confusion of the Church and Kingdom. It
is said of that man of Sin, that Son of Perdition, that he shall come after
the working of Satan, with all power and signs and lying wonders, and with all
deceiveablenesse and unrighteousness in them that perish, because they
received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved, 2 Thessalonians. 2. But
to see people so deluded without Miracles, is a Miracle. So that those poor
Women that are carried about with every wind of doctrine, from that truth that
was taught by Christ and his Apostles, and confirmed by so many Miracles; and
those that do and have misled them, have all of them a great deal to answer
for. But this I speak by the way, conceiving that all those new Converts would
endeavor, as the good Samaritan Woman did after her conversion, not only to
bring their Wives, Children, and Families, but their Neighbors also, and whole
Cities to the same faith. And I have that opinion also of all the Women and
people of that Age, that they were as ready to embrace the truth, as the Women
and people of this Age and in these our times are to follow errors. But let us
now see what effects the other Miracles wrought upon the people that are
related in the 5. C. as of Ananias and Saphira his wife, who for tempting the
Spirit of God, were both stricken downdead and gave up the Ghost; and the other
Miracles wrought by the Apostles. It is said in Verse. 11. That fear came upon
all the Church, and to as many as heard these things (and that to the rest,
viz. the Scribes and Pharisees, the Maglinant party) durst no man join
himself* And Believers were added unto the Lord, multitudes, both of men and
women: Here come in the good Women now. And in Verse 26. it is said, that the
Captain, with the Officers, brought the Apostles without violence (for they
feared the people, least they should have stoned them.) It will not be amiss
briefly to take notice of the several effects these Miracles wrought.

Thefirst is, That great fear of offending God came on all the Church, Gods own
people; which notwithstanding of the many additions of Believers is called
still but one Church.

The second That none durst join themselves to the contrary party, the
Pharisaicall malignant crew.

The third, That Believers were added to the Church, and that multitudes, no
small companies both of Men and Women. Here is a new increase, and that a great
one.

The fourth is, that the very Captain and Officers were awed and kept in fear,
by reason of the multitude of Believers: so that those that feared not God were
afraid of his servants. By which it may be gathered, That the party of
Believers did balance the number of the incredulous and Pharisacall party, if
not by far exceed them, And therefore by all probability, must needs be an
innumerable company and a mighty multitude; and such a number as could not all
meet in any one place or congregation, to partake in all the Ordinances.

And to say nothing of the diversity of Tongues and Languages which were not
given to the Apostles to be useless and of no profit; nor to speak any thing
of the diverse Jews that were then dwelling at Jerusalem, devout Men and Women,
out of every Nation under Heaven; which notwithstanding may be a sufficient
argument to prove, That they all had their several meeting places, and their
several Ministers to preach unto them in their several Languages, that they
might be edified. I say, for the present to wave all this, let us take notice
what is positively set down in the last Verse of the fifth Chapter, that is,
That the Apostles daily in the Temple and in every house, ceased not to teach
and preach Jesus Christ; That is to say, they preached both publicly and
privately, and the very places where they preached are set down, as in the
Temple, and in every house. So that of necessity, there must be several
congregations and assemblies of Belivers in Jerusalem, according to that in the
2. of the Acts verse. the 46. where it said, That they continued daily with one
accord in the Temple, and breaking of bread from house to house, which by all
Interpreters is understood the administration of the Lords Supper: and that the
several assemblies and congregations were wont usually to meet in private
houses, is frequently mentiond in the holy Scriptures, as in the 16. of the
Romans verse the 5. and in the 1. of the Corinthians chap. 16. verse. 19. Col.
4. 14. and Saint Paul in the 20. of the Acts verse. 20. says, That he kept back
nothing that was profitable unto them, but taught them publicly and from house
to house, so that they had their Assemblies as well private as public, even
in the Church of Ephesus, where they did partake in all acts of worship; and in
that Church also they had many Presbyters, and yet were but one Church.

But now I will pass on to the sixth chapter in the 1, 2, 3. and 7, verses it
is said, That in those days, when the number of Disciples was multiplied,
there arose a murmuring of the Grecians against the Hebrews, because their
widows were neglected in their daily ministration. Then the twelve called the
multitude of the Disciples unto them, and said, It is not reason that we
should leave the Word of God and serve tables. Wherefore brethren look you out
among you seven men of honest report, and full of the holy Ghost and wisdom,
whom we may appoint over this business. But we will give our selves
contiunally to prayer and to the ministry of the Word, verse. 7. And the Word
of God increased, and the number of the Disciples multiplied in Jerusalem
greatly, and a great company of the Priests were obedient unto the faith. In
the which words, we may take notice briefly of these observables.

The first, of the cunning and policy of the Devil, who when he cannot by all
his wiles and stratagems assault the Church without, then he labors to assail
it within, as here with civil discords and differences among brethren: and in
other Churches in all ages even in, and from the Apostles times, by dissentions
in opinions, by Sects, Schisms, Factions, and Heresies; and by these his wiles
and craft, he first brings in difference in opinion, and afterward diversity
of affection, and that among brethren; and all this he does, that in fine, he
may bring ruin upon them all. And thus he began with the Church of Jerusalem,
raising a controversy between the Hebrews and the Greeks, who complained That
their widows were neglected in the daily ministration; as either that they
were not made Deaconesses, as the widows of the Hebrews were, or that there
was not an equal distribution of the Alms, according to the intention of the
Church, who sold their possessions and goods to that end, that they might be
parted to all men, as every one should have need, Acts 2. verse. 44, 45. chap.
4. v. 35. And this their supposition was the cause of that controversy.

The second observable, is, To whom the differing and dissenting parties did
apply themselves and appeal; and that was to the Presbytery or Colleage of
Apostles, not to any one of them particularly, but to the twelve; as in that
difference at Antioch, Acts 15. Paul and Barnabas and certain other of the
Brethren in the Church of Antioch appealed to the Apostles and Presbyters, and
in both those differences all the Churches submitted themselves to the Apostles
Order, and that willingly: and this example of the Apostles, is the Rule for
ordering of all controversies that all the reformed Churches set before them;
deciding all debates in Religion by the Word of God, and according to the
president they have laid down unto them, by the Apostles and Presbyters in
Jerusalem. Here I say, the whole Presbytery and College of the Apostles
determined the business; neither do we read, that the Assemblies of the
Hebrews and Greeks at Jerusalem, or the Church of Antioch, pretended their own
Independent authority, though several Congregations, or challenged a power
within themselves, of choosing their own Officers, or determining of
differences amongst themselves, or pleaded that they had Authority within
themselves, to make their own Laws by which they would be orderd, or that they
challenged any such privileges unto themselves, but they all appealed unto the
Presbytery at Jerusalem, as the supreamest Ecclesiastical Court, and freely
submitted themselves to their arbitrament, and to the Order they set down, as
the story specifieth.

The third observable is, the employment in which the Apostles were all taken
up, and the effect of it; and their employment is said to be continuing in
prayer and the Ministry, and preaching of the Word; and the effect of this
their Ministry was, That the Word of God increased, and the number of the
Disciples multiplied in Jerusalem greatly, and a great company of the Priests
were obedient to the faith. By all which it is most apparent, that such
multitudes being daily added to the Church, and where there was such variety of
teachers, and so many Apostles, and all of them taken up in preaching; and
where there was so many different Nations, and such diversities of tongues and
languages as was in the Church of Jerusalem, they could not all meet together
at any one time, or in any one place to edification, and that they might all
communicate in all the Ordinances, but of necessity they must be distributed
into several Congregations and Assemblies, if they would avoyde confusion; and
all that I now speak is evident by the very light of Nature and all reason; and
therefore it follows, That there were many Assemblyes and Congregations in
Jerusalem, and yet all made but one Church, and that that Church was
Presbyterianly governed. But that I may make this truth more evidently yet
appear, I will first out the former discourse frame several Arguments, and
then go on to the ensuing history. And out of all these six chapters I thus
argue.

Where there were eight thousand new converts, besides women and children, by
virtue of some few miracles and Sermons, after Christ's Resurrection added to
the Church of Jerusalem, and the society of believers, besides those that were
convertedby John the Baptist and Christ and his Apostles Ministry, before his
suffering; and to the which also there were afterward great multitudes of
Believers both of men and women, and a great company of the Priests joined; in
so much that they kept the very Officers and Soldiers in awe, and stru^k a
fear and terror into them: there they could not all meet together in any one
place or Congregation, to partake in all acts of Worship, but of necessity must
be distributed into diverse Assemblies and Congregations. But in the Church of
Jerusalem there were eight thousand new converts, besides women and children,
by virtue of some few miracles and Sermons after Christ's Resurrection added to
the Church and society of Believers, besides those that were converted by John
the Baptist, and Christ and his Apostles Ministry, before his sufferings; and
to which also there were after wards great multitudes of Believers both of men
and women, and a great company of Priests also joined; insomuch as they kept
the very Officers and Soldiers in awe, and struck a fear and terror into
them. Ergo, They could not all meet together in any one place or Congregation,
to partake in all acts of worship, but of necessity must be distributed into
diverse Assemblyes and Congregations if they would all be edified.

For the Major it is so evident, that I cannot believe that any rational man
will deny it: for who yet did ever see an Assembly of above ten thousand people
in any one place or Congregation, that could partake in all the Ordinances to
edification? Yea, to affirm this, is to fight against common reason and daily
experience. For the Minor, it is proved by the several places above quoted,
and therefore the conclusion does also of necessity follow.

This Argument, is so well grounded upon the Scripture of truth, and
corroborated also with such solid reasons as it is a wonderful thing, that
there should be any man now living in these days of light and knowledge that
should be either so ignorant or erroneous as to gainsay it; and yet learned
Master Knollys in his moderate answer as he calls it, page 8. and 9. replyeth
and answers to it, by denying the Minor of my Syllogism for very slender
reasons as his custom is after this manner: I will give you his own words
which are these.

There is no mention (says he) in any Scripture quoted by the Doctor of eight
thousand new Converts besides women and children. Neither does that Scripture
produced Acts 4. 4. prove any such thing. For the Reader may consider, that the
number of them there mentioned are but five thousand; and albeit the Dr. make
them up eight thousand, by saying those five thousand men were added to the
Church, and joined to the former believers, page 57. Yet there is a twofold
mistake in the Doctors addition, to wit; first, that some of the three thousand
(may be) were women, and how then can the Doctor say, there were eight thousand
new Converts besides women? secondly, these five thousand, are only called men
and not Converts, not believers. For howbeit many of them hearing the word
believed, yet it is not said, the five thousand men believed; and the truth i^,
the text well considered, only holds forth, that the number of men was wade up
five thousand. These are Master Knollys own expressions, and all that he has
to say against this Argument, with his confused reasons or rather triflings.

What man but of ordinary capacity, that had but cursorily read over my
Arguments, would not have observed the truth so plain and evidently laid down
in them* and confirmed with such reasons, as he would not only have been
well satisfied therewith, but would have judged it either great blockishnesse
in any and apparent ignorance to have yet doubted of it, or great temerity and
contentiousnesse of spirit to have gainsayed such evident demonstration of
verity? And yet Mr. Knollys out of the sublimity of his learning, being a
confident Disputant, not only confutes me, but repels the very Scripture it
self, and resists the Spirit of God, which is usually with him and his
Accomplices, and all out of the spirit of error and contention to maintain their
several factions. So that it may be admired, that such men are not abandoned
and abhorred of all people truly fearing God, especially, when they see their
whole study and endeavor, is, to delude and seduce poor silly creatures. But
I desire the Reader here deliberately to weigh and consider what the man says;
he denies that there is any mention in any Scripture quoted by me, of eight
thousand new Converts, besides women and children, whereas in the second
Chapter of the Acts which I cited, there is mention made of three thousand
added to the Church by the first Miracle and Sermon of the Disciples, and this
Master Knollys himself does acknowledge, page 8. of his Pamphlet. His words
are these. To whom were added, viz. to all those that were converted before by
John's and Christ's Ministry about three thousand souls, etc. Here he
confesses there were three thousand souls added to the Church; neither is
there any mention of women amongst them; and in the fourth Chapter he likewise
acknowledges, that the number mentioned there, is five thousand. His words are
these. For the Reader may consider, that the number of them there mentioned,
are but five thousand. Thus he. Now all the world knows, that three thousand
and five thousand are eight thousand, and the Scriptures quoted by me made
mention of these eight thousand, what so ever M. Knollys says to the contrary.
So that no man of understanding, can doubt of the truth of what I asserted. For
that which is confirmed by the testimony of the holy Scripture, were it single
and by it self, ought by all Christians to be believed; but that which has
both the holy Scripture, and learned Master Knollys his own witness to
confirm it, that he cannot with any good reason deny, but that there was
three thousand souls at the first Miracle and Sermon of the Apostles after
Christ's Ascension added to the Church, and five thousand after, both the Holy
Scripture affirms, and Master Knollys acknowledges it: Ergo, there were
eight thousand new Converts added unto the Church at Jerusalem: for these were
distinct actions or effects of the Ministry of the Apostles, and produced at
several times, and upon several occasions, from the Miracles and preaching of
the Apostles: for otherwise they would not have been taken such notice of as
such wonders, and have been so distinctly set down with all the several
circumstances both of time, place, and persons; neither would there have been
such running and going, questioning and consulting about that business, by the
Magistrates and Officers, as there was, if some new and strange thing had not
happend and fallen out: for men do not usually wonder at ordinary occurrences.
Now when the holy Scripture relates this new miracle in the 4. of the Acts, as
an unexpected thing and suddenly happening and as a matter of great admiration
and astonishment, yea of terror to the enemies, from the curing of the Criple,
and from the preaching of Peter and John, and asserteth withal, that many which
heard the word, believed, and the number of the men was about 5. thousand, v.
4. It is apparently evident, that as this was a new act and distinct from the
former: so that the conversion of these five thousand, was a new effect and
distinct one from the former, and is of purpose set down by the holy Ghost by
it self severally, to be taken notice of as a matter of more admiration than
the conversion of three thousand, by how much it was a greater work of the
Spirit of God, by another miracle and Sermon, to convert five thousand, then
three thousand. And without all controversy, it was thus recorded with all its
circumstances for this very end, that it should for ever be taken notice of, as
a distinct miracle and work of wonder from the former. For the holy Ghost is
very accurate in the relation of it, and very careful that there should be no
mistake in the whole business: for in express words and terms it is said,
Notwithstanding all the opposition that was made by the Priests and by the
Captain of the Temple, and the soldiers, to hinder the preaching of the Word,
and to smother this miracle, yet many of them that heard the word (says the
Scripture) believed. And that there might yet be no mistake or fallacy in the
story and narration, the very sum and account of those that were converted and
believed by reason of this last miracle and Sermon, is specified,
particularized, and set down in these words, and the number of the men, (viz.
that believed, says the Scripture) was about five thousand. So that the
Scripture it self sets down the number and calls them men, and not women and
children. And it is very safe always to speak as the word of God teaches us.
So that to any intelligible Christian, there can be no doubt or scruple any
longer left about this point. For that which God himself has dictated by his
holy spirit and recorded in his holy word, we may not gainsay; but God has
dictated by his holy spirit and recorded it in his holy word that the multitude
that was converted and believed upon that new miracle and preaching of Peter
and John was about five thousand men; Ergo, it is not to be gainsaid but to be
believed and received as an everlasting truth by all Christians. For as I said
before, this was a new effect or a new act and distinct and different from the
former; and therefore these five thousand are to be considered by themselves
and apart. Now five thousand and three thousand put and joined together make up
eight thousand, which were all added to the Church, to all the former that were
converted by the Ministry of John the Baptist, Christ and his Disciples in
Christ's life time; and therefore there is no mistake in my addition as Mr.
Knollys fondly and childishly concludes: and his reasons by which he would
prove my mistake, are as vain and senseless. For (says he) some of the three
thousand (may be) were women, and how can the Doctor say there were eight
thousand new converts besides women? Take notice I pray of the vanity of his
expression; Some of the three thousand (says he) may be were women: and it may
be they were not, and it stands with as good reason they were not, as any he
can bring to prove they were, although I did not set it down as my own opinion,
but said only, That it was the judgment of many learned men, that all those
eight thousand that were converted by those two miracles and Sermons were men,
and not women and children: and therefore Mr Knollys here commits a double
error: first, in making that my opinion and ascribing that to me which I only
then related as the judgment of others, and then left it in medio; that is his
first error; his second is worse: for whereas the Holy Scripture says, that
there were three thousand souls added unto the Church by the first Miracle and
Sermon, and five thousand by the second, in the fourth of the Acts, Master
Knollys peremptorily affirms they were but five thousand in all, and so gives
the Spirit of God the lie; who declares there were three thousand at one time,
and five at another added to the Church. But if there were but 5. thousand in
all, as M. Knollys asserteth, then by his own acknowledgement they were all men
and not women; and so then I had committed no error, neither can M. Knollys
convince me of an error if I had said it as my own opinion that al those that
were converted by those two Miracles, had been all men, and not women and
children: For, for the five thousand, the word of God says they were all men
and not women, the words are these in the Original, (...): the number of men
(according to Master Knollys his own interpretation) was five thousand; and if
there were five thousand men, then not women. And we find in the Holy
Scripture that the word (...), is always taken for men, as we may see it,
Matthew. 15. verse 38. (...), (...), (...), and they that did eat were four
thousandmen, besides women and children. So that amongst these five thousand by
the testimony of the holy Scripture, and in the judgment of Master Knollys and
by his own interpretation they were all men and no women; now then if all the
whole number of Believers that were converted by those two Miracles and Sermons
mounted in all but to five thousand, as Master Knollys affirms they did not,
and were all men as he accords, to what purpose then does he raise a new
and needless cavil against me, because I said that it was the opinion of
many learned men that those that were converted by these two miracles and
sermons were all men and not women and children: For I did not as I said
before, relate it as my own judgment, neither did I say there were no women
amongst those eight thousand, but that it was the opinion of the learned, that
they were all men only, and not women and children. But were I of as
contentious a spirit as Master Knollys, and that it tended to edification, I
could bring better reasons to prove they were men only and not women, then
either he or any of his Fraternity can produce to the contrary. But Mr. Knollys
himself seems but faintly to assert that there were any of them Women and
Children: for he says, it may be some of the 3. thousand were women, and thus
he trifles in his answer to my first Argument, saying, it may be there were no
more Believers in Jerusalem at the Feast of Pentecost but the hundred and
twenty names. Now all the learned know, that to say, it may be there were some
women, makes no real conviction of a mistake, it is but a naked and
groundless supposition of a mistake, especially when there may be many solid
reasons produced to prove they were all men and no women and children.

And therefore such kind of triflings are not sufferable in any that pretend to
fear God: for vain janglings and needless contentions about words, is that
that is condemned by the Apostle in all Ministers, in his Epistles to Timothy
and Titus, and it troubles me not a little, that I have to do with such vain
kind of creatures, whose cheese babble is about words. But notwithstanding I see
a providence in it: for in this, the man shows but his ignorance, and whiles
he would persuade the Reader, that he is very acute he shows himself to be a
very child in the art of disputation. There is an old saying, give some men
rope enough and they will hang themselves. Even so it is here with Master
Knollys whiles he takes that liberty to himself to run out in his discourse he
intangles himself on every side as by the sequel will appear, as here. He
said that there was no mention in any Scripture quoted by me of eight thousand,
and he denied withal that the Scripture does prove any such thing: and
asserted moreover that the whole number of all those converts amouted but to
five thousand, and he said that all these were men and not women, and yet here
he confutes himself; I desire all therefore to take notice of the vanity of the
man. He had confidently concluded there were but five thousand in all, and
asserted that they were all men, and notwithstanding as it were in the same
breath, he makes mention of three thousand more of another company amongst the
which he says some of them might be women: So that by his own concession, here
is two distinct numbers or companies, one consisting of 5. thousand and all men
and no women, and another consisting of three thousand more, of which he makes
a scruple saying that amongst them there might be some women: So that if the
five thousand were all men, and there was yet another company of three thousand
more besides, amongst which there might be some women, as Master Knollys says,
then this three thousand was a distinct company from the former: now three
thousand amongst the which there might be some women, and five thousand all
men, makes up full eight thousand, so that Master Knollys by his whibling
again and again Volens nolens confirms my assertion that the full number of
those converts by these two miracles and Sermons was eight thousand, and for
ought any thing can be said to the contrary, they were all men besides women
and children; and this is all he gains by his fond caviling and contention to
prove himself a very jangler, and one like that wicked servant, that condemns
himself by his own mouth. And this shall suffice to have spoke for proof of
the number viz: that there were eight thousand besides women and children.

And now I come to his second reason, by which he labors to evince and prove
they were not converts and believers, which I hope to make appear to be not
only groundless, but to be most impious and wicked, as giving the Spirit of
God the lie and indeed destructive to their own tenants and principles. His
words are these.

These five thousand (says he) are only called men, and not converts, not
believers; for howbeit, many of them hearing the word believed, yet it is not
said the five thousand men believed. And the truth is, the text well
considered, only holds forth that the number of men was made up five thousand.
Thus Master Knollys.

For my own particular, I stand astonished at the vanity, senslesnes and
wickedness of the man; for his words are not only against the light of reason
and the judgment of all the learned, and the very opinion of the Independents
themselves, who hold that they were all converts and believes, but they are
contradictory to the Spirit of God, giving the holy Ghost the lie as I said
before; for the Scripture says notwithstanding all the resistance and
opposition made by the enemies of the Gospel to hinder the work of the
Ministry: and notwithstanding all the persecution that was raised against them
for this very end, I say notwithstanding all their endeavor, the holy Ghhst
says, that many of them which heard the word believed, and the number of men
was five thousand. Here are two truths evidently laid down contrary to Master
Knollys his errors.

The first is, that they are not only called men, but believers: for says the
Scripture, they that heard the word believed.

Secondly, the number of those that believed, is there in terminis set down to
be five thousand, and the number of the men (viz. that believed) says the text
was five thousand* So that from this testimony of Scripture and from all my
arguments deduced from thence, these two conclusions do follow evidently.

The first, that Master Knollys is a very wicked man, that thus at pleasure can
give the Spirit of God the lie and oppose the truth it self upon all occasions.

The second, that there were more believers in the Church of Jerusalem, then
could possibly all meet in any one place and congregation to partake in all
acts of worship, and that in its very infancy; for here we read of eight
thousand more cnoverts besides women and children; for the Scripture makes
mention of no women nor children newly added to all those that were converted
by John the Baptist, and by the ministry of Christ and his Disciples in Christ's
life time, and all they were innumerable: for all Jerusalem went out unto them
and were baptized, besides the many other thousands that the Scripture
records were daily added to these, all which I say could not possibly meet
in one congregation to edification. And the truth of these conclusions I am
most assured, will appear so clear in the judgment of all the learned as
they will gather that Mr. Knollys and his accomplices that thus sottishly oppose
it, ought severely to be punished for these their wicked practices who for the
upholding of their own errors and for their base lucre and gain and for worldly
ends care not what they say or do to the disturbance of church and State, for
the seducing of the poor people and hindering of the work of reformation so much
to be desired.

But before I pass on to Master Knoylls his other Cavills, I shall desire the
reader a little to consider what I have yet in this place to say to him. These
five thousand (says he) are called men, and not converts, not believers; for
howbeit many of them hearing the Word believed, yet it is not said the five
thousand men believed. And the truth is, the text well considered, only holds
forth that the number of men was made up 5. thousand. From hence I gather if
these words of his may be credited, that it may be a very well formed Church
after the new testament form, (for this Church at Jerusalem was such an one by
the confession of all the Independents) although they be not all visible
Saints, but many of them unbeleevers, Jews and Infidels, and be not true
converts; and that for the moulding up of a true Church after the new testament
form, it is not absolutely necessary that they should be all visible Saints;
for here Master Knollys says they were mixed good and bad together, it is not
said says he the five thousand men believed and yet they were all members: so
that by his doctrine some of them were unbelievers, and notwithstanding they
were all molded up into a Church body: so that they were not all visible
Saints, and yet the true Saints and believers made no separation from the
other: but they all continued together in Church fellowship both Saints and
infidels and communicated in all Ordinances. Now whether or no Master Knollys
by this doctrine of his does not fight against the opinion of all his brethren,
and utterly overthrow all the new fabric of Independency, I leave it not
only to the judgment of the learned of the congregationall way (if there be
any such) but to the censure of the seven new churches of which he is one of
the pastors, and an other Saint Diotrephes, who if they do not punish him for
this his Grollery, I will say they deserve censure and punishment themselves.

But this is not all I have here to say to Mr Knollys; I have this also to
add, that if any credit may be given to his words, there will then be no
certainty in any thing the Scripture relates unto us. For he says, That those
five thousand that were added to the Church are called men, and not Converts
and Believers; and howbeit many of them believed, yet it is not said the five
thousand believed. So that if he may be credited, all that the holy Scripture
has related unto us concerning the conversion of these men is a mere fable:
for the Scripture says they believed, and he affirms the contrary, and says
they were only called men and not converts not believers. Whether this fellow
therefore ought not to be cast out of the seven Churches, and out of all the
Churches of the world for this his wickedness and temerity, I leave it to the
judgment of all the learned, either dependents or independents. and so I will
pass to his other good stuff which in its due place you shall meet with. But
in the mean time out of all the above quoted places of Scripture, I thus
farther argue.

Where there was almost an hundred preachers and Ministers, besides the twelve
Apostles, and all these continually taken up in prayer and preaching, and could
not leave their Ministry to serve tables: and where there was such a company of
believers and people as did employ them all; there of necessity they must be
distributed into dive^se congregations and assemblies, if they would all be
edified and avoid confusion, and partake in all ordinances. But in the Church
of Jerusalem there was almost an hundred preachers and Ministers, besides the
twelve Apostles; and all these were continually taken up in prayer and
preaching and could not leave their ministry to serve tables: and where there
was such a company of believers and people as did employ them all, there of
necessity they must be distributed into diverse congregations and assemblies,
if they would all be edified, and avoid confusion and partake in all Ordinances.

For the major, very reason and the common light of understanding, without any
reluctation will assent unto it. And for the Minor, it is manifest from Chapter
the 1. ver. 21. 22. and from chapter the sixth ver. the 2 and 4. and chapter the
8. ver. 1. So that the conclusion is undeniable. But out of all the former
places I thus farther argue.

Where there were people of al nations under the heavens, and them in some
multitudes, and most of them believers and devout men and women which waited
upon the Ordinances and had a desire daily to hear the Word; there of
necessity they must be distributed into diverse and sundry congregations and
assemblies, and have such to preach unto them severally in their own language;
or else they could not partake in all acts of worship to edification. But in
the Church of Jerusalem there were people of all Nations under the Heavens, and
them in some multitudes, and most of them Believers and devout Men and Women,
that waited upon the Ordinances, and had a desire daily to hear the Word.
Ergo, of necessity they must be distributed into diverse congregations and
assemblies, and have such to preach unto them severally in their own language,
or else they could not partake in all acts of worship to edification.

For the Major, no reason can gainsay it, for the Apostles and the other
Ministers employed all those gifts of the Holy Ghost, and those diverse
languages which they had received for the edification of the Church, to the
utmost, and did improve all opportunities for the converting of the people
committed unto their charge, and for the further building of them up in their
holy faith, which was their calling and employment: and this they could not
have done, unless they taught those Nations in their several Languages; and
that they could not do without confusion, unless they were distributed in
several assemblies, where they might distinctly hear their own Languages. For
otherwise, as Saint Paul says in the 1 Cor. 14. 23. if men should speak to the
people with unknown tongues, if the unlearned, says he, come in and
unbelievers, will they not say that they are all mad? And therefore Tongues are
given for a sign, not to them that believe, but to them that believe not. Now
they were devout Men in Jerusalem and Believers; and therefore the Apostles and
Ministers were to speak to them severally in their own languages: and for that
purpose God gave them those Tongues, and that diversity of languages, that
those that were Believers might be more edified, and that the unbelievers and
unlearned, and such as belonged unto Gods election, might be convinced and
judged of all; and that the secrets of their hearts might be manifested, that
so falling down upon their face they might worship God, and report that God was
in them of a truth, as the Apostle there says. So that I say for the Major, no
reasonable creature will call it in question.

And for the Major, it is manifest out of the Chap. 2. Verse. 5. etc. and in
Chap. 6. Verse. 1. and Verse. 2. 4. And for the conclusion, that from the
Premises does also ensue.

Again, I thus further argue out of the former Chapters.

That which the holy Scripture in express words and in diverse places has
declared unto us that every Christian is bound to believe: but the Scripture in
express words and in diverse places has declared unto us, that there were
diverse assemblies and congregations of Believers in the Church of Jerusalem,
and that the Apostles and all the Believers in Jerusalem, did continue daily
with one accord in the Temple; and that they brake bread from house to house,
and that daily in the Temple, and in every house, they ceased not to teach and
preach Jesus Christ. Ergo, there was diverse congregations and several
assemblies of Believers in the Church of Jerusalem, where they did daily
partake in all the Ordinances, and enjoyed all acts of worship.

For the Major, no Christian can deny it. For the Minor, it is manifest from 46
Verse of the 2 Chapter, and Chap. 5. verse. 12. and verse. 42. and Chap. 3. verse.
12, 13. and many more places that might be produced. And in those places it is
not only said they preached in every house, but that they brake bread from
house to house; by which expression all Writers interpret, the holy Communion,
and partaking of the Lords Supper: and if it should not so be understood, we
never can read that any Christians in Jerusalem besides the Apostles, ever
enjoyed all acts of worship, especially those that are peculiar to Church
Communion.

It is related often that they preached the Word daily in the Temple, which was
common to Jews and Christians (though no Jewish worship) as all men
acknowledge. And by evident Arguments it may be proved, that they never
administered the Sacraments in the Temple, those discriminating and
distinguishing Ordinances of the Christian Church; as all the most Orthodox
Interpreters gather from the ensuing words, where it is said, They continued
daily with one accord in the Temple; but when they speak of the Administration
of the Lords Supper, it is expressed in these words, and breaking of bread from
house to house, which is interpreted by all Divines, of Sacramental bread;
which phrase and manner of speaking is usually so expounded by all the Learned,
upon Acts the 20. verse. the 7. And our Brethren do not deny this. And it is
well known, that the Primitive Christians had their meetings and assemblies in
private houses, as by the many places is manifest, which I cited but a little
before.

Besides, the Sacrament of breaking bread is no Temple-ordinance; and therefore
could not be adminis^^ed in the Temple with the safety of the Christians and
Believers: for if they were so highly displeased with the Apostles, for
preaching Jesus and the Resurrection, in the Temple, as it appears Acts 4. 2.
They would not have suffered them to have administered the Sacraments there. And
if Paul was so assaulted, Acts 21. 28. for being but supposed to have brought
Greeks into the Temple, what would these men have done, if one should have
brought in a new Ordinance, and a new worship and service; and that so contrary
to their legal rights? Surely the Jews would never have suffered it, neither
do the Brethren contend for this.

Now it is well known that in the Primitive Church, if not every day, yet every
first day of the Week at least, they met together to break bread; that is to
receive the holy Sacrament, which was never without preaching, as we see in
Acts 20. 7. and in the places above quoted: in which it is said, they daily
brake bread together, and that in several and particular houses; and that of
necessity must be; for a few houses could not have held so many thousands, as
all reason will dictate: and if they were or could be contained under one roof,
yet they must be forced to be in diverse and several chambers or rooms. So
that what is done and spoke in the one, the other knows nothing of it, so that
they are still several congregations: as under the roof of Paul's there are
diverse meeting*places where Men may partake in all Ordinances, and they are
called several Churches; and they that meet there several congregations,
though under one roof: for the distinction of the places under one covert,
makes always a distinct assembly, as it is daily seen in the several
Committees at Westminster; where every Committee of both Houses have their
several rooms and equal authority, and are yet all but one Parliament,
though distributed into so many several assemblyes. So here, they had several
assemblies, and that in several houses, as is declared: and reason it self,
without any testimony of holy Scripture, will persuade this: for the Apostles
they all preached, and that daily; and they must have several rooms to preach
in, to avoyde confusion: for all things in the Church must be done in order,
and they must have several auditories or assemblies, or else they should
preach to the walls: so that if the Apostles would all preach; and the people
all hear, of necessity they must be distributed into several congregations
and assemblyes, to avoyde disorder; and that there were several congregations
and several assemblies, the places above specified do declare and tell us. So
that there is no man that resolves not to oppose all truth that is contrary to
his received opinion, but may evidently perceive that there were many
congregations and assemblies in the Church of Jerusalem, and yet they all made
but one Church, and were governed by one Presbytery; as the many Committees in
both Houses are in diverse rooms, and make diverse assemblies, and have equal
power and authority among themselves; and yet they all make but one Parliament;
and all those several Committees are governed by the joint consent of the
Great Civil Presbytery of the Kingdom, which is all the Parliament, and all
this without confusion, yea, with most excellent order and decency.

This is the last argument I produced out of the above cited Scriptures to
prove that there were many assemblies of believers in the Church of Jerusalem
before the persecution: And concerning this argument Mr Knollys before he comes
to answer it, makes a little sucking preamble. His words are these.

But the Doctor (says he) has one argument which is more to the purpose then
all the other, which I desire the reader seriously to consider: page 64. Thus
he.

His Answer to this Argument is as follows, I will set down all his own
words, which are these.

Now I desire the Reader to consider how the Doctor proves his Minor, which he
says it manifest from Acts 2. 46. and chapter the 5. 12. 42. and chapter 3.
11. 12. and many more places that might be produoed. page 64, 65, 66. In all
which discourse, the Doctor gives you nothing but his own suppositions and
conclusions, for the proof of his Minor proposition, which is his manner of
discoursing through his book.

This Argument (says he) I answer; First by denying the assumption or Minor
proposition, and the reason of my denying it is, because the Scriptures
produced by the Doctor, do not in express words declare, that there were
diverse assemblies and congregations of believers in the Church of Jerusalem.
The Scriptures quoted do in express words declare the contrary to what the
Doctor would prove. For Acts the 2. verse 42. 46. All that believed were
together, and they continued with one accord in the Temple. And Acts the 3. 11,
12. it is expressly said, that all the people can together to them, in the Porch
which is called Solomon's. Acts the 5. 12. And they were all with one accord in
Solomon's Porch. So that these Scriptures produced by the Doctor to prove that
there were diverse assemblyes and congregations of believers in the Church of
Jerusalem, who met together in several places at one and the same time, upon
the first day of the week where they did partake in all Ordinances, do
expressly prove the contrary, to wit, that the Apostles* and all the Believers
in the Church of Jerusalem met together with one accord in one place, to wit in
the Temple and in Solomon's Porch, and brake bread from house to house, (...)
domatim, not (...) per singulas domos, and thus they did (...) quotidie day by
day, and they continued steadfast the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, and in
breaking of bread and in prayers, and all that believed ^^re together: Acts the
2. v. 42, 44, 46. Yea the Doctor himself says in his Minor proposition, the
latter part of it, That the Apostles and all the Believers in Jerusalem did
continue daily with one accord in the Temple, and that they brake from house to
house; and this shall suffice for refutation of what the Doctor has written
touching the first proposition.

Thus profound Mr Knollys confutes my arguments. I have set down all his words
at large: And as he earnestly desired the Reader seriously to consider my
Argument; So I in like manner entreat him that he would but look back upon it
and advisedly weight whether there be nothing either in that or any other of my
arguments and in all my discourse, but my own suppositions and conclusions for
proof of what I say, as he affirms, and whether I have not both Scripture
and reason for what I say through my whole book; and if he shall upon mature
examination perceive that I have good authority for what I say, then let him
judge whether or no M. Knollys and all his accomplices that thus upon all
occasions traduce me, be not a generation of the accusers of the brethren, and
whether both Mr Knollys and all his confederats be not a company of
calumniators and raylors, and Liars rather then Saints. For I bless God I have
both Scripture and sound reason for all that I say, and I speak it here in the
presence of the great GOD, that if I had ever seen the least ground of truth,
in all the Scripture of truth, for what they of the congregationall way hold
about their Church, I would rather have suffered any misery in the world then
ever have opened my mouth against their way, much less have written against
it; but finding it not only a novell Opinion, but heretical and indeed the
very sourse of all heresies and errors, and of dangerous consequence, and such
an one that if it be not speedily looked unto, will not only bring down the
plagues and judgments of God upon the Nation, and overthrow all the Christian
Religion and all power of godliness, but all government in Church and State
through City and Country and bring a miserable desolation and utter ruin upon
the 3 Kingdoms, which God of his infinite mercy and goodness prevent.

And the consideration of all these things, in the presence of God I say it
again, and no other, put me upon this employment to oppose the error of the
ways of all the Independents and Sectaries, and in this course I am now in, by
the grace of God and his blessed assistance I will persevere in with all my
endeavors to the last period of my days.

And now I come to reply to what Mr Knollys has here set down by way of
answer, and although I have formerly given an answer to all the fond cavills of
the Independents concerning their several meetings together in the Temple and
in Solomon's Porch, which the Reader I am confident will say is satisfactory
enough to any that know what reason is, yet here again for Master Knollys
farther satisfaction, if he will with any thing be satisfied, I answer as
follows to what he childishly bables against this Argument of mine.

This argument of the Doctors (says he) I answer first by denying the
Assumption, etc. One would have expected that when Master Knollys began with
this word first, which amongst learned and rational men in disputing, it being
a word of relation, has ever reference to some second answer at lest if not a
third and fourth; that he had had some second and third reserve of reasons at
least to have fallen upon my argument with, this I say all wise men would have
imagined. And yet there follows neither a second, third or fourth answer. But
howsoever he may speak nonsense by his calling, and by virtue of his
Independency, I will take no advantage against him for that: I will examine
only the futility of his denial which he calls a reason, which indeed is a
mere contradiction not only of himself, but of the holy Scripture and is a
giving of the spirit of God the lie as at other times, as will forth with
appear,

For whereas he says that the Scriptures produced by me do not in express
words declare, that there were diverse Assemblies and Congregations of Believers
in the Church of Jerusalem; and that the Scriptures quoted do in express
terms declare the contrary, it is most abominably false, and that by his own
confession, as we shall by and by see. For should I grant unto Master Knollys
which I cannot do for many reasons set down in my foregoing Discourse, That
when there were but three thousand converted and added to the Church, that they
might then all meet together in any one place or congregation to partake in all
Ordinances, and that when there were five thousand more added to them, they
might still likewise all meet together, either in the Temple or in Solomon's
Porch to hear the Word: I say should I to gratify Master Knollys grant him all
this; yet it will not follow, that when there were daily new additions upon
additions of other Converts and Believers, and that of many thousands, that
then they could still do the same.

But I cannot grant all this, for it would be against all reason, and contrary
to daily experience, which tells us, that eight thousand men cannot meet in any
one Congregation to partake in all acts of worship to edification. Yea, if I
should grant this to Master Knollys, both he himself and all his Fraternity
would laugh at me, and all learned men would conclude that I were indeed a mad
man, as my brother Burton speaks of me; for it is most certain, that all the
Believers and Converts in the Church of Jerusalem did never all together
partake in all Ordinances, and in all acts of worship, either in the Temple, or
in Solomon's porch: for we never read that they either baptized or brake bread
in either of them: neither would the Magistrate have ever endured, or suffered
it, and yet both these were the discriminating, and sealing Ordinances, by
which all Christians were distinguished from Jews and Gentiles, and all
Unbelievers, and it is well known that there was no room in any private house
that could contain such a multitude to partake in all Ordinances to
edification (and this my brother Burton accords to, saying in express words,
that there was no room or place large enough (to contain them all) and the
very Scripture also is clear in this point in many places. Yea, Master Knollys
assenteth to this, though he takes no notice of what he says at any time.
But because he perhaps will believe himself rather then me, and because also
his Followers and Scholars will give credit to his words, rather then to any
reasons produced by me, let them I pray hear what he says.

The Apostles and all the Believers in the Church of Jerusalem (says he) met
together, with one accord, in one place, to wit the Temple, and in Solomon's
Porch, and brake bread from house to house (...) Domatim, not (...) per
singulas domos, and thus they did (...) quotidie, day by day, and they
continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, and in breaking
of bread, and in prayer, etc.

These are Master Knollys his own words.

From the which all learned men may easily perceive the force of truth, and the
weakness and feebleness of error: for whiles the man labors, to enervate my
Argument, he contradicts himself, and the holy Scriptures, and overthrowes
his own Principles, and confirms my opinion; for by his own words it is
evident there were many Congregations and Assemblies of Believers in Jerusalem
which he stiffly denied. For (says he) The Apostles and all the Believers in
the Church of Jerusalem met together with one accord in one place, to wit, the
Temple, and in Solomon's Porch, and brake bread from house to house. I desire
the Reader to take notice of his expression, and see if there be not only a
flat contradiction of himself, but a full confirmation of what my Argument
proves, viz. that there were many Congregations of Believers in the Church at
Jerusalem, which he peremptorily denied. For says he, they met together day
by day in the Temple, that is one place, and in Solomon's Porch, that is an
other place, and they brake bread from house to house, that is in innumerable
places more; so that for one place we have many assigned by him; for they
communicated in all those houses, in all acts of worship; for they never brake
bread or baptized but they had the word also preached; for the Word and
Sacraments were to go together, so that where the one was, there was the
other, and they neither baptized nor brake bread in the Temple; and a few
houses could not contain such a multitude of people: and therefore says
Master Knollys, they brake bread from house to house, and that daily, or day by
day; now we know that they in those days brake bread always in the evening,
so that about one and the same time there was every day, or at least every
first day of the week innumerable Congregations and several Assemblies, and
that at one time in every house at Jerusalem; and all this I learn from Master
Knollys, which says, that they brake bread daily from house to house, that is
they had several Congregations in several houses: Ergo, if Master Knollys be
worthy of credit, or if any belief may be given to his words, there were many
if not innumerable Congregations of Believers every day in Jerusalem, and so
he confirms my first Proposition which he has taken so much pains to
confute, and declares unto the whole world that he is a man void of all reason
and honesty; and truly if such a worthless Fellow had his due deserts for his
seducing of the poor people, he ought severely to be dealt with; and this
might suffice to have answered to Master Knollys, but there yet remains one
whibling cavil made by him to be answered unto, who learnedly distinguishes
between (...) that is between house and house, and houses by houses, and
would persuade the world that there were some great Mystery, or at least some
vast difference, between (...) house by house, and (...) houses by houses;
whereas indeed if we consult with the Original and with all Interpreters
and translations, we shall find that they are all one, and that they translate
the word in the singular number after the same manner, and with the same
expressions, or with words equivalent unto them that they do the plural,
making no difference between them; and although I never doubted, but that the
word (...) house by house, or in every house, was the same that (...), houses
by houses, or in all houses; for so they may be translated if we stand rigidly
upon the word, though the sense and meaning be the same as we shall see by and
by: but I say though I never made any scruple about the translation since I had
acquaintance with the original, yet for farther satisfaction I have consulted
with all the Interpretations and translations, both in the Latin, French,
Italian, Spanish, Dutch, English that I could meet with, and I find them all
agreeing in this, that they translate (...) in the singular, and (...) in the
plural after one and the same manner, and with the same expressions, and in
the same words many times, or in language intimating as much, as they that
render and translate the plural (...) per domos, translate the singular
likewise (...) ^ira domos, rendering the word both in the singular and the
plural, always in the number of multitude: and they that translate (...) in
the singular domatim translate the plural (...) domatim likewise, as they that
will consult with all the Latin Translations upon the second of the Acts, and
the 46. verse, and the 5. of the Acts, and the 42. verse, where the word (...)
is used in the singular number may see; Again if they will turn but to the 20.
Chapter of the Acts, and the 20. verse, there they shall find (...) in the
plural translated after the same manner the singular is by all the Latin
Interpreters, that is as they did render and translate the word in the
singular, so they translate it in the plural, making no difference in their
significations but taking them as all one: and so in our English translation,
Acts the 2. v. 46. there they translate (...) from house to house, and in the
5. Chapter, verse the 42. they render (...) in the singular in every house, and
in the twentieth of the Acts, and the twentieth verse, where the word is in the
plural (...) they render it there from house to house, as they did in the
singular, never making any difference between the singular and the plural; and
so the Italian renders the singular number (...) in the fifth of the Acts, verse.
4^. per le case, and in the 20. of the Acts, v. 20. (...) in the plural, he
translates it likewise per le case, making no difference between the singular
and the plural as the Holy Ghost does not, and the same I might show out of
all the Interpretations. Now it is well known that (...) in Greek when it is
joined with the accusative case, it often, if not ever signifies in or through,
and being joined with a word of the singular number, it signifies as much as if
it were joined with the plural, as we may see it in the 8. of Luke, verse. the
1. where (...) is rendered through every City. He went (says the
Interpretation) through every City preaching, or he preached in every City,
or in all Cities, or through all Cities; and so in the 1. of Titus, where Saint
Paul says, that he left Titus in Crete that he should ordain Elders, (...)
that is translated in English in every City, and by Master Knollys himself
oppidatim City by City, which is as much as in every City, or in all Cities,
or through all the Cities of Crete, and in the fourteenth of the Acts, verse
23. it is said when they had ordained them Elders, (...) Master Knollys
himself translates the singular there per singulas Ecclesias, in every Church,
that is to say in all or through all Churches; these are his own words, as you
may see it in the third page of his wise Pamphlet. So that when it makes for
his turn he can make no difference between the singular and the plural; yea
he translates (...) domatim, that is house by house, which is as much as (...)
as houses by houses, and per singulas domas, for he that says (...) man by
man, says as much as men by men; and therefore he plays the Iugler, and
cheat thus to cloud, the light, that he may put off his base wares the better,
and to darken the truth with his trifling about words, and all this to show to
the people that he has some skill in the Greek and Latin, because he can
write the words out of the Text, which every School boy can do. But I pray
see how the poor creature troubles himself in beating the air; he says it
is in the Original (...) domatim, they brake bread from house to house, but it
is not (...) per singulas domos, that is to say they did not break bread in
all houses, or through all the houses; Ergo, there were not many Congregations
in Jerusalem, which is a mere wickedness in him to trifle thus: for he
himself a little before translates (...) per singulat Ecclesias, and here he
would make a great difference between the singular and the plural: when
notwithstanding in the Original there is none: for in the twentieth of the
Acts, v. 20. there the Holy Ghost says (...) in the plural, which is all one
with (...), but if Master Knollis Interpretation be good, that when the word is
used in the plural, it signifies many Congregations and Assemblies, then in
the Church of Ephesus by his own confession there were many Congregations, and
yet they all made but one Church within that Precinct; and doubtless so it was
in Jerusalem, there were many Congregations there, and yet they all made but
one Church: and the truth is so evident, that Master Knollys his own
interpretation of the word (...) in the singular will carry it: for he
translates it domatim, house by house. Now I appeal to any intelligible man,
that knows but the English tongue, or any other language, where civility
dwells, and barbarism is banished; whether or no, when the Magistrate sends
Messengers or Officers to search for any Delinquents, and gives them in charge
to search through such a street house by house, I demand I say, whether the
Messengers by this their warrant are not in joined to search every house in
that street, and whether house by house be not to be understood every house and
all the houses in that street: and when the Officers return again to the
Magistrate, and relate unto him that according to his command and order they
have diligently searched house by house through the street, do they not I pray
in this acknowledge that they have searched every house in that street yea all
the houses? all men that know any thing in reason, know, that house by house,
in every street, or in every City, is as much as all houses in that street,
and in all houses in that City. Now when the word of God says, Acts 2. that
the Christians in Jerusalem and Believers brake bread from house to house, and
when in the 5. of the Acts, v. 42. it is recorded, that the Apostles daily in
the Temple, and in every house, or from house to house, or house by house (as
Mr. Knollys would have it) ceased not to teach and preach Jesus Christ* It is
manifestly apparent that in every of those houses and in all those houses they
had an Assembly or Congregation of believers, and for ought any thing can be
said to the contrary, there might be as many congregations then in Jerusalem as
they had Ministers and Pastors there which were in abundance: For none but the
Ministers might administer the Sacrament of Baptism and the Lords Supper: the
Apostles and the Ministers of the Gospel only had the charge to feed Christ's
sheep and Lambs, so that the sheep and lambs were not to feed their Pastor?
Now all the people under them were either sheep or lambs, and they were not to
intermedle in those holy Ordinances to administer them, though they might
receive them from them; and therefore what the holy Word of God relates to us,
that we are bound to believe: but the holy Word of God relates unto us that in
Jerusalem, and that in the very infancy of the Church, they had congregations
and Assemblies every day in many several houses at one time; yea in every
house. Ergo, there were many Assemblies and Congregations of believers in the
Church at Jerusalem, and that in the very infancy of it: and this Master
Knollys does acknowledge; for he confesses they had their meetings day by day,
and house by house, that is to say every day and in every house they had their
Congregations in Jerusalem, and so he is constrained to confess that which he
had so often and peremptorily denied: but such is the force, power, and
efficacy of truth as it will break out of the mouth of the enemy and fly in
their faces: for Master Knollys does confess, that besides their meetings in
the Temple and in Solomon's Porch, and that daily, they had their meetings also
house by house Domatim, so that their meetings and congregations in Jerusalem
were numberless, if they were from house to house. But if neither the
Scripture, nor his own confession, can convince his error, at least let his
own Words take some place with him who in the 23. page of his learned answer
has these expressions. Some godly and learned men of approved gifts came to
sojourne in this city, and preached the Word both publicly and from house to
house, and daily in the Temples, and in every house they ceased not to Teach
and Preach Jesus Christ, and some of them have dwelt in their own houses and
received all that came unto them etc.

Thus Mr Knollys speaks, and for proof of what he says he quotes the very
places of Scriptures in the Margent of his book that I produced as Act. 2.
ver. 46. Acts the 5. 42. Acts 20. verse. 20. Where from house to house and in in
every house in his dialect is all one, which it was not when I quoted it out of
the Word of God. And very reason and common experience teaches all men that
wheresoever the Independents have their meeting houses they have a Church or
congregation there; and as many meeting houses as they have, so many Churches
ordinatly they have, witness Toleration-streete, which they call the holy
street I mean Coleman-streete, which an Independent one day meeting me
passing through it, told me was the Saints street, and that their were more
precious Churches in that street then in all England besides, and he did
confidently believe it. And I was no sooner passed from him, but turning on the
right hand I saw many of the Independents going into the Nags-head a Tavern a
little above Coleman-streete; there they call their Parliament, and make
Committees and Chayre-men, for preparing of businesses for the great Council,
and for the advising of them what to do, and there they order how they will
deal with the Presbyterians; and this is one of their meeting houses also
whither the Saints resort upon all occasions to consult together about the
affairs of the Church and State, and that is the holy drinking School of the
Saints, for they say, they are all Saints, and to the pure all things are pure;
and therefore they must have a pure drinking School. But passing from
Toleration-streete and leaving their drinking school and they together: Let us
consider their practices and what Master Knollys says, who tells us that some
godly and learned men of approved gifts came to Sojourne in this City and
preached the Word of God both publicly and from house to house, and daily in
the Temples and in every house, they cease not to teach and preach Jesus
Christ. I demand of any of the Independents now, whether or no, wheresoever
any of those gifted men preach, they have not a congregation to preach to; and
whether or no wheresoever any of them has a gatherd Church (as they call it)
he has not there ^n his meeting house a Congregation and assembly, and whether
or no wheresoever they have preaching of the Word and breaking of bread amongst
them they have not a Church or Congregation there? I am confident they will
none of them deny it: Yea they will acknowledge that in as many places as the
Word of God is preached amongst them, and the Sacraments administered, that in
all those they have a several Church, congregation, and assembly and this very
reason will dictate unto any man. And therefore if in this City there be many
Congregations and assemblies in all those places where they preach publicly,
and from house to house, and in every house; not only because Mr Knollys says
it, but because every man's reason will convince him of it: after the same
manner every man will conclude, That in the Church of Jerusalem there was many
Congregations and Assemblies; for the Scripture relates, That the word of God
was preached publicly in the Temple and in Solomon's Porch, and that the Saints
brake bread from house to house, and that the Apostles ceased not to teach and
preach Jesus Christ in every house; and therefore all Christians are bound to
believe this because the mouth of the Lord has spoke it, yea and it is
acknowledged by Master Knollys; from all which it does now evidently appear to
all the world, that there were many Congregations and Assemblyes of believers
in the Church of Jerusalem, which Mr Knollys notwithstanding does wickedly
deny, affirming there were no more believers in Jerusalem, then could all meet
in any one place, and so he not only contradicts himself and fights against
the very light of reason, but which is more he gives the spirit of God the lie,
and therefore he ought by all those of the seven Churches to be severely dealt
with as a wicked impostor and deceiver and ought indeeed to be thrown out of
all their Congregations as a jugler and a false prophet.

Having thus evidently proved that there were many Congregations in the church
of Jerusalem, before the persecution: I will by Gods assistance make good that
there were also many Assemblyes under the persecution, and after the
persecution; and this I do the rather undertake, because some of the brethren
have said that howsoever it could be proved that before the persecution there
were many several Assemblies: yet by reason of the dispersion of the
believers, the Church of Jerusalem was so wasted and scattered that there were
no more left then could all meet in one Congregation. And were it so, that
after the scattering of the Believers and Christians in Jerusalem, it could
never be evinced and made good that there were more then could meet together in
one place: yet all this were nothing for the enervating of the argument: for we
must ever look upon the first constitution and government of the Church, and
what it was originally and by divine constitution, and not what it was
accidentally and through persecution and oppression and by the violence of men:
for governments of Churches are often changed from their Primordiall State
through many casualties as it happened often in the Church of the Jews: and
therefore in all reformations things are to be reduced to the first rule and
original pattern: and we are not to look upon them as by occasion they vary
and change through the injury of the times.

And therefore if we look into the Church of Jerusalem as she was in her youth
and in her most flourishing age, we shall find her consisting of diverse
Congregations and many Assemblies, and all them governed by a Common Council
and joint consent of a Presbytery, which must be the pattern of all Church
Government to the end of the world, if we will in our Reformation conform our
selves to Gods Ordinance and to the first constitution.

But because I say they think it so difficult a thing to prove many
Congregations in Jerusalem after the persecution, I will now God willing make
it evident; and not only after the persecution, but even in, and under the
persecution: and I will do it first out of that very place our brethren bring
against us, and by which they labor to evince the contrary: the place is in
the 8. of the Acts verse 1, 2, 4. In these words, And at that time there was a
great persecution against the Church which was at Jerusalem; and they were all
scattered abroad through the Regions of Judea and Samaria, except the Apostles,
verse 3. As for Saul he made havoc of the Church, entering into every house and
haling men and women, committed them to prison. Therefore they that were
scattered abroad, went every where preaching the word: From whence the brethren
gather, that there were no more believers left, than could meet in one
Congregation.

Before I come to prove my Assertion, I must give some Reasons to evince and
make good, that this dispersion and scattering of the Believers here spoken of,
was not so general and universal and so great, as that there might not yet
remain more Congregations in Jerusalem, and more people then could possibly
meet in any one place or two: for persecution is the bellows of the Gospel,
which blows every spark into a flame: so that this their division proved their
multiplication at home and abroad, as we shall see after I have set down my
Arguments and Reasons, so that it was no cause why we should conceive that
there were fewer assemblies in the Church of Jerusalem then before; for
although I should grant that this persecution was very great in respect of the
intention of the persecutors, as reaching to imprisonment and death of all
sorts, chap. 22. verse 4. and although I should likewise accord, that in regard
of the extent of it, it reache^h to all sorts both Preachers and Christians,
because it is said, They were all scattered abroad through all the Regions,
etc. except the Apostles, both which notwithstanding I cannot yield unto for
some reasons following: but I say should I grant all this, yet I affirm that
this persecution rather made more Congregations in Jerusalem then fewer then
there were before, though they might be smaller and lesser, then so, to wast
them and bring them to such a paucity, as they might all meet in one
Congregation: for this their division was a cause of their multiplication at
home and abroad, as I said before, and will afterward appear.

And even as it was here in England in the time of the Prelates power, when any
assembly of those they called Puritans, were at any time found together, they
were haled before Authority, (as the whole Kingdom can witness) and these
people were all scattered; yet so, as they still had their meetings in less
numbers; and whereas before they met perhaps a hundred in a company, now this
hundred was divided into three or four several assemblies, which were so many
several Churches; for in all these they enjoyed all the acts of worship, and
did partake in all the Ordinances as fully as if they had been in the most
crowded assemblyes; but this they did for their own safety, and that there
might not be such notice taken of them: for commonly if men see a good company
of people go into a house, and none of them come out again, they will by and
by gather, that there is something there to be done, more than ordinary; and
that there is some exercise of Religion, or some consultation and plotting
about some design or other; and therefore it stirs up the people to take more
notice of it, and then they begin to examine the occasion of that concourse,
and to pry into their proceedings: whereas, if they come but in slender
companies, they conceive it to be some ordinary entertainment, and think no
farther of it; so that they then more peaceably enjoy the society and
fellowship one of another, without any interruption, which they could not so
well have done, if they had come in greater assemblies and companies.

And even so it was among the Believers and Christians in Jerusalem, in that
persecution; they could not now meet in the Temple, nor possibly at their
wonted meeting houses, and yet even then they had their assemblies; no terrors
could make them forsake the companying of themselves together. For in that
persecution that is spoken of in the 12. of the Acts, we find the Church
assembled in several places; for they were praying in the house of Mary, verse
12. there was one Congregation, to which Peter comes and relates unto them the
manner of his delivery, and bids them go and tell it James and the brethren;
and there was another assembly; and without doubt Peter went unto a third: for
he would not go among the enemies: and it stands with all reason, that in this
persecution also, they were as zealous as then, and therefore did not forsake
the assembling of themselves together. Neither would the Apostles be idle, who
gave themselves continually to prayer and the ministering of the Word, which
they could not have done if there had been but as many Christians in Jerusalem
as could all have met in one place and in one Congregation; for one or two of
the Apostles could have preached unto them all, and then to what end or purpose
did all the other Apostles tarry in Jerusalem (who in all their motions and
stays, were directed by the Spirit of God) unless it were to comfort and
support the Church there, in the heat and rage of this persecution, when they
had scattered their other teachers from them? From all which it may evidently
appear, that there was a very great multitude of believers at this time in
Jerusalem, and that they were not diminished or scattered, though all their
Pastors and Ministers, saving the Apostles, were.

And I have very good reason to induce me to believe, That this persecution did
not extend to all Christians promiscuously, and that all the Believers were
scattered and dispersed except the Apostles, as our brethren conceive. For if
we consider the usual method of the persecuting Jews, and the manner and
custom of all the enemies of the Church in all ages, we shall ever observe
that they chiefly aimed at the taking away and extirpating of their teachers
and Ministers, and those that instructed them. So the Jews malice was greatest
against the Prophets in all ages, as we may see Matthew. the 5. verse the 12. For
so they persecuted the Prophets: and in the 23. of Matthew, our Savior says,
verse 29. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees hyprocrites, because ye build the
tombs of the Prophets, and say, if we had lived in the days of our Fathers,
we would not have been partakers with them of the blood of the Prophets; and
therefore ye witness unto your selves, that ye are the children of them which
killed the Prophets. Wherefore behold I send unto you Prophets, and wise men,
and Scribes, and some of them you shall kill and crucify, etc. Here our
Savior Christ declares what method they had formerly used in their
persecutions; and that was chiefly to persecute their teachers, and what
method they would for the future take, and that was principally To kill and
crucify, the Prophets, Wisemen, and Scribes; which Prophecy of Christ, was
here in this persecution manifestly fulfilled: for here it is said, They were
all (viz. their teachers) scattered abroad and persecuted, except the Apostles.
It was I say ever the method and custom of persecutors to aim principally at
the rooting out and taking away of those they supposed were ablest to teach and
instruct the people, and this enraged them against John the Baptist and Christ
himself; and that made them at this time so mischievously to persecute their
Ministers and Teachers. Neither do I read in all the New Testament, before thss
persecution, that as yet they were come to the massacring of the common people;
they had slain the Lord of Life, and stoned Stephen; and after in the 12. of
the Acts we read, How Herod slew James, and because it pleased the Jews, he
proceeded to take Peter: they always had their eyes upon their teachers and
haled them to prison, as they did Peter and John in the 4. of the Acts; but for
the people, the only punishment they under-went, till this persecution, was
this, That they were cast out of the Synagogues, if any of them did publicly
profess Christ.

Indeed in this persecution their violence extended to the haling of men and
women to prison; But before, we read of no violence offered unto the people;
only they railed on them, reviled, and reproached them, as all wicked men,
whose tongues are set on fire from Hell, use to do, on all the generation of
the just.

The same method did the Prelates here in England use; they chiefly and more
principally persecuted the faithful and painful Preachers and Ministers every
where, and such as they thought best able to instruct the people, and selected
but here and there some private families for to scare others, and this method
Antichrist and his accomplices had learned from the devil and the Jews. So that
when it is said they were all scattered except the Apostles, it is to be
understood that all their Preachers and Teachers, the Apostles only excepted,
were scattered; For the word all in this place, must be understood, either of
all the Believers, or of all the Teachers and Officers in the Church of
Jerusalem, except the Apostles. But it cannot be understood of all the
believers, that they were all scattered; and therefore it must be understood of
all the Teachers, and that for many reasons.

The first, if all the believers had been scattered and none left, to what end
then should the twelve Apostles have remained in Jerusalem? They were not to
Preach to the walls, neither would they have remained there idle, but would
rather have shaken off the dust of their feet, (as Christ commanded them) for a
witness against them, Luke 10. And would have departed and have gone away with
the rest of the Teachers, as all good reason persuades.

A second reason is; because if this particle all be always exceptive or taken
to the utmost, and in the largest extent, as some of the brethren imply and
would have it; then there should not one believer have been left in Jerusalem
besides the Apostles, which is expressly against the Text, for verse. 3. It is
said, That Saul brake into houses, haling men and women, committing them to
prison, and this he did at Jerusalem at this time, as he acknowledges himself
Acts 26. ver. 10. And therefore of necessity it must follow, That all the
believers were not scattered abroad, for some of them were in prison in
Jerusalem. And for ought I can gather, all the rest were in their several
houses, or else the Apostles could have had no harbor: for if all their
friends had been scattered by this tempest, and if all the sheep had been drove
away and the whole flock dispersed, their Pastors without doubt would have
followed them: for he would be counted a very bad Shepherd that should not
follow or look after the poor sheep that were scattered by the Wolves.

Neither can we imagine that the Apostles that were the Pastors of the flock of
Jesus Christ, and to whose care he had committed his sheep and his Lambs, with
a special charge that they should feed them, would relinquish their care and
choose rather to dwell amongst a company of Wolves, from whom they could
expect no fair measure, then amongst the sheep: But in that all the Apostles
still remained in Jerusalem, I rather gather, and that without all
controversy, they continued there for this very purpose, that they might
comfort and support the Church there, and refresh the Believers in this heat
of Persecution, when they wanted the help of their other faithful Ministers
and Pastors.

Thirdly, it is very evident from the Text, they were only the Preachers that
were scattered; for verse 4. It is said, That they that were scattered went
every where preaching the Word, which expression in the Original, as may be
proved by innumerable places, signifies such teachers as were Ministers by
Office, and such as preached by way of Sermons to a multitude, though they
might likewise in private conference instruct, which their public Ministry
did not exempt them from. And although private Christians may teach and
instruct one another, as Aquila and Priscilla taught Apollos, and as all
Christians are commanded to instruct one another, Col. 3. verse 16. Yet this
text speaks not of such a teaching, but of preaching, They went every where,
says the Scripture (...), preaching the Word. For teaching may be an act of
Charity, but preaching is an act of Office; for how can they preach except they
be sent? Romans 10. So that by virtue of their Office, they might both publicly
preach, and in private converse also instruct others wheresoever they came,
whether they were sent out by persecution or by mission. As I do conceive of
any of those Godly Ministers that were not many years since, drove from their
habitations, and that were persecuted out of their places by the Prelates, that
they might have preached publicly in any Congregation as Ministers and men in
Office, and might also have instructed privately; but the one was an act of
duty as it was their Office, and the other of love and charity. And so may a
well gifted private Christian instruct and teach others upon occasion, and in
private conference, which is an act of love; but he cannot properly be said to
Preach, which is an act of one in Office, and belongs only to the Presbyters
and Pastors, and such as for their sufficient learning and abilities are called
unto the Ministry and ordained and set apart to this Office: and such only
were those that were scattered, except the Apostles: and by all probability
these Ministers and Preachers that we scattered were those that were at the
choosing of Matthias, the seventy Disciples and many more. So that for ought I
can gather, all the believers in Jerusalem, yet remained in their several
habitations and dwellings, except those that were haled to prison. And
therefore of necessity there must be many Assemblies and Congregations yet in
Jerusalem, that made all the Apostles abide and continue still among them all,
which makes exceeding strongly to prove, that there were innumerable multitudes
of Believers still in Jerusalem, which of necessity were forced to divide
their assemblies into more distributions and less Congregations then formerly,
and therefore rather multiplied their assemblies then otherwise, that by such
Privacy they might avoid persecution, as in our times, good Christians here in
London were wont to do, when the Prelates were in their ruff. But out of this
place I thus argue.

Where there were twelve of the most able, painful, and diligent Preachers in
the world, and that gave themselves continually to prayer and the Ministry of
the Word, and at such a time as there was most need of preaching, and when they
could not publicly come together, by reason of the Persecution, and where
there were innumerable multitudes of believers of all nations to be taught and
preached unto in their several Languages and tongues; there of necessity there
must be several Congregations and assemblies for the employment of them all,
both Preachers and hearers. But in the Church of Jerusalem in the time of the
hottest persecution, there were the twelve Apostles, the most able, painful,
and diligent Preachers in the world, and that gave themselves continually to
prayer, and the Ministry of the Word, and when they could not publickely come
together, by reason of the persecution, and where there were innumerable
multitudes of believers of all nations to be taught and preached unto in their
several Languages and tongues. Therefore of necessity there must be several
Congregations and Assemblies for the employment of them all, both Preachers and
hearers.

For this Syllogism, all and every part of it, is so cleared by what has
formerly been said, as I am most assured, no rational man will call either of
the Propositions in question. But from the former place I thus further argue.

Where there were such multitudes of believers of all Nations and Countries,
still remaining even in the hottest time of persecution, as had for many years
employed and continually taken up above an hundred painful Ministers and
Teachers, there they could not all meet together in any one place or room, but
of necessity must be distributed into diverse Congregations and assemblies, if
they would all be edified; and much more now they were forced unto it, if they
would avoid Persecution, and provide for their own safety: But in the Church
of Jerusalem in the hottest time of Persecution, there were such multitudes of
Believers of all Nations and Countries still remaining, as had for many years
employed and continually taken up above an hundred painful Ministers and
Teachers: Ergo, they could not all meet together in any one place or room: but
of necessity must be distributed into diverse congregations and assemblies, if
they would all be edified, and much more now were they forced unto it, if they
would avoid persecution, and provide for their own safety.

The Major of this Syllogism by the very light of nature and reason, which we
may not in a matter of disputation especially relinquish, is manifest and
evident. For the Minor it is also apparent from the foregoing discourse: by
which it is proved, that their Preachers only were scattered, and all those
Ministers that were at the choosing the Apostle Matthias, chap. 1. and many
more that instructed the people: but for the people and believers, they
remained still in Jerusalem; the conclusion therefore is firm. But I will now
go on to evince, that after the persecution, there were more believers still
in the Church of Jerusalem, then could all meet in any one place and room
together: and therefore of necessity, they must be distributed into many
Congregations and Assemblies: And for proof of this Assertion, the places
following will suffice: and first that in the 9. chap. of the Acts, verse 31.
Then had the Churches rest through all Indaea and Galilee and Samaria, and were
all edified, and walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the
Holy Ghost, were multiplied. Out of which words it may evidently appear, that
persecution is but the bellows of the Gospel; and that which the enemies of
the Gospel think to be a means of extinguishing the light of it, makes it but
more gloriously shine forth, and the farther to spread its rays: for by
blowing and puffing at it, they spread it the more, and extend it here and
there farther abroad; as we see by this persecution and scattering of those
Preachers and Ministers of the Gospel: for this their dispersion, by which the
persecutors had thought to have wasted the Churches, was an occasion of the
multiplication of them, and the cause of the increasing of Believers every
where.

And here we may also observe, That by how much more the rage of the enemy is
great and violent, by so much it is less durable; for this great persecution
was but short. And it cannot be conceived, but they who were scattered by
persecution, would upon the ceasing of it, return again to Jerusalem, as most
people commonly do, t^^^eir own Countries, Cities, and places of habitation
after persecution. And this also must needs be a great Argument, to induce
others to the love of that Religion, which they see God so much favors the
Lovers and professors of; the which the Lord so preserves, comfort, and
follows with so many mercies, and upholdeth in all their afflictions and
trials, never forsaking nor never leaving them. But if those that were
scattered had never returned, that makes nothing for the weakening the truth of
this Proposition, that there were many Congregations and Assemblies still in
the Church of Jerusalem; for this Text proves that it was not decreased after
the dispersion. Out of the which words I thus argue.

That Church before the Persecution and Dispersion of whose Ministers and
Pastors, was so numerous and had such multitudes of Believers in it, of all
Nations, as they could not all meet in any one plaee or room, for edification,
and to partake in all acts of worship, but were forced to preach in diverse and
sundry places, as in the Temple, and from house to house; and after the
persecution ceased and the Church had rest, was greatlier yet multiplied then
before; and whose companies were more and more in number increased, they of
necessity could not al meet together in any one place or room for edification,
and to partake in all acts of worship, but must necessarily be distributed into
diverse and sundry Congregations and Assemblies if they would all be edified.
But the Church of Jerusalem, before the Persecution and Dispersion of her
Ministers and Pastors, was so numerous and had such multitudes of Believers in
it of all Nations, as they could not all meet in any one place or room for
edification* and to partake in all acts of worship; but were forced to preach
in diverse and sundry places, as in the Temple, and from house to house; and
after the Persecution ceased and the Churches had rest, was greatlier yet
multiplied than before: and whose companies were more and more in number
increased. Ergo, Of necessity after the Persecution there were more believers
in the Church of Jerusalem, then could all meet together in any one place or
room for edification, and to partake in all acts of worship, but must
necessarily be distributed into diverse Congregations and Assemblies if they
would be edified.

For the Major besides common understanding and ordinary reason which confirm
it, it is manifest from the 2, 3. and 5. Chapters of the Acts, which in
express words signifies, That they met daily in the Temple, and from house to
house, yea in every house, and therefore that is true and out of all doubt: and
for the Minor it is evident from the place above cited, where it is said, The
Churches, (that is to say, all the Churches in Judea, of which Jerusalem was
the Mother Church) were multiplied, the word in the Original (...) signifies
properly an increase in number and multitude, and not in measure; and is so to
be understood in this place; and cannot being applied unto persons, be
otherwise taken, whatsoever it may of sins and graces; and then also the word
is capable of this construction, as may be proved if need required: so that the
conclusion does follow.

And truly that of Saint Paul in the first of the Galatians is an excellent
Argument to evince that there were more Congregations in Jerusalem then one,
where proving that he had not received the Gospel which he preached, from
men, but from God, he uses this reason; That if he had received it from men,
it must be from the Jews, and from the Apostles; for the Gentiles were
ignorant of it, and he was to carry the Gospel unto them, and therefore they
could not teach it him; and to prove that he received it not from the
Apostles; he thus speaks of himself.

When it pleased God to reveal his Son unto me, that I might preach him
amongst the Heathen, I immediately I conferred not with flesh and blood,
neither went I up to Jerusalem, to them that were Apostles before me; but I
went into Arabia; Then after three years I went up to Jerusalem, to see Peter,
and aboade with him fifteen days; but other of the Apostles saw I none, save
James the Lords Brother.

Out of the which words besides the singular testimony we have that the
preaching and writings of Saint Paul, are the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and the
Word of the living God, against the Papists: we may evidently gather against
the Independents, that after the persecution there were more believers in
Jerusalem then either did or could all meet in one place: for in saying that he
was with Peter fifteen days, but in all that time saw none of the Apostles
save James, this I say, is a sufficient Argument to prove more Congregations
and assemblies of believers in the Church of Jerusalem, which so employed the
Apostles in their several Ministeries asthey had not so much spare time to
visit Paul, and that Paul also was so taken up in preaching there, that he had
no leisure to visit them. And for the diligence of the Apostles in their
Ministry it is said in the sixth of the Acts, That they gave themselves
continually to prayer and to the Ministry of the Word: and therefore they were
never idle; and that the Apostles either all or the most of them continued
resident for many years in Jerusalem, before they distributed themselves into
several Nations and Countries; and that very few of them were sent abroad,
there are frequent testimonies in the Acts of the Apostles; neither as yet did
I ever hear it scrupled, or called in question, whether the Apostles were then
there or no, when Paul was at Jerusalem; for it is taken pro confesso, that
either all or the most of them were at that time in Jerusalem: neither does
Saint Paul say, I saw none of the other Apostles because they were absent, or
were gone to Preach the Gospel in other places. And for Saint Paul we read,
that wheresoever he came, he went into their Synagogues and into their
Assemblies to Preach, and that he preached from house to house: and he that gave
so strict a charge to Timothy (and in him to all Ministers) that he should
Preach in season and out of season; he himself without all doubt, would not
neglect his duty, who in the 20. of the Acts, sets his own example before all
the Presbyters for their imitation in their diligent preaching, and he
ordinarily preached by the day and by the night, as is manifest out of the same
Chapter and many other places; and surely the time he remained with Peter in
Jerusalem, he was as diligent in Preaching, as he was in any of the other
Churches; and he professes of himself that the care of all the Churches lay
upon him, and that he labored more then all the other Apostles in their
particulars: so that it stands with all reason, that while he was in
Jerusalem he was very sedulous in Preaching, as who had both strength of body,
and Gods special assistance, and his immediate inspiration always to help him
in his Ministry; so that I conceive, as of charity I am bound, that Paul was
daily in one assembly or other: now if there had been at that time, no more
believers in Jerusalem then could have met in one place, congregation, and
Assembly, then of necessity Paul must have seen the other Apostles there, as
well as Peter and James (for they also were good Churchmen, to speak a little
in the Prelates dialect) and they never left the Word, but were always taken up
either in praying or preaching amongst them in the Temple, and from house to
house, yea in every house: and if there had been but one Congregation or
Assembly of believers in Jerusalem, the Apostles would daily upon all occasion
have been with their flock: Now in that Paul saw them not in all that time he
was in Jerusalem, it is evidently apparent there were more Congregations of
believers in the Church of Jerusalem then one, and more Christians then could
all meet in any one or a few places.

But to proceed to a place or two more for the further confirmation of this
truth Acts 12. verse 24. It is said there, that the word of God grew and
multiplped. Here also we have another good effect of a new sierce persecution
in Jerusalem; it increased the number and multitude of Believers there after
the Persecutor was taken away, For the Word of God grew and multiplied, says
the Holy Ghost. Out of which words I thus argue.

Where the Word of God daily more and more grew and multiplied after the
persecution, that is to say, where there were more multitudes and greater
numbers of Believers added unto the Church; through the Ministry and preaching
of the Gospel then was before; which notwithstanding was then so numerous, as
they could not all meet in any one place or room, to enjoy all the Ordinances
to edification, there of necessity they must be distributed into diverse
assemblies and congregations to enjoy all the Ordinances to edification. But in
the Church of Jerusalem after a double persecution, the Word of God daily more
and more grew and mnltiplyed; that is to say, there were more multitudes and
greater numbers of Believers added unto the Church through the ministry and
preaching of the Gospel by the Apostles then was before: which notwithstanding
was then so numerous, as they could not all possibly meet in any one place and
room. Ergo, there was a greater number of Believers after the Persecution then
before: and therefore of necessity they could not all meet in any one place or
room to communicate in all the Ordinances, but must be distributed into
several Congregations and Assemblies if they would all be edified.

For the Major I conceive it is so evidently clear as no man of ordinary
understanding will not see the truth of it. For the Minor, the Text proves it:
and if we will compare Scripture with Scripture, the truth of it will by and by
be out of controversy, for in the 15. of John verse 16. Our Savior speaking
there to his Disciples, says, I have chosen you and ordained you that you
should go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain: that is,
I have chose you to preach the Gospel and convert men, which is the fruit of
preaching the Word; and causes the multiplication of Believers, for Faith
comes by hearing, Romans 10. Now this Scripture is here fulfilled, for it is
said, that the Word of God grew and multiplied; that is, it brought forth the
great fruit and increase of multitudes of Believers, and converted many,
notwithstanding all the persecutions that were raised against it and the
Church. So that the conclusion must necessarily follow from the premises, and
it is most apparent, that there were many Congregations of Believers in
Jerusalem after the Persecution. But in the 21 Chapter, 20 Verse. there is a
place that puts an end to this Controversy; and with the which I will
conclude my first assertion. In these words, Thou see Brother (says Saint
James, and the Presbyters of Jerusalem to Saint Paul) how many ten thousands
(for so it is in the Original, (...)) of Jews there are which believe, and
they are all zealous of the Law: In this place the Evangelist speaks of the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem that were Believers, and had their abode there, and
not of strangers, as our Brethren suppose; and such as they conceive were come
up to Jerusalem at that time to the feast of Pentecost, at which they think
Paul then was: which opinion of theirs might be confuted with many reasons, if
it were necessary; some of the which I shall briefly set down. As first, it is
well known that the feast of Pentecost lasted but one day, and that in the
time of Wheat-harvest, when ordinarily but few came to Jerusalem. Besides none
of the Jews that lived out of the Country of Judaea, and the confines of
Israel, were enjoined to come to that feast, or any other of the feasts so
far as I remember; neither indeed could they, dwelling in such remote
countries; except they spent all their time in running about. So that as I
conceive is was arbitrary in the Jews, that dwelt in other countries, whether
they would come or no to all those several Feasts: though I have this opinion
of some of the most zealous of them, and best ablest and richest of them, and
that had time and leisure, that they would spare neither pains nor costs, so
they might enjoy the Ordinances and the society of their Brethren. Besides we
read but of very few strangers, that were at Jerusalem at this time when Paul
was there, and they were them of Asia, which were persecutors rather then
believers, as the story relates, verse 27, 28. Now the multitude of which
there is mention made in this place in the 22. verse, they were all Believers,
and were inhabitants, and such as were well known to Saint James and the
Presbyters, and were all strangers to Paul; and such as had only heard that
Paul taught all the Jews that were among the Gentiles to forsake Moses, etc.
And therefore none of these many ten thousands were of the believing Jews
amongst the Gentiles: for they are clearly distinguished from them: for it is
said, that those Myriads of believing Jews were informed that Paul taught all
the Jews among the Gentiles, etc. They then were informed that Paul had taught
others. The Jews among the Gentiles were they who Paul had so taught, and how
could they be in the number of them that were informed? Had they need to be
informed by others what Saint Paul had taught themselves? Therefore they must
needs be the believing Jews of Jerusalem, and the inhabitants and dwellers
there. So that out of the Text I thus argue.

Many ten thousands of Believers could not all meet at any one time, or in any
one place or congregation to enjoy all the Ordinances to edification; but of
necessity must be distributed into diverse and sundry congregations and
assemblies, if they would partakes in all acts of worship and be edified. But
in the Church of Jerusalem after all the persecutions, there were many ten
thousands believers. Ergo, they could not all meet together at any one time, or
in any one place or congregation, for the enjoying of all acts of worship to
edification; but of necessity must be distributed into diverse and sundry
congregations and assemblies, they would partake in all the Ordinances, and be
edified.

For the Major all reason will assent unto it; for the Minor, the text it self
confirms it; neither does the word Myrias or Myriades ever express less then
ten thousand, as might out of many places of Scripture be proved and diverse
authors. And truly to any man but of an ordinary understanding it would seem
strange, yea an incredible thing that Jerusalem the Theater of so many miracles
and where there were twelve Apostles, and the most of them for the most part
resident, and so many famous Preachers and Presbyters, and who at the first
beginning of their Ministry, after they had received the gifts of the holy
Ghost by their powerful preaching and a few miracles had in a short time
converted above eight thousand people, besides great multitudes both of men and
women, besides Priests, and who preached daily in the Temple, and from house to
house, and that for above twenty years together (as most of the Apostles did
without interruption) that in all this time of the Gospells spring, and that in
so populous and numerous a city that all these famous Ministers and Teachers
should convert no more to the faith, then might all meet in one Congregation: I
say all this will seem strange to any rational man. And as it is against all
reason, so it is against the express words of the holy Scriptures as has out
of many places in the foregoing discourse bin sufficiently made appear, and out
of the place last cited, which does affirm, That there were many ten thousand
believers in the Church of Jerusalem after all the persecutions; all which
could not meet in any one place to enjoy all Acts of Worship, no not in a few.
Whether therefore it has not by this and the many other testimonies of holy
Scripture and the arguments out of both been sufficiently proved, That there
were many Congregations in the Church of Jerusalem, I report my self to any
that have not the pearl of prejudice in the eye of their judgment? And this
shall suffice to have spoke for the proof of my first assertion.

But as in all their former discourse I faithfully set down what Mr Knollys and
I. S. had to say by way of answer and confutation to those several Arguments
they opposed, so I shall now in the same manner truly relate what Mr Knollys
has to reply by way of refutation to this my last Argument, and then I will
come to what my brother Burton has to gainsay, and reply to him in order.

Master Knollys his words in way of answer to this last Argument page 9. are
these.

As for the many ten thousands mentioned Acts 21. verse 20. (...) comes of
(...) infinitus (and though the word (...) do sometime signify numerum december
millium, yet not always, but for some great number which cannot suddenly be
told as Luke 12. 1. And Beza both according to the old and new version of the
Greek into Latin, reads it millia thousands, not de^em millia: And so we have
it in our English Bibles translated thousands. And the following verse 22. will
make it probable that they were not so many thousands; for there we thus read;
the multitude must needs come together, so that I say it is probable that they
were not so many thousands, but they could, yea must assemble together. Neither
can the Doctor make good from those Scriptures he produces page 26. to wit
Acts the 1. ver. 21, 22. chap. 6. ver. 2, 4. and chap. 8* ver. 1. That there
was almost an hundred Preachers and Ministers besides the twelve Apostles in
the Church of Jerusalem. The twelve are named indeed in Acts 6. 2. 4. but not
an hundred besides, no not any one Preacher but them twelve. And as for the
other two places Acts the 1. 21, 22. and Acts the 8. ver. 1. There is not any
word concerning Preachers or Ministers, only some directions touching the
choice of Matthias who was one of the twelve mentioned Acts 6. v. 2. And
although they who were scattered preached the word Acts 8. ver. 4. yet the
Scripture does not declare that they were Preachers or Ministers of the Church
in Jerusalem.

This Mr. Knollys had to reply; whose words I have set down at large that all
men may see the force of his denial, and with how little reason these men
^ight against the truth, to maintain their idle opinion of Independency and of
the congregationall way: viz. That there were no more believers in the Church
of Jerusalem then ^ould meet in one place: And if words and denyalls and
sottish evasions might be sufficient to overthrow any apparent truth, then
Master Knollys and his fraternity will not want them in opposing the most
grounded truth and doctrine for the upholding and maintenance of their fond and
grollish errors.

But now to examine his words, that the truth may more evidently appear, and
that my Argument stands firm and good notwithstanding all Master Knollys has
to say to the contarry.

First, he babbles about the word (...) saying that it comes of (...)
infinitus; but what is this I say to the matter in hand thus to trifle about
words, if not to amuse the ignorant people only to cloud the truth? which
nevertheless breaks forth more illustriously for the confirming and
strengthening of my Argument and for the corroborating of the truth contained in
it, as will by the seqnell appear: for if (...) be derived and come from a word
that signifies infinite in the concrete, as he affirms, then as all the
learned know, the abstract is of a larger extent: for darkness is more then
dark, and signifies the extremity and profundity of dark; and so in the same
manner, if (...) be the abstract of (...) as it is according to Master Knollys
his learning, then it denotes and signifies a greater number then ten thousand,
rather than a less, by how much Myriads an infinite and an innumerable
multitude of people signifies more then a finite, then ten thousand: for so the
word (...) in the 12. of Luke is translated when there were gathered together,
says the translation, an innumerable company of people insomuch that they
trod one upon another, etc. an innumerable company therefore signifies rather
more then ten thousand, then a less number in any ordinary understanding.

And the best interpretes say positus est definitus uumerus pro infinito, a
definite and a certain number for an infinite. Others interpret the word thus,
innumer ae turbae multitudo amultitude of immumerable people. So that by this
his vain jangling about the word he gains nothing. Yea the truth is so
clear, that he himself confesses, that the word (...) sometimes signifies ten
thousand, yet not always, but for some great number which cannot suddenly be
told; and for the proof of what he says he quots the 12. of Luke the place
above mentioned, and brings Bezas his version and our English translation for
the confirmation of his assertion viz. that (...) does not always signify ten
thousand; and after that he abuses his own reason to confute Saint Luke who
recording the words of St. James to Paul, says, thou see brother how many
ten thousand believing Jews etc. To which words of Luke Master Knollys
learnedly replies that the following verse. 22. will make it probable that there
were not many ten thousands; for there (says he) we thus read, the multitude
must needs come together; so that I say it is probable that they were not so
many ten thousands, but they could, yea must assemble together.

Thus Master Knollys disputes; so that it is manifest that he argues not only
against me, but confutes Saints Luke himself, who by the Spirit of God delivers
unto the world, that there were many ten thousands of believers in the Church
of Jerusalem, which Master Knollys by the spirit of error gainsaith; so that it
is no wonder, if he and his fraternity make nothing of of my arguments, when
they undertake to give the Spirit of God the lie upon all occasions: for in
express words the spirit says there were many ten thousands of believers in
Jerusalem, and Master Knollys and his associates affirm the contrary, saying
that the Word (...) does not always signify ten thousand, and that it is
probable there were not so many believere in Jerusalem, and he produces Bezas
his version and our English translation to confirm his errors; which kind of
silly arguing of his, if it be good, then not only every truth of God may
easily be over-throwne, but all Heresies be established: but I pray see the
folly of the Man: Beza (says he) and the English interpreters have not
translated the Word (...) ten thousand Ergo it is not so in the Original: If
such kind of disputing be allowed of in the Congregationall way, I shall not so
much wonder hereafter that they tumble daily into so many hideous and monstrous
opinions; but of the validity of this argument more by and by, In the mean
time, take notice of Master Knollys his words, howsoever says he (...), does
not always signify ten thousand, yet it is taken for so^^ great number that
cannot suddenly be told.

Now I refer my self to any intelligible and judicious man, whether in this,
Master Knollys does not plainly oppose Saint Luke, and confute what he has
writ, and whether notwithstanding what he says, the truth does not yet more
clearly appear, and that by his own interpretation of the word (...) for in
his interpretation two things are observable; the first, that it signifies some
great number. The second, that it signifies such a great number as cannot
suddenly be told: from which all rational men will conclude, if (...) signify
some great number that cannot suddenly be told, as Master Knollys affirms,
then it signifies more then ten thousand; for ten thousand is not so great a
number, nor such a number but may without any difficulty be suddenly told: for
we have read of five thousand that have suddenly been fed, and of four
thousand at another time, besides women and children that have all likewise
been suddenly fed; and therefore ten thousand may suddenly be told; and
although those five thousand could meet together, and be suddenly fed in the
fields, I will not be induced to believe that any one place or room, in a
City or house could have contained them all to communicate in all the
ordinances. Now then if according to Mr. Konllys his learning there were many
greatnumbers of Believers in Jerusalem that could not suddenly be told; all
rational men will gather, that they could not all meet in any one place or
congregation to partake in all acts of worship; this I say every good
accomptant and intelligible man will easily gather.

But because Mr Knollys affirms, and that so peremptorily, that the word (...)
does not always signify ten thousand, and to that end cites Beza's his
version, and the translation of our Bibles, who interpret it thousands, and not
ten thousands; I think it fit to say something concerning this business in way
of farther answer to Master Knollys, that all men may the better discern in to
the wickedness of these trifling men: for all Accomptants know, and they that
are but a little skilled in Arithmetic, that the word ten thousand in what
language soever it be, loses nothing of its signification, but retains the
full number, and always signifies ten thousand, though any Interpreter
translating the word should for ten thousand interpret it thousands, or many
thousands: for this his interpretation diminishes nothing from the
signification of the word; for ten thousand is ever ten thousand: as for
instance, if one writing to his friend beyond the Seas concerning the Battle at
Nazebie, should relate unto him the manner of the fight in every particular,
and should also set down the number of each Army; and in express words say,
that the Kings Army consisted of ten thousand, and the Parliaments Army of as
many, and he that should translate this Letter into the French or Dutch tongue
for this certain number of ten thousand, should say the King came into the
field with thousands or many thousands, and the Parliament with as many: I
demand of any understanding Arithmetician, or skillful Accountant, or but of
any intelligible creature, whether the number of ten thousand loose any thing
of its signification, or be not still ten thousand, although the Interpreter
for that definite and certain number set down an indefinite number? I am most
assured, his reason will dictate unto him, that there is no diminishing of the
number, but it will ever be in the Original Copy ten thousand, though the
Interpreter did not in formal words say the King and the Parliament came into
the field with ten thousand men a piece.

Even so it is here, Beza and our Translators taking the liberty of
Interpreters render the word (...) thousands, or many thousands, which word
notwithstanding in the Original signifies ten thousand. I appeal now to the
judgment of any wise man and godly Christian, whether I shall cleave rather to
the interpretation, or to the original and authentic Copy, or whether the
Text is rather to be relied upon or the traduction? especially when we are
commanded to go to the Law and to the Testimony; without the guidance of
which, we shall wander in darkness. Isa. 8. I am confident that all
judicious men will conclude that the original is rather to be stuck to and
believed then the interpretation. Now when in the Original the word (...) ever
signifies ten thousand, and never less, but many times more, as being a word
in the abstract, it follows notwithstanding all that Master Knollys, and all
those of his party can say or a^firme to the contrary, that the word (...) in
that place, and in all other places in the Holy Scripture, and in all good
Authors, ever signifies ten thousand; and Beza himself upon the first verse of
the 12. of Saint Luke* verse 1. in his brief notes has this expression (...)
word for word (says he) signifies ten thousand, and so he interprets it in
other places. So that Beza's his translation helps Master Knollys and his
brethren nothing.

And as for our English translation, howsoever in this place it renders (...)
many thousands, yet in other places it gives the right interpretation, the
full number the word signifies, as in the 19. of the Acts, v. 19. where the
word is in the Original (...) they translate it there fifty thousand pieces of
silver, and *Beza denariorum quinquaginta millia, that is in both translations
five Myriads. And so likewise in the 5. of the Revelation, verse 11. (...) they
render it ten thousand times ten thousand, and in Jude the fourteenth. (...)
they translate it, and behold the Lord comes with ten thousand of Saints. So
that it is most apparent, by our interpretation that the word (...) never
signifies less then ten thousand, but being taken single and by it self it
often signifies more, and is left free to reach to a greater number, yea an
innumerable company, as in the place above quoted in the 14. of Jude, and in
the 12. of the Hebrews, verse 22. where (...) in our translation is
interpreted an innumerable multitude of Angels: by all which I am most assured,
the learned will all conclude that, the place in the Acts (...) signifies no
less then many ten thousands. So that all Master Knolly's pudder about that
word, shows nothing but his vanity.

And for his reason of his probability, that there were not so many, it is
impious and fights against the truth, and gives the Spirit of God the lie; and
as for the multitude in that place that follows in the 22. verse, all the
best Interpreters understand some of the chief and select men, and of the
prime in authority: for all things were to be carried with order and decency,
and not with confusion, which the coming together of many ten thousands would
have caused, though they had bin Saints; for we see what a tumult a few zealots
of the Law by stirring up the people against Paul made in the Temple. Now if
all the Believers in Jerusalem besides women and children had met together, and
some of Paul's enemies had been there also, and suggested to the people that
he was an enemy of the Law of Moses; what a confusion may all men conceive
would there then have been? Besides, there was no one place could have
contained them all: and therefore Master Knollis his prattle, is not only
against all reason, and the very opinion of all orthodox Interpreters, but
indeed against the judgment of the learned of his own party, who by
multitude in this, as in many other places, understand the more eminent and
chiefest of believers, and men of gravity, and wisdom to manage a business,
and not a confused company as this man says: so that what I have replied in
way of answer I persuade my self it sufficiently satisfies all well grounded
Christians of the truth of my first Position; to wit, that there were more
believers in Jerusalem then could all meet in any one place or a few, to
communicate in all acts of worship. Yet before I pass on to show the
confusednesse, and senselessenesse of this Master Knollys his following
discourse, I think it fit out of his own Interpretation of the word (...) to
frame an Argument for the corroborating of the truth. His words are these.
Although the word (...) do sometime signify ten thousand, yet not always,
but for some great number which cannot suddenly be told. I will not quarrel
his English and the manner of his expression, though it is none of the best as
in many other places, lest I should seem to be like him and his abbertors to
trifle about words. But thus I argue out of his words.

Where there was not only some great number of believers that could not
suddenly be told, but many such great somes, there they could not all meet
together in one place or Congregation to communicate in all acts of worship:
But in the Church of Jerusalem there was not only some great number of
believers which could not suddenly be told, but many such great somes: Ergo,
they could not all meet together in any one place or Congregation to partake in
all the acts of worship: for the Major, it is evident, yea so apparent by the
very light of reason, that no judicious Christian can deny it; for all men know
that ten thousand may suddenly be told, if five thousand may suddenly be sed;
and they likewise know that ten thousand cannot meet together in any one place
or room, or in any one Congregation to communicate in all the Ordinances; this
I say all men know by the very light of natural understanding, and as by daily
experience they are taught; much more by the same reason they will be convinced
that many such great numbers cannot meet together in one Congregation to
communicate in all Ordinances; all this, the very light of reason suggests to
any man: and therefore cannot be denied; so that the Major of my Syllogism is
undeniable: and for the Minor, besides the holy Scripture that asserts there
were many ten thousands, we have Master Knollys his concession, that the word
(...) sometime signifies ten thousand, but always is taken for some great
number that cannot suddenly be told; and the word of God says there were many
Myriads, that is many such great numbers: therefore by Master Knollys his own
interpretation of the word it follows, that there were more Believers in the
Church of Jerusalem then could all meet in any one place or a few to partake in
all acts of worship.

And now I will briefly examine his following discourse, though it be little to
the purpose, the vanity of the which having been so often again and again
discovered in the forgoing treatice. And then I will come to my brother Burtons
answer. Master Knollys his words are these. Neither can the Doctor make good
from those Scriptures he produces page 62. to wit Acts the 1. verse. 21. 22.
Chapter 6. ver. 2. 4. and chapter the 8. 1. that there were almost an hundred
Preachers and Ministes, besides the twelve Apostles in the Church of Jerusalem,
etc. for answer in a few words, I boldly affirm what the Scripture teaches
me, viz: that before the persecution we read of in the 8. chap. v. 1. and
before the dispersion and scattering of the believers, besides the Apostles
there were in the Church of Jerusalem almost an hundred Preachers and
Ministers. And for this the Word of God is clear and evident: as in Acts the
1. verse 21. 22. Wherefore (says Saint Peter) of these men which have
companyed with us, all the time the Lord Jesus went in and out amongst us
beginning from the baptism of John, unto that same day that he was taken up
from us, must one be ordained to be a witness with us of the resurrection; and
they appointed, two Joseph called Barsabas and Matthias.

Out of the which words these ensuing truths do necessarily follow; first,
that they that were assembled here with Peter and the other Apostles were
ancient Disciples; for says the text, they were such as had companyed with the
Apostles, all the time the Lord Jesus went in and out amongst them, beginning
from the Baptism of John etc. and therefore must needs be such as had been
diligent Scholars all that time in Christ's School and such as were well
instructed in all Christian principles as is easily gathered out of the very
words; for any one of them were thought fit in the Apostles judgment to
succeed Judas in his place and to be an Apostle, in regard that they had heard
and seen all things Christ both spoke and did till his death and ascension;
for otherwise they could not have been witnesses of all things to his
resurrection. All this I say in the first place does necessarily follow.

Secondly, this truth also does ensue out of the forgoing words, that either
all those men were Ministers, or the most of them: for in express terms it is
related, that they had accompanied the Apostles the time the Lord Jesus went in
and out amongst them, beginning from the Baptism of John until Christ's
ascension. Now amongst those that conversed with the Apostles, besides John
scholars Christ had seventy Disciples all Ministers, which he sent out two by
two into all Cities to preach and to work wonders, who came back again to him,
rejoicing that the Devils were subject unto them, and they still waited upon
Christ's Ministry; we read also of many of John's Disciples that came unto
Christ, all which were Ministers likewise, and such as preached and baptized:
and all these were with Peter and the rest of the Apostles at this time, and
continued with them till the persecution: for we read of no departure of them,
or separation till then: and all these were men of singular gifts and graces,
and such as by the Apostles were thought fit to succeed Judas in his
Apostleship, and therefore were all Preachers and Ministers by Office, and were
such as had been formerly sent out by Christ or John the Baptist to preach and
baptize and to work Miracles, and therefore I affirm were all Ministers and
Preachers by their place and Office; and not only gifted brethren: and the
Scripture is so clear in it, as nothing can be more apparent: for it says
Wherefore of these men which have companyed with us all the time the Lord Jesus
went in and out amongst us beginning from the baptism of John unto the same
day he was taken up from us, must one be ordained etc. Wherefore of necessity
they must needs be ancient and inveterate Disciples and Ministers by Office, or
otherwise the Apostles would not have judged them fit for an Apostleship. And
all these continued with the Apostles in Jerusalem for ought any thing related
to the contrary till their persecution, and were of the Presbytery in that
Church: and then it is said they were all scattred saving the Apostles:
therefore those that went abroad Preaching the Word after their dispersion and
publishing the Gospel, were Ministers and Preachers by Office, which taught by
the way of Sermons in all places where they came, and not out of charity as
gifted brethren as I have formerly sufficiently proved upon that place, whether
I refer the Reader, and therefore shall not fear here to conclude that of
necessity there must be an innumerable company of believers in the Church of
Jerusalem, that had employed so many faithful Ministers and diligent Preachers
almost an hundred so long a time, and the which in this their hottest
persecution took up and employed twelve of the most painful and laborious
Ministers in the world, who spent all their time in Praying and Preaching
amongst them: and for the performance of each of their duties, all intelligible
Christians will also gather, that they must necessarily have several
Congregations and Assemblies: for all of them could not preach together at one
time and in one place or room, and therefore there were many Assemblies and
Congregations even under the persecution in the Church of Jerusalem, the which
afterward were exceedingly multitplyed and increased when the Churches had rest
as the Scripture records, the which amounted to many ten thousands; all the
which could not then possibly meet in one Congregation or a few. And this
shall suffice to have answered to what ever Master Knollys and I. S. had
vainly and impiously to Cavil against such of my Arguments as they thought
themselves best able by their learning to deal with, for the seducing of
unstable and ungrounded people. And now I come to what my brother Burton has
to say against all my foregoing Arguments. Whose words are these.

But I come briefly to your Arguments, whereby you would prove your Classical
Presbyterian government, and so upward. The pattern hereof you take from the
Christian Church at Jerusalem. Hereof many Arguments, or rather words, and
tautologies you multiply, and toil your self and vex your Reader withal,
which you might have reduced to one. It is in sum this.

In Jerusalem were many Christian Congregations, and all these made but one
Church, and so were governed by one Presbytery.

But the Church of Jerusalem, being the prime Apostolic Church, is a pattern
for all succeeding Churches.

Ergo, all Church government ought to be regulated by that, and consequently by
a Presbytery over many Congregations.

As for your indefinite enumeration of those multitudes baptized by John
Baptist, and by Christ's Disciples, we take no notice of them, unless formed
into a Church or Churches: but following the express Scripture, the first
formed Church we find is in Acts the 2. which though consisting of five
thousand, yet it was one entire particular Church, and not Churches; and they
continued daily (...) with one accord in one place together (verse. 1.) and in
the Temple (ver. 44. 46.) growing from an hundred and twenty (Acts 1. verse.
15.) to three thousand more (Chap. 2. 41.) and then in all to five thousand
(chap. 4. 4. and all these but one Church, which assembled together to hear
the Word in the Temple; and although they wanted a convenient place so
spacious, as whereinto break bread, or receive the Lords Supper altogether, so
as they were constrained to sever themselves into diverse companies, in several
private houses to communicate; yet this severing was not a dividing of the
church into so many distinct formal Churches, or Church bodies, being but so
many branches of one and the same particular Church; which though you call so
many Congregations, yet properly so many Churches they were not. And therefore
you never read the Churches at or in Jerusalem, but the Church of Jerusalem.
And this no national Church neither, witness those Churches in Judea Gal. 1.
22.

Whereupon I answer to your Argument; and first to your proposition. I deny
that those congregations you name are so many Churches properly so called,
having their distinct Officers and Members united into one Church body
respectively: This I put you to prove: And without proving it, your 11. or 12.
sheets spent about that argument, prove to be mere waste paper. And for your
assumption, that the Church at Jerusalem as being a prime Apostolic Church, is
therefore a pattern for all succeeding Churches, and therefore for a Classical
Presbytery over many Churches: You must first prove your proposition, as
before, that there were many Churches in Jerusalem constituted in their
distinct forms and bodies.

Secondly it being no more then one entire particular Church (and not any
Diocesan, or Provincial Church, or the Presbytery thereof classical (as you
would bear us in hand) it is a pattern for all particular Churches in
succeeding ages; and yet by your favor not so perfect a pattern, as no
Apostolic Church besides it should also come in to make up the pattern
complete. For we are necessarily to take all the Churches in the New Testament
together, to make up one entire and perfect Church pattern. For in the Church
at Jerusalem, we find election of Officers, but we find not expressed that
part of discipline for casting out of corrupt Members, as in the Church of
Corinth, and so in the rest. For the Churches were not brought forth to full
perfection in one day. Their very constitution had a graduall growth. The
Church at Jerusalem had not at first Deacons, till there was a necessity; and
the largeness of the Church required seven Deacons, which is no pattern for
every Church to have seven Deacons. The sum is, to make up a complete
pattern, not only the Church at Jerusalem, but that of Corinth, of Ephesus,
those of Galatia, that of Philippi, and the rest, are to be conferred together,
that each may cast in its shot to make up the full reckoning, that so what is
not expressed in one, may be supplied by the rest, to make one entire platform.
For the Scripture consists of many parts, as so many Members in one body; one
Member cannot say to another I have no need of thee, 1 Cor. 12.

Again, the Church at Jerusalem, if it must be a pattern for all other
Churches, then in this that all other Churches must be subject to some one
Church, because (Acts 15.) things in question were there debated, and
determined, and sent to other Churches to be observed. But for as much, as that
Church, at that time in those things was infallibly guided by the Holy Ghost,
wherewith the Apostles there were inspired, in which respect their resolutions
were with authority, it pleased the Holy Ghost and us (that which no particular
Church since the Apostles could ever say) it follows that the Church then at
Jerusalem remains not in all things a pattern for other Churches; for a
pattern must be in all things imitable and perfect.

Lastly, for Appeals so much agitated, and pressed, I have said enough before,
and elsewhere (as in my vindication) to vindicate the right use of that in
point of Church matters. And so I pass briefly from your first question to
your second; which is concerning the manner of gathering of Churches, and
admitting of Members and Officers.

I have set down my Brother Burtons expressions at large, that all men may see
how fairly I deal with him: ^s for his censure upon all my Arguments, that
went before, by which I proved my first Proposition, that they are rather words
and tautoligies then arguments, by which I toyled my self and my Reader, I
pass it by, as neither regarding his pr yses, nor sleightings, who was never
yet constant to the Principles either of Humanity or Religion, but like the
Camelion he speaks of page 3. receives impressions of sundry forms
changeable according to the present condition: And as it is said of King Henry
the eight, that he never spared any man in his rage, so it may truly be
averred of him, that he never spared any in his fury and passion, neither
living nor dead, upon the least conceived displeasure against them; no not
those he was most obliged to, as all that have been familiarly acquainted
with him, and his frothy Pamphlets and language can testify: for he spares not
the King himself, nor Parliament upon all occasions, to the one of which
notwithstanding he was not only obliged in all Loyalty as a subject, but as
a special servant: and to the other, if ever any man was engaged in all the
obligations of duty and veneration, he was, who is bound unto that great
Council for his Liberty, which is the life of life, and for his honor and
good name, which is better then life; and yet he has spared neither, but has
most unchristianly, and undutifully, and that publicly and privately aspersed
them upon all occurrences: and therefore if at pleasure he can vilipend,
slight, traduce and speak evil of those dignities, I may not think my self
agrieved, if he most unbrotherly in his scriblings abuse me.

Yea, I am so far from being offended at him, for this his so dealing with
me, as I think my self honored by it, and account it matter of rejoicing,
having learned that lesson of my heavenly Master, That when men revile me,
reproach me and speak all manner of evil of me falsely, for his names sake,
that I should rejoice and be exceeding glad; for so they have done by all the
Prophets, Matthew. 5. Luke the 6. and Paul took such dealing from the false
Teachers of his time, for matter of triumph, (2 Cor. 12. verse 10.) saying, I
take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions,
in distresses for Christ's sake, for when I am weak then am I strong. This I
apply unto my self, who have suffered as much from him, and those of his
party, in reproaches, in persecutions, and in all manner of reviling and
blasting language, as their daily Pamphlets and words can witness, as any man
now living; and for no other cause that I know of, but that I maintain the
truth against error, and oppose the novelties and groundless opinions of the
times; all the which will the more aggravate their judgment; because they did
as immoderately praise me (as can be proved) before they knew my differing
opinion from them, as they do now maliciously and causelessly vituperate me:
and the Lord knows, that I am not changed in my opinion in any known truth
from what I both believed and to my power practiced, above these thirty years;
neither had I any reason to vary from my Principles, they being grounded upon
the unerring word of truth: and therefore for my brother Burtons and his
parties sleighting of me, and my endeavors, I wave them as mere Grolleries,
knowing that my books have been read by more judicious men, then either
himself, or any of his Fraternity, and have had the approbation of learned men
at home and abroad.

And now I come to his Argument, for he has not so much candor, and fair
dealing in him, as to lay down my reasons, that the Reader might see the
grounds of truth, but conceals them all, and makes a Syllogism of his own, or
else has borrowed it, from some of his American friends, and fetched it out of
the new World: For I never read the like in either Europian or Asian Writer; no
nor in any African Author: and yet that Country was famous for Monsters, and
usually esteemed to be the Mother and Nursery of prodigious births, and yet
such a Syllogism I never saw brought forth by any of that Nation, as this of
his framing: and I am confident that every sucking Sophister will be ready
truly to say of it, as he falsely speaks of those multitudes baptized by John
and Christ's disciples, that they were not formed into a Church or Churches: the
same I say, will any but a Novice in the Art of disputation conclude of his
Syllogism, that it has neither form, mood, or figure: and that I could
easily make evident, were it not for mispending of precious time, and that I
desire not to displease the good old Father, in discovering his nakedness, and
infirmities, who if he were so highly offended with me, because he conceived
I meant him, when I spoke of a Basket-hilted beard, how much would he be
enraged, if I should discover his ignorance, and make it appear, that he is a
mere stranger in the art of Logic, which he would persuade the world he were
so great a Master in.

But leaving that, I will come the matter in hand, which is of public
concernment: and in the first place, I must needs blame him for his Sacrilege
and unjust dealing, who at one time robbs the Church of Christ of such
multitudes of believers as were converted and baptized by the Baptist and
Christ's Disciples, and by them added unto the Church of the Jews, who were then
the only visible Church upon earth, and proclaimed by Christ himself (John 4.)
to be the only true worshippers, who says that Salvation was of the Jews, and
that the Samaritans, worshipped they knew not what. Now to the Church of the
Jews those true worshippers, those that were converted by John the Baptist and
Christ's Disciples, and baptized into Christ, were added: and therefore they were
worthy to have been taken notice of by my brother Burton, as formed into a
Church or Churches, if believing in Christ, repenting and being baptized in his
name and by his authority, be sufficient to make men members of a Church: for
as the Catholic visible Church consists of many National, Provincial, and
Presbyterian Churches, so did the National church of the Jews of many city
and Countries, Churches which were in their Dialect called Synagogues, which is
the same with our Churches both in cities and countries, as all the learned
well know; for in all those Synagogues they partaked daily in the moral
worship, and had the Preaching of the law and the Keys of Heaven. Now then
when those multitudes that I enumerated in my arguments, baptized by John and
the blessed Apostles, and the seventy Disciples were all gathered into Christ's
fold, and made his sheep and true believers, and that by the Preaching of the
Gospel, and hearing of the voice of their Pastors, and had amongst them all
those sealing and discriminating Ordinances, that were sufficient not only to
form them into a church or churches, but to difference them from Pagans and
Infidels, as who were Israelites, to whom pertained the adoption, and the
glory, the Covenants and the giving of the Law, and the Service of God, and the
promises, as Saint Paul speaks, Romans 9. verse. 4. all which I conceive were
sufficent and avaylable to make any then living, members of Christ's Church.

I say, when they had circumcision, and the Passoever, and baptism, and the
Law and the Gospel and that worship of God that he had established amongst
them, and were his peculiar people, of whom Christ had given this testimony
that they were his true worshippers, and when they were also gathered in
according to Gods own appointment, by the sound of the Gospel and by the
preaching of Faith and Repentance and by the Ministry of the Word, as all the
Prophets had formerly gathered Churches, then those that were Baptized by John,
who was a Prophet sent of God (Luke the 3.) and sent to baptize (John the 1.
33.) and those that were baptized by the Disciples who were sent from Christ as
he was from his Father who said Go teach all nations baptising them, etc. all
they I say ought by my brother Burton and all the Independents to be taken
notice of, as formed into a Church or Churches, what so ever he and I. S. say
to the contrary, who in this agree, that those that were baptized by John and
by Christ's Disciples were no Christians, much less cast into a Church mould,
according to the New Testament form, and lest of all that they were members of
one Christian Church at Jerusalem. These are J. S. his formal words page 9. So
that whiles these men will dispute against the truth, they blaspheme and give
the Spirit of God the lie: for Christ has said, that they that hear his
Disciples, hear him, and that they that hear his voice are his sheep; now,
when all those that were converted by their Ministry, and were in token of
their faith and obedience baptized, and had given up their names unto Christ,
they were all incorporated into his fold, which is his church, his Mystical
body, and were molded into a church or churches, and so they are set down to
us in the holy Scriptures as believers and true members of Christ's church; and
therefore formed into a church or churches; for there is but one Shepherd and
one sheepfold, and Christ had then no other church on earth that we read of
but that of the Jews; and which is yet more, it was a reformed church; for
Christ had cast out all the Buyers and Sellers (John 2.) out of the Temple, and
calls it his Fathers house, and the house of prayer, so that it was now a pure
church, and cleansed from all pollutions, and in the which all Christ's
Ordinances were in their purity; here was the Preaching of the Gospel, the
Teaching of the Law, and all the sealing Ordinances, both old and new: here was
Circumcision, the Passover, Sacrifices and Ceremonies, here was Baptism and
the Lords Supper or breaking of bread; here was the true Invocation or calling
on the name of God, and that in the house of Prayer, where all Supplications
were heard, and that before Christ's death: Here we have all the materials for
the making or forming of a church or churches, or casting of Christians into a
church mould according to the newtestament form (to speak a little in the
Independents dialect) for here we have visible Saints in multitudes, devoute
men and true worshippers from out of all the Nations under heaven (Acts 2):
here we have Christ and his twelve Apostles, and his seventy Disciples, Elders
and Teachers in abundance, besides many Women that followed him and ministered
unto him; here was no want of Ministers and Officers and Members of all sorts
besides innumerable multitudes of believers and cryers Hosanna, and all this
before Christ's death, as well as after, and all these Christian believers, and
such as did partake of all sealing and saving Ordinances sufficient to cast
them into a church mould, and to form them into a church or churches, as well
as after Christ's ascension: and therefore my indefinite enumeration of those
that were baptized by John and Christ's Disciples, ought by my brother Burton
and I. S. and all the Independents to have been taken notice of as formed into
a church or churches, without Christ and his blessed Apostles who partaked in
all Ordinances, be not in their esteem reputed Christians and formed into a
church, or cast into a church mould, which were blasphemy in any to think, and
therefore is much more the height of wickedness in my brother Burton and I. S.
to affirm and Print: for I. S. his expressions I produced them often before. I
will now set down my brother Burtons formal words, which I cannot but
reiterate.

For your indefinite enumeration (says he) of those mulititudes baptized by
John, and by Christ's Disciples, we take no notice of them unless formed into a
church or churches; but following the express Scripture, the first formed
church we find is in Acts 2. These are his words and that in the name of all
the Independents, saying we take no notice of them. So that by this, all men
may gather that in the Independents language, and in their Divinity, John
Baptist, and all Christ's Disciples with Christ himself and all Christian
believers in Christ's time, and all that by baptism were received into Christ's
fold and church, and such as had given up their names to Christ, were not
worthy to be taken notice of by the Independent brethren who esteem of them
all as no Christians, but a deformed church, and not cast into a church mould:
For my brother Burton peremptorily affirms, and that in the name of all the
Independents page 11. that following the express Scripture, the first formed
church we find is in Acts the 2. So that they all prof^sse, they read of no
formed church, nor of no church cast into a church mould, according to the
new testament form, till after Christ's death; and that expr sly set down for
the time of it Acts the 2. So that the Christian church before Christ's death
and ascension was deformed; that is to speak plainly, that John the Baptist,
Christ and his holy Apostles and all Christians made by them, were not molded
up as they ought to be and formed into a Church or Churches; which if it be not
the height of blasphemy, I refer to the judgment of any intelligent Reader!
Amongst them in their new molded congregations, a Pastor and a Teacher, and
two Elders, and a Deacon and five or six brethren more and three or four
Sisters can make up a formed Church after the New Testament form; Now is there
any man so stupid and brutish as will not conclude that where Christ was the
great Pastor and Shepherd of our Souls, and where there were James and John
the sons of Zebedee two Teachers or Doctors, those Bonaerges, those sons of
Thunder, and eight or nine Elders with seventy Disciples all Saints all whose
names were writ in heaven with multitudes of Believers with many women that
followed Christ the great Shepherd of our souls, who had also a Decon amongst
them, Judas by name, that all these could not or did not make up a formed
church or churches, when ten or twelve in their whibling congregations, so
qualified as formerly, can make a formed church after the New Testament form? I
say he that shall not believe that the Lord Jesus Christ the great shepherd of
his sheep, and all his Disciples, Scholars and followers cannot as well make a
formed church, as a few in our new founded or rather confounded congregations,
is void of all reason and understanding: And they that shall peremptorily and
rashly affirm that they were not a true formed church, I proclaim them guilty
of blasphemy and deserving most condign punishment: And therefore when my
brother Burton and many of the Independents are guilty of this heinous and
facinorous crime they ought severely to be dealt with, as prevaricators against
the divine Majesty of the King of Saints and King of Kings and against the
honor of the Saints in Christ's time, and ought by all Christ's true Disciples
and such as love the honor and dignity of their King and Savior Jesus Christ
to be abominated as a company of false teachers, calumniators and horrid
seducers, how godly soever they seem to the wrold to be.

And as all such teachers as my brother Burton and his accomplices are, ought by
Christ's Saints and Servants to be looked on as a company of grand impostors and
juglers: So the poor and despised Presbyterians, who they term sinners and
carnal people, and men of earth and enemies of Christ and his Kingdom, may
comfort themselves in this that they are like their master and his Disciples,
and all that were converted by John the Baptist and by the Ministry of Christ
and his Apostles and Disciples and baptized by them: for they pronounce of us
all, that we are not formed into a church or churches, nor cast into a church
mould according to the New Testament form, and that we are not members of any
true church nor Saints, but enemies of Christ, and at best but converts in
part, as if Christ the author and finisher of our Faith, wrought his work to
the halves, this I say may comfort all us the poor despised Presbyterians; for
the same they say of Christ and his Disciples, and of all that were converted
and baptized by John's and their ministry and such as partaked in all
Ordinances, of all which they affirm, That they were not formed into a Church
or Churches according to the New Testament form: for in their babble, there was
not a formed church, till that we read of Acts the 2. So that neither Christ
nor his Disciples nor John the Baptist and his Disciples, nor the hundred and
twenty names we read of Acts the 1. in their learning were a formed church, nor
all the other worshippers the Scripture speaks of Act. 2. nor thought worthy by
them to be taken notice of for a church or churches; So that by this bold
assertion of my brother Burton and I. S. they do not only oppose the truth, but
indeed many of those of their own party and tribe, howsoever they pretend they
write in the name of them all, who I am most assured will give them little
thanks for this their pains; for to my knowledge the learned of them are
against them in this point and disavow their opinion: For the principallest of
them hold that the hundred and twenty names we read of Acts the first, were a
true formed church as all their writings and disputes declare: and therefore my
brother Burton and I. S. affirming the contrary, in this they oppose many of
their brethren as well as the Presbyterians; and for this their temerity, I am
most confident they will be highly blamed by all the Judicious of that party.

And truly if the hundred and twenty names were not a true formed church, there
was then none upon Earth. And if they had not been a formed church according to
the New Testament form, they could not have given a form to other churches;
for all learned christians agree in this, That it must be a true formed Church,
that must make others true formed churches: For they cannot give and
communicate that to others that they have not themselves: this is one of their
own principles, and therefore they cannot deny it.

Now if the hundred and twenty names were a true formed church, then all that
were baptized by John and Christ's Disciples, and as many as were converted by
their Ministry, were a true formed church or churches; for they were all formed
after one and the same way, so that what made the hundred and twenty Names a
true formed church, made all the other a true formed church or churches, if the
same cause can produce the same or the like effect.

And if men would but seriously consider, what it is that is absolutely
requisite or necessary and indeed abundantly sufficient for the making or
forming of a true church or churches, or for the making of any man or woman a
Member of a true formed church, they would soon and without any difficulty
perceive, That all those that were baptized by John the Baptist and Christ's
Disciples were as well formed into a church or churches as the hundred and
twenty names and those three thousand my brother Burton speaks of, and which
he ^alls the first formed church: For all those that were baptized by John and
Christ's Disciples believed the maine points of the christian Faith, and
professed subjection unto the Gospel of Jesus Christ and his Kingdom, as well
as the hundred and twenty names and the other three thousand, and this was as
much as John the Baptist, Christ himself and all his Apostles required for the
forming of them into a church or churches and making of any men or women
Members of the same, as is manifest in the second of the Acts verse 38* where
Peter says, repent and be baptized. And where likewise it is recorded, That as
many as gladly received the Word were baptized, verse 41. and the same day were
added to the church about three thousand Souls. Neither was there required any
more of those converted by Philippe in the church of Samaria, Acts the 8. or of
the Eunuch or of the Jailer, or of any other that were admitted into
church fellowship in the Apostles ^imes, then that they should believe and be
baptized, as is apparent through the whole story of the Acts.

Now then when all that were baptized by the Baptist and Christ's Disciples, did
all repent and believe, as the Scripture relates they did, of which the
hundred and twenty names were a part as well as those three thousand, then they
were all molded into a church form, and formed into a church or churches as
well as the three thousand, that my brother Burton confesses, following the
express Scripture, were the first formed church.

And if believing the Gospel then, and yielding subjection unto it, and
repenting and being baptized were sufficient to make them Members and form
them into a church or Churches, then believing and repenting now, and being
baptized and yielding subjection unto the Gospel is sufficient for the making
of either men or women Members and forming of them into a church or churches;
for these were the principal things and the only things then thought
sufficient by the Baptist, Christ and the blessed Apostles and all the
Evangelists for the making of any Members, and that in the Apostolical, prime
and purest churches. Neither have any Ministers of the Gospel in these our
days, any other rule to go by informing or gathering of churches or receiving
of Members into any church, then that John the Baptist and the glorious
Apostles and Disciples of Christ had, all the which notwithstanding did then
set up Christ upon his Throne as well as any Independent Ministers in our
times: and therefore as it is high presumption and rashness in those of the
congregationall way to make or frame to themselves and to the Church of God any
other rules to go by in forming of churches then those set down by Christ
himself, who is only to be heard Mat. 17. So it is a great sin and breach of
charity in them to deny those to be formed into a church or churches, that
observe not their new rules, and yet observe and follow Christ's injunctions and
commands: from all which I may well and safely conclude, That when those that
were baptized by the Baptist and Christ's Disciples embraced the Christian faith
and professed subjection unto it and unto Christ the Messiah, and were baptized
by them into Christ or in his name, who were men in office and sent of God to
this purpose, as having their commission immediately from him for their so
doing; for so Saint John says, Ioh. 1. v. 33. He that sent me to baptize, etc.
so Christ says, Go teach all Nations and Baptize them, etc. Mat. 28. I say
when this was the substance of John and the Apostles commission, and when John
performed it accordingly baptizing all Jerusalem and all Judea, and all the
Regions round about, Matthew. 3. and when the Disciples of Christ baptized more
then John, John. 4. then it follows that all those they baptized were all
molded into a Church or Churches, as well as the hundred and twenty names (who
were baptized by their Ministry) and those thousands that were converted,
baptized and added unto the Church in the 2. of the Acts by the Preaching and
Ministry of Peter, and the other Apostles, and were all by the same reason
formed into a Church or Churches, (not withstanding whatsoever my brother
Burton and I. S. speak and dispute to the contrary) and therefore they ought
to have been taken notice of by my good brother as formed into a Church or
Churches.

And if it be duly considered what the Independents teach and hold concerning a
true formed Church, after the New Testament form, and according to their
Principles, then this very Church my Brother Burton says was the first formed
Church we read of, was neither in his own opinion, nor according to the
doctrine of those of the congregationall way, a true formed Church, as not
having distinct Officers and Members united into one Church body respectively,
and therefore not a church properly so called: and so then it will follow,
there was not at that time a true formed church in the World, which is impious
to say or think, as in the sequel of this tractate by Gods assistance I shall
abundantly make appear, and that from my Brother Burtons own words, and from
the Independents definition of a Church: and therefore my Brother Burton ought
as little to have taken notice of those converted by Peter's Sermon for the
first formed Church as of those that were baptized by John and Christ's
Disciples, for they had not their distinct Officers and Members united into a
Church body respectively according to their learning; yea they had not then
Deacons at all, nor Elders as many of the Independents hold, nor other of their
requisits for the making of a formed Church: and therefore it was notachurch
properly so called to speak in their Dialect* But of these things in their due
place.

I will now examine his following discourse, by which the vanity of my Brother
Burton will the better appear, and for the which I persuade my self he will
receive if not a severe censure, at least a moderate check, such an one as I
causelessly had not long since from a Plumporidge Presbyterian brother, one of
their fellow comoners and a trencher friend to that party: for my Brother
Burton does in expr^sse words grant that which all the Independents and those
of his faction absolutely deny, viz. That there were many congregations and
assemblies of Believers in the Church of Jesalem: this I say he grants, which
all they deny, attesting the contrary, as all their dissenting Arguments show,
who labor to prove that there were not many congregations and assemblies of
Believers in the Church of Jerusalem; and in formal words affirm, That there
were no more Believers in that Church, then did and could all meet together in
one place and congregation: for they knew very well that if they should grant
that, the day on their side is lost: and this caused Master Knollys by name,
and I. S. to come out against me for holding there were many congregations,
with a promise, that if I could prove there were more Believers in the Church
of Jerusalem then could all meet in one place to partake in all acts of
worship, that then the controversy would be at an end, and so do all the
Independents say, that I ever yet talked with.

Now my Brother Burton an old Disciple, and Father amongst them, acknowledges
that there were many congregations of Believers in the Church of Jerusalem, and
that in its infancy and childhood, and proves it by reason and arguments, as
that there was no place great enough to contain them all; and therefore they
were forced into several assemblies, and that the largeness of the church
required seven Deacons. These are his own words, by which he proves many
congregations in the church of Jerusalem, which was that I labored to prove,
and therefore he has done my work. Now all men know where there are seven
Treasurers, there must needs be an innumerable number and multitude of
Believers: For two or three Treasurers would have served any one congregation
though it had consisted of many more then five thousand, as daily experience
teaches us. Now that there were se^en at the first appointed, it shows a
mighty vast multitude of Believers and Saints; and if in its infancy there were
so many ordained, how many more may we suppose were afterward in future times
made, when the multitudes of Believers daily increased as the Scripture
relates? and these I say are my brother Burtons own Arguments against himself
to prove many congregations of Believers at that time in the church of
Jerusalem, which notwithstanding, is that all the Independents deny. Now if his
brethren do not truly conclude of him, and say, as they did, when he writ his
Protestation protested of which he himself was ashamed, that he was a weak
man, and unfit for that business, and that he should have left that dispute to
those that had many years studied the question, I shall be much deceived: and
if I have not been misinformed by some of that way, many of the most approved
of them for judgment, have already given this verdict of him, and that for his
very vindiciae veritatis, or rather falsitatis, and for his Truth shut out of
doors that he was a weak man, and unfit for this employment, as being a man
of more passion and choler then grounded reason and argumentation; and
therefore would spoil their cause.

But now to the matter in hand. My Brother Burton acknowledges that the
Believers in the church of Jerusalem, were so many, in the very infancy of it,
that for want of a convenient place, as wherein to break bread, or receive the
Lords Supper all together, they were constrained to sever themselves into
diverse companies; and to communicate in several private houses, which
concession of his quite overthrowes the opinion of those of the congregationall
way as they call it; yet says he, this severing was not a dividing of the
Church into so many distinct formal Churches or Church bodies, because but so
many branches of one and the same particular church, which though (says he)
you called so many congregations, yet properly so many Churches they were not,
as not having their distinct Officers and Members united into one Church body
respectively. These are his formal words. So that he distinguishes between
church and congregation, as Master Knollys does between (...) not making them
synonima's, as other men and those of the congregationall way usually do, and
thinks by this his grollery to evade the dint of all Arguments that are
brought to convince them. The question therefore between me and my Brother
Burton at this time, is, Whether a congregation and a company of believers
communicating together in church Fellowship, and in all the saving and sealing
Ordinances, be a church properly so called, which my Brother Burton denies,
saying, that although I called them so many congregations, yet properly so many
churches they were not; and puts me upon the proof of it: and therefore to
gratify my kind brother, and to show how willing I am to please his humor I
do undertake that work. Now if I can make it appear, and evince, that those
several Assemblies and congregations of Believers in the church of Jerusalem
we read of in the first six chapters of the Acts, were so many several
churches properly so called, then he will acknowledge and confess that my
elevenor twelve sheets spent about this Argument prove no waste paper; and then
also the controversy between us is at an end, and he must turn Presbyterian
Dependent if he has any honesty in him. This then is my task to maintain,
and prove that those congregations and several assemblies or companies of
Believers in the church at Jerusalem, were so many churches properly so called,
which by the grace of God and his blessed assistance I doubt not but to make
good, although he had sufficiently himself overthrown the Independents
doctrine, by the very granting there were many congregations in Jerusalem.

But by the way, before I come to prove what I have undertaken, I will take
this liberty to premise thus much, if That my brother Burton speaks of the
church at Jerusalem be orthodox divinity, viz. that the severing of
themselves, into diverse companies, and into many several congregations, in
several private houses, for the partaking in all the Ordinances, and for the
enjoying of all the acts of worship, that they might be the better edified,
makes them not so many distinct formal churches, or church bodies properly so
called, (because but so many branches of one and the same particular church,
the communicating and participating notwithstanding in all the which Ordinances
in all ages, was thought sufficient to constitute a formal church, or a church
body properly so called): then I affirm the same may be concluded of the
catholic visible church; for that is but one church, and one sheepfold, as
being founded and built upon that one Rock Jesus Christ, that only Pastor and
Shepherd of his sheep; and therefore one of these conclusions must
necessarily ensue upon his Principles, viz. if the severing of a particular
church into many congregations and assemblies makes them not several churches
or church bodies properly so called, as my brother Burton teaches; because it
is but one and the same church, and all those congregations are but so many
branches of that one church: then the severing of the catholic visible church
into many congregations and assemblies through the world, makes them not so
many churches properly so called, because the church of Christ is but one and
the same church, and all those congregations are but so many branches of that
one church: and so by his learning there shall now be no visible churches upon
earth properly so called, although they enjoy all Christ's Ordinances in each of
them, for they are but so many branches of that one church. And if this be
good Divinity, then let all men turn Expectants and Seekers, for we have not
in the world as yet any particular visible formed churches; for all these
several congregations are but so many branches of that one catholic visible
church: and a branch and a member of a church is not a church properly so
called in my brother Burtons Dialect: and therefore we have no true visible
churches, or church bodies upon earth properly so called: this I say will
necessarily follow upon my Brother Burtons unsound Principles and this his
opinion, which I am confident upon his more serious thoughts, and when he makes
not such haste, (as he confesses he did, when he writ this his book against me)
he will acknowledge to be very erroneous.

But if he shall against all reason, undertake to maintain the same doctrine
concerning the Catholic visible church he does about the church of Jerusalem,
I am assured he will be highly condemned by the learnedest of his party as well
as by the universal consent of all the judicious Divines in the world, who I
know are of a contrary judgment. But I say, if upon mature deliberation he
shall acknowledge and grant that the several congregations or churches of
believers mentioned in the Scriptures, as that of Corinth, Ephesus, Galatia
etc. and their own several congregations in their new gathered churches
(howsoever he will not grant that title unto our assemblies) I say if he shall
but accord that both the primitive churches and their new congregations be
churches properly so called or church bodies, though but so many branches and
members of the Catholic visible church, which yet is but one and the same
church: then likewise of necessity it will follow, and he must yield unto it,
that all those several congregations and assemblies in the church of Jerusalem
were churches properly so called, though but so many branches of that one and
the same particular church, because as the learned know, all particular
congregations and churches that partake in all the Ordinances as they are
similar parts of the whole church, so they do all partake of the name and
nature of it and are all of them churches properly so called; and therefore by
the very same reason I say, all those several congregations and assemblies in
the church of Jerusalem being parts of that National city or Presbyterian
church, that one and the same church, as partaking both of the name and nature
of that church, are all of them churches properly so called; one of those
conclusions, I affirm will necessarily follow from my brother Burtons
principles. And for the better evidencing of what I have said, I will add a
few words more by way of a corollary, that whatsoever the whole church at
Jerusalem had in it to make it the first formed church properly so called, the
same had all the congregations and assemblies respectively and severally
considered, to make every one of them churches properly so called: And
therefore if the whole church at Jerusalem may challenge the name of a true
formed church (as the Independents acknowledge) then the several congregations
and assemblies respectively and severally considered, might do the same, and
were churches properly so called. For if the whole consisted of visible Saints,
so did every one of those several congregations and assemblies consist of
visible Saints. And if the whole had the blessed Apostles in it and Christ's
seventy Disciples and all sorts of church Officers, so had every several
congregation and assembly of that church, though but a part and a branch of the
whole. And if the whole church inioyed all the saving and sealing ordinances
and all acts of worship, and continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine and
fellowship and in breaking bread and in prayer, so did every one of those
congregations and assemblies severally and respectively considered: And
therefore when all the branches of that one particular church at Jerusalem,
viz: every congregation and assembly severally considered and as a part, were
equal to the whole church in all privileges immunities and in whatsoever is
required for the making of a true formed church, so that there was nothing
wanting to either of those congregations that the whole church partaked in and
enjoyed or could challenge for the making it a complete Church, then it
follows and that necessarily, that if the whole church be a true formed
church and a church properly so called as the Independents confess, that all
those congregations and assemblies severally considered were churches properly
so called. This I thought good to premise. And now I come to make good what I
undertook, which is to prove those several Assemblies in the church of
Jerusalem, to be churches properly so called, which I do by this argument.

All such assemblies and congregations as daily met together in diverse
companies in the Temple, and in Solomon's Porch and in several private houses,
in the fellowship of the Gospel, and in the name of Christ, and clothed with
his power, and honored with Christ's presence, being all believers and Saints,
and such as gladly received the word, and were all baptized and continued
steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and in the breaking of
bread and in prayer, and enjoyed amongst themselves in their several
congregations all the saving and sealing Ordinances, and all Acts of worship,
and whatsoever privileges and immunities the whole church partaked in (and the
which the Independents themselves repute and think sufficient for the making
and constituting of a formed church) and who also had amongst them in those
several assemblies Ministers immediately sent them of God and inspired with
the holy Ghost, every one of the which had the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven
given unto them by Christ himself, with a promise to be with them to the end
of the world, and that whatsoever they loosed on earth should be loosed in
heaven; and whatsoever they bound on earth should be bound in heaven, and that
his spirit also should lead them into all truth; the which Ministers likewise
taught them whatsoever Christ had commanded them, and that daily in the Temple
and in every house, all and every one of them respectively and severally taken,
were true and complete churches properly so called.

But in the church of Jerusalem there were many such assemblies and
congregations as daily met together in diverse companies in the Temple and in
Solomon's Porch, and in several private houses, in the fellowship of the
Gospel, and in the name of Christ, and clothed with his power, and honored
with Christ's presence, being all believers and Saints, and such as gladly
received the Word, and were all baptized and continued steadfastly in the
Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and in the breaking of bread and in prayers,
and enjoyed amongst themselves in their several congregations, all the saving
and sealing Ordinances, and all acts of worship and whatsoever privileges and
immunities the whole church partaked in, and the which the Independents
themselves repute and think sufficient for the making and constituting of a
formed church, and who also had amongst them in those several assemblies
Ministers immediately sent them of God and inspired with the holy Ghost, every
one of the which had the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven given them by Christ
himself, with a promise to be with them to the end of the world, and that
whatsoever they loosed on earth should be loosed in Heaven; and whatsoever they
bound on earth should be bound in Heaven, and that his spirit also should lead
them into all truth: the which Ministers likewise taught them whatsoever Christ
had commanded them, and that daily in the Temple and in every house. Ergo, all
and every one of those Assemblies and Congregations respectively and severally
taken, were true and complete churches properly so called.

For the Major, no well grounded Christian will deny it, especially the
Independents cannot gain say it: for if two or three met together in the
fellowship of the Gospel and in Christ's name make a true visible church, as
those of the congregationall way hold and teach; then much more where two or
three hundreds are met together in the fellowship of the Gospel and in the
name of Christ and in the which also they partaked in all the saving and
sealing Ordinances, as in the preaching of the Word and Prayer, and in the
Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper, and that by lawful Ministers and
Officers appointed and sent by God himself; I say, by far better reason such a
congregation is a true and visible and complete church properly so called, as
all rational and intelligible men will easily conclude; and therefore this
cannot be denied by the Independents, especially when (as I noted before) it is
their own Doctrine, taught in all their writings, and Preached by every one of
the congregationall way, and confirmed by their own daily practice. And to
pass by many books writ of late by the Ministers of New England and some of
the Independent Ministers here amongst us, I will only at this time pitch upon
one who has in my opinion, dealt more heartily then any of his brethren: for
he kepes no reserves Donec ad triarios redierit res, but sets down plainly
what they hold. I will make bold therefore with his new blasing lights, lately
set up, upon that learned Beaken, called Truth gloriously appearing from under
the sad and sable cloud of obloquy. In the which treatise, page 22. and 23.
the author in the name of all the Independents declares their judgment,
concering this business, whose words I will set down at large, desiring to
deliver their mind in their own expressions rather then in mine, that they may
not hereafter accuse me to have picked and chose what made most for me and
against them, and left the rest. His words are these.

Object. It may possibly here be objected, how will it appear that so small a
number as two or three joined together in the fellowship of the Gospel, do
constitute a visible Church?

Answ. It will appear evident by this ensuing argument. Christ has given his
power, and promised his presence to two or three joined together in the
fellowship of the Gospel; therefore two or three so joined together, do
constitute a visible church.

The Antecedent is proved from the Words of Christ Matthew. 18. If thy brother
offend thee, tell him of it; if he refuse to hear thee, take two or three; if
he hear not them, tell it to the church: if he neglect to hear the church,
let him be unto thee as an Heathen and a Publican. I say unto you, whatsoever
you shall bind on earth shall be bound in Heaven, and whatsoever ye shall
loose on earth shall be loosed in Heaven. Lo! Here Is their power given them by
Christ.

The presence of Christ is promised by them. verse. 20. Where two or three are
gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them.

The consequent cannot be denied; for what people in the world may be called a
church, if they may not, to whom Christ has given his power, and promised his
presence? If the gifts of Christ be of any force, if the power of Christ be of
any efficacy, then they have a right to be so called. Neither is this destitute
of learned men, who have given their suffrage to it. Humfred. de religione vera
conservanda page 24. Ecclesiam cum dico, non unum aut alterum sacerdotem aut
ministrum, sed legitimum ac Christianum catum nomino et innuo.

Besides, the definition of a visible church, will prove the consequent. A
visible church is a mystical body whereof Christ is the head, the members be
Saints, called out of the world, and united together into one congregation by
an holy covenant, to worship the Lord, and to edify one another in all his
holy Ordinances. This definition, though it properly look upon a complete
church, it is appliable to two or three that are joined together in the
fellowship of the faith of the Gospel.

2, Object: But is it like that two or three there is taken for the church
mentioned verse. 17. to which Christ has given his power?

Answ. I do not say that it is always so taken, for because the church does
frequently consist of many; but this I say, that it may be so taken, as the
very coherence of the words shows.

Beside, it will further appear thus; if two or three may meet together,
clothed with Christ's power, and honored with Christ's presence, then two or
three may be the church mentioned, verse. 17. but two or three may meet
together, clothed with Christ's power; for they meet in his name (as the text
speaks) 1. e. clothed with his power, for name signifies power in several
Scriptures Prove. the 18. 10. Philip. 2. 10. and honored with his presence: and
therefore two or three may be the church there mentioned.

3. Object. But such a company being destitute of Officers, can be no church.

Answ. If it had been said, they could have been no complete church, I would
have consented. But to say, that they are not a complete church, therefore they
are no church, is a Non sequitur.

A man that wants a hand, or foot, or both, is notwithstanding a man, though a
maimed man, Officers do not concur to the esse or being of a church; but to
the been esse, or well being of a church; for otherwise, put case the Officers
of a church dye, then must the church be unchurched, and so Toties quoties as
such a thing happens, which in times of mortality may be often. Again, a
company of believers joined together in the fellowship of the Gospel has the
matter and form of a church, even before it has any Officers, and therefore
is a Church without them; it has the matter of a Church, a company believing 1
Cor. 1. 2. Ephesians. 1. 1. and it has the form of a Church, viz. a combining and
uniting of themselves together into one body by the bond of an holy Covenant.

I have spoke some thing the more in this particular, to strengthen such as
have built upon this foundation; that upon the reading of any books, or hearig
of any arguments on the contrary side, their hearts may not (like the heart of
Ahaz Isai the 7. 1. when he heard of the confederacy of Syria and Ephraim) be
moved, as the trees of the wood are moved with the wind.

This is the discourse of that Author, whose words I have related in their full
length and extent, not intending at this time to show all the errors of them,
which would require a just volume, though occasonally I shall meet with some
of them, and make it appear that according to his description of a church,
which he has taken out of Master Cotteos book of New*England none of the
congregationall churches at this day are complete churches properly so called.
And if that also my brother Burton speaks, be true, then the very church of
Jerusalem (as I said before) which he calls the first formed church, was not a
true formed church properly so called. All this occasionally I hope to make
evident.

In the mean time, I will make use of such Arguments, as the new lights from
the Summer Islands afforde me, for the proving of my major proposition, which
was, that, All those Assemblies and Congregations, met together in those
several houses at Jerusalem, every one of them respectively and severally
taken, were churches properly so called. And this I do the more willingly,
because I conceive it will better sound in my brother Burtons ears, and those
of his party, to hear one of their own great Rabbyes who they usually call
Giants, and tall fellows, then to hear me, who at pleasure they style a Pigmy
and Dwarf; from his words therefore I thus argue.

If two or three met together in the fellowship of the Gospel and in Christ's
name, and clothed with his power, and honored with his presence, do
constitute a visible church, as he asserteth and labors to prove in the name
of all the Independents: then much more two or three hundred met together in
the fellowship of the Gospel and in Christ's name, and clothed with his power,
and honored with his presence, having amongst them also their lawful Officers
and Ministers, and enjoying likewise all those saving and sealing Ordinances
within themselves, which the Independents confess are sufficient for the
constituting of a Church properly so called, then I say, and that with far
better reason, that such a company do constitute a complete visible Church or
a Church body properly so called: but in the Church of Jerusalem there was not
only two or three met together or two or three such Assemblies and
Congregations, but at least twelve, if not half twelve score, yea innumerable,
in all and every one of the which, they met together in the fellowship of the
Gospel and in Christ's name, and clothed with his power, and honored with his
presence, and in all and every one of the which respectively and severally,
they had also their lawful Officers and Ministers, and enjoyed all those
saving and sealing Ordinances, which the Independents confess arr sufficient
for the constituting of a Church properly so called. Ergo all and every one of
those Congregations severally and respectively considered were Churches
properly so called.

This Argument is grounded upon the Independents own Principles, and upon
their very words, and corroborated with their own reasons, For what people
(say they) in the world may be called a Church, if they may not, to whom
Christ has given his power, and promised his presence? If the gifts of Christ
be of any force, if the power of Christ be of any efficacy, then they have a
right to be so called. Thus the Independents speak; and therefore without they
will renounce their own Principles, and abjure all reason, and the very light
of understanding given them of God, they must acknowledge those several
congregations in the Church of Jerusalem to be Churches properly so called, as
having in every one of them whatsoever they think requisite and sufficient to
constitute a formed Church; for there were in each of them respectively such
Ministers and Officers, as to whom Christ had given his power, and promised his
presence, and that to the en^ of the world, Matthew. 28. verse. the last. They had
also in all those congregations, all those Privileges, Immunities and
Ordinances, the enjoying of the which the Independents think sufficient to
make any one of their new congregations a complete and formed church, or church
body properly so called: as for their Ministers and Pastors, they had all the
blessed Apostles amongst them, and Christ's seventy disciples, and many other
Preachers abundantly furnished with all gifts as who had gone in and out with
Christ from the very beginning of his and John's Ministry, the meanest of which
was thought fit to be an Apostle, as is manifest from the first of the Acts;
and they had amongst them also in their several congregations, many Believers
and Saints, and all of them extraordinarily gifted and qualified, and such as
continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and in the
breaking of bread, and in prayers; therefore they were visible Churches, (I do
not with the Author say mystical bodies) the Members of the which were visible
Saints, such as were called out of the world, and united together in their
several congregations, and that with the holy covenants of Baptism, and
breaking of bread to worship the Lord in all his holy Ordinances, and therefore
they were so many complete churches, and churches properly so called, as being
joined together in the fellowship of the faith of the Gospel, and having in all
those assemblies and congregations severally and respectively, both for matter
and form, that which the Independents hold ever sufficient to constitute and
complete churches properly so called: for the matter of those congregations,
they were visible and miraculous Saints, not ordinary ones, as being inspired
with the Holy Ghost, and having amongst them Officers and Ministers of
incomparable sanctified and transcendent indowments, viz, the holy Apostles, all the which were led into all truth by the Spirit of God, who spoke in them and
by them infallibly, who had all and every one of them the Keys of the Kingdom
of Heaven, viz. the power of order and jurisdiction, by which they preached the
Gospel, and ordained and constituted all other churches, and gathered and
formed churches, both in Jerusalem, and in all other cities and countries
wheresoever they came.

And as in all those congregations and assemblies they had the materials both
for Officers and Members of true complete formed churches; so t^^y had
likewise that which the Independents call the form of complete churches
properly so called, to speak in their own language; for they were all united
and combined together in all and every one of those several congregations, by
the bond of an holy covenant or covenants; as that of Baptism, and breaking of
bread, those sealing Ordinances; and they had the preaching of the Word and
prayer amongst them, in all which Ordinances every one of those several
congregations did daily partake with the Fellowship of the Apostles, all which
in these our days are thought sufficient by those of the congregationall way
to make any of their Assemblies a true and complete formed Church, and a Church
properly so called: so that wheresoever according to their own Doctrine and
Principles, they enjoy all these Ordinances in their several meeting houses
with a Pastor and Doctor, and an Elder or two and a Deacon, and three or four
good women, and as many men, every one of these several Congregations
challenge unto themselves (though they consist but of ten or twelve) the name
of a formal and complete Church properly so called, and do conclude, that
they are so many Churches properly so called, in all which they affirm and no
where else that Christ is set up as King upon his Throne.

And therefore if all the several Congregations of the Independents considered
by themselves respectively and apart, may properly in their opinion be called
churches, and that for the enjoying but some of the above mentioned Ordinances
and Privileges, that all those several Congregations in the Church of
Jerusalem did completely partake in, then all good reason will conclude that
all these several Assemblies in Jerusalem respectively and severally
considered were complete churches properly so called; and that (as I said
before) with a great deal more and better reason by how much it is certain
that those congregations and several assemblies of Believers in the Church of
Jerusalem had both for Matter and Form and all other requisits, whatsoever in
these our days can make a complete Church or Churches properly so called.

And this that I have now said for the confirmation of the Major Proposition of
my Argument may suffice, it being grounded upon the Independents own
Principles and Doctrine, so that I shall not need any more Reasons for the
corroborating of the truth of the same.

As for my Minor Proposition, they that shall read but the first six Chapters
of the Acts, and the 18. of Matt. and the 28. of the same Book, and the
sixteenth and twentieth of Saint John's Gospel shall find it sufficiently
confirmed; yea, my Brother Burton denis not, that there were many congregations
in Jerusalem.

So that now, I hope every judicious and intelligible Reader from all the
forgoing Discourse will see, that I have proved what I undertook, viz. that
there were not only several Congregations and assemblies of Believers in the
Church of Jerusalem (which all the Independents, saving my Brother Burton deny)
but that all those several congregations and assemblies, severally and
respectively considered were Churches properly so called (which my Brother
Burton thought a thing impossible to be evinced) and that all those
congregations and Assemblies notwithstanding made but one Church, and were all
of them under one Presbytery governed communi consilio Presbyterorum, which my
Brother Burton and all the Independents do acknowledge; and therefore of
necessity it must follow there was in Jerusalem a subordination or combining of
many Churches; all which nevertheless were called but one Church, as being
under one government, as the Churches at this day of Geneva, Bazill, and of the
other reformed Cantons, all the which consisting of many congregations or
churches properly so called, being united and combined together and
subordinate, make up but one Church in their several Precincts, after the
example of the Church at Jerusalem, and the other Primitive and purest
Churches, the government of all the which was left as a pattern of imitation
to all succeeding (...) to the end of the world, to teach them to unite and
combine themselves* there for the better and more orderly governing and
regulating of them.

And it is very fit, that as the Mother Churches, and those the most purest
ones, were ruled and ordered, so should all the Daughter Churches be moderated
and regulated in all following Generations to the full consummation of all
things: yea, all reason will persuade any intelligible man, that a Council or
college of grave Divines and experienced men, and men of Knowledge, Learning,
and Integrity, should know a great deal better how to govern, then a few
giddy headed, witless and worthless men, and women, which most of the new
Congregations consist of.

Now in all the Primitive and Apostolical Churches we find this kind of
government, as in the seven Churches of Asia, the which consisted of many and
several Congregations in their several Precincts, and yet made but one Church
in their particular Jurisdictions, and all those my Brother Burton speaks of,
and which he brings in for the making up of a complete pattern of Church
government, were so governed communi consilio Presbyterorum, as that of
Ephesus, as I shall by and by briefly prove, after I have answered to what my
Brother Burton has yet to say in this business, to whose words if any credit
may be given, then the Church of Jerusalem it self which he calls the first
formed Church, was not a perfect formed Church; for he accuses that of
imperfection, and not that only, but all the other Primitive and Apostolical
Churches, saying that they were not complete within themselves; so that to
make up a complete pattern of a true constituted Church, we must borrow
something from each of them; and he affirms, that there is the same relation
between church and churches, that is between the Members of the body, every
one having need of the other; so that of necessity by this his doctrine they
were all dependent, by the which he does oppose all his brethren of the
congregationall way, who hold and labor to maintain not the perfection only
of every one of the Primitive churches within themselves; but the parity
likewise of them, and the equal authority; and affirm that they were all
Independent; which opinion of theirs, my Brother Burton overthrowes, making
them all Dependent.

But let us hear himself speak. Secondly, (says he) it being no more then
one entire particular Church, and not any Diocesan, or Provincial Church, or
the Presbytery thereof classical, as you would bear us in hand it is a
pattern to all particular Churches in succeeding ages; and yet (by your favor)
not so perfect, as no Apostolic churches besides it should also come in, to
make up the pattern complete; for we must necessarily take all the Churches,
etc. as you may see at large in his words before quoted. I desire the Reader
here in the second part of his answer, to take notice of his expressions; where,

First, there is Petitio principii, an ordinary Error amongst sophistical
dealing men: he begs the question, denying the Presbytery of the church at
Jerusalem to be classical, which notwithstanding the Scripture sufficiently
evinceth, as has been abundantly proved, viz. that the church of Jerusalem
consisted of many congregations, and notwithstanding it was governed by the
joint consent and common counsel of many Presbyters, to both which he
accords, and yet as if nothing had been granted by himself, or said by me,
to prove it, he grollishly denies it.

Secondly, I shall entreat the Reader to observe, how he does not only
contradict himself, but oppose all his brethren of the congregationall way:
for they all acknowledge, That the church at Jerusalem, and the government of
that, was to be a pattern of Government to all churches insucceeding times, as
being a most perfect pattern, and the Mother church, in imitation of the which
Government as they pretend, they mould up all their particular congregationall
churches; saying, that as the church at Jerusalem had an absolute power within
it self, and was not dependent upon any other churches, as being complete
within it self, so ought every church in like manner, after the example of
that church, to exercise all authority within it self, and not have dependency
on any other; for in all particulars they avow, the church of Jerusalem was a
perfect formed church, and the same they assert of all the Primitive and
Apostolical churches. This I say is the Doctrine of all the Idependents
besides himself, that I ever have read or talked with; yea, my Brother Burton,
in the beginning of his Answer to his own Argument, says, that the first
formed Church we find, is in the second of the Acts. Then if it was a formed
Church (as he confesses) and then there was nothing wanting unto it; so that
of necessity it must be a complete and perfect church; for that that is
deficient and deformed, that cannot be said to be perfect and complete and a
formed church; now if it were a formed church, as he above said, then it was a
perfect and an entire church, as all rational men will easily and readily
gather. And yet notwithstanding here he affirms that it was not a perfect
pattern; and therefore (says he) for the making up of a complete pattern of
church government, all the other Apostolical churches besides it must come in.
By which words of his, I maintain, he does not only oppose all those of his
own party, who all hold the contrary, but contradicts himself.

But let us hear himself speak: of necessity (says he) we are to take all
the churches of the New Testament together, to make up one entire and perfect
Church pattern. For in the Church of Jerusalem, we find Election of Officers,
but we find not expressed that part of Discipline for casting out of corrupt
Members, as in the Church of Corinth, and so in the rest. For the Churches were
not brought forth to full perfection in one day. Their very constitution had a
graduall growth. The Church of Jerusalem had not Deacons at first till there
was necessity. The sum is, to make up a complete pattern, not only the Church
of Jerusalem, but that of Corinth, of Ephesus, those of Galatia, and Philippi
and the rest are to be conferred together, that each may cast in its shot, to
make up the full reckoning, so that what is not expressed in the one, may be
supplied by the rest, to make up one Entire Platform. For the Scripture
consists of many Books, as so many Members in one body, one Member cannot say
to an other I have no need of thee, 1 Corinthians. 12. etc.

Thus my brother Burton confuteth all his brethren, who in all their writings
with an unanimous consent hold, that the church of Jerusalem and all the other
Apostolic churches were prefect formed churches, and absolute within
themselves and Independent: where as he blames them all of imperfection, and
says, They must all be conferred together to make up an entire platform,
which if it be not an opposing of them all and a contradicting of himself, I
refer to the Judgment of the learned! For he in the beginning of his answer
said, The first formed church we met with was that in the 2. of the Acts, and
yet he here accuses it of imperfection and faylings and therefore not formed:
for at that time says he it wanted Deacons, and we find not expressed that
part of Discipline for casting out of corrupt members at any time, as in the
church of Corinth and the rest: So that by his Doctrine here was a great defect
and failing in the Church at Jerusalem, and therefore it was not a church
properly so called; for every church properly so called, according to his
learning, must have not only a good Discipline but Distinct Officers and
Members united into one church body respectively: for these are his formal
words page 11. Now a church according to their description truly formed and
properly so called, is when it has a particular Pastor, and Teacher or Doctor
and two to three Elders, and a Deacon with ten or eleven good men and women,
with an explicit particular Covenant; now I shall desire my brother Burton in
his reply to send me word which of all the Ministers that were there at that
time was the peculiar-Pastor of this formed church, and which of them was the
Teacher or Doctor or who were their Elders and who were their Deacons for the
distinction of Officers and Members united into one church body respectively,
is that that makes up a formed church properly so called in their Dialect; and
therefore if he cannot make all that I require of him clearly appear, then he
can never prove either the church at Jerusalem, or any of the primitive and
Apostolical churches, churches properly so called; for we read not in all the
holy Scripture, that any church had a particular Pastor and Doctor peculiar to
it self, or but two Elders and a Deacon, with a small company of men and women:
or any particular Covenant; but we read that in all the churches there were
mighty multitudes of believers and many Deacons, and that they had many
Presbyters set over them and church Officers to govern them in common, and
nothing in particular of that distinction of Officers and Members united into
one church body respectively, with any such Covenant which he and all the
Independents say make a church properly so called: and without which in their
Language it cannot be adistinct and formal church properly so called: from
which I do with very good reason conclude and that from the new light I have
from my brother Burton, that either the church at Jerusalem, and all the other
primitive churches were not churches properly so called or well formed churches
according to the new testament form, which were impious either to think or
say; or if they were, that then there may at this day be complete churches
properly so called although they have not distinct Officers and Members, united
into one church body respectively, but serve their flocks and congregations in
common.

So that all the babble of my brother Burton and his brethren of the
congregationall way, is but wickedly and unchristianly to abuse the world and
to delude poor people when they demand such things of their brethren as
essentially necessary for the constituting of a church properly so called as
God never required at his peoples hands, and of which there is neither precept
nor president in all the holy Scriptures: for this distinction of Officers they
call for in all churches, and many other things they rigidly exact of us for
the completing and forming of a church after the New Testament form, were not
in the church of Jerusalem, the mother church, and yet it was by my brother
Burtons confession the first formed church and that in the judgment of all the
Independents besides himself, a perfect church at that time.

But because he requres of me to show him distinct Officers and Members, united
into one body respectively in all the several congregations in the church at
Jerusalem, without which he affirms they were no formed churches properly so
called; I desire of him likewise that he would show me that distinction of
Officers and Members in that whole church that he demands of me in its parts,
without the performing of the which all that he has written is nothing; and he
must of necessity grant that the church at Jerusalem was not a church properly
so called, if that distinction I say of Officers and Members be essential to
the completing of a church or churches. For he confesses at that time he
calls it a formed church, they had no Deacons, and all the Independents that
ever I have seen or talked with, say they read of no Elders in the church at
Jerusalem till the 12. of the Acts which was a long time after the first
forming of this church: and we read not at any time of any particular Pastor
or of any Doctor or Teacher joined with that Pastor as is usually in the
churches of the Congregationall way, but that upon all occasions all the people
applied themselves to all the Apostles, and and said Men and brethren what
shall we do? and that they continued in the Doctrine and fellowship of all the
Apostles and that all things were transacted by the common Counsel of all the
Apostles, and that they all laid their hands in the Ordination of the Deacons
upon each of them; we hear nothing I say of any particular Pastor or Teacher
or of any Elders all this while; and yet by my brother Burtons Doctrine it was
a formed church then, and we neither hear nor read also any thing of an
explicit particular Covenant which the Independents call the form of a church,
neither do we read of many things they now rigidly require of all such ^s
desire to be Members of their new Congregations practiced in that Church. I
shall therefore cordially desire of my brother Burton, seeing the underwriters
his tributaries have given him leave (as he says in his Truth shut out of
doors) that he should baulke no truth he shall meet with in the plowing up of
the Scripture, but should Preach every truth, I say he having obtained this
Christian liberty of his Benefactors, and truth being now no more in prison,
that he would heartily and plainly without any reserve Do^e^ ad triarios
redieritres, tell me the next time I hear from him* who was the particular
pastor in the church at Jerusalem, who was their particular Doctor or Teacher,
who were their Elders, who were their Deacons: seeing my brother Burton denies
any congregation to be a church properly so called if it have not its distinct
Officers and Members united into one church body respectively; for these are
his words; therefore I put him upon this to prove, and without proving it all
that he has hitherto writ both in this book and in his vindication will all
prove but waste paper to use his own language. I am confident he will not say
that James or Peter were their Pastor or Teacher, or that any of the Apostles
were the Pastor or Teacher of that particular church: for they were the
Universal Pastors of the visible Catholic church, and were extraordinarily
sent into all the world as the Scripture records: therefore they could not be
either the particular Pastors or Teachers of that church: for as the
Independents teach they must be fixed and should not leave their charge and
Flocks; neither can my Brother Burton tell which were their Elders; for the
Independents say they read of none in the church at Jerusalem till the twelfth
of the Acts: and therefore according to their doctrine they then had none: and
it seems to be my brother Burtons opinion; ^or he ^aith the Church at
Jerusalem wanted that part of discipline of casting out of corrupt Members,
which if they had had Elders, they could not have wanted: and for Deacons, my
brother Burton acknowledges that at that time he calls it a formed Church,
they had none: So that by this I have now said I believe it will be a
difficult, if not an impossible thing either for him or any of his fraternity
to show me that distinction of Officers and Members in the whole Church at
Jerusalem which he requires I should show him in the several branches and
congregations; without the which notwithstanding according to his learning it
cannot be a Church properly so called, and so then the church at Jerusalem it
self was no church properly so called.

Therefore when he is at plow again (as now I understand he is) I desire him
that he would furrow up this truth unto me, and show me that distinction of
Officers and Members; withal, I desire to be resolved how he comes to make
this distinction of Officers and Members, united into one church body
respectively, to be the form of a Church, when his brethren of the
congregationall way make an explicit particular covenant to be the form of a
Church, and the Members and Officers to be the materials only of a Church; All
these truths I desire and that earnestly, that my brother Burton at his next
going to plow he would lay open and discover unto me, and then I will conclude
of him that he is a singular tiller and a very good husbandman in Christ's field
his Church, or otherwise he will never be fit either to make a complete
Independent Country courtier, or an absolute Independent Gentleman, but he
shall be a Haberdasher in the small wares of Independency, and with those I
persuade my self he will be best able to trade with.

But in the mean time till I hear from him I will affirm that if it be true
he says, That the Church of Jerusalem wanted Deacons and Church discipline and
an explicit particular covenant and many other good things they require of us
for the completing of a church or churches properly so called, then that
Church was not perfect and complete, and yet we read not that the Saints of
those times made any separation from their public Assemblies and Congregations
though they wanted Officers and Discipline and many other things required now
by them, so that we may learn from those primitive and holy Christians that we
ought not to forsake the public Assemblies of the Saints for want of some part
of Discipline, or for want of some Officers, or for want of many things they
now exact of all Christians for the completing and moulding of them into
Church bodies pro perly so called: for we read, That in the Church of Jerusalem
they were perfectly converted and were Saints indeed, and yet that for some
wants they made no separation, rent or schism from their brethren, but that
they daily met together in their public Assemblies, as in the Temple and in
Solomon's Porch, and from house to house openly and that in all love and charity
with one accord; And yet if my brother Burton and the Independents may be
believed, they had neither Deacons, nor Elders, nor distinction of Officers,
nor a great part of Discipline nor many other of their requisites: So that from
the pious and godly example of those glorious Saints, I learn this lesson, That
rents and scismes are not to be made amongst brethren for some failings in any
Churches, yea though there be some defects not only in Officers and Members,
but a very want of Officers themselves and of a good Discipline also in any
Church or Churches: and that they that do make rents and divisions have a great
deal to answer for.

Withal I learn that it may be a true Church though there be a failing in
Discipline and a want of some chief Officers and Members: For my brother
Burton acknowledges, That the Church at Jerusalem was a formed Church,
although it wanted both Officers and Discipline, and all those things they now
require of all such as desire to be made Members in their new Congregations.
And therefore if this he now preaches be solid and orthodox Divinity, and if
he may be credited in what he writes, as there was at that time no just ground
of separation from their public Assemblies for want of those things, so there
is now in these our days no just cause of separation from our Assemblies; if
there be indeed a real want of discipline and Church Officers, which we might
long since have enjoyed had not he and his brethren hindered our happy begun
Reformation. Especially I say we ought not to separate when there is no failing
or want in any dominative or fundamental point of Religion necessary to
salvation, and where all the counsel of God requisite to eternal happiness
is daily publicly taught in every one of our Congregations and Churches, all
which the Independents themselves do acknowledge we want not.

Besides it is granted by all orthodox Divines, that Discipline makes not for
the esse but the been esse of a Church: Yea the Independents themselves hold,
That Officers in a Church make not for the esse, but the been esse of it, as
the New Lights from the Summer Islands apparently delucidate: For they say,
Though the Officers all dye, yet the Church cease not to be a church.

But to return to the matter in hand: Whereas my brother Burton affirms that
the Church at Jerusalem wanted Discipline and that it had not Deacons at first,
and that the Churches were not brought forth to full perfection in one day, and
that their very constitution had a graduall growth, I maintain that in all he
asserteth, he is not only exceeding erroneous and ignorant, but understands
not the very doctrine of the Independents, who are all against him in those his
assertions; for they all acknowledge and in express words affirm it in their
writings that all the Officers of the church were virtually in the Apostles,
saying they were Pastors, Teachers, ruling Elders and Deacons, etc. And
therefore they wanted neither Deacons nor Elders (if their concession be true)
nor any church Officers, which is point blank against my brother Burton his
opinion. They confess likewise that all the Apostles and every one of them,
had the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, that is, the power of order and
jurisdiction, viz: the key of knowledge and authority: And therefore they had
also in the church of Jerusalem that part of Discipline of casting out corrupt
Members. They acknowledge in like manner that all the Apostles had equal power
amongst themselves, and that they had authority over all the churches as having
the care of all the churches who were committed to their charge, and that they
left both the Presbyters and people in their several churches to the exercise
of all their particular rights, and impeached neither of them of their
liberties. And they do also confess that as Paul by his own authority did
excommunicate Hymeneus and Alexander. 1 Timothy 1. ver. 20. and others: so might
the other Apostles have done, if they had had the like occasion given them, and
might have put any church, not only in mind of their duty and reproved them for
their neglect of Discipline, but have enjoined and commanded them also to have
put it in execution, as both Paul did the church of Corinth, and Saint John the
seven churches of Asia: which were all well constituted, and well and perfect
formed churches, by their first constitution and brought forth to full
perfection in one day, so as they had no need of a graduall growth as my
brother Burton affirms. All these things I say, the Independents do accord
unto. And all reason will persuade any well grounded Christians, That the
church of Corinth was a perfect church at its first constitution before the
incestuous person appeared in it; and the same they will say of the other seven
churches in* Asia, before the doctrine of the Nicolai^tans and that of Baalam
and Jezabell sprung up in them, and before those lukewarm Laodiceans appeared
and all the other offenders there spoke of; all the which were so far from
adding any perfection to those churches, as it was a deformity to them all, to
have such creatures and failings amongst them, and it was reputed their great
sin to connive at them and suffer them to be amongst them and in their
bowels, which by their first constitution they had power to have cast out: For
it is well known that all those churches at their first plantation and founding
had all of them their Presbyters and Elders and all other Members and Officers
as consisting of Saints, and had in all those several churches both the power
of order and jurisdiction and the power of the Keys; and this in their first
constitution; and therefore had no need of a graduall growth but were all
brought forth to full perfection the first day contrary to my brother Burtons
doctrine.

And it is confessed likewise by the Independents and by my brother Burton
himself, That where there are Church Officers as a Pastor and Teacher with an
Elder or two and a Deacon, and where there are a few visible Saints if they
amount but to the number of twenty, nay if they be but ten or twelve gathered
together according to their method, that there is a complete formed Church
where Christ is set up as King upon his Throne, and that this Church is clothed
with Christ's power and honored with his presence, the which likewise wants
nothing for matter and form, but has plenary authority within it self; and
therefore is as complete a Church within it self as any church in the world;
by all which it must necessarily follow and that upon their own principles,
that it is brought forth in perfection in one day and has no need of a
graduall growth.

Now I shall never beleevethat those glorious churches founded by the holy
Apostles in every city in the which they had their Elders and Presbyters and
all other Officers appointed them, the which churches also consisted of visible
Saints, that they were not at their first constitution as complete churches,
and in the which Christ was not as well set up upon his Throne, as any of our
new gathered churches of the congregationall way. Yea it were an impiety to
think that the blessed Apostles did not know how to gather churches and how to
set up Christ upon his Throne in them, and how to bring them to perfection in
one day at their first constitution as well as our brethren the Independents,
who notwithstanding do all proclaim they but imitate the Apostles, both in the
gathering and constituting of their new churches. And therefore if the
Independent congregations, are all completed at their first founding and
constitution, and be all complete within themselves, as having plenary
authority and power within themselves, much more had all the Apostolical and
Primitive Churches absolute jurisdiction within themselves at their first
constitution, which is yet more manifest from the reproof given to the Church
of Corinth by S. Paul who blames them for not casting out the incestuous
person; and from the reproof given to some of the 7 churches of Asia by Christ
himself: For otherwise they if they had not bin perfect and complete at their
first constitution, might have replied and answered, That they had no power to
cast out corrupt Members, and that their churches were not completely molded
up at their first founding, and that they wanted that part of Discipline; but
none of these churches pretended any such thing, neither could they; for Saint
Paul had given the church of Ephesus by name a caveat to take heed of Wolves,
that would rise up among them after his departure, and had armed them likewise
with power and authority for the casting of them out, as it is at large to be
seen in the twentieth of the Acts; and that church executed its power in
finding out of false Teachers, and is praised for it, though the other are
blamed. So that the neglect of this their duty, and not executing of their
Discipline was that that was found fault with in them, and that they had not
exercised that power that was given them in casting out of those corrupt
Members from amongst them. This I say was their failing, and for this were they
blamed; so that it was not for want of Discipline or that they were not perfect
at their first constitution, but their negligence and their not doing their
duty was their sin.

Neither was the Church of Jerusalem inferior to any other church in power, or
wanted that part of Discipline of casting out corrupt Members, as my Brother*
Burton boldly, and without all reason affirms: for it is well known, that
the church at Jerusalem had power of life and death, as we may see in the
story of Ananias, and Saphira, his wife, the which if it could take away the
very life of offenders, as it did theirs for lying to the Spirit of God, then
it had power to cast out any corrupt Members, and scandalous persons, if they
had had any amongst them, as all reason will dictate to any well grounded
Christian.

But that we read not of any excommunicated in the Church at Jerusalem, it
was not for any want of Discipline, or power in that Church of casting out
offenders, but because there was no open Delinquents and scandalous persons;
for they were all zealous of the Law (as it is well known) and would suffer
none in the least to transgress it without questioning them; nay, if they
conceived but an offense in the Apostles themselves, they would call them to an
account, as we may see Acts the ^1. where they questioned Peter for going in
to the Gentiles; and it is conceived by learned and judicious Christians, that
the punishment also that was inflicted upon Ananias and Saphira, struck so
great a terror of offending into all the Ghurch, (as it is in express words
declared) that they durst not in public be vicious; and therefore that made
them all afraid of public open and scandal; withal it is recorded that they
were all true Believers, and Saints in the Church of Jerusalem, and that they
continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine, and Fellowship, and in breaking
of bread, and prayer, and were all true converts and Saints indeed; now no
church uses to cast out Saints, and men of a holy and unblameable
conversation, and such as persevere in goodness, and do their duty, but the
wicked and scandalous, which when there was none in the church at Jerusalem,
there was no need of excommunication, or at least they had no occasion of
exercising that part of discipline at that time. For discipline in any church
is as Magistracy in a Commonwealth or Kingdom, which is not a terror to the
good, but to the wicked, as Saint Paul speaks Romans the 13. it is a comfort to
well doers and as, the Magistrate uses the sword only against Offenders and
Delinquents; so the Officers of the Church exercise that part of Discipline
only in casting out corrupt and scandalous Members, (which is solely to be put
in execution against them:) and therefore that we read not of excommunication
in the Church at Jerusalem, it was not for want of that part of Discipline, but
because there were no public and scandalous persons there, as in the church of
Corinth.

Besides, all men know that Discipline is one thing, and the execution of
discipline is an other, and is but the result and effect of discipline, as the
church is one thing, and the Administration of the Sacraments is another: Power
and Authority in a court, whether ecclesiastical or civil, is one thing, and
the execution of the power of that court is an other: and as the execution of
its authority makes it not a court, nor gives not the power to it, but
declares it to be a court invested with authority; as in the Parliament the
great and supreme court of this Kingdom, the cutting off of Strafford and the
Prelates heads gave not power to the Parliament, but declared the power they
had by their first constitution: for they were a court before, and had the
power of execution before, but upon this occasion they exercised it: but will
any man say, if they had not at this time exercised their authority as they
have not done for these many years before, that the great court had wanted that
part of Discipline? all men that should attempt to say that great council
wanted that part of Discipline, I beeleeve they would exercise some more of
their authority to teach such an one better manners or more wit.

Even so it was in the Church at Jerusalem, they had discipline in that Church,
though we read not of the putting of it in execution, as we do in the Church
of Corinth, and Ephesus, neither will any rational man conclude, that all the
other Primitive Churches wanted that part of discipline; because I say we
read only of the execution of it in the church of Corinth, and that of
Ephesus, which is commended for it, and some of the other seven churches are
blamed for not casting out their corrupt Members, and because they had not at
that time exercised their authority, neither read we of it in the churches of
Galatia, Colosse, nor amongst the Thessalonians, nor in the church of Rome, nor
Antioch, nor in Samaria: will any man therefore say that all these churches
wanted that part of Discipline, because we read nothing of it in them? I am
confident they will not be so fanaticall, as to make such a conclusion from so
brainsick a premise: much less will any intelligible christian argue as my
Brother Burton does, saying, we read not of that part of Discipline in the
church at Jerusalem, of casting out corrupt Members, Ergo, it had it not: this
would indeed prove a non sequitur, and such a consequenct or conclusion could
least of all have been made from the Church at Jerusalem upon such an
Antecedent, then from any of the other churches, because the church at
Jerusalem had not only the power of the Keys within it self, but a
legislative power also, who gave Laws to all other churches, both for the
ordering and ruling of them, and for the exercising of their Discipline in
every particular, and that by Gods appointment; for out of Sion shall go forth
the Law (says the Prophet) Isa. 23. and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.
So that the Church at Jerusalem the Mother church gave power to all the
daughter churches, and that both the power of Order and Jurisdiction; the power
was radically in it, and in that church was the fountain of all authority, the
streams of the which flowed to all the other churches of the world: For out of
Zion shall go forth the Law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.

And can any rational man think it gave away all its power, and did not keep
a reserve* donec ad triarios redierit res? I believe that all the Independents
will much blame my brother Burton for this his rashness, in affirming the
church at Jerusalem wanted that part of Discipline for casting out corrupt
Members, when the Apostles themselves had all power in their hands bequeathed
unto them by Christ himself, who said, Mat. 28. verse 18. 19. All power is
given to me in Heaven and Earth, go ye therefore and teach all Nations, etc.
and John the 20. verse 21, 22, 23. as my Father has sent me, even so send I
you; and when he had said this, he breathed on them, and says unto them,
receive ye the Holy Ghost; whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted
unto them, and whose soever sins ye retain they are retained: Lo! here was
plenary authority given unto all the Apostles, who as they had the Keys
promised them in the sixteenth of Matthew, here they now received them, and
therefore they had the power in their hands, both of order and jurisdiction,
which the Keys imported, as all the learned know, and the very Independents
do not deny; now this power was not only given unto them, but unto all
faithful Ministers their successors, to whom Christ made a promise as well as
to the Apostles, Matthew. 28. that he would be with them to the end of the
world; neither do we ever read that the Apostles and Ministers in the church
of Jerusalem did ever relinquish their power, and therefore they wanted not
that part of Discipline, as my Brother Burton grollishly affirms, who begins
now to doubt, when he begins to dote; but if there had been any just occasion,
without all controversy, they would have put it in execution; but that church
consisting of visible Saints, and having no scandalous persons amongst them,
had no occasion of the exercise of that part of Discipline: which they wanted
not though they exercised it not; for it is to be believed that the Apostles
would have discharged their duty in punishing offenders if there had been any.

And I believe that the Independents would blame any of their Scholars and
Members if they should say their new congregated churches wanted that part of
Discipline of casting out of corrupt Members, though they have not as yet in
some of them put it in execution: for they have learned to distinguish between
the power of a Church and the execution of that power in a church: for as it
does not argue that a Court of Justice has not power of life and death when
notwithstanding it is invested with the Authority of hanging and drawing,
though perhaps after it is erected they either have no occasion of executing
that authority that is given, or them out of Clemency will for a time show
mercy and use lenity toward offenders, not taking the extremity of the Law the
more with humanity and kindness to reclaim them; even so in all well
constituted Churches the not executing of the power given them by Christ, or
the not having just occasion of putting that power in execution, does not prove
a want of that power: and if any of the Members of the new congregations should
so argue, against their new church Officers, I believe they would soon make
use of their Keys to shut such a Member out of their Church doors, as my
brother Burton falsely complains that Truth was lately shut out of Aldermanbury
Church doors.

And truly if one of their whibbling congregations have no want of that part of
Discipline, though they execute it not: shall any man be so temerarious and
unadvised as to think that the power of the church, in Jerusalem was evacuated
or enervated, or that they had not that part of Discipline, when there was
greater power in it then in any church in the world, all who had all the
Apostles amongst them and as Christ's and John Disciples, all of them armed with
the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and when the Magazine and treasury of all
power resided continually in that church, and therefore that part of
Discipline, when all other churches derived their power, authority and
jurisdiction from that as the mother church. And to this I now say, I am most
assured all judicious men will easily consent and agree. And therefore my
brother Burton affirming that the church at Jerusalem wanted that part of
discipline of casting out of corrupt Members, saying, That neither the Church
at Jerusalem was a perfect pattern, nor none of the Primitive churches were
complete within themselves, but that they must all of them necessarily be
conferred together for the making up of a complete pattern; so that every one
of them was to bring in its shot to make up the full reckoning, that so what is
not expressed in the one may be supplied by the rest to make up a complete
platform. These are his formal words, adding with all, That as the Scripture
consists of many books, and the body of many members, and one Member cannot
say to the other I have no need of thee 1 Cor. 11. So it was amongst the
Apostolical churches they had all need one of another. I say my brother Burton
in his thus speaking, is not only against the opinion of all the Independents
(for the which, I am assured th^^ will sharply reprove him) but Volens Nolens
concludes, that all the Primitive churches were necessarily dependent one upon
another as the several Members are in one body, which is that that all those
of his party peremptorily deny, though indeed it be an Evangelicall truth, as
I shall god willing abundantly prove in examining the government of all those
churches my brother Burton enumerateth, as that of Corinth, Phililppi, those of
Galatia and the rest, with that of Ephesus, all which he brings in for making
up of his complete pattern and all the which I will take notice of though he
and his Scholars will take no notice of my indefinite enumeration, of those
that were baptized by John the Baptist and Christ's Disciples to be formed into
a Church or churches.

I say although he will take no notice of my enumeration, I will take notice of
those churches he enumerateth, and prove them all Classical and dependent upon
their several Presbyteries, and that there was not an Independent church such
as they describe unto us in the world in the Apostles time nor before our
days, nor never such a whimsie taken notice of before this doting age of the
world. I shall also take notice of his words for matter of comfort to us poor
Presbyterians who the Independents term at every word an Antichristian brood,
who may not think it much nor be offended with it, but rather rejoice when they
accuse our churches not to be well formed churches after the new testament
form, and when they say that our churches are not perfect churches and
churches properly so called: for here my brother Burton a Master illdependent,
censureth and judges not only the congregations in the church at Jerusalem to
be no churches properly so called, but the whole church of Jerusalem it self
for want of a great part of Discipline and for want of Officers, and blames
all other Churches, accusing them likewise of faylings and imperfections,
saying, that they must be all conferred together for the making up a complete
platform, which is in plain English to say they were all defective and not
complete and formed churches, which indeed is a horrid piece of blasphemy and
deserves condign punishment from all those of his party.

And truly as it is a matter of wonder to see when men once desert and forsake
the truth, what errors out of pride and giddiness they soon f^ll into, so it
may exceedingly rejoice and comfort us, that in all their aspersing of us and
daily calumniating our Churches for some faylings and imperfections as they
conceive, and in their denying of them to be true formed churches; for in this
we are like sufferers with all the Primitive and Apostolic churches, all the
which my Brother Burton accuses of imperfection and for faylings, so that if
he will censure them, it is no wonder they not only condemn all our churches
for Antichristian and not well formed Churches, but separate from them as from
so many Synagogues of Satan, for so they term our Assemblies: But now to take
notice of my brother Burtons enumeration.

The sum of all (says he) to make up a complete pattern, not only the Church
at Jerusalem, but that of Corinth, and those also of Galitia and that of
Philippi, Ephesus and the rest are to be conferred together to make up one
entire platform. Thus he* Now then if it can be proved that all these Churches
my brother Burton enumerates, as that of Corinth, Philippi, those of Galatia,
of Ephesus and the rest, did consist of many and several congregations within
their several Precincts, and yet were all of them governed by the Common
Council of their several Presbyteries, and all of them notwithstanding made
but one Church i^ their several jurisdictions, and that all those Churches I
say were Classically governed, and were all dependent upon their several
Presbyters, as being subordinate to them, and likewise subject to the
Synodicall Decrees at Jerusalem; then it will follow, that all churches in
succeeding ages to the end of the world are to be so governd: for all these
churches make up an entire and complete pattern or platform of governing all
churches for future ages, as my brother Burton grants. I shall therefore
desire the reader (it being a business of so great importance) to give me
leave, as I proved the Church of Jerusalem to consist of many Congregations or
Churches which my brother Burton calls branches of that Church, therefore
necessarily depending upon the stock: So now briefly to evince, that all those
Churches my brother Burton enumerats consisted likewise of many Congregations
and were all Classically governed. And then I will also prove, that according
to the Independents definition of a Church, their very Congregationall Churches
and Assemblies are not true Churches properly so called, and withal I shall
make good by Gods assistance and that from their own Principles, that they are
Dependent, All which I will do in order.

And first I will begin with the Church of Samaria which is one of the rest my
Brother Burton says must be taken in for the making up a complete platform.
This City of Samaria was the Regal City and the Palace or Chamber of the Kings
of Israel, and was one of the greatest Cities then in the world, and next to
Jerusalem the famousest in all Palestine and one of the greatest in all Canaan
for extent, and it must needs be a great one that could entertain the whose
Assyrian army at one time, and it was exceeding populous, as all the stories of
the Kings and Chronicles witness, in the which we know there was a true Church
in Christ's time and that planted by Christ himself, as we may see in the 4 of
John where we read that our Savior converted not only the woman of Samaria
but many more who were made believers by his Ministry, as they themselves
acknowledge and testify; and to this Church were many thousands added by the
preaching and miracles of Philip: for it is said of them Acts the 8. verse. 6.
10. 12. 14. that all those that had bin seduced by that Jugler Simon Magus,
which were in no small numbers, every one of them being undeceived by the
preaching and wonders of Philip, now believed and were baptized, so that there
was a mighty company: for it is related that the people of the City with one
accord from the greatest to the least, both men and women believed and were
baptized. Now if any man shall duly consider and weigh things, this City was no
contemptible one, as appears from that I said before; and yet it is asserted by
the holy Ghost who is worthy to be believed and credited that all the people of
that City from the greatest to the least both men and women believed and were
baptized: and therefore they could not all meet in any one place or a few,
neither was any one Pastor able to Teach them all, which appears in that the
Church of Jerusalem at first sent two of the chiefest Apostles Peter and John
to Samaria, so that all this shows there was an innumerable company of
believers in that City, all which could not meet in any one or a few places as
all reason will easily persuade. Besides, the Apostles, Evangelists and the
Ministers of those times had an other manner of converting faculty, then the
Independents in our days, who I never yet heard converted any, though they
have perverted and seduced many. For the Apostles and Evangelists and the
primitive Ministers there, were immediately sent of God, and inspired with the
holy Ghost and spoke in all Languages, and did Miracles such as none could do
but those that came from God, as Nicodemus said unto Christ, that none could
do such works and miracles as he did except God were with him, John 3. 2. for
they cured all manner of diseases with their word and shadow, they raised the
dead, made the lame to walk, and cast out Devils, and did whatsoever was
wonderful. Withal they Preached unto them the glad tidings of joy and peace
and of everlasting happiness after a miserable life here; and did also
instruct them how to order their ways and conversations here, so that they
might live with honor and dye with comfort, and be useful to all men both in
life and death and after death. And the Apostles, Evangelists and Ministers of
those times, as they did good wherever they came, so they lived so holily and
unblameably in all manner of conversation, and were men of such integrity,
sincerity and of such plain upright dealing, as the people that beheld their
conversation, and saw withal their works of wonder that they did, said of
them, that gods were come down amongst them in the likeness of men, so that
they converted whole cities and countries wheresoever they came; yea, it was an
ordinary thing with them to bring whole Nations in a short time, and with a few
Miracles to the obedience of the faith, as we may see through the whole Story
of the Acts, and from that of Paul, Romans the 15. verse 18. 19. where the
Apostle abundantly declares the effect of the Gospel and Miracles of those
times, who wrought so powerfully wheresoever they came, even to the converting
of whole countries and cities, and so they prevailed in this city of Samaria,
that the people of the same were speedily converted from the greatest to the
least, both men and women, who all believed and were baptized; and what
rational man will think, or can believe, that all the people men and women of
a mighty and royal city, could meet in any place or a few to partake in all
acts of worship, but must necessarily be distributed into diverse congregations
and churches, if they would partake in all ordinances? and yet all these made
up but one Church, as being under one government, that of the Presbytery; for
there were Presbyters ordained in every Church, and in every city, as is
apparent from Acts the 14. verse 23. and Titus the 1. And now I have proved
that the two Mother cities of Palestine, Jerusalem and Samaria consisting of
many congregations, were Presbyterially and classically governed: I will go on
to the other cities of the Gentiles enumerated by my brother Burton, and prove
that they also consisted of many congregations, and assemblies, and were all
subordinate to their several Presbyteries and Classes.

And first I will begin with the city of Corinth, which was a famous city, and
in the which there was an illustrious church, and therefore in it also there was
constituted a Presbytery, that was many Presbyters to govern and rule that
Church and those congregations under them: for it is said, Acts the 14. that
Paul and Barnabas ordained them Presbyters in every church, and Paul and
Barnabas were Ministers in the church of Corinth; yea, Paul planted this
church, and Apollo with Barnabas, and the Presbyters watered it; and therefore
there must necessarily be many congregations and assemblies in that church: For
one Pastor or Minister would have been sufficient for own flock, at least a
Pastor and a Teacher, or a Doctor would have been sufficient to have fed one
congregation: now in that they had many ordinary Pastors, and many
extraordinary Teachers in it, with all good reason it follows, that there
were many assemblies and many congregations in that church, which will yet more
abundantly appear from its first constitution or planting: for we read of
multitudes, both of Jews and Gentiles in that City that believed, Acts the
18. verse 5. 7, 8. etc. and that besides Iustus, Crispus also and all his
household, and many Corinthians believed, and were baptized, and the Lord also
said that he had many people in that City, ver. 10. which by the diligent
preaching of Paul for eighteen months together were converted, verse 11. for
whose further building up in their most holy faith, Paul, Apollos, Timothy,
Cephas, and many other extraordinary, and famous Ministers and Teachers,
besides their own Presbyters, were all constantly employed in season and out
of season in preaching the Gospel, and administering the holy Sacraments, and
laboring in word and doctrine, 1 Cor. 3 and 4. all the which imports many
congregations and assemblies of Believers in that City.

Besides, both the Epistles of Paul to the Corinthians show that there were
multitudes of deceitful Teachers, Seducers, and false Apostles, which urged
the ceremonial Law, and the observation of it, and they also had their
congregations and assemblies: there were also many vain Instructers and idle
Teachers, who though they kept the foundation, yet built upon it wood, hay and
stubble: Now all reason will suggest, that Pastors of such several minds, and
teaching such several and discrepant doctrines had all of them scholars, and
followers of the same opinion whereof their several Pastors were, as now we see
in the several Sects in our times; and therefore they did not all meet in one
or a few places, except we understand their meetings for the convention of
their Officers with a part of the more choice people for discipline; besides,
as we have express mention of a Church in Aquila, and Priscylla's house, 1
Cor. 16. so there were many other meeting places in Corinth, where the
Christians assembled themselves together: for in express words there is
mention made in that Epistle of churches in the plural number, 1 Cor. 14.
verse 34. Let the women says the Apostle keep silence in the Churches: by
which it follows, that in Gods dialect congregation and church are
synonima's, and not that only, but that there were many churches in this
church of Corinth, and that they were all but one church, as being so many
branches, and depending all upon that stock, and therefore were all
classically governed, and subordinate to one Presbytery.

The same may be concluded of the Church of Philippi, where verse the 1. Paul
and Timothy salutes all the Bishops and Deacons, so that in the first entrance
of that Epistle we meet with a college of Bishops and Presbyters, for they
were all one, and we meet also with many Deacons; all which proves to any
understanding man that there were many congregations and churches; for one
Deacon would have served for one congrgeation or assembly; and yet they all
made but one church, as being subordinate to one Presbytery, and governed by
their joint consent and common Counsel; and that there were multitudes of
Believers there, it is evident from the variety of Teachers, besides their good
and godly Bishops; for Paul says, there were dogs amongst them, evil workers,
and those of the concision, and he bids the Philippians to beware of those,
Chap. 3. verse 2. and there were many other of their Teachers which were
worldly men, that minded earthly things, whom he proclames enemies of the
Cross of Christ, who made their belly their God, as too many of the
Independent Ministers now adays do, chapter 4. verse 18, 19. and gives them
in command to shun their example, and only to follow his, and such as walked as
he did, whose conversation was in Heaven; and many such Teachers there were in
the Church of Philippi, and such as taught the Gospel out of good will and
sincerely; all which sufficiently prove there were many congregations of
Believers in this Church; and that it was yet but one Church, and governed by a
classis and college of Bishops and Presbyters. And the same may be said of the
church of Galatia, where Paul complains that there were many false teachers
amongst them, which he wished were rooted out, and cut off or destroyed: so
that it follows, that in that church also, there were many congregations, and
they were all governed by the joint consent and common counsel of a Presbytery
there; for there were Presbyters ordained in every church, and in every City.
And now I come to the seven churches of Asia, and that by name my brother
Burton speaks of, viz. the church of Ephesus, with which I will conclude, and
this was but one church in the singular number, Revel. the 2. of the which Paul
called the Elders to him, Acts the 20. verse 17. In the which church there were
such infinites of Believers, as they could not all possibly meet in any one
place or a few; yea, Paul himself declares as much in express words in the
20. chap. verse 20. where he says that he taught them publicly, and from
house to house, which in the original is (...) which by Master Knollys his
learning signifies per singulas domos, and therefore by him acknowledged to be
many congregations, as in the forgoing discourse is suffic^ently proved; and
all reason indeed will persuade it, had it not in words been specified. For
Ephesus was a famous city, and a place of great traffic, where Paul preached
two whole years, by whose hands God wrought no small Miracles, so that all
they that dwelt in Asia heard the word of the Lord Jesus, both Jews and
Gentiles; and through other wonders that were wrought in that city, it is
related that the word of God grew mightily and prevailed, as it is at large chapter
19. set down, so that great multitudes of the very Scholars, and such as
studied curious Arts, were also converted, and burnt their Books, the price of
which amounted to fifty thousand pieces of silver, in so much that fear came
upon all the Greeks and Jews that dwelt in Ephesus, and the name of the Lord
Jesus was magnified. And can any man conceive or believe, that all the Jews
and Greeks in Ephesus a mighty city, and a mart Town, could all meet in any
one place together to communicate in all acts of worship, yea? were it not a
madness to think so, if the very diversity of their languages and tongues of
the people did not dissuade it? for if they would all be edified, they must
understand their Ministers preaching unto them, which so many people of
several Languages and dialects could never do by any one; for it was then a
Miracle to have the gift of tongues, which for the most part were conferred
upon the Ministers, and Publishers of the Gospel, and upon such as were to be
sent from place to place, and from City to City to convert the Nations, such
as were the Apostles, Evangelists and Prophets, all extraordinary men, and very
seldom had the ordinary people the gifts of the Holy Ghost conferred upon
them, but it was chiefly upon some select and chosen ones, not upon all
promiscuously, bu^ upon such as the Apostles laid their hands; for if it had
been upon all, then Simon Magus needed not have offered money to the Apostles
for the purchasing of the gifts of the Holy Ghost, if those graces had been
promiscuously given; but without all doubt it was but to some sortsof men for
the most part that the gift of tongues was distributed, such as the Apostles
made special choice of, for so it appears, 1 Cor. 12. ver. 10. 11.

And therefore when the common people had not the understanding of all
languages, they if they would be edified, must have such to preach to them as
they could understand, and therefore all the Jews and Greeks in Ephesus must
necessarily have diverse places to meet in, if the multitudes of them otherwise
had not been so great but that they might have assembled themselves together,
and only that they might be edified. Besides the great multitudes that we read
of at the first plantationof this church, the Scripture says Acts the 20. That
for three whole years together Paul taught them night and day as an
extraordinary Minister; they had also Timothy sometime amongst them and other
extraordinary teachers and a whole college of Bishops and Elders ver. 28. who
all had the care of the flock committed to them with a charge that they should
feed that church which Christ had redeemed with his blood; They had a
commission likewise given them to oppose all false Teachers, which they
faithfully performed, as the Lord bears them witness, Revel. the 2. ver. 2.
saying, I know thy works, and thy labor and thy patience, and how thou can
not bear them which are evil, and thou have tried them which say they are
Apostles, and are not, and have found them liars. By which we learn that the
Government of that Church was wholly committed into the hands of the
Presbyters, who had the charge for the examination and trial of the doctrine
of all Teachers that came amongst them; and that they were invested with power
likewise and authority of casting them out that were Deceivers and falls
Teachers; and we farther learn that the care of all those several
congregations was committed to all the Bishops and Presbyters of that Church in
common; and although it consisted of many congregations, yet it was but one
church, and therefore was classically governed communi consilio Presbyterorum;
and so were all the other six churches of Asia governed, in all and every one
of the which there were many congregations and churches of believers as is
manifest from the manner of Christ's concluding his Epistles, sent by the
Ministry of Saint John to all those Asian churches Rev. the 2. ver. 7. Let him
that has an ear hear what the spirit says to the churches: From the which I
thus argue.

He who makes the particular or singular church he writes to, to be a
multitude or company of Churches not one only (as the body is not one member
only) he does make that one church to which he writes to in singular or
particular, to be a Presbyterian, Classical, or Collegiate Church: But Christ
in his Epiphonemicall conclusion to every Church, which he had spoken to in
singular or in particular, does speak of the same as of a company or multitude
of Churches, let him that has an ear hear what the spirit says to the
Churches: Ergo, One Church has many Churches in subordination to it, and is
classically or collegiately governed communi consilio Presbyterorum.

To the which argument the Independents answer by denying of the assumption,
saying, that the words may be taken consequenter, as well as antecedenter, with
relation to what follows, as well as to what goes before; and they cite Junius
his testimony for the proof of this their denial, nothing to the purpose.
They produce also Master Bains his authority to as little end. Christ (says
he) does not use the plural number, in respect of the one Church preceding, but
in respect of the seven collectively taken, it being his will that the Members
of each singular Church should lay to heart both severally and jointly,
whatsoever was spoken to them and to others.

This is the Answer, the Author of the New Lights from the Summer Islands in
the name of all the Independents makes to this Argument, page 133. And if words
may serve for answers, those of the congregationall way will never want Answers
and Replies; but we look for reasons and not for words in any men that shall
deny our arguments: And therefore when he has no reason for his gainsaying,
the argument shall for ever stand in force, to prove many Congregations and
many Churches in the Church of Ephesus and in the other six Churches. And truly
he grants the argument whiles he seeme^h to oppose it, saying, that the words
may be taken consequenter as well as antecedenter: So that he acknowledges the
wor^^ may be taken antecedenter as well as consequenter, that is, with relation
to what goes before, as well as to what follows: viz: both ways* which is as
much as I require and as much as by the argument I labored to prove. For who
ever denied that when Christ spoke to his Apostles bidding them watch, that
what he spoke to them, he spoke to all men? So who ever yet denied that when
Christ in the conclusion of every one of his Epistles to the Asian Churches,
said, Let him that has an ear hear what the spirit says to the Churches,
that by Churches there, Christ has as well reference not only to all the
seven churches in Asia, but to all succeeding Churches to the worlds end, that
they should by their examples be forewarned lest they likewise offend in the
same manner? For all men know, That whatsoever was written, was written for our
instruction upon whom the ends of the world are come: Though primarily,
principally and antecedenter he has reference to all the several
Congregations, Assemblies, or Churches in each of those Churches; as first to
those of Ephesus which is yet called but one Church in the singular number, as
the others also, as consisting of many several companies and several
congregations, yet being all combined together in their several Precincts and
subordinate to each of their Presbyteries, were all collectively taken but for
one Church within their particular jurisdictions: and therefore Christ speaks
to them all severally in the conclusion of all his Epistles in the number of
multitude as to many, though in the beginning of his Epistles he writes to them
all as particular and singular Churches, because though each of them consisted
of many congregations (as I said before) yet they were subordinate to their
several Presbyteries and governed by the common counsel of their several
Presbyteries in a classical way.

And there is all reason to convince any man that the word Church in those
Epistles should as well be considered collectively, as the word Angel: Now all
orthodox writers and the very Independent Ministers themselves hold that by
Angel is meant all the Ministers and Presbyters in each of those several
Churches: And therefore if the word Angel in those several Epistles may or be
to be taken and interpreted collectively for many Ministers; then the word
Church also may or is to be taken collectively for many Churches: For those of
the congregationall way do acknowledge, that Pastor and ^lock are relatives and
have reference one to another: Now if there were many Pastors in each of those
Churches, then there must likewise be many Flocks in each of those churches:
but that there were many Pastors and Bishops in those churches it is manifest
by their constitution: For the Apostles ordained Presbyters in every Church
Acts 14. and in the church of Ephesus by name we find many Presbyters and
Bishops, a whole college of them Acts the 20* ver. 17, and 28. And therefore
it is manifest there were many congregations and assemblies of Believers as in
that church so in the other six: for in express words Paul says that he
preached unto them in the Church of Ephesus publicly, and (...) that is in
every house which is by Master Knollys acknowledged to signify many several
congregations in that church. And as it is at this day amongst us, when the
Independents preach publicly and from house to house or in every house, every
one of the shallowest understanding knows, that they have several
congregations and several meeting places, and therefore several churches:
even so it is to be understood by the same expression, that there were many
churches in that one church of Ephesus, because they had many assemblies and
many meeting places which the Scripture says, they had both publicly and
privately. It seems that the Magistrates there were converted, and the
Christians in that city had obtained so much favor from them, that they
allowed them public places of meeting as well as private, as may be gathered
from Paul's words who said, That he had taught them publicly and from house to
house.

Now where there were such multitudes of people as could take up a famous
Apostle night and day for three whole years together, who ceased not all that
while to warn every one with tears Acts 20. 31. and that publicly and
privately ver. 20. and where there were many more extraordinary Teachers,
besides a whole College of Bishops and all of them faithful and painful
Preachers as appears Revel. 2. ver. 2. and all these likewise continually
employed, there of necessity there must be several churches and congregations:
but in the church of Ephesus there were such multitudes of people as employed
the Apostle Paul for three whole years night and day and many other
extraordinary Ministers, besides a whole college of faithful and laborious
Pastors and Bishops: Ergo, there were several churches and congregations in
the church of Ephesus, and therefore the word church is to be taken
collectively, as well antecedenter as consequenter as well as the word Angel:
for there is the same reason of both.

Now then if the word Angel in the Independents opinion (...) to be taken
collectively, the word church by as good Authority is to be so taken, and
therefore as there were many Angels and Ministers in the church of Ephesus, so
there were many Assemblies and churches in that church, by all which it
undenyably follows that one church may have many churches in subordination to
it, as this of Ephesus and the other Asian churches had, and consequently was
Collegially and Classically governed communi consilio presbyterorum: Now then
when the the church of Ephesus and all the other churches my brother Burton
enumerateth were all so governed, it follows that all these churches must be a
pattern of government for the regulating and moderating of all other churches
to the end of the world, which being all Presbyterially and Classically
governed as has been proved, all other churches at this day are to be
Classically and Presbyterially moderated; so that now when it is manifest both
by Scripture and reason and by the Independents own concession that the word
churches may be taken as well Antecedenter as consequenter, it matters nothing
what Master Baines thinks to the contrary, whose judgment in this business is
very erroneous, how Orthodoxe soever he was in his other writings: for there is
no man though of never so greatlearning or parts, no not an Angel that shall
ever by Gods assistance make me believe or embrace any doctrine or opinion that
is contrary unto the holy Scripture and all sound reason, as this novell tenent
and whimsie of the Independents is: and truly so it appears to be from my
brother Burtons own words: who by his induction of so many churches and by
that nigh relation he affirms they all had each to other, and amongst
themselves, concludes they were all dependent, For if there was as great or
nigh a relation between church and church, as is between member and member in
the body of a man (as he asserteth) so that the one cannot say to the other I
have no need of thee, then of necessity they must be all dependent: but there
is as great or nigh arelation between church and church as my brother Burton
asserteth, as there is between member and member, so that the one cannot say
to the other I have no need of thee: Ergo they are all dependent. For the
antecedent it is so clear that all intelligible men will assent unto it. And
for the assumption, my brother Burtons words confirm it, and therefore the
conclusion does necessarily ensue.

And if men would but consider and that duly, the m^nner of the civil
government in all the Cities we read of in the old Testament, both in Judah and
Israel, and the Ecclesiastical government in them, the truth would, easily be
perceived and the controversy would quickly be at an end amongst all sober
minded Christians. Now in those several Cities we shall find, that under
their several Kings and Princes they were all governed by a secular Presbytery
called by the name of Elders and Nobles, whose civil power and Authority under
those Kings and Princes extended as far as the several bounds and territories
under their several Cities delated themselves and not only within their walls:
for as at their first constitution they were so many several kingdoms as the
Scripture relates and had their several jurisdictions and bounds; so into
whosesoever hands and Authority they were in succession of time devolved,
either by conquest, donation agreement or compact, they commonly continued
their Ancient dimensions and limits, and as far as their secular power
extended it self in respect of their civil government and policy, the same
limits did the Ecclesiastical ever observe, and governed all the Towns and
Villages under them, all whose inhabitants and dwellers in their several
abodes and habitations within the compass of their several jurisdictions were
called Citizens, and the whole country in their several precincts were called
by the names of the several Cities, as all Histories relate. And if we will
but examine the Annals of times, all men may find that which I now say to be
true. For we see in the change of all governments, from Democratiall to
Aristocraticall, and from both to Monarchy, that as far as their bounds and
limits extended themselves before their changc, the Monarchsor Kings that
either invaded those Governments or were brought in by election or the free
choice of the people, extended their sole power to the extremest limits of
those several governments and in their own name ruled those several
Countries, which before were governed by the Common counsel of their States,
Senats, Elders or Judges, as we see it happened not only in the kingdoms of
Judah and Israel after the government of the Israelites was changed into a
Monarchy, but even in the Roman Empire and all other kingdoms; for when
Caesar had invaded the Soverainty and had made himself Perpetuus dictator, as
far as the bounds and limits of the Roman Aristocracy extended its self
before the change, so far did his sole power expatiate and extend it self
after the alteration; and the same power did all the succeeding Emperors
exercise to the extremest bounds of that Empire till the dissolution of it, as
all Histories declare.

Even so when the several Presbyteries through the Christian world were
through the cunning and policy of Antichrist, that man of sin, changed into
Episcopacies, as far as the several Presbyteries extended themselves, so
far did the several Bishops appointed over them extend their sole power and
exercise their sole Authority. Hence arose so many broils contentions and
digladiations amongst those several Bishops about the bounds and limits of
their several Seas and jurisdictions, of which all Ecclesiastical stories are
full; all the which do sufficiently prove and declare to any man of but
ordinary understanding that in those several Cities which were after their
change of government, the Seats of their Bishops and Prelates, they had many
Towns and Villages and many Churches and Congregations under them all the
which before this alteration were all governed by their several Presbyteryes
respectively and were all uuder them, and were ordered and moderated communi
consilio Pesbyterorum which the Independents themselves do acknowledge, and my
brother Burton by name in his vindication.

Hence is was that the blessed Apostles went from City to City, to Preach the
Gospel there in their Synagogues, as the whole Scripture of the new testament
relates, and they did not only Preach the Word to them in their several
Cities, but in each of them ordained and constituted Presbyteries, giving
charge to Titus and Timothy to do the same, leaving the government of all
those congregations and Churches in those several Cities in the hands of those
several Presbyteries in their several jurisdictions, injoyning also those
several Presbyteries and Churches to observe the Decrees of the Synod and
Council of Jerusalem, and commanding the people, all Christians and believers
in those several Cities under them, to be subject and obedient to all their
several Ministers and Guides set over them, and to observe all that they
should from God teach them to observe and do, as we may see out of the
several places I set down at large in the foregoing discourse, as out of the
14. of the Act. 23. Acts 20. 27. 18. Tit. 1 verse 5. 1 Timothy 5. verse 17. Heb.
13. verse 7, 17, 24. and the first of Pet. 5. 2. Iam. 5. 14. and Acts 15. 23.
Acts 16. 4. Acts 21. 25. All which places of holy Scripture, and all the
Arguments by which I prove all the Primitive and Apostolical churches to be
classically governed, my Brother Burton and I. S. passed by, not so much as
taking notice of them, as they did not of those multitudes baptized by John the
Baptist, and Christ's Disciples, of whom likewise they took no notice as not
formed into a church or churches. But as our Savior said to the Seducers,
Matthew. 22. Ye err not knowing the Scriptures; so I may truly say of all the
several Sectaries of this time, they err not knowing the Scriptures, nor the
power of God to punish them for their wickedness; For would they but take the
word Church in that sense the holy Scripture delivers it unto us and relates
it, the controversy would soon be at an end. Now the word Church in all the
places above quoted, and through the whole Scripture of the New Testament for
the most part, is taken collectively, either for all the catholic invisible or
visible Church, or for the representative body of the church, or for many
congregations and assemblies of Believers, all combined together under one
government, either in a city or country partaking in all the Ordinances, as
in preaching, and praying, and the administration of the holy Sacraments, and
in the exercising of godly discipline; not only within the walls of those
several cities, but through all the towns and villages, as far as the
bounds and limits of their several governments, precincts, and jurisdictions
did extend, as Acts the 15. 23. The Apostles and Elders send greeting unto the
brethren which are of the Gentiles in Antioch, that is, to the Church in
Antioch, and in Syria, and in Cilicia. So that church is most often taken
collectively, as the church of Geneva at this day, and of Basil, and the other
reformed Cantons, as it was in the seven churches of Asia. Now when the word
church for the most part in holy Scripture is taken in this sense, as the
church at Jerusalem, the church of Samaria, Antioch, Philippi, Corinth, etc.
and where there were many congregations and churches combined together, and all
collectively taken, in this the Independents and all Sectaries err, that they
always take the word church for no more then can meet together in one of
their pipkin congregations, to partake and communicate in their Ordinances;
whereas the Scripture as I have in all the forgoing discourse sufficiently
proved, takes the word collectively for many congregations under one
government, although every one of those several congregations considered apart
and by it self may truly and properly be called a church, as being a Branch
and Member of some particular church, and communicating in all essential
Ordinances with it, as has abundantly bin proved; yet still it is considered
but as a Member, and a Branch or part depending upon the whole particular
church under which it is, and therefore classically governed.

From all which I may conclude, that when all those several Churches, as that
at Jerusalem, Samaria, Corinth, Philippi, Ephesus, which my brother Burton
says must be brought in to make up a complete pattern of Church government,
were all collectively taken, and classically and collegiatly governed, as
consisting of many congregations, and yet but under one Presbytery in their
several precincts and jurisdictions, my Arguments will everstand good; yea,
they are all strengthened from my brother Burtons Concession and his express
words. For if when there were but three thousand Believers in the Church at
Jerusalem, as it appears, Acts the 2. they were then forced to sever
themselves into diverse companies, because they wanted a convenient place so
spacious as wherein to break bread, as my brother Burton says, how impossible
a thing was it for them all after that time to meet together in any one place
or a few, when the church at Jerusalem multiplied daily, and that by many
thousands, and at last grew so numerous as they amounted to many Myriads, or
innumerable companies, as appears Acts the 21. all which notwithstanding my
brother Burton passes by and takes no notice of, wilfully deceiving the poor
people, in concealing from them so apparent a truth: But should I take notice
of the error of his words and discover all his juglings, my discourse would
swell into a mighty volume: for to speak the truth, his expressions contain
in them a heap of fraud and confusion, all which he must one day give a
severe account for. But not to take notice I say of his several faylings: what
he grants, is to be taken notice of, viz. that when the Church at Jerusalem was
in its infancy they wanted a convenient place spacious enough to communicate in
all ordinances, and therefore they were constrained to sever themselves into
diverse companies in several private houses to communicate* Then of necessity
when that Church was multiplied into many ten thousands, they must needs be
distributed into many and many congregations and churches to partake in all the
Ordinances, and all these were but one church, and under one Presbytery, as my
brother Burton acknowledges.

So that now I am most confident every judicious Reader will easily perceive,
that my Brother Burton, and all those of the congregationall way merely trifle,
and delude the poor and ignorant people, whiles with their scriblings they
trouble the world, in making rents and schisms in church and state.

But hear yet how he cavilleth: the church of Jerusalem says he, cannot be
a pattern to all churches, for then all Churches must have seven Deacons, and
must be all subject to some one Church; because things in question, were there
debated and determined, and sent to other Churches to be observed; and in
regard also that that Church was infallibly guided by the Holy Ghost; in which
respect, the resolution of that Church was with authority; it pleased the Holy
Ghost and us, which no particular Church since can ever say. In these respects
(says he) it follows then that the Church of Jerusalem remains not in all
things a pattern for other Churches; for a pattern must be in all things
imitable and perfect. Thus my Brother Burton makes a noise to little purpose,
contradicting all those of his own party that I ever yet read or talked with,
who all acknowledge that the Church of Jerusalem was a pattern to all churches;
and from the example of that church, (as they pretend) they form and govern
all their churches, and labor to reduce all to that pattern, and ground all
their proceedings upon the Plat-forme of that church, and do all as they
affirm, in imitation of that, holding Synods to be one of Gods ordinances,
and ground it upon the meeting of the Apostles and Elders in the 15. of the
Acts: and yet my Brother Burton here maintains the contrary, as his words
sufficiently declare: for which his grollery, I believe all those of his
Fraternity will give him little thanks, and blame him for his so great haste
in answering me: who in his wise Epistle to the Reader says, I hasted at last
as fast, as before I was slow, if possible to recover our brother: so that it
seems he made more haste then good speed (according to the Proverb) Canis
festinans caecos parit catulos, and will have cause at leisure to repent; for
he has by this his juggling and conjuring quite rased the foundation, and
overthrown the whole Fabric of the new Babble of Independency, which his
brethren had been so busy and diligent to lay, erect, maintain, and uphold,
and that from the example of the Church of Jerusalem.

But it will not be amiss to examine his trifling reasons of this his
gainsaying, and denial that the Church of Jerusalem cannot be a pattern to
other churches: for then says he, every Church must have seven Deacons, and
all Churches must be subject to one Church, and to the Decrees of that Church,
which they cannot be, there being none now infallibly guided. Thus my Brother
Burton out of the acumen of his wit disputes at randoun: after the very same
manner did the Prelates in their generation dispute against the godly people
they termed Puritans, when they alleged the example of Christ and the blessed
Apostles in receiving of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, as that they all
received it either sitting or using a Table Gesture: and therefore that all
Christians, and Christ's Disciples were bound to imitate and to follow his and
the Apostles examples rather then Antichrists, as a pattern set down to them
of receiving the Holy Communion to the end of the world.

To which the Prelates, and those of that faction replied, that if the Puritans
would make Christ and his Apostles in receiving the Lords Supper a pattern for
their imitation; then they must always celebrate it in an evening, and that
after supper, and in an upper room, and in a private house, and not in
public, and then they must never exceed twelve or thirteen communicants, and
they must be all men and no women: and an hundred such other toys they brought
to prove, that the example of our blessed Savior and his holy Apostles was not
to be a pattern of imitation for the receiving of the Lords Supper to all
Christians in succeeding ages: and after the same manner does my brother Burton
now trifle to no purpose. For as the example of Christ and the blessed Apostles
was a pattern in respect of substance, and not in every circumstance, which was
never required; so was the church of Jerusalem, in respect of substance, and
not in every circumstance to be a pattern to all churches for their imitating
to the end of the world; As for instance.

The church at Jerusalem had liberty given them by the Apostles to nominate and
make choice of Deacons, when there was a necessity of such Officers and to
nominate and make choice of as many as they thought sufficient for their
occasions. And in this it was a pattern to all churches in succeeding ages,
that they likewise if they had need of Deacons, might make choice of holy and
godly men, and of approved integrity, and of as many as they had need of,
whether fewer or more, and as often as their occasions required, no church
being limited for the number; and as the Apostles only in that church ordained
the Deacons, and not the people, so the Ministers and Presbyters only, in all
churches should do the same. And as upon any difference amongst the brethren
that are joined together in church Fellowship (as it happened then between the
Grecians and the Hebrews, Acts 6. about their widows, who they thought were
neglected in the daily Administration) they made their appeals to the Apostles
for redress; so in this the church at Jerusalem is a pattern to all other
churches upon any occasions of such or the like difference, to appeal unto
their several Presbyteries: and as they willingly submitted themselves to
their determination, so when the Presbyters command or appoint any thing in the
Lord, and according to his word, the people are to yield willing subjection and
obedience to their order; and in their so doing to make the church of Jerusalem
their pattern: and as in the church of Jerusalem there were many congregations
and churches, and all these were combined together, and subordinate to one
Presbytery in this also the church of Jerusalem is to be a pattern to all
churches in succeeding ages, that they may do the like in imitation of that
church, which is for ever to be a pattern to them; and as upon occasion then
certain men went down from Iudaea to Antioch, Acts 15. 1. and troubled the
people there and in other churches, with words subverting their souls, saying
that they must be circumcised and keep the Law verse. 24. pretending they came
from the Apostles and had a command from them of their so doing, so that upon
this the churches sent unto the Apostles and the Elders at Jerusalem for the
determination of this business in debate, and waited patiently for their
resolution, without making any rents or schisms in the church: and as the
Apostles and Elders of that church and of other churches called a council and
Synod and there disputed and debated the matter with arguments and reasons
searching the holy Scriptures What was the good will and pleasure of God in
them, and accordingly determined that difference and question by the written
Word, and from thence commanded that the Decrees of that Council should be
observed in all Churches.

After the very same manner in this their so doing, the church of Jerusalem is
a pattern to all other churches upon the like occasions, it any difference of
opinion rise amongst the churches, or if any new heresies spring up tending to
the subversion of the souls of the people, how holy and godly so ever they
seem to be that broach them, and what pretense so ever they make that they
have them from divine Authority; I say upon the like occasions in Imitation of
the Apostles and Elders in the church at Jerusalem, Kings and Princes, and
Christian Magistrates and those that are in Authority, may call a council or
Synod of Divines together; and as the Apostles and Elders there debated things
by dispute and reason, and by searching the holy Scripture found out the truth,
and determined the question and sent their Decrees which were binding, to all
other churches: so I affirm also in this their so doing that church is a
pattern of imitation to all churches in all Nations and Countries and Christian
churches in them, that Ministers out of several Presbyteries in a
representative body may meet together by the appointment of their Magistrates,
and dispute those questions by reasoning and discourse, and finding by
searching of the Word of God, what his good will and pleasure is, may determine
the question accordingly, and give out their decrees grouned upon the written
Word, with authority to be observed by all those churches under their several
Jurisdictions; and as the people then did patiently wait till the determining
of that difference without making of any rents, schisms, or separations, one
from another, and did then yield obedience to those decrees without any
reluctation, but observed them all willingly after the debate; so ought all
people in imitation of them and following their example, with patience to wait,
without making any rents and divisions, till things are fully discussed and
determined in any such Synod or council, and then willingly and cheerfully
submit themselves and yield obedience to them, and in their so doing they have
the church at Jerusalem for a pattern and the Apostles and Elders of that
church and the other churches for an example of imitation so long as they
injoyne nothing contrary to the Word of God. For this way of governing the
church by Synods and Counsels, upon differing and dissenting opinions between
church and church, and upon occasion of any new Heresies sprung up in Christian
Countries or any old ones revived, as it has its pattern from the church at
Jerusalem and that of Antioch which is left for our imitation that all churches
upon the like occasion should follow it; So this way of ruling is grounded upon
most excellent reason: as most agreeable both to the Law of God and nature and
the practice of all Nations and Kingdoms of which we have many presidents in
the holy Scriptures besides this council at Jerusalem and some others. For as
all Nations and Kingdoms have been ever governed by general counsels and have
ever had their several appeals, from inferior Courts and counsels to
Superior upon either public grievances, or upon any differences between
Province and Province, and County and County, or between Corporation and
Corporation, or City and City, or upon any Pressures or oppressions, or
impeachments or encroachments of each on the others liberties or through
injustice or injuries done to each of them, from some that are in power and
authority; So the church of Jesus Christ which is his Kingdom, is inferior to
no other Kingdom upon earth; but in that also the several Corporations that
are under it, which are so many Presbyterian churches, have in like manner the
liberty of their appeals upon any of the aforesaid or above named occasions.
And although they all enjoy equal privileges amongst themselves (as the
several Provinces, Counties, Corporations and Cities in any kingdom do) so as
they cannot severally and by themselves considered, give a Law each to other;
yet as in a general council in Kingdoms and Commonwealths, when the
Knights, and Barons and Burgesses of each of them are all met together in their
representative bodies in a Parliament or Diet, may being so Assembled together,
not only redress any abuses, and punish Del^nquents, but also for the better
government of those several Do^in^ons for the future, give Laws to each
Province, County, City and Corporation, yea and unto the whole Country, And
enact penal Statutes both to them, and to the whole Countries under them
according to the fundamental Laws of the Kingdoms and Countries. In the same
manner it is in the visible Catholic church which is Christ's Kingdom:
although in it, the several Presbyteries and churches considered by themselves
and as having equal Authority amongst themselves, cannot give Laws to each
other, severally and by themselves considered, as the Church of Corinth, and
that of Antioch, and Ephesus, and the other could not prescribe to each other a
rule or Law to walk by with Authority, but only in an examplary way by well
doing: yet all these several churches joining together in a general council,
as they did at Jerusalem Acts the 15. and having from each of them deligated
and sent their Presbyters and Ministers as so many Burgesses, of their several
cities and Corporations, and they being all met together upon any grievances
and having by debating of the matters and differences in question by dispute
and by disquisition found, What is the good will of God, and what is his
pleasure in his good Word and in the holy Scriptures which are the Fundamental
Laws of his Kingdom may in any Christian council so called, and ordering
their business as the council and Synod of Jerusalem did, give out their
Decrees and those binding ones to all those several churches that are under
their jurisdictions, and all these several churches ought to yield obedience
to them. And in this their so doing they have the church of Jerusalem and the
other churches a president and a pattern. For (I say) in all these respects the
church at Jerusalem is a pattern to all other churches. And as in the church at
Jerusalem, Corinth, Philippi, Samaria, Ephesus, etc. the Apostles, Evangelists,
and the Presbyters in every one of those churches had the charge of each of
those churches committed to them in common, as is manifest from all the places
above quoted, and through the holy Scripture; and as they fed them all and
governed them all in common: so in that also both the church at Jerusalem and
all the other churches (according to my brother Burtons doctrine who says they
must all come in for the making up of a complete platform) I say as all the
Presbyters and Ministers fed those several churches in common, so they are a
pattern to all churches in all succeeding ages to the end of the world, that
they may do the same in their several and respective Presbyteries. Neither is
there any president or example in all the holy Scriptures of the New Testament,
that any church had its peculiar Pastor and Teacher, or Doctor alloted to it,
with but two or three Elders and a Deacon with a slender congregation of people
of the which they only had the cure and care for the feeding and ruling of it,
and the which had absolute Authority within it self, and from which there was
no appeal, the which notwithstanding the Independents assert is a true formed
church after the new testament form; such a model of a church I affirm can
never be showed or proved in all the new testament. God (says Saint Paul 1
Cor. 12. verse. 28.) has set some in the church; first Apostles, Secondarily
Prophets, thirdly Teachers, after Miracles, then Gifts of healing, helps in
government, diversities of Tongues; are all Apostles? are all Prophets? are all
Teachers? etc. and in the 4. of the Ephesians verse. 11. When Christ ascended on
high, he gave gifts unto Men, etc. and he gave some Apostles and some Prophets:
and some Evangelists: and some Pastors and Teachers: for the perfecting of the
Saints etc. all the which places are to be understood concerning the Catholic
visible church. So that to appropriate these places of Scripture to any
particular church, as those of the Congregationall way do, is to abuse and
pervert the holy Scriptures for the upholding of their unwarrantable
proceedings: for if these Scriptures are to be applied unto every particular
congregationall church, then there must not only be a Pastor and a Teacher, but
many Pastors and many Teachers in each of them besides other church officers;
and then the Pastors and Teachers would be more in number many times then the
flock; and if we look upon all particular Churches founded by the Apostles
which must be a pattern indeed to all churches, then we shall find that in all
of them, severally, they had many Presbyters, as in the 14. of the Acts and in
the 20. of the same, and in all the above cited Scriptures does abundantly
appear. So that there is no ground in all the holy Scripture of the new model
of the Congregationall way: for following the express Scripture, (to use my
brother Burtons own words) the first formed church we find is in the Acts the
second, which consisted of many thousands, and in that church there were no
distinct officers and members united into one church body respectively: for all
the Apostles and Ministers of that church fed and ruled that church in common:
and therefore after the very same example and pattern may all Christian
churches to the end of the world do the same and be well formed churches, and
yet have neither a particular Pastor nor Teacher, nor distinct officers amongst
them: for neither the church of Jerusalem, nor any of the Primitive and
Apostolic Churches had that distinction of officers amongst them, and all and
every one of them nevertheless were well formed churches, and therefore in
this they be a pattern to all churches.

And as in the church of Jerusalem and in all the other churches all those that
were converted and added to them were none of them forced to walk either
Days, or Months, or years with them before their admission, that they might
either know the Saints and Members of that Church, or be known of them, no^
were ever forced to make a public confession of their faith, and bring in the
evidences of their conversion or to enter in by an explicit particular
covenant, and to obtain the consent of the whole church before their
admittance: So in this the Church of Jerusalem and the other Churches of the
New Testament are to be a pattern to all other churches to the end of the World
that they may follow the example of that Mother Church, and all the primitive
Daughter-Churches in admitting of their Members without any of these things;
for that was the first formed Church, and yet she required no such things of
any that were added into her. But of this in its due place.

And as the Ministers of the Church in Jerusalem, the Apostles and Teaches only
had the power of government, and admitting of Members, and did it without the
consent of the people, as we may see in their first admission of Members, who
applied themselves unto the Apostles only, saying men and brethren what shall
we do? and not unto the people; and as in that Church, when the people and
Believers opposed any that desired to be admitted, as they did Saint Paul, Acts
the 9. verse 26, 27. of whom they were afraid, not believing he was a
disciple, and he then appealing to the Apostles, who upon hearing of the truth
of the business, they admitted him coming in, and going out without their
consent; in this also the Church of Jerusalem is to be a pattern to all
Ministers and people in all succeeding Churches, that it is the Ministers place
only to admit of Members, and not the peoples, and if they should gainsay
the admission of any upon either their fears or jealousies, or out of other
respects, that then they may have their appeals from them to the Presbyters in
each Church, and giving them an account of their faith, they are by them to be
admitted, notwithstanding the dislike and dissenting of their brethren; for of
this way of proceeding we have the Church of Jerusalem for a pattern.

And as the Church at Jerusalem, and all the other Primitive Churches never
made any rents and schisms from the public assemblies for some faylings, but
always constantly frequented their public meeting places, notwithstanding the
many corruptions of the Teachers, both in Doctrine, Discipline and Manners, and
had not only the example of the blessed Apostles, but of Christ also in so
doing, who when he was questioned concerning his doctrine, said, I taught
publickely in the Temple, and in the Synagogue, and not in corners and by
places, and he enjoined the people also to do the same, Matthew. 23, saying, the
Scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses his seat: all therefore whatsoever they
bid you observe that observe and do, but do not ye after their works, etc.
So likewise other Churches to the end of the world ought to imitate this Church
as their pattern, not to separate from the public assemblies, and those
Churches for some faylings, especially when they are found in doctrine, and
preach all saving truths needful to salvation without any mixture of humane
inventions; and so much the rather all Churches ought to imitate the example of
the church of Jerusalem, and the other Primitive Churches in this, not only
because they have Christ's both example and precept for it, but because also
separation is blamed by the Apostle Paul in the Hebrews, Heb. 10. and
therefore forbidden, who says, verse 23, 24, 25. Let us hold fast the
profession of our faith, without wavering (for he is faithful that promised)
and let us consider one an other, to provoke unto love and good works, not
forsaking the assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is: but
exhorting one an other, and so much the more, as you see the day approaching,
It seems the Jews presuming of their own holiness, and that they were the
peculiar people of God, thought basely of the Gentiles, and began to separate
in that regard from their public assemblies, as too many now adays of the
Ildependents do from their brethren, thinking themselves more holy then they:
the Apostle therefore writing to his country men the Jews, blames them for
this, and in them reproves all that do the like, and forbids them so to do;
and Saint John speaking of such as made schisms in the Church, says, that if
they had been of us they would not have gone out and departed from amongst us;
but in that they separated from amongst them, it was manifest that they were
not of them: so that he makes it a mark and note of Apostates to make rents
and schisms in any Church from the public assemblies; in all these regards
therefore we ought to take heed of separation, and ought in this to make the
church of Jerusalem and the other Primitive Churches our pattern and example,
and not to separate from the churches and assemblies of the Saints, though
indeed there should be many faylings in them, which when the churches of the
congregationall way daily do, they are highly to be blamed as offenders
against precepts and presidents, both of Christ and the blessed Apostles, and
against the example of all the Primitive churches who never did it; all the
which notwithstanding my brother Burton says ought to be conferred together
for the making up of a perfect pattern for our imitation; they therefore not
following their pattern, but making rents, have in their so doing much to
answer for.

Lastly, as the church at Jerusalem, and all the other churches my brother
Burton enumerates, are to be a pattern to all churches in succeeding ages, in
their well doing and in what was praise worthy: so likewise, wherein either the
whole churches, or any officers or members in them, were failing in their duty,
and for it either reproved, threatened, or punished for their own disobedience,
or but for their indulgence at others in their sins, as old Ely, I Sam. 3. in
that he did not correct and chastise his wicked sons, and the seven churches
of Asia for their particular faylings, especially those of Pergamos, Thyatira,
and Laodicea, for suffering the doctrinc of Balaam, Jezebel, and of the
Nicolaitans, though it was not with approbation of the same, but only in that
they connived at them, and did not exercise their power in casting out those
offenders, and punishing those lukewarm Laodiceans, who were indifferent what
religion was set up or embraced amongst them; I say in all these respects, both
these churches and people and all other churches for their faylings and
punishments are examples to us, to teach and forwarne us not to offend in the
like manner, lest partaking with them in their sins, we partake with them
also in their several plagues and punishments: for whatsoever was written was
pend for our admonition upon whom the ends of the world are come, 1 Cor. 10.
verse 11. and therefore if we will tolerate all religions among us, and shall
not be zealous for the honor of our God, and labor by all our might to
establish his true worship, and for the extirpating of all heresies and
scandals, the Lord will have a controversy against us, as he had against
them, and if we repent not, will remove his Candlestick from us, and leave us
in darkness and in the shadow of death, as he has done those churches in
Asia, who are all now under the Mahumetan superstition. For we must take
notice, that as every command of God is both preceptive and prohibitive; so
there is something in the practice and manners of all the Saints and churches
of God, as that in the Israelites, 1 Cor. 10. and in the above mentioned
churches that have some things in them to be shunned and avoided, as their
special sins and faylings, and some things in them likewise to be imitated,
as their zeal, piety, virtues, and godly examples, and holy courage, which as
they are all praise worthy, and for which they ought ever to be honored, so
they are set down for our learning and imitation that we should do the same;
yea, this their example is as a command to us that we should follow them in
this their well doing; and where they did evil and failed in their duty, in
this, there is a prohibition to all christians and to all churches in
succeeding ages to the end of the world, to take heed left they do the like,
and so fall into the same condemnation, as Paul speaks, 1. Tim. 3. verse 6.
where prohibiting the Evangelist to ordain a novice for a Minister, (he says)
lest being lifted up with pride he fall into the condemnation of the Devil:
for by his pride he was cast out of heaven, that says the Apostle he was
condemned for; therefore lay thou no hands upon a novice, lest he be lifted up
with pride and fall into the same condemnation.

So that in all the former respects, both the church at Jerusalem, and all
other churches, and the people of Israel are a pattern to us, upon whom the
ends of the world are come, that we should always set them before our eyes,
if we desire to enjoy those mercies and blessings they partaked in for their
well doing, or to shun and avoid those punishments were inflicted upon them for
their sins negligences and rebellions.

And this I thought good to say, in way of answer, to my brother Burton
concerning the Church at Jerusalem, and the other Churches enumerated by him,
all the which he asserteth are to be conferred together for the making up of
a complete pattern and plat form of Church government, and yet grollishly
denies that they can be a pattern in all things, which to speak the truth, is
a piece of nonsense and a contradiction.

But before I conclude with him and shut up this discourse, I shall desire the
Reader a little to ponder and weigh my brother Burtous expressions in the very
entrance of this his answer, and reply to his own argument. For your indefinite
enumeration (says he) of those multitudes baptized by John the Baptist, and
Christ's disciples, we take no notice of them, unless formed into a Church or
Churches: but following the express Scripture, the first formed church we
find is in Acts the second.

These words deserve due consideration. Amongst those that were baptized by
John the Baptist, Christ himself was one, the Lord of life, who sanctified
that ordinance in his own person, and that in a special manner, as being done
by his special command, and that for the fulfilling of all righteousness,
both in himself and in the Baptist, as it is at large set down, Matthew. 3. and
it was ratified by all the blessed Trinity, as by the immediate descension of
the Spirit of God upon Christ, in the likeness of a Dove who was the person
baptized, with a voice from God the Father out of Heaven, saying, this is my
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. So that Christ, God the Father, and
God the Holy Ghost did sanctify and confirm this ordinance, not only to all
those that had been baptized by John, and Christ's disciples, who were also
baptized by John: but to all those in all future ages that should be baptized
by Christ's disciples, and all his faithful Ministers, which he sent into all
nations to preach and baptize them, Matthew. 28. to all which he promised his
presence to the end of the world. So that I am most assured, all good
Christians believe, that Christ was well baptized; and if he was well baptized,
it cannot be denied but that all those that were baptized by John and Christ's
disciples, were all likewise well baptized, and were all good Christians: for
both John, and the Disciples had their commission from God and Christ himself
for their so doing; and therefore if any authority from Heaven, and a special
command from God, and a mission from him, be of any force to ratify, and
ascertaine any ordinance, then the baptism of John and Christ's disciples was
authenticke; and all those that were baptized by them, ought to have been
taken notice of by my brother Burton, and all the Independents, as formed into
a church or churches, except they do indeed believe, that Christ the King and
head of his church, with his blessed Apostles and all his seventy Disciples,
whose names were written in Heaven, and all those multitudes of men and women,
that administered unto him and followed him, of whom he gave this testimony,
Matthew. 12. ver. 49, 50. Behold my mother and my brethren; for whosoever shall
do the will of my father, which is in heaven, the same is my brother, and
sister and mother; except I say they believe all these cannot make up a formed
Church or churches, which were impiety to think.

Now I refer it to the judgment of any well grounded christians, whether or
no they do not believe that the great Pastor and Shepherd of our souls
Christ Jesus, with his mother, brethren and sisters, with all those that heard
the voice of this their Shepherd, and knew it, and therefore followed him, and
believed in him, with all John's Disciples and those that were baptized by his
and Christ's disciples Ministry, cannot as well make up a formed church or
churches, as any of our new formed congregations with a Pastor and Teacher, and
a few other of their conceited Members? I am fully persuaded, that upon due
deliberation, they will say, they can see no good reason, but that Christ the
chief Pastor of his sheep, and so many true believers and Saints with him,
should not all of them as well make up a formed church or churches, as ten or
twelve in one of our new congregations; and therefore that they ought to have
been taken notice of by my brother Burton, and those of his Fraternity as
formed into a church or churches; which notwithstanding they do not, asserting
in express terms, that they take no notice of them as formed into a church or
churches; which if it be not the highest point of blasphemy and temerity, I
know not what either blasphemy or rashness is in any.

The Ildependents have unchurche^ all the reformed churches, and all churches
but those of the congregationall way, and now they unchurch all those glorious
Christians that were baptized by the Baptist and Christ's disciples; we (says
my brother Burton in the name of them all) take no notice of them unless
formed into a church or churches. So that we may not wonder, at least we may
not take it in ill part that they unchurch us, and deny our churches here in
England, and all other reformed churches, to be formed churches after the New
Testament form; for they say the same of Christ and all that believed in him,
and that were baptized into him, whiles he was upon earth, affirming, that
they were not formed into a church or churches. So that having so good company,
we may the more quietly sit down, when we are so like our Master and his
Disciples and Followers, of all the which they say they take no notice of them
as formed into a Church or Churches.

These words may not slightly be passed over: We (says my brother Burton)
take no notice of them, unless formed into a Church or Churches, etc. What men
ordinarily take no notice of, they slight or little regard, especially if they
speak those words from the judgment of deliberation, and not upon extemporary
passion: or except they be in very great haste, and then they may be somewhat
excused, if they pass by their best friends and take no notice of them;
otherwise if they speak it out of seriosity, that they take no notice of men,
it is as much as to say they slight them, regard them not, or despise them. But
I have a better opinion of my brother Burton (though he thinks very
unworthily of me) then that he should slight his best friend Jesus Christ, and
take no notice of him, and his disciples, and all the believers in Christ's
time* especially when he pretends That he only labors to set him up upon
his Throne as King, and counts all his dissenting brethren from his ways,
enemies of Jesus Christ and his Kingdom. I say, in this regard I harbor a
more favorable and a more charitable opinion of my brother Burton, then that
upon mature deliberation and serious thoughts, he should take no notice of
Christ, and his Apostles and Followers, and of all the faithful baptized by
John and Christ's disciples as not formed into a church or churches; and yet
these are his words, we (says he) take no notice of them as formed into a
Church or Churches.

I therefore conceive more venerably of him, as that it was in his haste, when
he thus spoke and printed; for so he intimates in his learned Epistle to the
Reader; therefore (says he) I hasted at length, as fast, as before I was slow
if possible to recover our brother; a charitable Gentleman toward a brother,
though not well advised! It seems here was some tumor began to grow and made
him giddy and run like a chicken without a scalpe, which needs timely lancing,
to prevent some inflammation to a head, whiles the humor flows in so fast to
use some of his own Rhetoric. This humor of his made my good brother
idle-brained, and occasioned him to make more haste then good speed; certainly
it either perverted his judgment, or put him into a lunacy, or into one of his
odd dreams; for otherwise he would have taken notice, if not of those
multitudes baptized by John and Christ's Disciples, atleast of Christ himself
his good Friend, his Lord and Master, the King of Saints and King of Kings, the
mighty Potentate, the sole and only head and Lawgiver and Governor of his
Church: I say if he had not been in very great haste indeed and giddy withal
in his brain, or in some distraction, He would have taken notice of Christ and
have thought him and his blessed Apostles and seventy Disciples and those
likewise that were baptized by John with Christ's Mother, Brethren and Sisters,
worthy to be esteemed a formed Church or Churches; yet he and his brethren
pass by them all; saying, we take no notice of them as formed into a Church or
churches; so that it is no wonder they at this day take no notice of our
Churches and that they absolutely deny them to be formed into a church or
churches after the New Testament form, when they do the same to all the
believers in Christ's time.

Surely that Subject that should pass by his King and Sovereign, and all his
retinue and Courtiers, and take no notice of him and them, and should yield him
no reverence, would be thought crased in his brain; especially if he should in
a slighting manner say, He took no notice of them. And all men that should
hear such an expression from him, would not only judge such an one a very
unbred man and an uncivil fellow, but that deservedly he ought to be taught
better manners. And without doubt a King that should understand of such a
Subject, if he at any time had need of his favor, would reply unto him, Sir,
you would take no notice of me and my servants, go now to those for help that
you think worthy to be taken notice of: As the Lord said unto the Israelites,
who when they were oppressed by their cruel enemies and came then flying unto
him for his assistance, Go, says he, to your gods, that in your prosperity ye
served, and seek help from them. And truly if the business be seriously
considered, this my brother Burtons and his associates dealing with Christ and
his Disciples and Followers, is not altogether unlike the dealing of the
Israelites with the Lord, at least in words: For in plain terms they say, we
take no notice of them as formed into a church or churches, so that Christ and
his Disciples are very little beholding to those of the congregationall way.

Certainly, the man was in very great haste when he uttered these words, or
exceedingly distemperd in his brain; for otherwise Christ had been worthy to
have been taken notice of, if his followers had not. Our Savior speaks of
some, that at the last day shall say unto him, Lord, Lord, have we not preached
in thy Name, and in thy Name have we not done wondrous works? Mat. 7. ver. 22,
23. To whom Christ says, he will reply, Depart from me, I know you not. And
doubtless if my brother Burton and his accomplices deeply repent not of these
their words, and of all their evil dealing, in seducing and mis-leading of the
poor people and of making rents and schisms in Church and State, but shall
still persevere in the error of their ways, and will not yet take notice of
those multitudes baptized by John the Baptist and Christ's Disciples and of
Christ himself and his Followers, nor of their brethren at this day through
all the Reformed churches, as formed into a Church or Churches; it is to be
feared that whatsoever both he and those of his party shall pretend, As that
they have preached in his name, and done wondrous works, in gathering of new
churches, and preaching up the congregationall way and publishing of new
truths, and setting up of new lights and placing Christ upon his Throne; I say
whatsoever they shall in this kind pretend, Except they all repent of this
their wickedness and uncharitable dealing toward all their Christian
Brethren, it is to be feared, that Christ will say to them as he professes he
will say to the others, I know ye not, depart from me ye that work iniquity,
and they all likewise perish.

For what can any man that has not resigned his understanding think less of
this so weighty a business? but that Christ may say unto them at that day, You
have taught it in your congregations and printed in your books set forth by
authority by all your consents, and that upon deliberation, that you take no
notice of all those multitudes that were baptized by John and my Disciples, to
be formed into a Church or Churches. These (will he say) are your own words
and that in capital letters; nay you deny them to be Christians, for so J. S.
speaks page 8, and 9. in the name of all the brethren, giving many reasons
there to the contrary, asserting that by the baptism of John they were not
made Christians, much less cast into a church mould, according to the New
Testament form, and least of all, that they were all Members of one Christian
church at Jerusalem: These are his expressions; For which he has been much
applauded by all of that fraternity, who usually say of him when he rides
through the streets, there goes he that beat up Doctor Bastwicks quarters;
approving of this good work of his in unchristianing all those that believed
in me and were baptized by the Ministry of my servant John the greatest
Prophet that ever was borne of woman, and sent by me and my father to baptize
them: And of Mr. Burton they never speak but in high praises, blessing God that
he has answered Bastwicks Book, which he writ in defense and maintenace of my
honor, and for the reputation of all that believed in me, and were baptized in
my name; So that all those books that were set forth by those of the
congregationall way to my dishonor and the disrepute of my followers are
approved of by you all, and in them you say you take no notice of those
multitudes that were baptized by John as formed into a church or churches.

Now amongst those that were baptized by John, I was one, and my Disciples and
my Mother and my Brethren, etc. So that you slight us all, and take no notice
of us, as formed into a Church or churches; that is in plain words, you are
ashamed of us and deny us; Now those that are ashamed of me and deny me before
men, and take no notice of me and my Disciples, and of my Brethren and Sisters
and Mother, and of those that believed in me and followed me whiles I was upon
the earth, to be formed into a church or churches, I will be ashamed of them
and deny them, and take no notice of them before my Father in Heaven to be
formed into a church or churches: For he that despises my Disciples and my
Followers, despises me, and he that despises me, despises him that sent me;
Yea, whosoever shall despise one of these little ones that believe in me, it
were better that a millstone were hanged about his neck and that he were cast
into the midst of the sea. This was one of my statute laws, will Christ the
King of his Church say. Now you of the congregationall way take no notice of
me, nor of them that believed in me and were baptized in my name by John and my
Disciples, as formed into a church or churches; for these are your own
expressions; I therefore will take no notice of you of the oongregationall
by-path, as formed into a church or churches; not only for these your hard
speeches against me and those that believed in me, but because in all my holy
word I never appointed such a model and form of churches as you have erected
amongst you, I therefore in all these respects, take no notice of you as formed
into a church or churches; I know you not; depart from me; this I presume any
rational man will be ready to gather will be the doom of those that take no
notice of Christ and his Followers.

Of these their words and of this their dealing therefore, except my brother
Burton and his associates, seriously, unfainedly and speedily repent, they must
give a dreadful account at the last day. For if we must give an account of
every idle word, what an account then must be given of such expressions as
these are, which despise Christ himself and his blessed Apostles and all his
Followers and all that believed in him when he was upon the earth, and take no
notice of them as formed into a church or churches? And what a dreadful
reckoning must he and his abetters give for all those erroneous, impious and
uncharitable opinions they have of late hatched and brought into the world? the
very naming of the which would be unpleasant to a true sanctified soul, as
this amongst the other, that they take no notice of Christ and his Disciples
and Followers and all those that were baptized by John to be formed into a
church or churches? Yea what a fearful account must they at that day give for
all their bitter and reviling speeches and malicious practices against all
their Christian brethren through the Reformed churches who they have all
unchurched?

Yea my brother Burton and his accomplices must also give a great account of
this, that whereas they should have taught the people the way of God truly and
plainly and have delivered unto them the whole counsel of God, they not only
profess they will keep a reserve Donec ad triarios redierit res, contrary to
the command of God who has enjoined all his servants to be ready to give an
account of their hope to whosoever shall demand it 1 Pet. 3. and preach it
publicly and upon the house topp whatsoever he taught his Disciples in secret
and privately, but blame all churches but their own of the congregationall way,
as not rightly formed according to the New Testament form, and yet would never
set down to their brethren the model of that form and show it unto the people
and Saints of God that they might all be undeceived if in an error, although
they have bin often and again solicited thereunto, and although also they by
promise had engaged themselves to deliver in their model by such a time, and
by this their unjust and unrighteous dealing have kept the people of God and
many precious souls in ignorance of many principal truths if their doctrine be
true, and caused the people by that means exceedingly to err and to remain
still in darkness; when notwithstanding they glory that they set up every day
many New Lights, which is in them all a most fearful and abominable sin, and
of the which as of all their hard words against their brethren, and of all
their calumnies and reproaches, and bringing up an evil name and report
against the Presbyterian government as the wicked Spies did against the good
Land, of all these things I say as of all their errors, scismes and heresies,
and especially of their taking no notice of those multitudes baptized by John
and Christ's Disciples to be formed into a church or churches, they except they
speedily repent, must give a dreadful account at the great day, and my brother
Burton especially; for he is one of the principal Leaders and Captains in this
Militia and new Model of Ill-dependency.

If some young Sprigge that had been turned about with every stream of opinion,
and carried about this way and that way with every wind of doctrine, had spoke
such words only, and had bin the author of such novell opinions and of such
double dealing and juggling, I should never have wondered at it, knowing how
unstable youth is; but for an old Tree, in which the sap of youth should now be
well dried up, and which should be stiff and unmovable and for ever to be
settled; for such a one I say as my brother Burton was expected to be, to be
unstable, thus tossing and tumbling about with every stream of new doctrine or
every novell blast of any windy opinion, it shows that it is either founded
upon a sandy ground or a brittle foundation or rotten at the very root, and
that if it be not speedily looked unto and underpropped that it will suddenly
fall, and that the fall thereof will be very great; which that it may not
happen to my brother Burton, and that the Lord would give him and his
associates repentance for all their unthankfulness to God and for all their
evil dealings and uncharitableness toward their brethren, and especially
toward my self, it shall be my earnest prayer for them all who they have so
much despised and ^ilified.

And this I thought fit to speak concerning my brother Burtons reply, to
whatsoever he had to say in way of answer concerning my first four propositions
and the whole first part of my book. What he has to reply to my arguments
about the second question, touching the gathering of churches, shall be
answered in their due place, after I have spoke alittle, according to my
promise, concerning the Independents definition of their Church, which
occasionally I met with, when from their own Principles I confirmed my
arguments, that if any thing, it might make them more specious in the
Independents eyes, or at least that they might not be so enraged against me
hereafter, when they shall take notice that I spoke nothing, but what I
ratified and made good from their own grounds: Their definition of their church
is this.

A visible Church is (say they) a mystical body, whereof Christ is the head,
the Members Saints, called out of the world, and united together into one
Congregation by an holy Covenant, to worship the Lord, and to edify one an
other in all his holy Ordinances.

Before I discover all the errors of this definition, and come to show that
according to this their description of a Church, there has never as yet been a
true formed church, and that none of the congregationall churches themselves
(if this their definition be good) be true formed churches; and which is more,
that they must of necessity, be all dependent, I shall set down the chief
things observable in it.

First, they define a visible church, to be a mystical body, of which Christ
is the head, the Members Saints, etc.

Secondly, they assert, that this church is but one congregation, or as many as
can conveniently meet together in any one place to partake in all Gods holy
Ordinances.

Thirdly, they affirm, that the form of this church, is a holy explicit
covenant, which falsely they make one of Gods Ordinances: or they say, they are
united together into one congregation by an holy covenant. Now it cannot be
holy, except it be one of Gods Ordinances, and have his command and authority
for it, which is that that ingraves holiness upon it: otherwise it is either
diabolical, or at least but humane. So that in the Independents learning,
wheresoever any of these things are wanting, in any congregation of christians,
it is not a formed church: for this is their definition of a church, within the
bounds and limits of which whatsoever church does not come, and within the
which it is not terminated, it is no true church; and so by this, all
particular churches that are and have been in the world, neither were nor are
true formed churches, no not the very Independent congregations themselves, as
I hope by Gods assistance I shall illustriously make appear, after I have said
something in order of the particular branches of this their definition, and
have showed the absurdities of it, and the impossibilities of attaining such a
church as they have set out, and the great inconveniences, and indeed the
unsupportable bondage that would redound unto thousands of Gods people, if
these men might have their mind, and all things according to their definition:
For from such a church as they describe and desire, though it consist but of
ten or twelve, be they never so erroneous in their doctrine, and never so
corrupt in their manners, and never so perverse, malicious and unplacable in
their minds and wills, and let their unjustice done against any poor oppressed
Member, by them, be never so great or exorbitant, there is no appeal from it,
or help or redress to be expected by any appeal to any other court, church,
or Ecclesiastical Tribunal; which is a yoke of one of the most horrid
tyrannies and slaveries that ever the world yet saw, and which neither we nor
our Forefathers could ever bear, a greater then the which never any men
voluntarily put themselves under, before these our unhappy times. All the which
I shall, God assisting me, in the examination of the several parts of this
definition, make evident.

And first, whereas they define a visible church, to be a mystical body. If
any Presbyterian should have so spoke, the Independents would have said, it had
been a bull. For visible and mystical cannot be predicated of one and the
same body, at one and the same time: for if it be mystical, then not visible,
and if visible then not mystical: and therefore their definition belongs
rather to the invisible church, then to any visible congregation, because the
matter of it is the mystical body of Christ, consisting of Saints, and such as
are truly holy and godly, which none know but God himself; for no man can
certainly and positively say, that this or that man is a Saint, but in the
judgment of charity, which is often mistaken, as the Independents themselves
acknowledge they have been: for the time was, that they thought some men
Saints (who are the same still, they then were) and yet now they not only
think, but say, though falsely, they are Devils, and repent that ever they
prayed for them. But most true it is, that God only knows who are his: yea,
the Apostles themselves, though of more discerning spirits then any in our age,
yet could not discover Judas; Christ only knew he was a Devil; it was hidden
and a mystery to the Apostles, and the same to this day lies hid from all men,
who are Saints indeed; that belongs only to God, it is his Prerogative, who is
the searcher of all hearts: and therefore their definition is absurd,
groundless, and vain in this branch of it, when they say a visible church is
a mystical body consisting of none but Saints. And then it would follow, that
none of the Apostolical churches were true formed churches, according to this
their model; for we read not only of many scandalous walkers amongst them,
but of some heretics, and yet they ceased not to be true churches, what ever
the Independents think now of such congregations as are mixed, though in none
or in very few of them, they can discover any such offenders as were in the
church in Corinth, Galatia, Philippi, and in some of the seven churches of
Asia; and therefore if their definition be good, none of the Primitive
churches were true churches; yea, I hope to make it evident in the sequel,
that none of the churches of the congregationall way are then true churches, as
not consisting of all Saints.

But now I come to the second branch or part, viz. that the Church they desire,
must be but one congregation enjoying all Gods Ordinances in it: which if it be
true and good in this branch also, then the Church at Jerusalem was not a well
formed church; for there were many congregations; and then also never a Church
in the world to this day was a true church; much less can any of our new
congregations challenge that title and be true churches, it being impossible,
though they consist but of one congregation apeece, for them severally to enjoy
all Gods Ordinances in any one of them: for amongst Gods Ordinances the
Independents both in New England, and here amongst us, hold, that Synods and
Councels are one of Gods Ordinances, and yet they are not churches properly so
called in their dialect, though as they are representative bodies of many
churches, they may have that name given them, and are churches in my notion and
according to my understanding; but I say, not properly according to their
language: for their congregations consist of particular Pastors and Teachers,
and of two or three Elders apeice and Deacons, and of a few men and women, and
have many other pretty things required for the moulding of them up into formed
churches, after the New Testament form; whereas in Councels and Synods, they
have neither particular Pastors, nor Teachers over them, nor any such Elders
and Deacons as they require, nor no women; so that no particular church in the
world to this present day enjoyed that Ordinance in it.

For a Synod and Council consists of Presbyters only, and that of many, not
only out of any one particular church though never so large and great, but out
of many, sent and delegated from each of them respectively and severally; yea,
many times not only out of many several Presbyteries adjacent, but out of
other countries and Provinces; as that at Jerusalem, and all the ancient
Councels, and that lately at Dort, and this our Synod now present; and their
employments likewise are of an other nature, then that of ordinary Pastors in
their several congregations, as all men know: and therefore not a church
properly so called, according to their language; for a Synod and church, are
two distinct things, and both of them together were never yet found in any one
congregation in the world; and so by consequence, there was never any
congregation or particular church that yet enjoyed all Gods Ordinances, and
therefore if their definition be good, they were no true churches, for they had
no Synod or Council in them: neither can any of our new congregations at this
day have a Synod in them, and therefore they enjoy not all Gods Ordinances in
them severally, and so come not within the compass, bounds and limits of their
own definition, and therefore remain not true formed churches, as not
enjoying that Ordinance.

Besides, there are other Ordinances that the congregationall churches cannot
enjoy: for there is an impossibility of it, not only in the beginning and first
constitution of them, but many times after in regard of mortality, and the
death of their Elders and Pastors, and other Officers, or when there remains
but one alive, as it often happens in our new congregations; and therefore of
necessity they must be Dependent, if they will enjoy all Ordinances, or else
be no churches, as not enjoying all Ordinances: As for instance, there are
Ordinances that nearly concern every particular congregation, which cannot be
performed by that alone; for how can a particular congregation, which for the
most part consists of ignorant men and women, try the sufficiency of the
Presbyters, that are to be elected or put over them, when they have no
knowledge in those Sciences, Arts, Faculties and Histories, and of the tongues
and languages, as Latin, Greek, Hebrew, and are ignorant in many other
things, that in some competency are required in all such as are to be made
Presbyters and Ministers over them; when I say not any one in those
congregations, many times, have any knowledge in any one of those arts and
sciences, in all which a Minister ought in some measure to be versed in, if
he will take upon him that high calling, and charge of the Ministry, and duly
and rightly perform it unto them: and were it so, that in all these new
gathered churches they had such intelligible Members, who when they have made
choice of them, shall give them imposition of hands which belongs only to the
Presbytery and Elders to perform, and cannot be done by the people, who never
were appointed by God to ordain Officers in his church, as all the learned
of the Independents hold and teach: so that when any Elders and Presbyters, and
other church Officers are to be ordained in their new gathered churches, they
permit not the common people to impose hands upon them, but always desire
Elders and Presbyters of other congregations to do it, without whose help
they cannot enjoy this Ordinance amongst themselves; and therefore if they will
have it, they must necessarily be Dependent. The same may be said of the
Ordinance of Excommunication; but I will first speak of imposition of hands,
and ordination of Elders and Officers, the which howsoever in some of the more
unlearned Independents esteem it to be of small weight, and but a complement;
yet it is one of Gods holy Ordinances, which the Author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews accounts and reckons amongst the Principles of Religion, and a part of
the Foundation, Heb. 6. ver. 1, 2, which place of Scripture, one of the Fathers
of the congregationall way, Master Henry Jacob by name, who first baptized
their new gathered churches, with that compellation of Independent churches,
for his own advantage exceedingly urged to overthrow the lawfulness of the
Ministers of the church of England, because as he supposed, the church of
England erred in the Foundation, not having the due and right imposition of the
hands of the Presbytery, though in this as in many of his other opinions he
was very much mistaken: for those that imposed hands upon the Ministers at
their Ordination, were Presbyters. Yet I say, they can urge this place for
their advantage against us, and therefore I see no reason why we also may not
much more make use of it against them, it being Gods own institution, and to
be perpetuated to the worlds end in all churches; so that wheresoever this
Ordination and Imposition of hands by the Presbytery is wanting in any church,
that church cannot be truly said to enjoy al Ordinances within it self; for
there is an impossibility of obtaining or enjoying this Ordinance of Ordination
of Officers, by the Imposition of the hands of the Presbytery, and that often
in their new gathered churches, not only in the beginning of them, and in
their first constitution (as I said before) but at many other times also, and
that by reason of the death and mortality of their Elders, or when but one of
them remains alive, which frequently happens amongst them, as daily experience
teaches us, so that of necessity they must crave the help of other churches,
and therefore in all these respects are Dependent; for not any one Elder alone,
and by himself can ordain an other, there must be more together for that
employment; for it must be done by the imposition of the hands of the
Presbytery if it be justly done and according to Gods appointment; that is, of
many Presbyters as the word imports.

And if we take a survey and view of all the Primitive and Apostolical
churches, as that at Jerusalem, of Philippi, Ephesus, and the other Asian
Churches, we shall find in them all, an established Presbytery (as I have
abundantly proved) many Elders and Pastors in each of them, appointed over them
to govern and rule them in common, and all those several Presbyteries had in
each of them the power of Order and Jurisdiction, and the authority of imposing
of hands, and ordination of Elders and Officers within themselves in their
respective Presbyteries, so that they were as so many Corporations or
Committees, having their Presidents and Chaire-men, with all other Officers
amongst themselves, and that in abundance, as the Scripture relates, as in all
well ordered Corporations at this day it is to be seen; so that if any one or
more of their Presbyters or Officers dyed within their several preeincts, they
did by virtue of their several Charters presently go to the Ordination of new
ones, and of as many as they had need of, of which they had store and choice
for the most part, as all well ordered Corporations at this day have, who if
their Presidents dye or any of their Aldermen, or any of their Common Council,
or any of their other Officers, they forthwith make election of others, out of
some of their Freemen, or of men well known to them for sufficiency,
wisdom and discretion, and all other abilities, without having recourse to
any other Corporations; for they are armed with authority within themselves for
this purpose, and they have usually choice enough of men fit for their
employments; and so it was in the Apostolical and Primitive Churches, who
collectively taken, were all collegiatly and classically governed, and depended
upon their several Presbyteries in their several jurisdictions, which if they
had been single congregations only, as the Independents would persuade the
deluded people, they could never have done, for the many reasons both now and
in the foregoing Discourse specified. So that I am consident, it sufficiently
now appears to any rational man, that no particular Congregation can enjoy
all Gods Ordinances within it self, without Dependency upon others, there
being an impossibility of it self.

The same may be said of the other Ordinance of Excommunication, which cannot
in any particular congregation be enjoyed without it be Presbyterated, to use
their own expression; that is to say, except it have their Presbyters and
Elders, and Church Officers within it self annexed to it: for they amongst the
Independents, that hold that excommunication must be inflicted by the votes of
the whole Congregation, understand it then only to be a complete and formed
Church, and to be an entire and a whole congregation, when it consists of their
Elders and their other Officers, as well as of the people, and affirm, that
the people without the Elders cannot excommunicate any, nor the Elders without
the people; and they of the Independent party on the other side (for they do
not all agree amongst themselves in their Church government) which has
retarded the bringing in of their new nodle, least that by it they should loose
many of their Disciples and Followers which they well know would soon break
of, if they should not humor them in their new mould; and therefore they
cunningly juggle with the people and feign pretenses, when indeed if they had
meant Christianly and honestly, they would long since have brought in their new
noddle of church government; but fearing what would ensue, and which would not
be for their profit and honor, they have hitherto made delays to the great
disturbance of Church and State, and the seducing of many; but I say those of
the congregationall way, that hold that this Ordinance of Excommunication
belongs unto the Elders only, and put it into their hands, excluding the
people from their votes, and that for many inconveniences as they suppose which
are not yet removed, for all that, as will by and by appear, yet I say on all
sides they agree, that without the Presbyters consent none can be
excommunicated be they never so scandalous, so that so long as any congregation
is without their Presbyters and Officers they cannot enjoy this Ordinance also,
neither can they ordain them within themselves without help from other
Churches, as I said before, and therefore they want this Ordinance till their
new supply, and that they must crave from other churches when their officers
are dead, and therefore of necessity they must still be Dependent; but now let
it be granted, that when their church or congregation is again recruted and
made up again, or presbyterated and complete in respect of both Officers and
Members, and that it consists of ten, twenty or thirty, or it may be of a few
more, which is a pretty full church and congregation amongst them, what
inconveniences, and them of dangerous consequence, would forth with ensue upon
it; yea under how intolerable a yoke of slavery would many oppressed
Christians by this means groan under, when at any time they are unjustly and
wrongfully injured by them? for there is no appeal from them to any other
Court or Church-Tribunall for redress or relief: let them be never so much
wronged, or injured, or damnified by them; For if the formidable sentence of
excommunication pass once against any person, be it right or wrong, they throw
and cast him out of communion not only amongst themselves, but the whole
visible catholic Church, and deliver him up to the devil; therefore if this
ordinance of excommunication be once inflicted upon any Member by the whole
congregation (as some of the II-dependents would have it) or by two or three
Presbyters only as others contend, the misery and grievance is never the less,
nor the inconvenience (and that of dangerous consequence) the less avoidable
as will daily appear: for if all the congregation pass this sentence, many of
the Members who have their votes, are private men, and for the most part
unlearned and unexperienced, through want of years, parts, education and
breeding, and not able to understand the nature of the allegations and
probations, they being many times so intricate, so that they can never be able
to apply the rule unto the case for the inflicting of a just censure, and may
be in danger also to bear a peculiar hatred or ill will unto their persons, and
so apt to be swayed by their passion to do unjustice, or may be overawed by
fear or threatenings of some other in the congregation who are the enemies to
the party in question, so that they being powerful men, rich in estate amongst
them, and they being poor and indigent people whose dependency may be upon them
as they are either children, servants, workmen or tenants, of which most of the
congregations consist, and they daring not displease them, especially if they
be their friends, as many times it happens for all or any of these respects, I
say they going with the stronger side may pass this sentence of
excommunication against him most unjustly, as it often happens; and this must
go for current if the most voices carry it, and from them the party unjustly
dealt with has no appeal: but if they be obstinately bent against him, must
live and dye in this condition under this heavy doom, which I believe in every
understanding man's judgment will seem an intolerable inconvenience, for there
is no appeal from them. On the other side be it granted that the Elders only
of this particular congregation have the power of excommunication in their
hands, they are not ordinarily above two or three, and many times none of the
learned, wisest and honestest men that ever were borne, and therefore are
liable and in danger of the same temptations that the other were, because of
particular relations, and their dependence on their congregation for their
maintenance and support: who they ordinarily dare not displease: for they know
the fickleness of the people and how little a thing will disgust them and
alienate their affections from them, which would be a cause also of withdrawing
their contributions and supplies by which they support themselves and their
families, and commonly when any rich and great man falls of from a Minister
though he be never so faithful and diligent in his place yet he will withdraw
many, yea of themselves the unstable people will take occasion by others
example to slight and neglect their Ministers as hourly experience teaches us;
for, humor not them in every thing and they are gone. Yea but publicly or
privately reprove them for their malversation or for any erroneous opinion they
hold, and they will become your secret, if not your open enemies, and upon the
least occasion be ready to side with any to do their Minister a displeasure,
which when their Ministers well know, they are very fearful of offending any,
especially their more wealthy and abler Members; besides we know upon what
slender occasions differences many times do arise amongst nearest friends, when
it concerns their profit or reputation, or their judgment in things of their
estates or religion; for if you jumpe not with them in their opinion in all
things, they stand at a distance; or hinder them in the least thing but in
their gain and profit, and they will bear a secret grudge unto a man and wait
an opportunity to do him a displeasure and to be even with him; and this every
man knows is the practice of most men; so that for any of these reasons men
will be ready to harbor a displeasure against any Member, and if he be called
in question for any conceived miscarryage or scandal or for any different
opinion, and this come once to banding and debate in the Church or
Congregation, and there be siding on both sides, and parties made on each side,
so that they grow into a heat, the Ministers and Presbyters in their several
Congregations are by this means brought into many straights, not knowing what
many times to do, as not daring to displease either side, which way soever
their private judgment leads them; but ordinarily it is observed, That the
Ministers will go with the strongest party and will gratify that, and that for
their own emolument and private interest; neither is this all, but the
Presbyters and Ministers themselves in their Churches many times are subject to
the same passions and affections as I said before, that other men are, and for
some secret and private grudg against the person in question they may use the
extremity and pronounce the sentence of excommunication against him, which when
it is once past, there is now no remedy of appeal left unto him, be the
unjustice or wrong never so great; and presidents of this nature there are many
to be met with in the congregationall Churches, as I shall if occasion serve be
able to prove. What a sad condition therefore are such poor oppressed men in
when this formidable sentence is once passed against them; and when it lies in
the breast of a two or three Presbyters amongst them? and what a horrid yoke of
bondage do miserable men by this means by their voluntary subjection bring upon
themselves through their wilful giddynesse, when they yield to so
unwarrantable a government as to stand to the verdict either of a little
ignorant congregation or of two or three men that are subject to the same
temptations that other men are? and then to be without all help or hope of
relief be they never so much injured by them.

But let it be supposed and granted that a slender Congregation of people or
those two or three Elders in every one of their Congregations were as fre from
infirmities and temptations as Angels, which they are not, yet the weightinesse
and solemnity of the censure requires to be performed by a whole Council and
College of Presbyters and Elders of a combined Presbytery which is Gods
Ordinance, as I have abundantly evinced: so that it being passed not by the
votes of a few people or by the voice of two or three Elders only; and they
liable to so many temptations also; but by the conjoynt agreement and consent
of a great Presbytery free from any such temptations and exceptions, it may be
done with the more advised and combined authority, and be more dreadful to the
party, and be the better accepted and submitted unto without heart burning and
grudging against either the Congregation or particular Elders, or fear of
revenge.

But will some say, How if this whole College of Elders should err in their
consure and do injustice, for some of the above mentioned reasons, what remedy
or relief then has the injured person offended by their censure? For answer,
he has the benefit of his appeal to a higher Presbytery or Classis; and if
wronged there, he has the benefit yet of appeal to a higher Presbytery and
Classis; and if he have no releife there, yet he has the benefit of an appeal
to a Synod, which is Gods Ordinance also; so that he has still hope of relief
and he still in Gods way; and so long as there is hope and he takes a right
course, he needs not despair, and if at one time he find not redress in one
Presbytery nor in one Synod and Council, he may in another; it is good ever to
wait upon God in his Ordinances; for in so doing we have a promise of a
blessing, and here is always comfort and expectation of relief, and this is
not only Gods method, but the custom of all Nations and Kingdoms for the
well ordering and governing of them and for the redressing of grievances and
abuses; and i^ there can no justice be had by this his endeavor in no Court,
this still does uphold a drooping spirit and comfort him that he has used all
lawful means and does for ever commit himself and his ways to God, who is a
reliever of the oppressed, and a revenger of the wrongs and injuries done unto
his Elect, who has said, Luke 18. ver. 7, 8. Shall not God avenge his own
elect, which cry day and night unto him, though he bear long with them? I tell
you he will avenge them speedily. So that there is mercy with him that he may
be feared, and therefore I say, There is ever hope in the use of lawful
means, and in all their just appeals. But grant there be no justice on earth
to be found in any Courts, and that there were such an universal corruption
amongst all judges both Ecclesiastical and Temporal, which were great
uncharity to suppose, much less to say, Yet, I say, the people of God when
they are unjustly oppressed shall ever be able to solace themselves in this,
That there is forum poli, as well as there is forum soli, that there is a Court
in heaven as well as there are Courts on earth; there is a great tribunal
before which all men must one day appear, to give an account of all their
unrighteous dealing on earth, the thought of which will support the most
drooping and oppressed spirit: which not withstanding does not always cast
away his confidence, as long as there are any Courts and higher counsels to
appeal to here in this world, which all those that submit themselves to the
Presbyterian Government are like to enjoy; whereas those of the congregationall
way and that stand for the II-dependent Government deprive themselves of, and
not only bring themselves under an unsupportable slavery, but would subjugate
the whole world to the same bondage and tyrannical usurpation, Which the Lord
preserve his people from, and put it into the hearts of the great Council of
the Kingdom, and all cordial and understanding men to oppose with all their
might, as they love the peace of Church and State, and the establishing of the
true religion in these three Kingdoms, and the propagation of the Gospel to
the worlds end; all the which the whimsicall opinion of Independency will
hinder, which indeed tends to no other end but to bring in an Anarchy and a
confusion of all things, and the setting up of Athisme or a Pantheon of all
Religions, to the great dishonor of God and the disturbance of our Church and
State, and the alienating of the nighest allies one from another, and to the
distraction of all men, as our small and little experience of that way has by
woeful trial and daily experience taught us.

And this shall suffice to have spoke of the second branch of their definition
in discovering the absurdities of it, and the impossibilities of attaining such
a church as that sets down, and the great inconveniences, with the
unsupportable bondage that would necessarily ensue upon it to all such as
should subject themselves to such a Government as the Independents would bring
into the world.

I now come to the third part of their definition, viz. Their particular
explicit holy Covenant, which they not only call the form of a Church, but
make it an holy Ordinance, which it cannot be for the reasons above specified,
as having no warrant from God our father, nor no example in any of the
primitive Churches, who had no other but the general Covenant, which all the
Presbyterians allow, as it is authorized by God himself, though they reject
that particular explicit Covenant brought in by the Independents, as being an
humane Ordinance, which all Christians in Gods service ought to abhor, as not
commanded and enjoined unto them by the King of his Church Christ Jesus, whose
voice only they are bound to hear, and who alone they are to set up as King
upon his Throne, who is their Lawgiver and mighty Councellor, and the sole
governor of his Church and Kingdom. And should it be accorded and granted to
the Independents, That this their particular explicit Covenant were indeed the
form of a Church, as they would persuade the people, then all the primitive
and Apostolical Churches, as well as all the reformed Churches at this day in
the world besides their own congregations, were not true formed Churches, which
were a great wickedness and impiety to aver and maintain.

But besides this their unwarrantable Covenant which they make the form of a
Church, they require of all such as will enter into Church fellowship with
them, many other pretty things, which they hold not only requisite, but Gods
Ordinance also; as,

First, That they should walk some weeks, months, and perhaps years, with them
for a proof of their conversation, and for the trial of their behavior and
manners, and except they can please the whole church, there can be no
admittance at last.

Secondly, after their good liking of their carriage, they enjoin them to make
a public confession of their faith; and if that dislikes them, they cannot be
admitted.

Thirdly, after this, they require of them to bring in the evidences of their
true conversion, as the time when, the place where, and the manner how, all
which if the congregation approve not of as sufficient, they cannot be yet
admitted.

Lastly, they that are to be admitted, must have the consent and approbation of
the whole congregation both of men and women, or else by their Charter they
cannot be admitted into Church Communion with them. All these things as I am
able to prove, they require in some of their Congregations, before any can be
admitted as joint members amongst them; never a one of the which conditions or
injunctions not withstanding has either precept or president for it in all
Gods holy Word. And therefore it is an unsufferable flavery that they impose
upon the people, besides this their particular explicet covenant, which they
make the form of the Church, which should they only require, without any of
their o'her grolleries, were a bondage too unsufferable; for in that their
Covenant, as I have been informed by some of them, when in familiar manner, and
in the time of our friendship, I desired to know the method of admitting of
their joint members, and especially what the Covenant imported, and what they
promised in it, and what by it they were tied unto, and for answer they
replied, that three things were contained in this their holy explicit Covenant.

First, That they promise and by this Covenant bind themselves to each other
in all Church fellowship, as to be helpefull one to another in all things, and
especially to their Pastors, and to stand one by another without desertion of
each other, and that in the greatest dangers and difficulties, and to yield
obedience and willing subjection and conformity not only to those truths that
are now embraced and entertained amongst them, but also willingly to submit
themselves to all such New Light for the future, that God shall by his Word and
by the Ministry of their Pastors discover unto the Church. This as I have been
informed by the Independents, is the first thing they require of those that are
to be admitted as members, and which they promise and Covenant to perform.

The second thing contained in the Covenant, is, That if they be single persons
either batchelors or maidens, widows, or widdowers, they may not marry without
the consent of the Church.

The third thing contained in this their holy Covenant, is, That they may not
remove their habitations and dwellings, though never so advantageous unto them
for their traffic and tradings, into any remote place from them, without the
consent of the Congregation, and some other things there are comprised under
this Covenant, which they keep among themselves as arcana regni as secrets of
their Kingdom, all the which if they be seriously looked into, contain in them
so many mysteries of Iniquity; yet all of them exceedingly advantageous unto
themselves, they all tending to the strengthening of their party, and the more
corroborating their combination, as those that are judicious have well observed.

But were there no other slavery and bondage, in their whole religion, but this
of their covenant and of the appertinances belonging thereto, as amongst
others, their blind obedience, there was never yet a greater yoke of servitude
put upon poor people under Antichrist himself; and the truth is, as the Papists
often times, scoured over old holy days with new ceremonies and solemnities, and
put them upon the people to be observed as new ones; even so the Independents
furbush over old errors with new varnish, to make them more specious to the
deluded people, and bring them in as new truths, and set them up as new Lights,
when they are nothing else but ancient errors, and very Popery it self in a
new attire, as is apparent to any that will not wilfully put out their eyes. In
the time of the Prelates reign, every ceremony they brought in was excepted
against as a human tradition, and that worthily: and every invention and
tradition of man was rejected as Popery, and will worship was abhorred as
Antichristian; and to serve God by the precepts of men, and by a service
established only by humane authority, was rejected as a thing displeasing unto
God, and thought unsufferable; and to have Prelates set over them to Lord it
over Gods heritage was thought the highest point of tyranny; and for the
removal of them root and branch with all their trumpery and appertinances, all
the Independents themselves, with the whole city and the greatest part of the
Kingdom, petitioned the great Council of the Kingdom; and not only so, but
many of them have ventured their lives in the just defense of their Christian
liberty, and have offered their estates and exposed themselves and theirs to
greatest dangers in this good quarrel, which will ever be to the immortal
honor of them all to all succeeding ages, and they will be an example to other
Nations to do the like. Yet behold every one of these things revived now and
brought in amongst the ignorant people, and contended for with all severity and
eagerness, as for the Oracles of God, notwithstanding ding they are but the
inventions of men, there being neither precept nor president for them in the
whole Word of God, nor any practice of them in any of the Apostolical and
Primitive Churches: and therefore it does necessarily follow, That their whole
service and Discipline with all their concomitants are but their own
appointments, for which there is no warrant or pattern in the whole Word of
truth; and as for their Ministers and Pastors, both in New England and in their
new Congregations here they Lord it over the poor people, in as high a manner
(as can be proved) as ever the lordly Prelates did, in respect of their
supercilious behavior; and yet the people swallow all these things as Gods
Ordinances, and bind themselves by their unholy Covenant to observe them, which
in any understanding man's judgment, that knows what his Christian l^berty is,
and in the which he is commanded to stand fast in, Gal. 5. ver. 1. is the most
intolerable yoke of bondage which the world yet ever saw.

And thus having briefly discovered some of the errors of their definition and
showed the absurdities of it, and the inconveniences of such a Church as they
would have, and evinced also, that according to that, there has never yet bin a
true formed Church on earth, and that all the congregationall Churches, if they
will be included within the compass of that description, they must necessarily
be Dependent; I will now come to my last and main conclusion, which is to prove
that none of the Churches of the Congregationall way are true Churches, as not
consisting of all visible Saints, and therefore not to be communicated with in
holy things: which I shall do from their own argument. For thus they dispute
against us.

Those Assemblies (say they) or Churches, in which the Members are not visible
Saints, called out of the world and united together into their several
Congregations by an holy Covenant to worship the Lord and to edify one another
in all his holy Ordinances, they are no true formed Churches according to the
New Testament form, and ought not to be communicated with in holy things, but
are to be separated from, unless they will be made companions with such kind
of Saints as Job would not set with the dogs of his flock, being tagg ragg,
with whom godly souls can no more converse then with heathens.

But, the Parochial Congregations through the whole Kingdom are such. Ergo,
they are not true formed Churches after the New Testament form, and ought not
to be communicated with, unless etc. This is the Il-dependents doctrine they
teach their Disciples concerning our Churches, as appears in all their
Pamphlets, as in that of I. S. and my brother Burtons especially, and this is
one of the capital arguments which they use, to maintain their separation from
us; and upon which they ground the gathering of their new Congregations, the
futility and vanity of the which every one that shall but vouchsafe to read
this book shall find in many places discovered. I will therefore in this
place, make use of the same against themselves to prove that their Churches and
new gathered congregations are not true formed Churches after the New Testament
form, as not consisting of all visible Saints, and therefore not to be
communicated with in holy things as the several ensuing arguments will
declare: which I desire the Independents themselves would without any prejudice
seriously consider and ponder, that they may the better discern into the errors
of their ways, and in time repent of all their unrighteous and uncharitable
dealing toward their brethren. I thus argue.

Those Churches and Congregations, the Members of the which are not visible
Saints, called out of the world and united together into their several
Assemblies by an holy Covenant to serve the Lord in all his holy Ordinances,
but are joined together in a wicked conspiracy and combination against the
people of God and his Ordinances and to hinder the reformation of the Church:
they are no true formed Churches after the New Testament form, and the Members
of them are not true visible Saints and therefore ought not to be communicated
with in holy things, but to be separated from. But all the Churches of the
Congregationall way are such: Ergo, they are not true formed Churches after the
New Testament form; and therefore by their own doctrine, not to be
communicated with in holy things, but to be separate from, and that for the
same reasons the Il-dependents falsely pretend they sever themselves from our
public Assemblies.

The Major of this Syllogism is their own, and therefore they cannot gainsay
it; the Minor therefore being proved, the conclusion will necessarily ensue.
And as for the Minor, I thus evince it.

Those Churches and Congregations whose Members are raylors* revilers,
slanderers, covenant-breakers with God and man, ordinary liars, notorious
calumniators and false accusers (such as in holy Scripture are called (...)
Devils) heretics, open seducers and causers of division and offenses contrary
unto the doctrine of Christ, such as all Christians have a special command to
take heed of and to shun, and are prohibited to receive into their houses or
bid God speed, or so much as to eat with, they are no visible Saints nor good
Damons: and therefore no true formed Churches nor to be communicated with in
holy things.

But the churches of the congregationall way consist of such Members: Ergo,
they are not visible Saints, and therefore no true formed churches nor to be
communicated with in holy things.

For the Major of this Syllogism, it is grounded upon Godsown word, and has its
warrant for it as the ensuing places sufficiently prove, Romans 16. ver. 17, and
18. Now I beseech you brethren (says the Apostle) mark them which cause
divisions and offenses* contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and
avoyde them: 1 Cor. chap. the 5. ver. 11. But now I have writ unto you (says
Saint Paul) not to keep company, if any man that is called a brother, be a
fornicator, or covetous, or an Idolater, or a raylor, or a drunkard, or an
extortioner, with such an one no not to eat. 1 Timothy chap. the 6. ver. the 3.
and 5. If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, even the
words of our Lord Jesus Christ and to the doctrine which is according to
godliness, from such withdraw thy self, and 2 Timothy chap. 3. ver. 1, 2, 3, 4,
5. In the last days (says the Apostle) shall perilous times come: For men
shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers,
disobedient to parents, without natural affection, covenant or trucebreakers,
false accusers or make-bates, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are
good, traiterous, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of
God, having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof: from such
t^rne away; for of this sort are they which creep into widows houses and lead
captive silly women laden with sins, etc. Tit. 3. ver. 10. A man that is an
heretic after the first and second admonition reject says the Apostle, 2.
John ver. 10. If there come any unto you (says Saint John) and bring not the
doctrine of Christ, receive him not into your house, neither bid him God speed:
for he that bids him God speed, is partaker of his evil deeds. And Gal, 1.
ver. 8, 9. If we or an Angel from Heaven (says the Apostle) preach otherwise
then that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed; as I said
before so I say now again, if any man preach unto you any other Gospel, then
that you have received, let him be occursed. Out of all the which places and
many more that might be produced, we are taught to shun and decline the society
and fellowship of all such Christians as are corrupt in their doctrine or
manners, and such as either preach or practice otherwise then they have precept
or example for in the holy word of God; especially we are to have no communion
with them, when they not only preach another way to Heaven then that which
Christ and the holy Prophets and blessed Apostles have chalked out unto us and
delivered unto the Church, but have joined themselves in a wicked and
unwarrantable Covenant to persist and continue in this practice; for they are
no Saints: But such are those of the Congregationall way, whose Teachers and
Members are combined together to persevere in their wicked practices and
courses; and therefore by express command from Heaven we are to have no
communion with such unless we will be found fighters against God, and partake
in their punishments: And these places of holy Scripture with these reasons
shall suffice for the proof of the Major proposition.

For the Minor, that the churches and assemblies of those of the
congregationall way consist of Raylers, Revilers, Slanderers, and
covenant-breakers, etc. it is evident and well known to all such as are
acquainted with the practice of the Independents, and are verst in their
doctrine, and have read their Pamphlets, which consist chiefly of errors,
untruths, and right-downe raylings, as amongst others, those of my brother
Burton, and John Lilburne, not to mention the Pamphlets of all the other
Independents, the very names of which would make a book, in all the which
there is little other but railing and dangerous novelties. Some of my brother
Burtons, and John Lilburnes expressions, with an other or two more which write
in the name of all the Independents, I will produce, that by the mouth of two
or three of their witnesses, the truth of their proceedings in their Raylings,
Errors and Lies, and bad practices may be yet more evident. My brother Burton
in his Vindication has these ensuing words against all the Presbyterians, both
Ministers and people: and first against the Ministers of whom he says, that
they deny, disclaim, and preach against Christ's kingly Government over men's
consciences and churches, so that such a conversion (as is wrought by them)
comes not home to whole Christ; and such with their converters, do deny
Christ's kingly Government, or at least, and best, they are converted but in
part, and that maine thing is wanting, to wit, Christ's kingly Office. And in
his Vindiciae veritatis he accuses me, page 21. for taking Christ's name in
vain, because in my Book I asserted that the Ministers of the church of
England set up Christ upon his Throne; which for me to affirm, he says it
is to take the name of Christ in vain: his words are these.

And here says he, I challenge our brother for taking Christ's name in vain,
when instead of finding Christ set upon his Throne in their congregations, we
find there no more but an Image, such as Michal had made up instead of King
David; or as those that in mockery made of Christ a Pageant King, stripping
him, and putting on him a scarlet Robe, and on his head a Crown of Thorns,
and in his hand a reed, saluting him with Hail King of the Jews, with which
title over his head they crucified him; therefore (says he) those passages
quoted out of my Book will stand good against their opposers. These are his
words against all the Ministers of the Church of England. Now of all the people
that are not of the congregationall way, and of their new Assemblies, my
brother Burton in his Vindication has these words, We exhort them (says he)
to set up Christ King in their hearts: We exhort them to become and profess
to be those Saints of whom Christ is King, for he is King of Saints, Revel.
15. 3. but they will not believe us (says he) they will not depend upon
Christ as the only Lawgiver and King over their consciences. Now what would
you have us to do in this case? (says he) baptize the Infants of such
parents, as will not in this respect profess or confess Christ to be their
King? why do you not know (says he) that no Infants have any title to
Baptism that are not within the Covenant visibly? and how are they within the
Covenant visibly, but by virtue of their parents faith outwardly professed? and
what outward profession of faith is there in their parents that refuse Christ
for their only King? that are ashamed or afraid to profess to be in covenant
with Christ as their King? if therefore the parents profess not, yea, refuse
thus to be in visible covenant, can the children be said to be in visible
covenant, and so to have a right in Baptism, the external Seal of the
Covenant? here is an obex, a bar put. These are my brother Burtons own
words, which I have set down at large, omitting many other such expressions;
the sum of them briefly is this; that all the Ministers of the Church of
England, that are not in their combination, do deny, disclaim and preach
against Christ's Kingly Government over men's consciences and churches, and are
no better then the persecuting Jews that made a mock, scorn, and ludibry of
Christ; and that all the people under their Ministry, are men unconverted, or
at least converted but in part, wanting the maine thing, to wit, Christ's kingly
office, men visibly out of the covenant of grace, who have not so much as an
outward profession of faith, who deny Christ to be their King; to whose persons
and infants the very Sacraments and seals of grace, with all church communion,
may and ought to be denied. Now I refer my self to the judgment of all
learned and impartial Christians, whether there can be uttered with the tongue
or pen of men any more injurious, unjust ra^lings and revilings, or more untrue
and false accusations against their brethren? For all those godly Christians
through the thr^e K^ngdomes can wit^esse the contrary, who by the p^eaching of
the Word and Gospel have been converted by the Ministry of the church of
England: Yea, the Independents themselves, and my brother Burton, if they will
no belie the truth, must acknowledge next under God their conversion to the
Ministers of the church of England: for none but converts and believers are to
be admitted into their new congregations; and I never yet heard that the
Independent Ministers converted any, and therefore when my brother Burton
accuses all the Ministers and believing people of the church of England, to be
enemies of the Lord Jesus, when they all endeavor to set him up upon his
Throne as King, it is a most horrid wickedness in him, and those of his party
to bear false witness against their Neighbors, and so to calumniate and
revile the true servants of the Lord by which they come to take the Devils
office upon themselves, and become all of them false Accu^ers of the brethren,
Raylers and Persecutors, and Seducers, and therefore no Saints. Yea, it is
ordinary with my brother Burton as can be proved, both to speak and print
untruths, and notorious falsehoods; but passing many of them by, in some of his
last books, as Truth shut out of doors, and in this his Book called
Vindiciae veritatis, which may be more properly styled Vindiciae mendacii in
the 24. page, speaking there most maliciously against learned Master Edwards,
and my self, he says, that he by his pen and preaching, and that I by my
pen, labor to take an order that the Independents shall have no Pulpits to
preach in at all, Witness (says he) that late mis-rule at your town of
Colchester upon your books, and T. E. his preaching; by which words of his,
he would make the deluded people believe that there was some great Persecution
stirred up at Colchester against some Independent Ministers there, to hinder
them from preaching in their Pulpits; which is a most notorious falsehood, the
contrary of which is true; for the Independents made a mis-rule in the very
Church against Master Edwards, and openly reviled him in the congregation,
using many railing speeches against him, and that against all the Laws of
Christianity and civilitie, and had almost by their barborous carriage against
him, raised a tumult in the Town to the disturbance of them all, had it not
timely by the wisdom of some been prevented. So that it may easily be
perceived, what the Independents would do against the Presbyterian Ministers,
if the authority were once wholly in their hands, when they so timely begin
where their faction is any thing powerful; yet such is the boldness, or
rather impudency of these men, that when they are the only Persecutors of
others, and the Raysers up of tumults and commotions against the faithful
Ministers of the Gospel, they falsely spread it abroad that they are persecuted
by us, and not suffered to come in our Pulpits, as my brother Burton does here
accuse the good people of Colchester, and those of Alderman-bury, as if they
also had shut truth out of doors; when notwithstanding it can by a cloud of
witnesses from Colchester be proved that the Independents made the mis-rule,
and that my brother Burton shut himself out of doors at Aldermanbury, and yet
he untruly accuses them of that crime of persecution; and this is the
general practice of all the Independents, falsely to accuse and calumniate
their brethren; and my brother Burton and John Lilburne are Masters in this
art, and therefore surely they can be no Saints, without Devils be Saints: for
so the holy Scripture calls such: I have cited some of my brother Burtons
expressions; I shall now set down some of John Lilburnes language, concerning
both the Ministers and believers of the church of England. In his Letter to my
brother Prynne, to omit many of his railing and violent calumnies there against
the Ministers, he says that they are the sworn enemies of Jesus Christ; yea,
the professed enemies of their anointed Christ, and in his one of his Pamphlets
which he made in prison, and which he lately again set forth upon more mature
deliberation, he has many most unchristian, bitter, and unsavery expressions,
and so apparently untrue, that every child can say he is a notorious
calumniator and Liar. Some of them I will here set down: amongst other things
he speaks of the church of England, and of the faithful, he thus utters
himself, affirming

That the Church of England is a true whorish Mother, and that they that are of
her, were base begotten, and bastardly children, and that she neither is, nor
never was truly married, joined, or united unto Jesus Christ in that espousall
band, which his true churches are, and ought to be, bnt is one of Antichrists
national whorish Churches and Cities, spoken of Revel. 16. 19. etc. That the
Church of England is false and Antichristian; and as she is a false and
Antichristian church, she can never make true Officers and Ministers of Jesus
Christ; and absolutely denies, that conversion and confirmation, and building
up in the ways of God, are wrought by the Ministry of the church of England;
for how (says he) can they build them up in that which they themselves are
ignorant of, and enemies unto? for as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so
do these men also resist the truth, etc. and further asserteth, that as he
has taken pains by the word of God, and demonstrable arguments grounded
thereupon, to prove the church of England antichristian; so he promises to
all the world, that he will in the strength of the Lord of Hosts, for ever
separate from Church, Ministry, and Worship of England, and all and every one
of them, as Antichristian and false: And concludes, that all the Ministers of
the church of England are not true Ministers of Christ, but false and
Antichristian Ministers, and that our Religion neither is the true Religion,
nor that it leads men the true way to salvation: And affirms, that he
groundedly and absolutely denies, that either the Church of England is or ever
was a true Church; innumerable more such sentences might be produced out of
this Pamphlet to this effect, and from many such premises as these, he exhorts
all good people that are in the bosom of the Church of England, as they love
their own inward peace, and spiritual joy, to withdraw their spiritual
obedience and subjection from her. Now here again I appeal to all judicious
Christians, what the Devil the Accuser of the brethren could have spoke more
raylingly and falsely against the faithful servants of God, both Ministers and
people, then what John L^lburne in the name of all those of his Fraternity has
uttered against them all. Surely, if any Enemies, Persecutors, Raylers, and
Revilers of the people of God, and false Accusers ever lived upon the earth,
they are those of the congr^gationall way; and therefore they are no S^ints.
Ye^, when they write most mildly against the Presbyterians, they call them
Lions, Bears, Wolves, Tigers, and in their ordinary language in town and
country, they never see almost any Minister pass^ by them, but they call them
Baals Priests, the lims of Antichrist, the Antichristian brood, the Devils
Ministers, Presbytyrants, with a thousand other words of con^umely; and of all
their Presbyterian brethren, both Scots and English, they speak of them most
shamefully upon all occasions, terming them sons of earth, sinners, carnal
people, enemies of Christ Jesus and his Kingdom; nay, they revile us in the
open streets when we pass by them; and all that I now say, the Independents
themselves cannot deny to be most truly related by me; and their very books
and all their Pamphlets are now in the hands of the people, and daily read by
them, and they all can witness for me, that I have wronged them in nothing;
by all which, that part of my Minor is sufficiently proved, that all the
Independents are notorious Raylers, Revilers, and false Accusers, and therefore
no Saints, nor good Demons, but such as ought to be separate from and not to
be communicated with in holy things, as not formed into a church or churches
after the New Testament form, which ought to consist of all visible Saints.

And that they have caused divisions and offenses contrary to the doctrine of
Christ, is also apparent, and that from the great rents, schisms and factions
they have causelessely made amongst their brethren in church and state, having
neither Precept nor President in the whole Book of God for any of their
practices, and proceedings in their new congregations, and therefore this truth
also being by the sad experience of all men notoriously known, we have a
command to shun them and take heed of them, as of a company of Seducers and
false Teachers, who so long as they persevere and continue in these their
ungodly ways, they proclaim themseves to be no Saints nor good Demons, but a
Generation of vipers and serpents, and such as all godly souls ought to have
no communion with, whatsover their pretenses of holiness and sanctity be.

And that they are notorious covenant breakers, it is most evident and apparent
to all that will not wilfully shut their eyes; for they have entered into a
solemn covenant and oath, and that made in the presence of God, to labor for
a through reformation of Religion in the Kingdom of England, and Ireland, in
Doctrine, Worship and Discipline, according to the word of God, and the example
of the best reformed Churches; and in express words also, they have vowed and
covenanted in the presence of Almighty God, the searcher of all hearts, with a
true intention to perform the same, as they shall answer it at the great day,
that they will without respect of persons endeavor the extirpation of Popery,
Prelacy, Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever shall be
found contrary to sound doctrine and the power of godliness, lest they partake
in their sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their plagnes. They*
have vowed also, with all faithfulness to endeavor the discovery of all such
as have been, or shall be Incendiaries, Malignants, or evil Instruments by
hindering the reformation of Religion, dividing the King from his people, or one
of the Kingdoms from an other, or making of any factions, or parties amongst
the people contrary to th^s league and covenant. And all the Independent
Ministers in the Reverend Assembly did faithfully promise unto their brethren,
and under their own hands by writing confirm it, that they would preach such
doctrines publicly only as tended to Faith, Repentance, and Salvation, and
that they would not trouble the people with any of those controversies
concerning Discipline and Church Government, till they saw what Plat-forme of
Discipline the Parliament and the Assembly should set down; and solemnly
promised also by such a time to bring in their model; and others of the
Ministers of the congregationall way when they came out of New England, entering
into serious discourse with some of their brethren the Ministers of the Church
of England, that had suffered much under the Prelates tyranny, and that indeed
had endured the brunt, and undergone the heat of the day of their cruelty and
persecution, and of whom they had experience for their faithfulness and
constancy in the truth; I say some of these fugitive Ministers after their
return, entering into communication with them, and demanding of them what
Discipline and Government they intended now in place of the Prelaticall
usurpation to establish and set up, for answer they told them, that their
endeavor God assisting them, should be to set up a Government according to the
word of God as nigh as they could, after the example of the best reformed
churches, in Scotland, France, Germany, and Low Countries; whereupon they
immediately replying, said, if this be indeed your real intention, then in the
presence of God we give you the right hand of Fellowship, resolving to stand
to you and by you faithfully unto the death. All that I now relate can be
proved by an Iliad of witnesses.

Notwithstanding all these Covenants, Promises, and serious engagements, and
that in the presence of God, they have all of them blake all these covenants
and promises, made both to God and man, and have violated them all and every
one of them, and have not only neglected to bring in their model of
government, though promised by them, and again and again urged to it, but
made factions, rents and schisms in the Church, and preached up the
congregationall way, and brought an odium and hatred of the Presbytery amongst
the people, and most shamefully continually inveighd against their brethren the
Presbyterians, and all their proceedings: and have labored also with all their
might and power to hinder the reformation of Religion, and to break the union
between the two nations, Scots and English, and to bring in a toleration of
all Religions under the name of liberty of conscience, which tends to nothing
but profanesse and all licentiousness, which is against the power of
godliness, and against their solemn vow and covenant made before God and men;
and therefore all they that do these things, as all the Il-dependents daily
do, they are no Saints in Gods Dialect, nor good Demons, but a Generation of
wicked and ungodly men, with whom all good Christians ought to have no
communion with in holy things, as not being churches after the New Testament
form. But will some say, though some of the Independents should be guilty of
all these crimes, yet they are not all to be condemned as equally guilty. For
answer, here I shall make use of my Brother Burtons Learning, page 16. where
endeavoring to make all the Conformists guilty of Persecution, he has these
words, the most of the Conformists (says he) if not all, have had their hands
less or more, either by acting or assenting, or by silence or connivence in
the persecution of those godly Ministers and people which stood out against the
Antichristian usurpation over their consciences, inferring from thence that
they were equally guilty.

I have made choice of his words, though it be a truth and doctrine set down
in holy Scripture, and confirmed by the light of nature, and by the practice of
all nations, both Jewish, Christian and Heathenish, who adjudge Consentors,
Connivers, and Abettors, and all the accomplices in any treason, conspiracy,
wickedness and malefice as equally guilty as the Actors, Plotters, or
Contrivers, as all Histories both divine and humane do declare; and for some
examples out of holy Scriptures we find that although Iezabel was by name the
principal agent in killing and persecuting of the Prophets, yet all the
Israelites are accused as guilty, because they connived and assented by their
silence unto their death; and therefore the holy Prophet says, they have
slain thy Prophets, and have brake down thy Altars; and so all the Jews are
adjudged guilty of the death of Christ, as well as Herod and Pontius Pilate, as
consenters and allowers of it; and so Christ himself accuses all the Jews as
guilty of the death of all the holy Prophets, in that they allowed of their
Fathers doings, by building the Monuments of the Prophets, by which their
action our Savior says that they allowed of their doings, and in express
words charge them as equally guilty; the same he said of them concerning the
death of John the Baptist, ye says he have done to him whatsoever seemed good
unto you; whereas it is related in the Gospel, that it was Herod's act, who only
is said to have commanded that John should be beheaded; yet this wickedness is
laid upon all the Jews as connivers, and by their silence consenters unto it;
and Paul in like manner accuses all the Gentiles in the first chapter of the
Epistle to the Romans, and all the Jews in the second chapter, of all those
sins he lays to their charge, though they were not many of them actors and
committers of these haiuous crimes, but in that they connived at them, and by
their silence allowed of them or hindered them not, or by punishing the
offend^rs prevented them not, which was the sin of old Ely in not punishing his
sons for their wickedness; So that by all these examples out of the word of
truth and by my brother Burtons own words and learning, it is apparently
evident tha^ all such as by their silence connive and assent unto any
wickedness, persecution, railing, or covenant breaking, they are as ^q^ally
guilty as the actors and contrivers: Now when all the I^*^^pendents as well
Ministers as people in any of th^se way^s or in all of them are guil^y of
railing, reviling, seducing, and Covenant Breaking and making divisions
contrary unto the Doctrine of Christ, and of hindering Reformation, and of
breaking the Union between the Nations of England and Scotland in as much as in
them lies, it follows they are neither visible Saints nor good Demons; and
that those Churches that consist of such Members, are not true formed Churches
after the New Testament form; for they are to consist of visi^le Saints, and
therefore they ough^ to be separated from; and all good Christians ought to
have no communion with such Churches in holy things* as being mixed
Congregations and tagg ragg, and such Saints as ^ob would not set with the
dogs of his flock. And this shall suffice to have spoke for the proof of my
first Argument.

My second Argument is this:

Those Congregations and Assemblies whose Members contrary to the example of
all the holy Prophets and Servants of God, who were ever humble in their own
eyes, continually, falsely, and pharisaically and upon all occasions boast
themselves of their own righteousness (so much condemned in holy writ)
calling themselves the precious and holy servants of God, the godly party, the
praying people, the only men of Gods right hand, the Saints, the generation of
the Just, hating and despising their poor brethren, and are ever plotting
against them, accounting them as Heathens and Infidels, and departing from them
as more holy then they; all such, I say, are neither visible Saints nor good
Demons, as being by Christ himself and the holy Scripture condemned and
therefore are not true Churches after the New Testament ^orm* whose Members
ought to be all visible Saints; but are mixed Congregations with whom truly
godly souls ought not to communicate in holy things.

But all the Congregations and Assemblies of the Il-dependents are such as
consist of such Members: Ergo, they are neither visible Saints nor good
Demons, and therefore ought not to be communicated with in holy things, but to
be separated from, by all the truly godly souls.

For the Major proposition no man can deny it, now if the Minor be confirmed,
then there is no man that will doubt of the truth of the conclusion; for that
will necessarily ensue from the premises.

The parts of the Minor are these: The first, That it was ever the practice of
all the holy servants of God, to be humble in their own eyes.

The second, That God did ever condemn such as justified them* selves and
boasted of their own righteousness.

The third, That the Il-dependents do both falsely and pharisaically boast
themselves when they call themselves the precious and holy servants of God, the
godly party, the praying people, the only men of Gods right hand, the Saints
and the Generation of the just.

The fourth, That they do despise their Christian brethren and separate from
them as being more holy then they; By all which they declare themselves to be
neither Saints indeed nor good Demons, nor a Church or Churches after the New
Testament form, and therefore ought to be separated from.

I shall now prove all these parts in order beginning with the first, by which
the conclusion will be the more obvious to every judicious Reader, and I hope,
to many of the Il-dependents themselves if they will seriously and without
partiality weigh all things: And for the evincing of that, I will begin with
Abraham the Father of all the faithful, who says, Genesis 18. ver. 27. Behold
now I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord, which am but dust and ashes.
Here we see Abraham had no high though^s of himself, nor of his own
righteousness, which example of his was left to all his children in succeeding
ages, to teach them to esteem meanly of themselves and not pharisaically to
boast of their own holiness. Jacob likewise in 32. of Genesis ver. 9, 10.
speaking unto the Lord says, O God of my Father Abraham, and God of my Father
Isaac, etc. I am not worthy of any the least of the mercyes and of the truth
which thou have showed unto thy servant, etc. Here likewise we see what a low
esteem he had of himself. The same we find in Ezra the 9. ver. 6. who in the
name of all the people, said, O my God I am ashamed and blush to lift up my
face to thee, my God: for our iniquities are increased over our heads and our
trespass or guiltiness is grown up to the heavens, etc. And so in the ninth
of Nehemiah, ver. 1. etc. The children of Israel were assembled with fasting
and with sackclothes and with earth upon them; they were all in a posture of
humility as the whole Chapter declares. Job also that righteous and upright
man, in the 42. chapter ver. 6. says, Wherefore I abhor my self, and repent
in dust and ashes. He had no bigg thoughts of himself and his own holiness.
The same we see in Isaiah that great and holy Prophet, who in the 64. chapter
ver. 6. in the name of all the people of God in his age he says, But we are
all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses as filthy rags, and we
all do ^ade as a leaf, and our iniquities like the wind have taken us away,
etc. They had no proud conceits of their own righteousness, nor vaunted not
of their holiness and sanctity. Neither was Daniel in any other posture,
though a man greatly beloved of the Lord, chapter 10. ver. 11. Yet he in the 9.
chapter in the name of all the people humbly prostrated himself, Seeking unto
the Lord by prayer and supplication with fasting and sackcloth and ashes.
Saying, O Lord the great and dreadful God, etc. We have sinned and have
committed iniquity, and have done wickedly and have rebelled, ver. 3, 4, 5,
etc. And so we might run through all the Old Testament and find all the
Prophets and holy men of God ever confessing their own vileness, and never
boasting of their own righteousness. The Publican also and the Prodigal had
learned this lesson, the one of which said Luke 15. ver. 19. I am not worthy to
be called thy son: the other standing afar of, Luke 18. ver. 13. would not so
much as lift up his eyes unto Heaven, but smote upon his breast saying, God be
merciful unto me a sinner. All the faithful, and truly holy people, and godly
party, both under the Old and New Covenant, had learned this lesson of
self-denial; and Paul acknowledged himself the greatest of all sinners,
crying out of himself, Romans 7* O miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me
from this body of death! They had no overtowring conceits or thoughts of their
own holiness and righteousness, nor never boasted themselves that they were
the only holy people and the generation of the Just: That was the practice of
the Justiciaries, yea of the hypocrites and wicked under the Law and of the
Pharisees in the time of Christ, as we may see in Isaiah 65. ver. 5. who said,
Stand by thy self, come not near to me, for I am holier then thou, etc. The
Pharisee also stood and prayed thus with himself; God, I thank thee, that I am
not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this
Publican; I fast twice a week, and I give tithes of all that I possess, etc.
By which it may evidently appear, that those that boast themselves of their own
righteousness and holiness tread not in the steps of father Abraham and all
the truly holy Prophets and people of God in all ages, but in this their so
doing they deviate from their example, and imitate the example of the wicked
Pharisees and old Justiciaries, and therefore are justly to be blamed and found
fault with as transgressors against both the precept of God, and example of
Christ (who said) Learn of me for I am humble and meek, Mat. 11. and against
the President of all the faithful which is the second part of my Minor, which is
to prove, That God did ever condemn such as justified themselves and boasted of
their own righteousness, as is manifest from that place in Isaiah above quoted
in the 65. chap. ver. 5. where the Lord says, that such as gloryed they were
more holy then others, were as smoke in his nose and fire that burns all the
day. And in the 16, of Luke ver. 15. He said unto the Pharisees, Ye are they
which justify your selves before men, but God knows your hearts; for that
which is highly esteemed amongst men, is abomination in the sight of God. And
in the 18. of Luke the place above cited ver. 9. He in a Parable reproved
certain which trusted in themselves as being righteous, and despised others.
And told them plainly ver. 14. That the Publican that meanly esteemed of
himself, went down to his house justified rather then the other; For every one
(says Christ) that exalts himself, shall be abased, and he that humbles
himself shall be exalted. Yea, it is the command of Christ Matthew. 16, to all
such as will be his Disciples ver. 24. That they should deny themselves and
take up their Cross daily and follow him: Now self-denial and boasting of
their own holiness cannot stand together, for Saint Peter in his first Epistle
chap. 5. commands all Christians to be subject one to another, and to be
clothed with hum^lity, saying, That God resists the proud, and gives grace to
the humble; Humble your selves therefore (says he) under the mighty hand of
God, that he may exalt you in due time. The same lesson does Saint James teach
us chap. 4. v. 6. And if we look through the whole Scriptures we shall find,
That God looks unto those only that are of a poor and contrite spirit, and
that tremble at his word, Isaiah 66. ver. 2. The same also the Lord says
Isaiah the 57. v. 15. Thus says the Lord the high and holy One, that
inhabiteth eternity, whose Name is holy, I will dwell in the high and holy
place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the
spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones. David had
learned this lesson also, who in the 51. P salme says, A broken and a contrite
heart O Lord thou will not despise. But for all such as pharisaically boast
themselves of their own righteousness God will despise and resist: especially
when they come far short of the Pharisees righteousness who fasted ordinarily
twice or thrice a week, and gave tithes of all they had, and were very
bountiful and charitable to the poor and did many other things praise worthy,
whereas all the Il-dependents are so far from giving tithes of all they have,
as they would not willingly that any other should give them writing books to
the contrary and that bitter ones; and for the many other acts of holiness in
the Pharisees, as fasting and deeds of charity, the world knows they are not so
frequent in them toward their poor brethren that dissent from them: but in
running from sea to land, and from one place to another to make Proselytes and
seduce the people, they are very like the Pharisees, and in boasting and
glorying of their own righteousness, in this they ^qualise if not exceed the
Pharisees and Justiciaries of old, and if they repent not, God will have a
controversy against them, for God resists the proud and will give grace unto
the humble, and in the 30* of the Proverbs ver. 72. God says there, That there
is a generation pure in their own eyes, and yet they are not purged from their
filthynesse: Gods people were ever humble, but the Il-dependents are not, as
will by and by appear in the sequel.

The third part now to be proved: viz. That the Il-dependents do both falsely
and pharisaically boast themselves when they call themselves the precious and
holy servants of God, etc. Now that they boast and glory of their own
holiness, and that they are the only people, and the godly party, all that
are acquainted with their language and have heard their Sermons, and have seen
their books, can bear witness with me of the truth of that I now charge them
with, neither can the Il-dependents themselves deny it. And that they falsely
glory and boast of their own righteousness, holiness, and sanctity, is my
task now to prove, which by the grace of God I will do running through all and
every several branch of their gloriations. And to begin with the first, when
they call themselves the only precious servants of God, and the godly party,
in this their glorying, I say, they as falsely as Pharisaically boast, which
will evidently appear, if we duly examine who in Gods dialect are a holy people
and the only holy servants of God. In the 1 of the Corinthians chap. 7. ver.
34. The Apostle there describes who are the holy people, they (says he) are
such, as care not for the things of the world, but for the things of the Lord,
how they may be holy in body and spirit; They were such, as being bought with a
price, studied, how they might glorify God in their bodies and in their
spirits which were the Lords. 1 Cor. 6. ver. 20. And how they might cleanse
themselves from all filthynesse of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holinesle
in the fear of God. 2 Cor. 7. ver. 1. The holy servants of the Lord, are such
as present their bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God as their
reasonable service, and that from the consideration of Gods great mercyes unto
them. Romans 12. ver. 1. They pressed toward the mark to the high calling of God
in Jesus Christ. Phil. 3. 14. Whose conversation was in Heaven. ver. 20. Those
Saints minded not earthly things, but being contented with food and raiment,
they esteemed godliness the greatest gain. 1 Timothy 4. Gold and silver (says
Peter) I have none. Acts 3. He studied only to be holy, and regarded not the
world. The life of all the godly and holy party was above in heaven, according
to that of Solomon Prove. 10. They were not grovelling upon the earth, nor
regarded not the things of this life, they were changed from that they were
before, they were now no longer conformable to this world, but they were
transformed by the renewing of their mind, that they might prove what is that
good, that acceptable will of God. Romans 12. ver. 2. According to that of Paul,
Ephesians. 23. 24. They were renewed in the spirit of their mind, they had put on the
new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness, Yea
they were renewed in knowledge after the Image of him that created them.
Coloss. 3. ver. 10. In a word, all the truly holy and godly party have an
universal change wrought in them, their understandings wits and affections
are changed they are all heavenly, the whole frame of their lives and
conversations are changed, they are all heavenly; so that they by all their
actions declare they are such as really mind nothing but heavenly things, they
are mortified men, they seek not great things, nor they entangle not
themselves with earthly businesses, they only mind heavenly things, where
Christ sits at the right hand of God, Coloss. 1, 2, 3. No sooner was Levi
called from the receipt of custom, but he relinquished and left the world and
followed Christ. The same did Zacheus, distributing that he had liberally to
the poor, and manifesting to the world, by giving full satisfaction to all men
that could say they were damnified by him, that now he minded nothing but
heavenly things, the things of the Lord, how he might be holy in body and
spirit which were the Lords; and this was the practice of all the holy servants
of God in all ages, they were heavenly minded, lowly, humble, meek, they were
of one mind, having compassion one of an other, they loved as brethren, they
were pitiful and courteous, they rendered not evil for evil, or railing for
railing, but contrariwise blessing, knowing that they were thereunto called,
that they should inherit a blessing, they refrayned their tongues from evil,
and their lips spoke no guile, they eschewed evil, and did good, they sought
peace and ensued it, 1 Pet. 3. verse 8 9, 10, 11. they loved without
dissimulation, they abhorred that which was evil, and cleaved to that which
was good, in honor they preferred one an other, Romans 12. verse 9. in
Lowliness of mind they esteemed of others better then themselves, Phil. 2.
ver. 2. 3. they wete all heavenly minded men, who regarded no worldly things,
neither do we ever read in all the sacred Scriptures, that any of the holy
Prophets or Saints of old, were taken up with the world, or aspired to the
Honors and Dignities of the same, but chose rather to suffer affliction with
the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a while; yea, they
esteemed the reproach of Christ greater riches then all the treasures of Egypt,
they chose rather to wander about in deserts, in sheeps skins, and goats skins,
naked, despised, and contemned, in the caves and dens of the beasts of the
earth, then to dwell in the greatest affluency of worldly things, they slighted
all the world, and all the Glory of it, and exposed themselves to any miseri^s
and hazards, rather then in the least worldly pleasure to ensnare their
affections in things below, as the eleventh chapter of the Hebrew^s does fully
declare.

Now if we look upon the generality of the Il-dependents, we shall find them
void of all the abovenamed gra^es, as being men most addicted to the world and
worldly things, and that when she is in her old age, so that it is ordinarily
observed, that howsoever they call themselves the holy people and godly party,
there is none more covetous, none are more taken up with the pleasures and
bravery of the world, none more envious and malicious, none more proud,
haughty, and supercilious, none more greedy and having then they, and none more
worldly; so that ye shall find them at the receipt of custom through the
kingdom, mere Toule-gatherers, which was amongst the Saints of old counted a
trade incompatible with holiness and godliness; for Publicans generally were
all esteemed the worst and wickedest of men; yet I say, the Independents at
this day for the universality of them, are taken notice of for their worldly
mindedness, so that through the whole Realm you shall find them in all the
Excise offices, in all the custom houses, and in all the gainefull places and
employments by Sea and Land, in all the Committees, in all gainefull offices in
the Army, and through all the Courts of the Kingdom; neither are there any
that aspire more to all places of honor in all parts of the Land then they,
and make more use of their friends, by running, riding and letters, for the
hindering of any other but themselves, in attaining places of Dignity and
Emolument wheresoever they are vacant, as daily experience teaches us, and as
it can be proved by a cloud of witnesses; yea, so notorious are their covetous
and ambitious designs to all men, that the very Malignants can say, that they
have got all the rich plunder into their possessions, and have made themselves
wealthy with the spoils of others, and especially those that came out of New
England have been taken notice of amongst others to have bought things
plundered of mighty worth, at small rates, and have sent them over thither, in
so much that the very Cavaliers, and Gentlemen of good rank and place have
told me, that if ever they got the day, they would make a voyage into
New England, to demand their plundered goods of them. And it is well known,
what vast sums of money they have gathered through the Kingdom of godly
people, under pretense of relieving the poor Saints there, and for the sending
over boys, and young children, and so they have all of that party bestirred
themselves in getting of moneys under the pretext of good uses, and buying of
plundered Goods, as if they had studied nothing but the getting of earthly
things; so that wheresoever there is any money stirring, or any gainefull
offices, thither do the Independents fly, like a company of flies upon a gald
Horses back: yea, their very Ministers have got all the gainefull Lectures
through town and country, many of them having two or three very profitable
ones at once, the least of which by report, would maintain two or three
Families, when as many more learned then themselves cannot get bread to put in
their childrens bellies, so that they are generally cried up, and other godly
and painful Ministers are despised through their calumnies and craft; so that
all men may easily perceive, that the world and they are very good friends,
whereas the holy people of old cared not for the things of the world; and for
bravery and gallantry, and all manner of voluptuousness they exceed all men;
yea the very Daughters of Jerusalem never minced it more, Isay the 3. then the
Independents wives and daughters do, nor never enjoyed greater pleasures then
they, in so much that it is one of the infallible notes of the Il-dependents,
both men and women, to exceed all others in bravery and delicacy; never was
there such a gallant Generation of Saints since the world began; yea, their
very Ministers, and their Dames go rather like Ruffians, then the holy and
mortified people of God, and matrons of old, in so much that some of the
Il-dependents themselves were heard say, when my last book came out in my own
defense against John Lilburne, where I made my self merry with them, at the
which so many of them stormed against me with indignation, at that time I say,
some of the Independents were heard to say, that what Doctor Bastwicke had writ
merrily was too too true: for the truth is say they, they are too much given to
their pleasures, and to good cheer, and many of them are abominably proud and
covetous, and gaping after honors and riches, and are so unbridled in their
expressions, and so disorderly in their carriages, and many times so insolent
in their behaviors, as they justly give offense and scandal, both in word and
deed, to many that otherwise would have harbored better opinions and conceits
of them; and that that I now say, and a great deal more, can be proved; and
amongst other things they related, that they being present at the Committee of
examinations, never saw any man more injuriously abused by any then I was; in
so much, that they admired my patience, I could carry my self at that time so
calmely toward them. So that if need be, I shall be able to produce good
witnesses from amongst the Il-dependents themselves, that by their testimony
shall make good this my charge against them for their worldly mindedness, and
extreme pride and insolency, and their unchristian dealing toward their
brethren; I shall not want the witnesses also of some, and they of good
quality, that have fallen off from walking with them, who are ready to attest,
that the sole and chief moving cause of their disliking their companies, was
for the very reasons I have now specified, who will affirm, that they could
not continue in so costly and chargeable a Religion, they having found a
cheaper way to Heaven, it will also be proved, that whereas many before they
came acquainted with them, and to be of their Fellowship, they could for three
or four hundred pounds a year maintain themselves and their families, and
do a great deal of good to many distressed people, and indigent and
persecuted Christians; but since they grew into acquaintance with those of the
congregationall way, what with the entertainment of them and their party, and
presents, and what with their frequent relieving of those of that Fraternity,
it has stood them in eight hundred, nine hundred, a thousand pounds yearly;
yea, some times more, so that it has been admired how they have subsisted: and
it is well known, that one of their chief designs is to get into their
societies, the chiefest and richest people every where, and especially the more
honorable women, by means of which, they exceedingly strengthen their party:
for those poor creatures not diving into the subtilty of their proceedings,
and being carried on with a blind zeal, conceive they can never do too much
for them; and therefore upon all occasions, stir up their Husbands and
friends to advance the cause (as they call it) and to the uttermost with their
power and purses to promote it; and hence arise those factions on all sides,
every one of them in their particular places seeking the maintenance of their
party; hence it is, that*there are so many days amongst those of the
congregationall way, set apart, for the seeking of God (for that is their
language) for the gaining of some great and wealthy personages into their new
gathered Churches, which they call the conversion of them, when indeed it is
nothing but the perverting, and misleading of them into the by-ways of their
errors. I could if need were, instance many a Godly Family, that were known to
be of approved Integrity, Piety and Holiness, before these men appeared in
the world, and yet are now reputed the holy people and Saints, and only for
being of the congregationall way. The truth of this thing is so apparent, as
some of the Independents themselves have uttered it, that they well perceive,
that many of their Ministers seek themselves, whiles they pretend they seek
the good of others; yea, they seek the world whiles they persuade others to
abandon it. Saint John says, 1 Epist, Love not the world, nor the things that
are in the world; for he that loves the world (says he) the love of the
Father is not in him. It is an impossible thing in Gods Dialect to serve two
Masters, they cannot serve God and Mammon: for the friendship of the world is
enmity with God, says Saint James. Now then when it is evident by all the
practices of the Independents, that they for the greatest part of them gape
after the world, and are chiefly employed in those things that worldly men are
taken up in, as in biting and devouring one an other, in hatred, variance,
emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, etc. It is manifest
they are not the only holy and spiritual people, if Paul's doctrine be true,
Gal. 5. ver. 15. 20, 21. and that the Independents are too too busy in these
employments, daily and sad experience teaches us, neither is there any truly
judicious and impartial Independent, that can gainesay what I now write.
Besides, the holy people of old, as Abraham, Jacob, Joshua, Cornelius, etc.
were such as with their whole houses served the Lord, they would have none in
their Families but such as were of one and the same Religion, they would
neither connive at, indulge or tolerate any Religion in their houses, but that
God had appointed, as all the holy Scriptures testify, they at their uprising,
and lying down, at their goings out and comings in, Deuteronomy. 6. and Deuteronomy. 11.
instructed their children and families in the statutes and commandments of the
Lord; they with their Menservants, and Maidservants, and the stranger within
their Gates, Exodus 20. took care that all of them under their roofes should
sanctify the Sabbath, and keep all the commandments of the Lord; they
thought it their duty and their place, to see that they should serve the Lord
with one shoulder, and with one lip, they left them not every one to the
liberty of his own conscience, but according to the express rule exacted
obedience from them, to the commandments of the Lord: and this they esteemed
to be the holiness well pleasing unto God, not their own fained conceits.
Now in this thing also most of the Il-dependents are failing in their duty, as
can be proved, who leave their Families to their own Genins in the serving of
God, so that they may go whether they please on the Lords day, and be of what
Religion and Sect they like best; and therefore they follow not the example of
the Godly Party, and holy Saints, and servants of God of old. In all these
regards, and many more that might be specified, it is apparently evident, that
those Churches of the congregationall way do not consist of all Saints, as
being but mixed assemblies as well as the congregations of their brethren that
they separate from, and therefore they are not the only holy people, as not
being crucified unto the world, and the world to them, as the holy people of
old were, when they are wholly for the world; and this shall suffice to have
spoke concerning the first title they dignifie themselves with above their
brethren, calling themselves in all their preachings and writings the holy
people, and godly party, whereas the truly holy people and Godly Party were
ever humble in their own eyes, and thought basely of themselves, counting
themselves wretched and miserable sinners.

Neither does the other title truly and only belong unto them, when they call
themselves the praying people: for our Savior has said, Not every one that
says Lord Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of Heaven, but he that prays
according to his will, for so Saint John asserteth, in his first Epistle, chap.
5. verse 14. this is the confidence we have in him, that if we ask any thing
according to his will he hears us. So that it is not the mere praying of
any people that will procure audience from God, but the praying according to
Gods will; for Christ has said, Matthew. 6. that men are not heard for their
much babbling, for that is a thing displeasing unto him, but in that they pray
according to his direction and will; so that of necessity it follows, they
only are the praying people properly so called, that in all their
supplications and requests follow the rule set down by Christ himself the
only Prophet of his Church, and who knew best what the will of God was, and
what the meaning of the Spirit of God was; for he only it is, that must help
our infirmities in prayer, for we of our selves know not what to ask, Romans 8.
It will not be amiss therefore briefly to run over some of those Petitions,
that the Lord has set down for an everlasting rule for all the truly praying
people, to square their prayers by, the which whosoever in prayer swarveth
from, they cannot properly be called the truly praying people.

Our Savior teaches us, Matthew. the sixth, verse. 9* 10* (...) 13* saying, when
ye pray, say Hallowed be thy name. So that they that pray aright desire that
the name of God may be glorified, and in so praying they desire that whatsoever
hinders the glorifying and hallowing of Gods name, may be taken away and
removed; now the toleration of all Religions under pretense of liberty of
conscience, which all the Independents not only pray for, but with all their
might labor for, will not make for the hallowing and glorifying of Gods name,
but greatly to his dishonor, and the unsanctifying of his holy name, and be a
means of bringing in of profanesse and atheism, and all manner of
abominations, and damnable heresies, as the very connivence at them already
teaches all men: therefore they that pray, that as there is but one God, one
truth, and one true Religion, so that no other may be tolerated, pray
according to his will, and are the only true praying people; and those that
pray for liberty of conscience, and the toleration of them all, as the
Independents do, are not the only true praying people, whatsoever they
pretend unto the deluded world, for they pray not according to Gods will.

Again, the truly praying people are taught to say thy Kingdom come, in which
Petition they are instructed to pray, not only that the Kingdom of Glory may
come, but the Kingdom of Grace, viz. that the Gospel may be everywhere
published, preached and set up; and to that end that God would send faithful
Laborers into his Vineyard and Harvest; and in so praying, they earnestly
desire, that whatsoever hinders the preaching of the Gospel, as the toleration
of all Religions does, may be taken away; now the Independents pray for a
toleration, and for liberty of conscience, and labor as much as in them lies
the hinderance of sending faithful Laborers into Gods Harvest, and much
discourage those that are already sent* and hinder also the setting up of that
Discipline and Government that would most make for the advancement of Christ's
Kingdom, and for the coming of the same; therefore they are not the truly
praying people, for they pray not according to Gods will.

Again* the true praying people are taught to say thy will bee^ done on earth
as it is in heaven, and in their so praying they are instructed to pray for the
removal of all such things as are against the good will and pleasure of God,
and do hinder the doing of his will. Now God has revealed in his will, that
as there is but one God and one Mediator, so there is but one Faith, one
Baptism and one Religion, and that all the people of God should bring up their
children and families in the nurture, knowledge and fear of this one and only
true God* as Abraham, Jacob, Joshua, and Cornelius, and all the faithful and
dear servants of God in all ages have ever done, and that they should instruct
their children and households in the Statutes and Commandments of the Lord at
their lying down and rising up, at their goings out and commings in: Deuteronomy. 6.
and Deuteronomy. 11. and Ephesians. 6. v. 4. And that both they and their menservants and
maid servants, and the stranger within their gates, should sanctify Gods
Sabboths and keep all his Commandments, Exodus 20. And this is the duty of all
parents and masters of families, and this they are for ever tied unto by the
revealed will of God, and that they should not spare their nighest allies and
kindred that should labor or endeavor to bring in any other Religion then
that God has appointed in his holy and blessed word: Den. 13. and this they
that pray aright and according to Gods will, pray may be done to the end of the
world, and that both they and their families and all the families of the earth
may continue to instruct their households and families according to the
commandments of God which is his revealed will, and that whatsoever shall
hinder the doing of this will of God may be removed abominated and abhorred, as
the toleration of all Religions will do, and that pretended liberty of
conscience, as hourly experience teaches us; for by this both the duties of
the first and second tables are neglected on all sides: for neither fathers nor
masters of families can perform or discharge their duties, if a Toleration of
all Religions should once be set up; for then both servants and children, and
the strangers within their houses, should every one of them be left to the
liberty of their consciences without control^, so that they may go whither they
will, and embrace what Religion or Heresy they please; and therefore it
concerns all men more earnestly to pray for the setting up and establishing of
the only true Religion, and the rooting out of all false and erroneous
Religions; for in this they do according to Gods will: And they only that thus
pray, are the true praying people; But the Il*dependents pray that there own
wills may be done, and not Gods will; for they pray for a Toleration of all
Religions, and that against the revealed will of God who has declared his will
to the contrary: Deuteronomy. 13. Yea Christ himself in his Epistles to the Church of
Pergamos and Thyatyra: Rev. 2. ver. 12. etc. 18. shows his high displeasure
against them for but suffering and conniving at those false doctrines that were
taught amongst them. Yea in this blessed prayer of Christ we are taught to pray
not only that the will of God may be done on earth, but he farther adds by
way of example and for a pattern of our imitation, that it may be done on earth
as it is in heaven: Now all those that are Christ's Disciples, know, that there
is but one Religion in Heaven, and one way of worship there, as there is but
one God; they therefore that pray for a Toleration of all Religions as the
Il-dependents do, are not the only true praying people, seeing they would have
the will of God otherwise done on earth then it is done in heaven; for in
heaven there is but one Religion; and therefore they pray contrary to the will
of God when they pray for liberty of conscience and a Toleration of all
Religions.

Again the truly praying people are taught to pray lead us not into temptation,
but deliver us from evil; therefore they pray against the toleration of all
Religions, which is not only a great temptation and an occasion of evil, but
the very sourse and fountain of all errors, schisms, heresies, and of all
abominations, and of all the evils both of sin and punishment, that can light
upon any Church, Nation or Kingdom, as we may see by the example of the
Churches of Pergamos, and Thyatyra, to the which the Lord says, Repent, or
else I will come unto thee quickly, and will fight against thee with the sword
of my mouth. And I will cast her into a bed of great tribulation, and will kill
her with death, and all the Churches shall know, that I am he which searches
the reins and hearts, and I will give unto every one of you according to your
works. I say therefore from very good ground, that a Toleration of all
Religions is not only a great temptation, but the greatest evil in the world,
and would be a means of bringing plagues and judgments upon the three
Kingdoms, and a distraction and disorder amongst all the people and a
confusion of all things; against all the which as so many temptations and
capital evils, all truly godly praying people if they will pray according to
Gods will, ought incessantly to put up their daily supplications, as they
desire the favor of God and the removeall of his judgments, and in their so
praying they do but their duty and according to the will of God: Therefore when
the Il-dependents pray for a Toleration of all Religions under the name of
liberty of conscience, and labor for it, and hinder with all their power the
setting up of the only true Religion and work of Reformation, and the setting
up of such a Government in Christ's Kingdom, which is his Church as he has
revealed in his blessed will, and they have also covenanted to bring in, in
their so doing they neither pray that Gods name may be hallowed, nor that his
Kingdom may come, nor that his will may be done, nor that they may not be led
into temptation, and be delivered from evil; and therefore they pray not
aright, and are not as they falsely boast themselves the only true praying
people; for they pray not according to Gods will.

Now when those Churches of the Congregationall way consist of such kind of
praying Members, it is apparently manifest they are a mixed Generation of men,
and not the Generation of the just, nor the men of Gods right hand, which is
another title they falsely and pharisaically also claim and challeng unto
themselves, as they did the former, as will by and by appear upon due
examination and discussion of the true sense of that expression. For those that
are the men and people of Gods right hand properly so called, are such, as with
all their might stand up in defense of Gods true Religion, and earnestly
contend for the faith once delivered unto the Saints, Jude 2, 3. and are not
only ever ready to lay down their lives for that ancient faith, but with all
their power to fight for it to the last drop of their blood, in opposition to
all errors, superstition, heresies, and all manner of false worship, and in
opposing whatsoever is against the power of godliness as a Toleration of all
Religions is, which tends only to the bringing in of all profaneness and
irreligion.

Now the Il-independents deny, that they did ever fight for Religion: Yea, I my
self have heard many of them say, That it is unlawful to fight for Religion,
and they professed that when they went out with the sword in their hands, they
fought only for the liberty of their consciences, and for a Toleration of
Religion which is a part and branch (as they said) of the Subjects birthright:
All this I can with many more depose, and therefore they falsely arrogate unto
themselves that title of being the men of Gods right hand, which no more
belongs unto them then the other ensigns and titles did: And as little right
have they to the title of Saints and the generation of the Just (which is so
frequently in their mouths) if we bring them to the true touchstone of that
mettle; therefore it may be to very good purpose to turn to the 15. Psalm and
briefly to run over that where we shall find a true description of Saints
indeed.

Who (says the Psalmist) shall abide in thy Tabernacle, and who shall dwell in
thy holy hill? that is to say, who are Saints indeed and the generation of the
Just? For answer, the Holy Ghost, that best knew who were Saints indeed, sets
down the characters of true Saints. The first of which is, his upright walking;
He that walks uprightly (says the spirit of God) This is a metaphorical
expression, signifying the trade of a man's life, his custom and carryage in
it, as when a man is said to walk after the flesh, it is as much in the dialect
of holy Scripture as to say, He goes on in his natural condition and in his
irregenerate state, in his ignorance, blindness, wicked courses and
practices, and has no work of grace wrought in his heart, nor any chang in his
will and affections, nor in his whole frame of life and carriage, but he is the
old man still, Romans 18. ver. 1. So to walk uprightly, in Scripture language,
is, to walk after the spirit, to be regenerate, to be a holy and heavenly
minded man, who does all the actions of one borne again of the water and of the
spirit, he makes the Law of God his delight, and squares his life and actions
according to that rule and the direction of his blessed word, and he orders his
life by that rule in all integrity, sincerity and without hypocrisy, or any
base or by-ends or wordly respects. He makes it his employment with Enoch and
Noah to walk with God secretly as well as openly, in all manner of
conversation, in his thoughts words and deeds, as if he were ever in the sight
and presence of God, walking uprightly also toward men, carrying himself
justly toward all, but especially his main aim is to endeavor that the true
worship and service of God may be set up in his family, and wheresoever he has
power; he declines not to the right hand nor to the left in matters of
Religion, but keeps himself strictly to the rule and goes right on according
to the direction of that: He halts not between two Religions or more, for he
knows how much that is disspleasing unto God, who said unto the people by his
Prophet, Why halt ye between two Religions? That God cannot endure in any
people, no more then he can endure the lukewarm Laodiceans that are neither
hot nor cold, but indifferent what Religion be set up, so they may enjoy their
case; all such he knows God has and will spew out of his mouth; Such therefore
as halt and limp in Religion and hop first on this side to this Religion, and
then on the other side to that other Religion, and a little after limp into
another opinion, and soon after hop into another Sect, all that walk thus, are
no Saints in Gods dialect: For the true Saints indeed they walk up ^ghtly
before God in that one Religion he has appointed, they turn not to the right
hand nor to the left, they take no by-way or cross path in Religion, they halt
not, nor limp not, nor doubt not of their way; neither do they sit still or
make a stand, nor set not a foot backward in Religion, all which were not to
walk uprightly before God, but all the true Saints walk uprightly, they go on
with constancy without interruption in their Religion that way Jerem. 6. They
are not carried sometimes this way with this wind of doctrine, and sometime
that way with that blast of opinion, but they walk right on, they set not a
step backward from their first love to Religion like the Church of Ephesus,
Revel. 2. but pass forward toward the price and mark of their high calling
with as great a zeal and fervency as at first, and hate all false ways and
erroneous religions, they persevere in all the ways of God and in the
footsteps of all the Saints of old, and imitate all those virtues and graces
that are commendable in the Saints and all the Churches; They cannot endure
that any doctrine of Baalam, Jezabell, or of the Nicolaitans should be connived
at amongst them, or tolerated, or any other Religion but that which the Lord
our God has appointed and established in his blessed word, and in that they
walk and persevere, they decline not in their love to it, they go not backward
with Demas to embrace the present World, nor with Hymeneus and Philetus; they
will deny no truth of God, nor with any Heretics innovate any thing in their
Religion, but they walk uprightly to the mark of the high calling in Jesus
Christ: They stand not still neither, nor make no pause in their way, but they
are ever journying and in the action of well doing, going from strength to
strength till they come to the heavenly Zion, they go on cheerfully in their
Religion, yea they run the race set before them with patience, and that through
thick and thin of all afflictions and persecutions, and abate not their pace,
casting aside every thing that presses down, as the love of the world, the
love of honors and riches, the love of pleasures, the love of profits, the
love of friends, and all earthly emoluments, yea and the sin that sticks so
close unto them, all their hereditaty and inbred corruptions, yea they reject
likewise all novelties in Religion, nothing can hinder them from walking
uprightly in the old way God has appointed them to walk in, but in despite of
all impediments they not only walk, but run the race, and the whole race set
before them, Looking upon the author and finisher of their faith Jesus Christ,
who for the glory that was set before him endured the cross, despised the
shame, and is now set down at the right hand of God in heaven, Heb. 12. 2. He
made that good confession to the death before Pontius Pilate and witnessed the
truth; All they therefore that are conformable to Jesus Christ and desire to
walk in his steps and that are Saints indeed and the generation of the Just,
can never endure a Toleration of all Religions; for that is not to walk
uprightly with their God, nor after Christ example; for Christ whipped the Buyers
and Sellers out of the Temple, and would not tolerate them but laid corporal
punishment upon them for their evil doing, and preached against the Scribes,
Pharisees and Saduces, and all erroneous Sects in his life time, and after he
was ascended into heaven he wrote unto the Churches of Pergamos and Thyatyra,
sharply reproving them for suffering and tolerating amongst them any other
Religion then that he had appointed, and for but conniving at any novelties in
Doctrine and Religion. They therefore that follow the ill example of those of
the Church of Pergamos and Thyatyra, and not only suffer all manner of
Religions amongst them, but labor and endeavor to have an indulgence and a
toleration for all under the pretense of liberty of conscience, they follow not
the example of Christ the Prophet of his Church, nor the example of Abraham,
Jacob, Joshua and all the Patriarks and blessed Apostles who abhorred all
novelties and tolerations, and therefore they walk not uprightly with their God
and are not Saints indeed according to Gods own description of a true Saint.

Now whether therefore the Il-dependents by their practices can challenge this
Character to themselves, I leave it to the judgment of the learned, when they
would have a Toleration of all Religions.

But now to pass on to the second Character of a true Saint, He that works
righteousness, says the spirit, they that make it their employment to render
to every one their due obedience and subjection to the higher powers, Romans 13.
Tribute to whom Tribute, Custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to
whom honor is due, and they that will owe no man nothing but love, and that
love one another, knowing that he that loves fulfilleth the Law, they are
Saints properly so called v. the 7. In a word, all that are Saints indeed in
Gods repute, work righteousness; they first give unto God his true worship
and labor for the establishment of that Religion only that he has appointed,
they cannot endure the Toleration of all Religions, neither will they connive
at or indulge that any way of serving and worshipping of God should be
permitted, where they have power and ability to hinder it, but that which God
himself has commanded; for they know that that is not to work righteousness;
for that is not to give God his own, For he appointed but one Religion, and
that he challenges for his own; so then, they that set up any other but that,
or tolerate more, or allow of a Toleration of all Religions, they work not
righteousness toward God; for that is unjustice and a thing highly
displeasing unto his divine Majesty, as taking his right and authority out of
his hand who is King of his Church, and substituting themselves in his place,
which is the greatest injustice and unrighteousness in the world; and
therefore all that are the true Saints indeed and the generation of the just,
dare not attempt any such unjust thing; for they work righteousness.

Again, the true Saints in like manner work righteousness toward all men,
they yield all subjection to those that are in authority over them, and they
give the Magistrates their due honor and reverence, yielding unto them all the
duties of obedience and subjection and veneration, and they yield unto the
Ministers and all their Brethren the duty of love and their true honor, and so
are fulfillers of the law of God. They therefore that malign their brethren
and detract from their praises and hate them and speak evil of them and of
those that are in dignity and authority, and rail of those in the Ministry,
and as much as in them lies endeavor to make them odious to the world by their
daily traducing of them, and assuming the honor due to them unto themselves,
and all such as do assent unto them in this their unrighteous dealing, they do
not work righteousness, and therefore in Gods dialect they are not Saints
indeed, nor the generation of the just: for it is great injustice to detract
from any their due honor.

Now I appeal unto the judgment of any intelligible man, whether or no those
that write defamatory books and daily utter injurious and reproachful words
against the great council of the Kingdom, traducing them before all the
people, and accusing them of injustice, and of exercising a lawless and an
arbitrary government over the people, proclaiming them tyrants and as bad as
Strafford and the Bishop of Canterbury, and guilty of the same crimes, and that
at pleasure can impeach any of the Parliament and accuse them to the people as
traitors and such as keep correspondency with the enemy, and are betrayers of
their liberties, and those that do allow of such men, favoring them and
encouraging them by their countenance or connivance, I say I appeal to the
judgment of any whether they that do or assent to such doings do work
righteousness, when they do apparently transgress the law of God in speaking
evil of their rulers. I am most assured that upon due deliberation they will
acknowledge, that this is no righteous dealing: And therefore they must
conclude, that they that work not righteousness are no true Saints, nor the
generation of the just in Gods esteem.

Again I demand of any man but of a moderate temper, Whether those that with
most opprobrious terms do calumniate our Brethren the Scots, and detract from
their honor and due praises who came in for our assistance and help, and for
our aid and deliverance, and have been under God one of the principal means
of our preservation, whether in their so doing they work righteousness. I
demand further of any one but ordinarily principled either in Religion, or
Morality, whether to speak evil of their Ministers, and of their Presbyterian
brethren, and fellow soldiers, with all manner of calumnies and reproaches,
and to defame them in word and writing through the world, and to do them all
the evil offices their most mortal enemies can do against them, and who
continually labor, to make them and the Presbyterian government hateful to
the world, and that will take great and chargeable journies, and write large
Letters and scurrilous Pamphlets to do any of their Presbyterian brethren an
ill turn, and will also glory of it, and that in Print: I demand I say of any
moderate minded Christian, whether the doing of ary of these things, or the
hindering the work of reformation, and the laboring for a toleration of all
Religions, and the assenting unto such be to work righteousness, and if he
shall accord unto me, that these actions are unrighteous, then he must accord
also that those that do them are no Saints; for the true Saints work
righteousness, it is their trade to be so employed. Now whether the
II-dependents be not guilty of all these dealings, I refer the Reader to all
their Pamphlets, especially to those of John Lilburn lately set forth, and
those of my brother Burton his Vindication, and his Vindicia veritatis, and
their daily practices; and I am most assured if he will but spend a day or two
in reading over the writings and the sermons of the Ill-dependents, they shall
find little other then unrighteous dealing of all kinds against both
Magistracy, Ministry, and all their Presbyterian Brethren and Fellow Soldiers;
For they slight them all, and make nothing of all that ever they have done; for
all the Glory of all the famous victories they assume unto themselves, and
attribute the honor and glory of them to that Army they call the praying Army,
as if none of the Presbiterian Soldiers either prayed or deservedany share in
the honor of those victories, when it is most certainly known, that amongst
the Presbyterian soldiers there are many thousands that live as holy and
godly, and that pray as devoutly, and earnestly for all good success upon
their undertakings, and for a blessing upon their endeavors, as any
Independents in England, and are as dearly beloved of God as any of them; for
with God there is no respect of persons, but every one that works
Righteousness, Act. 10. of what nation soever he be, God hears him; yea,
and it is well known also, that in the Army there is ten, if not twenty
Presbyterians to one Independent; and all men know likewise, that many of them
are experienced soldiers, whereas not twenty of them before these times ever
saw the face of an enemy; and it is likewise acknowledged by all impartial
men, that they have ever fought as valiantly as any Independents, and have
stood to the Battle when many companies of them ran away, as can be proved;
notwithstanding all these things, the Independents ascribe the honor of all
those victories to their own party, and say the Independents got this and that
victory, and only because perhaps some of their Colonels, and a few other
Independent Commanders had the leading up of the Presbyterian forces, and they
that under God did the work, loose their due praises amongst the people, and
the Independents arrogate the honor to themselves (which is their daily
practice) and in its due place will appear: And therefore when the
Independents do upon all occasions derogate thus from their brethren the glory
that belongs unto them, and ascribe it to their own Fraternity; and when they
are culpable and guilty of the foregoing charges, they work not
righteousness; and therefore unles7s;e they timely and cordially repent of all
their unrighteous dealing toward God, and their brethren, this character of
Saints and the generation of the just, will not belong to them; for the Saints
indeed, and the generation of the just, work righteousness, whereas the
Ill-dependents work unrighteousness. But now to pass on to the other
characters: the third character of the Saints, and Generation of the just, is
this.

He speaks the truth in his heart, says the Psalmist, and such an one is a
Saint indeed; all double dealing men therefore toward either God or men, and
such as have a heart and a heart, and whose tongue and heart go not together,
they in Gods Dialect are no true Saints; which doctrine is confirmed by Saint
James, chap. 1. verse 8. who says That a double minded man is unstable in all
his ways, and therefore in the 4. chapter he exhorting those of his time to
draw near unto God, uses these words, draw nigh unto God (says he) and he
will draw nigh unto you, cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purify your
hearts, ye double-minded; they therefore that are double-minded, and speak not
the truth from their hearts, are unsanctified and impure, and are not Saints
indeed, whatsoever they pretend. Now then all such as make the world believe
that they will reveal the whole truth of God unto the people, and promise they
will give in their model of government, and do notwithstanding profess, and
that in express words, that they will keep a reserve donec ad triarios
redierit res, and will not speak the truth in their hearts, nor communicate
unto their brethren fully their ways, though God has commanded them, that
whatsoever he spoke to them in secret they should preach upon the house top
openly, they are double-minded men, and speak not the truth in their hearts;
and therefore in Gods esteem they are not Saints indeed; but such are all the
Il-dependents. Again, they that in outward appearance and before men show a
great deal of love to their Neighbors, calling them brethren, and
notwithstanding plot all the mischief they can against them, speak not the
truth in their hearts, according to that of Saint John, in his first Epistle,
chap. 3. verse 18. My little children, (says he) let us not love in word,
neither in tongue, but in deed and in truth. There were it seems such kind of
creatures in his time, as made fair semblances of love to others in tongue and
word, but did not really and in truth love their brethren, which he condemns,
for they spoke not the truth in their hearts; all such therefore as contrive all
the mischief they can against those whom at every word they call brother and
good brother, and yet write whole books to the defaming of them, and killing
of their good name, which is worse then the murdering of their very bodies,
they are so far from being Saints, as they are like Cain that wicked one that
slew his brother, ver. 12. all such therefore as say one thing and practice the
contrary, are double-minded men, and a Generation not of the just but unjust;
for they speak not the truth in their hearts: when therefore all the
Independents in words pretend love unto their Presbyterian brethren, and seem
to honor the Parliament, and the Scots, and their godly brethren the
Ministers, and yet seek by all means possible they can to render them all
odious to the people, and to baptize them into the hatred of all men, and write
scurrilous and defamatory books against them all to this very purpose, and
rejoice at any evil that happens to any of them, or to hear of any breach or
division amongst them, and labor to make it greater, and will not so much as
pray with them, or pray for them, but have been heard, in their public
congregations say, and that in their prayers, Now Father we should come to pray
for the Parliament and the Assembly, but they are not worthy the prayers of the
Saints; thus they speak unto God himself of the Parliament and Assembly in
their own congregations, and will not vouchsafe them so much as their prayers,
as can sufficiently be proved; and yet to the world they pretend they honor
the Parliament and Assembly, and love all their Presbyterian brethren, and wish
them all happiness, when all their actions, words, and Pamphlets proclaim the
contrary; for it is well known, that the whole scope of most of their
employments is to traduce the Parliament and their government, and to make the
Scots and all the Presbyters their brethren the most hateful people in the
world, as if all their endeavors were to bring the people under an
unsupportable slavery, and a greater yoke of tyranny then that of the
Prelates: this is their very language in all their discourse and writings; yea,
often in their meeting places, by which they have so enraged the people every
where against all our godly and painful Ministers, that they are looked upon
with an evil eye through City and Country, and yet they pretend love unto
them in words, and call them brethren at every turn, and their godly brethren,
and yet would sterve them if they could, and both in their writings, and
preaching, and disputes, labor to take away their good name, yea, their
livelyhoods, their Tithes, the only maintenane by which they should support
themselves and their families, all which their dealing is abominable
dissimulation. So that when they most court them, and faune upon them with the
title of brother, and good brother, and show them some outward courtesies, they
had most need to take heed of them; for then they plot mischief, and speak
not the truth in their hearts; and therefore the Ill-dependents are no true
Saints, for they speak not the truth in their hearts. But to go on to the
other characters of the true Saints, they says the Holy Ghost, verse the 3.
Back bite not with their tongue, nor do evil to their neighbor, nor take up
a reproach against their neighbor. In this verse there are three other
characters together of true Saints, as in the former ver. The first, they
backbite not with their tongue; the second, they do no evil to their
neighbor; the third, they receive not a reproach against their neighbor: they
will not entertain, endure, or take up, or believe an evil report against
their brethren: for they that are Saints indeed, know, that they that receive
stolen goods into their houses, or do assent unto a Thief, are as equally
guilty as the thief that took them away; now all such as make it their chief
employment, to traduce their neighbors and defame them, and speak evil of
them, and foully reproach them with all manner of contumelious, and disgraceful
language, calling them the professed enemies of Jesus Christ and his Kingdom,
the Antichristian brood, the lims of Antichrist, using a thousand such
scurrilous and unchristian reproaches against the Presbyterian brethren in
tongue and pen, and do all manner of evil unto them in word and deed, and
write libellous books against them, and receive and embrace all manner of
evil reports against them, yea, hunt after such, and seek for them that they
may have matter of slander against them, and give ear to Tale-bearers, and
busy bodies against the word of God, and will embrace the acquaintance of the
most impious peoyle in the world, as can be proved, and give ear and credit to
the calumnies and reproaches of professed Atheists in any thing they shall
falsely report against any of their Presbyterian brethren, all such in Gods
dialect are no true Saints; for they that are Saints indeed, back-bite not with
their tongue, they do no evil to their neighbor, nor they will not receive a
reproach against their neighbor, much less against those that are in
authority and dignity.

Now I say, if it can be proved that the Independents make it their ordinary
and daily practice, not only to traduce, back-bite, and do evil, and receive
a reproach against their fellow brethren, but do all these evils also against
those that are in dignity and authority, and are made Rulers and Governors of
the people, and over themselves, it follows that they that do all these evils,
and all those that assent unto them in their so doing, are not Saints indeed in
Gods esteem; now that the Il-dependents are guilty of all these crimes, the
many Pamphlets lately set forth by them, as those published by John Lilburne,
and my brother Burton, and all the other scurrilous and libellous Books set
forth by those of that party, and countenanced by them do sufficiently
witness. And here I shall desire of any man, ingenuously to tell me, what it
is to back-bite their neighbor, and do evil to them, and to receive a
reproach against them, if speaking defamatory words of them all, and writing
and publishing of libellous Books against the great Council of the Kingdom,
and those in authority, be not to back-bite their neighbor. Certainly such
words and books, as accuse the Parliament of Injustice, tyranny, and of
exercising an arbitrary power over the people against Magna Charta, and the
Petition of Right, and the privileges of the subject, and make them all as bad
as Strafford and the Prelate; and such words, Pamphlets, and writings against
the House of Peers and Commons, as tend to the defaming of them, and their
just power and government, and to disaffect the people against them, and to
stir up a faction against their just authority, and to make them odious to
all men; and all those, that either speak such words, or write or print such
Books and Pamphlets, and all such as allow of such words and Pamphlets, either
by their silence or connivence, or approbation, or by buying and receiving of
them into their houses, or venting, selling, and publishing of them, and either
praise or like of the authors and contrivers of them, and all such as shall
scatter and spread such books abroad, and shall releeve and support such men in
this their evil doing by supplying and furnishing them with moneys, or
visiting of them and petitioning for their maintenance and allowance in these
their wicked practices, or by their silence favor them; all and every one of
them may truly be said, and that by divine and humane authority and by the very
testimony of my brother Burton, to be such as backbite their brethren, and they
have all of them a great deal to answer for such their doings before the
righteous judge of the whole world, and in Gods dialect all such as backbite
their neighbor with their tongue and pen, are no Saints; for the true Saints
backbite not their neighbor with their tongue.

Now that it is the general practice of all the Il-dependents to do this, I
refer my self to those Pamphlets above specified and to their daily
Proceedings, their combinings and confederatings of themselves together for
this very purpose; all which do sufficiently testify and declare unto the
world as well as their daily publishing through City and Country such words and
books as tend altogether for the defaming of the Parliament and the traducing
of all their brethren; that it is one of their master pieces boldly to
calumniate all men that something may cleave and stick.

Again, I demand of any man what it is to do evil to his neighbor, if
plotting against the life and blood of their neighbors be not to do evil unto
them, if making rents, schisms and factions in Church and State, and to vent
and publish desperate and dangerous opinions and open heresies, all which are
works of the flesh leading men to perdition Gal. 5. I ask I say, of any man,
whether the acting of all these things be not to do evil to their neighbors?
And whether or no to violate all the laws of God and nature upon needless and
unwarrantable pretenses, as to divide the husband from the wife, the parents
from the children, the servants from their masters, the subjects from their
governors and them in authority over them, the people and sheep from their
Ministers and faithful Pastors, and to labor for a toleration of all
Religions in a State and Kingdom, yea in many Kingdoms, and by this means to
bring confusion upon them all: I demand I say, of any moderate man, whether the
acting of all these things be not to do evil to their neighbors? And whether
to ride and run from one end of the Kindom to another to seduce the people, and
to do their neighbors a mischief, and by tongue and pen and all manner of
infamous language to wrong them to the taking away of their good name which is
better then their life, be not to do evil to his neighbors? Again I demand of
any solid Christian whether the endeavoring the taking away all means of
livelihood from the Ministers, as their tithes the only support of their
families, and the making of them odious by their railing Pamphlets, and the
hindering Reformation in the Church, and the breaking of all promises and
covenants with their brethren to the prejudice of the whole Kingdom, be not to
do evil to their neighbors? And whether to raise up false and infamous
reports against their brethren the Scots and them in authority, and to publish
them in word and print be not to do evil to their neighbors? And whether the
denying of their brethren their very prayers, aid, help and assistance at any
time, yea to pray against them and for their confusion, be not to do evil to
their neighbors? I shall here desire of any soberminded Christian to tell me
whether the acting or doing of all these things or any of them or the
consenting unto them and allowing of them, be not to do evil to their
neighbors? And I am most assuredly confident, that he will heartily
acknowledge that the acting of all this is to do evil to their neighbor.

Now that the Il-dependents daily practice all these things, can be proved by a
cloud of witnesses, yea all their Actions and Pamphlets can testify it,
especially the late conspiracy of many of them against the life of that
Honorable Gentleman Mr Speaker of the House of Commons and many more of the
High Court of Parliament, and their running and riding about to preach up their
new doctrines and heretical opinions to the disturbing of all order in Church
and State for the seducing of the people; and their running riding and going
from place to place to defame and traduce their neighbors, for the hindering of
them from coming to any employment by which they might have been useful in
their generation to the land of their nativity; all these passages I say can
witness against them; and innumerable presidents more of their unchristian
proceedings against their breth^^n might be produced and may be proved by
numberless witnesses, besides their own writings, that all of them do evil
to their neighbors, and that this is the general practice of the
Il-dependents. Yea it is notoriously known, that there is scarce a meeting of
them, whether in their festivities or in any of their solemn assemblings of
themselves together, gether, that they do any other great thing amongst
themselves, but that that tends to the evil of their neighbors in word and
deed, there scarce issuing any thing out of their mouths but injurious words
against them: Yea they cannot contain themselves in the very open streets and
in the Churches from railing against their Christian brethren, as can
sufficiently be proved; Yea let any Presbyterian accidentally but come into
their houses, and they will reproach and rail at him. And if all this be not
to do evil to their neighbors, I know not what is to do evil unto them.

Now in Gods dialect all such as perpetrate any of these actions, are not
Saints indeed: for the true Saints do no evil to their neighbors.

The Il-dependents may not here pretend, that their Ministers can preach and
pray well, and that those of their fraternity have many of them excellent
gifts; for gifts are not sufficient to make Saints, but grace is that that
makes Saints; For Saint James and Saint Paul have sufficiently proved That unto
all the true Saints; for so in the first of the Corinthians chapter 13. v. 1. 2.
Though I speak (says Paul) with the tongues of men and Angels, and have no
charity, I am become as sounding brass and a tinckling symball. And though I
have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries and all knowledge, and
though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have not
charity, I am nothing. And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and
though I give my body to be burnt, and have not charity, it profits nothing.
So that by the doctrine of Saint Paul all gifts are nothing without that grace
of love. And Saint James in the second chap. ver. 17. says, That faith without
works is dead, and that such as shall not relieve and help their Christian
brethren in their necessities, their Religion is not so good as that of the
devils, for they believe and tremble; for pure Religion and undefiled is to
visit the fatherless and the widow, and to releeve them in their necessities,
J am. 1. therefore they that are so far from relieving their brethren and doing
good to them and loving of them, as they do them all the evil they can,
pretend they what they will, they are no Saints. Yea, Saint John also in his
first Epistle says ver. 10. In this the children of God are manifes;t and the
children of the devil, whosoever does not righteousness is not of God,
neither he that loves not his brother; For this is the message that ye heard
from the beginning, that we should love one another, not as Cain who was of
that wicked one and slew his brother; All they therefore that work not
righteousness toward their neighbors, but do them evil and sl^y and murder
them in their reputations and honor, they are no Saints; but such are the
Il-dependents notwithstanding all their gifts, as all their practices declare;
for they do all manner of evil in word and deed against their neighbors in
persecuting them continually with their tongues and pens, and by all
reproachful actions as daily experience teaches all men.

And here I shall take an occasion to bring to the memory of the Il dependents
some passages of their uncharitable dealing toward my self lately, that all
men may see how unjust and partial judges they are, and how they upon all
opportunities will condemn any Presbyterian for that which they count a
pleasantery and an elegancy or matter of mirth in their own mouths. The story
briefly is this.

When the Earl of Strafford was in question before the great Council of the
Kingdom, the high Court of Parliament, as if that supreme tribunal had wanted
either judgment or prudence and sufficient understanding and knowledge for the
trial of a Delinquent, or had wanted courage or resolution or a mind to
execute justice against so eminent an offender as he was, who notwithstanding
carried on the whole business with such wisdom and moderation and in so fair
a way, as by which the Parliament has gained an immortal fame to the worlds
end; yet at that time those of the Il-dependent party were the chief agents of
all those tumults at Westminster, who made it their employment daily to run
thither to cry for justice against the Earl, abusing him though then in the
hands of authority, with all the reproachful words that with the tongues of
men could be uttered, as all the standers by can witness, describing him from
all the parts of his body, and from every one of them gathering some presage of
evil that should first be acted by him, and that should finally bring him to
an evil and untimely end, and this for the most part was the theme of all
their spiteful discourse concerning him as he was carried both to and from the
Parliament: Amongst other of their expressions, they said, he looked like the
belly of a toad and that his teeth stood in his head like a pot-fish, and that
he was so rotten with the pox, that if they could not by their clamours
procure justice against him, yet they comforted themselves in this, that he
could not continue long; for said they he will fall apeeces he is so rotten
with that noisome disease.

These and many other expressions they daily and openly*uttered against the
Earl, ever affirming that he was the ugliest man that ever they beheld.

This language I can depose I learned amongst them as never having heard it in
all my life from any man before that time; and they took no small pleasure in
venting these words upon all occasions, and they used them as the flowers of
their rhetoric, and it was thought neither blasphemy in them nor a lie nor any
scurrility, neither were there any then of that fraternity so severe, as to
think that any that used such words could not have the least dram of grace in
them. But upon their clamours and through their exorbitant insolences against
him, I being one day at Westminster waited for his passing by that I might see
what a hideous creature he was, that I might at another time say I had seen
him, and in beholding of him I heard their uncivil and reviling speeches
against him, but observed nothing in his looks and person, but had his actions
been as serviceable to the Kingdom as they were destructive to all the Kings
Dominions and to himself, there was nothing wanting in the man, either for
person or courtship, or any other accoutrements that might not have made him
lovely and venerable in any part of the world. And I may truly say this of him,
that he had more generosity in his look then half the Il-dependents that ever
I saw, were they put all together: but thus they did asperse him for his very
looks and complexion. And in the same manner they spoke of those Cavaliers that
accompanied the king when he came to the House of Commons to demand the five
Members, of all the which they said they looked like so many devils, furies
and feinds from Orco and Hell it sefe, and used all the odious expressions
people could imagine to set them forth: And of all the ministers of the Church
of England they say they are belly-gods and such as run from one end of the
Kingdom to another to get preferment and to do mischief.

Now upon an occasion not long since of a mutinous company of Il-dependents
that sought the life and blood of many honorable Members in the House of
Commons; and had entered into a wicked conspiracy to that end, whose immaculate
reputation notwithstanding they could not with all the breath of their
calumnies in the least thing blast; I say upon this occasion being cited and
commanded to appear at the Committee of Examinations about that business, and
coming thither I found such a rabble rout of odd fellows, that for the illness
of their looks, and the badnesse of their complexions, and the manner of their
behavior, I never saw the like, or any man that was there that I talked with,
as they are all ready to witness, they being so rude and uncivil toward all,
especially toward my self, they being also such a company of squanderling
fellows, not one of six of them having a cloak to his back as if they had come
only to make a tumult or an uprore, and therefore had laid aside all
impediments that might have hindered their activity, as those that stoned
Stephen, that they might be the more nimble, left their garments in other men's
keeping. When I saw so ^ude a company, and hearing withal that they were of
all Religions and that they had combined themselves together by swearing to
take away the life of many in the House of Commons, and that their business
might go on the better and with the greater success, that whiles some of them
were there acting of their parts in a disorderly and tumultuous manner; others
of them were in the city at a private Humiliation, a special day being set a
part to seek God, (as they said) that they might have justice done against some
of the Members of Parliament that were not favorers of the Il-dependents, as
Jezabell caused the Elders of Jezreell to call a Fast when she took away the
life of poor innocent Naboth.

This that I now say, was related unto me by one of that company that not long
after went out of the room, who was the only person I knew amongst them all.
But I not knowing the cause of such a concourse of uncivil people, demanded
the reason of it, and it was replied, that there was not a third part of those
that were to come up; for the whole city would appear there in that business
the day following, to demand justice against such and such as guilty of High
Treason, but that now they were seeking God and in private Fasts, and that some
were assembled in such a man's house, naming the party. In this formal manner
things were related unto me, as the righteous Judge of the whole world knows,
all which proceedings I suppose was to do evil to their neighbors.

Now when I had well viewed and considered all these men, and saw their
complections ^arre worse then that of the Earl of Strafford, and beholding all
their behavior, and seeing their incivility toward all men, and especially
toward my self, whom they causelessly reviled, saying, that they had kept me
from hanging not long since, and that I had lived on their alms, and that they
had prayed for my deliverance out of my troubles, and that now I was come home
with a vengeance unto them; for I was turned an Apostate, and a Persecutor of
the Saints, so that they could not in their hearts pray for me, and many other
reviling speeches they used in the presence of many honorable Gentlemen, as
they can all witness, and that without giving them any occasion in word or
deed, as the standers by are ready to depose; I say, I seeing this their
disorderly behavior, and withal hearing them with open mouth traduce the
great Council of the Kingdom, and accusing them all of injustice, affirming,
that their proceedings were as tyrannical as those of Strafford, and the
Prelates, and not only saying it, but printing it in a Pamphlet, in the which
they had most shamefully and falsely belyed me, as the whole Parliament knew,
in all which they did evil to their neighbors. I in replying to that
Pamphlet, in my just defense, thought it an abuse of gravity to use it upon
such whibling Fellows, and chose rather by way of merriment to answer them,
then seriously to spend time about them: and therefore calling to mind some of
their own expressions against the Earl of Strafford, as that he had got a
blow with a French Coulstaffe, and that he looked like the belly of a Toad;
and remembering also, what they had spoke of the Cavaliers that came with the
King to the Parliament, that they looked like so many Furies and Fiends out of
Hell, and recollecting withal what they had often spoke of the Ministers of
the Church of England, how that they ran from one part of the Kingdom to an
other to get Church preferments, and regarded nothing but their bellies, and
sought nothing but the inslaving of the King himself, and all the Gentry and
Nobility of the Kingdom, that they might the more tyrannically domineer over
all the people, and how they had polluted all the Church of God, with their
idolatries and superstitions, and with all manner of heathenish and
antichristian defilements and abominations, and remembering also many of Martins
expressions against the Presbyters of the Church of England, in his blasphemous
Pamphlets, as that of the Arraignment of Mr. Persecution, and his Echo, and
his Hue and Cry, the which Books were entertained amongst all the
Independents, and read with great delight, they making themselves upon all
occasions merry with them, and especially with those expressions, wherein he
brings in all the Presbyters, and Master Simon Synod, with great ironteeth,
and such luxuriant tushes, as one might pick them with a Rowling-pin; and I
say, I calling to my remembrance all these their expressions, (in which they
greatly delighted, and pleased themselves, when at any time they inveighed
against the Presbytery, and studied to make them all odious to the people, as
they have done; in all which they have done evil to their neighbors;) thought
it not amiss to make choice of some of their own Rhetoric, which I did
purposely to find out the humor of the Cattle, and that all men might see the
partiality of the Independents, and indeed the vanity of all unstable men in
general, who are won with an apple, and lost with a nut, and will praise and
disprayse they know not for what, and one day commend that in themselves which
an other day they will condemn in any of a contrary mind, and at one time
extol a man for that which upon an other occasion they will censure him for,
with all manner of aggravations. The consideration of these things, and with
what disguised aspects, and hideous looks, and odd complexions they appeared
in all the rooms about the Committee, and how they grinned at me with their
teeth, made me in the description of them use the same expressions that they
had formerly done of Strafford, and the Cavaliers, and the Presbyters of the
Church of England, when both in their countenance and actions they paralleld
them, and say they looked like so many furies, and like the belly of a Toad,
and as if they had got a blow with a French Coulstaffe, and that one might
pick some of their teeth with a Bedstaffe, all which were their own
expressions; and as they accused the Presbyters for belly gods, so they also
were very sensible of good cheer, and that as the Presbyters had with their
superstitions polluted the Church, so they did pollute them with their
scummering and pissing in them; and that as they sought to inslave the Gentry
and Nobility, and the whole Kingdom; so the Independets if they could but once
attain the mastery would do no less; and for this my so speaking I had very
good reason, being well acquainted with their language and dialect, having
often heard some of them say, that the Gentry and Nobility had been the cause
of all the miseries of the Kingdom, and that if they continued in their
greatness, we might never look for happy days; nay, it can be proved that
some of the Independent Ministers have made it part of their employment, to run
from one place to an other to preach their errors, and in their Sermons to
bring the Gentry and Nobility into the hatred of the people, accusing them as
the cause of all our calamities, publicly declaming against them, as the
basest Gentry and Nobility in the world, saying in express words, that
howsoever Noble-mens Mothers were known, yet their Fathers were Grooms, or
some base fellows, and that they were nothing but dross, dress, dross; and
this they have spoke in great and crowded Assemblies; all the which speeches,
if they tend not to make the Nobility hateful to the people, and so by
consequence to the ruin and overthrow of them in time, I know not what can;
and whether all this be not to do evil to their neighbors, I leave it to
the judgment of others; and how many of the Independents have vilified the
great Council, let their books be examined and they will say I wrong them not
in any thing, when I affirm they labor to bring in a confusion of all things;
yea, their words daily at the very Parliament door can witness that howsoever
they pretend to honor the Parliament, yet they do accuse them of arbitrary and
tyrannical Government, and assert that the Lawyers in the Parliament have
betrayed the Liberties of the subject, and this is their daily language, and
that it may be the better known, it is all extant in their printed Books, by
all which they do evil to their neighbors. Now then if I, in my just defense
made use of their own expressions to set down the wickedness of their ways,
and to discover their bad intentions, there was no just cause why any rational
man should condemn me for it, for ridentem dicere verum quid vetat? Now that
the Independents have so severely censured me causelessely for this, they show
they are altogether partial and very unjust Judges; and whiles they do the
greatest evil unto men, that can possibly by the malice of men be done unto
them which no true Saints do, for they do no evil to their neighbors, as
the Spirit of God says; yet they will condemn others, for but making use
truly of such expressions (as they themselves have falsely and causelessely
used against others); for I in discribing of them and their proceedings expressed
my self but in their own dialect, and yet they fill the whole Kingdom with
clamours against me, for being but their scholar. The time was, when I writ
my Letany for to make my self and my fellow Prisoners merry in our bands, that
when many grave men liked it in private, yet dissuaded me from making of it
public, that those that are now the great Sticklers of the Independent party,
against all the counsel of my grave friends, persuaded me to print it,
protesting, that they thought it would do the Prelates more mischief then any
book that was seriously penned against them, and therefore entreated me by
all means, that I would publish it; yea, they offered me to set it forth upon
their own charges and costs; and through their importunity they prevayled with
me to give them the copy, and it was printed, and liked so well of by that
party, as they commended me with all the praises men could extol and magnify
a man with, as can be proved, and they have often professed unto me, that they
thought it was the best way of dealing with any enemies of the Church, and
therefore I conceive that Martin uses so much of this method in his books. But
indeed there have bin many, and grave Divines that have writ many merry and
pleasant books against the Prelates in all ages and nations, which have
discovered their vanities more then any thing that was seriously writ, by which
means many personages of eminent quality, as well as those of low degree, have
come to the knowledge of the wickedness of the Papal Hierarchy, which had
they been seriously penned no man would have regarded; yea, the holy Prophets
and divine Penmen have made themselves merry with the vanity of the false
Prophets, and great men of their time, many presidents of the which might be
produced out of sacred writ, so that there is no sin in writing pleasantly
against any such as go about to seduce and mislead the people, and alienate
them from their duty toward God, and their obedience to those that are in
authority, and from their duty and love to their brethren, all which are
capital evils, and which no true Saints will perpetrate.

Now I say, in this that the Independents did so well like of my Letany, and
the merry passages in that book, and are so highly offended at my mirth in my
just defense against them, that are equally guilty with those they most
mortally hate, and in that they so harshly accuse those expressions in my
book, which I have but borrowed from them, saying, that none that uses such,
can have a dram of grace in them, in all this they are very partial, and
unjust Judges, and give unrighteous judgment against their neighbor, which is
to do evil to their neighbor, which all true Saints will not do; and they
may remember that the Lord in the 29. of of Isaiah, condemned such as made a
man an offender for a word: But of all these things in their due place, When I
upon an other occasion shall answer to the moderate checks, wherein I shall make
it appear, had those expressions been mine own, there had been no blasphemy
in them, without it be esteemed blasphemy with them, to compare a company of
rude and rebellious wicked people to a good creature of God, when as the Holy
Ghost compares such to a Dog returning to his vomit, and to a Sow wallowing in
the mire; withal I shall then make it evident, that the conspiracy of Corah,
Dathan and Abiram was not greater against Moses and Aaron, then this
confederacy of the Ill-dependents at that time against some of the honorable
Members of the Parliament. But letting pass their partiality in many other
things toward their own party, in whom they can see no sin, I will go on
to the other characters of true Saints indeed, as they are set down by the
Spirit of God: the third of which, in this verse, is that they receive not a
reproach against their neighbors.

The true Saints, says the Holy Ghost, take not up a reproach against their
neighbors, they will neither hear much less entertain or receive an evil
reproach or calumny against their neighbors, for they have learned better
things out of Gods holy word, as in Exodus 23. verse 1. where the Lord speaking
to his own people, and all true Saints, says, Thou shall not receive or raise
a false report; put not thou thy hand with the wicked, to be an unrighteous
witness. Neither is there any thing more forbidden through the whole
Scripture, then whispering, and tale-bearing, as all the Proverbes, and indeed
all the Prophetical and apostolical writings can witness, so that all such
as either raise, or receive false reports, or reproaches against their
neighbors, in Gods esteem, are no true Saints, but wicked men and unrighteous
wretches; for so the Lord proclameth all such; and a greater unrighteousness
and sin toward men, there cannot be then to rob them of their good name,
which is to them as a precious ointment, and better then gold or silver, or
great riches, Proverbs 22. verse 1. Ecclesiast. the 7. verse 1. and hence it
was that David compares the tongues of reproachful men to Spears, Arrows, and
Swords, and all instruments of death; for by their calumnies they wounded and
murdered the reputation of their innocent neighbors, and killed them whiles
they were alive* which is the worst of all mortal deaths: and therefore the
holy Prophet though otherwise a valiant man, and undaunted, yet often
professes, that they had brake his heart with their reproaches; and truly a
sorer affliction in this life cannot lite upon any men, then to be wounded in
their good name, and to have their due honors and praises taken from them, and
to be made vile amongst the people, which is the greatest of worldly evils, as
all judicious and impartial men will easily judge; for there is no fence or
ward against calumnies in the schools either of wit or art; and all such as
either raise such reports against their neighbors, or receive a reproach, and
harbor any evil thoughts against them, and such as tend to the wounding of
their good names and fames, are all in Gods Dialect reputed no Saints; for the
true Saints says the Holy Ghost, take not up a reproach against their
neighbors; for thus the Lord has declared himself in his holy word
concerning all such men as either raise or receive a reproach against their
brethren, asserting that they are no Saints.

Now when the Il-dependents make it their daily practice, not only to receive
reproaches against their ordinary neighbors and brethren, but against both the
Magistrates, Ministers and all their Presbyterian brethren both Scottish and
English, as all the Pamphlets of John Lilburne and my brother Burton and all
the other writings and words and the very Sermons of those of the Il-dependent
party and all their proceedings do daily witness, it is sufficiently evident
that they are no Saints: For the true Saints and all such as are Saints indeed,
receive not a reproach against their neighbors. Yea it is well known and can
be proved that they hunt after reproaches against their innocent neighbors,
and will not only entertain into their companies, but even into their new
gathered Churches such infamous persons as have been a shame and dishonor to
all their kindred, and such as continue still in their wicked and ungodly
practices; and only for this, that they can impudently and wickedly reproach
their neighbors and raise an evil report against them; all this I say can
sufficiently be proved. Nay some of them have been heard say, when they have
railed at and reviled some godly Presbyterian Ministers that opposed the errors
and novelties of the times, when they were demanded what evil they knew by
them, and what they could blame in their lives and conversations; I say when
this question has been propounded unto them, they have replied, this is the
mischief and spite of it that they are unblameable in their lives: then the
which there could not be a more wicked, malicious and unchristian expression,
by which they declare unto all men that it troubled and perplexed them that
there was no evil in their lives by which they might justly defame them; so
that it is evident to all men that it is matter of rejoicing amongst the
Il-dependents when they hear of any failings in their Presbyterian brethren
contrary unto the custom and practice of the people of God and the true Saints
in all ages; for they receive not a reproach against their neighbor;
innumerable instances of this nature might be produced against the
Il-dependents, but that their practices are so obvious to all those that are
acquainted with them, or but come in their companies; for a man shall not be
half an hour in any of their societies but he shall hear them either reproach
the Parliament or their Proceedings, or inveigh against some of the Generals
of our Armies, or speak against the reverend Assembly of Divines and against
all the Presbyterians their brethren, or against the Scots; and all that they
speak of them or any of them, tends to their reproach or infamy, so that they
do not only receive reproaches against their innocent neighbors that live
harmlesly by them, but they raise up reproaches against them and print them,
yea against the whole city that has deserved so well from Church and State, and
only for that they desire to keep their Covenant with their God, and which they
have solemnly taken, lifting up their hands and hearts to the most high, and
vowed to perform, which will be for their immortal praise; and yet for this
cause only and no wrong done or attempted against them, they can in the Great
Court of the Kingdom and in print also reproach them all and accuse them of
black choler, yea blackcoat choler, as if they were the most malicious,
rancorous and envyous wicked men in the world, which is so unsufferable a
reproach against the great city of the Kingdom as yet before these our times
never saw the light.

Now if these men at their pleasure will causlessely traduce and that publicly
and in print, men in authority and men that have deserved so well from the
Church of God and the whole Kindome, What may any man imagine will not these
men do and plot in private to reproach their harmless neighbors when they
thus daringly and prodigiously reproach them in public and that in print? So
that I may conclude and that truly of them, Except they seriously and cordailly
repent of this their wicked dealing toward their brethren, this character of
the Saints also will not belong unto the Independents; for the true Saints,
neither raise nor receive a false report or reproach against their neighbors,
nor assent to any that do either.

And this shall suffice to have spoke of the three Characters of all true
Saints indeed contained in the third verse of this 15. Psalm. There are yet
other four in the ensuing verses, three of which I will run over briefly, they
being all things of practice and well known to all men: And they are these; In
whose eyes a vile person is contemned: and he honors them that fear the
Lord: and he that swears to his own hurt and changes not.

The first of these Characters, is, to contemn a vile person.

The second is, to honor such as fear the Lord.

The third is, to swear to his own hurt and change not.

Those therefore that are Saints indeed, in whose lives and conversation these
three Characters are evidently visible and apparent; and those that either
countenance vile persons, and honor not such as fear the Lord, or break their
vows, promises and covenants with either God or men, they in Gods repute are
not Saints indeed, pretend they what they will, but are wicked and ungodly men
and such as bring down the wrath of God upon the place where they live: For as
Solomon says, By the blessing of the righteous the city is saved, so by the
mouth of the wicked it is overthrown. Prove. 11. ver. 11. Wicked and ungodly men
are the cause of the ruin of Cities and Countries; according to that of Saint
Paul the second of Timothy chap. 3. ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. This know also (says
he) that in the last days perilous times shall come; for men shall be lovers
of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to
Parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, covenant-breakers,
false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good,
traitorous, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God,
having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof, from such turn
away: For of this sort are they which creep into widows houses, and lead
captive silly women laden with sins, led away with diverse lusts, etc. In the
which words, briefly we may take notice that the Apostle setting down the
reason of the perilousnesse and danger of the latter times, says not that
either in respect of wars, or pestilences, or famines, or earthquakes, or
inundations, or murders, slaughters, and robberies, or for any such
calamities, the lastdayes and times shall be perilous; but they shall be
perilous times, says he, for that men shall be lovers of themselves,
covenant-breakers, false accusers, covetous etc. So that self-love,
covetousness, false accusations of their brethren and covenant breaking etc.
are the cause that makes times perilous and brings down the judgments of God
upon any city and places where the Inhabitants are practicers of these sins:
And therefore the Apostle after he had forewarned all such as fear God of the
cause of all the evils that are coming upon the world, commands all the true
Saints indeed to take heed of such men, and in express words says, from such
turn away; have nothing to do with such, for all covenant-breakers and false
accusers, and such as countenance vile persons and honor not them that fear
the Lord, and such as keep not their word and promise with neither God nor men,
are the cause of the perils and miseryes that shall come upon the world, and
therefore all such are not Saints indeed, but ought to be abhorred and avoided
according to that of Solomon Prove. 4. ver. 14, 15. Enter not (says he) into
the path of the wicked, and go not into the way of evil men. Avoid it, pass
not by it, turn from it, and pass away. Here we see the wise man, as if he
could never have given caution enough to all his scholars, by many
reduplications of his words gives all the people of God a strict charge not so
much as to company with such men: and that for the many reasons set down in the
following verses; but this reason specified by Saint Paul may suffice, who
says, That all covenant-breakers, and false accusers and self-seekers are the
causes of perilous times: and so are all such, in whose eyes a vile person is
not contemned, and who honor not such as fear the Lord, and who keep not their
covenant and promise: For all such are no Saints in Gods esteem, and therefore
a wicked generation of men and such as make the times wherein they live
perilous and dangerous, and therefore ought by all the true Saints and godly
to be shunned and avoided.

Now if it can be proved that the Independents be such, as in whose eyes a vile
person is not contemned, and such as honor not those that fear the Lord, and
such as keep not their word and promise neither with God nor man, but are
notorious covenant-breakers, or assenters to all such persons, then it will
follow that they are not Saints indeed: For the Characters of the true Saints
are to contemn a vile person, and to honor those that fear the Lord, and to
keep their vows and promises both with God and men; for not only the Psalmist
thus describes the true Saints, but Saint John also says, By this men are
known to be Saints if they love the brethren, by this says Christ, ye shall be
known to be my Disciples, that is Saints indeed, if ye love one another: I
shall therefore demand of any well grounded Christian, Whether they believe
that those that run from place to place, and join with any wicked and ungodly
men and seek their advancement, and that to places of the greatest trust in
the Kingdom, and prefer them before such as they daily acknowledge to be godly
and truly religious, and will run from Committee to Committee, to do the most
wicked and vile men and known Malignants any courtesy, and will both in word,
countenance and deeds favor and honor them; I demand I say, whether they
think that in such men's eyes as will do all these offices to wicked persons and
that in opposition to any of their godly brethren, and that will at any time
join with any such against either the godly and painful Ministers or their
Presbyterian brethren to defame them or do them any mischief or to remove them
from their places and livelyhoods, or for the hindering of their preferments,
yea and which is more for the hindering of the work of Reformation in the
Church: I demand I say of any truly godly Christian, whether they think that in
any such men's eyes as do all these offices and courtesies to wicked and ungodly
men, a vile person is contemned? when he daily sees the contrary that they
honor them and prefer them before such as fear the Lord; I am most assured he
will conclude and affirm, That in their eyes a vile person is not contemned.

Now that this is the daily practice of the Independents, I undertake upon my
life to prove it by a cloud of witnesses, and that there is not the vilest
person nor the wickedest wretch that they will not join with to do any of their
Presbyterian brethren a mischief, and that they will not give credit to in
falsely belying their brethren; yea it can be proved, that when the Independents
have been demanded by some godly and orthodox Ministers why they have left the
public Assemblies seeing there was now no ceremonies nor any thing in their
doctrine that they could find fault with, and they have replied, That it was
in regard that their Congregations were mixed, that tagg ragg and all sorts of
men were admitted to the Sacrament, with whom they could not join. Whereupon
the Ministers, that they might remove this scandal and offense, labored by
all means to persuade the people so to behave themselves as they might manifest
unto all men they were worthy communicants, otherwise professing unto them that
they durst not administer the communion unto them; and therefore for some
months abstained from the public administration of the Sacrament and used all
their best endeavor in that interim by their faithful and painful preaching
and exhortations, to fit all men for the better receiving of the Sacrament, and
that by this means they might gratify their tender consciences; I say in this
interim of time it shall be proved, that these Independents, who those godly
Ministers had such a desire to please, went unto these wicked and ungodly men
that the Ministers excepted against for their conversation as ungodly and
profane, and joined with them against their Ministers, saying unto them, What
will you give tithes and maintenance to such Ministers as shall thus deal with
you as to deny you the Sacrament of the Lords supper? surely were I in your
condition, and were I a Member of your Congregations, I would never own such a
man for my Minister, nor never give any allowance to any such as would not
administer the Sacrament unto me: By which practices of theirs they have made
those painful Ministers so odious to the people by joining with those wicked
varlots as they have not only deprived them of their livelyhoods and
maintenance, but so persecuted them with all manner of reproaches and evil
language, as they have forced them to leave their places and to wander about
the world to get themselves a poor living for the supportation of themselves
and their distressed families; by all which proceedings if the Independents do
not declare themselves to be such as countenance a vile person, and to be
enemies of those that fear the Lord, I know not what ever any men did to
deserve those Characters, by all which they proclaim themselves to be no true
Saints, if the Lord himself knows how to describe Saints indeed: This that I
have here related I shall by Gods assistance be able to prove by such witnesses
as against whom there can be brought no just exception.

And that all the Independents are notorious covenant-breakers, or assenters
unto such as violate their oaths and promises both to God and men, all the
Kingdom can witness for me, especially those Ministers of the Reverend
Assembly, with whom the dissenting brethren have brake all promises and solemn
agreements not once but many times; so that it would be a needless work to
expatiate any further, in proving them to be no Saints indeed, when they
manifest by all their practices that they neither walk uprightly nor work
righteousness, nor speak the truth in their heart, and when they backbite
their neighbors with their tongue and do evil unto them and receive a
reproach against their neighbors and countenance vile persons, and honor not
such as fear the Lord, and keep not their promises either with God or men; by
all which they declare unto the world that they are not Saints indeed, when all
these Characters are the badges only of wicked men, to do contrary to that
description of true Saints.

Now when all the Churches of the Congregationall way consist of such Members
as these are, it follows that they are mixed Assemblies as not consisting of
visible Saints, and therefore ought justly to be separated from and not to be
communicated with in holy things; and that from their own principles: For they
pretend they separate from our assemblies only because they are mixed of tagg
ragg and such Saints as Job would not set with the dogs of his flock.

Many other Arguments also might I here bring against both the Ministers and
people of the congregational way to prove them no visible Saints, and that not
from any private information or clandestine practices, but for open delinquency
and scandalous walking and that in the veiw of all men, and such as can be
proved by such personages, as against whom there can be no just exceptions. But
before I conclude this business let me say that which a learned man once
uttered reading Christ's Sermon upon the mount and the holy Evangelists, either
this is not the Gospel (says he) of Jesus Christ, or if it be the men now
living are no Christians: After the same manner I may truly say of those of the
Congregational way, that either this description of the true Saints is not the
word of God, or if it be, those of the Independent Assemblies are no Saints:
for there is no agreement between them and the description of those Saints
there specified, as all their practices sufficiently and apparently declare.

And now the fourth and last part of my Minor Proposition remains only to be
proved: viz. That the Independents and all those of the Congregationall way
despise their Christian Brethren and separate from them as being more holy then
they; which is so apparently true, as besides their words and Pamphlets in all
which they protest against us, as enemies of the Lord Jesus Christ and his
Kingdom and as an Antichristian brood, their daily practice declares it, who
have molded themselves into innumerable sucking Congregations which they term
the only true Churches, and have separated from our Aslemblies as from so many
Synagogues of Satan, for this is their language. So that it may be thought a
needless spending of time, to use any Arguments to evince that which is in the
view of all men, and which the Independents themselves avouch.

Having therefore thus proved all the parts and branches of my minor
proposition, the major being undeniable, the conclusion will necessarily
follow, That the Churches of the Congregationall way, are not true Churches
after the New Testament form, as not consisting of all visible Saints, but are
mixed Congregations, and therefore by truly godly people ought not to be
communicated with in holy things, and that from their own principles.

So that now, it is apparently evident to the judicious Reader from that I have
formerly spoke and from my brother Burtons words and from their own definition
of a Church, That neither the Church of Jerusalem, nor any of the Primitive and
Apostolical Churches, were true formed Churches after the New Testament form,
if my brother Burtons and I. S. his words and their definition of a Church* be
true, and that the very Churches of the Congregationall way, as not coming
within the bounds of that definition, are no right constituted Churches, as not
consisting of all visible Saints and communicating in all Ordinances, and which
is more, That if they will be right formed churches they must al be dependent.
All this I say is sufficiently proved f^o^ all the foregoing discourse to any
intelligible and impartial Reader in the which I have been the more large,
that if it be possible, I might undeceive the poor deluded people, and persuade
them to take no notice of them (as the Independents do not of those multitudes
baptized by John and Christ's disciples) as formed into a church or Churches
after the New Testament form: for the first formed Church we read of is Acts
the second, that consisted only of visible Saints, and yet had neither Deacons
nor Presbyters at that time, nor distinct Officers and Members united into one
Church body respectively, and wanted that part of Discipline also of casting
out corrupt Members (as my brother Burton asserteth page 10.) So that by this
it evidently follows, That those Congregations that consist of visible
Saints, though they have not distinct Officers within themselves and want
Discipline, may be true formed Churches after the New Testament form, as the
Church here of Jorusalem was, which at that time it was a true formed Church
(by my brother Burtons confession) had no Deacons, nor Elders nor dictinstion
of officers and members, nor that part of Discipline for casting out corrupt
Members, and yet I say notwithstanding it wanted all these things (by their own
concession) it was at that time a true formed church, and that because the
Members of that Church consisted of visible Saints: from all which I may draw
these two infallibleconclusions.

The First, that all such congregations as consist of visible Saints, such as
believe the Gospel, and make profession of the Christian Faith, and are
baptized, and continue steadfastly in the doctrine of the Apostles, in breaking
of bread, and in prayer, are true formed Churches after the New Testament
form; although they want both distinct Officers, and Members united into one
Church body respectively, and although they want that part of discipline for
casting out of corrupt Members. This first conclusion, I say, I infallibly
gather from the Independents doctrine.

The second is this, That whatsoever Congregations and Assemblies they be, that
have both distinction of Officers and Members, and Church discipline, and all
other outward performances, if the Members of them be not visible Saints, they
are not true formed Churches after the New Testament form; for all true formed
Churches after the New Testament form, are such as consist of visible Saints,
without which they are but shadows of Churches, and no true churches for
substance; but all the Independent congregations are such as only glory in
outward performances and consist not of visible Saints. Ergo. And this shall
suffice to have spoke to all that Mr Knollys I. S. and my Brother had to reply
against all my Arguments, for the proof of my first Proposition, viz. that
there were many Congregations and several Assemblies of believers in the
Church of Jerusalem, in the which they enjoyed all acts of worship, and all the
saving and sealing Ordinances amongst themselves, and that before the
persecution, and under the persecution, and after the persecution.

And now I come to what Master Hanserdo, I. S. and my Brother Burton have to
answer to my second, third and fourth Propositions ensuing; and after I have
dispatched that work, I will then in like manner reply to whatsoever either
Master Knollys, I. S. or my brother Burton have to say to all my Arguments
concerning the gathering of Churches, and touching the liberty of conscience,
or the toleration of all Religions; and because they are not so large in their
answers to them, as they were to my foregoing reasons; and to speak the
truth, speak little to the purpose, but for the overthrowing of their own
opinion, and for the corroborating of mine, I shall be the briefer in them. But
first, I will set down my Propositions, and show how far the Jndependents
assent unto them; and I will then also faithfully relate their own words, so
far as they are for their purpose, or any way make against my Arguments, or are
in any respect advantageous to their cause.

My second Proposition now follows, viz. That all these congregations and
several Assemblies made but one Church. And for proof of this I shall not
need to use many words, or any great dispute; for the brethren themselves
acknowledge, that all the believers in Jerusalem were all Members of that
Church, and they accord farther, that it was but one Church. And it is manifest
out of the holy Scripture; for it is said, they that were converted, were added
to the Church; and therefore Members of it, and that they continued in the
Churches communion, and in the Apostles doctrine, and put their estates in the
Churches common treasury, and those Officers for the Church; and all this (I
say) our brethren do acknowledge, and take this fellowship of these Members
for a pattern of ordinary Church Communion; and therefore this my second
assertion is without controversy, it being in express words set down in the
2, 3, 4, 5, 6. chapters of the Acts, and many places in the same Story, and
assented to by the brethren.

To this Proposition, and the Reasons of the same, Master Knollys in the
eleventh page of his Pamphlet thus replies. To which J also (says he)
consent; but the brethren have not acknowledged, neither bath the Doctor by
Scripture proved, that in this one Church of Jerusalem there were diverse
Congregations and several Assemblies of Believers; and therein I must manifest
my dissent from the Doctors opinion, promising him, if he shall soundly prove
it in express words of Scripture (which he has undertaken) I will acknowledge
it.

This is all Master Knollys has to say to this Proposition. I will first
therefore reply to him, and in doing that, insert my brother Burtons answer to
it, with what I. S. has to say, and answer to them all in order. Now whereas
Master Knollys affirms, that the brethren have not acknowledged, nor the
Doctor by Scripture proved that in this one Church of Jerusalem there were
diverse Congregations and several Assemblies of Believers; in all he says, I
am most assured all that shall without prejudice read my foregoing Arguments,
and seriously weigh and consider what my Brother Burton, Master Knollys, and I.
S. have written, will conclude, That Master Hanserdo is a man of very shallow
capacity, and of as little honesty, and no way to be credited in what either
he says or writes. Neither ought Master Knollys in this controversy
(especially when the debate is yet sub Iudice) to be both party, witness,
Jury and Judge, in his own cause, as all wise men will gather: and therefore I
leave it to the judgment of the learned, whether or no I have not by Scripture
sufficiently proved, there were many congregations, and several Assemblies of
Believers in that one Church; and whether I have not by express words of
Scripture, and from my brother Burtons and Master Knollys his own words
abundantly evinced it; all this, I say, I leave to the judgment of all
impartial and understanding Christians, who I am confident will grant that I
have sufficiently proved there were many congregations of believers in the
Church of Jerusalem; and therefore I challenge Master Knollys his promise, and
expect that he should acknowledge his error; and so relinquish his fond
opinion of Independency, which if he do not, he cannot be an honest man, and
a true Saint, as not keeping his word; for David describing a true Saint, Psalm.
15. verse 4. says of such an one, that he swears to his own hurt, and
changes not. Now if he be in the number of those Saints, and will keep his
promise, he will abandon his tenent of the congregationall way.

But because Master Knollys so peremptorily asserts, that the brethren have not
acknowledged that there were many congregations and several Assemblies of
Believers in the Church at Jerusalem; I shall desirehim and all those of his
fellowship to hear my brother Burton who esteems of himself as none of the
weakest brethren, but accounts himself a Champion, and therefore comes out
to dare all the world of Presbyterians; and yet he in the name of all that
Fraternity acknowledges, that there were many assemblies of Believers and
Saints in the Church of Jerusalem, and this his book is allowed of and highly
approved of by many of them: And if I have not been misinformed, it was
licensed by their Batcheler of the black-art of Il-dependency that shotten
hering in divinity, who allows of all their other Pamphlets and sets his
Imprimatur to them; So that what he licenseth is approved of by them all.

Now I desire Mr Knollys and I. S. and all those of his society to listen unto
their great Rabbi, old Harry, my courteous and learned brother, whose words are
these in the ninth Page of his Answer.

The first formed Church (says he) we find is in the second of the Acts,
which though consisting of five thousand, yet it was one entire particular
Church and not Churches; and they continued daily (...) with one accord in one
place together (v* 1.) and in the Temple (ver. 44. 46.) growing from an hundred
and twenty (Acts 1. 15.) to three thousand more (chap. 2. 41.) and then in all
five thousand (chapter 4. 4.) and all these but one Church which assembled together
to hear the word in the Temple, and though they wanted a convenient place so
spacious as wherein to break bread or to receive the Lords Supper all together,
so as they were constrained to sever themselves into diverse companies in
several private houses to communicate, yet this severing was not a dividing of
this Church into so many distinct formal Churches or Church bodies, being but
so many branches of one and the same particular Church, etc.

These are my brother Burtons words in the name of all his brethren, and
therefore they may abundantly satisfy Mr Knollys and all men that the brethren
have acknowledged there were many Congregations of believers in the Church of
Jerusalem. But for the farther confirmation of this truth, that the brethren
have acknowledged there were several assemblies of believers in the Church of
Jerusalem, I will unto the testimony of my brother Burton add the testimony
likewise of another faithful brother against whom I presume Mr Knollys can
have no just exception; so that this truth being confirmed by the mouth of two
approved and seraphicall witnesses, the brethren can never doubt of it any
more: and this witness is one Saint Hanserdo one of Saint Georges for England
his Chaplains, a man worthy of esteem who usually preaches on horseback to
the Country Courtiers all the the truth (as he said) of the Gospel; And
therefore I know Mr Knollys will give great heed to Saint Hanserdo's testimony
concerning this matter, and he touching this point in the tenth page of his
learned book says that the Apostles and all the Believers in the Church of
Jerusalem met together with one accord in one place, to wit, the Temple, and in
Solomon's Porch, and brake bread from house to house domatim, and thus they did
quotidie day by day etc.

From the which two testimonies the one of my brother Burton the other of Saint
Hanserdo, all intelligible men may easily gather, that there is very little
credit at any time to be given to what Mr Knollys or those of his party shall
affirm either concerning the judgment of their brethren or what they shall
relate concerning other men: For he in the name of them all asserteth these two
things.

The first touching themselves: viz. that the brethren (meaning all the
Illdependents) have not acknowledged that there were many congregations in that
one Church at Jerusalem.

The second concerning my self, of whom he says, that the Doctor has not by
Scripture proved that there were several assemblies of Believers in that one
Church.

Now for the latter of his assertions, I have not only from Scripture proved
it, but from my brother Burton and Master Hanserdos their own concessions made
it good: viz. that there were many Congregations of Believers in the Church of
Jerusalem: And therefore I do to all the world accuse Master Knollys of calumny
and dishonesty.

And for the first of his assertions: viz. That the brethren have not
acknowledged it, for the conviction of him of an apparent untruth in this, my
brother Burton and Saint Hanserdoes testimonies do it for me; for in their
above mentioned words, and that in the name of all the Independents, and that
in books approved of by many of that way, in those I say my brother Burton
conceptis verbis says, that though it was but one entire Church, yet for want
of a convenient place so spacious as where to break bread, they were
constrained to sever themselves into diverse companies in several private houses
to communicate. And Saint Hanserdos his testimony is as full as my brother
Burtons, for he says the Apostles and believers met day by day in the Temple
and in Solomon's Porch and brake bread from house to house, that is they did
communicate from house to house or in every house; So that Saint Hanserdos
witness to prove many assemblies is most evident. So that both these brethren
in the name of all their fraternity acknowledge, there were may Congregations
of Believers in the Church of Jerusalem, and that in several private houses,
and my brother Burton says moreover, that they were so many branches of one
and the same particular Church.

Now I refer my self to all the world, whether there be any regard at any time
to be given either to Master Knollys or any of his faction, when he and they at
pleasure dare publish such notorious untruths as these, for he in the name of
all the Independents affirms, that the brethren have not acknowledged that
there were many congregations of Believers in the Church of Jerusalem, when my
brother Burton notwithstanding and Saint Hanserdo have in express words, and
that in the name of all their fraternity asserted, That when there were but
five thousand yea but three thousand believers, for the largnesse of the Church
at that time and for want of so spacious a room as could contain them all to
enjoy all acts of worship, they were then forced to sever themselves into
diverse companies and that in several private houses and to break bread from
house to house. So that for Mr Knollys and those of his way they are not to be
regarded: for all they of that fraternity are generally so given to tell
untruths, that for my part, I never believe them; neither when they say true,
nor when they ly; for they will ly by the day and by the night.

But out of my brother Burtons and Hanserdoes words and that in the name of all
their brethren, I desire the Reader to observe what they both grant. And first
to consider my brother Burtons expressions, for he in them accords to these
three things: viz.

First, That the Church of Jerusalem was but one particular Church.

Secondly, He acknowledges that there were diverse companies of Believers and
that in several private houses in that Church, which did daily communicate in
Gods Ordinances severally.

Thirdly, He asserteth that all those companies in those several private
houses were but so many branches in that one and the same particular Church.

Now in the second place I shall desire all men duly to weigh Saint Hanserdoes
words in his reply to my second proposition, and there he aaknowledgeth that
the Church of Jerusalem was but one Church, notwithstanding in the same page he
grants that that Church consisted of diverse Congregations; for he
acknowledges, that they had a congregation in the Temple, that is one place;
and he grants also, they had an Assembly in Solomon's Porch, that is another
place, and he acknowledges moreover, that they brake bread from house to house
(...) domatim; and thus they did (...) quotidie day by day: Here Hanserdo
assigns innumerable places more then the Temple and Solomon's Porch wherein
the believers at Jerusalem communicated and partaked in all acts of worship,
and that every day, and those places were as he assigns them (...) from house
to house or in every house, for so it is translated by all interpreters and
confessed by Mr Knollys; So that when Saint Hanserdo has acknowledged that the
believers in Jerusalem were in such multitudes that besides the Temple and
Solomon's Porch, wherein they met every day to hear the word, they brake bread
and heard the word daily also from house to house and in every house, then he
in this does accord with my brother Burton, that there were diverse
Congregations and several Assemblies of Believers in the Church at Jerusalem,
which Master Knollys nevertheless denies, affirming, that the brethren have
not acknowledged it, nor the Doctor by Scripture proved it, when Saint Hanserdo
nevertheless Vna fidelia duos parietes, has done both.

For first, he acknowledges there were many Congregations there.

Secondly, he proves it by Scripture as out of the first 5 chapters of the
Acts: So that Master Knollys I hope will not hereafter say that the brethren
have not acknowledged that there were many Congregations in Jerusalem.

But I do verily believe that Master Knollys and all the brethren of the
Congregationall way, when they shall duly and maturely consider what my brother
Burton and Saint Hanserdo have acknowledged, will give them little thanks for
their pains; for their doctrine is not only contrary to all the Independents
principles, but totally subverteth and overthrows the tenent of the
Congregationall way: For all the Independent Ministers through the World preach
up and publish in all their Pamphlets, that in all the Primitive Churches there
were no more believers in any one of them, no not in the very Church of
Jerusalem it self, then could all meet together at one time and in one place
to communicate in all Acts of Worship: And this doctrine they have broached to
all people wheresoever they come, persuading them that this is Gods way, and
the Gospel way, and the right way of gathering Churches, and therefore they
call it the Congregationall way, affirming, that all the Apostolical Churches
we read of in the holy Scriptures, each of them in their several Cities and
Precincts consisted but of as many as did all meet in one Congregation, and
this they call Gods Ordinance. And many of the brethren both assembled and not
assembled, have been heard say and promise, that if it could evidently be made
appear unto them, that there were many Congregations and diverse Assemblies of
Believers either in the Church at Jerusalem or in any other of the Apostolical
Churches, that then they would relinquish their opinion of Independency, and
acknowledge that the Congregationall way had not any warrant and footing in
Gods word, and that the opinion of the Presbyterians concerning the combining
of many Congregations under one Presbytery and their Dependency upon it, and
their making of a subordination of many Assemblies under one Aristocracy to be
governed by the Common Council and joint consent of many Elders, was Gods
Ordinance.

This I say, all the Independents that I have ever talked with or or by
relation heard of, have promised and by protestation engaged themselves, that
if it could be made appear unto them by the word of God, that there were many
Congregations of Believers either in Jerusalem or in any of the Primtive
churches that then the controversy amongst the brethren would be at an end.

Now although I have in the foregoing treatise sufficiently evinced and made it
evident, that there were many Congregations of Believers in the Church of
Jerusalem, and that they were all dependent upon that one Presbytery; yet
because it is the chief point of controversy between us, and the which being
sufficiently cleared, is that, that will put an end to the whole debate; and
because also Mr Knollys has so peremptorily affirmed, That the brethren have
not acknowledged that there were diverse Assemblies of Believers there, for his
farther satisfaction and for the satisfaction of all those of his party, and
for the satisfaction of all men, and that at last the brethren may be the more
fully convinced of the error of their ways, and that the simple people also
may be undeceived, I shall desire them all seriously to weigh and consider what
both my brother Burton and Saint Hanserdo are forced to confess (though I must
needs say thus much of them both, That they withhold much of the truth in
unrighteousness, as I shall by and by make appear) but this (I say) I desire
all men advisedly to weigh, what they are both constrained to acknowledge.

First therefore I will again set down my brother Burtons words, and in the
second place I will repeat Saint Hanserdoes expressions: For my brother Burton
his words are these, They were (says he) constrained to sever themselves into
diverse companies, in several private houses to communicate; and which is
more, he grants, That those several companies were but so many branches of
that one and the same particular Church, etc. thus he. Master Hanserdoes words
are these, All the believers (says he) in the Church of Jerusalem, met
together with one accord in one place; to wit, the Temple, and in Solomon's
Porch, and brake bread from house to house, and that day by day: these are
Saint Hanserdoes own words. Now I shall desire all judicious Christians duly to
consider both their expressions; for all men know, that branches either of a
vine or tree, as we see it in the fifteenth of S. John, and in the eleventh of
the Romans, they are all dependent upon the Vine and root, as drawing life and
sap from them; for being severed and cut off they do forthwith dye and wither.
Now then, if according to my brother Burtons opinion and learning, and if his
similie be good, That there is the same relation between the several companies
in those several private houses and the whole particular Church in Jerusalem,
that is between either the branches of the Vine or Tree, which ever depend upon
their stock or root for sap and life, and for the completing of them: then I
say, by my brother Burtons own concession, There were not only many
Congregations of believers in that Church, but they all of them were dependent
of that one particular Presbyterian Church, and were all subordinate unto it,
and were to be regulated and governed Communi consilio Presbyterorum. And the
same may be concluded out of the words of Saint Hanserdo.

And whether this be not true or no, I refer it to the judgment of all such
Christians, as have not either morgaged their reason; and put it out of their
own possession, or absolutely sold the fee simple of their understanding; and
to all such I say, as have not been prodigal in either of these kinds, or
have not forfeited all their wit and knowledge, and so are to be begged for
punies and fools, I refer my self as most assured they will all say and
affirm, That my brother Burton with one stroke of this his Phocions hatchet
has cut in two the long thread of all the alribiadian fluent, and luxuriant
rhetorications (to usurp his own words) of all his brethren of the
Congregationall way, by which they bound and tied up their ill-shrouded
Ill-dependency, and by this has given a fatal stroke to that their Hydra, and
indeed utterly overthrown their whole Congregationall Fabric, and the same
they will conclude concerning Saint Hanserdo.

Yea, I dare in this controversy between us, make my brother Burtons and Mr
Knollys their greatest friends, and my greatest enemies arbiters and judges,
especially if they be not so wedded to their own resolves and opinions, that be
they never so adulterated, they are yet resolved never to give them a bill of
divorce; except I say, they be men desperately besotted and doting upon their
filthy and deformed novelties: were they I say, much their friends, and very
much my enemies, I dare leave the deciding of this business and difference
between us unto their judgment and determination. And I shall rest most
assured, and be ever confident if my brother Burtons and Hanserdoes words be
true, and to be credited, and if they both stand to what they have said, to
wit, That there were many companies of believers in the Church of Jerusalem,
and that in several houses, where they did communicate, and that all these
congregations were but so many branches of that one particular Church, which
brake bread from house to house or in every house, (as they both affirm) that
they will all accord, judge, and conclude, That they both of them have
overthrown the Doctrine of Independency and that of the Congregationall way,
and delucidately proved, That the Church of Jerusalem was Dependent, and
Presbyterianly and Classically governed. And withal, by that I have now said,
I hope that Mr Knollys himself will in time be convinced of his error, and
will not hereafter so boldly affirm, That the brethren have not acknowledged
it; especially when he shall deliberately read what my brother Burton and Saint
Hanserdo that faithful brother and witness has written.

But as I accused my brother Burton and Mr Knollys before of juggling and of
indirect dealing in this so serious and weighty a matter: so here I will make
it good; for,

First, They make all the believers of Jerusalem, till the receiving of the
gifts of the holy Ghost (which we read of Act. 2. ver. 1.) to amount to no more
then an hundred and twenty names, and so would persuade the poor ignorant
people, that there were no more believers then in Jerusalem, which I affirm is
a great wickedness in them both, so to betray the truth and to give the spirit
of God the lie, when it is manifest out of all the Evangelists, that there were
infinite multitudes of believers then in Jerusalem all inhabitants there; and
when in express words, in the second of the Acts it is said, That there were
devout men and true worshippers from out of all the Nations under heaven, at
that time in that City.

Secondly, whereas it is related in the second chapter, That there were three
thousand souls at the first miracle and sermon of Peter converted, besides many
others that the Lord added daily to the Church, ver. 47. And whereas it is
recorded in the fourth chap. That there were five thousand men more converted
by another miracle and Sermon: and whereas it is storied in the 5 chap. upon
the miraculous and fearful death of Ananias and Saphira his wife, and through
the other signs and wonders the Apostles wrought, that believers were more
added unto the Lord multitudes both of men and women, v. 14. mark I pray the
expression, it is said, there were multitudes; now multitudes among the Romans
and in all nations is ever taken for turba or agmen, a great company, that is,
for a great Assembly or Congregation; and here the word of God affirms in the
plural number, That by that miracle and by those other wonders of the
Apostles, multitudes both of men and women were added to the Lord, that is to
say, many more great Congregations and Assemblies of believers then were before
were added to that Church in Jerusalem, all this I say is evident out of those
words.

And whereas it is farther related in the sixth chapter ver. 7. that the word of
God increased and the number of the Disciples multiplied in Jerusalem greatly,
and a great company of the Priests were obedient to the faith. And whereas in
diverse other places of the Acts it is witnessed that there was increase upon
increase of believers in that Church: And whereas in the 21. of the Acts it is
recorded that there were many ten thousand believers there and all Inhabitants;
my Brother Burton and Mr Knollys in their enumeration of the Believers in
Jerusalem at first and last make them but five thousand in all. My brother
Burtons words are these: Growing (says he) from an hundred and twenty (Acts 1.
15.) to three thousand more (chap. 2. ver. 41.) and then in all five thousand
(chap. 4. ver. 4.) and all these but one Church. Master Knollys his words are
these, Page 8, Those places in Matthew and Mark and Luke (says he) tell us of
very many who were baptized by John and by Christ's Disciples; but do not
declare how many of these baptized persons were of the Church of Jerusalem; and
for ought I know (says he) or the Doctor either, many of those baptized
persons might be in the other Churches of Iudaea, yea the most of them and but
few in Jerusalem, it may be no more but those hundred and twenty mentioned Acts
1. 13, 14, 15. to whom were added about three thousand souls. And in the ninth
page he says the text well considered only holds forth, that the number of
men was made up five thousand. Thus he. So that in the reckoning of my brother
Burton and Master Knollys, the whole number of believers in Jerusalem at first
and last was but five thousand in all.

Now I refer my self unto the judicious and godly Reader whether these men
have not made false Musters or no to use some of I. S. his language, and
whether or no my brother Burton and Master Knollys have not withheld the truth
from the people in unrighteousness, Romans 1. And whether they have not done
most sacrilegiously, unjustly and wickedly in thus robbing the Church at
Jerusalem of so many thousand Members?

For first they subduct and cut off all those that were baptized by John the
Baptist and Christ's disciples, and all those devout men, and true worshippers
in Jerusalem spoke of in the second chapter, and take no notice of them.

Secondly, whereas it is related in the second chapter, verse 47. that besides
those three thousand souls that were converted by Peter's Sermon, that the Lord
added daily unto the Church such as should be saved, they subduct and cut off
those likewise, and make no mention of them. And whereas in the fourth chapter
the number of those that were converted by the second miracle, and sermon, is
related to be about five thousand men, they cut off three thousand of these
also; and whereas in the fifth chapter it is said, that Believers were more
added to the Lord, multitudes both of men and women, that is to say many more
great Assemblies and Congregations then were before, all those in like manner
they subduct and pare off: and whereas in the sixth chapter it is related, that
the word of God increased, and the number of the disciples multiplied in
Jerusalem greatly, and a great company of the Priests were obedient to the
faith, all those likewise they defalcate with all the other increases of
multitudes the Scripture speaks of, with the many ten thousands recorded in the
21. chapter, neither do they make any mention of them, or take any notice of
them, but casting up the whole sum, they bring in the total reckoning and
number of all the Believers in the Church of Jerusalem at first and last to be
but five thousand in all; and all this they have done out of their perverse
wilful and obstinate wickedness, to the end they may deceive the ignorant and
simple people, (which is a most horrid sin and wickedness in them thus to
juggle) who they could not delude, if they were indeed truly informed, and did
not they and their accomplices withold the truth from them in unrighteousness;
for were the people truly informed, that in the Church of Jerusalem there were
many ten thousands; al intelligible, yea, but ordinary understanding men and
women, yea very children would conclude, That they could not then all possibly
meet in one congregation or a few to partake in all acts of worship, and
therefore of necessity they must be distributed into diverse congregations and
assemblies, all which notwithstanding made still but one Church, and therefore
they would gather that they must necessarily be combined under one Presbytery,
and be dependent upon it. This I affirm every rational creature would from
grounded reason be able to gather, if they were rightly instructed; whether
therefore it be not the highest point of dishonesty, both in my brother Burton,
Master Knollys, and all those Teachers of the congregationall way, thus to
abuse the people, and whether this be not in them all to withold the truth in
unrighteousness, I leave it to the judgment of all the truly godly, and such
as make conscience of their ways and dealings.

And now I come to what I. S. that Groll has to say to my second Proposition;
for he must be answered also, or else he will exceedingly triumph. In the 11.
page of his Flagelli he has these words by way of answer. I am not (says
he) satisfied by any thing that has been alleged by the Doctor, that the
Church of Jerusalem consisted of many congregations and assemblies, and that
upon the scruples before instanced. Thus I. S. expresses his non-satisfaction
in that place; and in the tenth page for farther answer, he thus declares
himself. First (says he) you say the brethren themselves acknowledge, that all
the Believers in Jerusalem were all Members of that Church. If you mean that
Church spoke of Acts the 15. 4. J deny, and say it is a gross presumption, and
begging of the question, to say that we acknowledge all the Believers in
Jerusalem, to be Members of that one ministering Church, especially if you
reckon all John's Disciples and converts to those Believers: for as there was a
good space of time after there were multitudes of Believers, ere there was such
a Church; so for any thing has yet been brought to the contrary, it is
probable* enough, that the true Believers, which were not so many, after you
have cut off John's converts, I mean those that did stick in John's Baptism,
which were multitudes and temporary Believers, which ceased to walk with
Christ, which were not a few and strangers, which did afterward disperse
themselves into several countries, those that did remain at Jerusalem, did
gradually gr^w up unto Church fellowship; and it amounts to no less, then to
the former begging and presumption, that which sollowes, viz. that this
Proposition is manifest out of the Scripture, viz. that they that were
converted, are said to be added to the Church. For what (says I. S.) if that
be to be understood of the Church Catholic, and not a particular church? It
may not be denied that the word Church, is often so used in the New Testament,
and it is suspicious that the three thousand converted at once, were not so
soon instructed in church fellowship as converted, etc. Thus worshipful Sir
I. S. disputes, whose words are a very farrago of errors and vanity, by which
he sufficiently declares unto the world, that he is in the number of those
Masters Saint Paul speaks of, 1 Timothy chap. 1. verse 7. who desiring to be
Teachers of the Law, understand neither what they say, nor whereof they
affirm: and confident I am, that there was never a more arrogant, and a more
presumptuoas sot that ever put pen to paper, then this I. S. and whose words
are* guilty of more ignorance, and fuller of the emptiness of self
conceitednesse, and more liable to exception; for he is not only a stranger to
the Independent doctrine, and to the Church of Jerusalem he speaks of (as all
the learned will easily by his expressions perceive) but he is a mere novice
in all divine learning, and al good literature, and a fellow very wretched and
worthless, and such an one as deserves to be exploded out of the schools of
the learned, and to be thrust out of the society of all orthodox and
conscientious honest Christians, and indeed if he were dealt with according to
his merits, he deserves to be spewed out of the seven new churches, of whom,
before I come to my reply, I will take liberty to say yet a little more, and as
of him, so of my Brother Burton, and Master Knollys, that as they are fratres
in malo, so they are equally guilty of the same sacrilege and unrighteous
dealing, for as I. S. so they also rob the Church of Jerusalem, of all those
Members that were converted by John the Baptist, Christ himself, and his
blessed Apostles and Disciples before Christ's death, as is manifest from their
words quoted before, and from I. S. his scruples he speaks of, page 8. and 9.
where he unchurches and unchristians all those that were converted by John's
and Christ's ministry, he also with them withholds the truth from the people
in unrighteousnes: and as if that had not been enough, in the words, I have now
quoted out of the tenth page, besides his denying, that I have proved my first
Proposition, which indeed is a mere Presumptiou and begging the question, to
use his grollish expression, he to all his iniquity adds transgression and
sin, which is the height of wickedness accumulating error upon error, as
will frequently appear; for here again he first cuts off all those that were
baptized by the Baptist from the Believers in Jerusalem whom he deridingly
calls John's disciples and converts.

Secondly, He affirms of them all that they stuck in John's Baptism, and
were but temporary Believers, and ceased to walk with Christ.

Thirdly, He affirms that those that were baptized by John the Baptist did
afterward disperse themselves into several countries.

And fourthly, He asserteth, that those that did continue at Jerusalem did
gradually grow up into church fellowship. Every one of the which assertions of
Sir I. S. howso ever they are presumptuously laid down by him, as so many
certain and infallible truths, yet I attest, there is not the least warrant
for any of them in the whole word of God; no not so much as a shadow of any
authority to cover or color them over; yea, they are all as egregiously and
notoriously erroneous as they are uncharitable; for they are all contrary to
the word of God, and to the law of love and kindness which thinks no evil;
yea, they contradict the revealed will of God, as we shall see in some
particulars: for whereas he arrogantly amongst other of his false assertions
says, That those that did remain in Jerusalem, did gradually grow up into
Church fellowship, as if they had not by Saint John's Ministry been made perfect
Christians, I say this is contrary to the express words of our Savior, Luke
the 7. where he gives this testimony concerning all those that came out of
Jerusalem to John's Baptism, all which were Inhabitants and innumerable
companies, for the Scripture says, Matt. the 3. and Mark the 1. That
Jerusalem went out to him, and they of Jerusalem, that they justified God, and
rejected not his counsel against themselves to their own destruction, as the
Pharisees and Lawyers did, but they embraced Gods mercy to their salvation. So
that by Christ's own testimony and witness, the Pharisees and Lawyers only
excepted, all the other were good and perfectly made Christians, and in such a
Church fellowship as with which they grew up to a perfect stature, without any
new Church Fellowship: and therefore I. S. not only saying, that they were
temporary Christians, and ceased to follow Christ, but that those of them that
remained in Jerusalem, did gradually grow up in Church Fellowship afterward,
in all he says, I affirm, he gives the spirit of God the lie, who has
recorded the contrary, as that they were perfect good Christians, as having not
rejected the counsel of God to their own perdition, but embraced the promises
to their salvation; so that they were all by John's Ministry very well
instructed in their duty in all respects. Therefore both J. S. my brother
Burton and all the Ill-dependents, are most abominably wicked thus with their
scriblings to unsettle the minds of the people, ever prattling about a kind of
Church fellowship, of which they have neither Precept nor President in all Gods
holy Word, and which they themselves could never declare unto the world what it
was, and ^et they are ever babbling of this Church Fellowship, and unchurchying
all Churches but their own, because forsooth in their opinion, they are not
cast into a Church mold after the New Testament form, nor are not in
church fellowship; whereupon they rashly proclaim us all enemies of Jesus
Christ and his Kingdom; and it is no wonder, that they think so
contemptuously of all those that were baptized by the Baptist, and that they
judge so wickedly of us all; for I. S. says in the words above cited, which is
another of his great errors, that it is suspicious, that the three thousand
converted at once, were not so soon instructed in church fellowship as
converted. These are his expressions.

From which I gather that Sir I. S. and all his accomplices are a generation of
men very censorious, and that they are creatures full of jealousies and
causeless suspicions, and therefore that they ought by all good men to be
shunned and avoided, as both dangerous and treacherous: for here we see they
suspect those very three thousand converted by Peter, as not well instructed in
church fellowship, notwithstanding in the very same chapter it is related, that
they were all well taught their duties, both toward God, and one toward
another; truly if ever any people were well instructed, they all were, in whom
all the acts and fruits of faith are evident, for wheresoever it comes it
purifies the hearts of al those to whom God has given it, Acts 15. as here it
is manifest it did it in that the souls of all those converts being pursued by
the guilt of their own sin in crucifying the Lord of life, and being
sensible of the wrath of God due unto them for this their sin, their
consciences also accusing them, and aggravating unto them the haynousnesse of
it; it made them all fly unto Christ, and roll themselves upon him, and wholly
rely on him for mercy and forgiveness, and wrought love also in them all
toward God and Christ, and charity one toward another, the effects of which
are set down by the Holy Ghost, and fully recorded in the second chapter,
verse 42, 43. who says, That they continued steadfastly in the Apostles
doctrine and fellowship, and in the breaking of bread, and in prayers, and that
all that believed were together and had all things common, and sold their
possessions and goods and parted them to all men as every man had need, and
that they continued daily with one accord in the Temple, and that they brake
bread from house to house, and did eat their meat with Gladness and
singleness of heart. Thus the Holy Ghost describes those three thousand
converts unto us, as not only skillful in the theory of church fellowship, but
also exceedingly well verst in the practical part of it; whether therefore in
this particular also (in that J. S. says) it is suspicious, that the three
thousand converted at once, were not so soon instructed in Church fellowship,
as converted when the Scripture reports the contrary, it be not to give the
Spirit of God the lie, I leave it to the judgment of all the godly and
impartial R^aders; who I am confident will give their verdict against I. S.
For certainly there is no act of church fellowship, that was omitted by them,
and although I love not such as will groundlessly be suspicious as I. S. is
here and those of his Fraternity; yet I am confident the Independnnts will
never be induced to imitate the example of those three thousand, and I have
very good reason to make me continue in this belief for what I already know
in their daily practices, and therefore they are rather to be suspected that
they are not well instructed in church fellowship, they make notwithstanding so
great a noys about* therefore whether this be not a great temerity in these
men, thus upon all occasions, not only to censure their christian brethren
that live harmelessely by them, but to suspect all those that were converted by
the Baptist and the Apostles themselves before Christ's death; yea, and to
suspect even those three thousand also that were converted by Peter, after
Christ's ascension, and to adjudge both Pastors and people to be all ignorant,
what church government and church fellowship was, I leave it likewise to the
judgment of the prudent, and advised Reader? And yet this is the daily
practice of all the Ill*dependents thus to speak of them all, as if they had
not learned their lesson as well as the congregationall Predicants and their
disciples, and knew not how to cast them into a church mold after the New
Testament form, and to instruct them concerning church fellowship, when not
withstanding it is recorded of those Ministers that they revealed the whole
counsel of God, and whatsoever was needful to be known or practiced by all
christians to the end of the world, Acts the 20. and therefore could be
ignorant of nothing that tended to edification, and the building up of
believers in their most holy faith.

But yet notwithstanding I. S. and his brethren are still full of suspicions
and yet never satisfied in any thing that can be produced out of the holy
Scripture to confute their erroneous novelties: for although I had sufficiently
confirmed my first proposition and proved by both Scripture and reasons, that
all those that were baptized by John and Christ's Disciples were good Christians
and true Believers, and that there were many Congregations of Believers in the
Church at Jerusalem, yet I. S. page 11. says, He is not satisfied by any thing
that has been alleged by me, that the Church of Jerusalem consisted of many
Congregations and Assemblies, and that upon the scruples before instanced. And
Mr Knollys in his 11. page affirms the same. So that it is certain these men
are resolved never to be satisfied though things be never so evidently proved
unto them.

And it is no wonder that there is at this day such a brood of creatures in the
world; for there has ever been a generation of such men in all ages, that will
never be satisfied. Christ the great Doctor of his Church with all his blessed
Apostles and faithful Ministers could never satisfy the Jews, but they ever
resisted his spirit Acts 7. Neither can the holy Scriptures now satisfy all
gainsayers but they will still be doubting, amongst the which Sir I. S. and
Saint Hanserdo with many of their fraternity may well be numbered. But for all
such Christians as whom the god of this world has not blinded their eyes that
they should not see the glorious light of the Gospel of truth. I am confident
they will be satisfied that I have sufficiently proved that there were many
Congregations and several Assemblies of believers in the Church of Jerusalem,
and from that satisfaction they will learn to abhor the errors of all the
sectaries and straglers of our times, and to decline and shun their company and
fellowship. And for all such as they are that will receive the good seed of the
word into good and honest hearts, I desire ever to satisfy them, and not those
that are resolved to be ever scepticall and ever learning, yet never attaining
or coming to knowledge, or at least withhold the truth from others in
unrighteousness: And for all such I shall not much study to give them
satisfaction as being a company of unreasonable men from whom we ought daily to
pray to be delivered, for all such the Lord has given over to strong
delusions, that they should believe a lie, because they received not the love
of the truth that they may be saved, 2 Thessalonians. 2. Notwithstanding I say I have
very little hope ever to satisfy any such, and therefore may be thought to go
about an impossible work if I should endeavor it; yet that all men may s^e my
fairer dealing with I. S. because he says, that he has not been satisfied
with any thing alleged by me, that the Church of Jerusalem consisted of many
Congregations and Assemblies; I will therefore add a few reasons more or at
least call some of the former briefly to his mind, which I am most assured, if
there were no other in the whole book, would persuade any rational man that
there were many Assemblies and Congregations of believers in the Church of
Jerusalem, which if they cannot yet satisfy him, I am confident they will
satisfy and content others. And to the reasons I shall produce, I will also
add some testimonies of those of his own party for his farther satisfaction or
conviction at least.

All such as have read I. S. his learned works, know, that he has not only cut
of all those that were baptized by John and Christ's Disciples before Christ's
passion and ascension from the Church of Jerusalem, but razed them out of the
Calendar and Roll of the Saints, absolutely denying them so much as the very
name of Christians; all this I say, those that have read his scruples, very
well know: They know likewise that he grants there were three thousand
converted by the first Miracle and Sermon of Saint Peter, though he
uncharitably says, That it is suspicious that they were not so soon instructed
in Church fellowship as converted. So that here by his own confession we have a
very ample Congregation consisting of three thousand and six score persons. And
in the same chapter it is related, that there were devout men true believers
out of every Nation under Heaven all Inhabitants and Dwellers there, and that
the Lord added daily to those, such as should be saved; and these were without
doubt great numbers they being indefinitely set down. And in the fourth chapter
we find a new addition of five thousand men more converted; and withal I may
tell I. S. that it is suspicious (to use his own language) that the three
thousand first converts were all men likewise, for so many learned men conceive
of those converts: but for the five thousand it is out of doubt: for the holy
Word of God says in terminis that they were all men: And by the law of charity
we are bound to believe that all those converts were as zealous for the
publishing and spreading abroad of the truth of this their Christian Faith and
Doctrine, as any other people ever were; and therefore that they did make known
the wonderful things of God and what he had done for them to all their
acquaintance and neighbors, especially we are obliged to believe that they did
teach and instruct their wives, children and servants and their whole families
in the nurtrature and fear of the Lord, and in the knowledge of the Gospel.
And it is also to be believed that the women and all sorts of people were then
as docible and intelligible, and as ready to give attendance unto wholesome and
sound words and to embrace any truth of the Gospel, as our giddy-headed people
and women are now ready to embrace and follow novelties: especially we may with
all reason be induced to believe this that they would then be the sooner
persuaded to receive the doctrine of the Gospel, in regard it came ratified
and confirmed unto them with such mighty signs and wonders; for the Jews had
often before desired signs and miracles, saying unto Christ, What sign she
west thou that we may believe in thee? intimating that if he could show unto
them any sign that then they would believe in him, and so they said unto him
when he was upon the cross, If thou would have us believe in thee (said
they) come down from the cross and save thy self, and then thou shall
persuade us that thou art indeed the son of God.

Now then when the Lord by his Apostles and Disciples did daily gratify them
with such signs and wonders as that the very high Priests and Rulers
themselves were forced to confess upon the cure of the criple, that no body
could deny but it was a wonderful miracle; I say therefore, when the preaching
of the Gospel was concomitated upon all occasions with such mighty wonders, it
cannot be doub^ed but that the ordinary people both men and women were easily
persuaded to believe it, (when the Magistrates themselves were astonished to
see those wonders) and therefore yielded the more credit unto their husbunds
and masters instructions: yea we read of many women Luke 23. ver. 27, 28. that
mourned for Christ when they carried him to crucifying: And if we look also
into the story of holy writ we shall find that there were many women that
followed him in his life time, and those honorable ones which ministered daily
unto him. Now then if we believe, which we ought in charity to do, that there
were but as many believing women converted as men (as we may for ought any
thing can be said to the contrary) then we have already sixteen thousand
believers in the Church at Jerusalem, according to the new style of the Church.
Neither did the Church stand then at a stay: For in the fifth chapter upon the
dreadful death of Ananias and Saphira and by reason of some other miracles,
Believers, says the text, were more added to the Lord, multitudes both of men
and women.

Now this word multitude as I showed before, in all languages it ever signifies
some great company, or some great assembly or concourse of people whether it be
taken in a good sense or a bad, therefore says the holy Scripture follow not a
multitude to do evil; So that here many new great congregations of believers
were added to the Church, besides all those before specified; and in the 6.
chapter v. 7. it is recorded, that the word of God increased, and the number of
the Disciples multiplied in Jerusalem greatly, and a great company of the
Priests were obedient to the faith. In the which words there is these four
things observable.

The first, that the word of God increased, that is brought forth many children
which were begotten to the Faith by the preaching of it.

Secondly, in express words it is said, that the number of the Disciples
multiplied in Jerusalem, the place it self where being specified, that is to
say they were increased and that in no small companies in that very Church and
City of Jerusalem.

Thirdly, it is said, that they multiplied greatly, both the words having a
great emphasis in them, the number of Disciples multiplied, says the
Scripture, and that greatly, to show the miraculous and wonderful* increase of
them, as if the Scripture should have said that the number could not be set
down.

Fourthly, it is said also for the setting forth of the efficacy of the
Gospel, that a great company of the Priests were obedient to the faith, not a
few but a great company also of the Priests, those inveterate enemies of Jesus
Christ; every one of these words has weight in it, and being but a little
pondered, will create belief from any ordinary understanding man that there
were by this means and after their conversion infinites of people daily added
unto the Church of Jerusalem, not only by the powerful preaching and miracles
of the Apostles, but by the help and preaching of these Priests also, of whom
we ought to harbor this opinion, that now they were as diligent (considering
the great love of Christ toward themselves) to convert and bring men unto him,
as ever they were before to dissuade the people from following him; this I
conceive the law of charity binds all men to believe, that they being now
converted would study to convert others. For we see that as soon as Andrew had
found Christ John 1. he brought his brother Simon to him. And after Christ had
called Philip unto him, he finding Nathaniel brings him also unto Christ. And
if we observe it, it is the nature of true grace that it is ever operative and
fruitful and will loose no opportunity of doing good and gaining friends unto
it: So that all those that are really and truly converted, they will ever study
and endeavor to convert others, yea they are bound unto it, according to that
of Christ, who when he related unto Peter that the devil soughts to winnow him
as wheat, and told him farther that he had prayed for him that his faith might
not fail, added withal this lesson unto Simon Peter saying, When thou art
converted, strengthen thy brethren. This duty lay not only upon Simon Peter,
but it lies to this day upon all Ministers and people; and all those Priests
knew very well that this duty lay also upon them, and that by a special
command from God long before given them, who had said that the Priests lips
should preserve knowledge, and that the people should seek the law, will and
good pleasure of God from their mouth.

Now then if all Christians and all the Servants of the Lord in all ages
studied to teach their friends and families the knowledge and fear of the Lord,
as we see in Abraham and Jacob and Joshua and all the Patriarks, and they had a
special command also to do it as we see Deuteronomy. the sixth and Deuteronomy. the eleventh,
and when it was the practice of all people truly converted to do the same, as I
said before, and we see it likewise in the woman of Samaria how quickly she
brought her neighbors and fellow citizens unto Christ after she was
converted; then I say we ought to think, yea we ought much more to believe that
these Priests being thus wonderfully converted spent their strength and might
now to gain Disciples unto Christ and that by how much the more they had been
his enemies and persecutors. And the people without all controversy would be
the readier by far to give heed unto what they taught them because they knew
that they were learned and in that they had a command from God himself, to seek
the law of God from their mouths, who said, that the Priests lips should
preserve knowledge and wisdom. Yea Christ himself sent the lepers at any time
when he had cured them to the Priests, and the Scriptures sufficiently declare,
that the Priests were in great esteem among all the people and that they did
mightily prevail with them, so that they could persuade them to do any thing
they would have them.

Now when the people saw that their Priests in great companies were converted,
without doubt they still followed their Pastors and waited upon their Ministry;
and the law of love binds us to believe that abundance of the people also were
daily converted and added to the Church by their Ministry and Preaching, and
this ordinary reason and daily experience will persuade every man to believe:
for we see here amongst us what mischief a few whibling and unlearned fellows
that were Ministers, have done in seducing of the people after they revolted
from the truth, upon whom they still depend, and what distractions among all
sorts of men and women a few unstable and unconstant Presbyters hourly make,
when for base ends they fall from their principles and turn Independent
Praedicants, and Itinerany Preachers; we see I say that they have in a very
short time with the leaven of their doctrine and with their sottish, wicked and
groundless opinions sowred the whole lump of the sweet truth of the Gospel,
and seduced many thousands both of men and women (if their gloriation be true.)
Now if a few illiterate seducers in these our days have misled and perverted
such multitudes with their novelties, and that without any miracles, without
all controversy that great company of Priests that were converted, preaching
then unto all the people the truth of God and the glorious Gospel of glad
tidings, and not their own fantasies, and the people seeing it also daily
confirmed unto them with such stupendous miracles, they prevailed greatly to
the converting of thousands: for the example of such men as the Priests were,
wrought very much upon the people; yea we see how it has been in all ages when
great and rich men whether Magistrates, Ministers or people, embrace any new
opinion, what way they go, the common people ordinarily follow whether it be
truth or error, rather following example then precept, as we may see it, When
Moses was but gone up into the Mount, and that Aaron had built them a calf,
they all began to dance about it; and when Jeroboam set up his calf^s ten
tribes revolted with him, yea it is said, He caused all Israel to sin: And
we may observe it daily amongst us if these grolls seduce but any giddy-headed
Gentlewoman that is rich or but any inferior Lady, and make them but turn
Independents, what a noise there is by and by through the Kingdom of it, and
how staggering other poor unstable women begin to be.

But if any great Noble man, or Courtier, or Parliament man, or some of our
temporizing Presbyterian Ministers but turn Independents, or is but rumor'd to
favor that way, we see what revolt amongst unsettled and ungrounded people
their examples make in many places. Whereas the truly godly, and such as are
well grounded, know that the stars shall fall from heaven, and that they
usually chang themselves into Angels of light and seem to be the Ministers of
righteousnee, that they may the better seduce; yet I say, such as fear God and
are rightly instructed, are not moved, but they abhor the evil of their ways,
and cleave the faster to the truth, and are of such discerning spirits as they
can well perceive, that it is for base ends and worldly respects that many have
turned Independents; and it is well known and can be proved, That the
Independents have persuaded many if they would prosper in the world, that they
should turn to their party, for that was (as they said) the thriving way. And
it is taken notice of also, that very few but Independents are either greatly
countenanced or preferred, or at any time rewarded for any service they have
done their Country. Now every generous spirit, especially a constant well
grounded Christian detests and abominates all such base dealings, and such base
fellows as will be of any religion for earthly fading momentary and uncertain
things, and therefore stand more stoutly to the truth and their ancient
principles: yet such as have a mind speedily to get into the chair of
preferment, or to be in any Office, or to grow rich, they turn Independents;
and I am most confident, that whereas the Independents brag, that many of the
Lords are Independents, they notoriously belie them: but this I dare presume,
that if Sir I. S. can from his great and rich Independent friends, procure a
yearly and certain pention to be confirmed upon my lord Tapps, that upon that
condition he would turn independent, and so then they should be sure to have
one lord of their party; and then also Sir I. S. might happily attain unto the
honor to be my lord Tapps his Chaplain which he is very fit for, and might
also reside in Cambridge where he may so indoctrinate his plumbeous
cerebrocities, as he may speedily be able to divisinate a snayle pie or a
mushrome into two particles.

But to be serious, if a few obscure Presbyters here amongst us that were never
really guilty either of learning or honesty, revolting once from the truth
through covetousness and other base ends, have notwithstanding with their
feigned holiness, and under pretense of their long prayers devoured so many
widows houses, and seduced and deceived such multitudes of simple people as
they have done, and that in a short time, what multitudes of people may all men
think those learned Rabbis, those Priests with all the Apostles daily
converted in Jerusalem, when their doctrine was so crowned with so many
miracles? If the holy Scripture should never have delivered it unto the world
that they converted innumerable companies, yet common reason would persuade
every man that they must needs have converted many thousands by the Ministry of
them all; but when the Scripture relates unto us, Matt. 3. and Mark the 1.
and in many other places, that all Jerusalem went out to the Baptism of John,
and that they were baptized by him in Jordan, and were made good Christians;
and when it farther also records, that there were three thousand converted at
one Sermon and Miracle, and says in the same chapter that the Lord added daily
unto the Church such as should be saved, and when in the fourth chapter it
relates the conversion of five thousand men more, and in the fifth chapter
says, that more multitudes both of believers of men and women were added to
the Lord, and when in the sixth chapter it says, that the word of God
increased, and that the number of the Disciples, multiplied in Jerusalem
greatly, and a great company of the Priests were obedient to the faith; all
these places witness unto the world that they came into the Church in such
great bodies as they could not now be told; for when they came in by by three
thousand at a time, and five thousand they could speedily be reckoned; but when
the increase grew so great, they were forced then to set them down as it were
by whole sale, not in enumerate parcels, and spoke of them as of numberless
companies, saying multitudes of believers, both of men and women, that is to
say, mighty congregations and great assemblies of both sexes, in such abundance
came in, as they could not be told, and as if this had not been enough the
holy Scripture speaks upon all occasions of the increase of the Word, and sets
down in general terms, that the number of the Disciples multiplied in
Jerusalem greatly, and a great company of the Priests were also obedient to the
faith, and as if this had not been sufficient in many other places of the
Acts, there is mention made of the increase of Believers, and in express words
in the 21. of the Acts it is said that there were many ten thousands of
Believers in the Church of Jerusalem; now all men know, that all these could
not possibly, no not a quarter of them meet in any one place or a few to
communicate in all Ordinances to edification; neither was there any place or
room spacious enough to contain the very bodies of the tenth part of them,
and if any place could have held the tenth part of them, yet then it had been
impossible that they could then have partaken in all acts of worship to
edification; for they could not have heard the voice of their Ministers
preaching unto them: for by daily experience we see it, that in one of our
Churches here in London, which will not, nor cannot hold half ten thousand,
that half of them ordinarily cannot well hear the voice of the Minister,
though he have a strong pair of Lungs; yea, I hear men daily complain that
they could not understand the Minister* preaching they stood so far off from
him, when notwithstanding there were not three thousand then in the Church;
yea, and I my self have been in less Assemblies where all the people could not
hear to edification: and therefore all reason will persuade any man, that is
not resolved ever to resist the truth, that there must of necessity be many
congregations of Believers in Jerusalem, where there were such infinite
multitudes; especially they are bound to believe it when the Scripture in so
many places, as I have quoted, says there were many congregations and
assemblies of Believers in that Church, which I have at this time briefly
related, that if be possible I might at last satisfy Sir I. S. and persuade
him to believe the Scripture, and be satisfied with it, if he will not believe
me, or be satisfied with any thing I can say to convince him of his error.

But if all I have hitherto writ will not satisfy his tender conscience, and
take his scruples out of his mind, I shall now before I conclude this point for
a Corallary, desire him to hear what my brother Burton, Saint Hanserdo, two
faithful brethren of his society, have writ concerning this business. It may be
I. S. upon the testimony of two such approved witnesses, and great Masters of
the Assembly of the congregationall way, will be persuaded that there were many
Congregations of Believers in the Church of Jerusalem, though he would not be
satisfied with any thing I have delivered.

I cannot but often make mention of my brother Burton, and Saint Hanserdo,
because all the Ill-dependents judge them to be very honest men, and suppose
that they will speak the truth, and I believe also that Sir I. S. has a very
venerable opinion of them both for their singular wisdom and erudition; I
entreat I. S. therefore in the first place to hear my brother Burton sapientum
octavum; it may be his words may satisfy his scrupulous and tender conscience,
who in the ninth page of his wise book says, that the believers in Jerusalem,
when there were but three thousand of them, and five thousand at most were
constrained to sever themselves into diverse companies in several private hou
es to communicate. Saint Hanserdoes words are these, page 10. and 11. The
Apostles and all the Believers in Jerusalem, met together in one place, to wit,
the Temple, and in Solomon's Porch, and brake bread from house to house. Thus
they both declare their faith, and opinion cencerning the number and assemblies
of Believers in the Church of Jerusalem, and that in the infancy of it. Now
then when there were but about three thousand and six score souls at the first
and five thousand in all at last, according to the computation of my brother
Burton, and Saint Hanserdo, they were then forced into many congregations and
companies, as having no convenient place spacious enough as wherein to break
bread: so that they were forced to hear the Word in the Temple, that is one
place, and in Solomon's Porch, that is another place, and to communicate in
several private houses, according to my brother Burtons doctrine, and to break
bread from house to house; or house by house, and that daily or day by day,
according to Saint Hanserdoes learning, that is in innumerable places; I say
when by the testimony of these two Seraphicall Doctors it is evident that in
the very infancy and childhood of that Church There were many Ass blies and
Congregations, and that in several private houses or from house to house: how
many congregations and assemblies of believers may we suppose were then in the
Church at Jerusalem* when many more great congregations and Assemblies of
Believers, were daily added to that Church, and when the holy Word of God in
express terms, in the 21. chap. of the Acts says, There were many ten
thousands of believers there? without all controversy there must needs at that
time be a mighty many of Assemblies and Congregations, and yet in the very
infancy of it, and when there were but five thousand believers, as my brother
Burton and Saint Hanserdo do both witness, they then had diverse Assemblies and
Congregations and communicated in several private houses, and brake bread from
house to house, that is to say, in every house. And therefore I have now great
hope, that not only Mr Knollys will confess the brethren have acknowledged
That there were many Congregations and Assemblies of believers in the Church of
Jerusalem, but that Sir I. S. his scrupulous conscience also will be satisfied
about this point, especially when it comes ratified not only by Scripture,
but by the testimony and witness also of my brother Burton and Saint Hanserdo.

But if Sir I. S. shall still persevere in the error of his ways, and shall be
so far from believing that there were many Congregations and Assemblies of
believers in the Church of Jerusalem, as he will yet swear, there were no more
Saints there, then could or did daily all meet in one place or congregation,
then I will conclude of him that he is a gentleman very fit to be made a Knight
of the post, whether I send him, to be whipped out of his grolleries.

Having for the gratifying Mr Knollys and Sir I. S. and for the undeceiving of
all cordial and well affected Christians, and such as desire to know the
truth, been the more large in this controversy; I shall now refer my self and
all that I have said concerning my first and second propositions, to the
judgment of every indifferent Reader, whether I have not sufficiently proved,
not only that there were many congregations of believers in the Church at
Jerusalem, but that it is likewise acknowledged by the brethren, that there
were many Assemblies of them there, if any credit may be given either to my
brother Burton or to Saint Hanserdo: and if they shall judge that I have
sufficiently proved it, both from Scripture and Reason and from the testimony
of two prime witnesses of the Independent party, against whom there can be no
just exception by any of the Congregationall way, they being of their own
fraternity, Mr Henry Burton and Saint Hanserdo by name; I shall again challenge
Mr Knollys his promise, who has engaged himself, That if I could by the
express word of Scripture evince there were many congregations of believers in
the Church at Jerusalem, that he would relinquish his grollish opinion of
Independency. Now therefore when I have done it both by Scripture and the two
witnesses above specified, I say again I challenge his promise, and if he
notwithstanding all I have writ, will not abandon this his error, I shall never
esteem him to be either a man of faith or common honesty, and shall for ever
hereafter proclaim both himself and all such teachers as he is fighters against
God and his truth, and resisters of his holy Spirit, and such as withhold the
truth from the people in unrighteousness. And so I conclude this second
Proposition and come now to see what they have to say to the third.

My third Proposition is this, viz. That the Apostles and Presbyters, Governed,
Ordered, and Ruled this Church, consisting of many congregations and
Assemblies, by a common Council and Presbytery. This is my third Proposition,
which is evident out of many places of the Acts, and sundry other places of
holy Writ, some of which with my Arguments, I shall here relate in order as
they were first set down in my book called Independency not Gods Ordinance, the
which Mr Knollys, I. S. and my brother Burton endeavored to Answer unto. And
after I have faithfully related the Arguments I deduced from those several
Scriptures, by which I then made good my third Assertion, I shall also truly
set down the Answer of Hanserdo Knollys, and I. S. to all those Arguments.

The places therefore of Scripture, with my Arguments gathered from thence, are
these following, Acts 11. 27. And in those days there came Prophets from
Jerusalem to Antioch, and there stood up one of them named Agabus, and
signified by the Spirit, that there should be great dearth through all the
world, which came to pass in the days of Claudius Caesar; then the Disciples
every man according to his ability, determined to send relief unto the
brethren that dwelt in Iudaea, which also they did and sent it to the
Presbyters by the hands of Barnabas and Saul. Here in these last words we see
that the Presbyters, and none but the Presbyters received the Alms; for it is
said, They sent it to the Presbyters by the hands of Barnabas and Saul, which
sufficiently proves, That the Presbyters in all Churches were the men in
government, as who had the Ordering and authority of appointing unto the
Deacons, how they should distribute those monyes, that they might be best
improved and disposed of, which is an act of government, as all men (that know
what belongs unto government) will acknowledge.

Now should it be granted that these Presbyters here spoken of, were the
Presbyters of Iudaea, which notwithstanding is not specified, but only the
distressed brethren in Iudaea; yet had it been in express words set down, That
the Alms had been sent to the Presbytery of Judaea, the Presbytery of
Jerusalem must necessarily have been included in it, as being the Metropolis of
Judea; and it was an ordinary thing for the Churches that were abroad, and
particularly that of Antioch, to send to the Apostles and Presbyters of
Jerusalem, as we may see Act. 11. ver. 22. and Act. 15. And by all probability
Paul and Barnabas brought these Alms to the Presbyters of Jerusalem; for he in
the fifteenth chapter of his Epistle to the Romans, makes mention of a
contribution that was made in Macedonia and Achaia for the poor Saints in
Jerusalem; Whether the Apostle, says he, was going to Minister unto them, and
desired the Romans to pray for him, that he may be delivered from the
unbeleeving Jews, and that his service for Jerusalem might be accepted of the
Saints, which by the learned Interpreters is generally taken that Paul speaks
of this time, and that they were then sent to Jerusalem from Antioch. But
howsoever, it should be understood, that these alms were sent to the
Presbyters in Judea, yet these two conclusions necessarily result from it.

The first, that this expression comprehends also the Presbyters of Jerusalem
as being the chief City of Judea.

The second, that the Presbyters in all Churches were the men to whom the
government and ordering of businesses was committed, and in whose hands the
power and authority lay of disposing of the very charity and bounty of the
brethren to all the necessitated Disciples within their jurisdictions, and who
gave directions to the Deacons how they should be distributed to the best
emolument and benefit of the poor, and according to the intention of these
benefactors, which, as it is an act of Government, and that a principal one,
so of necessity the Presbyters must then meet together, that by their joint and
common consent and council, all things may be rightly ordered.

But in the chap. 15. v. 2. 4. 6. 22. the Presbyters of Jerusalem by name are
expressed, and in chap. 16. and in Act. 21. v. 17. 18. in these words, Then
they determined that Paul and Barnabas and certain other of them should go up
to Jerusalem unto the Apostles and Presbyters, about this question, and they
were received of the Church, and of the Apostles and Presbyters, to whom they
declared all things that God had done with them, and how that there rose up
certain of the Sect of the Pharisees which believed, saying, that it was
needful to circumcise them, and to command them to keep the law of Moses, and
the Apostles and Presbyters came together to consider of this matter, etc. ver.
22. Then pleased it the Apostles and Presbyters with the whole Church, etc. and
chap. 16. v. 4. And as they went through the Cities they delivered them the
Decrees to keep, that were ordained of the Apostles and Presbyters which were
at Jerusalem, etc. and chap. 21. v. 17, 18. And when we were come to Jerusalem,
the Brethren received us gladly, and the day following Paul went in with us
unto James, and all the Presbyters were present, and v. 25. As touching the
Gentiles which believe, we have written and concluded, say the Presbyters, that
they observe no such thing.

Out of all which places, before I form my arguments to prove That the Church
of Jerusalem, consisting of many Congregations and Assemblies, was governed by
a Presbytery, that is, by the joint consent and common Council of the Apostles
and Presbyters, which made but a grand Presbytery: I shall desire all men to
consider, that howsoever the Apostles in the places above specified, are
differenced by that title from the Presbyters, yet in all acts of government
performed by them in the Church of Jerusalem, they were for the substance of
them ordinary acts, such as Presbyters daily perform, and therefore answerably
the Apostles themselves are in them to be considered as Presbyters, that is,
men governing in an ordinary way, as such as had received the keys, which is
the power of jurisdiction, and therefore were in their ordinary employment
(though at other times in their several ministries, and going from Nation to
Nation to preach, as Christ's extraordinary Ambassadors; 2 Cor. 5. they used
superlative authority, which God had invested them with and graciously bestowed
upon them for the benefit of the Church and the good of his people) and I am
induced so to believe, because the Apostles in holy Scripture are called
Presbyters, that is, the ordinary Governors and Magistrates of the Church,
though the more principal and primary ones, and therefore did act as
Presbyters in ordinary acts of Church Government, and for a pattern to all
Churches in like administration: Neither may any suppose, for all this, that
the Apostles did fall lower in their power, in that they acted as Presbyters;
for our brethren do acknowledge, that at Jerusalem the Apostles acted as
Presbyters of a particular Congregation; Now then if they did not fall lower in
their power by acting as Presbyters in a particular Congregation, what reason
will dictate to any man, that they should fall lower in their power by acting
as Presbyters in a joint Presbytery? The truth is, to govern and to rule the
Church was the ordinary employment of the Apostles, and therefore they are
styled Presbyters, which is to say, the Rulers, Councillors, Magistrates, and
Governors of the Church; neither, for all this, did their Presbyterships
exclude their Apostleships, nor did their acting as Presbyters, deprive them of
their Apostolic power, nor of that Apostolic spirit which guided them, even
in these things wherein they acted as Presbyters; for although under one notion
we look upon the Apostles as extraordinary men, yet under another, as in all
those affairs of public concernment, and in matter of government, and for
that end the assembling of themselves together, we do not consider them as
Apostles, for therein they did not act as Apostles, with a transcendent and
infallible authority, and in an extraordinary way, but as Presbyters, and
ordinary Governors and Councillors, and in such a way as makes their meetings
and actions a pattern and president to succeeding ages, and of the Presbyters
congregating of themselves together for common acts of Government, whether in a
Presbyterian or Synodicall way.

And as it is in civil affairs, and in the government of Kingdoms and
States, so it was then in the Church of God; in a Kingdom some of the
Counselors are of the more secret admission, and are generally called Cabbinet
Counselors, and are counted of as extraordinary men, and others of the
general and ordinary Council; yet when all these sit in a Common Council
together, to consult about matters of State and public concernment, they ^it
then together as ordinary Councillors, and every one of them has as much
authority and liberty to debate things by reason and dispute in way of
consultation, and to give his vote about any thing, as well as any of the most
extraordinary Counselors; and this has been the practice of all ages.

We read that Hushy when he was by Absalon called into counsel, had his voice
and gave his vote as well as Achitophel the Oracle of that time; and as in the
Common-Councels and Parliaments of Kingdoms, whatsoever honor, dignity, or
extraordinary employments any of them were taken up in before their session and
meeting, or whatsoever dignity or titles of honor they have extraordinarily
above others, and take their places accordingly before they come together into
the Parliament, yet they all sitting as Judges and Peers in the Kingdom, the
meanest Lord in the Kingdom has as much authority there as the greatest, and
so in the House of Commons: as they are Judges, and chosen by the people for
that purpose, have all of them, even the meanest, as much voice and authority
in way of consultation as the greatest: And so likewise in the Synod or
Assembly now of Divines, the meanest Presbyter has as much voice and liberty
in way of debate and voting, as the greatest Prelate there.

And even so it was in the Church of Jerusalem, when the Apostles those
extraordinary gifted men, and the Ordinary Presbyters met together in counsel,
they all acted there as counselors and ordinary presbyters; and therefore in
all those particular actions of the Apostles, we have mention of in their
several meetings, whether we consider them by themselves alone, and not
joined with the Presbyters, or in common council with them, those actions, I
say, were done and acted by men which were Apostles, but not as they were
Apostles exclusively, so as they might not act them under another notion,
neither will our brethren affirm it; for if the Apostles did preach, take the
trust of the goods of the Church, ordain Officers, as Apostles exclusively and
in an extraordinary way, and as by a privilege peculiar to themselves, it
would follow from thence, that none may do any of those things but Apostles,
which the Brethren will not assent unto: as for some instances.

In that ordination of Deacons in the sixth of the Acts, the Apostles there
acted partly as Apostles, and partly as Presbyters; for in constituting an
Office in the Church, which was not before they acted their Apostolical
authority: but in ordaining men to that office which the Church had chosen,
they did act as Presbyters: and there is no doubt but the Brethren will yield
to this; for if they will not grant that the Apostles did herein act partly as
Apostles, and partly as Presbyters, they must then accord, that they acted
either only as Presbyters, or only as Apostles: If only as Presbyters,
thence it will follow, that all Presbyters have power, not only to ordain
men, but to erect a new office in the Church: If only as Apostles, then hence
is no warrant for Presbyters, so much as to ordain men into any office, nor
for so much as to meet together to consult about acts of government, either in
a Presbyterian or in a Synodicall way: and by this means all Church government
would speedily be overthrown.

Neither is it a difficult thing in our Brethren, or any other man to
distinguish between these two: for look by what infallible rule they make
some thing in the practice of the Apostles, to be not only a pattern and
president for imitation, but even a proof of institution, yet decline other
things practiced by the same Apostles as things not only by institution, not
commanded to us, but not permitted to be imitated by us: By the same rule,
they may infallibly distinguish between what they acted as Apostles, and what
they acted as Presbyters, and as ordinary Counselors, Judges and Governors;
and withal they may infer and conclude, that what they acted as Presbyters,
and by joint and common consent, it was to give a pattern and president to all
Presbyters and Synods in all succeeding ages; and as the taking in of the
consent of the Church in the choice of Deacons, Act. 6. was to give a pattern
for the sufferage and voice of the people in all Churches to the end of the
world, in chosing of their Deacons; so for another instance, as there were many
Congregations in the Church of Jerusalem, and diverse, Assemblies, and all these
congregations made but one Church, and the Apostles and Presbyters who were
Officers governed that jointly and by a common Council, (as our Brethren
acknowledge:) Here likewise they left a pattern and president to all ages, for
several Congregations and Assemblies in a City, or vicinity, to unite into
one Church; and for the Officers and Presbyters of these Congregations to
govern that Church jointly in a College and Presbytery,

And for a third instance, as the Apostles and Presbyters meet together in a
Synodicall way, and the Apostles in that Assembly acted not by an Apostolical
and infallible spirit, no more then the Presbyters did, (as when they were
writing of Scripture) but stating the Question, and debating it from Scripture
in an ordinary way, as it is at large discussed in Acts 15. (which we never
read they did when they writ the Scripture,) and having by disputing, arguing
and searching the Scripture, found what was the good and acceptable will of
God; thereupon they determined the question, saying, it seemed good to the Holy
Ghost and us, as the Assembly now of Divines, or any other, for ought I know,
upon like assurance of Scripture warrant, may do. In this action also, and
their so doing, the Apostles and Presbyters left an example and president to
all the Presbyters in all succeeding ages, what they should do upon the like
occasions, for the deciding of controversies and differences of opinions in
Religion. viz. To congregate and meet together in some one place, to state the
questions, and to debate from Scripture, and to follow the written Word, as
their rule in all things; and whatsoever they do, to do it by joint consent,
and the the Common Council of them all, or by the most voices; but in all
these their proceedings they must ever cleave to the rule of the Word of God,
or warrantable authority and evidence of reason deduced from thence, as then
the Apostles and Presbyters did; yea, the very name of the Presbyters in
Jerusalem, signifies the Judges, Counselors, Magistrates and Rulers of that
Church, who had the Keys committed unto them as well as the Apostles: and by
their place were more peculiarly overseers of that Church, as they were tied
unto it, then the Apostles; as the Presbyters of Ephesus were in that Church,
and were assigned in their several places to execute their office, and to
look to their particular charges in the government; so that whether the
Apostles were present or absent, the Presbyters had the government laid upon
their shoulders; and if the Apostles themselves had taught contrary to this
Constitution, or an Angel from Heaven, Gal. 1. I am confident the Presbyters
would not have obeyed them, nor have relinquished their authority, neither
ought they, but would still have kept that rule, power and authority which God
had put in their hands: so that for my own particular, I look upon the
Apostles in all these several actions, and in all those acts of government,
joined and met together with the Presbyters, as I look upon Counselors and
Judges in the great Council of both Kingdoms, where all the Judges have equal
power and authority in decisive voting, and do verily believe, that the
Presbyters sitting at any time in council with any one or more of the Apostles,
did act as authoritatively as the Apostles themselves, and I am ever able to
prove it and make it good against any man, that the Presbyters might as well
conclude, It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us, as well as the Apostles:
and may say, we have written and concluded, as well as the Apostles: As any two
or three of the Parliament, whether of the Lords or Commons, may as well say,
we have made such an Ordinance, as any twenty of them, or the whole Council,
and that without disparagement or impeaching the dignity of any, when they
joined with them in that work, and assented to it; and in this very notion I
look upon the Presbyters in Jerusalem, joined with the Apostles, and consider
them, as in my contemplations I look upon the Lords and Commons now sitting in
the great Council, as the grand civil Presbytery of the Kingdom, where all
binding Ordinances are to be passed by the joint consent and Common-counsell
of them all, and whose place and office it is to command and rule, and the
peoples office and place to obey and yield subjection to whatsoever they
command and injoyne, according to the will of God and for the common good and
preservation of themselves and the whole Kingdom; and that whosoever should
resist this their just authority, are guilty of contumacy and are high
offenders and delinquents; for God has laid the government upon them, and left
the duty of obedience to the subjects who may not without a public call
intermeddle with matters of government.

And so in the matters of Church Government, I look upon the Presbyters as Gods
peculiar servants, and as upon the Stewards, Councillors and Magistrates and
Judges in the Church, as men set apart by God himself for this purpose to be
the Teachers and Rulers of their flocks committed unto them in the Lord; to
whom in the matters of their souls all people under their several
Presbyteries, so far as they command in the Lord, and according to the
written word, are to yield obedience, and much to reverence and honor them,
and this according to Gods command, for it is his Ordinance. And they are not
to be looked on and slighted as the fagge end of the Clergy, as many black
mouths and profane lips speak of them: for the Presbyters, they have their
authority as well grounded in the word of God, as Kings and States have theirs;
and therefore as they are employed in a more supreme orb, and in matters of
eternal concernment, so they should be venerated as men watching over our
souls; and all contumelious speeches against them deserve severe punishment
and ought not to be tolerated: and so much the more the Presbyters of this
Kingdom in these our days, have deserved better from the Church, the
Parliament and the whole* Kingdom, then any of their Predecessors, not only
in their desiring a perfect and through Reformation in both Doctrine and
Discipline, but in that they have stood now so cordially to the common cause,
and more for the liberty of the Subject then any before them, and have cleaved
most faithfully to the Parliament, and have been also a most singular means
of keeping the people wheresoever they were suffered to Preach, in obedience to
that great Conncell. In all these respects, I say, they deserve well, yea
better, not only from the Church but from all the Kingdom for the present,
than any of their Predecessors, and their memories ought to be famous to all
posterity for this their good service. And that government that God has given
unto the Presbyters, if the Lords and Commons shall now labor to establish it
in the Kingdom, and to settle it on them, they may not only promise unto
themselves a blessing from heaven, and peace unto the Church and State, but
also immortal praise from all succeeding ages. Having taken leave to make this
digression, I will now to my business, and prove that the Church of Jerusalem
consisting of many Congregations and Assemblies, were all governed by a common
Presbytery; and that the Apostles there acted as Presbyters among the
Presbyters.

They that in the Holy Scripture are called Presbyters, and acted and ordered
things in a joint body and Common Council, with the Presbyters, and exercised
that ordinary power that was committed to them in the 18. of Matthew, they
acted ruled, and governed as Presbyters; but the Apostles in governing the
Church of Jerusalem consisting of many Congregations and Assemblies, acted and
ordered things in a joint body and Common Council with the Presbytery of that
Church as Presbyters, Ergo, the Chuch of Jerusalem was Presbyterially governed,
and by a Common-counsell of Presbyters.

The Mayor and Minor of this Syllogism being proved, the conclusion will
necessarily ensue. And for proof of the Major the Scripture is clear, as 1 Timothy chap. 4. ver. 14. where Paul writing unto Timothy says, neglect not the
gift that is in thee, which was given thee to preach, with the laying on of the
hands of the Presbytery: in the which Presbytery Paul was one that laid his
hands on him, and ordained him, as is evident in the second Epistle to Timothy,
chapter the first, verse. 6, where putting Timothy in mind of his duty, he says,
stir up the gift of God which is in thee, by the putting on of my hands: so
that Paul joining in this public action of ordination, though an Apostle, yet
acted as a Presbyter, and counts himself in the number of them, as any of the
Presbyters that now ordain the Ministers, may say as well as all of them
together, to any new ordained Minister, neglect not the gift of God which is in
thee, by the putting on of my hands. As men ordinarily in a Jury, may assume
that unto themselves that all may do, as being Actors in common. So Peter
likewise in his first Epistle, chapter 5. verse 1, 2* calls himself a
Fellow-presbyter, and Saint John in his second and third Epistle styles him so
also, The Presbyter unto the elect Lady, etc. The Presbyter unto the well
beloved Gajus, etc. So that his Presbytership did not exclude his Apostleship,
nor the acting at any time of a Presbyter, deprive him of his Apostolical
power; for at that very time he calls himself a Presbyter, he wrore Scripture
by an Apostolical and infallible spirit, and yet continued still a presbyter.
So that for the Major, although I should say no more it is sufficiently proved;
yet for a further corroboration of it, it is not good to reject the consent of
our Brethren in this point; for they acknowledge, that the Apostles are called
Presbyters vertually, because, as they say, Apostleship contained all offices
in it; yea, they further assert, the act of ministerial power to be the same
in the Apostles and Presbyters, the only difference they seem to insinuate,
is, in the extent; from which it may be inferred, that in all the affairs
transacted by the Apostles, properly concerning the Church of Jerusalem, they
did act as presbyters, because in such acts there was no extent of their power
to many, much less to all Churches. But when they affirm, that the Apostles
power over many congregations, was founded upon their power over all Churches,
and so cannot be a pattern andpresident for the power of Presbyters over many.

For answer, first I say, that the Brethren, in my opinion, take more upon them
then beseems them, and usurp a kind of unlimited authority to themselves,
that they can make what pleases them exemplary only, and reject whatsoever
agrees not with their opinion and humor, though they were all the acts of all
the Apostles, and transacted by joint consent, and common agreement and accord,
and left in the church of Christ, as well for a pattern and president for the
Presbyters and Ministers to follow in all succeeding ages to the end of the
world, as any of their other acts; and so they pick and choose at pleasure, and
in so doing (under reformation be it spoke) I say they assume unto themselves a
greater authority then beseems them; for they can make the Apostles joint
governing of one congregation, (for so they take it pro confesso, that the
church of Jerusalem was but one congregation,) to be a pattern of many
Ministers governing one congregation; but whereas it is most evident, that the
Church of Jerusalem consisted of many congregations, and were yet under but one
Presbytery, and was governed by the joint consent of the Apostles and
Presbyters, as under a grand Common-presbytery; this at pleasure they reject
and make it no way exemplary and binding.

But for a further answer I assert, that the Apostles power and authority over
many assemblies, as one Church, to rule and govern them all as one Church,
jointly and in common, was not grownded upon their power over all Churches, but
upon the union of those Assemblies and Congregations into one Church, which
union lays a foundation for the power of presbyters ruling and governing many
Congregations; and the Apostles practice in governing many Assemblies jointly
as one Church, is the pattern and example of that government to all succeeding
ages; and this president of the Apostles, the presbyters in all churches ought
to set before their eyes in all reformation; for what the Apostles did in the
public affairs of government, they did as presbyters, and for imitation.
Neither do our Brethren only grant the act of ministerial power to be the
same in the Apostles and presbyters, saving in the extent: but they acknowledge
also, that they were called presbyters vertually as I said before; and that the
Apostles acted in a joint body and by common consent, and affirm that it was
fit that they should so do, and say withal, that the Apostles wherever they
came, left the presbyters and people to the exercise of that right which
belonged to them, although they joined with them: These are their formal
expressions, out of which their concession my argument, yea, the whole
Syllogism, is not only confirmed and strengthened, but the truth does more
evidently shine forth; for if the Apostles left the presbyters and people to
the exercise of that right which belonged unto them, in all churches, and the
presbyters right be to rule as Ecclesiastical Magistrates, as to whom the
power of the Keys peculiarly belongs by Gods institution: and the right of
the people in all churches, be to obey, as they are every where commanded;
then it follows necessarily, that it does not belong unto the people to
ordain either Deacons or Presbyters, whatsoever they may do in the choosing
of them: nor to excommunicate or cast out any out of the Church, or to make
Members whom they please, nor to rule and govern the Church, which is the
peculiar right of the Presbyters, left unto them by Christ and his Apostles;
for none of all these things were ever left unto the people, neither is there
any President of it in holy Scripture; so that while the brethren seem to
contend for the liberty of the people, they plainly overthrow it; for they
grant, That the Apostles left the Presbyters and people to the exercise of that
right that belonged unto them in all Churches; the right therefore of the keys
of Government and Jurisdiction belongs properly unto the Presbyters in every
Church, who are the Officers and Magistrates appointed by God himself for that
purpose, Acts 20. ver. 28. and therefore when the Apostles writ to the Church
of Corinth, to excommunicate that incestuous person, although his Epistle be
not directed to the whole Church, yet the Presbyters in that Church only
executed that act of Government which of right belonged unto them, though the
people also assented unto it, even as we see daily, and experience teaches us
in all well ordered Corporations, when the King or Counsel writes unto any
City or Corporation, though their mandates be directed to the whole City or
Corporation, for the raising either of men or moneys, or about any other
employment of public concernment, the Mayors, Aldermen, and Common Council,
and the Officers under them only manage the business; for that is their right
and place; and the people under them do yield obedience, and submit
themselvesto what they order and command, and intermeddle not in that
employment, as knowing very well it is their right and place only to obey. And
even so it was in the Church of Corinth, the Presbyters only exercised the
Government, and ordered all according to the Apostles injunction, and the
people assented unto it, and submitted themselves to their order; and the
mistaking of that place and many more has* been the cause of so much confusion
in the Church at this time, when not only the men in every Assembly, but the
very women in many of the new Congregations, as Members, challenge a power and
right both in the electing of Church Officers, and of admitting of Members, and
of casting out and excommunicating, which before these our times was never
heard of in the world, when as the right of Jurisdiction and of the Keys, (as
I have often proved) peculiarly belongs unto the Presbyters; and that the
people neither men nor women, ought to intermeddle with it; for if they should,
in short time it would overthrow all Government in Church and State, and bring
confusion into the world.

But I conceive the cause of so gross a mistake of that place concerning the
excommunicating of the incestuous person, arose from this, that they look upon
the Church of Corinth and the other Churches spoken of in the New Testament,
not as Corporations, as they were indeed, but as on their now sucking
Independent new Congregations and Assemblies consisting of twenty or thirty
Members, such as many of those be, whereas those several Churches are to be
considered under another notion, as consisting of many Congregations, (as that
of the Church of Jerusalem) united into one Church or body in the several
Corporations, and each of them governed by a Common Council of Presbyters, and
by the joint consent of their several Presbyteries, all these several
congregations making but one Church, though never so much daily increased, and
keeping still the name and denomination of such a Church, either from the
place, City, Country, or Nation, or several language, as the Church of the
Jews, the Greek Church; the Latin Church: or from the Cities, as the Church
of Jerusalem, of Ephesus, Rome, etc. All the which though they consisted of
never so many Congregations and Assemblies, yet they ever kept the name of
unity, and were accounted but one Church, in their several places and
Precincts, as at this day the Church of Geneva, though it consist of many
Congregations, is counted but one Church, as it is: so that I say, the
conceiving of the Church of Corinth, and those seven Churches in Asia, under
the notion of one of their Congregations, caused through this mistake, that
great confusion that is now in the Church, and was the original cause of the
opinion of Independency, when notwithstanding it is manifest, that those very
churches were not Independent, but made their appeal to the Apostles and
Presbyters at Jerusalem upon all occasions, as that of Antioch; and it is said,
that the Apostles and Presbyters came together to consider of that matter;
which meeting of the Apostles and Presbyters, for Synodicall acts of Government
is no weak proof of their meeting for Presbyteriall acts of Government,
unless men will suppose, that they who were careful to assist other churches,
did neglect their own Churches committed to their peculiar charge, and took no
course or care for the governing of them.

Yea Act. 15. 2. it does most certainly prove a Presbyteriall government in
Jerusalem, out of the which place I thus argue; Where the Apostles and
Presbyters did govern, and many Congregations were by them ordered and
governed, yet so, that all these congregations were one Church, there was a
Presbyteriall Government; but in the Church of Jerusalem the Apostles and
Presbyters did govern, and many Congregations were by them governed, yet so
that all these Congregations were one Church; Ergo, in the Church of Jerusalem
there was a Presbyterian Government; all which is sufficiently manifest out of
the places above specified, and from all the former discourse. For in the 21.
chapter it is asserted, that there were many ten thousands of believers in
Jerusalem, which could not all be contained in a few places, but must of
necessity be distributed into many and several congregations and assemblies,
all which notwithstanding made but one Church, as is evident, Act. 8. verse 1.
and many other places, the which congregations could not be one politic
ministerial Church, except only because they were united under one
Presbyteriall Government, and therefore of necessity the Church of Jerusalem
must be Aristocratically and Presbyterially governed, yea, the very mentioning
so often of the Preebyters meeting together, proves that they met together
about acts of Government, from which I thus argue.

That Scripture which proves a Presbytery in Jerusalem, or an Association of
Presbyters in that Church, proves that the Presbyters of the Church of
Jerusalem did meet together for acts of government, and did really govern that
Church. But, the places above quoted prove a Presbytery in Jerusalem, or an
Association of Presbyters in that Church; Ergo, they prove that they did meet
together for acts of Government, and did really govern that Church, and that
the Church of Jerusalem, consisting of many Congregations, was Presbyterially
governed.

For the Major, the Brethren cannot deny it; for the very name of Presbytery,
signifies a company or common council of rulers, governors, and magistrates;
now all men know, that governors in common cannot do their duty, but must of
necessity neglect the work committed to them, if they do not meet together for
acts of Government.

Neither can they deny the Minor, unless they will deny the Scripture; for
that expressly declares, that James and the Presbyters met together, and our
brethren take their warrant from that place, for their Presbyters meeting apart
from the multitude to consult, and to prepare matters: Yea, it is not only set
down, that James and the Presbyters met together, which had it only been for
the entertainment of Paul, it is an argument sufficient to convince any
rational man, that if the Presbyters would meet together for a salutation,
they did much more meet for acts of government: But I say it is not only
specified, that the Presbyters met together, but what they did in consultation
in that their meeting, and what they acted upon deliberation, and that was to
advise Paul, and to direct him what he should do, which council of theirs was
not lax, but restrictive and binding, verse 23. Do therefore that which we say
unto thee. By all which it is evident that they met about acts of Government,
when they gave an order and rule to Paul himself, how he should behave
himself at that time; and we read that Paul followed their council, and
submitted himself to their order; by all which it is most apparent, that the
Church of Jerusalem was ordered and governed by the joint consent and Common
Council of Presbyters, though consisting of many Congregations, and was
Presbyterially governed.

But I further thus argue, Where there were many Assemblies in Jerusalem, and
many Presbyters, and these Assemblies were all one Church, and these Presbyters
all of them Presbyters of that one Church, there of necessity there were many
Congregations under one Presbytery, and that Church was presbyterially
governed; but in the church of Jerusalem there were many assemblies, and many
presbyters, and those Assemblies were all one Church, and those Presbyters all
of them Presbyters of that one Church; Ergo, in the church of Jerusalem there
were many congregations under one presbytery, and that church was
presbyterially governed.

For the Major, no man of sound reason or judgment will deny it.

And for the first part of the Minor, that there were many Assemblies in that
Church, it has sufficiently been proved in the foregoing discourse, and is
evident out of the 21. chapter, where it is said there were many ten thousands.

And for the other parts of it, that the Church of Jerusalem was but one
Church, and that all the Presbyters there were Presbyters of that one Church,
the Brethren themselves do acknowledge it; and they do also accord and grant
that the Church of Jerusalem was governed by a Presbytery, and that it was
Presbyterianly ruled; but withal they conceive the church of Jerusalem to
consist of no more believers than might all meet together in one place and
congregation; so that the difference between us and the brethren is not whether
the church of Jerusalem was Presbyterianly governed or no, for that they do
acknowledge, and would have their churches governed after that manner; but this
is the debate between us and them, whether there were no more believers in the
church of Jerusalem then could all meet in one congregation, which is their
opinion; but whether or no it has not by the foregoing discourse been
sufficiently proved that there were more congregations and assemblies in the
church of Jerusalem, and a greater number of believers then could all meet in
any one place or congregation, and that all these were under one Presbytery:
that I refer to the understanding Reader to judge of. And this shall suffice to
have spoken of the third conclusion or proposition.

And now according to my promise I will faithfully set down wh^t Master Knollys
and I. S. have to say to these my arguments. And in the first place I will
begin with Mr Hanserdo who page 11. and 12. thus replyeth to my first argument.
The words of this Scripture Acts 11. ver. 27. (says he) which the Doctor
makes use of to prove his assertion, are these, ver. 30. and sent it, viz. the
relief to the Elders by the hands of Barnabas and Saul: Here in these last
words says the Doctor, we see that the Presbyters and none but the Presbyters
received the Alms, which sufficiently proves that the Presbyters in all
Churches were the men in government. To the which argument of mine, Master
Knollys page 11. replyeth as follows. It is not denied by the brethren (says
he) that the Presbyters in all churches were the men in the government of the
Churches in which they are Elders. But this I conceive (by the Doctors favor)
does not prove it; to wit, because the alms were sent unto the Elders. Much
less does that Scripture prove that the Apostles and Presbyters governed and
ruled the Church in Jerusalem by a common Council and Presbytery. But in the
15. chap. ver. 2. 4. 6. 22. and and chap. 16. 4. and chap. 21. 17, 18. The
Presbyters of Jerusalem by name (says the Doctor) are expressed.

These are Master Knollys his own words with his reply and answer to my first
argument by which I proved my third assertion, in the which I shall desire the
Reader to consider, what he denies and what he grants. It is not denied
(says he) by the Brethren (meaning the Independents) that the Presbyters in
all churches were the men in the government of the churches in which they are
Elders. Take I pray his own expression. He acknowledges, that the government
in all churches was committed to the Presbyters, and that it lay only in their
hands as to whom it was solely delegated, so that he grants as much as I
contended for by that argument, by which all judicious and understanding men
may now perceive that Mr Knollys and the brethren do accord unto this truth;
viz. that the people have nothing to do with the government of the churches in
which they are Members; so that I have as much assented unto by him and all the
brethren as I desire, by the which (if I am not mistaken) he has utterly
excluded the people in all their seven new churches, and in all their new
gathered assemblies of the congregational way, from any hand in the government
of the churches: For (says he) it is not denied by the brethren that the
Presbyters in all churches were the men in the government of the churches in
which they are Elders. So that hereafter I hope the brethren will not be so
enraged against me, if I believe as the seven new Churches believe and as all
the brethren of the congregationall way believe those confiding men: when
Master Knollys says, that it is not denied by them that the government in all
Churches is laid upon the Presbyters shoulders; and therefore not upon the
peoples. So that now there is little need of farther contesting between us
about this business; seeing he grants, that the Presbyters in all churches
ought to have the government of them.

But it will not be amiss a little to take notice of the contentiousnesse of
the man's spirit who grants the thing, and yet wrangles about words, and that
wretchedly and poorly; and therefore I shall desire the Reader to consider what
he denies in my argument with the reason of it: viz. these two things. First,
that this does prove it, to wit, because the alms were sent unto the Elders.
Secondly, that that Scripture proves that the Apostles and Presbyters governed
and ruled the church in Jerusalem by a common Council and Presbytery: These
two things Master Knollys affirms will not ensue from that portion of
Scripture upon which I grounded my argument.

Now before I come to reply to both these cavills of Master Hanserdo, I shall
take this liberty to say unto him that as he is a mere novice in Divinity and
a foreiner to all good learning, so he is but a sucking politician, not knowing
either his Primer in that art, or his Catechism in Theology, or any thing in
the government either of Church or State, which is one of the grand errors and
heresies of all his fraternity, who while they pretend to learning and would
persuade the world they are excellent Statesmen and Grandees in Government,
they will in time prove themselves (as they are indeed) a company of grolls and
ninnyes; and I hope yet to see that day that they will be as much exploded and
bafled out of their fond whimsies, as ever the Prelates were or any distempered
Sect in the world.

But that all men may the better see the truth and discern Master Knollys his
errors and the groundlessenesse of his denial of my argument, who says, it
does not prove that the presbyters were the men in government, because the
alms were sent unto the Elders; and that the Apostles and Presbyters governed
and ruled that church by a common council and presbytery, because the relief
was sent unto the Presbyters.

I shall now upon this occasion speak something concerning politics, and show
wherein the sovereign power and authority in all governments consists, and in
whose hands it resides; and what are the essential properties or rather parts
of Government in either of them: So that wheresoever they are exercised in any
country or common wealth, those men only who are invested with them or to whom
they are betrusted either immediately by God himself or by the election or
choice of the people, the sovereign authority in those several governments
lies and is deposited in their hands that manage them, and in no bodies else
but such as are allowed of by their appointment or good liking and love.

And if men will then seriously consider and weigh the government secular in
all States and Countries, and compare the Ecclesiastical with them; which
(without any offense) they may do, the truth will more gloriously shine forth,
and the strength and force of my Argument will be the more obvious to every
intelligible creature.

Now all men know, that have either read or observed any thing in Politics,
and the government of the world, that in whose hands soever the legislative
power lies, so that they can either make or enact new Laws and Statutes, or
repeal or abrogate any old ones, and ratify both with sanctions, and who have
also the power of life and death, and the authority of punishing all
Prevaricators against their Laws, all men I say, know, that the sovereign
power and authority resides and lies soly and only in those men's hands that
exercise it: And this is the first essential part or property of sovereign
and supreme authority in any state, and that declares unto all men who are the
men in government there.

The second Essential part of sovereign power in any government, consists in
this* that they can erect and create new Offices, and new Officers within their
jurisdictions, and set up new Courts and Judges, and can confer Names,
Honors, and titles of Dignity upon them severally, and invest them all with
power and authority to execute their several places, Offices and Iudicatures;
and this is the second essential property of supreme authority in any state,
so that in whose hands soever this power resides, they only are the Rulers in
that government, and no other persons.

The third Essential part of sovereign power in any state, is this, to make
war and peace at pleasure, either foreign or domestical, upon any just
occasions, and to have the managing of the Militia, etc. so that those only, in
whose hands this authority lies, they are reputed, and indeed are the supreme
Rulers in that state.

The fourth Essential property of superlative power and authority in any
government or state is this, to have a Court of ultimate resort, to the which
all men may fly for relief, and to the which all Appeals, by all persons from
all parts, within their jurisdictions, and from all inferior Courts are made
upon any unjustice done them there, or upon any pressures or grievances by any
one in authority, and in whose power it is to end and determine all
controversies and differences, or to redress all abuses, and to relieve the
oppressed, so that in whose hands soever this authority resides, they only are
said to exercise the sovereign power, and to be the sole Governors and
Moderators in that state.

The fifth and last part of supreme authority in any state consists in this,
that they have the power of pressing and stamping moneys and coins, and
setting the valution upon them, or any other moneys that are current in their
countries, or have the disposing of the treasury of those states in which they
live, and have the Exchequer in their hands, and all the revenues of them, and
to whom all the tributes, subsidies, assessements, customs, benevolences and
collections of the people that are gathered for the common relief and
preservation of the whole country or state are sent, and who have the
disposing of them according to their wisdom, in those men's hands I say that
this power ^esideth of disposing the treasury or revenues, they and they only
are the supreme Magistrates and Rulers in that state, as at this day it resides
with all the former essential properties in the hands of King and Parliament,
that great Council of the Kingdom; by all which it sufficiently appears,
that all sovereign power resides in them only, and is soly exercised and
managed by them, so that if Master Knollys should say that it does not prove
that the government lies now in the hands of King and Parliament that great
Court, because the contributions, collections, and excises from all parts of
the Kingdom are sent unto them, and are now at their disposing, I believe the
great Council would teach him a little more wit, and all those his brethren
that should join with him in this his argumentation a little better manners.

Now if we will compare things together, we shall find, that whatsoever can
prove the sovereign power in all secular governments to be in those men's hands
which exercise it; the same may be said concerning the Ecclesiastical
Government in the Church at Jerusalem, and of the Apostles and Presbyters of
that Church, who were the chief Officers, and men in authority in it, that the
government and sovereign power in that Church lay in their hands only. So
that it will then undeniably follow, that my argument will for ever stand good
against Master Knolly's fond cavils for the proving of these two truths, viz.
that the Presbyters in the Church at Jerusalem, and in all other churches were
the only Governors in those churches, and that from this reason, because the
alms were sent unto them, and because they had the disposing of the treasury
of the Church: This I say, will in the first place necessarily follow. The
second truth, that will result out of the words, is this, that the Apostles and
Presbyters governed and ruled that Church by a common council and Presbytery,
both which Master Knollys vainly denies, will follow from my Argument.

But for the farther elucidation of this truth, and that it may the better
appear unto all men, I will briefly run over the essential properties, and
parts of supreme and sovereign power that were exercised in that church, and
show that they resided only and solely in the Apostles and Presbyters hands,
who were the Governors of that church, and that the people had nothing to do
with them; and for the first, to wit, the legislative power it was in the
church of Jerusalem, and committed only into the hands of the Apostles and
Presbytery of that church, as who had received the Keys, Matthew. 16. and Matthew.
18. For so says the Prophet, Isaiah chapter the 2. verse 2. out of Zion shall
go forth the Law; and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem; and Acts the 1.
verse. 2. 3. it is said that Christ, for the time that he remained upon the
earth after his Resurrection, through the Holy Ghost gave commandments unto
the Apostles whom he had chosen, speaking to them of the things pertaining to
the Kingdom of God, and commanded them that they should not depart from
Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the Father, which was that he would
send them the Holy Ghost the comforter which should teach them all things, and
bring all things unto their remembrance whatsoever Christ had said unto them,
and that he should abide with them for ever, John 14. verse 26. and lead them
into all truth, and in the fifteenth Chapter he calls his Apostles his friends,
telling them that he had made known unto them all things that he had heard
from his Father, verse 15. and he promised, that the Holy Ghost should bring
all those things to their memories, and in the same Chapter in the 26. verse
Christ says, when the comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the
Father, even the spirit of truth, which proceeds from the Father he shall
testify of me. From all which places, and from the 28. of Matthew. verse 18, 19,
20. Mark. the 16. verse 15, 16, 17, 18. and John the 20. verse 21, 22, 23. and
many more that might be alleged, it is apparently evident that the Apostles
and Presbyters in the Church of Jerusalem were invested with a legislative
power, so that whatsoever they preached or writ that we find recorded in the
Holy Word of God, they are all the Statutes and Laws of the King of his Church
Christ Jesus, and by the which all Christ's subjects to the end of the world are
to be regulated and governed. The Apostles and Presbyters in the Church of
Jerusalem had power also to abrogate old Laws, and to enact and establish new
ones, as we may see Act. 15. and Act. 16. yea, they had power of life and
death, of which we have one example in Ananias and Saphira, Act. 5. yea, they
raised the dead, cured the lame, and healed the sick with their very shadows,
and all this power was given unto them for the ratifying of their authority,
and to show they were sent of God; withal they had the power of erecting new
offices and creating new Officers, not only in Jerusalem, but in all the
Churches, as that office of Deacons in the sixth of the Acts, and the office of
Elders or Presbyters in the 14. chapter, where it is said that Paul and
Barnabas ordained them Presbyters in every Church, and therefore they appointed
them first in the Mother Church Jerusalem, for out of Zion, (says the Prophet)
shall go forth the Law and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem; yea, they gave
those Officers their names, and invested them all with power to execute their
several Offices, as is manifest, Acts the 6. and in the 20. of the same book,
and in the Epistles of Paul to Timothy, and Titus. They also had the power of
making war and peace with the Nations, and all the Inhabitants of the earth;
for they preached and published the glad tidings of peace to all such as
received the Gospel, and denounced war and death with all manner of
judgments to those that obeyed not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Thessalonians. 1. verse 8. and to the Apostles and Presbyters in Jerusalem likewise, as
to their ultimate and extreme refuge, and relief and help, all appeals were
made (as we may see in the fifteenth of the Acts, and in the 6. and in the 9.
and in the 15. of the same book) as to the supreme Tribunal upon earth in
Gods matters, in whose hands all the highest power and sovereign authority for
Ecclesiastical matters then resided, and whose place it was not only to hear
the controversies and differences of greatest concernment in Christ's Kingdom
his Church, but also to decide and determine them, and put a final period unto
them, the which example of theirs was left as a presi^ent of imitation to all
succeeding ages for Ministers to do the like upon the like occasions, as in
that controversy that arose among the Christians at Antioch through false
Teachers, by whom that heresy was broched, viz. that it was necessary to
salvation that the ceremonial Law should be observed, and that Believers could
not be saved without it, by which great scandal was given to the weak jews,
who by this means were alienated from the believing Gentiles, because they did
neglect those Ceremonies, whereupon there arose a great schism and rent
amongst the brethren to the disturbance of the Church of God.

Now for the deciding and determining of this controversy, the Christians of
Antioch appeal to the Apostles and Presbyters at Jerusalem, as knowing that
all power was given unto them both Dogmaticall, Diatacticall and Critical,
yea, authoritative and commanding, who entering into a Council and Synod, and
there debating the business, by Reason, Arguments and Disputation, and finding
by disquisition of the whole matter, what was the good will and pleasure of
God, what he had revealed concerning the Gentiles, and the New Covenant under
the Gospel, they determined the whole matter according to the written Word of
God, not pretending any new Revelation or new light or any extraordinary or
superlative assistance in the deciding that debate, but only exercised that
ordinary sovereign power in the church of God, which God had invested them
with, and given unto them in his holy Word the rule and square of all
Doctrines, and not only unto them, but to all his faithful Ministers his
servants to the end of the world; and in the deciding of this controversy,
they first showed and put forth their dogmaticall power confuting and
convincing the heresy, and vindicating the truth.

Secondly, they declared their diatacticall authority, making a practical
Canon or Law for avoiding of scandal, and abstaining from such things as gave
occasion of it.

Thirdly, they exercised their critical power and judiciary authority, verse
24. condemning and branding those Teachers with that infamous and black mark
of Liars, subverters of souls and troublers of the Church.

Fourth. and lastly, they sufficiently manifested their imparative and
authoritative power in sending those Decrees unto the Churches of the Gentiles
with do this and live, v. 29. for so much the words imports, all which are
acts of sovereign power and authority in all governments whatsoever, as the
learned know which when they resided in the Apostles and Presbyters of the
Church at Jerusalem, and were exercised by them there; it is sufficiently
manifest that all the power of government likewise remained, and resided wholly
and solely in the Apostles and Presbyters hands, and that they exercised it by
joint consent, and the Common Council of them all, for all acts of government
ever run in the name of all the Apostles, or in the name of the Apostles and
Presbyters.

Lastly, they had the disposing of the treasury of that Church in their hands,
as all the Presbyters of all the other Churches had, for they brought the
moneys always to the Apostles, and laid them down at their feet, as it
appears, Act. 4. and afterward all the moneys and alms were sent to the
Presbyters through all Churches, as in whose hands the sovereign authority
lay, which they never gave out of their hands or relinquished, but upon all
occasions gave directions to their several Deacons how to distribute them for
the good of the church, and for the common emolument of the poor Saints: for
otherwise to what end should the alms and benevolences of the Gentiles be sent
unto the Presbyters in the churches in Iudaea, if they had not been the men in
authority in those churches, and to whom the government of them belonged, and
who only and wholly had the disposing of them. Now then when the contribution
and relief was sent unto the Presbyters of the church in Jerusalem as well as
the other churches; it follows that they and they only had the power and
authority in that church which they ever exercised by the joint consent and
common council and agreement of them all, for it was sent unto all the
Presbyters in every church, and therefore they were in common to dispose of
them. Now before this relief was sent thither, and long after that, as the
story of the Acts declares, most of the Apostles resided there, and all the
Apostles were Presbyters (as the Independents themselves do acknowledge) and
the same Scripture that relates that the alms and relief were sent speaking
in the plural number, says, they were sent unto the Presbyters, now they were
all Presbyters, and therefore they were sent unto them in common; and if we
observe the Dialect of holy, writ through the whole story of the Acts, we
shall find for the most part, if there be any mention made of any act of
government, that either all the Apostles, or some more of them are ever made
mention of to be the chief Moderators and prime Agents in the business, which
was never carried by any one of them, or by the multitude or people; and it it
is credibly believed that most of the Apostles resided in Jerusalem or in
Judaea till after the Council and Synod at Jerusalem, Act. 15. and for the
Apostle Saint James, it is the opinion of most of the Ecclesiastical Writers,
that he continued President of the Presbytery in Jerusalem his whole life
time, as he was President in that Council in the 15. of the Acts, and it
stands with very good reason; for many years after he continued still the
prime man in authority there amongst the Presbyters, and knew very well the
condition of all the Believers there, and what numbers and multitudes of
Disciples there were Inhabitants in that Church, all which sufficiently
demonstrateth that he had his residence continually, or for the most part in
Jerusalem, so that Paul coming thither to the Feast, as it is related, Acts
the 21 chapter, was informed by him, not only that there were many ten
thousands of Believers in that Church, but what those Disciples had heard
concerning his preaching, which shows not only that Saint James had his
abode in that City, but that those believers likewise were dwellers and
inhabitants there, and that now he had very good acquaintance and familiarity
with them; yea, which is more, at that very time that Paul and Barnabas were
sent to Jerusalem with those alms, Peter and James were then in that City, if
not other of the Apostles also, as the twelfe chapter of the Acts abundantly
shows; and without doubt they all joined with the Presbyters, and in a
Common Council ordered how the Alms should be disposed of by the Deacons to
the necessity of the Saints; yea, it does most necessarily follow (what so ever
Mr. Knollys, and those of his Fraternity shall be able to say to the contrary)
for the Scripture records, that the relief was sent to the Presbyters
through Iudaea, and Jerusalem was the Metropolis city in Iudaea, and in the
12. chapter, v. 25. it is related, that Barnabas and Paul returned from
Jerusalem whither they had carried the alms, so that many of the Apostles
being at that time in Jerusalem, and the princiall and chief Presbyters in
that Church amongst the other Presbyters, it may not be credited that they I
say being the prime Magistrates and Governors did sit still and leave the
rule, ordering, and government of that Church to other of their fellow
Presbyters, and them of inferior rank, but they also acted their parts in the
government at that time, as well as at others, and therefore I say when the
disposing of the treasury of the Church or State, is an Act of sovereign
power, and belongs only to those that are in authority in either, and when all
the Apostles and Presbyters governed that Church by a Common Council and joint
consent, and when the alms were sent unto all, it necessarily follows,
notwithstanding all Master Knollys his garrulity, that my Argument out of that
Scripture will ever stand good to prove that the sending of the relief to the
Elders, makes good these two things; the first, that the Presbyters were the
only men in authority there: and secondly, that the Apostles and Presbyters of
that Church governed and ruled it by a Common Council and Presbytery: yea,
Master Knollys his own words confirms me in my opinion, who says, it is not
denied by the brethren, that the Presbyters in all Churches were the men in the
government of the Churches in which they are Elders; so that all businesses of
public concernment, were to be transacted and managed by the common consent
and agreement of them all, and not by the determination of any one particular
Presbyter in either of those Churches; much less by any other persons or
people in them but the Presbyters.

And this shall suffice to have spoke concerning the confirmation of my first
Argument grounded upon that Scripture, that the relief and alms were sent
unto the Presbyters of Jerusalem.

And now I come to what he has to say against my second argument by which I
proved my third proposition, which is this, as he himself set it down in the
12. Page of his book. They that in the holy Scripture are called Presbyters,
and acted and ordered things in a joint body and common Council with the
Presbyters, and exercised that ordinary power committed to them in the 18. of
Matthew they acted as Presbyters: But the Apostles in governing the Church of
Jerusalem consisting of many Congregations and Assemblies, acted and ordered
things in a joint body and common Council with the Presbytery of that Church
as Presbyters. Ergo: the church of Jerusalem was Presbyterially governed, and
by a common Council of Presbyters. The Major and Minor of this Syllogism
being proved (says the Doctor) the conclusion will necessarily ensue.

Thus Master Knollys relates this Argument, wholly passing by all the rest.

And to this argument he first thus replies. I know not (says he) that the
brethren ever deny ed that the Church of Jerusalem was presbyterianly governed.
So that he assenteth unto the conclusion, which is all I contended for by that
argument; So that by this it follows that the people had no hand in the
government for they are not Presbyters by office. And yet such is his ambition
to be thought some body in the art of disputation, that he quarrels the form
of my Syllogism, and takes upon him to show me how I should have framed it
aright; but all those that know indeed what really belongs to learning will
easily perceive the man does but babble, and if I should spend time in trifling
with him about forms, moodes, and figures in Syllogisms, who knows no more in
Logic then the horse he preaches on, I might be thought as vain as himself;
therefore entreating him hereafter to learn his Grand-dame to suck and not me
to make Syllogisms, passing by all those his grolleries I will set down what he
has farther to reply to this argument in the 13. page, and then answer to
that, and after I have done with him, I will come to I. S. that learned
Gentleman and profound Clerk. Master Knollys to this argument thus farther
answers, Though the Apostles (says he) were called Presbyters in the
Scripture, yet it follows not, that they acted as Presbyters, but as
Apostles, Act. 15. And they cannot therein be a pattern and president for
Presbyters; First, because the Apostles had the care and charge of and over all
Churches 2 Cor. 11. 28. But the Presbyters had the care and oversight of some
one Church only as Ephesus Act. 20. 28. or Philippi Phil. 1. 1. and this the
Doctor often inserts in his book. That all the Churches we read of in the New
Testament (though they were presbyterially governed) were Dependent upon their
several Presbyters page 12. And secondly, because this would make the
Presbyters Independent indeed; for so the Apostles were in the government of
all the Churches; the Presbyters of Jerusalem, of Ephesus, and of all the
Churches were Dependent upon the Apostles, and the Apostles only Dependent on
Christ; by whose holy spirit they were always guided in the government of
their churches, and therefore they said Acts 15. 28. It seemed good to the holy
Ghost and us. And though the Doctor say the Presbyters might say so, as well as
the Apostles because the Elders and Presbyters are mentioned there. The Doctor
might have also considered that the brethren, even the whole Church, the
multitude (how many soever the Doctor can make of them) were present as well as
the Presbyters Acts 15. 4. 12. 22. 23, 25, 27, 28. and so have made the
brethren, the multitude, even the whole Church Independent also; and the Doctor
might as well have affirmed, that the brethren even the whole Church might say,
it seemed good to the holy Ghost and to us.

Thus Master Knollys pleases his own humor in heaping up a senseless and
confused multitude of words and that only to delude the people.

But should I make a full discovery of all the errors of this his babble and
nonsense and give a full answer to them, truly I might make a very large
discourse, I will therefore study brevity and answer him in a few words, though
I will omit nothing worthy to be taken notice of. But by the way I may say thus
much that this his answer is nothing to the purpose and his reasons are as
vain, frivilous and fond as by the sequel will appear.

But whereas he denies, that the Apostles though they be called Presbyters
acted as Presbyters and that they cannot therein be a pattern and president for
Presbyters, it is a mere begging the question and a fond trifling in a serious
and weighty matter, when it was sufficiently proved and that out of the holy
Scripture that the blessed Apostles were not only called Presbyters but that
they were Presbyters really as well as virtually (which the Independents
themselves deny not) and that they acted also as Presbyters at Jerusalem, that
is, as ordinary rulers and officers in all acts of government, as also in that
Council in the 15. of the Acts; for otherwise their example could not indeed
have been a pattern of government to all Ministers and Presbytes in all
succeeding ages, if in either of them they had acted as extraordinary men, by a
transcendent and superlative power and by an inimitable authority and as men
immediately assisted by the holy Ghost as when they wrought Miracles and when
they writ the holy Scripture.

Now that the Apostles in all those acts of government were and are to be a
pattern to all Ministers in the ages to come, all the learned of the
Independent tribe and all their brethren of New England do acknowledge it, and
take the ordination of Deacons and Elders in their new Churches from the
example of the Apostles in the sixth of the Acts and the fourteenth chapter of
the same book, and they acknowledge and accord that Synods and Counsels in
like manner are one of Gods Ordinances and ground it upon the Apostles and
Presbyters meeting in the 15. of the Acts, and take their example for a pattern
and president of gathering into Synods and Counsels upon the like occasions,
all which they could not do if the Apostles in all those acts of Government had
acted and managed them only as Apostles and in an extraordinary way with a
transcendent and infallible authority and by a special dispensation from
heaven and as only peculiar unto themselves as miraculous and extraordinary
governors. So that whiles Master Knollys fights against the truth and against
me, he with the same weapon wounds his own cause and overthrows the
Independents doctrine, who from the examples of the Apostles though
extraordinary men take their ordination of Deacons and Elders and of calling
Synods. And therefore in the first place this may serve for the discovering of
his ignorance and futility.

As for his reasons of his denial that the Apostles cannot be a pattern and
president for Presbyters, because the Apostles (as he says) had the care of
all churches, and the Presbyters were limited and confined to their particular
charges, they are foolish and vain, and make nothing for the enervating or
weakening of my argument: for it does not follow as the learned well know, that
because the Apostles in some respects were extraordinary men and rulers,
therefore in all acts of Government they did nothing ordinary or for the
imitation of other Church governors; I say this can never follow with any good
reason, neither will any judicious man thus argue because the Apostles were
extraordinary men and officers, therefore they did not the acts of ordinary
governors; whereas when they assembled themselves about the affairs of the
Church and for the good of it, it was for this very end and purpose that they
might leave an example and president to the ages to come and to all Ministers
that should succeed them of doing the like; and therefore we are ever to
consider the Apostles in all acts of government to have acted as ordinary
governors and rulers, and for a president and pattern to all Ministers to the
end of the world.

But whereas Master Knollys grollishly says, that the Apostles were
Independent in the Government of all the Churches, and that the Presbyters of
Jerusalem and Ephesus and all the Churches were Dependent upon the Apostles,
and the Apostles only Dependent upon Christ by whose spirit they were always
guided in the government of their Churches, and therefore they said Acts 15.
28. It seemed good to the holy Ghost and to us. In every sentence, I might say
word, there is an error.

For first, the Apostles were not Independent at all no more then the
Presbyters, but they were ever tied unto the word of God and his revealed will
and that by Christ himself who said John 5. search the Scriptures; and Luke 14.
They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them; Yea Saint Peter 2 Epist.
chap. 1. v. 19. teaches us, That we have a more sure word of prophecy
whereunto we do well to take heed, etc. So that the Apostles themselves were
tied to the Scriptures. And Paul the great Apostle of the Gentiles in the 24.
of the Acts and in many other places makes the Law and the Prophets the rule of
his faith, professing that he believed all things according to them. So that
when Peter swarved from that rule and began amongst the Galatians to halt and
temporize Paul resisted him to his face and accused him openly of
prevarication: Nay which is more so far they were from being independents that
they were always to follow the guidance of the spirit; they were not to move
but as he directed Act. 16. Yea the Apostles themselves were subject to the
Presbytery at Jerusalem and were to give an account of their actions to them at
any time, as we may see Acts 11. where Peter was questioned, and was forced to
give in his answer for satisfaction; the other Apostles also were subject unto
that Presbytery, and gave an account how they had spent their time amongst the
Gentiles; yea, Paul himself received orders from the Presbytery in Jerusalem,
Acts 21. and was ruled by them: yea, they were not only subject to the Church
in Jerusalem, but to all other Churches also, and were sent on their message at
any time. For Peter and John were sent to Samaria by the Apostles, Act. the 8.
and Paul and Barnabas were sent from Antioch by that Church there to Jerusalem,
and from Jerusalem they were sent again to Antioch, Syria, and Galatia, so
that they were as much dependent as any other Ministers of the Gospel; and
therefore M. Knollys is altogether in error in asserting that the Apostles were
independent; neither is that true also that the presbyters were dependent upon
the Apostles any farther then they commanded in the Lord; for there was a
special caution and caveat made to the contrary, not only by Christ himself,
who said to all his Followers and Disciples beware of false Prophets and false
Christ's, but also by the Apostles themselves, and that in the Synod at
Jerusalem, Acts the 15. who bad all the Gentiles beware and take heed that they
listened not to any as coming from them, unless they taught according to the
word of God and their decrees; yea, Saint Paul in his Epistle to the Galatians,
Gal, 1. verse 7, 8. gives them and all Christians a special charge, that if
he himself or any of the Apostles, or an Angel from heaven should teach
otherwise then he had taught them, that they should account him accursed, and
the same doctrine he delivers to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 10. and 11.
charging them to take heed of falls Apostles, although they transformed
themselves into the Ministers of Righteousness, and injoynes Timothy and Titus
to do the same, and in them warnes all Christians to beware of false Teachers,
though they come in the name of Apostles, if they bring not the doctrine of
Christ, and teach not according to sound words; and the same does Saint Peter
in his Epistles, and Saint John in all his Epistles, and commands them
withal that they should not receive them into their houses, nor bid them God
speed; and the same does Saint Jude in his, and the Church of Ephesus, Revel.
the 2. verse 2. is commended for discovering and casting out the false
Apostles, by all which and many more proofs and reasons that might be alleged,
it is apparently evident, that the Presbyters did not depend upon the Apostles
themselves, but upon Christ whose Ministers and Angels they were, and the stars
in his right hand, Apocalyp. the 2. verse 1. who had their authority and
Commission as well from Christ as the Apostles themselves had theirs, and who
preserved and protected them as well as he did the Apostles, bidding them not
to be afraid what man could do against them, as the second and third chapters
of the Revelations sufficiently declare: and therefore they were all dependent
upon Christ, and not upon the Apostles (as Master Knollys fondly says) who
were their fellow servants, though in a higher degree and order; and if we
duly consider the transaction of all the business in the Synod at Jerusalem,
Acts 15. the Presbyters were as much guided by the spirit in that Council as
the Apostles themselves, as I said in my Argument, and shall by and by, by Gods
assistance more abundantly prove, that all the world may see the vanity of
Master Knollys, who thinks all men should take for an Oracle every word that
falls from his pen, though it be never so erroneous and never so liable to
exception and just control as that other of his expressions is, where he
says that the Apostles were always guided by the spirit in the Government of
their Churches; in the which words there is a twofold error; for Peter was not
guided by the spirit, neither when Christ called him Satan, neither when he
denied his Master, nor when he temporized amongst the Galatians; besides the
Churches were not the Apostles Churches, as he erroneously and ignorantly
speaks, but they were Christ's golden Candlesticks Revel. 1. ver. 20. who
walked amongst them: And the Apostles profess 2 Cor. 4. ver. 5. that they
preached not themselves, but Jesus Christ the Lord and themselves the servants
of the Church for Jesus his sake, and in the first of the Corinthians chap. 3.
ver. 21* 22, 23. Therefore let no man glory in men (says the Apostle) for all
things are yours, whether Paul, or Apollo or Cephas, or the World, or Life, or
Death, or things present, or things to come, all are yours, and ye are Christ's,
and Christ is Gods. If the Churches therefore be Christ's golden Candlesticks,
and his Churches and his houses, as Paul in the 1 of Timothy averreth chapter 3.
ver. 14, 15. where he says, These things I write unto thee, that thou may
know how thou ought to behave thy self in the house of God which is the
Church of the living God, the pillar and ground of truth: if therefore, I say,
Churches be the houses of God and the Churches of the living God, and the
golden Candlesticks of Jesus Christ, and he be the Lord of them, and there be
also a special prohibition given by Christ himself to all his Apostles and to
all ministers that they should not Lord it over his people as the Princes of
the Gentiles did over them that were their subjects; how then can Mr Knollys say
that the Churches were the Apostles Churches? Every man I conceive that has
any ordinary understanding, that with deliberation shall read Mr Knollys
scriblings, will conclude of him, That he is altogether ignorant in sacred
things, and if he had not been a frontlesse man and without all shame, he would
never have published so many errors and so much ignorance as he has done to
the view of the world, neither would he ever have said that though the Apostles
were called Presbyters in the Scripture, yet they acted not as Presbyters,
especially when it was proved unto him and all those of his fraternity in my
first book that they acted in all acts of Government and in that Synod at
Jerusalem Acts 15. as ordinary Presbyters. But because Mr Knollys is not yet
satisfied about that point nor perhaps never will be, for the more ample
satisfaction if not to him, at least to others, I will here prove that point a
little more fully; viz. that the Apostles acted as Presbyters in an ordinary
way as the other did, and after I have done that, I will briefly also answer Mr
Knollys his grolleries concerning the fufferage and votes of the Church and
people in that Synod in Jerusalem.

But first I will prove, that the Apostles in the debate and controversy in
the Synod and in that whole business did not act as Apostles with a
transcendent and infallible authority, but as Presbyters in such a way as makes
their meeting a president and pattern to ordinary Councels and Synods.

For first Paul an Apostle and Barnabas, though both extraordinary men and
endued with an infallible spirit, yet were at that time sent to Jerusalem by
the Church of Antioch ver. 2. as servants of that Presbytery, who willingly and
in obedience to the order of that Church subjected themselves to their
determination, which they would not have done had they acted as Apostles and
not as Members (for that present) of the Presbytery of Antioch; now all men
know that they that are sent as Messengers by command and appointment, as they
were, were not greater then those that sent them, which is one of the reasons
all orthodox Divines use against Peter's Supremacy, in that the Apostles which
were in Jerusalem (Acts 8. 14.) sent him and John to Samaria, and therefore
they conclude that the College of Apostles had authority over him and that
they were not subject to him: And the same may be concluded concerning Paul and
Barnabas that they were subject to the command of the Church: And it is yet
more evident out of the second verse of the 15, chapter of the Acts, Where it
is said, that when Paul and Barnabas had no small dissension and disputation
with them, that then they determined that Paul and Barnabas, and certain others
of them should go up to Jerusalem unto the Apostles and Elders about this
question, out of the which words every one may observe these conclusions
following: First, that Paul and Barnabas used not any transcendent
extraordinary and Apostolical authority in that Church* neither did they
challenge unto themselves an infallible authority for the deciding of that
difference, which they might have done if they had then and there acted as
Apostles and put forth their Apostolical power; yea which is more, it is in
terminis said, that Paul and Barnabas had no small dissension and disputation
with them, intimating by those words that they argued and debated the matter by
Reasons and Arguments, as the other ordinary Presbyters of that Church did,
which they would never have suffered if they had acted there as Apostles and
with an infallible authority; and this is the first conclusion may be gathered
out of those words to prove that Paul and Barnabas acted there as ordinary
Presbyters, and were not only at that time subject to that Church, but Members
of the same.

The second conclusion that may be gathered out of those words is this, That
they were sent as the other ordinary officers, and the same commands laid upon
them that were laid upon the other: Now if they of Antioch had looked upon Paul
and Barnabas as extraordinary Messengers endued with Apostolical authority,
they would have made some difference between them and the certain others spoke
of in that place; but sending them all with equal authority and with one and
the same Message and making no distinction between them, it sufficiently
proves that they of Antioch in this imploiment looked upon them but as ordinary
Presbyters.

The third thing observable is this, that Paul and Barnabas with those certain
others were sent as well to the Elders or Presbyters at Jerusalem about the
question, as to the Apostles, for so runs the text, they were all sent unto as
having equal authority and as the ordinary Governors and Councillors of the
Church and as to such as sat by one and the same Commission, Writ, or Charter,
and governed with a joint consent and by a Common Council and Agreement: And
therefore they are all to be considered as ordinary Presbyters in that Council
and Synod; and all this I say may be gathered out of that text.

But there are many other Arguments to prove it, because the Presbyters all of
them and that all along through the whole debate acted as authoritatively as
the Apostles: For as the Presbyters were sent unto as well as the Apostles and
assembled themselves accordingly v. 6. So they did decree and write the Epistle
as well as the Apostles ver. 22. 23. and Act. 16. 4. they are called also the
decrees of the Apostles and Elders, and Act. 21. the Presbyters say, We have
written and concluded, manifesting unto all the World that they in that Synod
sat and acted by the same authority and were assisted and guided by the same
spirit the Apostles were as sitting by the same Commission or Writ: And
therefore when the holy Ghost makes no difference between them in respect of
their authority, but only in regard of their names, it is a very great
rashness in Mr Knollys and those of his fraternity to say that the Apostles
acted not as Presbyters, which is indeed to confute the Scripture and all this
to delude the poor people.

Many Arguments more might be produced to prove that the Apostles acted as
Presbyters, and were no more then guided by an Apostolical and infallible
spirit then the other Presbyters; but for brevity sake I shall only name one
more, which is this, in that they stated the question, and debated it from the
holy Scripture in the ordinary way disputing Con and Pro, arguing and reasoning
what they should write, and what they should judge of that business, as it is
apparent in the 7. verse, and many more places in that Chapter, by their
deliberate suffrages and discourses in that Council, and having by searching
the Scripture (says the Holy Ghost) found what was the good and acceptable
will of God, thereupon they say it seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us; as
any Synod or Council of Divines upon the like assurance of Scripture warrant
may do.

Now I affirm, had the Apostles at that time acted by an apostolical and
infallible Spirit, a when they writ the holy Scripture, and not as Presbyters,
they would never have admitted any disputation, nor entered into a serious
debate and consultation what they should write and judge of that matter, but
would speedily have dispatched the business, and by their Apostolical
authority, and that infallible Spirit they were led with, they would have
decided the matter, and either have said, thus says the Lord as the Prophets
of old did, or take notice that what we write are the commands of the Lord,
dictated unto us by the Spirit of God, and would never have gone to consult
with others about it, or debated the matter by Arguments and reasons; which
when they did, it is a sufficient Argument to prove that the Apostles acted as
Presbyters in that Council; and therefore from all that I have now said it is
apparently evident that all the Apostles at Jerusalem acted as Presbyters, and
that the other Presbyters had equal authority and power with them,
notwithstanding all Master Knollys his babble. And this shall suffice to have
spoke by way of answer to that part of his fond cavil: and now I come to reply
to his Grolleries concerning the votes and suffrage of the people in the Church
at Jerusalem whom Master Knollys joyneth with the Apostles and Elders, and
makes them equal with the Elders in authority, misconceiving what is meant by
brethren there; his words are these, page 13. The Doctor (says he) might have
also considered that the Brethren, even the whole Church, the multitude (how
many soever the Doctor can make of them) were present as well as the
Presbyters, Act. 15. 4. 12. 22, 23. 25. 27, 28. and so have made the Brethren
the multitude, even the whole Church independent also; and the Doctor might as
well have affirmed, that the Brethren, even the whole Church might say it
seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us. Thus Master Knollys disputes not
only against all sound Divinity, but against all reason, whiles he would make
all the people to have equal suffrage and voices or votes with the Elders in
that Council; and therefore Master Knollys shall never be my Master, who had
he known any thing concerning governments, either in Church or State, or had
he ever read any thing concerning Councels in either, he would never have so
argued: For Councels in all governments consist of peculiar and select men, who
for their Gravity, Wisdom, Learning, and their inveterate experience are made
choice of, and set apart for that purpose, and to whom the rule and government
of the Kingdoms and Countries wherein they live is committed: so that the
ordinary people are not to intrude or intermeddle in those affairs whose place
it is only to obey and to yield subjection to their Ordinances, and they that
would go about or endeavor to change this order appointed by God himself,
would speedily bring confusion upon themselves and others; and as it is and
ever has been in the matters and affairs of the State, and in the Kingdoms
of this world; so it is in the Kingdom of Jesus Christ which is his Church,
all things are to be managed with order and decency, and by such men only as
upon whose shoulders God has laid that government, and into whose hands he
has committed the Keys those ensigns of authority; now when Christ the King
of his Church has given the Keys to his Apostles, and to the Presbyters only,
and to be continued in their hands to the end of the world, they only are to
manage the affairs and government of the Church to the consummation of all
things, whose calling and place it is to rule and govern them, as who have the
care of the churches, who are the prime men in authority in them, for the
ruling and governing of them, and the people are only to obey them, and their
Ordinances in the Lord, and are not to intermeddle in the government of the
Church, or have their voices or votes in matters of government, as has been
often proved. And therefore Master Knollys in saying, That the Brethren, even
the whole Church, the multitude (how many soever the Doctor can make of them)
were present as well as the Presbyters, and had their voices there, is
altogether mistaken in his commentary exposition: for he by Brethren,
understanding that the whole Church, the whole multitude of Believert, men,
women and children then in Jerusalem (for so his words do import) were present
in that Council, speaks he knows not what; for it is most certain by the
holy Scripture, that the tenth part of the Believers that were in Jerusalem
could not have met together in any one place, and therefore all the many ten
thousands that were there could not possibly have come together in one Synod or
Council; and besides the impossibility of it, all men know, that the Members
of Synods, and such as have their voices there, are Presbyters and Ministers of
the Gospel only, and such as are sent Commissioners, and delegated out of the
several Presbyteries to those Councels for the right ordering and well
managing of the government in them; and this is their calling; and for the
other people as the secular Magistrates, Masters of Families, Wives, Children
and Servants, they are every one of them to continue in that calling and
statiou God had placed them in, 1 Cor. 7. and all under authority, are therein
to abide, and every one of them to follow their particular negotiations and
affairs, yielding obedience in their several places to those that are over
them; and women especially by a statute Law from heaven, 1 Cor. 14. are
enjoined silence in all the Churches, and are commanded if they have any
doubts, to ask their Husbands at home, and to be subject and obedient unto
them, they are not to vote it in Synods, neither were women ever that I have
read or heard of, before such Teachers as Master Knollys, and his Fraternity
appeared in the world, permitted to have their voices in the Churches and
Synods, which when it is an apparent transgression of the Law of God, I am
confident that the Apostles and Presbyters then assembled in the Council of
Jerusalem would not have suffered any women to have brake the Laws of God
before their faces; and therefore I may with good authority out of Gods Word
conclude, that there was not a woman in that Synod; for the Scripture says,
the Synod consisted of brethren, and not sisters who had never the Keys
committed to them, or any voice there, as Mr Knollys vainly asser^eth, and
therefore for women they were not there; so that there was not the whole
multitude, how many soever the Doctor can make them, when the sisters are
exempted, there being none but brethren. Besides it was against another statute
law from heaven made by the Apostle Paul in the 14. of the Romans ver. 1. that
weak brethren should be admitted to doubtful disputations, who says* For
those that are weak in the Faith, receive, but not unto doubtful disputations
or ambiguity of disputes, for they being not well settled and grounded in
Religion, would have either been more imbittered against one another or filled
more full of scruples, then resolved, as daily experience teaches all men, who
see what a confusion such paultry fellows as Master Knollys is, have already
brought in^o the world by admitting their weak brethren to their doubtful
disputations and vain janglings upon all occasions. Neither will I ever believe
for my part, that the Apostles ^ould be transgressors of their own Laws, and
teach one thing and practice the contrary; now when Saint Paul had made that
law, that the weak brethren should not be admitted to doubtful disputations,
shall we think that the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem would have admitted
the whole multitude of all the believers amongst the which there were so many
weak brethren, into the Syno^ to those disputes* and so have violated this law
and statute from heaven? especially can any rational man believe this when
they were not at that time so well acquainted with their Christian liberty? For
this would have tended to nothing but a confusion of all things, and would have
put the people in an u^rore, as is evident from very good reason; for if many
years after the preaching of the Gospel and the free grace of God and the
teaching of them their Christian liberty, they remained still so zealous for
the observation of the ceremonial law of Moses, as we may read in the 21.
chapter of the Acts, that they out of a distempered zeal would have destroyed
Paul, and only because they heard that h^ taught the Gentiles not to observe
the law of Moses; how would all those weak brethren have been enraged against
all the Apostles and Presbyters (may any man suppose) if they had been admi^ted
into that Synod and should then and there have heard them dispute against the
ceremonial law, condemning it as a burden too heavy for them, and to be such
as neither they nor their fathers could bear; and therefore decreed, that it
should not be imposed upon the believing Gentiles? I say it stands with all
good reason if the weak believers in Jerusalem which were many ten thousands
should have heard these disputes, it would have put them all in such a heat
and rage, as they would have set the whole City in an uproar, to the hazarding
of the lives of both the Apostles and Presbyters there, and all such as should
have sided with them, and so much the more it would have incensed them against
the Apostles and Presbyters, because they granted greater Privileges to the
Gentiles, and gave them an immunity from the observation of the Ceremonial
Law, which the Jews still observed and strictly kept, so that many of the Jews
going from Iudaea wheresoever they came urged the observation of the
ceremonial Law amongst the Gentiles also, as necessary to salvation: now I say
if these Zealots of the Law had all both men and women how many soever can be
made of them (to use Master Knollys expression) been present, as he
groundlessely affirms, and should have heard these disputes, they would have
been so far from voting with the Apostles and Elders, and saying it seemed
good unto the Holy Ghost and us, as they would have voted the contrary; and for
this that I say it is evident from the Holy Scripture; for in the one and
twentieth chapter of the Acts it is said, that they would have stain Paul, for
this their jealousy only, that he preached and taught the Gentiles against
the Ceremonial Law, which they would never have been offended with him for,
if the Brethren in Jerusalem those believing Jews, the multitude, even the
whole Church, how many soever the Doctor can make of them (as master Knollys
says) had then had their voice in the Council and Synod at Jerusalem, and had
assented and voted against the ceremonial Law, and for the abrogation of it,
as Master Knollys against all reason says they did, for then they would never
have been displeased with Paul for instructing the Gentiles, and all people in
their christian liberty, and for teaching them that they were freed from the
Ceremonial Law, for that Council and Synod made those Decrees for the benefit
of the Gentiles: but they would rather have been offended with Paul, if they
had heard that he yet urged the observation of it amongst the Gentiles, if they
with the Apostles and Presbyters had (...) with one unanimous consent and
agreement had, by searching the holy Scripture, found out what was the good and
acceptable will of God, and from thence had decreed the abolishing of the
Ceremonial Law, I say, if all the believers in Jerusalem, the whole Church and
multitude as many as can be made of them, as Master Knollys affirms, had been
present in the Synod with the Apostles and Presbyters and should have voted
with them it seemed good to the holy Ghost and to us, to abrogate the
Ceremonial Law, and to free the Gentiles from it: they could not then have
been displeased with Saint Paul for observing their Order and Decrees, and for
obeying their injunctions: but when they were displeased with him, for but
hearing he taught the Gentiles against the Law of Moses and the Temple, it is
apparently evident, that by brethren spoke of in the text, and by the whole
church and the multitude, cannot be understood all the believers in Jerusalem,
how many so ever could be made of them, as he grollishly asserteth, could they
have all possibly met together in one place: for then they themselves should be
transgressors of their own Decrees and be offended with others for observing
what they themselves had commanded, which is a sin; and therefore by brethren
there.

First, all sisters are excluded; for they are not numbered amongst them, and so
then not all the believers, for sisters also are believers and of the
multitude: and,

Secondly, all those zelots spoke of in the 21 chapter, had no vote in that
Synod, and were not present there; for they were enemies to Saint Paul for
Preaching according to those Decrees made and Voted there; so that Mr Knollys
in time may come to see his Error, and by brethren there, and the multitude,
and the whole Church, may very well understand that they were such as Judas and
Sylas were: viz. Prophets and chosen men, and assistants to the Apostles,
members of the Church in Jerusalem, of which they had store, for many of the
Priests were converted and were members there, though not fixed Officers and
Presbyters, and Elders, as the other were who Synecdochically were called the
Church, a part being understood for the whole, which is usual in the holy
Scripture: and to these may be added all the Presbyters that came out of all
the Churches of Iudaea, from among whom those false teachers were gone, and had
taught among the Gentiles the observation of the Ceremonial Law, as necessary
to Salvation, which was a cause of their meeting together; and with these also
may be reckoned those that came with Paul and Barnabas to that council from
the Church of Antioch, which were the brethren spoken of as the Text does
sufficiently declare, so that to all men that read but the 15 chapter of the
Acts with judgment, they will soon be satisfied, That by brethren and the
whole Church, and the multitude there spoken of, are to be understood, some
chosen men, men of eminency for all divine knowledge, Prophets who disputed and
argued the businesses there, and debated the matter by reason, such as Judas
and Sylas were, for so the Scripture speaks, and not the people men and
women, the whole Church, the multitude, how many so ever the Doctor can make of
them; as Master Knollys and those of his fraternity daily though falsely
assert, and upon this false ground and rotten foundation laid in their own
brain, would erect and build their new confused Babel of Independency,
admitting all people both men and women, not only to Votes in their new
Congregations but also in Counsels and Synods, and free them from all
dependency upon other Churches, which tends to nothing else but to the bringing
in of a confusion in Church and State, and to mere Anarchy, and therefore from
all that I have now said these two conclusions will evidently ensue and plainly
arise.

First, That all the Apostles and Presbyters, were all equally Depending upon
God and his Word, and that all the Churches we read of in the New Testament
were all likewise Dependent one upon another, and upon their several
Presbyteries.

Secondly, That the people neither brethren nor sisters in those days were to
have their Votes or suffrage in the Government of the Churches, and admission
of members and Officers, much less in Synods, that employment belonging wholly
to the Presbyters in each Church, whom God had made Rulers in his Church over
them, and commanded the people to yield obedience unto them, Heb. 13. and
therefore that all the new gathered Churches, affecting an Independency, and
challenging their Votes and suffrage in the Government of their Churches, are
all transgressors against both precept and example. And this shall suffice to
have spoke in way of Answer to Mr Knollys his vain jangling against my third
Proposition.

And now I will briefly Answer to what Sir I. S. has to say to it, whose words
are these, page 11. In asserting, That the Presbyters did rule the Church, and
ordinarily other Churches, whom do you hit (says he) sure not the
Independents, as you call them; we grant it is their part to rule: but we
distinguish (says he)? between Authority and jurisdiction on the one hand, and
power and interest on the other: this latter (says he) belongs to the people,
the other is proper to the Officers, which yet they exercise in the name of the
Church: so they (i) the Officers ordain, they excommunicate (i) pronounce
excommunication, they lead and direct in all government and disputes, they have
executative power as you demand page 93. but the people have a power and
interest too, as those places alleged by your self show expressly, Act. 15.
for though ver. 2. Paul and Barnabas are said to be sent by the Apostles and
Elders only, yet ver. 4. they are said to be received of the Church, and
Apostles and Elders; therefore they were sent unto the Church also; and that
word (...) with one accord ver. 25. imports a multitude met together; and this
to be the result of that multitude, else it were no great commendation of the
resolution that it was convened and issued forth (...). And though only the
Apostles and Elders are mentioned, as coming together to consider of the
question, verse 6. yet it is said, verse 22. that it pleased (not only the
Apostles and Elders) but the whole Church also; therefore the Church also came
together to consult; or the Apostles and Elders as a Cnmmittee, first prepared
the dispute, as not counting it so safe perhaps to admit the weak to the same,
while it was intricate, and then reported it, and had their assistance and
concurrence; and the Letters of resolution run in the name of the brethren (i.)
the Church as well as the Apostles and Elders, ver. 23. and so in Ordination
(...) (i) Election by lifting up the hand belongs to the brethren, though (...)
(i.) imposition of hands be proper to the Officers, where there are officers as
in a Church constituted and complete.

Thus speaks I. S. in the name of all his brethren in way of answer to my third
Proposition, the errors of whose expressions should I but only name them all
severally they would take up some time and a great deal of paper; but should I
undertake the full confutation of them all and discover all the impiety, evil
and wickedness that lies couched in these his words, I might make a just
volumn and spend some months in the employment: for grosser errors my eyes
never beheld, and such as are more contrary unto the holy Scripture, and to the
honor and dignity not only of the Apostles and Presbyters in the Church at
Jerusalem and in all Churches, but to the very dignity and honor of Christ
himself the King of his church who the Independents most shamefully disthrone)
as I shall by and by make appear God assisting me whiles notwithstanding they
make the greatest noise of setting him up King in his Church: And to speak the
truth, though the Independents seem to hate Popery, their doctrine is Popery it
self only the upside of it turned down and the rear made the front, otherwise
there is no great difference between their Tenants, but that the Independent
doctrine is more shamefully erroneous (as will be made evident) and more
derogatory to the honor and dignity of Christ the King of Kings and Lord of
Lords and to the honor and dignity of the Apostles and Presbyters and more
tending to confusion and the overthrow of all Government in Church and State,
all the which assertions that they may be made a little more evidently
manifest, I will briefly run over and examine some of the passages in this his
answer; for to discover but half the errors of it, they would weary the Reader
to hear them; and to speak but the verity, he that shall have to do with such
whibling and unlearned fellows as I. S. and Hanserdo Knollys are, had need to
be a man of intolerable patience.

But before I begin with him, I shall desire the Reader to consider, whether I.
S. be not guilty of interferring tautology and great confusion, crimes he lays
to my charge to use some of his own language Page 15. and 16. if not
contradiction, and be not great of his own sense, and a very catechumenos, and
one that has as well need of instruction as of refutation, for as much as to
me it seems unmeet, that a man should be polemically exercised before he be
positively principled: these things I refer to the Readers consideration and
now I go to my work.

In asserting (says I. S.) that the Presbyters did rule that church, and
ordinarily other churches, who do you hit? Not the Independents as you call
them; (says he) We grant it is their part to rule: but we distinguish between
avthority and jurisdiction on the one hand, and power and interest on the
other: this latter belongs to the people; the other is proper to the
officers, which yet they exercise in the name of the Church: So they (i.) the
officers ordain, they excommunicate (i.^ pronounce excommunication, they lead
and direct in all governments and disputes, they have the executive power, but
the people have a power and interest too etc. And in the 12. page. In
Ordination (says he) Election belongs to the brethren, but imposition of hands
is proper to the officers, where there are officers as in a Church constituted
and complete. Thus profound I. S. I shall entreat the Reader here to take
notice, what he grants, and what he denies, and how at every turn he juggles.

First he grants that the Presbyters did rule the Church of Jerusalem and
ordinarily other Churches, and says, that my Argument hits not the
Independents; for they, as he in the name of them all asserteth, grant that it
is the Presbyters part to rule. So that if he had stayed here, there had been
some ingenuity in him, but with the same breath he blasteth yea blows down
all that he had formerly set up, and that with a windy vain American
distinction (which he has borrowed out of some of those monstrous Pamphlets
that come from thence, called the way and the keys, etc. which are fraught
with nothing ^ut Peacocks, Parrets, and Jackanapes or more mischievous things
though gayly set forth) with the which he befooles himself and amases yea
deceives the poor and ignorant people whiles they go gazing after them: For
says he, We distinguish between authority and jurisdiction on the one hand and
power and interest on the other, and this latter belongs unto the people, the
other is proper to the officers, etc.

But before I come to my answer, I must tell I. S. that from whom soever he
has borrowed this distinction it is groundless and has no Warrant for it in
sacred writ; yea I hope to make it good that it is contrary unto it, and
therefore it was well said by a learned Professor of Divinity in the University
of Oxford, that it was an easy thing to find distinctions in schoolmen to
mock God and destroy their own souls, and thereupon exhorted all his Scollers
to be very careful lest out of respect to men's persons and from the conceit
they had of their piety and abilities in learning they were not deceived: And
the same exhortation may now in these our days be of very good use, especially
when a lying spirit is gone out into innumerable false Prophets as it did in
Ahab his time and when a spirit of error is gone out into the world and is to
be found in every house of the Independents in all these regards, I say the
caveat and exhortation of that reverend Divine may now be very useful and
serviceable for these our times. And therefore it stands all men upon to prove
and examine all things according to the Apostles rule 1 Thessalonians. 5. ver. 21, and
hold fast that which is good. Now in Divine matters and in the matters of our
God we must be especially careful that we see a ground and warrant out of his
word, or from excellent reason or good consequences deduced from thence; for
whatsoever opinion or distinction in sacred things shall be brought and
propounded unto us, and if it have not its authority or ground from thence or
some example or president or sollid reason or good consequence out of the same
word to warrant and confirm it, it is to be rejected by all good Christians,
especially if it consist of captious, doubtful and ambiguous expressions, and
which will admit of various and different interpretations, and to all the rest
be found contrary to the word of God, as this grollish distinction brought by
I. S. does: for he makes a distinction between authority and jurisdiction on
the one hand, and power and interest on the other, as if there were some vast
difference between them when all learned men know, that authority, jurisdiction
and power are all one, as when a Magistrate making use of either of these words
says such an one is under my authority or jurisdiction or power, all men know
that either of those words signifies his authority over him and those
expressions intimate one and the same thing. But as for the word interest which
he makes a Synonima with power, it is a mere grollery, for that is a word of
ambiguity and of various significations, and admits of diverse interpretations,
and therefore cannot be the same with power, the meaning of the which I am
confident that I. S. himself knows not, but this word serves the turn of
our American brethren and those of the Congregationall way here to juggle
withal: But if a man would but seriously consider and weigh what the meaning
of this word interest signifies in their dialect, and what they understand by
it, if they would speak out, they shall find that by that distinction of power
and interest in the people, by interest they mean and understand a title or
right or due in the people, both to the property and possession of all the
power in Church and State and believe that it is originally and radically in
the people and that it is properly their due and right, and from them only
delegated to the officers of Church and State, whom as they do betrust with it,
so they may at pleasure take it from them again; and this that I now say the
Pamphlets of these times many of them can witness is their meaning by
interest; amongst others that of Englands birth right and John Lilburns learned
Letter who in the 14 Page of the same has these words.

For my part (says he) I look upon the House of Commons as the supreme power
of England, who have residing in them that power that is inherent in the
people, who yet are not to act according to their own wills and pleasures, but
according to the constitutions and customs of the Land, etc. out of whose
words it is apparently evident, that they make all power to be inherently in
the people as their birthright, to which they may at any time make as good
title and claim as to their inheritance, and that they in their language call
interest, and this also can be proved out of many of the Independents Pamplets,
and from their words, that if they conceive the Parliament use not that power
they are entrusted with, according to the constitutions and customs of the
land, they may at any time by the people be divested of it, or at least
questioned; I am confident I say there would be no great difficulty to prove as
much as I now say has been uttered by the Sectaries of these our times, and I
am most assured if they increase but to a little greater number, that unless
the Lord show his mighty power in preserving the Parliament, if they should in
the least displease them, and not humor them to their content, they would put
that in execution, and really act what now they but mutter in corners, and set
forth in libellous Pamphlets, and in warning pieces, as in Londons late
Warning-peece; so that this truth is very well known that by power and interest
in the Independents language, which they place in the people and not in the
officers, they mean the sovereign and supreme authority, and all say that it
is their peculiar birthright, and that they are the Parliament and Judges, and
that the officers are but their servants, either to prepare matters for their
hearing, or for executing of what they would have them to do, and that
whatsoever they speak of authority and jurisdiction in the officers, it is
only to please them a little by putting a rattle into their hand that may
look gayly, and make a little noise but have no strength in it: for they keep
all power in their own hands, and this I hope to make good out of I. S. his
distinction, and that to the dishonor of God himself, as well as to the
overthrowing of all authority in time through the world, and therefore this
distinction must necessarily be against the word of God. But that my charge
against I. S. and those of his party, (for he writes in the name of them all)
may the better appear to all that shall read this Book, I will here again
repeat his answer to my Argument with his distinction: The Jndependents (says
he) grant that it is the Presbyters part to rule, but (says he) we
distinguish between authority and jurisdiction on the one hand, and power and
interest on the other: this latter belongs unto the people, the other is proper
to the officers which they exercise in the name of the Church, etc. If he had
said in the name of Christ it had been better; but all error is like unto
sin, it seldom goes single and alone, for here I. S. commits a multiforme
error in robbing not only the Presbyters and Ministers of Christ of their due
honor, but in robbing also the Lord of life himself of his dignity and
royalty, and making all the Ministers and Officers of Jesus Christ, and his
peculiar servants but the vassales and slaves of the people who they call the
Church, so that according to I. S. his learning all the Officers and Ministers
of Christ are at the peoples disposing, for they are all of them to act as the
Church directs them, and they must do it always in the name of the Church,
and this is the Hysteron Proteron Divinity of the Independents, in all which
they deal most wickedly on every side, so that when they seem to speak the
Ministers fairest, they abuse them to their face; for here I. S. by that
distinction of his would persuade the world that the Independents give great
honor to the Ministers, in saying that authority and jurisdiction belongs unto
them and is theirs properly, and that only power and interest belongs unto the
people, and yet in the same breath before he has passed two steps, by his
own description of the power and interest which he grants unto the people,
he gives away all that authority and jurisdiction that he spoke of a little
before, not only from all the Ministers and Presbyters of the Gospel, but from
Christ himself the King of his Church, and invests the people with it, which
he calls the Church, saying, that the Officers are to exercise their authority
and jurisdiction in the name of the Church, so that it is evident according to
his Divinity that the Ministers of Jesus Christ are but the slaves of the
people; and that all men may see that this is his meaning, he in the 12. page
says, that the very Apostles and Elders in the Council and Synod at Jerusalem
were but as a Committee to prepare the dispute, and then to report it for the
assistance nnd concurrence of the multitude; these are his own words, by all
which, if hegives not the people, by his distinction of power and interest, a
greater authority then he gives unto the Apostles and Presbyters, and to
Christ himself, let every ingenious man judge, which is not only a horrid
impiety, but abominable in justice and sacrilege: yea every man may plainly
perceive, and that out of his own words, and from the language of all the
Independents, that he invests the people with all authority under that
distinction of power and interest; for in saying in the same page that in
ordination, election of officers belongs unto the brethren, and imposition of
hands to the officers, where there are officers, as in a Church constituted and
complete, by these words he invests the people with all full and ample
authority as any men are capable of or can be betrusted with: for amongst many
of the Independents to my knowledge, they make nothing of ordination and
imposition of hands, and count it but a complement that makes nothing to the
essence of any officers (as they say) for they assert that it is sufficient to
make any man an Officer or Minister if he be once chosen by the people, and it
is the election of the church, and their call as they say that makes officers,
without which they affirm they can be no true officers; so that if election
be the maine and essential business required for the making of Church Officers,
and as they teach their followers, and they give the power of election to the
church or people, and affirm that all things are ever to be done in the name
of the church, it matters not with them whether they be ordained, or have any
imposition of hands or no; that being in their dialect but a complement, or a
needless ceremony (for so I have heard them speak) the which ordination also,
though they say it belongs unto officers, notwithstanding the church and
people make no scruple to exercise it at any time and to put it in execution if
they think it fit, as the practice of the new gathered Churches daily teaches
all men; yea, we may gather as much out of I. S. his own expressions, that
the power of ordination as well as of election resides in the people and lies
in their hands, who says, that imposition of hands is proper to the officers
where there are officers in a Church constituted and complete, intimating that
if they have no Church Officers they themselves may then ordain them, and this
is the practice of some of the churches of the congregationall way, by all
which their language and proceedings, if by their distinction of power and
interest they do not assume and arrogate all power to themselves, and take it
into their own hands, and invest the people with plenary authority over all
Ministers in Church and State, I know not what it is to confer authority on
any people. It is most notoriously known, that our Independent Gentlemen would
place all authority in the people, and would have the Magistrates and Ministers
in Church and State all dependent upon them, and expect their election and
ordination from them, and they only would be independent; and all this may be
gathered not only from their words and practices, and out of all their
Pamphlets, but even from I. S. his own distinction of power and interest,
which he says belongs unto the people: having thus from their own Principles
sufficiently elucidated that by the Independents doctrine, and by their
distinction of power and interest they assume all authority to themselves,
whiles they pretend they give authority and jurisdiction to the Ministers; I
will now set forth their wickedness in sh^wing how they rob Christ of his
honor, and the Apostles also and Presbyters of Jerusalem of their dignity and
power as well as they do all other ordinary Presbyters of their due honor and
authority.

And I will first begin with their dealing toward Christ the King and Lord of
his Church which is his Kingdom. All those that know how the Kingdoms and
Empires of the world a^e governed, know that all their Councels, Ambassadors,
Judges, Rulers and Officers under them, either in the time of peace or war,
in all their acts of government* and in all their precepts and mandates,
whether Imparative or Prohibitive, and in all their Courts of Judicature,
transact and pass all things with all their writs and summons in the name of
the King or Emperor* and for any Magistrate or any Court to issue out any
writ, warrant, mandate or summons in their own name, and by their own
authority makes them fall into a Praemunire, and makes them guilty laesae
majestatis; so that all warrants run in the name of the King or Emperor; and
whosoever fails in this kind, as not to command in the Kings or Emperors
name, does make himself a Delinquent, and this if I am not mistaken was one of
the charges against the Prelate of Canterbury, that he issued out writs and
summons in his own name, or in the name of his Court.

Now Christ is the eternal King of his Church, that immortal and mighty
Potentate, in whose name all the Prophets of old ^ssued out all their warrants
and mandates, speaking ever to the people in the name of the Lord, saying, thus
says the Lord; nothing was done in the name of the Church, or in the name of
any creature in those days, and God never changed the style of issuing out his
warrants, neither did Christ resign his regal dignity, or put it into the
hands of the Church, but is still their King, and he keeps the same tenure
still all through the New Testament as well as through the old, commanding that
all should be done in the name of God, saying, Matthew. 28, 19. Go ye therefore,
and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost; teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I
have commanded you; and lo, I am with you all even to the end of the world,
amen.

By the way take notice the very Apostles themselves were limited what to
preach, they might not exceed their bounds, they must teach nothing but what
Christ the King of his church commanded them; but Christ never taught his
Apostles or any of his true Ministers, to issue out any thing in their own
name, for that was the custom of all false Teachers; neither did he ever
teach them to issue out any thing in the Churches name, or say unto them at at
any time, what you do in all Administrations let it be done in the Churches
name; Christ I say taught nothing of all this; that is but the new blasphemous
style of our new gathered churches, and of our new church officers, who J. S.
says must exercise their authority and Jurisdiction in the name of the church;
whereas Christ our King and Lawgiver, as in the place above quoted, so in Mark
16. v. 17. In my name (says he) they shall cast out Devils, etc. all in the
church was to be done by all the faithful Ministers and people of God in
Christ's name, the King of his church. And so S. Peter accoring to his Masters
command in his Sermon in the 2. of the Acts, preaching unto all the people and
new converts, says nothing to them in the name of the Church, but in the 38.
verse says, Repent and be baptized every one of you in the name of the Lord
Jesus Christ, etc. H^e was a faithful officer, and did nothing in the churches
name: he was not acquainted with our new Divinity; and in the 3. chapter, when
he cured the Creeple. verse the 6. In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth
(says he) rise and walk; and so Saint Paul had learned his Lesson well, who
when he cast out the spirit of Divination out of the Damsel in the 16. of
the Acts, verse 18. says unto it, I command thee in the name of Jesus Christ
to come out of her, and he came out at the same hour. Nothing was done in
those days in the Churches name, but in the name of their King Jesus Christ;
to omit many other places, we have a special command in the 3. of the Coloss.
verse 17. whatsoever you do (says the Apostle) in word or deed, do all in
the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God, and the Father by him: all
Christians are bound to do all in Christ their Kings name. Yea, the Apostle in
the 1 of the Corinth. the fifth chapter, verse the 3. and 4. teaching the
Corinthians, and in them all Christians, in whose name all acts of Church
governemt should be managed and exercised, says I verily as absent in body but
present in spirit have judged already, that he that has done this doed, in
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ when ye are gathered together, and my spirit,
with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver such an one unto Satan for
the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the
Lord Jesus. Here the Apostle teaches all Ministers of all Churches, that as
all believers are to be received into the Church in the name of the Lord Jesus
their King; so when any for their disorderly walking are to be cast out, they
are to exercise all those acts of government, and to cast them out in the name
of the Lord Jesus Christ their King, he knew nothing of this new style, that
our Independents and learned I. S. publish to the world, who in terminis says,
that that Authority and Jurisdiction that is proper to the officers is to be
exercised in the name of the Church; these are his words, in the name of all
his brethren, saying, the Officers ordain, and they pronounce excommunication,
they lead and direct in all government and disputes, and have the executive
power, but the people have a power and interest too; that is in his learning,
the officers must yet exercise their power and Jurisdiction in the name of the
Church, so that the Ministers are but the churches servants at pleasure, and
their executioners. This is our American Divinity, so that whereas we are
taught by Christ himself, and all his blessed Apostles to do all in the
Church in the name of Christ our King, these our confiding brethren, and our
Itinerary Ill-dependent Predicants have brought in a new style of exercising
all acts of church government, and that not in Christ the Kings name, but in
the name of the Church; and whereas the Church of Jesus Christ is the most
absolute Monarchy in the world, in the which all things should be done and
acted according to his command, and in his name, they have changed this
Monarchy into so many thousand sucking Democrasies, or rather so many
Anarchies, in all the which they transact all things, and send out all their
Writs and Warrants in the name of their several new Churches, and so have
dis-throned Christ, whom notwithstanding they pretend to set up as King in his
Church. But whether in this their so dealing with Christ, and with his people
and subjects they are not more Independently and arrogantly blasphemous, then
the Pope himself, or any Prelates that ever the world yet saw, I leave it to
the saddest thoughts and deepest consideration of all such as truly love the
Lord Jesus, and desire from their soul the glory of his Kingdom, and that he
may be our sole Monarch and eternal King, and may perpetually rule in his
Church, and have all things done in his alone name, and according to his own
appointment; to the judgment I say of all such cordial subjects of
Iesus*Christ, and to their seriousest thoughts and censures I leave the
consideration of this weighty business: I am confident they will conclude their
blasphemy was yet never paralleld by the very Pope himself, or by any of his
shavelings, who were never yet so notoriously usurping and injurious to Christ
the King of his Church, as to send out their Mandates in their own name, but
all things issued out in in nomine domini, hence came up the Proverb, when
they heard of any thing from the Pope, that they usually said in nomine domini
incipit omne malum, for he always pretended to do al in the name of Christ the
King, for that style notwithstanding did that man of sin ever observe and
keep, continually ever setting forth his grolleries in nomine domini, whereas
our Independent Brethren act all their baggatelly and trifling business in the
name of their several churches, their officers ever saying, when they carry or
bring any learned Messages one from an other, that they come in the name of the
churches, and what they do, they would have them know they do it as officers
in the name of the church; Christ's name the King of his church is never so much
as heard amongst them in the transacting of their church affairs, so that we
may truly say, that whatsoever they pretend of setting up Christ as King upon
his Throne, their practice shows the contrary; for in the government of all
their several churches, they act all not in the name of Christ, but in the
name of their several churches; so that Christ the Kings name is not so much as
mentioned amongst them (as we have learned not only from their daily
practice, but from I. S. and our American monstrous Divinity.

To all that I have said for proof that all the Independents by their doctrine
disthrone Christ and set themselves in his place whiles they most of all
pretend they set him up upon his Throne, I may for a corallary add their new
traditions and practices which they impose upon all the Members of their
several new gathered churches as the commandments of God and as the practices
of the Saints of old, and injoyne them and urge them as the statutes,
ordinances and decrees of God; yea I might here farther show how they practice
contrary unto Christ's the King and Lord of his Church commands: For whereas he
sending out his Disciples and Apostles setting down the conditions upon which
all men should be admitted into the Church, which were to repent and believe
and to bebaptized in token of their beliese and repentance, which whosoever
should accept of and embrace, they should thereupon be received into Church
fellowship; the Illdefendents notwithstanding regard not Christ's commands, but
unto it add their own vain traditions, for the which they have neither precept
nor president in all holy writ nor the practice of any well reformed church;
and they force men to conform unto them, or else there can be no admission;
howsoever they offer themselves to do as much as Christ their King commands them
to do. And whereas Christ the King of his church laid the Government of it upon
the shoulders of none but his Ministers, to whom he had given the Keys; the
Ildependents not only dispense with this law at pleasure, but absolutely
oppose it; for contrary unto this law is their doctrine and practice who teach
that the power and interest lies in the people, and that is their part, and
that the Ministers are to exercise their authority and jurisdiction in the
churches name, and so they spoil the Ministers of their power and invest the
people with it, and give laws unto the people of God, yea unto the Law^iver
Christ himself; whether all these dealings therefore of the Illdependents with
many more paslages of the like nature that might be produced, if not worse, be
not to disthrone Christ, when they slight his Laws and prefer their own
traditions before the commandments of Christ the King of his church and revile
and reproach his servants and officers offering all the indignity that can be
committed against men to them all, I leave it to the judgment of the wise and
godly. Again I refer it to the wisdom of any discerning spirit to consider and
judge what difference there is between the Sectaries and the Pope and his
conclave in this point, whenas they both assume all authority to themselves and
take it from the Ministers, and make them but their executioners: Surely they
will find them both equally guilty and both Antichristian in rebelling in all
things against Christ; For Christ says to all men that they that despise his
Ministers despise him, and they that despise and slight Christ, in as much as
in them lies they disthrone him, and therefore when all the Independents daily
practice all the malifices above mentioned, and that in a higher manner and
strain, pretend they what they will of setting up Christ upon his Throne, they
plainly disthrone him and dishonor him; which may yet further appear if we
consider some of their other passages; for it is well known that some of the
chief pillars in their houses and churches those Atlasses that some of them
confide so much in for their strength and so much extol for the preaching up
of Christ's Kingdom and for the setting of him up upon his Throne, I say some
of these as it is well known have upon the Frontispices of their Pamphlets set
this title Against Jesu Worship.

Now although it be praise worthy in any in maintenance of Gods true worship
and service to write against all Idolatricall or Superstitious worship of the
true God or Jesus, yet it is a thing no way beseeming any Christian to write
against God Worship and Iesu-Worship which are both commanded because that some
fail and err in the manner of the Worship of either God the Father or God the
Son: Yea, it would have been thought in any Christian Nation an unsufferable
thing to have tolerated the very reading or publishing of any books with such a
title and inscription though the matter in them might have been good: for no
man much less a Christian o^ght to write against Iesu-Worship no more then he
ought to write against God-Worship, for Jesus also is God blessed for ever, the
eternal Son of the eternal Father, who has commanded all his Disciples John
5. To worship the Son as they worship the Father; Now then if it be an
unsufferable thing to write against God-Worship, no less intolerable is it in
any to write against Iesu-Worship, and all such as write such books and all
such as allow of them and approve of them and their authors, let them pretend
what they will of setting up Christ upon his Throne, all such as these are I
say, make Christ a Pagent King and salute him with hail Master as the Jews
did, to usurp some of their own rhetoric and learned elequence, but indeed
they disthrone him: For what is it to disthrone a King if writing of Warning
Pieces, and Pamphlets against Kings*service and Kings-honour be not? And what I
pray is it to disthrone a King* if this be not to pass all acts of Government
in the peoples name, and to send out all their warrants and mandates in the
peoples name, and to command all their officers to manage all their imploiments
in the peoples name, never so much as mentioning or taking notice of the King
in a public act of Government? Are not all these actions and passages to any
rational creature a sufficient demonstration that the King in that Kingdom is
either absolutely disthroned or is but a King to them in ludibry as Christ was
to the wicked Jews? I am confident that all understanding men will so conclude.
Now when in all the new congregations those new gathered churches the
Ildependents there have such amongst them that write books and that with their
approbation against Iesu-Worship, that is, against the Worship of Jesus who is
the eternal King of his Church, and when every day in all their particular
churches they exercise all the acts of Government in the name of their
churches, and not in Christ's the Kings name, and that against the command of
Christ and his Apostles; I affirm and by the grace of God I hope ever to make
it good, that all this is not only a robbing Christ our Lord and King of his
due honor, but a blasphemous and more then a Papal usurpation and derogating
from his Kingly dignity and royalty, yea it is indeed a plain disthroning of
Christ their King and thrusting him out of his place and putting themselves in
it, which whether or no it be not the highest point of contumacy, rebellion and
blasphemy, I leave to the judgment of others; as for my self, I know not what
either of these things be if they be not blasphemy; for when I learned Divinity
I was taught that blasphemy consisted in this, either to give unto God that
that belonged not to him and to the excellency of his Majesty and divine
nature, or to detract from him that that peculiarly belonged either to the
essence, persons or glorious attributes of the diety, or to give the honor
properly and peculiarly due to God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost or to any
person in the glorious Trinity, to any creature, or maliciously or wickedly to
speak evil of God his essence, attributes, word, works, etc. or to do or act
any thing obstinately and wilfully that is or may be derogatory to the dignity
and honor of the Divine Majesty of God blessed for ever; any of these things,
when I studied Divinity, were thought blasphemy and worthy of severest
punishments, and those that perpetrated any of those crimes were reputed
unworthy to live, and proclaimed blasphemers and men unsufferable: and yet there
are many such kind of creatures in our new gathered Churches who are guilty of
all that can be called blasphemy, and that rob Christ the Lord of his Worship
and write against Iesu-worship, and blaspheme the holy Scriptures, and deny the
diety of Christ and the blessed Trinity etc. and disthrone Christ in their new
Congregations whiles they cry hail Master, exercising all acts of Government
amongst themselves in the name of the Church, never so much as mentioning the
name of Christ the King* and many more intolerable insolences they daily
commit against the Sovereign Majesty of heaven and earth the Lord Jesus Christ
our Lord and King; and all these notwithstanding are counted Saints that commit
these vices and malifices; and great books are writ in defense of all these
wicked blasphemous wretches, and both their errors and their persons are
countenanced, and that by their great Rabbyes and Champions, all which
notwithstanding are in Gods dialect and in his holy Word both old and new
counted abominable creatures, and men unholy and displeasing unto God, and the
acters and abetters and countenancers of all such blasphemies and wickednesses
were thought equally guilty, and great and fearful judgments were denounced
against them all as it is apparently evident out of Gods holy Word, and yet
these great evils are counted but the infirmities of the Saints amongst our
Independent masters. Now then I say when the Illdefendents are guilty of all
these crimes, as partly acting them, partly tolerating such as are both actors
and abetters, or conniving at them and countenancing them, pretend they what
they will of setting up Christ upon his Throne* I hope to be ever able to make
it good, that they all of them disthrone Christ and manifest to the world that
as much as in them lies they would not have him reign over them, and so make
themselves guilty of that crime they lay to the Presbyterians charg whom they
daily accuse to be enemies of Jesus Christ and his Kingdom and such as would
not have Christ rule over them, when notwithstanding the Presbyterians do and
ever will by Gods divine assistance set up Christ King upon his Throne, and
shall ever desire that all honor and glory and praise may be given for ever
and ever to the King eternal, immortal, invisible the only wise God the King
of Saints and King of Kings, and that he may solely rule for ever, and that all
his enemies and such as rob him of his honor and dignity may be made his
footstool, in the number of which the greatest part of the Sectaries are and
all such as comply with them.

And this shall suffice to have spoken concerning the first part of my
undertaking against I. S. which was to set forth the wickedness of the
Independents and to show how by their doctrine they rob Christ of his honor
and Kingly dignity when they pretend they set him upon his Throne, which is an
unsufferable blasphemy in them.

And now I come to prove against I. S. that I undertook in the second place to
make good: viz. that by their doctrine they not only rob Christ of his honor,
but all Christ's blessed Apostles, Ministers and Servants of their power, and
leave them nothing but the name and shadow of authority* which is a horrid
injustice and wickedness in the Sectaries and Independents to do; which
although I have briefly proved before, yet I shall here again for the more full
elucidation of the truth and for the better setting forth of the Illdependent
wickedness a little further expatiate in this business and answer to all that
I. S. has materially or with any color to speak in behalf of his cause,
where I presume he has spoke as much as he and his accomplices thought and
conceived made for it and for which their vain and impious jangling they must
one day give a dreadful account.

I undertake therefore now to prove that by this their doctrine, they not only
rob Christ the King of his Church of his honor and dignity, which I made good
before, but all the holy Apostles and Presbyters his Ministers and Servants
also of their honor, power and dignity, which the King of his Church the Lord
Jesus had invested them with and bestowed upon them, all which will clearly
appear if we shall again briefly consider and but take notice, First what power
and authority God gave unto his Apostles and to his Ministers, which was the
power of the Keys Matthew. 16. and Matthew. 18. that is all power in his Church
under him Matthew. 28. and Mark 16. I say if we shall duly in the first place but
consider that all the Apostles Christ's special Ministers and Servants were by
Christ himself invested with all authority and guided in their preaching and
writing by his holy spirit, so that whatsoever they taught or writ as his
Ministers, were the dictates of his spirit, and the commandments of God, and
were for ever to be the rule of his Church to all succeeding ages to the end of
the World; and if we consider also what he promised to his blessed Apostles and
all his Servants and Ministers that should succeed them: viz. that he would be
with them to the end of the World; to all which Ministers likewise he had given
the keys and made them stewards and overseers of his house which is his Church;
I say if we but duly weigh all these things we shall find them all invested
with plenary authority, and by the very commission of God for ever enabled to
exercise all acts of Government in the Church, and that by themselves without
the assistance and concurrence of the people who were never joined with them in
commission, but received commands from heaven to obey those that God had made
guides over them and made Rulers in his Church; I say if we maturely consider
all these immunities and privileges and the power that the Apostles and
Ministers of Christ were endued with and that from Christ the King of his
church: And on the other side shall but consider what learned I. S. in the name
of all the Independents his brethren declares concerning not only all the
ordinary Ministers of the church, but what he delivers concerning the blessed
Apostles, we shall clearly perceive that herobbs them all of that honor,
dignity and power which God has given them, and invests the people with it,
which is a double injustice* First in taking from the Apostles and Ministers
that which was their due and which God had bestowed upon them. And secondly, in
giving unto the people, that which pertained not to them and to which they had
no right nor could lay no claim and with which they were not to meddle.

But take notice of his Doctrine, what he holds and believes concerning the
ordinary Ministers, page 12. In ordination (says he) election belongs unto
the brethren, Jmposition of hands is proper to the Officers, where there are
Officers, as in a Church constituted and complete, otherwise if the Church be
not complete, according to his learning the people may do it. Thus I. S.
speaks there, and in the 11 page he grants it is the Presbyters part to rule.
But as soon as he has spoke the word, as if he repented of what he had
said, he comes in with a but, saying, but we distinguish between Authority
and Jurisdiction on the one hand, and Power and Jnterest on the other: this
latter belongs unto the people; the other is proper unto the Officers, which
yet they exercise in the name of the Church. The Officers (says he) ordain,
they excommunicate, they lead and direct in all government and disputes, they
have the executive power, but the people have a power and interest too, that
is, in his dialect as he declared himself in the words going before, the
Officers must exercise all their authority and jurisdiction in the name of the
Church, and must do as the people shall direct them, for their power is only
the executive power, they are only the executioners of the church, they can
neither elect any officers, nor excommunicate any without they have the leave
and good liking from the people; for the radical and original power lies in
the people and church, which if it be not utterly to overthrow the authority of
the Ministers, and to make them nothing but ciphers in the Church, and most
sacrilegiously to rob them of that power Christ the King of his Church has
given them, and to arrogate it, and assume it unto themselves, and whether this
be not the greatest wickedness and injustice in the Independents that can be
committed against men, I leave it to the consideration and judgment of all
conscientious and learned men: and whether such temerarious and bold impudent
theives and Church-robbers ought not with greatest severity and justice to be
proceeded against for this their malefice and unsufferable wickedness, who do
not only take from the Ministers of Jesus Christ, whom they ought ever to have
in great reverence for their works sake, 1 Thessalonians. 5. that honor, power and
authority Christ has given them, but labor likewise now with all their might
to take from them also that that God has put into the hearts of men his
servants to give them, viz. their tithes and livelihood, and all that by which
they should support themselves and their poor Families, which is as
intolerable an in justice and ingratitude, both toward God and men, as can by
mortal creatures be committed, which wickedness of the Independents and
Sectaries, if the Magistrates shall suffer to go unpunished, I most
confidently believe, that the Lord and King of his Church, the Lord of heaven
and earth will take the quarrel of his righteousservants into his hand, and
will pour down his plagues, both on them and all their accomplices and abettors.

And now I have made it evident, how they rob all the ordinary Ministers and
Presbyters of the Gospel of their due honor and power, I will make it likewise
appear that the Apostles also are by their doctrine in the same predicament,
and that they deal no better with them whom they have robbed also and spoiled
of their honor, power and authority, and count of them all no otherwise then
of ordinary and common Ministers, and but as of a company of Executioners: for
we must take what I. S. speaks in this business, to be uttered in the name of
all the Independents; for he is but their mouth, and his book came forth by
the authority and approbation of them all, and was esteemed of as a goodly
piece, and he highly honored amongst them for it. His words are these, page
12. The Apostles and Elders (says he) as a Committee, first prepared the
dispute, as not counting it so safe perhaps to admit the weak to the same,
whiles it was intricate, and then reported it, and had their assistance and
concurrence; and the Letters of resolution run in the name of the brethren (1)
the Church as well as the Apostles and Elders: these are his words.

And for confirmation of this his opinion, that the Apostles and Elders were
but a Committee, and only prepared the business and then reported it, and could
not without the assistance and concurrence of the brethren have ratified the
Decrees made in that Council, he in the same page produces his reasons for
this his fond conceit, saying, that Paul and Barnabas were sent unto the Church
and brethren as well as to the Apostles and Elders, for they were received of
the Church; withal (says he) the word (...) with one accord, verse 25.
imports a multitude met together; and this to be the result of that multitude,
else it were no great commendation of the resolution that it was convened about
and issued forth (...), and in verse 22. it is said, that it pleased (not only
the Apostles and Elders) but the whole church also: therefore the Church also
came together to consult: or the Apostles and Elders as a Committee, first
prepared the dispute, etc. Thus worshipful I. S. says and un-sayes,
determines and concludes, and then goes from his resolution again, affirming
that Paul and Barnabas were sent unto the Church also, and that the multitude
was with one accord together, or else it had been no great commendation of the
resolution; and he asserteth that the whole Church came together to consult;
and yet in the same breath as if he had forgot himself, he comes in with his
perhaps as a man doubting and wavering in his opinion, and altogether in
uncertainties, saying, that perhaps the Apostles did not count it safe to admit
the weak to the dispute while it was intricate, so that here all men may see
that he makes it suspicious and doubtful, whether the brethren, the
multitude, the whole Church were present there or not, and that for a double
reason, both in respect of the Apostles discretion and wisdom, as also in
regard of the weakness of the Brethren, saying, that the Apostles and Elders
were but as a Committee to prepare the dispute, and after reported it for the
churches assistance and concurrence, and so he learnedly concludes and
determines by all this his babble that they were all there, and they were not
there; where can any man find this creature, and what man of understanding is
he that shall behold the levity, vanity, rashness and ignorance of this
fellow, to say no more, that would not conclude that he is a mere
Catechumenos, and that one had need to instruct him instead of confuting him:
for as much as it may seem to any man unmeet that a man should be polemically
exercised before he be positively principled; these are I. S. his wise
expressions concerning me in his 16. page, which whether or no they may not
fitly be applied to himself, I leave to the judgment of the wise and learned,
who whiles he will be a Teacher of the Law, according to that of Saint Paul,
1 Timothy chap. 1. verse 7. understands not neither what he says, nor whereof he
affirms. I am most assured there scarce ever in the world appeared upon the
Theater of learning a more unlearned payr of wicked triflers then this I. S.
and Hanserdo Knollys. But it will not be amiss to consider the reasons of I.
S. by which he labors to prove that which he himself had first positively
set down to be a truth; to wit, that all the brethren, the multitude and the
whole Church were together in the Synod; and yet he after doubts whether they
were present there or no, I say it will not be amiss to consider the reasons,
by which he affirms these two things; the first, that all the whole Church
were present in the Synod; the second, that they all had their vote and
concurrence, without which there had been no great commendation of the
resolution of the Council as he prattles, and without which the Decrees of
the same had not been ratified; his first reason is this, because (says he)
Paul and Barnabas were received of the Church, Ergo, they were sent unto the
Church as well as to the Apostles and Elders as if one should thus conclude,
the Ambassadors of France and Swede were sent unto the King and Parliament,
and the City of London entertained them, Ergo, they were as well sent unto the
City of London as to the King and Parliament; again, the City of London
assented unto whatsoever the King and Parliament accorded unto to gratify
those Ambassadors after they had made them acquainted with what they had done,
Ergo, all the City and the whole multitude of Citizens had not only their
votes and concurrence in those great businesses, and were Judges also in the
Parliament, but they were altogether in the great Council, and that the
Parliament could have ratified nothing without them; would not all men that
should hear any man thus argue, gather that that man that should make such
inferences from such premises, and should so conclude, that he were crased in
his brain, or else a very Ninny, and void of all reason?

And yet this is the manner of I. S. and Hanserdoes disputing, and which is
more to show the vanity of this man, he understands by the brethren, the
multitude, and the whole Church, agreeing and according with Hanserdo in this
sottish opinion, who holds that by brethren, the multitude, and the whole
Church, all the believers in Jerusalem both men, women and children are to be
understood, and that they all had their Votes in that counsel and ratified the
Decrees, without the which they had not been valid, whereas it is most certain,
as I showed before in my Answer to Hanserdo, that there was not only an
impossibility that such multitudes of believers as were in Jerusalem should all
meet in any one place, but that by multitude there and the whole Church must
necessarily be understood some choice and select men such as Judas and Sylas
were, who are called Prophets and Ministers of the Gospel, of which the Church
of Jerusalem was furnished with good store, and of which that great council
only consisted, and who debated and argued con and pro about the business in
controversy, which is manifest from the seventh verse, where it is said, when
there had been much disputing, Peter rose up etc. and in the 12. verse for
farther confirmation of this truth, it is related that then all the multitude
kept silence and gave audience to Barnabas and Paul etc. And that James after
they had held their peace gave in his judgment, to which the whole multitude
and Church assented: so that out of all these words it necessarily and
undeniably follows that by the brethren there, the multitude and the whole
Church are to be understood, not the common people, men and women in the Church
of Jerusalem; For it is said they were brethren and therefore all the sisters
were excluded, who were not at any time permitted to vote in churches 1 Cor.
14. And therefore the whole multitude of believers were not there, for women
were part of the multitude; neither were the weak brethren to be admitted to
doubtful Disputations by a special command from the Apostle Paul Romans 14. v.
1. and this is accorded to by the wise I. S. that confident disputant, who
says that the Apostles and Elders as a Committee first prepared the dispute
and after reported it, not counting it safe to admit the weak to the same,
whiles it was intricate, so that from Saint Paul's Doctrine there were neither
women nor weak brethen there, and from I. S. his own concession, the weak were
not admitted all the time of the dispute: and therefore the whole multitude of
believers that were in Jerusalem were not in the Council, by all which it is
apparently evident, That by brethren, and church, and multitude there, the
whole company of Believers in Jerusalem cannot be understood, and therefore by
Brethren, Multitude, and the whole Church, we are necessarily to understand the
learned and godly Prophets, Ministers and Members of that church chief and
eminent ones such as Judas and Sylas were, and with them are to be joined the
other Presbyters that came out of all the Churches of Judea, with those that
came with Paul and Barnabas from Antioch, which being all confidered together,
made up a great number and multitude, all the which are called the Church, v.
3. the Scripture there speaking Synecdochically, and taking a part for the
whole, I say, of all such as these are did that Synod consist, and not of all
sorts of believers which were not members fit for a Synod and Council, which was
to be managed and ordered and consist of such men only as had received the
Keys, and upon whom the government of the Church was laid, which was never
committed to the people, much less to women; and therefore I say in all these
respects, by the Brethren and Multitude, and the whole Church, we are to
understand it Synecdochically as before, for all those that were in the
council which were but a part of the whole, for the eminent Ministers and
Prophets that were Commissioners there, and assistants to the Apostles and
Eld^rs, he which yet is more eviden^ from this reason, That they only could
be Judges and Voters in that Synod, which had heard the whole debate and the
full dispute on both sides; for none can be Judges in any cause to give
righteous judgment, that have not fully heard the allegations and probations
on both sides, which I. S. acknowledges, the weak neither heard, nor could
judge of, because they were intricate; ergo, they could not be Judges, nor give
their voices there upon no terms: for they could not be Judges of things they
had not fully and understandingly heard; now the weak neither heard, neither
could they have understood if they had heard (both which I. S. accords to)
and therefore by multitude and the whole Church the weak brethren cannot be
meant, much less the sisters: and if men would but with deliberation weigh and
consider of things as they ought to be pondered and considered of, very reason
without the warrant of holy Scripture would persuade every rational and well
grounded christian that none could or can be Judges in any cause but such as
have heard the pleading of the whole business, and controversy from the
beginning to the ending, which none but the apostles and presbyters, and the
Commissioners, and such as Sylas and Judas and Barnabas were, did; for the
Scripture says verse 6. that the Apostles and Elders came together for to
consider of this matter; and when there had been much disputing, etc. out of
which words we may gather, that none but they that managed the disputation,
and heard the whole debate, were or could be Judges, which all the people
neither did, nor possibly could do; neither may we conceive of the Council of
Jerusalem that they had any raw headed boys, or giddy braind creatures, or
Minors in it, or any such as were ever running out and in; for we may not
imagine, that that great Council was like a pigion house, where they are
continually fluttering out, and fluttering in; for that Council consisted of
such men only as were holy, grave and approved; all Prophets, such as Sylas,
Judas and Barnabas were, such as for gravity and experience, were thought fit
companions to sit with the Apostles and Elders in consultation; so that it is
apparently evident, that Council consisted of none but venerable, precious,
godly and staid men, of whom we can not by the Law of charity think that they
did the work of the Lord in that Synod negligently, or to the halves, or that
they did not all sit close, and diligently to the work from the beginning of
the Session to the conclusion of the same, and therefore that as they met
altogether at a set hour or time, so that they continued and kept together in
consultation and dispute as long as any other sat, and till they in their
wisdom by their joint consents and agreements thought fit to sit to the full
determination of the whole business, and till the Decrees were made, were it
fewer or more days or weeks, and although it be not recorded how long the
Council continued, yet we read no where in the 15. chapter, but that they
sat altogether in judgment, the Apostles and Elders, and Commissioners, till
they had heard the whole debate and di^pute, and none but they: This truth may
be gathered, not only from the holy Scripture, and from that I have formerly
spoke, but from I. S. his own words above specified, viz, that there were
neither weak brethren, nor the sisters; and therefore it is a great
wickedness in I. S. from such uncertainties as he goes upon, to raise and
make such conclusions as he does, which tend to no other end, but for the
taking away all the authority and power from the Apostles themselves, which God
notwithstanding had invested them with, and to put it into the hands of the
people, which they had nothing to do with; for as his words declare, he
accounts the Apostles and Elders but a Committee only, to prepare the
dispute, and then to report it, that they might have the assistance and
concurrence of the people, without the which (as he affirms) there were no
great commendation of the resolution, that is to say, if the people had not
assented unto the Decrees, they had been of no effect, which if it be not
wholly to divest the Apostles of all power and authority, and lay it and place
it upon the people, I leave it to the judgment of the learned, then the which
there cannot be a greater sacrilege, and injustice perpetrated against
Ministers and servants of God in the world by any; and as this dealing and
proceeding of I. S. is most injurious to the Apostles, so this his doctrine is
contrary to all divine and humane learning; yea, contrary to the very opinion
of the learned of the Independents: for this I. S. his judgment is, that the
Apostles and Presbyters without the concurrence of the people and Church, could
not have made the Decrees valid and binding, whereas all the Independents
(besides himself) joining with the Papists against the Protestants, affirm,
that the Apostles only in that Synod and Council, by their infallible
authority ratified those Decrees; and so they exclude all the Presbyters,
saying, that the Apostles acted not as Presbyters in that Council, but as
Apostles stles with a transcendent power, and were only the men who were led
and guided in that Session by the Holy Ghost, and by a spirit of infallibility
(which say they) the Presbyters were not endued with; and therefore their
presence only as Apostles made their Decrees binding, which opinion of the
Independents howsoever it is very erroneous, as I have often showed in the
foregoing Discourse; yet it is point blanke against the Doctrine of I. S. who
places all the power in the people, robbing both the Apostles and Presbyters of
their authority; and on the other side his brethren, they place all authority
upon the Apostles, and deprive the Presbyters of it, and count them but
ordinary men, and not infallibly there assisted by the Holy Ghost; both which
opinions as they are contrary unto the word of God, so they sufficiently prove
that these men are but Babel Builders, whose tongues and language are divided,
and tend to confusion; for they are diametrically fighting one against ano
there; so that all the world may see that those men that begin once to fight
against the truth, like the Midianit^s they destroy one an other.

But this has generally been observed, that such men as these are, that study
to invent Engines to beat down the truth, yet all the vapors of their brain
cannot so much as cloud so bright ^ Sun, but it will evermore gloriously
shine forth to the dazeling of the eyes of all the enemies of the same: So that
it is a wonder of wonders to me to see the people generally so hardened by
obstinacy, that they cannot yet discern into the craft and juggling of the
Ill-defendents predicants, who whiles they give the people or Church power and
interest, to humor them (it is not so much out of love to them, as hatred to
the Presbyterians) to build up their Diana Temple of Independency, hoping by
raising it to ruin the truth it self, and to overthrow the whole Fabric of
Presbyterian government, which Christ the King of his Church has appointed,
and in fine by this means to bring in a confusion of all things, and a m^^re
Anarchy in Church and State.

But howsoever the Ill-defendents seek to put out the light of the truth by
this their snuffing at it, they make it burn the brighter, as I. S. and
Hanserdo Knollys have done by their snuffing at it.

And this shall suffice by way of Answer to have replied to what both these
Gentlemen Master Hanserdo and I. S. had to say to my third Proposition*

I come now to my fourth, which I will first set down with their Answers to it,
and then make my reply as I have done to all their former cavills; and I will
go on in the same order, first answering to Hanserdo and then to I. S.

My fourth Proposition is this, viz. That the Church of Jerusalem and the
government of the same, is to be a pattern for all Congregations and Assemblies
in any City or Vicinity, to unite into one Church; and for the Officers and
Presbyters of those congregations to govern that Church jointly, in a College
or Presbytery.

And for the proof of this there needs no great dispute; for all men
acknowledge that the mother Church must give an example of government to all
the daughter Churches; now then when it does evidently appear, that this mother
Church of Jerusalem, in her most flourishing condition, and by her first
constitution, was consisting of many Congregations and several Assemblies, and
that they were all governed by a Presbytery, or a joint and common Council of
Presbyters: then it follows, that all other Churches should be governed after
the same manner as the mother Church was, to the end of the World; neither do
the brethren deny, but the government of the church of Jerusalem, must be the
pattern of government to all churches; and therefore out of that misprision
and mistake, that she was consisting of but as many as could meet in one
congregation, they take the church of Jerusalem, for imitation, and teach all
their several congregations to do the same, and to exercise the same power
among themselves Independent, and to govern with as absolute an authority in
their several Congregations, as the whole College of the Apostles and
Presbyters did in the church of Jerusalem, and from the which they allow of no
appeal, as all that know their tenants can witness: So that this last
Proposition being strengthened both by reason and the consent of the brethren,
needs no further proof.

Now to this my fourth Proposition and the Arguments contained in the same,
Master Knollys thus replyeth Page 14. Neither do the Brethren deny, but the
Government of the Church of Jerusalem must be the pattern of Government to all
Churches. But the Doctor knows, that the brethren deny that the Church of
Jerusalem consisted of diverse Congregations and several Assemblies under a
common Council, Consistory, College, or Court of Presbyters. And this they
have not granted, neither has the Doctor proved. And this may be sufficient to
be said in Answer to the four Propositions touching the first Question.

This is all Mr Knollys has to say by way of Answer to this my last
Proposition; in the which Answer of his, I desire the Reader to observe what he
in the name of all the brethren grants and assenteth unto, and what both he
and they all deny (at least as he says); for he personateth them all. He
grants in behalf of them all, that the Church of Jerusalem must be the pattern
of Government to all churches: And this is as much as I desire.

But by the way take notice that Master Hanserdo reckons before his host; for
I. S. is one of the brethren, and yet he Page 13. asserteth that the example of
that Church is not bindingly presidentiall. Now what he and all the brethren
deny, if Mr Knollys be worthy of credit, are these two things, viz. The first,
That the Church of Jerusalem consisted of diverse congregations. Secondly, they
deny that the Doctor has proved it.

That all the brethren deny (as Mr Knollys says) that the church of Jerusalem
consisted of many congregations, is not altogether to be believed: For my
brother Burton, none of tne meanest of the Brethren, does not deny it: yea he
not only grants it, but by arguments proves that there were many Assemblies of
Believers in the church of Jerusalem: and therefore Mr Hanserdo in this also
his assertion reckons before his host.

But whereas in the second place he says that the brethren deny that I have
proved there were many congregations of Believers in Jerusalem, he being better
acquainted with their denyalls then I am, may speak according to his
information, and so is not so blame worthy as in the former of his conclusions;
but if it were any thing material, or to the purpose, I could name some of the
Brethren of the congregationall way, that told me discoursing with them, that
by reading of my book they were convinced that there were many Assemblies of
believers in Jerusalem: and therefore to my knowledge all the Brethren do not
deny that I have proved it: But whether or no I have not abundantly evinced
there were many Assemblies of Believers in Jerusalem, and that not only out of
the holy Scripture, but from my brother Burtons and Hanserdoes own words, I
leave it to the judgment of all such men as have any understanding and without
prejudice shall read the foregoing discourse course, whither I send them,
entreating them likewise with diligence to peruse it: and then I doubt not, but
whatsoever they have believed concerning that business, or whatsoever they
have formerly denied, they will be convinced that I have sufficiently proved
both from Scripture and from my brother Burton and Saint Hanserdoes own
concessions that there were many Congregations of Believers in the Church at
Jerusalem, and withal I am most assured they will also for time to come take
heed how they believe Mr Knollys and those of his fraternity upon their bare
words without other sufficient and approved witnesses.

And this shall suffice for Answer to Master Knollys.

Now I desire the Reader to hear what learned I. S. has to say; He in the 13.
Page answers thus:

First, says he, They are not (meaning the Congregations and several
Assemblies) an example of uniting or aggregation, except it be found that there
were many Churches aggregated, which a very facile and swasible Reader may well
doubt of, for any thing that has yet been said to make it good.

For Answer to I. S. I say that he that is but a very facile and swasible
reader, that will vouchsafe to peruse and consider but what I have wr^t in way
of Answer both to himself, Hanserdo Knollys and my learned brother Burton,
will never doubt but that I have sufficiently made it good that there were many
Assemblies and Churches aggregated in Jerusalem: and therefore I shall send all
such as are studious to find out the truth, and to shun error and to decline
all trivall and fond seducers, to what I have written in the foregoing Treatise.

And this shall serve for Answer to his first Reply.

Secondly, says he, If this were granted that many Churches did aggregate and
unite in the beginning, yet would not this example be bindingly Presidentiall,
etc.

Here I shall desire the Reader to take notice of the vanity of this Novice,
and worthless man who is so far from all learning and knowledge, as he is not
acquainted with the very principles of any sound reason or with the
Independents doctrine; for he has the whole Army of the Independents against
him in this point as well as the Presbyterians, who all acknowledge that the
church of Jerusalem is for its Government to be the pattern of Government to
all churches to the end of the World; and that has been all the controversy
between the Presbyterians and the Illdependents, whether that Church consisted
of many Congregations and Assemblies, which if it could be proved they professed
that then the cause was lost and the day was the Presbyterians; for they all
acknowledge that the Church of Jerusalem must be a pattern of all Churches; and
this Master Knollys in the name of all the brethren assented unto in the
foregoing words, so that these brethren are not so well acquainted with one
another mind and principles as they persuade others they are.

Now profound I. S. denies that were it so that the Church of Jerusalem
consisted of many Assemblies, yet for all this that it could not be bindingly
Presidentiall, these are his words by the which he beats up all the
Independents Quarters, to use his own rhetoric, and utterly overthrows that
cause he as a Champion came out to maintain. Neither has he only beat up the
Independents Quarters, but indeed all the Apostles Quarters: For that
Government they established in Jerusalem and in all the other Primitive
Churches, was left for a pattern of imitation to all Churches in all
succeeding Ages, as not only the Independents but all orthodox Divines do
accord, yea the Scripture it self has commanded it, Isaih 2. saying, out of
Zion shall come the Law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem: Jerusalem
therefore must be a pattern, both for doctrine and government, and this all the
Independents themselves acknowledge, and the Scripture in many places says,
whatsoever was written was written for our instruction; therefore the
government of all the Primitive Churches, especially that of Jerusalem, and the
example of all the Apostles, are left for our imitation, Phil. 3. Now when the
Apostles constituted all churches after one way, and aggregated many Churches
or Congregations all under one Presbytery, in each of them severally, as in
that at Jerusalem, that Church principally, and all the rest are left for a
pattern of imitation of Church government to the end of the world, and this is
confirmed by the Holy word of God, and assented unto by all the Learned, from
all which when J. S. most rashly and wickedly dissenteth, I leave him to the
censure of the seven new Churches, who I hope will whip him out of their
Assemblies, with his foolish Flagello flagelli, for thus sottishly beating up
of all their quarters, and renouncing all the Independents Principles, whiles
he labored to maintain them; and this shall suffice for answer to I. S. his
grolleries to the former Propositions concerning the first Question.

Now before I come to my second question, concerning the gathering of Churches,
I will say thus much by way of Preface concerning Hanserdo, I. S. and my
brother Burton, that as they are very confused in their replies, jumbling
things together, that are heterogenious, leaping backward and forwards, picking
and choosing, snatching and carping, yea, and trifling about words, as the
custom of all the Ill*defendents is, so they deal not fairly with me, nor
ingenuously, nor Saint-like with the people, whom they desire to delude, and
therefore they pass over the most material Arguments, never so much as making
mention of them, and slighting all as not worthy the answering to, and by such
arts as these are, they most prodigiously abuse the well minded people, and by
these their unchristian, unbrotherly, and wicked dealings, they every day
broach their errors with more facility, and abuse all their ignorant and
credulous followers, to the utter destroying of many of their poor souls,
some of the which as I am able to prove, were men esteemed of to be godly, as
walking unblameably, being also diligent hearers of the word before they knew
them, yet after their acquaintance with them, being first by their means
seduced from our Churches, after some time they fell from their congregations
also, into wicked and desperate opinions, and in a short time after, became so
profane and beastly; yea, so atheistical, as it would exceed ordinary belief
to relate, and truly if I had not very good witness to prove what I say,
besides my own knowledge and experience, I would not have mentioned it; but
because if occasion serves I shall be able to produce many Presidents of
fearful Apostasies, even amongst those that were their Scholars, and the
Disciples of the Independent way, I am the willinger to speak of it, that I
might arm all men with some caution in reading their Pamphlets, which they
write against the Presbyterians; for they never deal heartily, neither with
them, nor with their own brethren: for first they either wholly dissuade them
from reading our books, or else by their emissaries, and railing Libels they
most shamefully vilify and belie them so, that they come prejudicated to them,
and then they send their own putrid and corrupt scriblings amongst those of
their Fraternity, whom they miserably cozen and abuse with their fraudulent
jugglings, and that against all the Laws of piety and common honesty, to the
disturbance, both of Church and State. This I thought fit (I say) to speak
before I come to my second question and several Queries arising from it,
concerning the gathering of Churches, and their answers unto them, wherein they
rather trifle then dispute, as will by and by appear; I shall therefore in my
replying unto them, first set down the question fully with all my queries, and
then answer to all the materials of their fond cavils and evasions, with their
silly responsals to them, and after I have done that, I will set down Gods
method, and the Apostles practice in the gathering of Churches, with the manner
of their admitting of Members, and then reply to whatsoever they have to say
against my Arguments and Reasons deduced from holy Scripture; and for further
confirmation of the truth, I will add many more Presidents, and them
undeniable ones of the Apostles receiving of Members, and that into Churches
formed after the New Testament form, according to their own description;
besides, those that were received into the Catholic visible Church, and all
without any of those conditions they now require of their Members, and I shall
by Gods assistance evidently make it appear, that God by his holy Apostles and
Ministers uses but one way of admitting of members into the church, whether it
be the catholic visible church, or any particular presbyterian church, whether
they be admitted in an ordinary or an extraordinary way, I say by thegrace of
God I shall clearly elucidate this truth, that God uses one and the same method
in gathering his people out of all nations into Church fellowship, and the
communion of the Saints, which ought to all Ministers to be a rule to walk by
in the receiving in of Members into their Congregations.

Having thus set down what order I will proceed in, I come now to the second
question between us and the Brethren, which is, concerning the manner of
gathering of Churches and admitting of Members and Officers, viz. Whether
Ministers of the Gospel may out of already congregated Assemblies of
`Beleevers, select and choose the most principal of them, into a
Church Fellowship peculiar unto themselves, and admit of none into their
society, but such as shall enter in by a private covenant, and are allowed of
by the consent and approbation of all the Congregation. And this question
brancheth it self into these several Queries: The first, whether for the
gathering of Churches there be either Precept or President in the Holy Word of
God, that the Preachers and Ministers of the Gospel did ever leave their own
ordinary charges, to which they are called, and whereto they are fixed, with a
command not to leave them, and under pretense of a new way, or a newborn
truth, or a new light, did run about and alienate the minds of the people,
well affected formerly to their several Ministers, as of duty they were bound,
as who had converted them to Christ by their Ministry, and fed them still with
the sincere milk of the Word, and built them up in their most holy Faith: I
say, the first Quere is, whether there be precept or example in the Word of God
of any true Ministers so doing? and whether it was ever heard of in the
Apostles and Primitive times, that any believing Christians were in great
numbers congregated from among other believing Christians, and molded into
several Congregations and Assemblies, as separate and distinct bodies and
Churches from them, and who had no Church Fellowship with the other
Congregations, nor communicated with them in the Ordinances, but were
independent from them, and absolute among themselves? and whether this way of
gathering of Churches was ever heard of before these days? and whether this be
to set Christ upon his Throne, to make divisions and schisms in Churches, and
among Believers and brethren, and that upon groundless pretenses.

The second Quere is, whether for the making of any man or woman a Member of
the Church, it be requisite or necessary, to the believing and being baptized,
that they should walk some days, weeks, months, perhaps years with them,
that they may have experience of their conversation before they can be
admitted, and after that, a confession of their faith should be publicly made
before the Congregation, and the evidences of their conversion, as, the time
when, the place where, the occasion how they were converted, should likewise
openly be produced for satisfaction to the Church before they can be admitted
to be Members, and if any, either men or women shall except against their
evidence, that then they are not to be admitted; this is the second Quere.

The third is, whether for making any man or woman a Member, or an Officer of a
Church, the consent of the whole Congregation or the greater part of them
besides the Presbyters and Ministers be requisite?

The fourth Quere is, whether for the admission of any one into
Church Fellowship and Communion, a private solemn Covenant be requisite or
necessary for the making of any one a Member, the neglect or refusal of the
which, makes them incapable of their Member-ship and admission? There is no
question between us and the brethren, about a public covenant, for we have
Presidents of that in holy Scripture, in all public reformations.

The fifth Quere is, whether the women and people, as well as the Presbyters
and Ministers have the power of the Keys, and whether the women have all their
voices in the Church, both for election and reprobation of Members and
officers, as well as the men, and whether the consent of all the women, or the
greatest part of them, be requisite for the making of any one a Member or
Officer, so that if they gain*say it, being the greater number, or allow of it,
the most voices carry the business? this is the fifth Querie, the practice of
the which, as of all the former, the brethren in some of their Congregations
hold for orthodox, and think all these things required of any that offer
themselves to be a Member.

The last Quere is, whether the practice and preaching of all these things, and
the gathering of Churches after this manner, be to set up Christ as King upon
his Throne? and whether Churches and Assemblies thus congregated be the only
true Churches, and in the which only Christ rules and reigns as King, and all
other that are not molded up after this fashion, be no true congregated
Churches, and in the which Christ is not set up as King upon his Throne, which
is the opinion of the brethren, as will afterward appear.

If I have failed in any thing in stating the question, or in any of these
Quaeries, the brethren must pardon me; for I speak according to the practice of
some of their Congregations, and according to the doctrine many of them teach,
not only in their own Assemblies, but in every Pulpit through the Kingdom
where they come, as I shall be able to prove: And therefore if I have been
mistaken in any thing, they may blame their own practice and teachers, and
thank themselves also, that in the space of almost three years (though it has
been again and again desired at their hands) they have not so much as set down
the model of their government, and what they would have, with all the
appertainances belonging unto it, that all the world might be out of doubt.
What therefore I find practiced amongst some of the most zealous of them, and
the most approved for integrity, and what I shall be able to prove, that I have
without any spirit of bitterness specified.

And now according to my method propounded I will set down their Answers to
what all of them have to say to the several branches and parcells of the
ensuing discourse concerning the gathering of Churches; only in this I shall
refer every cavil they make against my several quaeries and arguments to
their right place; whereas I said before, they had in a confused and disorderly
way by snatches answered to what they thought themselves best able to deal
with, eitherwholy passing by the main arguments with silence, or slighting of
them with contempt, wherein I shall in their due places discover their
dishonest dealing.

But before I come to my answer, I shall desire the Reader to hear, first what
Mr Knollys and I. S. say concerning me about this second question.

Hanserdoes words are these Page 14. And this question (says he) the Doctor
brancheth into six Quaries, wherein the judicious Reader may perceive the
Doctor (through misinformation I conceive) has mistaken the stating of the
question, which he partly acknowledges. Thus Mr Knollys speaks.

I. S. his words are these Page 15, 16.

The second question, says he, is of the manner of gathering of Churches and
of admitting of Members and Officers proposed by him: 1. in the Chaos it
seems. 2. orderly, (as he supposes) drawn forth into six Quaeries, though I
dare not say there is not interfering, tautologie and great confusion. The
nature in which the things are: viz. of Quarie, incourages me rather to do some
thing in them, for that I hope the Doctor will not be great of his own sense,
but take an Answer of these things from those that know the way better then
himself, who it seems is but a Catechumenos therein. I shall here therefore
endeavor to instruct him instead of refuting him, for as much as to me it
seems unmeet, that a man should be polemically exercised before he be
positively principled. Thus speaks learned I. S.

For my brother Burtons good opinion of me and his kind expressions of his love
toward me I shall in their places record them with my due thanks to him for
the same.

But whereas Master Knollys accuses me of ignorance in the stating of the
question, and says that I have partly acknowledged it, and conceives that this
mistake in me arose from a misinformation: In all he says he plays the vain
man; for I am able to prove from their daily practice all that I there set
down, and know the question as well as any Independent living, and can at any
time make it appear that Master Knollys knows not the Independents principles.
And so far as their New Lights have illuminated the world, so far I know of
their ways; and that I acknowledged and no other thing: But why did not Mr
Knollys in this place, if I were mistaken, honestly show me my error? And why
did he not as beseemed a Christian and a man truly fearing God, now set down
fully and plainly what their Way is that all men may know where to find them?
These ungodly men are not so honest as to set down their way, and yet they
pretend others are ignorant of it: when notwithstanding they know it better
then themselves. In the same steps of Hanserdo does I. S tread in accusing me
of interfering, tautologies and great confusion, and that I am great in mine
own sense, and that I am but a Cateshumenos, and that he knows the way better
then my self, and that he will endeavor to instruct me instead of refuting
me, for as much as to him it seems unmeet that a man should be polemically
exercised before he be positively principled.

Thus this wretched man tramples upon me for my ignorance, and vapors at no
allowance of his own knowledge, and yet keeps not his promise with me, to
instruct me, or to show me my error, wherein he proclames himself to be a
very unworthy creature, that I say no more: for it had been his duty to have
ingenuously here shown unto me my failings if I were in ignorance, and to have
truly and uprightly set down what their Way is (seeing he affirms he knows
it so well) that all men might at last be undeceived if in error. This I say
had been the part of a sincere Christian and one truly fearing God, in the
number of the which I cannot think or believe I. S. to be so long as he fondly
boasts of himself and keeps not his promise: and it is most apparently
evident to all that have read his wicked Pamphlet that he is in the gall of
bitterness and band of iniquity where they find nothing but brutish impiety
and apparent ignorance: For he himself, though a great teacher, knows not
neither what he says nor whereof he affirms; who is as apparently nescient
as Hanserdo of the Independents Doctrine, and had need himself to be
positively principled before he be polemically exercised.

But whereas J. S. accuses me to be a Catechumenos in their principles. I will
undertake this upon my life before the whole Kingdom to make it good, that I
know the Independent way as well as any Independent in England; and I farther
undertake if the great Council of the Kingdom shall call me and all the
dissenting Brethren before them, that I shall be better able in half a days
space to deliver in, what model they would set up (if they will deal
ingenuously before God and the world and speak their conscience) then they all
put together shall be able to do; I may perhaps be thought something
presumptuous; But J. S. his fond expressions makes me speak that I do, which
notwithstanding I still undertake to make good.

And if I have not been misinformed, there was one of the congregationall way,
and none of the meanest of them, hearing my brother Burton speaking very
trivially of me, after he was gone out of his presence and passing a long with
a friend of his and of the same fraternity, much blamed my brother Burton,
saying, that he had heard him speak as hyperbolically of me both for my
learning and honesty as ever he heard man speak of another, and added moreover,
that though I differed from them in opinion, yet he conceived that I was the
same man still in all respects that I was when my brother Burton spoke so well
of me, and said withal that he did verily believe, whatsoever Master Burton
spoke in a vilifying manner of me, that I was better acquainted with their Way
then he himself. And there will be no great difficulty if occasion serve to
prove all that I now say. And therefore J. S. plays the child to babble thus
to me, who by Gods assistance and the power of his might shall be able to
confound ten thousand such as he is, and to teach both him and all his
accomplices whether assembled or not assembled, that their tenants are most
wicked and abominable. And I hope that succeeding ages will say that God
enabled me to be as good as my undertaking, for in his might I shall ever come
out against all the Independents and Sectaries.

And now I come to answer to all their Replies to my Quaeries.

And first whereas they babble about the general stating of the question and
divide those things that I had joined together and made but one general
question of, they show themselves but triflers and not serious Christians. For
I never made any; doubt but that the Ministers of the Gospel may gather
Churches for God in all ages sent his Prophets and Ministers for this very end
to gather in the lost sheep of the house of Israel and all such as belong unto
his election into his house; for I know that the ordinary way to bring men to
the knowledge of God and of Christ, wherein consists life eternal, is by the
ministry of the Gospel, this I say is the ordinary means God uses for the
perfecting of the Saints, and for the edifying of the body of Christ, and this
I have learned from the holy Scripture, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. and 1 Cor. 12. 28.

And therefore all the pudder that I. S. and my Brother Burton make with their
grollish Interrogations about that business is but to beat the air, and
nothing to the purpose, and no answer to my Quere, as the Reader may well
perceive, if he looks but back to the question and first quere, neither can
my Brother Burton or I. S. make it good by any one example out of the holy word
of God, that the ordinary Ministers of the Gospel, did ever leave their own
ordinary charges, to which they are called, and whereto they are fixed, with a
command not to leave them, and that under a pretense of a new way, or new light
did run about to gather converted men, from among converted men, and so pick
out of other men's folds and flocks the best and fattest sheep, and molded them
into several Congregations and Assemblies, as separate and distinct bodies and
Churches from them, and who had no Church Fellowship with other Congregations,
but were independent from them, and absolute amongst themselves: I say and
affirm, that neither my Brother Burton, nor I. S. nor any predicant of the
congregationall way can show me any one President of this kind, either in the
Old or New Testament; and this was the question, whether there were any such
thing to be found in the Scripture; and not whether the Ministers of the Gospel
may gather Churches, as both J. S. and my Brother Burton deceitfully make it.
Now whereas in the 12. page he compares our Churches and Congregations with
the Popish Assemblies, and says, that they profess themselves to be
Christians as well as the Protestants, and that their gathering of people out
of our Ministers flocks is as tolerable as gathering them out of Popish
Parishes and Assemblies; for this is the drift of his reason; he deals most
uncharitably, and unchristianly with his brethren; for he himself in his
book called Babell no Bethell, has there by the help of learned Calvin and
Chemnicius, and other Orthodox Writers, proved that the Church of Rome is both
Idolatricall and heretical, and errs in the foundation, and that all the
Papists living and dying in that their Faith and belief, are in the state of
damnation. So that they being considered in his notion, are as Infidels and
aliens from the common wealth of Israel; and the gathering of churches out from
amongst the Papists is to open their eyes and to turn them from darkness to
light and from the power of Satan to God, and as bringing men out of heathenish
idolatry or from Jewish obstinacy, from the companies and congregations of the
which all Christians have an injunction to come out, they being commanded to
come out of Babylon.

Now I say in that my brother Burton compares all the Christian brethren in our
congregations to the idolatrous Papists, he shows the uncharitable opinion he
has of us all, so that now it is no wonder that upon all occasions he
proclames us all the enemies of Jesus Christ and his Kingdom. But blessed be
God, We believe that through the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ we shall be
saved as well as any Independents think they shall be saved Act. 15. v. 11.
Seeing God has put no difference between us and them purifying our hearts by
Faith. And therefore he deals very unchristianly and unbrotherly with us to
compare us to the Papists, especially when according to our Covenant our
Parishes and Churches are purged both of the Service Book and Hierarchy and all
Popish Superstition, as he himself acknowledges in the 13. page of his
uncharitable Pamphles: and therefore this his instance of gathering Churches
out of our congregations who believe in God as well as they* answers not to the
question.

And for his other instance in the 13. Page, Where he asks me if I know not
that the ancient Church of the Jews was then a Church when the Apostles by
their preaching gathered a Church out of it? a Christian Church out of the
Jewish Synagogues?

For Answer, I say first, that I well see (and that without spectacles) that by
these stones he hurls at all his brethren, and casts up dust yea dirt thus in
their faces (to usurp his own expression) pa. 13. that he shows his want of
love and charity to us, comparing our congregations and Churches at every turn
to the Popish and Jewish Synagogues, and esteeming of the gathering out of
people from amongst us, to be the same with gathering men and women from out of
their Idolatricall and Jewish Assemblies: for why otherwise if this be not his
meaning, does he bring his instances from both the Papists and the Jews at
every turn? and therefore for his so dealing, in the first place I answer, that
he is very injurious to his Brethren and must seriously repent for this
uncharitable dealing.

But secondly, I answer that my brother Burton is much mistaken: for the
Apostles did not gather Christian Churches out of the Jewish Synagogues, as we
may see in the second of James and through the whole story of the Acts, where
we find that the Apostles in all their peregrinations ever frequented the
Synagogues and preached unto them there, and our Savior himself
notwithstanding all the scandalls in that Church and all their traditions,
preached daily in the Temple and in their Synagogues, as the Scripture relates;
yea and the Apostles themselves after Christ's resurrection preached daily in
the Temple and in all Synagogues whersoever they journyed; yea Christ himself
commanded all his followers, the whole multitude with his own Disciples and
Apostles to hear the Pharisees Matthew. 23. ver. 1, 2. And without doubt they did
obey their Master and made no separation from the Synagogues and S Paul in the
10. to the Hebrews, blames those that did leave the assembling of themselves
together: therefore he did not allow of a separation from the Synagogues and
from Christian Assemblies and moulding themselves into separate Congregations,
under a pretense of a more refined holiness and pure partaking in the
ordinances, which is the pretense of all straglers; all such proceedings were
contrary both to the precept and example of Christ and his Apostles who taught
and practiced the contrary, Christ commanding the man out of whom he had cast
the devils, and that would have followed him, that he should go to his own
friends and abide amongst them still; and he ever sent all those lepers he
cured to the Priests; he never gathered Churches out of the Jewish churches,
neither did ever any of the Apostles or godly Ministers do any such thing, but
blamed it in all; and therefore the Independents going against both precept and
example, are highly disobedient to God, and have for these their wicked and
ungodly practices a great deal to repent of and to answer for: And if we will
compare times with times, we may believe it was amongst the Jews as it was
amongst us under the Prelates reign and power, those godly and powerful
Ministers such as my reverend Tutor Master Richard Rogers, Mr John Rogers of
Dedham and Mr Dod and others; when they sometimes went to visit their friends
through City and Country by their preaching they gained many Souls unto God in
many Towns and Villages, where after they had (through the blessing of God upon
their Ministry) converted them, they left them still abiding in their several
Parishes injoyning them diligently and carefully to wait upon their Ministers
there, dissuading them from separation upon all occasions; and so it was
amongst the Jews, they came out to the Ministry and Baptism of John and heard
him upon every opportunity, but never left their own Synagogues and their own
Ministers, as the Scripture relates, when they returned to their several
abodes, and so they went out to hear Christ and his Disciples as occasion
served, and then returned home again to wait upon the ordinances in their
several dwelling places, and they had Christ's command to do this, neither is
it ever recorded in all the New Testament, but in the tenth chapter to the
Hebrews, that the Christians relinquished the Jewish Assemblies, for which they
are greatly blamed by Saint Paul. And I am confident if all the Independents
do not seriously repent of their wicked and pharisaicall separation from our
Assemblies, the Lord will show at last some fearful judgment upon them. For I
affirm it, they have not one president for all these their practices in the
whole Book of God: and therefore my brother Burtons instance of the Apostles
gathering of Christian churches from out of the Jewish Synagogues, as it is in
all respects unchristianlyand and deceitfully done to delude his fellows, so it
is not true that he averreth: For the Apostles did never gather Christian
Churches out of the Jewish Synagogues: for they had a command from Christ to
the contrary; neither was there any cause for any Christians to separate from
them; for they exercised at that time nothing but the Moral Worship in their
Synagogues, having Moses and the Prophets daily read and interpreted unto them
Acts 15. 21. and to those Synagogues that unerring Council at Jerusalem,
consisting of all the Apostles and Presbyters Act. 15. did send all the people
and their several cities to be instructed in Moses; therefore the Apostles and
Ministers of those times never gathered Christian Churches out of the Jewish
Synagogues, as my brother Burton would infer to make good their wicked
separations from us; and their gathering of their Churches out of our Christian
and believing Assemblies, which, I am ever, by Gods assistance, able to make
good, is nothing to the question that I propounded concerning the gathering of
Churches out of already gathered Churches. And therefore hitherto my brother
Burton has befooled himself to no purpose but to discover unto the World how
little skill he has in Divinity when he is out of a common place wherein every
child may learn as much and far more then he can teach him. And this answer to
my brother Burton concerning gathering of Christian Churches out of Jewish
Synagogues for the justifying of their unwarrantable separation, may serve to
the same objection wheresoever the Reader shall meet with it, as Page 18, etc.
And this might suffice to have answered to what my brother Burton had to say to
the first Quaerie concerning gathering Churches out of Churches: But because my
Brother Burton conceives that if they should not separate themselves from our
Christian Assemblies (whom he says do not come up close to the rule) into
their several new gathered Congregations, they could not set up Christ upon his
Throne as not making his word the rule of reformation or a sufficient rule upon
which we must necessarily depend, for the form and law of Reformation, and that
we ought not to wait on men; and thereupon propounds a quaerie to me Page 19.
thinking by this means the better to justify their unwarrantable proceedings:
therefore I shall first gratify my brothers desire and answer to his demand
and then I will pass on to reply to what he and his accomplices have to say to
my five other quaeries.

But I will set down my Brother Burtons oowne words which are these, p. 19.
seeing (says he) we have all bound our selves by solemn Covenant to reform
our selves, and those under our charge, according to the word of God; yea, and
every one to go before others in this Reformation; tell me now Brother (says
he) if it were not a matter worth the while for our Reverend and Learned
Assembly, seriously to take into debate, whether the general tying up of men to
wait necessarily on the Synod for its final resolution about Church
government, be not an usurpation upon our Christian Liberty and a Diminution at
least of the authority and sufficiency of Scripture, and so consequently be not
a trenching upon a fundamental heresy; as also an inhibition, restrayning
every man in his place, Ministers, Masters, etc. from setting upon the work of
Reformation, and so necessitating a violation of our Covenant, or a dangerous
retarding of the work; thus my Brother Burton: these and such like are the
subtle baits, and cunning snares wherewith he catches and draws into his Net
many ignorant, yet well meaning tender hearted Christians, whereas Reformation
and Discipline in the Church in the full power thereof, had been settled long
since, had not Independents studied ways to molest our peace in opposing the
settling of Church government, according to the word of God; for this they have,
and do labor to withstand with all their might and great subtilty, by which
means my Brother Burton, and those of his faction increase and strengthen
their party, and set up their new ways, and give an inlet to old and new
heresies without interruption; but this practice of Independents is offencive
to God and man, and absolutely contrary to that Covenant, which we have all
entered into. For when we covenanted for Reformation, it was to be understood
that we were thereby engaged to humble our selves before the great God, and
with fasting and prayer earnestly to seek to the Lord, who is wise in heart,
and mighty in strength, Job 9.4. able to overpower the hearts, wills and
affections of Principalities and powers; yea, of the greatest Kings and
Monarchs in the world; who by his wisdom can advise, counsel and direct, and
by his mighty and omnipotent working, and by the operation of his spirit can
enforce, and compel them to obey his Royal commands, and to set up an
universal Reformation of Religion and Discipline in his Church, in its full
power according to his sacred word and divine will: And whereas we have all
bound our selves by solemn Covenant to reform our selves, and all under our
charge, according to the word of God, this strictly binds every one of us in
special to Reform our selves, and those under our charge, by forsaking every
sinful way and evil practice, that we or they have formerly walked,
delighted and continued in, whereby we have provoked the Holy one of Israel
unto anger, Isaiah 1. 4. and hereby Magistrates, Ministers, Parents, Masters of
Families are bound to take care, that all under their charge frequent the
Ordinances of God, and exercise all holy duties with them, and that they do^
not suffer any to wander and straggle abroad into dangerous ways and bypath,
and errors and heresies, and blasphemous tenants; for if they let them walk
where they please, it shows but little care taken to reform and keep them in
the right way, which leads to happiness, and it is a violation of this part of
our Covenant, where we have bound our selves every one, to reform one, and
all under our charge; yea, and we are bound every one to labor to go before
others in this Reformation: But our Covenant does not therefore bind every man
and woman to take upon them to set up, and follow what Government seems good
in their own eyes, or rather is most suitable to their boundless spirits: our
Covenant gives no such Liberty to any; for were this the sense of the Cov^nant,
when it binds every particular man to endeavor to go before others in
Reformation, this were to covenant against sin, Formality, and Tyranny, and
to vow for unlawful Libertis^e, Profaneness, and an Anarchie which would bring
inevitable confusion in Church and State; for under the pretense of going
before others in Reformation, Heresies, unwarrantable, corrupt, and dangerous
new opinions would then be broached, maintained, and dispersed abroad, without
either the fear of God or man (as at this day we are taught by sad
experience); and all these deadly and destroying Heresies would be disseminated
and divulged under pretext, that their ways are agreeable to Gods word, and
that they come nearer, and walk more close to the rule of Christ then others
do: although their feet tread not in the steps of his commandments, but walk
in ways contrary to his holy will; and therefore such disorderly walkings as
these, are a Deformation of Religion, not a Reformation according to Gods word
and our solemn Covenant which we have all entered into. But my Brother
Burton, as I related before, puts it to the question, Whether or no it be not
an usurpation upon our Christian Liberty, and a diminution at least of the
authority and sufficiency of Scripture, etc. for a man to be tied to wait on
the Synod for its final resolution for Church government: It may be answered
for Magistrates to be zealous for Reformation, and to settle that Church
government which God has appointed is so far from being any usurpation upon
our Christian Liberty, or a diminution of the authority and sufficiency of the
holy Scripture, as they have warrant for it out of holy writ; and the practice
of the most godly Princes is there recorded for their example and
encouragement, to go on undauntedly in the work, 2 Chronicles. 15. 8. to the 16. v.
2 Chro. 17. the 6, 7, 8, 9. 2 Chronicles. 29. etc. 2 Chronicles. 30. etc. 2 Chronicles. 31.
31. etc. 2 Chronicles. 34. etc. 2 King. 23. to the 24. ver. Ezr. 9. Neh. 9. so that
Gods word be the absolute rule to direct them in this their undertaking, and
the true intent of our Covenant, is that we will all be ayding and assisting to
the utmost of our power to further them in their holy endeavors. Now wherein
for the effecting of such a Reformation that may in all things be grounded on
Scripture can a better course be taken then authority has appointed? namely,
by calling together an Assembly of Ministers, men skillful in the original
tongues, learned in all other sciences, and approved to be godly, pious,
zealous, orthodox men, and mighty in the Scripture, and which is more, to be
selfe-denying men, who being met together have humbled themselves by fasting
and prayer before the Lord of Heaven and earth, imploring his divine
assistance, illumination, and direction out of his holy word, for the Reforming
and settling the Government of the Church, according to his sacred will; and for
these godly, conscionable, and learned Ministers, as they did thus meet
together, so they have ever since laboriously searched the Scriptures to find
out what is the good will and pleasure of our God herein, and they have not
concluded of any thing, but what they bring their warrant for out of Gods word,
being taken from the example, practice, precepts and commands of the holy
Apostles (and the Churches in their times) for that government which they stand
for, and humbly desire to have settled and established in the Church of God. Now
can it be justly said, that if men wait patiently while these truths are
discussing (which have been the longer by reason that daily opposition, and
many cavilling argumentations that have been brought against that truth which
they hold forth, by some irresolvable spirits) that this is to tie them to
wait on the Synods final Resolution? no surely; for to wait on the mere
resolves of men, the wisdom of the State would never permit to tie any man,
but to wait on Gods word, and those warrantable and unquestionable truths,
which by the Synod are clearly demonstrated out of the same, concerning
Church Government; and this is a truth cannot be denied, or gainsaid, that it
is better, and the safest way for men to wait, see, and seriously consider of
what God shall out of his word reveal to his faithful servants the Ministers,
who are met together in his name and fear for this very end and purpose,
diligently to seek and find out his good will and pleasure in this particular,
then for men to tie themselves to the private opinions and ways and policy of
some particular men, who under the pretense of going before others in
Reformation set up what government they please, and cause people to enter into
a Covenant of their own framing, for all which when matters are rightly stated
and tried by the balance of the Sanctuary, there is not any color nor warrant
out of Gods word, nor in the solemn Covenant which we have taken; and therefore
in the judgment of all, who are humble and low in their own sight, and who
sincerely aim at the glory of God, and Zions peace; it is not thought any
usurpation upon our Christian Liberty, nor diminution of the Scriptures
authority, nor retarding of the work, to wait and see what God shall make
clear to the Synod out of his word, upon their debates, consultations and
answers to all opposing parties; for this is a way to make truth perspicuous,
and as we are exhorted to try all things, and hold fast that which is good; so
those that are godly, and will not be deluded with shows, they bring all these
results to the Touchstone of Gods word, and if they find that they endure the
test, then they dare not but receive and hold them fast, being the words of
sound and wholesome truths, so that the final Resolution for Church government
which men wait for, is not from the Synod, further then they hold it forth,
and make it manifest to be agreeable to the Scriptures, and to that rule all
men are bound to submit, and we ought to wait and see what the Synod does
conclude of out of Gods word, as the Church of Antioch, and other Churches did,
Acts 15. where we have a President for our imitation set before our eyes, in
the which we may observe that the Christians of those times were as well
instructed as any in the new gathered Churches, or any of the dissenting
brethren, whether assembled or not assembled, and yet all those holy and godly
Christians thought it no usurpation upon their Christian Liberty, nor no
diminution of the authority and sufficiency of the Scripture, nor no dangerous
retarding of the work of reformation, and of settling their Church Government,
to wait upon the Synod at Jerusalem for their final resolution about that
question there in debate, and which had caused so great a schism between the
Jews and Gentiles; I say these glorious and truly precious Christians had none
of these panicke fears the Ill-dependents of our times are troubled with, but
willingly and cheerfully waited upon that Synod and Council, without making in
the mean time any rents and separations from their Christian brethren; and
this their doing was left for our example to teach us to do the like, and not
under a semblance and show of going before others in ^reformation to make rents
and schisms in the Church and State, and to gather new Churches, and separate
Assemblies; and this shall suffice in way of answer to have spoke to all my
Brother Burtons cavils against my first Querie, and for answer likewise to the
question propounded by him to me: and now I come to see what my Brother Burton
has to say concerning my second Querie, viz. touching the requisites in those
that are to be made Members; the Reader may look back to the querie by which
he will the better discern the Grollery of the man, As for I. S. he answers
to that querie (although it be the practice of many of new gathered Churches)
that he knows none such who hold it so; so that it seems I. S. is but a
Catachumenos in the Independents doctrine, whiles he undertakes to instruct
others in it: But my Brother Burton he is well verst in all the Illdependent
discipline, both for the Theory and Practick, who answers thus to my second
querie, page 14. I pray (says he) what harm is in that, that none are to be
allowed of but by the consent and approbation of all the congregation? for
answer I say, very much harm, in regard they impose a Law upon their brethren,
that Christ the King of his Church never laid upon his people, by which they
deprive them of that Christian Liberty Christ has purchased for them, and in
the which they have a command to stand fast, Gal. 5. 1. which is not to be
entangled with any yoke of humane bondage. But it will not be amiss to hear
his reasons; They (says he) who are to walk together, should first be agreed
together, as Amos the 3. 3. (an two walk together except they be agreed? If
therefore any one of the Congregation can object any thing, as a just cause of
non-admittance of a Member, he ought to show it, not only for his own peace,
but the peace of the Church, etc. A second reason is this, to know those well
(says he) that are to be admitted, abundans cautela non nocet, in things
weighty we cannot be too wary; nor do we so much look at circumstances in
conversion, as the substance.

This is all my brother Burton has to answer to my second qu^ry which he
calls a caption.

But for answer, I expected that he should have produced some command or
example out of Gods Word, for the ratifying of this their practice in their new
congregations; for that is ever to be the rule of Christians obedience, and
where our King Christ Jesus has ceased to command, there all his servants must
cease to obey; now when these of the congregationall way have neither precept
nor president for these their proceedings in their admission of Members, it is
but a vain tradition of their own brain and ought by all Christ's true
Disciples to be abhorred and abominated.

But whereas my brother Burton says, that they that are to walk together,
should first be agreed together, and cites these words out of third of Amos
ver. 3. Can two walk together except they be agreed? To this I thus Reply:

First, that if the Independents were Gods, and all the Presbyterians went on
in wicked and sinful courses, then this question of his had been to the
purpose; but when it is certain that the Illdependents are sinners as well as
the other Sons and Daughters of Adam, and many of them known to be
notoriously scandalous, not only for their damnable and heretical opinions
and schismatic doctrines, but for their lying, railing, hypocrisy, pride,
covetousness, etc. and all of them guilty of the sin of seducing and
misleading the poor people; I say in all these regards, I see no reason why
there should be any necessity laid upon Gods heritage and people to be
acquainted with them and their ways, except it be that all such as fear God and
will walk in his paths, by knowing of them, may shun them and their by-ways,
which they are bound to do both from precept Prove. 4. v. 14, 15. Ps. 1. v. 1.
and from the example of our Savior, Ioh. 2. ver. 24. where it is said that
Jesus did not commit himself unto them, because he knew them. And so all good
people and such as truly fear God should make use of their knowledge to shun
such seducers and deceivers, and to decline all their by-ways.

But secondly, I answer that God has no where enjoined or required that those
that either are to be made Christians, or to be admitted into Church fellowship
should either know the faces of all the Members of the congregation, or should
be particularly acquainted with the whole church that he is to be admitted a
Member of: For we have no warrant for such practice in the whole Scripture,
neither is there any example of it from one end of the Bible to the other; and
therefore it is mere Will Worship and a serving of God after the commandments
of men, which is so often condemned in holy Scripture, as Isaiah 29. Matthew. 15.
Mark 7. Coloss. 2. and therefore ought to be abhorred as an intolerable yoke of
bondage, which neither we nor our forefathers could bear Acts 15. Whereas
Christ's yoke is easy and light, and they that take his yoke upon them find
rest unto their souls Matthew. 11. ver. 28, 29, 30. who says unto his people,
Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden and I will give you rest.
He does not say, If you will come to me and be admitted into church*
fellowship, you must first walk sometime with my people and be acquainted with
them; I say Christ the King of his church has given no such command either to
those that are to be admitted or to his Ministers and stewards of his house
which is his church of any such practice.

Thirdly, I answer that as there is an impossibility almost for any man or
woman to be acquainted with a whole Church, so it is neither necessary nor
useful: For that knowledge that is required as necessary to salvation and for
the making of any fit to be church Members, consists in these things, that they
repent and believe and be baptized, and that they should know the only true
God and whom he has sent, Jesus Christ. John 17. And this is the first thing
absolutely necessary to salvation which is required of all such as will be
Christ's Disciples.

The second thing is, the knowledge of our selves, which consists in
self-denial and regeneration, For if any will be Christ's Disciples they must
deny themselves and take up his cross daily; For so says Christ our King
Matthew. 16. Luke 9. And again John 3. ver. 3. Christ speaking unto Nicodemus,
says to him and in him to all men, Except a man be born again he cannot see
the Kingdom of God ver. 5. Except a man be born of water and of the spirit he
cannot enter into the Kingdom of God: He must be a new creature, says he. And
this is the knowledge that Christ the King of his church requires as necessary
for their salvation, so for their admission into church fellowship, and he that
has these qualifications has as much as Christ requires; and there is no need
of any particular or familiar acquaintance with all those of the congregation
or with the whole church or that they should walk some time with them,
therefore it is wickedly done in all those of the congregational way to impose
laws of their own making upon the people of God their brethren who are a free
people: and therefore they that desire to serve their King Christ Jesus and to
hear and obey his voice only, ought to detest all these false teachers that
would so inthrall them, especially they ought to abominate their practices
because they make these their traditions Gods Ordinances.

But whereas my brother Burton says that abundans cautela non nocet, and that
they look not so much at circumstances in conversion, as the substance.

I affirm it is a most arrogant expression in any so to speak; for in his thus
speaking, he makes as if it were in the power of poor mortal creatures to
search men's hearts and judge of the secrets of the same which is only Gods
peculiar: but that is not all, but in this his expression there is a high
strain of confidence in the man that he will seem to be wiser then Christ
himself that was the King and Lawgiver of his Church and the mighty
Counselor; and yet he gave no precept for this abundans cautela: and yet it
is most certain, that he revealed the whole will of his Father, and his
Disciples also delivered unto the church the whole counsel of God Act. 21. And
yet neither Christ nor his Apostles did ever deliver this doctrine of walking
with the church sometime, nor never spoke of this abundans cautela; therefore I
gather it is neither part of the will or council of God that they enjoin this
walking upon his people: therefore all the true subjects of Jesus Christ and
all his liege people ought to abominate and abhor all such usurpers as my*
Brother Burton and his accomplices are, that trample down the Laws of Christ our
King and impose their own inventions and traditions upon his people for Christ's
Ordinances and Statutes.

And this shall suffice to have spak to what my brother Burton had to say to my
second Qu^rie.

To the third quaerie, concerning the consent of the people and congregation,
my brother Burton replies that it is answered before, which was no answer to
that quaerie.

But now learned I. S. comes in, and Page 18. We hold it (says he) yea, that
for the admission of any to Membership or Office bearing in a church the
consent of the congregation or the major part thereof, as well as officers, be
required, and that as well in regard every one takes a charge upon him as in
respect of interest.

I expected that this groll I. S. should according to his promise, not only
have given me a parcel of words; but as he accounted me a Catachumenos, that
he should have taught and instructed me out of Gods Word, which must be the
rule of our obedience, and out of his statutes, where ever Christ the King of
his Church had ever given such a law unto his people that they should admit of
none into his house without the consent of all their fellow servants, and where
he did resign his authority and put it into the peoples hands, and commanded
them that they should take a charge of his family upon them as having an
interest in it: and where Christ did ever by any law or statute make his people
servants to each other, as that they should take a charg over them and have an
interest in them to judge them at pleasure; all this I looked for at I. S. his
hands, and that now he should have fully informed me in it; especially when we
have a command from Christ our King to the contrary I desire to go on warily 1
Cor. 7. 23. who says to all his servants and subjects by his Apostle, Ye are
bought with a price, be not ye the servants of men: Now if we are not to be the
servants of men, how then comes it to pass that the Independents make us not
only servants but slaves and vassals to them? for what greater bondage and
servitude can there be in the World then to be under the control of every one
his fellow servants? so that without their good likin^ they can neither come in
nor go out of their masters house, nor be admitted to do that service their
master calls for at their hands, but if any one of their fellow servants shall
except against him, he must be kept out of doors. I appeal here to the
judgment of all men whether there were ever extant in the World such a
generation of Lordly Gentlemen over Gods heritage seen since mortality
inhabited the earth; or that did ever more impudently domineer and Lord it over
Gods Clergyes then in this our age where every man makes himself a Lord and
Judge over his brother who is purchased by Christ his King and made free by his
Word; especially is not this a horrid insolency in any to take upon him to
judge his brother, when there is a statute, law and a command laid upon him to
the contrary? Romans 14. 13. Let us not therefore (says the Apostle) judge one
another any more, but judge this rather, that no man put a stumbling block or
occasion to fall in his brothers way, in the which Law and statute there are 2
observables.

The first is this, that no man should judge his brother any more: and this
statute is ratified by many other and from most warrantable and divine reason;
the other statutes that confirm this are many in the same chapter with the
reasons thereof: For says the Apostle, What art thou that judge another man's
servant? to his own master he stands or falls ver. 4. therefore thou
ought not to judge him, For to this end (says he) ver. 9. Christ both dyed,
rose again and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and living.
Christ says he is our Lord both by donation, by conquest, by purchase, by
covenant, by fellowship with the son and with the Father, we were given unto
him by God the Father, and he conquered all our enemies and led captivity
captive, and vanquished the strong and armed man and disarmed him, and rescued
all his servants out of his slavery, and he has redeemed us by no less price
then his precious blood, and we are his people also by covenant and by
communion in his graces and resurrection and glory enjoying with him all
felicity and everlasting happiness with an eternal Kingdom; therefore says
he in the 12. verse, Why do thou judge thy brother, and why do thou set at
naught thy brother? we shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ.
Therefore judge not thy brother. And St. James says, my brethren be not many
Masters. And this I say is the first observable out of that text; that we ought
not to judge one another any more.

The second observeable is that no man should put a stumbling block, or
occasion of fall in his brothers way. Now I appeal unto any man, what greater
stumbling block, or occasion to fall can be put in any man's way, then when men
on their own heads impose a Law upon their brethren that Christ our King never
gave to his people, or what greater scandal and offense can be given to a
poor servant of Jesus Christ his King, then to be thrust out of their Masters
doors, or to be kept out of their Masters house, and to be judged at the will
and pleasure of his fellow servants, whether he be fit to come into his
Maastars family or not; if this be not to judge his brother, if this be not a
scandal; yea, if this be not an intolerable tyranny, there was never any
either judgment, scandal or tyranny in the world, nor greater rebellion and
contumacy against the King of his Church, and against his subjects* servants,
and redeemed ones: and therefore if the Pope and Prelates were so much
abominated and abhorred of all men for their usurpation over Gods heritage and
clergies, how much ought such squanderling fellows as this I. S. and his
accomplices be abominated, who thus take upon them to discern into the very
secrets of their brethrens hearts, and to judge them fit or not fit to be
received into Church fellowship, and into the communion of Saints, and
according to their conceit and opinion, so to bring in their verdict of
admission or non-admission, when Christ our Lord and King says, judge not lest
ye be judgod, Matthew. 3. and bids all men that are heavy laden to come unto
him, Matthew. 11. and says, John the 6. v. 37. Him that comethunto me I will in
no way cast out.

Here the Lord the King of his Church gives free admittance to all his subjects
and servants to come into his Kingdom and house; but here is my Lord Taps his
Chaplain and his associats, and they all take upon them this power and
authority, that except it be by their good leave and liking, they shall not be
admitted into the house of God; for they have a charge over that house, and an
interest also; these are I. S. his own expressions.

Now I do here again appeal to any that have but any ordinary understanding,
whether there was ever such a supercilious brood of creatures in the world
before these Ill-dependents were hatched that can thus trample all the Laws of
Christ under their polluted feet, and yet pretend they only set him up upon
his Throne, when notwithstanding it is apparently evident, they practice the
contrary, and violate all his most holy Statutes, and prefer their own
traditions before his commandments, as this is one of judging their Brethren,
and not admitting of them into Christ's Church and house, without the consent of
the whole Church, when Christ nevertheless has enacted so many Laws to the
contrary.

And this shall suffice to have spoke in way of answer to what I. S. had to say
to my third querie; the fourth follows concerning the covenant, whether
necessary to admission? To which my brother Burton thus replies, page 14. Now
(says he) the very name of a Covenant is become a bugbear to many, and tells
us moreover what he has said concerning their covenant in his vindication
(that learned piece of stuff, such an other as his Truth shut of doors) and
his Protestation protested, and then he makes a brief Description of their
covenant to no purpose, and then concludes, that it is not the name of Covenant
that is so terrible, but the order of Church Communion; and this is to those
only, that having usod to walk without a yoke, as the Scripture calls sons
of Beliall, love not to come under the yoke of Christ, then which to a willing
bearer nothing is more easy and sweet. I expected from my Brother Burton
especially, who talks so much of setting up Christ upon his Throne, as he
counts all men enemies of Jesus Christ, and Converts but in part, when they
come not up close to the rule of Reformation, Gods Word; for thus my brother
speaks, page 18. I say I expected from him, that he should have ratified their
practice, in admitting of their Members by a particular explicit covenant from
the Word of God, and from either some command, or some example, both which when
this their practice wants, it can not be of faith, and therefore is sinful.

But I desire the Reader to observe some particulars in my brother Burtons
expressions, not to show the vanity, sin and uncharitableness of them all,
for that would require a tractate by it self. But first; I pray observe, the
very name (says he) of a covenant is become a Bug-beare to many, that is to
say a terror again a few lines, after he says, that it is not the name of a
covenant that is so terrible, but the order of Church Communion. Here I leave
my Brother Burton to reconcile his own contradiction, the very name of a
Covenant (says he) is a Bug-beare, and it is not the name of a covenant that
is so terrible.

Secondly, he acknowledges that this covenant is a yoke, and so it is indeed;
but withal it is worthy of observation, he calls it Christ's yoke, and yet it
was never imposed upon the people of God by Christ's command, nor was it
appointed by him: so that whatsoever they bring into the church upon their own
brains they impose it upon the people as one of Gods Ordinances, which is an
insufferable insolency in these men.

Thirdly, my Brother Burton accounts of all such as will not submit it
themselves to their government, and go in their church way to receive or take
their covenant, to be the sons of Belial, and not under Christ's yoke; these
are his words, page 14. Thus charitably the Independents think of all the
Presbyterians their Brethren, because forsooth we will not enter into their
covenant, which notwithstanding they can neither give us either Precept or
President for ou^ of the whole Word of God, they account us the sons of
Belial. Now we are taught, that whatsoever is not of faith is sin, and
whatsoever is not grounded upon Gods Word, all men know is not of faith, which
when their Church practices without it, it is most apparent that they are in a
sinful way, and therefore are rather the sons of Belial then we. But
learned I. S. page 18. whiles he goes about to defend the covenant, says
enough utterly to overthrow it.

The fourth querie (says he) of an explicit covenant, whether necessary to
admission.

Answ. I know not (says he) why it should be more incovenient then a public
national Covenant. But necessary (says he) we hold it not; all the world may
see that I. S. is but a novice in the Independent Principles: yea, that he is
a very catechumenos: For all those that are any thing acquainted in the
Independents Principles, hold this explicit covenant to be the form of the
church, without the which the church cannot be a church, nor without the taking
of the which, there can be no admittance into church fellowship with them; yea,
my Brother Burton calls it Christ's yoke, and proclaims all those that will not
wear it to be the sons of Belial. So that these men do not agree amongst
themselves, the one party of them holding the particular covenant absolutely
necessary, the other saying, but necessary we hold it not. So then by I. S.
his own confession, who speaks in the name of all his party, it is none of
Gods Ordinances, for all Gods Ordinances are necessary in their season, and
whosoever should contemn or slight the least of them sins greatly. But
whereas I. S. says, that he knows not why a particular explicit covenant
should be more inconvenient then a public national covenant, I affirm this
is fondly spoke of I. S. For we have diverse Presidents and examples in holy
Scripture and precepts for entering into public covenants, and we have read
of the benefit that has from them redounded to the whole nation and country by
them for encouragement to all men, upon just occasions to enter into some
solemn covenant with our God: but we have neither precept nor example in all
Gods Word of an explicit particular covenant taken in any church; and
therefore it must needs be inconvenient as not being of faith: for whatsoever
is not of faith is inconvenient; yea, very hurtful to him that does any thing
in Gods matters without it; for it is sin to him, and will bring down
punishment upon him for it. But for I. S. I will say no more to him about this
point, who I find to be a very catechumenos in the principles of Independency,
when notwithstanding he promised me he would teach and instruct me in the
Independent way.

But I will now examine the Reason that the Author of the Book called Truth
gloriously appearing from under the sad and sable Cloud of Obloquy, gives for
this their covenant. He Page 126 labors to prove their particular explicit
covenant out of that place, Acts the 9. verse 16. Where when Paul was come to
Jerusalem, he assayed to join himself with the Disciples. Now says he, the
word join in the original (...) signifies to join by Covenant, and intimates
such a joining of Paul to the Church, as the joining of a man to his wife: For
in Matthew (says he) the same word is used, Matthew. 19. 5. For this cause
(says our Savior) shall a man leave father and mother, and (...) shall cleave
to his wife. Now (says he) we know that a man cleaves to his wife by a
covenant, and therefore why not so to the Church? If he had said, why not so,
unto Christ, he had said something to the purpose; for we are married only
unto Christ, and not to the Church, knowing that the Church is Christ's Spouse,
and Christ is the Churches Husband; and we are married unto Christ, and not to
the Church and one to another; neither did any Christian yet ever deny, but
that all those that would be joined unto Christ, and so be received into his
house and family, and be subjects of his Kingdom, they must take the oath of
Allegiance unto their King Christ, and therefore must enter into his house,
which is his Church, by the covenant of Baptism; this I say all men accord
unto, when men are first admitted into the Church: And this covenant, I say,
all that will be Christ's Disciples, and of his Kingdom and Family, must take
before they can be admitted. But that they should after they are baptized,
enter into another particular explicit covenant, and by that bind themselves
to the Church; I affirm, there is neither precept nor president for it in all
the holy Scripture, either of the old or new Testament; neither is there any
such mystery in the Greek word (...) as to employ so much; for we know the same
word is used in the eighth Chapter of the Acts, verse 29. Where the Spirit said
to Philip, go near and join thy self to this Chariot. Where the word join in
the original is (...) by the which word, Philip did not understand that he must
join himself to the Eunuchs chariot by a particular explicit covenant. No more
ought any wise man to conceive, that when Paul assayed to join himself to the
Disciples, that by that he would have taken a particular explicit covenant of
Church fellowship: This is nothing else but to beg the question, and to amuse
the simple, and to deceive them by taintering the words of Scripture, and
stretching them beyong their native signification, to make them fit for their
occasions, that they may juggle the better to delude the poor people, which is
a great wickedness in these men thus to trisle about words, till they loose
the Truth, which is the substance to the destroying of their poor souls. The
truth is, that word is often used in the holy Scripture, and is used
metaphorically as being taken from Joyners and crafts men, that join many
things together by Glue: And ^o ordinary discourse it intimates a close
joining, whether natural as a branch to the Vine, or an arm to the Body, or
artificial, as when two sticks are joined to become one in Ezekiels hand, Ezekiel.
37. As when Masons join stones together, or Carpenters timber to make a house.
But that this word join should always employ a particular explicit covenant
to any Church or Congregation, when any man takes on him a new relation to it
and is made a member of it: I affirm, there is not one example of it in all the
Word of God; and as for any command, that every member of a Church should do
it, there is none: And therefore, it is a mere Will Worship, and one of their
own Traditions, and ought to be abandoned of all Christ's Disciples, and with so
much the more detestation, because they make it one of Gods Ordinances, and
part of his Service and Worship, and the very form of a Church, whereas it is a
batch of their own leven, by which they have of late much sowred the Truth. But
as I said before, so I say now again, that Christians are to swear fealty only
to their King and Lord Christ Jesus, who is their husband, and who is the only
Master of his own House and Church, and whose voice is only to be heard, and
whose Laws are only to be obeyed and listened unto; and we swear no allegiance
or fealty to the Church, for we are all his servants and domestics, and have
no authority one over another, to impose Laws upon each other, or to enter in
to any covenants amongst our selves, without a special command from Christ: And
as when Stewards of Princes or Noblemen, take any in to their masters families,
they swear them only to their lords and masters; we never hear that the
servants enter into any covenant among themselves, or join or unite themselves
in covenant one to cleave unto another: Such proceedings amongst servants would
never be allowed or tolerated amongst men, it would be thought rather a
conspiracy or a confederation to do mischief, if they should attempt such a
thing. As when those men enterd in to a covenant amongst themselves, that they
would neither eat nor drink till they had killed Paul; yea, it has ever been
observed in all countries, That when servants began once to combine together,
and to join themselves by secret covenants, they have always plotted mischief,
and therefore there has been special care used to prevent such conspiracies.
And all men may well perceive by this their covenanting in their new gathered
Churches, what it tends to, if God of his infinite goodness prevents not their
design: Therefore, I say, we being Christ's domestics and his Church, and
being his house, and he being the only Lord of it, and our King, we are to
smite our covenant only with him, and to swear fealty and obedience to him
only, and his Laws, and we are not to be the servants of men, 1 Cor. 7. And
therefore the Lord says in Malachi the first, If I be a father, where is my
reverence; if I be a Lord, where is my honor? How is it that ye obey me not? We
are only therefore to obey his voice, and not to regard the traditions of men,
or to serve God after the commandments of men: Now then, when the Independents
impose this their covenant upon the people as a part of Gods worship, and will
not admit of any into their new Churches, without entering in to this
conspiracy; I say, by all their proceedings in as much as in them lies, they
dis-throne Christ in preferring their own laws before his; wherein they commit
a detestable wickedness. And this shall serve to have spoke concerning the
fourth quere. And now I come to the fifth, of women's votes, whether they are to
be admitted in elections? To which my Brother Burton thus replies, Page 15. We
(says he) tie not the keys to women's girdles. And I. S. page 19. But as for
this of women's voting in the Church (says he) we have no such custom, nor any
of the Churches of God that I know. Thus he.

For answer to both, my Brother Burton and I. S. I say thus much, That they
cannot be ignorant of the practice of the Churches, in many of which, and those
the principalest and the choicest ones, to my knowledge the women had their
voices both for the receiving in of members, and for the casting of them out
upon any scandal; so that there were none admitted, either men or women, though
of never so great rank and quality, without the leave and good liking of the
women; so that if at any time they opposed the entrance of any, though it were
but upon mere jealousies that they were not godly, they could not be admitted
members of those Congregations: But it seems they are now ashamed of this their
practice, and therefore plead ignorance in the business. But that the world
may see I write nothing in my first Book concerning women's voting of it in
Churches, I shall recite some two or three stories, omitting many to prove
their practices in those days. And what I shall relate, and much more I
undertake to prove by sufficient witnesses whenever the Independents shall
put me upon it. And withal I shall make it appear, there was never greater
juggling then has been amongst those of the Congregational-way, in admitting
of members.

The stories briefly are these: A Gentlewoman of my acquaintance coming up to
London, since these New Lights broke out, was so infatuated with them, that
she had a great desire to join her self to one of the prime Churches of the
congregationall way, concerning the which Gentlewoman I can say thus much upon
my own experience, and it can be proved by many, that whatsoever she is now,
before she became an Independent, she was a woman not only of an emaculate
life and conversation, but a woman of singular piety and charity toward all to
her ability, and who ordinarily twice or thrice a week was wont to set days
apart in private to seek God, and to humble her self by fasting and prayer,
and this was her constant course of life. Yet this woman assaying to join her
self unto these new disciples, and being to make the confession of her faith
before the congregation, and to bring in the evidences of her conversion, she
not having had many months acquaintance with them, and having not walked with
them above half a year, or there-abouts, was forced the better to make the
Church understand the work of grace wrought in her heart, to recite unto them
her course of life, how she had constantly walked with God, and what communion
she had with him, signifying with all that she had ever loved the Saints and
brethren, a sufficient token of conversion, and of being one of Christ's
disciples, if either Christ's own testimony or Saint John's may be believed.
Yet when she had made an end of her confession of her faith, and produced her
evidences, a Wench rose up in the Congregation, and professed before them all
that she was not satisfied with her evidences that she was a believer, for as
much as the Pharisees for all outward performances could say as much as she
did, or used words to this effect. Upon which the Church could not admit her,
for the sister was not satisfied: So that the Gentlewoman since joined her
self to another Congregation.

An other president is of a young man, reputed amongst his neighbors very
godly, who being much inamoured with the new way of Church Fellowship, assayed
to join himself to one of their congregations, not that I spoke of before,
and being to make his confession, and to bring in his evidences, and having to
satisfy the Church, done as much as they enjoined him to do, two of the women
in that Assembly opposed his admission; so that without their good liking he
could not be admitted a Member, and he applying himself unto their Pastor,
and to the Elders gave many signs of his true conversion, so that they related
unto him that for their parts they had nothing to say to him in way of
opposition, but wished him to apply himself to those sisters, telling him, that
without their consent they could not admit him into Church Fellowship,
whereupon he makes his addresses to them, and sometimes he courted them for
their favor, sometime he expostulated with them, desiring to know their
reasons why they were so adverse to him, and would not grant their consents,
demanding of them if they knew any thing by his conversation, and they replied,
no, but they could not believe he was godly and sanctified, and fit for Church
fellowship; and whether or no he was ever admitted in that Congregation, I
know not; but at that time he could not be admitted, and for no other reason
that can be given, but that the sisters did not give their consents, and they
could allege no other ground of their not agreeing to his admission, but that
they conceived he was not godly.

The third Story is of one that was reputed a very honest and godly man
amongst all his acquaintance, and who had also walked sometime amongst them in
one of their new congregations, and earnestly desired to be admitted a joined
Member, and he bringing in his evidences, and making the confession of his
faith, satisfactory enough to many of the Church, for the proving of himself
fit for Member-ship, a married woman rose up in the congregation, and professed
before them all she could not believe he was fit tobe admitted as a Member of
that church, and used some trivial reasons, for her not assenting to his
admssion, and for that time he could not be received into the congregation,
having not given the good sister plenary satisfaction; and whether he be yet
received into church fellowship, I know not, but that he was by the woman at
that time put off, that I shall be able to prove, with the other two Stories,
and be able likewise to produce many such Presidents more. Now I refer this
to any understanding man's judgment, whether the Keys in many of the new
gathered churches be not tied unto the women's Girdles, and whether my Brother
Burton and I. S. are always to be credited, either in their denials or
affirmations.

And this shall suffice to have spoke of the fifth querie. And now I come to
the sixth and last querie, viz. Whether the practicing and preaching of all
these things, etc. be to set up Christ as King upon his Throne? to the which
querie my Brother Burton, and I. S. answer as two Jugglers, nothing to the
purpose. My Brother Burtons words are these, page 19 Those Churches (says he)
that are for matter and form true Churches, and are governed according to
Christ's Word, do set up Christ as King upon his Throne: and for such as are
otherwise, let them consider whether they do as they ought, set up Christ as
King upon his Throne.

This is my Brother Burtons answer to my sixth querie. Now whether this be a
direct answer to my querie, I leave it to the judgment of the Learned. But
from this his answer I may boldly conclude, that their new congregations do
not set up Christ as King upon his Throne, they failing both for the matter and
form of true churches, and being not governed according to the Word of God;
all which I have sufficiently proved in my foregoing Discourse. As for J. S.
he answers nothing to the question, as all that shall read his words may well
perceive, which are these. I answer, (says he) no question but the purging
and purifying of Church Ordinances and Fellowship, which some contend for, is
to set Christ upon a higher Throne visible to the world, then by some other
ways he is, etc. Now w hither this be a satisfactory answer to the querie, I
leave it to others to judge of, but from his words I thus argue; Where Christ's
Ordinances and Church Fellowship are polluted, there Christ is not set up upon
his Throne; but in all the new congregations Christ's Ordinances are polluted,
and Church Fellowship contaminated, as I have sufficiently proved; Ergo, Christ
is not set up there on his Throne. And this shall suffice to have spoke by way
of answer to all they had to say to my queries.

But now I shall set down Gods method, and the Apostles practice in gathering
of churches, and the manner they used in making Members in every Church, and
compare it with the method our brethren the Independents use in gathering of
their congregations, that all men may the better discern truth from error, and
may all be undeceived in this business of so great concernment. And I will
first begin with Christ's Commission given to his Apostles, and in them to all
Ministers, and then consider the practice of John the Baptist, and of all the
Apostles and Ministers in the Primitive Church and the order that God himself
used for the gathering of those that belong unto his election, and for the
congregating of the lost sheep of the house of Israel into the fold of Jesus
Christ, who is that great Shepherd and Bishop of our souls; and I conceive
that Gods order and the Apostles practice is rather to be followed then any
other new found way.

But to begin with Christ's Commission to his Apostles, Matthew. 21. verse 19, 20.
Go ye therefore, says Christ, and teach all Nations, baptizing them, In the
Name of the Father, Son and holy Ghost; teaching them to observe all things
whatsoever I command you; and lo! I am with you even to the end of the World,
Amen. And in the 16. of Mark verse 15, 16. He says unto them, Go ye into all
the World, and preach the Gospel unto every creature: He that believes and is
baptized shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be damned. And in the
26. of the Acts, Saint Paul after he had declared the manner of his conversion
to King Agrippa, he likewise made known unto him the commission he had received
from Christ Jesus, in the words following, verse 15, 16. 17, 18, 19, 20. And I
said, who art thou Lord? and he said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest; but
rise and stand upon thy feet, for I have appeared unto thee for this purpose,
to make thee a Minister and a Witness, both of these things which thou have
seen, and of those things in the which I will appear unto thee, delivering thee
from the people, and from the Gentiles, unto whom now I send thee to open their
eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light and from the power of Satan
unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and an inheritance
among them which are sanctified by faith which is in me; whereupon I was not
disobedient to the heavenly vision, but showed first unto them of Damascus and
at Jerusalem, and through all the coasts of Judea, and then to the Gentiles,
that they should repent and turn to God, and do works meet for repentance.

Out of these several places, from the Commission of Christ given to his
blessed Apostles, and to all Ministers and Preachers of the Gospel to the end
of the World: here observe these things.

First, that their bounds and limits were set them, how far they should go in
their teaching all Nations, and beyond which they might not pass; and they
were these, that they should teach no other things but what Christ commanded
them and appeared to them in, and for the which they had his Word and Warrant;
and so long as they should do this, he promised them and all that should
succeed them in the Ministry, to the end of the World to be with them.

We also further observe the condition in the executing of this their
commission, they were to propound unto all Nations and people upon what
condition they were to be admitted into the Church, and that was ^aith and
repentance; and they were to receive all such as believed and were baptized,
and that upon the profession of their faith and repentance, without any further
testimony of others, unless they had been formerly known to be open enemies
and persecutors of the church, and then they were justly to be suspected, till
they had given public evidence by witness to the Apostles and Ministers of
their true conversion, as it happened to Paul, whom for a time the Disciples
feared, Acts 9. 26, 27. till they had better information and proof that he now
preached the faith that he had once persecuted, and had suffered for it, which
is the only president we have in all the Acts of the Apostles of any that were
refused to be admitted into the communion and fellowship of the Apostles, as I
remember (for he was a Minister before) but all the other that came in were
admitted upon their own offer, if they tendered themselves and embraced the
Gospel, and were baptized, and that without any reluctation or s^ruple.

Now before I come to my third observation out of the commission given to the
Apostles, I must wait here a little upon the motions of my brother Burtons pen
which as it marches along, makes now and then some whibling incursions into my
quarters; and therefore that all men may see my forces are ever in a
readiness, and that I am always willing to fight him wheresoever I meet him,
and that my brother Burton also may see how ready I am to gratify his desire,
who Page 7. says, Come on brother, let you and I try it out by the dint of
this Sword. I will here skirmish a little with him to breath him, and then go
after him; in the 15. Page of his book he puts me upon the reconciling of a
contradiction which he conceives I made: For says he, Page 101. of your book,
you say, The Apostles and other Ministers of the Gospel were to receive all
such as believed and were baptized, and that upon the pr ofession of their
faith and repentance without any further testimony of others, unless they had
been formerly known to be open enemies, and then they were justly to be
suspected, till they had given public evidence by witness to the Apostles
and Ministers of their true conversion as concerning Paul. Acts 9. 26, 27.

Now here (says my brother Burton) I observe.

First, a notable contradiction to what you say Page 115. As Gods command to
all Ministers was that they should admit all such into the Church, as believed
and were baptized upon their desiring it, without any confession either private
or public. Here (says my brother Burton) I leave you to reconcile your own
contradiction, upon their profession and without any confession.

For Answer, I assert that my words are so far from a notable contradiction to
any men that know what a contradiction is, that there is not at all so much as
a very similitude of a contradiction in them: For what contradiction I pray is
there in these expressions? The Ministers of the Gospel are to receive all
such as believe and are baptized, and that upon the profession of their faith
and repentance, etc.

Gods command to all Ministers, is, that they shall admit all such into the
Church as believe and are baptized upon their desiring it without any
confession etc. Here as all the world may see is no contradiction. But if I had
in those places expressed my self thus: viz. the Ministers of the Gospel are
to admit none into the Church but upon their public confession of their faith.

And in the second place if I had said, God commands all Ministers to admit all
such into the Church as believe and are baptized, without any confession of
their faith. Then my brother Burton might have had a poor occasion of making
observations; but if upon a conceit of so small a thing as a contradiction, he
will call for the attention of the whole world, and cry out a notable
contradiction! how would this man vapor if he could get some great advantage
against me? without doubt he would cry Victoria Victoria. I do believe that
Saint Cretensis would not more radomontadoe it over even to be honored Master
Edwards then he would over me: But as I said before and as all the judicious
will observe, there is no contradiction in those two expressions; for to
describe one and the same thing in a various manner, is no contradiction, which
as the learned know* consists in denying and affirming of one and the same
thing, which the saying, upon their profession, and without any confession,
does not; for profession is one thing, and confession is another, they are two
distinct things; and therefore there was no denying and affirming of one and
the same thing; and therefore no contradiction. But by such triflings as these
are, my brother Burton, ^. S. and Hanserdo Knollys, like those evil workers
Saint Paul speaks of Phil. 3. 2. whom he commands all Christians to beware of,
they squander away their precious time to delude and deceive the ignorant
people, whereas they might better by far employ themselves if they were all now
this hot weather in the Butchers shambles a killing of flies. And this shall
serve in way of Answer to his first observation of a notable contradiction.

And now I come to his other observation in the same page, but to what it has
relation I know not* nor how he brings it in to be an answer nor what he
intends by it: for the man is very rambling, but thus he speaks there.

Secondly says he, I answer, that in these days of professed and covenanted
for Reformation, there is required the profession or confession of one special
point of faith (which in words none dare, but in practice most do deny)
touching Christ's Kingly office and his absolute sole sovereignty, etc.

Thus he there expatiates, but against whom or what he makes that answer I know
not: For thus much I can say in the behalf of all the godly and learned
Presbyterians there are no men upon the earth that more endeavor both in word
and deed to profess and confess that special point of faith touching Christ's
Kingly office and his absolute sovereignty (as by all their practices they
declare) then they, as all their learned Sermons and Writings can witness: and
on the other side concerning all the Illdependents and Sectaries I can truly
say thus much, that never any people made a greater noise in words of
advanceing Christ and setting him up naked upon his Throne (for so they speak)
then they do, and yet never did any people more dishonor him or disthrone him
then they, as in the foregoing discourse I have sufficiently proved. And
therefore if this his second Answer concerns any, it belongs to the
Independents, and it highly indeed concerns them all, to consider their
erroneous ways and now at last to seek after the ways of Truth, Peace and
Love, and not thus with their tongues and penns to set the whole world on fire
and then to warm and heat themselves by the light of it, like those that danced
about their calfe, who did eat and drink and rose up to play. And this shall
serve for answer to that.

And so now I go on to my third observation out of the Apostles Commission.

The third thing we may observe, is, that this commission was delivered only to
the Apostles and Ministers of the Gospel, and that it was their place only, who
had the Keys delivered unto them to open and shut the doors of the Church, to
admit such as they thought for their faith, knowledge and repentance were
sufficiently qualified and fitted to be made Members; and to refuse such as
they conceived not fit to be received into the fellowship of the Church, either
for their ignorance or other sins and offenses, and to cast such out of the
Church, as through their malversation declared themselves to be no believers:
for the commission was only delivered unto the Apostles and Ministers, that
they should admit whosoever believed and were baptized; and they that believed
not and would not be baptized, were not to be admitted. This Commission I
affirm, was only given to the Apostles and Ministers, and it was and is that
office that peculiarly belongs unto them.

And if we look into the method of Gods dealing with his Church in all ages,
under the Law and under the Gospel, both for the admitting of any into the
Church as Members and Officers, or the casting out of any; and to all the
practice of the Prophets and Priests of the Old Testament, or the practice of
John the Baptist and the blessed Apostles in the time of the New Testament; we
shall find, that they that were admitted into the society and fellowship of
the Church, were by the Ministers only under both the Testaments received, and
to them the people by God himself were sent, and they sent unto the people for
this purpose.

And for proof of this I now say, I will first begin with the Old Testament, a
few testimonies of the which may serve for the confirmation of that truth, as
that of Malachi 2. ver. 4, 5, 6, 7. And ye shall know that I have sent this my
commandment unto you, that my covenant might be with Levy, says the Lord of
hosts. My covenant was with him of life and peace, and I gave them to him, for
the fear wherewith he feared me, and was afraid before my Name. The law of
truth was in his mouth, and iniquity was not found in his lips, he walked with
me in peace and equity, and did turn many away from iniquity; for the Priests
lips shall keep knowledge, and they shall seek the Law at his mouth; for he is
the Messenger or Angel of the Lord of hosts. A sufficient testimony to prove,
that the Ministers only under the Old Testament had the power given them of
admitting of any into the fellowship and communion of the Church, and that all
the people were directed to them as the Messengers and Angels of the Lord of
hosts, if they desired to be admitted into the Church. And so Jeremy and
Ezekiel, as we read in the first chapters of both their Prophesies, and the
same may be said of all the Prophets, they were sent unto the people. The
people were to be directed by them, and the Prophets and Priests only had that
power delegated unto them, of proclaming both mercies and judgments, and of
receiving into the Church such as should come unto them. And under the New
Testament, in the third of Matthew, we find Jerusalem and all Judea, and all
the regions round about Jerusalem, going out to John the Baptist, and were
baptized of him, and admitted into the Church by him alone, without the people;
and the substance of his Preaching, with his manner of admitting of members
into the Church, and the conditions upon which he received them, and what the
people did before their admission, is all fully set down in the third of Luke,
and the seventh. And for the sum of his Preaching, it is said, verse the third,
That it was the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins. And for those
that came unto him, as the common people, the Publicans and the Soldiers, they
all ask John what they should do? And after he had instructed them severally
their duties, and told them upon what conditions they might be admitted, it is
said in the seventh of Luke Verse 29. That all the people that heard him, and
the Publicans justified God, being baptized with the Baptism of John: But the
Pharisees and the Lawyers rejected the counsel of God against themselves, being
not baptized of him, Verse 30. So that by Christ's own testimony (the Pharisees
and Lawyers only excepted) all that came to him were baptized and admitted
into the Church without the consent of the people. And so we find in the
Gospel of Saint John, chap. 3. 4. yea, through the whole Book, That the people
every where made their addresses to John the Baptist, and to Christ and his
Apostles only; and that as many as came to Christ unfainedly, were received by
him, and his Apostles; and none upon the offer of themselves, if they accepted
of the conditions and were baptized, were ever refused. And we find further,
that when our Savior had at any time cleansed and cured the Lepers, he sent
them to the Priests, for to be admitted by them into the communion of the
Church, from which their noisome disease, as a type of sin, had for the time
excluded them.

As for John Baptist (says my Brother Burton, Page 16.) (about whose gathering
you have so bestirred your self before, and to as little purpose.) You may
observe, that those believers in Christ then to come, according to the Papists
doctrine, were not formed into a Christian Church, or Churches, as after
Christ's resurrection the believers were. And when you come to visit those
Christian Churches once constituted in their Gospel form by the Apostles, you
shall find, that the power of admitting, and rejecting or casting out of
members, was not in the Apostles and Ministers alone, but in the Churches. For
this, read 1 Cor. 5. where the whole Church of the Saints in Corinth, to whom
Paul wrote, were to cast out the incestuous person; as also, afterward upon his
repentance, to re-admit him, 2 Cor. 2. 6, 7. This one instance (says my
Brother Burton) is a sufficiens president for all Churches. Thus he.

And this is all he has to say there, concerning John Baptist* Now although I
have formerly answered, and that in many places in the foregoing Treatise, to
every several branch of this my Brother Burtons cavil; and although it be
nothing to the enervating of my Argument, as all understanding men will well
preceive, if they duly consider it; yet because I perceive by his whole
discourse, the main design both of himself, and all those of his faction (that
now trouble the world with their scribbling) is to deceive, and delude silly
souls, that they may the better bring all the Presbyters into the hatred of the
people, as men Antichristian, and more then Prelatical, and as affecting a more
lordly power over the people, then ever the Bishops exercised over them; (for
this is the language all their Pulpits and Pamphlets speak:) I say, in this
regard, though I have often formerly fully answered to every branch of this
cavil, I will here say something to it, for the better discovery of the vanity
and triviality of the man: And that I may declare unto all men how little his
asseverations are to be regarded.

But I desire the Reader to take notice of his grolleries (waving that
slighting passage of his, where he says, That I have so bestirred my self, and
to so little purpose about John Baptists gathering, etc.)

And first, That he joins here with the Papists in unchristianing and
unchurching all those that were baptized by the Baptist: And so in this point
he is a Papist.

Secondly, That he makes the form of a Church, which he calls the Gospel form,
to confist in excommunication.

Thirdly, Take notice of his peremptory assertion, and in it, of an other
notable error, where he says, You shall find, that the power of admitting and
rejecting of members, was not in the Apostles and Ministers alone, but in the
Churches. And for proof of these his grolleries he quotes, 1 Cor. 5. and 2 Cor.
2. 6, 7. and makes the example of that Church to be bindingly presidential (to
use I. S. his Rhetoric) to all Christian Churches: Whereas in his tenth page
he tells me, We are necessarily to take all the Churches in the New Testament
together, to make up one entire and perfect Church pattern. These are his words
there; and yet here he makes the Church of Corinth to be a sufficient president
for all Churches. So that every one of their Instances must be a sufficient
pattern to all other Churches; and yet when I produced the example of the Church
of Jerusalem, the Mother Church, for a pattern of Government for all other
Churches, he rejected it, affirming, that it was not a perfect pattern. And in
that his expression also, we may take notice of a parcel of good Divinity,
where he makes the Church of Corinth, a more perfect Church then that at
Jerusalem; which not withstanding he says, was the first formed Church. Now if
excommunication and discipline, as my Brother Burton says, be the Gospel form
of a Church, and the Church of Jerusalem wanted that part of discipline, then
it was not a formed Church; but so he speaks of it in the tenth page, where I
observe a notable contradiction (to usurp his one Language:) And here I leave
him a while to reconcile it. But now to speak briefly by way of answer to these
my Brother Burtons grolleries.

First, Whereas he joining with the Papists, unchristians and unchurches all
those that were baptized by the Baptist, he is very erroneous in so doing, and
deals most wickedly and unchristianly with all those glorious Saints; for
they were as good Christians and believers; as he or any Independents in the
world: As who all of them have Christ's own testimony for their true faith in
him, and their unfeigned repentance toward God, which are sufficient characters
ever to make any people good Christians; and of all them our Savior says,
Luke 7. 29, 30. That they justified God; and rejected not his counsel against
themselves, as the Pharisees and the Lawyers did; that is; all those that were
baptized by the Baptist^ repented, and believed in Christ, and embraced the
Promises; and therefore, by our Saviors own witness, they were all good
Christians as any in the new gathered Churches. And therefore, my Brother
Burton as a notorious Papist, and a calumniator, ought to be reproved,
especially by the seven new Churches which hold, That all that were baptized by
John the Baptist, were believers and good Christians. And this shall suffice to
have spoke to his first grollery.

His second is, That he makes excommunication the form of a Church, as we may
see page the twentieth of his Book, where answering unto my Argument* by which
I proved our Churches to be true Churches* viz. Because the saving Truth of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ was preached, received, and professed in our Churches. To
the which Argument of mine, he there thus replies. If you (says he) mean the
whole truth of Christ, it is well. But do not you know (says he) that there
dre three special visible marks of a true visible Church, The Gospel purely
Preached, the Sacraments duly administered, and Discipline rightly practiced?
All which marks to gather the Church of England (for ought I know) is yet to
seek. So that by these words of my Brother Burton, it is manifest, That in his
opinion the Gospel-Form of a Church is to have Discipline rightly Practiced. So
that where Discipline is wanting, by his learning, there is no true Gospel
formed Church.

But before I answer to this his grollery, I will say thus much to my Brother
Burton, That Discipline rightly practiced, is not one of the special visible
marks of a true visible Church; and that for these Reasons.

First, Because the Holy Ghost who better knew the essential marks of a true
visible Church, then my Brother Burton, yet he in setting them all down,
omitting that of Discipline, says, Acts 2. 42. That they continued steadfastly
in the Apostles Doctrine, and Fellowship, and in breaking of Bread, and in
Prayers: So that according to this unerring description of the essential marks
of a true visible Church; Wheresoever the Gospel is truly Preached, and where
the Sacraments are rightly administered, and where there is the true Invocation
of God (which is the third essential mark in Gods Dialect of a true visible
Church) there, there is a true Church, although there be no Discipline; and
therefore I gather, that Discipline though a most excellent Ordinance, and much
to be desired, and had long since been obtained, had not the Ildependents
hindered it, makes not for the esse but the been esse of a Church. And I will
ever believe the Holy Ghost in this point, rather then my Brother Burton. And
withal, I will live and die in this opinion, That the Church of England is a
true Church (notwithstanding, whatsoever all the Sectaries can say to the
contrary) because in the Church of England, the Gospel is truly Preached, and
the Sacraments are rightly Administered, and the Name of God is truly called
upon; all which, if they were sufficient to make the Church of Jerusalem a true
formed Church, yea, and the first true formed Church, according to my Brother
Burtons own learning, then they are sufficient to make the Church of England a
true formed Church.

But a second Reason to prove that Discipline rightly practiced is not the
form of a church, is from my Brother Burtons own words; for he everywhere
says, that the church of Jerusalem was a true formed church, and yet she
wanted that part of Discipline, of casting out corrupt Members; so that
Discipline there could not then be rightly practiced, if that church wanted
that part of Discipline, and if it were not there at all as he says; and
therefore for that mark it does not make for the esse of a church, and for the
bringing in of a Gospel form (as is said before:) and which is yet more, if
excommunication be the Gospel form of a true visible church then all the
Synagogues in Jerusalem, in Saint John the Baptists time were true formed
churches after the Gospel form; for Synagogue and Church in the holy
Scriptures are all one; and in all the Synagogues they had excommunication, as
in many places it is evident; and for instance these, John 9. 22. For the Jews
had argued already, that if any man did confess he was Christ he should be
put out of the Synagogue; and in the fourtieth verse, in terminis it is said,
that they cast out the young man, and in the twelfth chapter, verse 35. it is
said there, that amongst the chief Rulers many believed in him, but because of
the Pharisees they did not confess him, lest they should be put out of the
Synagogue.

Many places more to the same purpose might be produced to prove that there was
that part of discipline even in the Synagogues, and that in John's time,
how^oever it was abused, as excommunication daily is amongst all the Sectaries
at this day; and if we duly weigh and consider all things, this part of
discipline was taken from the Jewish Synagogues, and from them brought into all
Christian Churches; so that if that part of discipline be the Gospel form of a
true visible Church, or one of the essential marks of a true visible Church,
as my Brother Burton says, I shall not need to take a great journey from
Jerusalem, and John Baptists Churches, as my Brother Burton would have me go
to visit all the other Christian Churches, to find in them excommunication,
that Gospel form of a Church. I will leave that journey to their Itinerary
Independent Predicants, who have nothing else to do, and will content my self
with the Christian Synagogues and Churches, amongst the which John Baptist and
Christ himself both conversed, preached, and performed all the offices of true
Pastors; and in those Synagogues and Churches of Jerusalem, in all and every
one of them I find the Gospel truly preached, the Sacraments rightly
administered, and the name of God rightly called upon; and all those essential
marks made that Church a true formed Church after the New Testament form, if
the Scripture and my Brother Burton may be believed; and therefore I take
notice of this as a special error in my Brother Burton, that he makes
excommunication the Gospel form of a true Church, for which his tenent I
believe he will find some moderate check or other from some of his brethren of
the congregational way, who hold, that their particular explicit Covenant is
the form of the Church; and this shall serve for answer to that second
Grollery of my Brother Burton. His third Grollery is, that he says, that the
power of admitting, and casting out Members, was not in the Apostles and
Ministers alone, but in the Churches, which is a notable error in my Brother
Burton, and Contrary unto many places of the holy Scripture: for God gave the
Apostles and Ministers of the Gospel only the Keys, Matthew. 16. and Matt. 18.
and Matthew. 28. and they that had the Keys, and were the Stewards of Gods
family, could only open and shut the doors to whom they pleased without the
people: and we see that the Apostles only in the second of the Acts without
the people, received into the Church those three thousand first Converts; yea,
and received Paul into their Fellow-ship, contrary unto the Disciples and
peoples mind, Acts 9. and we know that Paul by his own power did
excommunicate and deliver to Satan Hymeneus, and Alexander, and others, 1 Timothy
chap. 2. verse 1. and we learn in the second and third of the Revelation, that
the Lord writing unto the Churches sends his Epistles to the Angels as the
chief officers, and blames them for neglecting their duty, in not casting out
those wicked ones that were amongst them: by all which testimonies, and many
more that might be produced, it is sufficiently evident, that the Ministers
only ought by themselves to manage the government of the Church, and that it is
their peculiar office, and the place of the people to yield obedience to what
they do: and even out of 2. Cor. 2. the same may be gathered where it is said,
he was excommunicate by many not al. And therefore it is a mavelous great
error in my brother Burton to conclude, because Paul writ to the church of
Corinth for the casting out of the incestuous person, therefore the power and
authority lay in the peoples hands, and not in the Apostles and Ministers
alone: But these are the unsound conclusions that those of the congregationall
way gather too too often from the holy Scripture for the ingratiating of
themselves amongst the people, whom they pretend much to honor, in telling
them, that they have a power and interest in the government, as well as the
Ministers have, and that the Presbyterians challenge this to themselves joly,
it is only to inslave the people, and to Lord it over them, and that worse
then the Prelates; and for no other end I am most assured, did my Brother
Burton bring in this cavil in opposition to my Argument: which not
withstanding stands firm to prove that John the Baptist did by himself, and
without the people execute his Commission, and receive Members into the Church,
and that from his and the blessed Apostles examples, all other Ministers may
take this example, and do the same, and that by Gods own appointment, as we
shall see more fully in the following Discourse; and this shall suffice to have
spoke to this cavil also of my Brother Burton, and all the Grolleries of the
same concerning the Baptist, and his gathering of churches.

But now to go on, after the Resurrection and Ascension of Christ, and that
the Apostles had received the gifts of the Holy Ghost, and at their first
entering upon their Ministry, had preached unto the people, and that the people
were pricked in their hearts when they heard them, it is said that the people
addressed themselves only unto Peter, and the other Apostles, saying, Men and
Brethren what shall we do? Then Peter said unto them, Repent and be baptized
every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye
shall receive the gifts of the holy Ghost, etc. Act. 2. 23, 24* then they that
gladly received the word were baptized, and the same day were added unto them
about three thousand souls.

Here we may observe these two things.

The first that the Apostles by themselves alone, without the multitude or
church admitted the people into the society and company of believers.

Secondly, that in the execution of their commission, they did nothing but
according to their warrant, and according to their injunction that was given
unto them by Christ; they propounded no other condition or terms for the
making all and every one of them Members of the Church, but Baptism and
Repentance; the which when the people had accepted of, they were forthwith
admitted, and that upon their own word and testimony, without any more ado, or
further inquiry, concerning the soundness of their repentance, without any
witness from others of their conversation, and without the voice, allowance or
approbation of the people* or the multitude of believers in Jerusalem, much
less of the whole Church, who were never joined with the Apostles in their
Commission, or consulted with by them, whether they should be admitted or no
into the Fellowship of the faithful, or demanded or asked by the people,
whether it were not fit that they should take some time of further
consideration, that they might walk with them, to the end that they might
behold their conversation, and by their own experience might further be
confirmed, that their conversion was sound and well: Neither did any call for
at their hands, that they should make a public confession of their faith to
the Church, and give in their evidences to the Congregation, that they were
converted really, or that they should take a private covenant, or enter into
the Church by way of a peculiar covenant: nothing of all this specified: But it
is only related, that the people upon their being pricked in their hearts,
applied themselves unto the Apostles, and that the Apostles by their own
authority, and that power that was delegated unto them without reference to the
Church or people, admitted them into the number of Believers.

I expected in this place to have met with General Burton, or cavalier
Hanserdo, Saint George his chaplain, knowing what daring men they are, that
they would have fought me here especially, and that they would have endeavored
with all their forces to have beat me from this ground, a place so
advantageous, that they that are Masters of it may bid defiance to the
powerfullest, and potentest enemies of the truth: and indeed I did so much the
more expect their encounter here, and that they would have given me Battle,
and that we should have had a pitched field for it, because they have ever
pretended an interest in it; yea, and challenge a right unto it, saying, that
the church of Jerusalem is theirs, and which is more, they had by usurpation
got this church into their hands, and had the possession of it, and having thus
attained unto their design, being backed with great friends, some Tobiasses and
Sanballets, they began to build castles in the air, and made Fortifications in
their brain, and laid a foundation in their fantasy, upon which they built
an Independent Church, consisting of no more then could all meet in one place,
to enjoy all acts of worship in Gods service, and pretended that this Church
being the Mother Church, was to be an example and pattern to all the
Daughter-churches, and that all Churches through the world must be governed
after that model; and being by the assistance of many Sanballats and Tobiesses
much strengthened, as I said before, they began to insult, and to give Laws of
government to all Churches, and to gather and set up churches after their own
model, and being much assured of their own strength, they bad defiance to the
whole world, flinging and casting their Gloves to all their enemies assembled
and not assembled; whereupon I being a Commander in the Presbyterian Army, and
taking up the Glove came out against them, and by divine assistance reduced
this place, and took it from them which they had sometime unjustly detayned
from the Presbyterians, to whom indeed it belonged by the right of inheritance
and succession: I say I having by conquest taken this strong city from the
Independent Usurpers, that now labor to manage all government by sea and
land, in church and state, pretending they are Saints, and that the Saints must
govern the world; and being in the possession of it, I expected that those two
confiding Commanders, Saint Hanserdo, valiant and venerable old Henry being so
completely armed as he was, with his sword, and Phocions Hatchet, and with his
great white baskethilted beard, that both of them assisted also with I. S.
would have come out in battle against me, and would not have left the field,
as Van Trump lately left the sea, especially seeing in their march they all
passed by the church of Jerusalem, and having also so great an advantage
against me, they being three to one, which makes me conceive that they are
all, either desperate cowards, or terribly treacherous, and in that regard are
not fit to be Generals and Commanders any longer in so great an Army as that of
the Ill-dependents; yea, this their declining Battle with me makes me boldly
conclude of them, that they deal unmanly on all sides: for if the church of
Jerusalem be theirs, and that they have any interest in it, or a right unto it,
why did they not now engage themselves in her quarrel, and fight for her,
especially when all their Army lay in the field? certainly it had been much
for all their honors now to have shown their valor: and therefore, they all
of them not striking a stroke, proclaim unto all the world their want, both of
animosity, and all heroical virtue, and their want also of honesty, in that
they pretend a right unto that they have no just title or claim to, and for
which they dare not fight, in that they amuse the people, and stir up
factions on every side, and all to strengthen their own party, for the making
of a groundless combustion in Church and State, telling the people that they
have power and interest in the government of the Church, and that authority and
jurisdiction only belongs unto the Presbyters, which they ought always to
exercise in the name of the Church, and thereupon they persuade them, that if
they relinquish this their right unto the Presbyters, they will more Lord it
over them then ever the Prelates did; and they teach them farther, that this
right is derived unto them from the example of the Church of Jerusalem, and the
other Primitive Churches, who when they were cast into a Gospel form, as they
say, the Apostles and Ministers had not the sole power of governing them, but
the people also were joined with them, and that they are all of them to have
their voices, both in electing of officers, and in receiving in of Members, and
casting out of any offenders as well as the Presbyters and Ministers, and wish
all the people to stand and continue in that liberty wherein Christ has made
them free; these and such like unsound Principles they season the people with,
for the inraging of them against the Presbyters, and take all occasions to
pervert the holy Scripture, for the maintenance of their newfound way of
Independency, and labor continually by shifts and juglings to evade the dint
of any Arguments that are brought against them, for the proving that the power
of government in the church resideth in the Presbyters and Ministers hands,
both for the admission of Members, and the casting of them out, as it did in
the hands of John Baptist and the Apostles, and Disciples, who only had the
authority with the Keys committed unto them by God himself, and who only
exercised it in their days, as by innumerable examples may be proved, as by
that of John the Baptist, and the Apostles in the church of Jerusalem, which
latter example, both my brother Burton, and J. S. pass by with great silence,
wherein they deal most dishonestly, as I shall by and by make appear. But for
the example of John the Baptist, my brother Burton set upon that at first,
pretending to the people, that the example of John's gathering in of people by
his sole authority was not binding, because as he says it was extraordinary,
and that the Churches and Assemblies gathered by him were not formedinto
Christian Churches, these are his words, page 16. and that those Churches only
which were put into a Gospel form after Christ's Ascension are to be a pattern
of government unto all christian churches to the end of the world; and he
says, if we visit them, we shall find that in them the power of admitting and
rejecting Members was not in the Apostles and Ministers alone; and for an
instance of this he brings in the Church of Corinth, 2 Cor. 2. which he
says is a sufficient President to all churches: and thereupon concludes, and
so persuades the people, that the example of John the Baptist in receiving in
and admitting of Members by his sole authority, cannot be an example and
pattern to the Ministers under the Gospel to do the same; and therefore labors
with all his power to evade the dint of that Argument by such turnings and
evasions as these, telling the people, That those Congregations that were
gathered by him, not being in a Gospel-Form, nor molded up after the New
Testament form, cannot be bindingly presidential; and therefore for our
imitation, he affirms, we must necessarily come to the Christian Churches
constituted by the Apostles, after Christ's Ascension; as that one for example,
the Church of Corinth, in which, says my Brother Burton, The people had
authority of admitting and rejecting members, as well as the Apostles and
Presbyters; and therefore, those primitive and Apostolic Churches only, are
to be a pattern of imitation to all Christians and Ministers of governing by,
and not that of the Baptist; and by this their craft and juggling, and by these
fallacious means and unwarrantable ways, my Brother Burton, Hanserdo Knollys,
and I. S. with all the fraternity of the Ill-dependent Predicants, having
prepossest the people with a prejudicate opinion against their faithful
Ministers, as if they affected a lordly power over them, and more then
Prelatical: They have, I say, by this craft so infatuated them, that there is
scarce left an ear open in many of them to hear the just defense of the
Presbyterians, or an eye to see or read what they can say for themselves, and
against all their calumnies; which wickedness and deceitful dealing of the
Ildependents itinetary Preachers is unexcusable. But because my Brother Burton
not only carps at the example of John the Baptist, but likewise at those I
brought of the Eunuch, of Paul, of Cornelius, of Lydia, and of the Jailer, Mr.
Knollys also joining with him in this good service and skirmish; the which
after that both himself and Absurdo Know-lesse (for so he may truly be called)
had spent their breath and strength to evade, and yet perceiving evidence of
truth in them so apparently perspicuous, as it dazzled their eyes, they cry
out, that those were extraordinary examples, and not binding, because those
being baptized, were not admitted or received members into any particular
Church, but into the Catholic visible Church; and therefore, say they, those
examples are not for our imitation, we look only for the example of such
Churches as were cast into a Gospel-Form, and into the mould of the New
Testament-Form.

Now, what a height of wickedness is it in these men, thus to trifle for the
deluding of the simple people, and to pretend unto them, that there are diverse
ways of admitting of members into Christ's Church? one way of admitting members
into the Catholic visible Church, and another of admitting members into a
particular Church, when in truth there is no difference; for he that is a
member of any particular Church, is a member of the Catholic, and so on the
contrary, as by the examples both ordinary and extraordinary by me produced, is
sufficiently apparent; for they were all admitted after one and the same way;
and I had two examples of receiving in members into Churches constituted after
the New Testament Form; as that of Jerusalem and Damaseus, both Churches
according to the Gospel-Form; and there were there three thousand received
members at one time in the church of Jerusalem, without any of those conditions
they require at their members hands; and Paul also was received a member of the
Church of Damascus, upon the same terms that all the rest were; and therefore
the example is bindingly presidential: And these two examples are taken no
notice of, but are passed by; and all the other counted extraordinary by them:
And the people by this means are deluded and miserably abused.

Now can there be a greater imposture or deceit in any that pretend unto
Religion and honesty, then that in these men? When they say in their writings
upon all occasions, produce us some examples of Churches according to the New
Testament Form, wherein any members were admitted by the Ministers sole
authority, and without the consent of the people, and without those conditions
we require of all such as are to be admitted members into our Churches, and
then you do some thing? Can there, I say, be a greater deceit in any men, then
this of theirs, to make the people believe that there has never been any such
example produced; when notwithstanding I had set that example of the Church of
Jerusalem, and that of Damascus, both constituted after the Gospel-Form before
their eyes? in both of which, their members were admitted by the sole and alone
authority of the Ministers of those Churches, without the consent of the
people, or without any of those requisites they now demand of their members in
all their new gathered Churches; By which their proceedings, they make
themselves guilty before God, and all men of indirect dealing, and of
withholding the Truth from the people in unrighteousness; and manifestly
declare unto the world, that they are resolved against all the Light of the
Truth, obstinately to persist in their erroneous ways, which is the greatest
height of impiety and wickedness in the world, and no less then to resist the
Spirit of God: For if there had been but the least dram of candor and fair
dealing in them, they would never have uttered such words; and had there been
but any Christian honesty, and love to the peace of the Church in them, they
would not have passed by the Church of Jerusalem, and that of Damascus
unsaluted, and without taking any notice of them, and fell upon the examples of
the Eunuch Cornelius, Lydia, and the Jailer, and then pretend that they were
extraordinary.

But that all men may see my fair dealing with them, and (if it be possible)
that I may undeceive the deluded people, I will in this place to gratify my
Brother Burton, and Absurdo Know-lesse, set before their eyes the examples of
the two Mother Churches in their Gospel-Form: viz. that of Jerusalem and
Samaria, that so by the mouth of two witnesses, the Truth may the better be
confirmed.

Now, because they took no notice of the Church of Jerusalem in my former Book,
but pass it by as not worth the regarding, I shall desire them at this time,
and all those that read this Book, duly to consider how members were admitted
there, not only at one time, but always: And I shall desire them likewise,
seriously to weigh the practice of that Church in the admitting of their
members: the example of which, according to their doctrine, must ever be
followed and imitated.

And because my Brother Burton says, That the other Churches also are to be
taken in for the making up of a complete pattern, I will produce two other
formed churches after the New Testament Form among the Gentiles, and them
eminent ones, that there may be no want of witnesses; for the confirming us in
the right way of gathering Churches, and for the receiving in of members.

First therefore I shall entreat the Reader to look into the second chapter of
the Acts where he shall find at the first admi^sion there were three thousand
souls taken in and made Members of that Church by the sole power of the
Apostles, and where the people had no voice in the admission of them: neither
was it required that they should walk sometime in fellowship with them, that
they might have experience of the truth of their conversion; neither was it
required of them that they should make every one of them a public confession
of their faith, and bring in the evidences of their conversion, or that they
should enter into a particular explicit Covenant, or that they should have the
consent of the whole Church; nothing of all this was required there; neither
had the people any hand in the admitting of them, but the Apostles by
themselves and by their sole authority managed the whole business; for those
that were converted and pricked in their hearts applying themselves unto the
Apostles said, Men and Brethren what shall we do; and the conditions upon which
they admitted them upon their repentance were these only; believe and be
baptized in the Name of our Lord Jesus; the blessed Apostles were not
acquainted with our new model, nor with the conditions of the new
Congregations. But by the way let me tell the Illdependents that the Apostles
and Disciples had then a just ground of making such conditions, if ever any
had; for they might with great reason have said, howsoever these souls be not
miracle proof, but that they are wounded to the heart by them, and by the
Sermon of Peter; yet we are not by and by to confide in them and to admit them
into church fellowship, unless they will walk some time with us that we may
have experience of the truth of their conversion; and unless also they will
make all and every one of them a public and particular confession of his
faith, and bring in the evidences of their conversion, and enter also into a
particular explicit covenant for observing all the Laws of membership, and
that they come in by the general consent and approbation of the church. I say
if ever there was a time that these conditions might have been required by any,
it might then especially have been, because all those had had their hand in
crucifying of the Lord of life, as Peter told them; and therefore they might
all be well suspected that howsoever for the present they were all struck into
a trembling condition, yet that they could not judge upon so short a time of
the soundness of their conversion, and therefore they might well have urged
all the former conditions, and chiefly because they had our Saviors own
example freshly before their eyes in the second of John where it is related
that he would not commit himself unto men which had been convinced by his
miracles, although they believed in him; so that I say in that regard, when
Christ would not commit himself unto them, the Apostles and Disciples might
much more have pretended in all these regards that they had no reason to
confide in these men until they had had better experience of them for the truth
of their conversion. But when neither the Apostles nor none of all the
Disciples so much as urged any conditions upon them beyond the commission given
them by Christ; to wit, Repentance, Faith and Baptism: the example of this
church is for ever binding to all churches, that they in the admission of their
Members should do the same, and they that propound other conditions do no less
then accuse the Apostles of injustice and imprudency, as of taking that
authority into their own hands from the people, and of so suddenly and without
any deliberation admitting of Members into church fellowship which ought,
according to my brother Burtons doctrine, ever to be done with great caution,
who says in his 14. Page Multa cautela non nocet; adding moreover that in
things weighty we cannot be too wary, in regard they look not so much at
circumstances in conversion as the substance; and in regard also there ought to
be a provident care for preventing inconveniences and scandalls; seeing turpius
ejici^ur quam non admittitur hospes, it is easier for a guest to be kept out
then to be cast out; by all which his expressions and by their daily practice
they do no less then proclaim unto the world that the Apostles took too much
upon them and were not so prudent in the admission of Members into
church fellowship and communion as they should have bin: for if they did not
accuse the practice of all the Apostles of deficiency, why do they not follow
their examples? and why do they impose new laws of admitting of Members and
other conditions, then either Christ the King of his church, God blessed for
ever, or his holy Apostles did? Which whether or no it be not one of the
presumptuous and blasphemous wickednesses, both in the Ministers and the people
that exercise this new Government, that ever was in the world, I leave it to
the judgment of all conscientious and solid Christians. This one example in
the church of Jerusalem might be a sufficient president for all churches
imitation for ordinary admission of Members into church fellowship. But I will
produce other admissions in the same church, that there may be no want of
witnesses to corroborate this truth.

In the last verse of the second chapter, besides this first admission, in
terminis it is said there, that the Lord added daily unto the Church such as
should be saved. Here we find additions of Members upon additions; for they
were daily added (says the Scripture) and that by the Lord and King of his
Church Jesus Christ, and that upon the former conditions; for we learn of no
other: viz. of repenting, believing and being baptized: Here we find nothing
of walking sometime before their admission, here is nothing of public
confession of their faith, nothing of bringing in of the evidences of their
conversion, nothing of a particular explicit Covenant, nothing of the consent
of the Church; the Lord Jesus whiles the Government of his church, whose yoke
was easy and his burden light, lay upon his shoulders, and as long as the
rule lay in his own hands, and before it came to my brother Burtons fine white
fingers, (which he says in his learned Epistle that some of his friends would
not have him foul with me) I say whiles the Government of Christ's Church lay
in his own hands, and before it came to my brother Burtons fingers, and into
the paws and clutches of those of the congregationall way; all Christ's
Disciples and precious ones were admitted into church fellowship without that
heavy burden of those conditions they have most arrogantly brought into the
Church of God; by which in as much as in them lies they have not only put the
whole world in a combustion, but most blasphemously dis*throned Christ,
preferring their own vain traditions before his most holy Laws, and doing all
in the Churches name, and inslaved his people, whiles notwithstanding they
pretend they set up Christ, upon his Throne, and they preach the liberty of the
Gospel unto the people, which is most impiously to juggle on all sides. But
now to go on to the other presidents of admitting Members in that Church.

In the fourth chapter we have it recorded, verse 4. that many of them which
heard the Word believed, and the number of the men was about five thousand: And
all these were admitted into church fellowship and into the Communion of the
Saints, and that by virtue of their believing Repentance and Baptism, as the
Scripture relates. Here is nothing recorded of walking any time, for they were
suddenly admitted, here is nothing of a public conf^ssion of their faith,
nothing of bringing in the evidences of their conversion, nothing of an
explicit particular Covenant, not a word of the consent of the people. And yet
this was the first formed Church after the New Testament Form; by all which it
does sufficiently appear, that all*the practice and prattle of the new gathered
Churches has neither precept nor president for it in the Mother Church. But it
is not amiss to produce an example or two more, omitting many through the Acts.

In the fifth chapter, upon the sudden and miraculous death of Ananias and
Saphira, and through the other wonders and miracles that were wrought, it is
said* that believers were the more added unto the Lord, multitudes both of men
and women: that is to say, many more Congregations and Assemblies of believers
were added to the Lord and admitted to be Members of that Church; And all these
also were admitted to be Members by the Apostles sole authority, and that as
soon as they offered themselves to be entertained without any of those
conditions they now require in their new gathered Churches: And yet let me tell
the Independents by the way, that at this time also the Apostles and Disciples
might have challenged a right to have propounded those conditions, if they
might at any time have been urged upon the people: for they might have
suspected, that this sudden conversion proceeded more from the miracles then
from any sound conviction of them from the conscience of their sin: And
therefore they might have urged that it was now very fit that they should
propound some other conditions of admission then they had formerly imposed upon
them; and that it was requisite and convenient that they should now walk
sometime in church fellowship with them, that they might have more and better
assurance of their real and true conversion, and that they ought therefore
before their admission be urged to make all and every one of them a particular
confession of their faith, and bring in the evidences of their conversion, and
enter into a particular explicit Covenant for the better preserving of Church
Communion; especially they seeing now before their eyes a president of so
gross hypocrisy and false dealing in Ananias and Saphira, and what a
consternation came upon the whole church by it, and by the which also God was
so much displeased: therefore I say in all these regards they might then with
very good reason, if at any time, have urged all those conditions, and withal
they might well have added, that they should not be admitted without the
consent of the whole church, of all which when there is no mention, it is
abundantly evident that they were received into church communion without them
and that by the sole authority of the Apo^tl^s, which is left for a rule for
all other churches to the end of the World of admitting Members after the same
manner; which when the Independents in all their new gathered churches daily
swarve from in their admission of Members, they are in their so doing
prevaricators both against the precept of Christ the King of his church, and
against the example of the blessed Apostles, and against the example of the
church at Jerusalem, which was the first formed church after the New Testament
Form; by which practice of theirs they make themselves offenders in an
elevated nature.

Now I will add one example more of ordinary admission of Members, and that in
the same Church, chap. 6. it is said, verse 7. that the Word of God increased,
and the number of Disciples multiplied in Jerusalem greatly, and a great
company of the Priests were obedient to the faith. All these also were by the
Apostles sole authority admitted Members of that Church: And here likewise the
Apostles and Disciples might upon very good ground have urged the imposing of
new conditions of admitting Members, if they might at any time have done it, in
regard of those Pri^sts, for they were notoriously known to have been Christ's
enemies in his life and death, and ^ad a great stroke in his crucifying, and
therefore if the Disciples were afraid of Paul, as it is rel^ted in the ninth
chapter, because he had persecuted the Church, and in that regard were
unwilling that he should be a joint Member with them, they had very good
warrant here of being afraid of this great company of Priests, and might
therefore have desired that they might not be admitted Members into
Church Fellowship, till they had walked some time with them, that they might
have some testimonies of their true conversion, and that they might also for
the satisfying of the whole Church, every one of them make a particular
confession of their faith, and bring in the evidences of their conversion, and
enter into a particular explicit Covenant, and be received in by the consent
of the whole church; all these things I say they might have urged with great
authority, and have been as well afraid of these Priests as they were of
Paul: Now in that the Apostles admitted here of all those Priests, as they did
of Paul, Acts 9. by their sole authority, and without their either walking with
them in Fellowship some time, or without a public confession of their faith,
or bringing in their evidences of their conversion, or without a particular
explicit Covenant, or without the consent of the people; I say in all these
regards it is manifest to all such as will not put out their own eyes, that
all the Independents that impose other Laws upon the people in their admission
of Members into Church Fellowship with them, are Trangr^ssors in a high degree
against both the command and example of Christ, who admitted of all that came
to him, and refused none, and against the example of all the holy Apostles, and
against the practice of the Mother Church, and the first formed Church after
the New Testament Form; and therefore, I will be bold to say thus much, That
all those Ministers and people of the Congregational by-path, that shall
notwithstanding all that I have now set before them out of the good Word of
God, still persist in their unwarrantable practices against both the prec^p^
and president of Christ, the King of his Church, and of all his bl^ss^d
Apostles, they will be found fighters against God; and i^ they do not all of
them, that have had their hand in these unwarrantable proceedings, speedily
repent, and relinguish th^se the^^ r^bellious courses, they will highly provoke
the Lord and King of his Church, to come out in wrath and indignation against
them. And who knows but as he let the devil loose upon the sons of Sceva, those
exorcists, for abusing his Authority, and using his N^m^ for all their wicked
dealings, I say, who knows but the righteous and just God may in like manner,
if they will still persist and go on in these wicked and ungodly courses, to
seduce his people, and pretend that they have authority from him, for their
preaching and practicing of all these things, notwithstanding they have neither
precept nor example for them in all the holy Word of God, that he may in
justice let the devil loose upon them, for the beating of them all out of their
TUBS? Certain I am, they by all these their dealings, highly provoke the Lord
to jealousy, and that daily; so that if the Christian Magistrates do not take
some speedy course for the vindicating of Gods Honor, I do verily believe, the
Lord will from Heaven show some fearful judgment upon this whole Kingdom, and
visit it with so many plagues, and such sore calamities, as all the Inhabitants
thereof, will desire, and wish, that the Mountains may fall upon them, and the
Hills cover them from the presence of the Lamb, and from him that sits upon
the Throne; the which, that they may not happen upon this Nation, shall be my
daily and constant prayer. And this shall serve to have spoke concerning the
Church of Jerusalem, the first formed Church, and concerning the ordinary
admission of members in it. I will now come to the Church of Samaria, and that
of Corinth, and Ephesus, all formed Churches, according to the Gospel-Form, and
briefly show how members were admitted into them all, and by whom, and upon
what conditions; that all men may see there is no want of presidents to
convince the Ildependents of their Grolleries.

In the eighth of the Acts it is related there, that through the miracles of
Philip, and through his preaching the things concerning the Kingdom of God, and
the Name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized, both men and women, from the
greatest to the least, Verse 10, 12. And were all admitted unto
Church Fellowship, and that by Philips sole authority; and this his method of
gathering of Churches, was ratified by the authority of the Apostles, Peter and
John, and the whole College of the Apostles at Jerusalem. And this was a true
formed Church after the New Testament Form: For in this Christ himself had
planted a Church, and converted many, as it is at large set down in the fourth
Chapter of the Gospel of Saint John; and here it is said, That the people with
one accord, gave heed unto those things that Philip spoke, and that there was
great joy in that City, Verse 6, 8. And that they were all baptized both men
and women.

Here we have neither any walking required at their hands, for he better
assurance, either of Philip or the Church, of the soundness of their
conversion: Here is no public confession of their faith required before their
admittance into Church Fellowship: Here is no evidences of their conversion
called for: Here is no particular explicit covenant demanded of them: Here is
no consent of the people desired before their admission into Church communion,
and yet this was a Church established according to the Gospelform. So that
according to the practice of the two Mother churches in Judea, and Israel, all
believers were admitted members, and received into Church Fellowship, without
the conditions those of the Congregational way now require of all those of
their new gathered Churches: Whether therefore it be not a high presumption and
arrogance in all the Independents, to slight the Laws of Christ, the King of
his Church, and the example of Christ himself, and the example of all the
blessed Apostles, I leave it to the judgment of all prudent and advised
Christians. I will now to satisfy my Brother Burtons desire, visit some
Churches of the Gentiles, formed according to the New Testament Form; and I
will first in this visitation, begin with that Church which he himself has set
before all Churches for a pattern of imitation, viz. the Church of Corinth.

In the eighteenth of the Acts it is recorded, that when Silas and Timothy were
come unto Paul to Corinth, the Jews refusing to receive the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, that he shook his raiment against them, and said unto them your blood
be upon your own heads, I am clear, from henceforth I will go unto the
Gentiles, and departing thence, he entered into ones house named Iustus, one
that worshipped God, and preaching the Gospel there, it is said, that Crispus a
chief Ruler of the Synagogue, believed on the Lord with all his house, and
many of the Corinthians hearing, believed, and were baptized.

Here we see in a Church put into a Gospel form, the Members of that church
were admitted by the sole authority of Saint Paul, and that barely upon their
hearing and believing; for the Apostle required no other conditions of them for
their admission into church Fellowship, he said not unto those many that were
baptized, that before they could be made Members of that church they must walk
some time with the church, that they might have experience of the truth of
their conversion; neither did he enjoin them for satisfaction of the people, to
make a public confession of their faith, or to bring in the evidences of
their conversion, or to enter into any particular explicit covenant, or to
have the consent of the whole church, nothing of all this did Paul require of
the Corinthians in this church after the Gospel form; but following Christ the
Kings commission upon their Faith, Repentance, and Baptism, he hy his own
and sole authority admitted them. The same way of admitting of Members we
shall find in the Church of Ephesus, as it is at large to be seen in the
nineteenth chapter of the Acts, where the manner of admission of Members there
is fully set down, and that was a Church also my Brother Burton sets down
amongst those that must be brought in for the making up of a complete pattern,
now in all those Churches they were all admitted upon Christ's own terms, and
by the Apostles and Ministers sole authority, without either walking sometime
with the Church, or without any public confession of their faith to the
Congregation, or bringing in their evidences, or entering into any private
explicit Covenant, or without the consent of the people. How unsufferable a
thing*therefore is it now then in all those of the congregationall way, to
demand other conditions of all their Members before they can be admitted into
Church Fellowship with them, then those that Christ the King of his Church, and
all his blessed Apostles demanded? If this be not the highest point of
presumption that was ever heard of, I leave it to the consideration of the very
ruggedest Independents upon due deliberation, desiting they may all seriously
lay it to heart, and timely repent of it: for if they do not they will indeed
be found fighters against God, and dis-throners of Christ the King, when they
shall slight both his Laws and example, and the example of his blessed
Apostles, and the practice of all those glorious Gospel formed Churches, and
set up new Laws and examples of gathering Churches, and of admitting of
Members, whereas in all the New Testament we have but one way of admitting of
Members, whether in an ordinary way, or an extraordinary; for they that are
made Members of any particular Church, by virtue of that they are made Members
of the Catholic, and those likewise that are made Members of the Catholic
Church, may by virtue of their admission into it, be Members in any particular
Church, as I shall prove by the Independents own Principles. And as for the
ordinary way of admitting of Members, I have proved it from the foregoing
examples, and the Primitive practice, that it was upon condition only of
Repentance, Faith, and Baptism, and Christ required no more; and for the
extraordinary way if it be evinced that that was after the same manner, and
upon no other conditions, then all men may see into what a desperate condition
of Rebellion all the Independents have by their new ways plunged themselves
into, and may withal well perceive the vanity of all those cavils my Brother
Burton, and Master Knollys made against my following Arguments. Now that they
may see how, and upon what conditions all Christians were admitted into the
catholic visible Church, it will be worth their pains to look upon the
practice of the holy Ministers of the Gospel, both Evangelists and Apostles,
who were all directed in what they did, by the special command of Christ
himself; And therefore far more worthy of imitation then our Independents
practices* Now we may take notice, that when the Angel appeared unto Cornelius,
in the tenth of the Acts, he sent him unto Ioppa, to call for one Simon, whose
surname was Peter; he did not send him unto the Church in Joppa. And it is
related that when Peter came to Cornelius, and that he had recited unto him
the manner of the vision, and that he was commanded by the Angel to send for
him; it is further also declared what Peter there did, and that he said, of a
truth J perceive that God is no respecter of persons, but in every Nation, he
that fears him, and works righteousness is accepted with him. And after a
Sermon made unto Cornelius, and all that were assembled there with him; It is
said, that the holy Ghost fell on all them that heard the Word, and that all
the believers that came with Peter, were astonished at it, for they heard them
speak with diverse tongues, and magnified God. Then answered Peter, can any man
forbid water that these men should not be baptized, which have received the
Holy Ghost as well as we? And he commanded them to be baptized in the name of
the Lord. Here we see first, that Peter was sent unto, and not the Church:
Secondly, that he admitted Cornelius and those that were with him into the
number of believers, and into the fellow-ship of the Church by his own
authority, and never consulted with the Church to ask their leave or voice,
but concludes the business with an interrogation, which has a greater force of
binding that no man ought to hinder any believer from coming into the society
of the church and communion of Saints, in whom the graces of Gods spirit
evidently appear, as in these; so that if either the Ministers come into their
houses, or they go into the Ministers and make sufficient testimony by
themselves of their faith, and that they fear God, of what nation soever they
be, they are by the Ministers to be admitted; the congregation has nothing
to do to hinder any such, nay, they may not, it is more than belongs unto
them; neither did those that came with Peter intermeddle in that business, or
require a covenant at their hand, or a publik confession of their faith.

Again, when the Lord of his infinite mercy was purposed to reveal himself
unto the Eunuch in the 8. of the Acts, he sends Philip the Evangelist unto
him, whom he found reading in his chariot, the prophecy of Jsaiah, and after
that he had interpreted unto him that prophecy, and preached unto him Jesus
and Baptism in his name it is related, that when they came unto a certain
water, the Eunuch said unto him, what does hinder me to be baptized? and Philip
said, if thou beleevest with all thine heart, thou may: And he answered and
said, J believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God: and he commanded the
chariot to stand still and they went down both into the water, both Philip and
the Eunuch, and he baptized him. Here we see that Philip and not the church
was sent unto the Eunuch, and that Philip by his own authority, and upon the
Eunuch his own testimony, without any reference unto any church, or without
consulting with any Congregation, admits him into the number of believers, and
makes him a member of the church, and here was neither a public confession
required of him by any of the church, or any Covenant exacted by the people:
and so when Saul in the 9. of the Acts was fallen down out of astonishment,
and afterward was converted as the Story there fully declares the whole
manner of it, the Lord sent one Ananias a Disciple, and Minister unto him; he
did not send the church unto him, neither did Ananias when he came to Saul,
say unto him, I will consult with the church to see whether they will admit
thee to be a member, for thou have greatly wasted the church, and made havocke
of the Saints, and therefore I will have their approbation and consent, and I
will have thee first walk with the Church some time, that they may behold thy
conversation, and then thou shall make a confession of thy faith publicly
before the Congregation, and give in thy evidences of the truth of thy
conversion, and enter in a private and solemn covenant, and so be received and
admitted. But without all this ado he baptizes Paul and admits him into the
number of believers, and makes him a member of this formed Church, and that by
his sole authority, and he was received immediately among the Disciples at
Damascus without any reluctation, or so much as any scruple, and strait-way he
preached Christ in the Synagogue that he was the Son of God; he was both
ordained and put in office without the approbation and consent of the people,
who knew nothing of the business, but only stood amazed, and said, Is not this
he that destroyed them which called on this name in Jerusalem, and came hither
for that intent, that he might bring them bound unto the high Priest? The
Ministers in those days when they were all taught of God, they only admitted
Members by their own authority into the church, without the approbation of the
people; but in these our days, wherein people have gotten itching ears, and
teachers after their own humors (such as S. Paul speaks of in his Epistles to
Timothy) they teach a new doctrine, and bring forth newborn lights, to the
darkening of truth it self, and to the bringing in a confusion of all things.
See what Saint James says in his fifth chapter to all churches and christians
in the world, Is any man sick, says he? let him send for the Presbyters of
the churches, and let them pray over him, etc. and the prayer of faith shall
save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up, and if he have committed sins,
they shall be forgiven him. The Apostle James here sends all christians to the
Presbyters of every church, who had the power of the Keys delegated unto them
for spiritual comfort, and whose office only it was to pronounce pardon and
remission of sins unto the sick upon their true Repentance, if they had
offended and sinned against God in the time of their health, and so scandalized
the Gospel and the Church; and it was the Presbyters place and office to admit
them again into the fellowship and communion of the Saints upon their co^diall
and untained repentance, and that without asking the church any leave; for as
the Presbyters only had the power of casting out offenders out of the Church,
so they only had the authority of receiving them in again upon their
repentance, and not the Church; so if we look into all those Epistles that
were written unto the seven Churches of Asia, in the 2. and 3. of the
Revelations, we shall find them all directed to the Angels of the seven
Churches, which is as much as to say, to the presidents of every several
Presbytrie established and constituted in every one of those Churches; which is
a sufficient Argument to me, to prove a Counsel or College of godly Ministers
in every one of those cities, according to that of Paul to Titus, chap. 1.
verse 5. for this cause left I thee in Creet that thou should ordain
Presbyters in every City, not one but many. And in the 14. of the Acts, verse
23. and when they had ordained them Presbyters in every Church, etc. many
Presbyters, a College of them was appointed to every Church: and so in the 20.
of the Acts, there were many Presbyters who had the charge and government of
that Church committed unto them in common, ver. 28. there was a College of
them constituted in that church, and therefore for order sake (which the light
of nature teaches) they must have a President, who by the way of excellency,
and to distinguish him from the other, is called an Angel, as the inscription
of the Epistle, Rev. 12. 1. declares, saying, Unto the Angel of the Church of
Ephesus. As in our dialect, when we speak of the great counsel of the
Kingdom, or of the reverend assembly of Divines, if there be occasion of
distinguishing the Presidents of those councels from the other Judges in those
assemblies, we say, Master Speaker in the house of Lords or Commons; or of the
President of the Ministers, we say, Master Prolocutor; and if any have occasion
to write to either houses or to the Assembly, they direct their letters to the
Speakers, or to the Prolocutor, who communicates them to each Assemblies, as
being the Presidents of each Society, and yet none of all these Presidents by
that their place of honor and eminency have any more power or authority then
the rest, but only in the casting voice when the parties upon any occasion are
for number equal, and for appoynting of the times and places of meeting, and
for the methodicall and orderly carriage of the business; yea, it is ever
observed, wheresoever there is a President, there is a college or council, or
a court; nature dictates this, and the custom of all nations proves it: and
withal, by the same light of reason that counsel or college to whom God
himself writes and directs his letters for redressing of abuses, has the power
in their hands for the rectifying of things amiss, and that it peculiarly
belongs unto them, as to the Magistrates invested with authority, to order
things according to direction, and to punish and cast out offenders; and that
by their own power, without the consent and approbation of the people, as it is
now in the great Council and Parliament of the Kingdom; who make not the
people acquainted with what they have to do, but so far as it pleases
themselves, and not out of any duty: And so it was in the government of Gods
Church by the first constitution, every Church consisting of many
congregations, were governed by a college of Presbyters, as that of Jerusalem,
and this of Ephesus, and the other six Churches; in all the which the
Presbyters by their sole authority governed them according to Gods Word,
without taking the people into council with them, who were no where joined in
commission with them: and therefore it is most apparent by those examples I
have now produced, and many more that might be added; and from the commission
that Christ gave to the Apostles, and in them to all Ministers, that the people
had not their voices, either for the admitting of any to be Members in any
church, or in the casting out of any for their delinquency, much less have
they authority to require a public confession of their faith to be made unto
the congregation, or to exact of them to bring in the evidences of their true
conversion, or to require that they should walk with them some time before
admission, or to enter into a solemn private Covenant before they be admitted
as Members, for we have no president for any of these things in Gods Word, much
less any command, only in Acts the sixth, there is mention made, that the
Apostles for the freeing of themselves from all unnecessary incombrances, and
that they might the better attend upon their Ministry and preaching, gave the
people liberty to make choice of their own Deacons, but still keeping the power
of ordaining them in their own hand, which always was arbitrary in them whether
they would exercise it or no, neither would the Apostles have ordained them,
unless those that were to be ordained, had been men so qualified as they had
appointed; for otherwise, it lay in their choice whether they would ordain them
or no. But that ever the congregation or people had the power of admitting of
members, or of ordaining of Officers, it is no where extant in Gods Word: But
that the women should have a voice in the Church, either for receiving in, or
casting out of members or officers, or should have any thing to do with Peter's
Keys, it is against the law of God and nature: For Paul in the first Epistle to
the Corinths, 14. makes it one of the marks of confusion in any Church where
women have their voices, saying, God is not the Author of confusion, but of
peace, as in all the churches of the Saints; and in the next verse following in
express words says, Let your women keep silence in the churches, for it is
not permitted unto them to speak, but they are commanded to be under obedience,
as also says the law: and if they will learn any thing, let them ask their
husbands at home, for it is a shame for women to speak in the Church. And what
Saint Paul writ to this Church of Corinth he writ to all Churches, and
proclames that what he writ to them were the commandments of the Lord, ver. 37.
so that God had commanded that the women should not speak in the Church, and
says that it is a shame they should: and yet in these our days, in many of
the new congregations, they have their voices in choosing of officers and
admitting of Members, and have all of them Peter's Keys at their Girdle, and
make learned parts of speech in the congregation, and dispute questions and
debate of matters and give their reasons con and pro as it is credibly reported
and others of them set ^orth and print learned Treatises in polemicall Divinity
with great applause and admiration of the Independent Ministers who cite their
authority, and quote them in their writings as classical authors, to the shame
of the Nation and ludibry of Religion: and howsoever there is not any that
shall more honor the truly virtuous and pious of that sex than my self, yet I
must confess when I see how far they become transgressors of the law of God
and do those things that the holy Apostle has not only forbidden, but
proclaimed a shame; I cannot but exceedingly blame them, and those Ministers
that allow of and approve of such rebellion against God and nature. And as if
it had been the special care in the Apostle to prevent this evil of women's
intermedling in matters of the Church, he foreseeing the confusion that would
be brought in upon it: In his first Epistle to Timothy, and in him to all
Ministers, to whom the Government of the Church was committed, he gives him
direction how to behave himself in the house of God, which is the Church of
the living God; in chap. 2. verse 11. 12. he says. Let the women learn in
silence, with all subjection; for I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to usurp
authority over the man, but to be in silence; for Adam was first made, then
Eve; and Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived, was in the
transgression, etc. Here the Apostle again and again, twice in these few
words, enjoins them silence in the church, and imposes upon them subjection and
obedience: I suffer not, says he, a woman to teach or to usurp authority over
the man, but to be in silene; and he gives his reasons of this his command,
because says he, Adam was first made, not by the woman nor of the woman, but
the contrary; and therefore she may usurp no authority over the masculine
sex, especially in Gods matters, and she is to be the disciple of the man, and
not the man her scholar: and therefore that superiority that the God of order
had established upon the man in the first creation, he does now re-establish
upon him again in his holy Word, after all things through sin had been
disordered and confused; and commands the woman to be both subject and silent,
especially in the Church. Another reason of this his command is, because the
woman was first in the transgression, and was the cause of Adams fall, as he
accuses her, and her disputing and voycing of it then brought confusion upon
all mankind; and for this her so doing, S. Paul concludes for ever hereafter,
that she ought to hold her peace and be in subjection to her husband, and ought
to learn in silence at home, but more especially in the Church; for if they
come to voice it once again in the Church, as Eve brought confusion upon
mankind by her disputation and reason, so these with their loquacity and
babble and confusion of voices will bring in a new Babel into the Church and
State, as they have prettily well already begun to do. Saint Paul says, I
suffer not a woman to teach, nor to usurp authority over the man, but to be in
silence. Here the Apostle as in the place above cited, out of 1 Cor. chap. 14.
commands them silence, and permits them not to speak, and expressly forbids
them to usurp authority over the man, that is, the viril sex. Now I appeal
unto any understanding creature, whether or no, to make large parts of speech
in the Church (as many of them upon occasions do) and dispute and give their
reasons con and pro, be not to speak in the Church? and whether to have their
voices in either admitting of Members or Officers, or in the casting of them
out, be not to usurp authority over the man? for all the world knows, that
they that have the power in their hands of either admitting of any into the
fellowship or communion of the Church, or of hindering their coming in, or have
their voices for the casting of them out when they are received, exercise and
usurp authority over those they so deal with* and there-fore they do against
the express prohibition of the Apostles, and all those women that have usurped
this authority, and all those Ministers that have permitted them so to do, or
taught this doctrine unto them, are all guilty of great contumacy against God,
and ought seriously to repent for this their temerity and rebellion, and it
will be the imortall honor of those women that have not intermedled; and if
there be not some speedy course taken by authority to forbid such disorder, we
may promise nothing to the Church and whole Kingdom but confusion. It has
ever been observed, that Hermaphrodite councels in any Kingdom or Country,
when women that are subjects intermeddle in government and matters of state,
that that Kingdom and Country is very crased and not far from ruin and
destruction; and we need not look into many ages or countries for presidents of
this kind; and if Hermaphrodite counsels in Kingdoms have ever been so fatal
unto them, what may any man think in time will become of this Church and
Kingdom, when the women have gotten Peter's Keys at their girdle, and have
their voices in many congregations, and a power of ordering and disposing of
things in Church affairs? Certainly, nothing but confusion can be expected; for
this their doing is against the express command of God, who is the God of
order, and injoyns the contrary: Yea, it is not only against the law of God,
but against the very law of nature and the practice of all Nations; for never
was it yet heard of in any well governed City, or Commonwealth, or Kingdom,
that women that were subjects had their voices in choosing officers or
Burgesses, or making of freemen, or disfranchising of them, or were permitted
so much as to sit in counsel with them, much less to rule and give laws to
others out of their own houses: And therefore as it is a thing odious to God
and man, and that which is a shame to that sex, it ought to be cast out of all
wel-governed Churches and States; and as the women ought to know their places,
so ought all men that are under obedience to learn their duty, and not to take
upon them that which God never gave unto them, as to have their voice either in
making of members in Churches, or casting of them out, or of ordaining of
officers, or of imposing laws upon others, either of making public confessions
before the congregations, or of producing evidences of their conversion, or
that they should walk with them some time that they might behold their
conversation, or of imposing a Covenant upon any that shall be admitted; for
all rule and government in the Church is put into the hands of the Presbyters,
and does not belong unto the people or multitude, neither may the Presbyters
usurp authority, but they also must exercise it only, according to the
commission given unto them by Christ, they may not transgress it or go beyond
it in the least thing; and therefore when many of the brethren call for a
public confession of men's faith to be made in their new congregations, and the
evidences of their conversion to be produced, and impose a Covenant upon them
before they admit them to be members of their Church, (as if they had lived
before in infidelity; Who notwithstanding were known to be holy and godly
Christians, and as true believers as any that now live in the world) and think
them only Christians and Believers that do as they would have them, and count
of others that will not conform themselves to their customs and novelties;
but as the offscowring and refuse and no Christians* I say it is an intolerable
usurpation, and a thing that was yet never before practiced in the world, in
any Church either Jewish or Christian till these days, and therefore they go
beyond their commission in so doing; for God in his commission to his Apostles
and all Ministers, bids them admit of all that come in and believe and are
baptized, he quenches not the smoking flax nor breaks the bruised reed; now
then, when they know thousands in this Kingdom that do believe, and are men of
unblamable lives, and such as would lay down their lives for the faith once
delivered unto the Saints and are baptized; what have they to do to lord it
over them, and to hinder them from communicating in the Ordinances and to be
admitted into Church*fellowship with them, or to debar them from the
communion of the Saints? Me thinks the vision to Saint Peter in the tenth of
the Acts should teach such men their duty, when God said unto Peter rise kill
and eat, Peter said not so Lord, for I have never eaten any thing that is
common and unclean; and the voice said, what God has cleansed call not thou
common. And this, says the Scripture, was done thrice, that by the mouth of
two or three Witnesses this truth might be confirmed to Peter and all other
Ministers, not to call those people common, profane and unclean, and to count
them but rubbish, whom God has graced with the gifts of his holy Spirit, and
has sanctified, and such as believe in Jesus Christ and are baptized as well
as themselves, and such as stood to the truth when they durst not show their
faces, but ran from the Cause and deserted it, or at least temporized, and such
as if the like occasions were offered, would manifest unto the world (by Gods
assistance) that their lives and all they have should not be dear unto them for
the restimony of Jesus; and yet such as these must be debarred from the
communion in their Assemblies, unless they will conform to their newborn
traditions; for these are no traditions of the Elders, but of the younger: and
if Christ in his time sharply reproved those that brake the Commandments of
God through the traditions of men, and deeply reproved the Ministers in those
days for teaching the people to prefer the traditions of the Elders before
the commandments of God, and for teaching them the fear of God after the
precepts of men: What shall we think those Ministers will have to answer at the
dreadful day of judgment, when they set up their traditions in the Church of
God and prefer them before the Commandments of God? and what can any man
think of the condition of that people, that account of such novelties as the
Oracles of God, and violate the law of Love, and make rents and schisms in the
seamlesse garment of the church through these traditions? Surely whatsoever
they may promise to themselves, their condition is very dangerous; for our
Savior says, Woe be to those by whom offenses come, Matthew 18, and whosoever
shall offend one of these little ones that believe in me, it were better for
him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in
the depth of the sea. And whether this be not to transgress the the
Commandments of God through their traditions and to offend those little ones
that believe in Christ, when they will not receive such into the communion and
fellowship of the church, as believe and are baptized, but count them as aliens
and strangers, yea, infidels and rubbish, I refer my self to any that is but
of ordinary understanding. For Gods command unto all Ministers was, that they
should admit all such into the church as believed and were baptized upon their
desiring it, without any confession, either private or public, or entering
into any covenant: Now this command of God they trangresse by their traditions,
and keep out many thousands of Believers through the Kingdom, as unholy, and
as having no right to the Ordinances, because forsooth they will not obey their
newborn Laws and Traditions; for where did ever God command that no
Believers should be admitted into the church except they made a public
confession of their faith, and walked some time in fellowship amongst them, and
then gave in the evidences of their conversion, and entered into a private
covenant, and gave the Church satisfaction? Or where was it ever practiced by
any of the Primitive christians, either by those that were converted by Peter's
Sermons and the other Apostles, or by Paul's preaching? was Lydia (when God
opened her heart to believe Paul's preaching) admitted into the church upon any
such terms? was the Jailer and his converted family forced to make a public
confession to the church of their faith, and to give in the evidences of their
conversion, and to enter into a private convenant before they could be made
Members of the Church, or was the Churches assent required before they could be
admitted and made members of it, or were ever any of these things they impose
upon Christians now, required at believers hands before these our times? and
therefore they are to be abominated as vain traditions, and such as by which
they break the Laws of God, making divisions in the Church and Kingdom, and
through all the families, and houses of the same, so that neither Masters of
families nor parents have any rule over their wives, children or servants:
their husbands go out one way, the wife another, their children to this
Assembly, their servants to that Congregation, and as it was among the
Corinthians which Paul blames in them, one said, I am of Paul, another I am of
Apollo, the third I am of Cephas, and so they flutter about like a company of
chickings, without either heads or wit, and none will be under obedience to
either Parents or Masters (not withstanding God has commanded children to obey
their Parents and servants their Masters) no farther than pleases their own
humors, and all this they have learned by the traditions of the younger: and
whether I have wronged the Brethren in any thing I have now said, I report my
self to all the distracted Families in the Kingdom where they have been
preaching, and the daily experience of any moderate minded Christian: and if
ever there was a Pantheon of all Religions in the world, it is now in England,
by reason of these new teachers, to the great dishonor of God, the hinderance
of Reformation, and the alienating of the affections one from another of those
that are joined together in nighest relations.

Now whereas Master Knollys and my Brother Burton passing by the Church of
Jerusalem in their march (as I said before) make some poor weak skirmishes
against my forces drawn out of the Garrisons of holy Writ, as that of the
Eunuch, Paul, Cornelius, Lydia, and the Jailer, which I had formerly brought
into the field, pretending they were extraordinary and not binding, because
they were not (as they say) admitted in any particular Church constituted,
according to the Gospel form, but into the catholic visible Church: I cannot
pass by their trifling without some answer unto their bravado; and therefore I
thought good in this place, before I march on to fight them, that they may not
hereafter boast, and vapor, that I durst not encounter them, or look upon
their most material Reserves, which is concerning Cornelius, and those that
were with him, which they especially pitch upon, conceiving they have a great
advantage against me, for the making of this ground good, viz. that the sole
power of admitting any to be Members of any Church, does not reside, and lie
soly in the Ministers of the Gospel, but that the people also have a hand as
well in their admission as they; and if they shall dislike the reception of
any, that then the Ministers cannot by their own and sole authority admit them
though never so well qualified, for this must necessarily be the scope of their
encounter; for to what end otherwise should it be made; yea, their very words
manifest as much, which are these, first Master Knollys, page 15. and 16. thus
declares himself, that the brethren did not intermeddle in that business
(says he) viz. of the admittance of Cornelius, and those that were with him by
Baptism into the Church, I conceive the reason why the Brethren did not
intermeddle to hinder their admittance to that Ordinance of Baptism, was not
because they had not that liberty, but because they had no just objections to
declare to Peter. Now that the Brethren had a liberty to declare any thing
which might justly have hindered, does appear by the question the Apostle
expounded (says he) I conceive he meant propounded, verse 47. Can any man
forbid water that these should not be baptized? And the Doctor himself (says
he) acknowledges that the Brethren or Disciples of the Church of Jerusalem,
which must be a pattern of all Churches, had this liberty to except against
some sort of persons, in case that such persons have been formerly known to
have been open Enemies and Persecutors of the Church, and then they are justly
to be suspected until they have given public evidence by witness to the
Ministers of their true conversation, and there produces a plain instance to
prove this out of Acts the ninth, where Paul coming to Jerusalem assayed to
join himself to the Disciples, but they were all afraid of him, believing
not that he was a Disciple. Thus Master Knollys speaks, and then concludes,
that all the Disciples in the like case have the same liberty, because
Jerusalem the Mother Church is to be a pattern to all other Daughter-churches:
therefore (says he) when it does evidently appear, that the Disciples or
Brethren of the Church of Jerusalem in her most flourishing condition had this
liberty to declare their fears and their ground thereof against Paul: How can
the Doctor (says he) make good that the Presbyters alone, without the consent
of Brethren may admit Members, and cast out Members, and that the Brethren and
the Congregation have nothing to do to hinder any such thing? I have
faithfully set down his words, and the force of his Argument, to which I will
by and by give my answer after I have set down also what my Brother Burton
has to say in this business, and then I will reply to them both in order.

My Brother Burtons words are these, page 17. It is one thing (says he) to
preach, and instrumentally to convert souls, which chiefly pertaines to those
that are called thereunto, but in the case of Church Government, of admitting
and casting out, it is otherwise. And here let Peter himself (whose words you
allege) resolves us; who when the Holy Ghost so wonderfully fell on all of
them that heard the Word, said, can any man forbid water, that these men should
not be baptized? etc. Which words imply, that if any exceptions could have been
made, it was in those Jews present, to give forth their allegations, why those
believing Gentiles should not be admitted to become one Church with the
believing Jews: So as your Observations fall to the ground: as that first,
Peter was sent to and ^ot the Church: And secondly Peter commanded them to be
baptized: Again this example was extraordinary in all the circumstances of it:
Your instance of the Eunuch Act. 8. 8. of Lydia Act. 16. as many other, are
mere extravagants. We (faith he) speak of Churches constituted, not of single
converts here and there one, not yet joined into a particular Church-body.

Thus my brother Burton declares himself, whose words I have faithfully set
down and all he has to say against all those examples.

But before I come to my answer I shall desire the Reader to take notice of
these men's dealings, they make all these examples either extravagants or
extraordinary, and yet they would from the example of Cornelius and Peter's
question to the brethren that came along with him, infer that the authority
of admission of Members, lay not only in the Ministers hand but in the peoples
also, as who had the liberty to bring in their exceptions against any for their
not admission. So that these men at pleasure will make the same Scripture they
except against as not authoritative and binding for us, yet to be bindingly
presidentiall for themselves; So that as far as in their own opinion it makes
for their grolleries and serves their turn it shall be for a pattern of
imitation to bind all Churches to the end of the world, which both Master
Knollys and my brother Burton learnedly infer; but as far as it makes for the
advantage of the Presbyterian opinion and to show that the Presbyters have the
sole authority of admitting Members into Church*fellowship from the example of
Philip, Ananias, Paul in baptizing the Jailer and Lydia, and Peter's baptizing
of Cornelius and admitting of him and those that were with him Members into
Church communion by their sole authority without those conditions they propound
and without the consent of the people, then they cry out that they are
extraordinary examples or mere extravagants. Now whether this be not with the
Papists to make the Word of God a nose of wax or a leaden rule that they may
either work and mould it or bend it into what fashion they please, I leave it
to the judgment of the learned and experienced Christian. But by the way also
I desire the Reader to take notice what my brother Burton grants: viz. that
the receiving of those Gentiles, and the admitting of them by Peter into the
Church by Baptism, was to make them one Church with the believing Jews; these
are his own words: From which it is sufficiently apparent, that be men baptized
and admitted into the Church either after an ordinary way or after an
extraordinary, it is sufficient to incorporate them into Church Fellowship both
with the believing Jew and Gentile and to make them Members of Christ's Church,
which is as much as I contend for: So that it is most certain as those that are
Members of any particular Church, are by virtue of that, Members also of the
whole Catholic visible Church: so in like manner those that are made Members
of the Catholic visible Church may also by virtue of that, be Members of any
particular church: for the Church of Christ is his Kingdom, and it is but one
Flock and one Sheepfold, and there is but one Shepherd of it and King that
governs it: and therefore in whatsoever part of this Kingdom of Jesus Christ
they are admitted Members, and after what manner soever they be admitted,
whether in an ordinary or an extraordinary way, they are Members of the whole
Church and may communicate in all ordinances with any particular Church
whatsoever as being subjects of Christ's Kingdom and enjoying all the
immunities and privileges that any of Christ's subjects can challenge. And all
this I learn from my brother Burtons doctrine, who so long as he holds out
any truth unto me, I will listen unto, as he has done in this point, but no
farther. Again as all those, viz. the Eunuch, Paul, Cornelius, Lydia, and the
Jailer, were admitted to be Members of Christ's Church by the sole authority of
the Ministers, Evangelists and Apostles, and without any of those conditions
urged by the brethren; so are all other Christians by the sole authority of the
Presbyters to be admitted into church fellowship, and that upon Christ's own
conditions: viz. Faith, Repentance and Baptism. Having upon the occasion of my
brother Burtons and Hanserdoes words spoke thus much, I will now come to my
Answer to them both.

And first whereas they peremptorily affirm from the interrogation of Peter to
those that came along with him; where he says, Can any man forbid water that
these men should not be baptized, etc. that it does imply that the brethren
have power also of admitting Members into the church and ought to have their
voices, as in the receiving of them in so in the casting of them out. It is a
mere non sequitur and a very groundless illation and inference: for the
interrogation plainly manifests the contrary: as will appear from other
presidents and reason: as for example in the eighth of the Romans ver. 33. 34.
Saint Paul says Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? Who is he
that condemns? who shall separate us from the love of Christ? All the which
interrogations do not imply as the Apostle himself answers, that any
creature can lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect, or that any creature
can condemn, or that any creature can separate the Elect from the love of God
which is in Christ Jesus. Another instance (to omit many) we have of the same
nature with that of Peter Acts 8. 35. Where the Eunuch said unto Philip, See
here is water, what does hinder me to be baptized? I demand of any whether or
no this interrogation of his does not imply as much as if he had said, no
creature now can hinder me from Baptism, seeing that we have water that element
that is appointed for it, and I do believe: And so much may be gathered from
Philips Answer to him, who says, nothing could hinder his baptism and
admission into the Church, if he did believe in Christ with all his heart;
whereupon the Eunuch answered, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God;
and he was forthwith baptized. So that by this it is sufficiently manifest that
that inference they would gather from Peter's words cannot groundedly be made:
viz. that it is in the power of the people to hinder any: as is yet more
evident from Peter's own words and reasons when he was questioned about this
business in the 11. of the Acts, the story whereof is there set down at large
with Peter's Answer to all their Objections, Who told them ver. 12. that the
spirit bad him go with those that came from Cornelius nothing doubting, etc.
saying in the conclusion of his discourse and that with an irresistible reason,
ver. 17. For as much then as God gave them the like gifts as he did unto us,
who believed in the Lord Jesus Christ, what was I, that I could withstand God?
All the which discourse of Peter and this his reason do sufficiently prove that
his interrogation, saying, Can any man forbid water, that these should not be
bapti^ed? Does not imply as my Brother Burton and Master Knollys would have it,
that it was in the power of those that were with Peter or any other to have
hindered their baptism and admission into the church of Christ seeing they
believed: For if Peter himself should have refused it he had been disobedient
to God himself and had doubted, which he was forbidden and withal had
resisted in as much as had been in him the spirit of God; For so says Saint
Peter, What was I, that I could withstand God? From which I gather and that by
very good reason that all those of the congregationall way that will not admit
all such as believe and are baptized into their new gathered churches without
they walk some time with them and without the making of a public confession of
their faith, and the bringing in of their evidences of their conversion and
entering into a particular explicit covenant and without the consent of the
whole church are all fighters against God and withstanders of his spirit: And
if they do not speedily repent for all their wickedness, and relinquish their
ungodly, unchristian and unbrotherly practices the Lord from heaven will show
his wrathful displeasure upon them all, for he will vindicate his honor and
the honor and privileges of his people? Shall not he avenge his own Elect and
that speedily? Luke 17.

And this shall suffice for answer to that impious cavil of my Brother Burton,
and Hanserdo. Now for that instance that Master Knollys brings, it quite
overthrows their doctrine, for it is point bank against it and their
practice. For although it be not denied, but that all true believers may at any
time make their complaint to the Church, that is to say to those that are in
authority in the Church; to wit, the Presbyters, as the extremest refuge upon
just offense; yet it must ever be granted that it lies in the breast of those
that are Judges to determine of the business according to the allegations and
probations, so that those that complain may not be both Plaintifs and Judges;
this I say is so known a maxim that none can deny it. Besides, we must take
notice that we never read inall the New Testament, that the disciples ever so
much as questioned any that desired to be admitted into church fellow ship, or
refused communion to any but Paul; and the reason was as the Scripture
relates, because they knew that he had been a mortal enemy unto them, and
had been a great Persecutor, and were then ignorant of his conversion, and
therefore it is said they were afraid of him; and upon the like occasion I
believe any of the brethren in any church may do the same, and they may fear
such an one, and suspect him, and complain of him, and that is all they can
do, but power they have none to keep him out of Church Fellowship if upon the
Ministers and Presbyters examining of the business they find that the man is a
believer, and converted from his sinful courses; for by their sole authority
without their good liking, or the consent of the people they may admit him into
church fellowship; and if the people should refuse to receive him upon his
assaying to join himself with them, he may appeal from them to the
Presbyters and Ministers who are Gods Stewards, and who have the power of the
Keys to open the door of the church to whom they conceive are fit: and for
this his so doing, and for the Presbyters accepting of his appeal they have
the Apostles and Presbyters of Jerusalem for an example; for when the Disciples
feared Paul, and seemed to be unwilling to admit him into communion with them:
He forth with appeals to the Apostles, who upon his appeal admitted him into
church fellowship according to their commission, which was, that whosoever
believed and was baptized, he should be received into the church and that
without the consent of the people, or any of those conditions the Independents
now impose upon their Members, as by this very example and instance of Mr.
Knollys does abundantly appear, which makes wholly against their doctrine and
practice, and utterly overthrowes their tenent: for most certain it is that
the power of admitting of Members, and casting out of offenders lies in those
men's hands only and solely that have the power of the Keys, and are by God
himself made Stewards and Overseers, and Guids of his Church his house, which
when they peculiarly belong unto the Presbyters, and not to the people, they
only, and not the people ought to have the managing of the government of the
church; and this has been sufficiently proved by the receiving in of Members,
both in an ordinary way, and in an extraordinary manner, by all the examples I
have produced, and by this very instance of Saint Paul, alleged by Master
Knollys himself, who when he was admitted into Church Fellowship, not only
without the consent of the brethren, but against their good liking it is
abundantly manifest, that the people have nothing to do with the government of
the Church, but that it lies wholly in the Presbyters hands. And all this I
say is clearly proved out of the good Word of God, within the walls of the
which, it is ever safe to abide, and in the action of obedience to the which
all men may promise to themselves perpetual security: and this shall suffice
to have answered to all that Mr. Knollys and my Brother Burton had to say to
all my Arguments.

And by all that I have now spoke, I hope it does sufficiently appear that
there is neither precept nor example through all the Holy Scripture to warrant
the practice of these men in the gathering of their new Churches; and if a man
will but look a little more upon the practice of Christ's seventy disciples,
and of all the Apostles in the gathering of Churches, they shall not find one
footstep through the whole Book of God of the gathering Churches after the
manner of their congregating of their assemblies: as for Christ's Disciples,
they were all sent to gather in the lost sheep of the house of Israel, they
went not to gather in converted men from amongst converted men, for they were
to bring the lost sheep into Christ's fold (and we are taught there is but one
Shepherd and one sheepfold) we never read that after they were once folded
and brought into the Church, that any true Pastors came into the fold and
flocks of their fellow-shepheards; and picked out all the best and the fattest
sheep, and the most wholesome, and molded them into an Independent Fold by
themselves, as separate and distinct from the others, and with the which they
would have no fellowship and communion in the Ordinances, this was never heard
of before these days: Paul was so far from getting away of others sheep
that he took it for a dishonor to him to build upon another foundation,
Romans 15. and preached Christ in those places where they had never heard of him
before; and planted the Church of Corinth himself, and left Apollo to water
it, and committed all the flocks that he had gathered, as that of Ephesus, to
the charge and care of faithful Pastors, and commands both the flocks and the
Pastors, and in them all Shepherds and Folds, to keep unity and love one with
another, Ephesians. 4. verse 1, 2, 3, 4. etc. and forbids them to make separations
and divisions, and schisms between flock and flock, and this method he used
wheresoever he came; yea, as soon as he was converted and entered upon his
ministry, as we may see in the first of the Galathians, he went into Arabia,
and preached there among the poor Infidels, he got not other men's sheep from
them, neither did he ever make any separation of sheep from sheep; yea, even
in those flocks and churches, as that of Corinth, Galatia and Colosse, where
there were many that walked disorderly and against the rules prescribed, and
taught false doctrine and heresies, and made schisms in the Church, and were
very scandalous, so that if ever there were in any Churches a just cause of
making a separation, it was then; and yet the Apostles bid not the Christians
separate themselves from the communion and assemblies of the Saints, and from
the Ordinances for these men's causes, but only that they should look unto
themselves, and examine their own consciences, that they may not offend, and
so make themselves unworthy of the holy things, and gives them power to cast
out the profane, but no way tolerates them to separate; only he bids them
not be familiar with such as walk disorderly, that by this means they might
learn to amend their lives, and tells them of what judgments have always
happened to such as were wicked, and bids them by their example to take heed
how they provoke God by the like, as it is at large set down in the tenth
chapter, and commands them to make no separation but from Idolaters and
Infidels: and so likewise in his Epistle to the Galatians, he says for his own
particular, he could wish that they that troubled them were cut off, yet he
bids not the Galatians to separate themselves into Independent congregations.

Nothing of all such things were taught before these days, that true believers
and the faithful servants of God should separate from the Assemblies of their
Brethren every way as dearly beloved of God as themselves, and such as with the
twelve Tribes of Israel, serve their God night and day, and would suffer any
thing for the Gospel; and that anv Christians I say, should make separation
from the fellowship of such, or that such should be accounted as en^mies of
Christ, it was never heard of before our times; by which their so dealing, they
have made the greatest schism in the Church that was ever yet made, to the
scandal of our holy profession.

I have been ever taught in Gods holy Word, that those faithful Ministers that
preached Jesus Christ and him crucified, and opened the eyes of the blind, and
turned them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God that
they might receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance amongst them that
are sanctified by faith in Jesus Christ, and taught the people that they should
repent and turn to God, and do works meet for repentance; and that
instructed all men that they being delivered out of the hands of their enemies,
they should serve God without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him
all the days of their life, and teaching them that the grace of God bringing
salvation, has appeared to all men, for this very end that they should deny
all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and should live soberly, righteously and
godly in this present world, looking for that blessed hope and the glorious
appearing of the great God of our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for
us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a
peculiar people zealous of good works. I say I have been ever taught by Gods
Holy Word, to believe that those Ministers that instruct the people to do all
these things, and where the people by faith embrace and receive this doctrine,
are the true Ministers of Jesus Christ, and those congregations under them the
church of Jesus Christ, and of his sheepfold, and that Christ in all such
congregations is set up as King in his Throne, as who rules in the hearts of
his people, and the which are swayed and guided by the Scepter of his Word and
Spirit, and deserve none of those contumelious languages the brethren asperse
both Ministers and people with.

Of the Ministers they thus speak and print, That they deny, disclaim and
preach against Christ's Kingly government over men's consciences and Churches, so
that such a conversion (as is wrought by them) comes not home to whole Christ;
and such with their converters do deny Christ's Kingly government; or at least
and best they are converted but in part, and that main thing is wanting, to
wit, Christ's Kingly office; and of all the people and Christian believers
through the Kingdom that are not in their congregations and new gathered
Assemblies, they speak and print thus: We (say the brethren, the Independent
Ministers) exhort them to set up Christ King in their hearts: We exhort them to
become and profess to be those Saints, of whom Christ is King; for he is King
of Saints, Revel. 15. 3. but they will not believe us (say they) they will not
depend upon Christ as the only Law*giver and King over their consciences: Now
what would you have us to do in this case? (say they) baptize the Infants of
such Parents as will not in this respect profess nor confess Christ to be
their King? Why* do you not know (say they) that no Infants have any title to
Baptism* that are not within the Covenant visibly? and how are they within the
Covenant visibly, but by virtue of their Parents faith outwardly professed? and
what outward profession of faith is there in the Parents that refuse Christ for
their only King? that are ashamed or afraid to profess to be in Covenant with
Christ, as their King? if therefore the Parents profess not, yea, refuse thus
to be in visible Covenant, can the children be said to be in visible Covenant,
and so to have a right in Baptism, the external seal of the covenant? here is
an obex, a bar put. These are their own words, which I have set down at
large; the sum of them briefly is this; that all the Ministers of the church
of England that are not of their fraternity, do deny, disclaim and preach
against Christ's Kingly Government over men's consciences and churches; and that
all the people under their Ministry are men unconverted, or at least converted
but in part, wanting the main thing, to wit, Christ's Kingly office; men visibly
out of the Covenant of grace, who have not so much as an outward profession of
faith, who deny Christ to be their King; to whose persons and infants the very
Sacraments and seals of grace, with all church communion, may and ought to be
denied.

Another of the Independents, amongst many of the contumelious and disgraceful
speeches he utters out against the Ministers of the church of England,
calling them the blackcoats in the Synod, who, he is afraid, will prove more
cruel Taskmasters than their Fathers the Bishops, who cowardly sit at home,
and in his apprehension, for no other end but to breed faction and division
amongst the well affected to the Parliament, promoting their own interest,
which (says he) is laziness, pride, covetousness and domination, and amongst
many such expressions as these, he proclaims them the sworn enemies of Jesus
Christ: and desiring that the Parliament may be put in mind of their Covenant,
for he thinks they have sworn to root out Popery: he tells them they have
established Tithes the very root and support of Popery which he does humbly
conceive is a contradiction to their Covenant, and which will be a greater
snare than the Common Prayer to many of the precious consciences of Gods
people, whose duty it is in his judgment, to dye in a prison before they act
or stoop unto so dishonorable a thing as this is, to their Lord and Master,
as to maintain the black-coats with tithes, whom they look upon as the
professed enemies of their anointed Christ, etc.

These are some of his formal expressions, I leave the comment of these
several passages to others: neither do I rehearse innumerable such like
sentences as are daily vented, to the intolerable disgrace, both of all the
Ministers of the Church of England, and of all those believing christians that
are under their several charges, and that in every Pamphlet in the which they
proclaim all the Ministers to be the sworn and professed enemies of the Lord
Jesus Christ, and such as deny, disclaim and preach against Christ's kingly
government over men's consciences and churches; and for the people and believers
in England, they proclaim them to be men unconverted, or at least converted
but in part, wanting the maine thing, Christ's Kingly office; men visibly out of
the covenant of grace, who have not so much as an outward profession of the
faith; who deny Christ to be their King, to whose persons and Infants the very
Sacraments and seals of grace, with all church*communion, may and ought to be
denied, etc.

By the which words, they not only unchurch all the congregations of England,
Scotland, Ireland, but indeed all the reformed churches, and unchristian all
christians but those that are in their own independent assemblies, and account
them as aliens and strangers from the commonwealth of the Saints, and make
Christ to be no King over them, or to have any Kingdom in or amongst them, but
only amongst themselves in their new congregations: whereas Christ ever had a
church or Kingdom upon earth in all ages before they were, and has without
all controversy a true Kingdom in many churches in these our days, where
they are not. Had I not seen their expressions in print, and the Book in
which they are uttered, set forth by authority with approbation, I should not
have believed that they had all of them bin so uncharitable; but finding that
book not only printed by license, but generally applauded by them all and
much magnified, as the frequent editions of it do manifest, I gather, it is
the universal opinion of them all. Than the which, what could be more
uncharitably and unchristianly spoken? what comfort can any of the Ministers of
the Church of England have in the society of these men, who (what soever
outward seeming favor they show to them) in their hearts conceive of them as
the sworn enemies of Christ and his Kingdom, and as men unworthy to live, and
who count it a dishonorable thing to their Lord and Master, to maintain those
black-coats with tithes, whom they look on as the professed enemies of their
anointed Christ? can I say, any Ministers with joy and alacrity converse with
these men? no surely; what real comfort can any poor christian believers
through the Kingdom either expect or look for at these men's hands if they
were in their power, whom they declare (and that in print, and in their
Pulpits) to be men unconverted, or converted but in part, wanting the maine
thing, Christ's Kingly office, men visibly out of the covenant of grace, who
have not so much as an outward profession of faith, who deny Christ to be their
King; to whose persons and Infants the very Sacraments and seals of grace,
with all church communion, may and ought to be denied? can any true christians
be real friends to the enemies of Christ? He (says Saint Paul, 1 Cor. chap.
16. v. 22.) that loves not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathama
Maranatha; will any true Christians bless those that God has cursed? David
said, I hate them that hate thee, yea, I hate them with a perfect hatred.

And surely those that are true friends to Christ, hate all his enemies; now
they look upon our Ministers as the professed enemies of Christ, and upon all
the people under their ministry as enemies of his Kingdom, and as men to
whose persons and infants the very Sacraments and seals of grace, with all
church communion, may and ought to be denied (they are their own words) can
they therefore expect any real friendship from them, whatsoever outward
courtesy they seem to show them? no doubtless; how can any poor christian
have any delight to come amongst these men, or so much as to be in their
society, whom they account of as the enemies of Christ and his Kingdom? For my
own particular, I would not willingly come in any man's company, or be familiar
with any that I thought a professed enemy of Christ and his Kingdom, neither
should I ever believe I could have any real esteem from such as think me an
enemy of Christ and his Kingdom.

It was the greatest calamity to the poor sufferers under the Prelates
tyranny, and to all those distressed christians that were haled into the
High Commission court, or into the Star Chamber, or before the Counsell-table
for matter of Religion and conscience (which was the lot of many thousands
through the whole Kingdom) that commonly their greatest enemies were those of
their own house; their parents, their brethren and sisters would be the
chiefest calumniators and reproachers of them, and that in word and deed would
most despightfully persecute them, denying them the common humanity of
hospitality, and would not so much as look on them, except it were to revile
them and insult over them, and would ordinarily join with their enemies both
privately and publicly, and desert them in their greatest streights, as all of
them can generally witness, which not only encouraged their enemies against
them, but added credit to their false acculations and calumnies; for they would
usually say, ye may see what manner of men these are, whose nighest friends are
not only ashamed of, but thus speak of them; which was a greater affliction
unto them than all the other miseries and sufferings they under-went; for had
they been their professed enemies, as David said, they could easily have
endured it, and there would less credit and regard have been given to their
words; but they were their parents, brethren, sisters and familiars, and
therefore it added more sharply to their affliction: So had they been our
professed enemies as Papists, Socinians, Arminians, or those of the Prelaticall
faction that should have proclaimed us enemies of Christ and his Kingdom, and
had they denied unto us and our children the seals of grace, with all
church communion, it would not have troubled us; but tu Brute! that Brethren,
that fellow sufferers in affliction, that had gone up to the house of God
together, and had taken sweet counsel together; that they should now proclaim
us the enemies of Jesus Christ, and deny communion with us; oh let not this be
spoken in Gath and Ashkelon!

This is that that grieves and sads the hearts of their brethren more then all
their former afflictions, and gives a great advantage to the common enemy, and
scandalizes the Gospel, and exposes both themselves and us to the scorn of the
Malignants, who ordinarily jeere and say, see those holy Brethren that lost
their ears together, are now together by the cares, and count one of another as
a company of Infidels, and disclaim all holy communion one with another, and
will not so much as admit of their children to baptism, or suffer them to
receive the Sacraments with them.

But this is that that makes all men wonder, to hear them proclaim all the
Ministers of the Church of England, to be such as deny, disclaim, and preach
against Christ's Kingly government, when it is apparently evident, both by all
their preachings and writings, and all their practices, that they ever advance
Christ's Kingly government as really as any of those that oppose them, who in
preaching up the Kingly office of Christ, and setting Christ upon his Throne,
are inferior to none of them in this work: For we are taught out of Gods Word,
that those Ministers set up Christ in his Throne, that open the eyes of the
blind, and turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to
God, that they might receive forgiveness of sins, and an inheritance amongst
them that are sanctified by faith in Jesus Christ, and that teach men to repent
and turn to God, and do works meet for repentance; and when the people that
hear them give themselves first to the Lord and upto his Ministers by the will
of God, and after denying all ungodliness and worldly lusts, live soberly,
righteously and godly in this present world.

And this, the Word of God teaches us, is to set up Christ upon his Throne;
and those Ministers that teach all these things, set up Christ upon his Throne,
and those people that embrace this doctrine, make Christ their King, as we may
see 2 Cor. chap. 8. ver. 5. Tit. 2. verse 12. For Christ sits as King upon his
Throne when he is believed in to be that horn of salvation, that was raised
up for us in the house of David, that has saved and delivered all that believe
in him, out of the hands of all their enemies both spiritual and bodily, that
they may serve him without fear, and when Christ rules in all their hearts by
the Scepter of his Word and Spirit, and when they own him as their only
Lawgiver, and acknowledge him to be the only King in his Church, and the
Savior of all those that truly believe in him; and this is to set up Christ
upon his Throne, and the brethren themselves accord unto this.

Now when the Ministers of England teach this doctrine, in their preachings and
writings, how can they be truly said to deny, disclaim and preach against
Christ's Kingly government, over men's consciences and Churches? and how can that
people be said truly to deny Christ's Kingly government who do both believe and
to the uttermost of their power practice this doctrine and follow only the
guidance of his holy Spirit and Word, both for doctrine and government, who is
King of the Church? whether therefore this be not an unjust and unchristian
calumny, laid both upon the Ministers and people of the church of England, I
leave it to the consideration of any moderate minded christian! doubtless all
charitable minded christians if they consider all things aright, will not think
so dishonourably neither of the Ministers of England not of the people under
their Ministry; for they deserve not to be accounted the professed enemies of
Christ, who are freed from that heavy accusation by Christ's own testimony; who
when it was related unto him by Saint John, Mark 9. ver. 38. That they had seen
one casting out devils in his name, which followed them not, and that the
Disciples had forbad him because he did not follow them: Our Savior Christ
replying, forbid him not, says he, for whosoever is not against us is on our
part.

Now these Ministers that open the eyes of the blind, and turn them from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God, they cannot be esteemed
enemies of Christ, and to be against Christ but for him, and ought highly to be
honored for their works sake 1 Thessalonians. chap. 5. ver. 13. and singularly, to be
beloved, and deserve not to be maligned and reproached, especially by brethren
who owe all their conversions next unto God, to their Ministry; yea, both the
Pastors and people of all the new congregated churches are beholding unto them
for their conversion; for they admit none into their Assemblies but believers,
and they were made believers and converted by their Ministry; and therefore
they are friends of Christ and not his enemies, and they ought all of them to
look upon them as their Fathers, and on the church of England as their Mother,
and on the believers of England as their brethren, and ought not thus
unchristianly and ungratefully to cast dirt in all their faces.

Saint Paul in his Epistle to the Philippians, chap. 1. has these words, Some
says he, preach Christ even of envy and strife, and some also of good will;
the one preach Christ of contention and not sincerely, thinking to add
affliction to my bonds, but the other of love: What then? notwithstanding every
way, whether in pretense or in truth Christ be preached, I therein do rejoice,
yea, and I will rejoice. Saint Paul speaks here of such as preach pure
doctrine, though not with a pure mind, and was glad that Christ was preached,
and counts them not the enemies of Christ, as he did the false teachers among
the Galatians, who joined the ceremonial law and their own inventions with the
Gospel, and therefore he wished that they were cut off; but in this place he
rejoices that Christ and the Gospel were purely preached, though it were of
envy.

Now when the Ministers of the Church of England, do not only preach the
Gospel purely, but of sincerity and of love, and mingle not their own
traditions and inventions with the Gospel, but follow their commission; how
can any men without intolerable injustice proclaim them the enemies of Jesus
Christ, and make them odious to the people under the name of Presbyterians,
whom they persuade all men, that they will prove more cruel Taskmasters then
the Prelates? yea and they have generally possessed the people with so
prejudicate an opinion of them all, as if they would more lord it over them
than ever the Bishops did, and causlesly have moved the people to hate the name
of Presbytery: And notwithstanding they themselves pretend they contend for the
ancient Presbytery, and by this make themselves Presbyterians as well as the
other: What justice or equity then is there in their dealing, to make their
brethren odious to the world for endeavoring to set up a Presbytery after Gods
Word, when they themselves are Presbyterians, and labor to set up a Presbytery
of their own? and therefore if the name of Presbyters be odious in the
Ministers of the Church of England, no reason can gainsay it, but that they
also should be as odious to the people as their brethren, for they also are
Presbyterians. But that the truth may the better appear, whether the Ministers
of the Church of England, or the Independent Ministers, be most guilty of all
the accusations laid to their charge, it will not be a miss to compare the
practice of the Ministers of the church of England and the proceedings of the
Independent Ministers together, and that both for their doctrine and
discipline, and in their several studies and endeavors, for the advancing of
Christ's Kingdom; and by so doing it will be easy for any to judge, which of
their governments and which of the Ministers are more intolerable, and which of
them are most guilty of those foul reproaches the Ministers of the church of
England are aspersed with by their Brethren; for he has a shallow
understanding and a very dim sight that cannot discern, whether those that
advance Christ's their Kings Word and Laws only, and follow his commission and
the example of the holy Apostles in their Ministeries, and that of John Baptist
and the primitive Preachers, or those that set up their own inventions and
prefer them before the Laws of Christ, and have neither precept nor president
for their doings in all the holy Word of God: He I say, that cannot judge which
of these most advance Christ for their King, either those that obey Christ's
Laws, or those that observe their own, neglecting Christ's, is of a very shallow
capacity.

But now let us compare them together; the Ministers of the Church of England
preach faith and repentance, the Law and the Gospel, according to Christ's
commission given to his Apostles, and they receive all into the Church that
believe and are baptized, and such as but desire to be admitted, they demanding
of them what they should do to be saved; and in their so doing they have both
precept and presidents: For Christ in his commission unto them has given them
authority so to do.

Neither did he ever say unto his Apostles and Ministers, admit none into the
church, although they believe and are baptized, without they walk with you some
days weeks, months or years, that you may behold their conversation and
manner of life, and after you have had some trial and experience of them, see
then that they make a public confession of their faith before the church and
give in the evidences of the truth of their conversion before the congregation,
and enter into a private and solemn Covenant and be admitted by the consent
and approbation of the Church; or otherwise, if they will not submit themselves
to this Law, and come into the Church upon these conditions, receive them not
into your Assemblies, nor admit of them for members.

Here is nothing of all this in Christ's Commission, nor in his holy Word, nor
any president of the same in sacred Authority; and therefore John the Baptist
and the holy Apostles and primitive Ministers admitted all that came unto them,
and such as but demanded of them what they should do to be saved; and baptized
them and received them into the Church without any gainsaying or question; as
we may see in the third of Luke, and in the seventh chapter of the same book,
and in the second of the Acts; and no sooner did the Eunuch desire baptism,
but Philip granted it; the Jailer did but ask Paul and Sylas, What they should
do to be saved, and they said, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shall
be saved and thy house; and it is related that the Jailer and all his were
straight way baptized, Acts 16. verse. 31, 32, 33. that is, they were forthwith
admitted into the Church, without either walking any time with the Church for
their approbation, or without either making a public confession of their faith
before the Church, or giving in evidences of the truth of their conversion to
the congregation, or entering into a private covenant, and without the consent
and allowance of the Church.

And Christ notwithstanding was embraced by them as their Lord and King, and
was preached by Paul and Silas, as the Lord and King of his Church, and was set
up upon his Throne as King by them, as well as he is in any Independent
Churches, and yet they had none of all their newborn truths, and they could
then see how to set up Christ upon his Throne without their new lights; and as
Christ was then by Paul and Silas and the other Apostles set upon his Throne as
King in all those primitive Churches, so he is at this day in all the true
Protestant Churches through the world, as well as in any of the Independent
Assemblies, and yet they were and are all ignorant of their new way; so that
any understanding christian may gather, that all their newborn truths are no
way requisite for the setting up of Christ as King in his Church, nor for the
advancement of Christ's Kingly government; for if they had, Christ would have
put them into the Apostles Commission, and the Apostles who were led into all
truth by the holy Ghost, who brought whatsoever Christ had taught them
concerning the Kingdom of God (Act. 1.) into their memories, would have
suggested all these things, The new way, the newborn truth, the new lights to
them, that they might have been recorded, if they had been necessary for the
setting up of Christ upon his Throne; but when neither Christ nor the holy
Ghost, nor the blessed Apostles have prescribed any of all these to the church,
nor called for them, nor required them of any that desire to be saved or made
Members of the church; whether this be not a great temerity in any men, to
preach all these things as the laws of Christ, I leave it to the judgment of
any ingenuous minded christian? and whether this be not to prefer their own
inventions and traditions before the commandments of God and the laws of
Christ the King of his church, and whether this be not rather to set up
themselves than Christ, I refer it also to any judicious and impartial
christians to weigh and consider.

I shall now demand of any moderate christian therefore, and let him answer me
heartily, whether of those Ministers and people most advance the Kingdom of
Christ, and acknowledge him to be their only Lord and Lawgiver, that both in
their teaching and believing follow his commission and Word, and teach nothing
nor believe nothing (as they are enjoined) but what Christ their King commands
them? or those, that to the commission and commands of Christ add their own
inventions and traditions, and prefer them before the laws of Christ the
King and Law giver of his Church? I am confident, if he will deal impartially,
he will answer me, that those Ministers and that people most advance Christ for
their King, and most set him upon his Throne, that own his Law, and that only,
for the rule of their faith and obedience; for Christ himself has said it,
John 10. My Sheep hear my voiyce, they will not listen unto the voice of a
stranger; Christ's voice only the King of his Church is to be heard, and they
only that obey it advance him for their King and set him up on his Throne,
which when the Ministers and Believers in the Church of England do, and the
Independents do not, they more advance Christ for their King than they; for the
Independents to Christ's Law and Commission add their own traditions and
inventions, and enjoyne all that will be admitted as Members into their
congregations, besides their believing and being baptized, to walk with them
some time for approbation, and to make a public confession of their faith
before the Church, and to bring in the evidences of the truth of their
conversion, and enter into a private and solemn Covenant, and not to be
admitted as members without the consent of the Church, all which Christ the
King of his church never commanded; and those that will not submit themselves
to these their traditions, they will not permit or suffer to enter into their
church as joined members, which they call the only true Churches of Christ,
and count of all others that differ from them, as enemies of Christ and his
Kingdom, and as men without the covenant: and if this be to set up Christ upon
his Throne, then the Pharisees set up Christ upon his Throne, who preferred
their own traditions before the commandments of God; yea, the Pope himself
and the Prelates set up Christ upon his Throne, who preferred their own
traditions and idolatries before the Laws of Christ.

Now if all the traditions of the Papists were justly abhorred and cast out of
the church as things de^ogatory to the Kingly and Prophetical dignity of Jesus
Christ, and as things repugnant to his Royalty: I see no reason but all other
popery under whatsoever name or title it be intruded upon the people should be
eliminated and cast out of the church; and whether this be not a new kind of
Popery, to bring in new ways, and newborn truths, and new lights, and impose
them upon the people as the commands of God, and to excommunicate and unchurch
all churches in the world but their own assemblies, I refer my self to the
judgment of any intelligible christian. Saint Paul writing to the Galatians,
blames those false Teachers amongst them, that would have joined but the
ceremonial Law with the Gospel, and calls it a perverting of the Gospel of
Christ, and wishes that such Teachers were cut off, Gal. 5. v. 12. and blames
likewise those Galatians that received their doctrine, saying, Oh foolish
Galatians, who has bewitched you that you should not obey the truth? and yet
they only urged the ceremonial Law which God by Moses had appointed to
remain till the fullness of time, but was now abrogated; they were not their
own traditions, they were no newborn lights, no new ways, no new truths.

Now if Paul was so displeased, or God rather, with the Galatians, both
teachers and hearers, the one for bringing in or joining the ceremonial Law to
the Gospel, and the other for admitting of them, how highly would God have
been displeased with them if they had set up their own inventions for the
Laws of God, and had brought in newborn truths, and intruded them upon the
people as necessary to salvation, and for the setting up of Christ upon his
Throne? Without doubt the Apostle would most sharply have reproved them, and
have given special caveats against them, as he did in his Epistle to the
Colossians, the second chapter of the which is chiefly spent in condemning all
humane traditions; yea, in his first chapter of his Epistle to the Galatians,
verse 8, 9. He charge them, that though the Apostles themselves, or an Angel
from Heaven should preach unto them otherwise than that they had received, they
should count him accursed; and as J said before, says the Apostle, so say I
now again, if any man preach unto you otherwise than that you have received,
let him be accursed.

But none of the Apostles ever taught the Church, that christians and
believers, though baptized, should not be admitted as members into the Church,
unless they had walked some time in church fellowship with them, and had first
made a public confession of their faith, and had brought in the evidences of
the truth of their conversion, and entered into a solemn private covenant, and
were admitted by the consent of the church; none of all this did ever the
Apostles teach, or the christians of those times embrace or believe, and
therefore such doctrines as these ought not to be received.

In the first of the Corinthians in many places he reproves those that made
schisms and brought in heresies and sects into the Church; and in the fourth
chapter and sixth verse, under his own and Apollo's name, he sets an example
before them, that they should contain themselves within the limits and bounds
of that doctrine and manner of preaching, prescribed and set down in the Word
of God, and used by the Spirit of God; and commands them that they should
learn in the Apostles, not to presume or to be wise above that which is
written, and enjoynes all christians to reject all ways of teaching that have
not Gods Word for their warrant: Now in all Gods Word there is nothing of all
this written, that after men believe and are baptized, they should not yet be
admitted into the Church, without they had walked some time with them for their
approbation, and without they had made a public confession of their faith
before the congregation, and brought in the evidences of their true conversion,
and had entered into a private covenant, and were admitted by the consent of the
church; none of all this is written in Gods Word, and therefore we ought not
to embrace it.

And in the 2 of the Corinths, c. 11* v. 4. the Apostle signifies unto the
Corinthians, that no man can teach the Gospel and the things of of heaven more
exactly than he and the other Apostles have taught them, nor set before them a
more perfect Doctrine of Jesus Christ than that that they have taught them, for
the converting of any unto Christ, and for the setting up of Christ as King
upon his Throne, and for the making of them Members of the Church, and for the
building of them up in their most holy faith, and commands the Corinthians to
take heed of all false Teachers, whatsoever piety and godliness they make show
of, calling them deceitful workers, and such as transform themselves into the
Apostles of Christ: And no marvel, says he, for Sat an himself can
transform himself into an Angel of light; and therefore it is no wonder his
Ministers transform themselves, as though they were the Ministers of
righteousness.

Now if men will consider what those false teachers were, we shall find them
to be no other, but such as under show of holiness and piety taught their own
inventions and grolleries, and abused the simplicity of the people for their
own advantage, and brought them into bondage and devoured them, verse 20. as
the Phatisees did the Widows houses, under pretense of their long prayers,
which our Savior Christ sharply reproves them for, and denounces a woe
against them for their so doing; after the same manner did these false Teachers
amongst the Corinthians, who made their own traditions joined Members with the
Gospel, as if they had had a more fine, neat and eleganter way of gathering of
churches, and admitting of Members than Paul and the other Apostles: But the
Apostle bids the Corinthians take heed of all such, how glorious soever they
seem to appear, and tells them they cannot teach the way to Heaven and
happiness better than he and the other Apostles have done; and yet neither
Saint Paul or any of the Apostles in preaching of the Gospel taught them that
they should admit of none to be joined Members of the Church, although they
believed and were baptized, except they walked sometime in fellowship amongst
them, that they might have approbation and trial of their conversation first,
and after make a public confession of their faith before the church, and did
give in evidences of the truth of their conversion to the congregation, and
entered into a solemn private covenant, and were admitted Members by consent of
the church.

Not a word of all this in the Gospel that Saint Paul and the other Apostles
taught; and therefore all that teach their new ways, their newborn truths,
and set up their new lights, are wise above that which is written, and teach
otherwise than Christ and his Apostles have taught, or the christians of the
Primitive times had received, and therefore ought by the Apostles command, Gal.
1. verse 8. 9. to be accursed. Saint John also in his second Epistle to the
Elect Lady, verse 9, 10. says, Whosoever transgresses and abides not in the
doctrine of Christ, has not God; he that continues in the doctrine of Christ
he has both the Father and the Son: If there come any unto you that
brings not the doctrine of Christ, receive him not into your house, neither
bid him God speed; for he that bids him God speed, is a partaker of his
evil deeds.

Now the doctrine that the Independent Ministers teach for the gathering of
churches and admitting of members, and joining and jumbling of them together,
was never taught by Christ nor any of his Apostles; for they themselves
confess it is a new way, and a new*borne truth, and a new light, and therefore
not the doctrine of Christ; and therefore such novelties are not to be
entertained nor embraced, nor the teachers of them, if we will be obedient to
Apostolical precepts: I desire therefore those of the Independent brethren to
produce any one testimony, or any one president out of the Word of God, where
these things following are taught or have been practiced.

First, that although men and women believe and are baptized, they are not yet
to be admitted as joined Members till they have walked sometime in fellowship
with the church for approbation of their conversation; this is the first thing;
I desire of the brethren either a precept or an example for this in Gods Word.

The second, where it is commanded that those that believe and are baptized
should not be admitted as Members of the church, whithout a public confession
of their faith before the church.

The third, where it is enjoined, that to their Faith and Baptism, they should
bring in the evidences of the truth of their conversion before they can be
capable of their membership.

The fourth, where it is commanded that they should enter into a solemn and
private covenant before they can be admitted to church fellowship.

The fifth, where it is imposed upon those that believe and are baptized, that
they should not be received into the church without the consent of the
congregation.

Sixthly, where it is commanded that the Ministers of the Gospel shall run
about from their own places and charges into the sheepfolds of their
fellow-shepherds, and separate and pick out all their best sheep and bring them
into their own folds, and debar them from all church fellowship and
communicating with the other believers in Gods holy Ordinances and Sacraments;
or where ever it is commanded that the Preachers of the Gospel shall gather
believing Christians from among believing Christians, and separate them from
the other sheep, into Independent congregations, and shall proclaim all that
are not thus molded up after this new model, to be people out of covenant,
and to have no right to the seals of the new covenant, neither they nor their
children, though believers.

All these things I desire the brethren by evident places of the holy Scripture
to make good and to confirm, or by any president or example to declare to have
been practiced either by Christ or his blessed Apostles; for I look for a law
from Christ the King of his church, who was as faithful in the house of God as
Moses was, and has not left the ordering and disposing of his church to the
will of men, but has commanded the church to hear his voice, who is the great
Pastor and Bishop of our souls, and the teacher of his church; his Word
therefore I look for, for a warrant for the ratifying of all these doctrines;
and I have good ground and reason to demand of them a warrant and authority out
of Gods Word for what they both teach and practice; for we are taught by Christ
the only Prophet of his church, that they that serve God after the precepts of
men, offer him a vain worship: and it stands with all good reason, that if all
humane traditions, though of never so ancient standing, and of never so long
antiquity were all cast out of the church, because they had no footing or
ground in Gods Word, that all novelties or new inventions of men (which
notwithstanding are imposed upon the people as the ways of God) should be
abrogated and nullified and cast out of the church.

It is recorded in holy writ, Joshua 9. that the Gibeonites deceived Joshua and
the people of Israel, under pretense that they came from a far country, and
for proof of that they produced their moldy bread, and their tattered botles
and their old shoes, and they taking what they said, pro confess, and not
consulting with the mouth of the Lord (as it is fully related in that chapter)
were deceived by them, and entered into a League with their enemies: And thus
the Papists and Prelates, for these many hundred years, have deluded the world,
under pretense of their moldy antiquities and tattered rags of traditions,
and in all this time they prevailed to mislead the poor people, because they
consulted not with the mouth of God, nor examined things by the Word of God and
the holy Scripture, as the noble Bereans did.

Now whatsoever was written, was written for our instruction, upon whom the
ends of the world are come; and therefore as it was the error of the
Israelites that they received things barely upon report, without consulting
with the mouth of God; and as it was the honor and praise of those noble
Bereans, that they searched the Scriptures to see whether the preaching of Paul
were according to the holy Scripture: so if we shall receive these newborn
truths, these new lights, these new ways without consulting with the living
Oracles, we shall offend as the Israelites did in believing the Gibeonites upon
their words, and shall degenerate and be unlike to those the renowned Bereans,
who would not receive Paul's doctrine, though an Apostle, without searching the
Scriptures, whether things were so or no, as he taught them: and surely now
much more ought we to try all things by the Word in these erroneous times,
whosoever they be that preach them unto us, and if they be not evidently proved
unto us out of the Scriptures, we may not admit of them; for it will be not
only a sin, but for our immortal shame to be deluded with novelties* much more
then it was our ancestors disgrace to be deceived by pretended antiquities.

And therefore it is the duty of every Christian seriously to consider with
themselves, that these are matters of God, and concern no less then our
eternal welfare; and in th^^ regard, we may not call men's ways, Gods ways, but
we are to seek for the old ways, Jer. 6 we are to examine Christ's and his holy
Apostles ways in gathering of Churches and making of Members, and it we find no
footstep in all Gods Word of these new ways, we ought to relinquish them and
turn again into the paths that God has commanded us to walk in, wherein we
shall be sure to find rest for our souls and comfort in life and death, and it
will be no disgrace to any to be undeceived; for they are deceived, and that
greatly and dangerously, that think or believe, that any men mortal can show
or teach a better way to Heaven, or set down a better way of converting souls
and of gathering of Churches, and making of Members, and of setting up Christ
as King upon his Throne, than that which Christ himself and his blessed
Apostles have taught and set down to all posterity; and from the which rule we
ought not to swerve, though an Angel from Heaven should teach us otherwise,
Galatians 1. ver. 8. 9.

When therefore the Ministers of the Church of England follow Christ's and his
Apostles way and method in their teaching and for the converting of men and
hear only the voice of Christ their King, and the Christian Believers through
the Kingdom under their Ministeries, do all faithfully cleave unto the written
Word and square both their faith and obedience according to that rule; there is
no just cause why the Independents should proclaim them all enemies of Christ
and his Kingdom, and such as oppose his royalty; and preach up themselves and
their congregations as the only people of God and his Saints, and account all
those that dissent from them as opposers of Christ's government, telling the
people in their Sermons, that they come over from beyond the seas, thinking
that they would have set up Christ upon his Throne, and that they would have
embraced him for their King, and would have established his government, and
have gone on in a church way, and have set up the ways of God; but they find it
otherwiise, that they deny and disclaim and preach against Christ's Kingly
government, and persecute the ways of the Lord Christ; so that they can find
more favor from moderate Papists and common Protestants than from them, by
which their dealing, say the Brethren, they have so taken off the edge of Gods
peoples affection from them, that the Saints and servants of God cannot pray
for them, proclaiming themselves the Saints and people of God, as if all the
other believers through the Kingdom dissenting from them in their opinions,
were no Saints nor people of God.

Nay, they affirm it in their Pulpits, and in every Pamphlet, that both
Ministers and people are enemies of Jesus Christ and his Kingdom, and all such
as will not join with them in their new ways: And one of them not long since
affirmed unto me, that the church of England was a Strumpet and an arrant
Whore, and that she being once a Whore, could never be presented unto Christ
as a chaste Spouse: which was an expression not only uncivil and unbeseeming
a christian, but untrue also; for grant she had been so, she is now come out
of Babylon, and has entered into a public covenant against her; and we read
of Judah, and Samaria, howsoever they had defiled themselves and played the
Harlots, yet upon their unfeigned repentance and true faith in Jesus Christ, and
renewing their covenant publicly of new obedience, were presented unto Christ
as a chaste Spouse, so that what is impossible with man is possible with God.

But this is the general opinion of the brethren, and howsoever they will not
all of them speak it out in plain words, as some of them do, yet they preach
and practice a separation from all our assemblies and congregations, as from a
people not to be communicated with, and declare that by their deeds, which
they will not as yet publish in their writings, nor in express words as he
did.

And one of the Independent Ministers not long since, denouncing Gods
judgments against all those that would not assent unto their new ways, nor
light their candles at their new lights, nor embrace their newborn truths,
told them, that by their standing out against the ways of God (for so they
suppose these are) and by their unkind usage of the Saints, and persecuting of
them, they would at last drive from amongst them the praying people (meaning
themselves, as if no other prayed but they only) and then they might look
that the judgments of God would speedily come down upon them, as it happened to
the Lutherans in Maydenburge in Germany, who thrust out all the Calvinists out
of their Town, a praying people, and immediately after, the enemy came upon
them with fire and sword and destroyed them all.

With these and such like expressions are their preachments stuffed, and to say
the truth of many of their Sermons, they are like Tailors cushions, consisting
of a hundred several shreds of various colors, all independent, making a fine
show, but comely no where but in a Tailors shop: and surely such kind of
expressions as these are may beseem their Pulpits, but no grave and learned
honest ministers: for they have no just cause to complain of persecution
amongst us, it is a calumny; neither deal they christianly with us, to accuse
us that we oppose the ways of God, for we do not so; we only contend for
the faith once delivered to the Saints, and against the ways of Men, and such
as were brought into the Church by the cunning craftiness of some, and thrust
upon the people as the Laws and Ordinances and ways of God, when they are but
their own inventions, and tend to no edification, but to the trouble and
disturbance of Church and State, and such as already have brought a confusion
upon us all, and if the Lord do not speedily from Heaven send his helping hand,
we can expect nothing but desolation, and all from these divisions, that their
new ways have brought in, and therefore it is high time for all good
christians and such as love the peace of Sion, more exactly to examine all
these new ways; and to put them upon the proof of them.

But that the Brethren should complain of persecution amongst us, and of evil
usage, it is against all reason and humanity, and shows little gratitude in
them to all the christians both through city and country; for if they remember
when they came over, though they had deserted the cause when they had most need
of them, they were more honored then any of those famous and learned Ministers
that had undergone the labor and heat of the day, and they were preferred
before them all, and settled in the prime Lectures of the Kingdom, and had more
honorable maintenance then was usually given to any Lecturers before them; and
therefore they deal not brotherly in any of all their proceedings, nor
humanely so to asperse them as they ordinarily do both publicly and privately.

I am confident there is not such a president in the world of humanity as that
showed here to them; it is well known, and their books and practices declare
it, that they preach new ways, newborn truths, as they call them, and set up
new lights: Now where was it ever heard of either in the Christian or Pagan
world, that it was ever permitted unto any Ministers or Preachers to have all
the Pulpits in any nation to preach a diverse doctrine, to that which is set up
by authority, and such as tends to make a faction and division amongst the
people? I do most assuredly believe that there cannot the like president be
produced.

Amongst the Heathen, the Jewish Religion in many countries was tolerated; but
they were confined to their own Synagogues, they might not come in the
Heathens Pulpits to preach up the Jewish worship amongst them or to set up
another service contrary to the custom of the Nation: It was an abomination to
the Egyptians that the Jews should sacrifice in their land, they would not
have suffered them then to have preached up their Religion in all their Pulpits.

In Turkey at this day Christians in many places have the liberty of their
consciences amongst themselves, and have their places for worship to assemble
in; but they are not so much as permitted to come into their Temples, much
less to preach up their Religion in their Pulpits.

In France the Protestants are permitted to preach, but it is only in such
places as are appointed for them, they may not preach in Popish Pulpits, tha^
is not permitted unto them.

In the Low Countries there is liberty of conscience, which they so much plead
for (of which afterward) and yet the diverse sects that are there, are not
suffered to preach out of those places assigned unto them, or to preach
publicly in any of their Pulpits against the Religion established by
authority, neither are they permitted to unchristian them or unchurch them, and
publicly and in print to proclaim them enemies of Christ's government; and if
any should dare attempt such a thing, or go about to disgrace their Ministers
and Church Government, or in the least entrench upon the Magistrates authority,
they would be made sly like lightning before thunder.

And yet the brethren among us have the liberty of all the Pulpits th^o^h the
kingdom without control, and vent all their new ways and their newborn
truths* and setup their new lights without any mo^estation, and have all
respectfull usage and the only esteem of the people, and are more followed
than all our learned godly and painful orthodox Ministers, and yet they cry
out of persecution, and unchurch and unchristian us all, and proclaim both
Ministers and people all enemies of christ and his Kingdom, and count of us
little better than of Infidels, and keep our children from Baptism, and debar
us from Communion with them* and exercise a kind of absolute Lordship over all
their brethren, so as Diotrephes never did the like, nor the Pope mo^e, and yet
they cry out of persecution against the aints, and lay odious aspe^^ions upon
their brethren and fellow. Presbyters, persuading the people that the
Presbyterian way will be as bad or worse then tha^ of the Prelates.

But if we as duly examine the manner of the Independent government, and
compare it with the Presbyterian, as we have done the manner of their preaching
with theirs we shall find there is little reason why they should so vilipend
the Presbyterian and magnify their own, and why they should make it so
hateful and odious to the people; laying aside therefore all p^ejudice, let us
examine things with deliberation, and then it will be soon evident, that the
Presbyterian government is not as bad or worse than that of the Prelates nor so
lordly as that of the Independent government which is also Presbyterian, and
they as well Presbyters as their brethren.

It is well known that the Prelates assumed and arrogated unto themselves to be
the only Pastors of their Diocesses* and ruled all the Ministers and people
under them by their own authority and spoiled all both Ministers and people,
and the several congregations under them of their liberty, and made them all
both Ministers and people their vassals and slaves, and from whose^ ourts there
was no appeal: Whereas the Presbyterian manner of government is not as that of
Lords and Masters over Subjects and Servants, but social as between equals,
between brethren, friends and colleagues, who all judge and are al^ judged
according to the Word of God, where no congregation is above another
congregation, no Minister is above another Minister, but only for order-sake,
where every Presbyter is left to enjoy the whole office of a Presbyter, and
each congregation to the freedom of a congregation, and what belongs unto
them, and they able to perform it, and the classes to corroborate and
strengthen them.

And if any man be wronged by the Presbytery, he may have the benefit of his
Appeal, and be cleared by more righteous Judges (a course ever followed by the
Churches, and agreeable to the light of nature) so that I say, if men would
without a prejudicate opinion weigh and consider all things, and compare the
government of the Prelates with that of the Presbyterian, they would speedily
be undeceived. And again, if they would compare the Presbyterian Government
Dependent with the Presbyterian Government Independent, they would have more
honorable thoughts of the one, and a less esteem of the other; for in the
Presbyterian Government Independent, they exercise a kind of absolute power and
sovereignty amongst themselves in every of their several Churches or
Congregations; so that if two or three of the Presbyters be malicious or self
willed, or corrupt or heretical, as it happens many times, and by their
learning or eloquence, or great abilities of wit and schollership, or by their
wealth or power, the congregation perhaps consisting of many poor people, and
it may be ignorant, who a^e relieved by them, and whose favor they dare not so
feit, if they prevailing with the major part of the congregation (as commonly
the poor people are like a company of wild Geese, who which way soever their
their leader flies they all follow) I say, if they do once deliver a man to
Satan, and will not by any art of persuasion be induced to reverse their
un^ighteous sentence, the innocent and wronged man must live under this doom
all the days of his life without any remedy, and must be held by all the
Churches of Christ (that are after that new model to whom their sentence is
given notice of, as an excommunicated person and shunned accordingly; they have
no power to absolve or help him, and from which he has no benefit or appeal.

And this that I now speak, there is not any of the brethren that is well verst
in the grounds of that kind of government, that either will or can deny it: And
this rigor to my knowledge both in the low Countries in the several
congregations of the English there, and in some here in England among us was
the cause of making so many several sects; for when they were cast out of one
congregation, for some particular opinion, in the which they differed from
them, the other Churches and Congregations of the same mould and profession
could not absolve them, nor durst not receive them into Church Fellowship with
them, without an attestation from the Church out of which they were
excommunicated, of their Christian walking amongst them, or until they had g
ven satisfaction to that Church of which they had been Members, and that they
would never be brought unto conceiving that the wrong was theirs who complained
as unjustly excommunicated, neither would they relinquish their opinion, as
being persuaded it was grounded upon the Word of God; whereupon they finding
others of their own opinion joined themselves into a new society and
congregation, and had a peculiar Church by themselves; and this has been one
of the chiefest causes of all these rents and divisions we now see every where;
for when they are upon every slight occasion, or for any difference in opinion
cast out, then they congregate a new Church by themselves, and turn Pastors.

The which, blessed be God, in the reformed churches of France and Germany,
has not yet been seen since the first reformation; for the governing of
Churches by the Common Council of their Presbyters, where they find such
brotherly dealing, and where they have their appeals upon any conceived wrong
or injury, and have right and justice done them, makes them willingly submit
themselves to that manner of government, without making rents and schisms: And
truly if things were but maturely weighed, all men would readily perceive that
there is no just ground of reproach to belaid upon the Presbyters, neither
would they see any reason, why, in way of disdain, the Ministers of the Church
of England should be more called Presbyterians than the Independent Ministers;
for they also are Presbyterians, and labor to set up a Presbyterian Government
as well as the other, and profess in their writings that they contend for the
ancient Presbytery, so that they also are Presbyterians as well as the other;
and if the one be made hateful and formidable to the people, in the judgment
of all solid men, the other also may be made as odious and hateful; for if
that odium and hatred they bring upon the Presbytery, be for the only fear
they have conceived the Presbyters will lord it too much over them and that
only I say, be the occasion that so terrifies the people from that government;
let all men here consider and compare each kind of Presbytery together, both
that of the Dependent and that of the Independent; for if the Independent
Presbyters in the infancy and very first beginning and rise of their government
assume unto every several congregation and Presbytery of theirs, an absolute
kind of sovereignty and jurisdiction from which there is no appeal, and if they
al^eady take upon them to unchurch all Churches but their own, and proclaim all
the Ministers and people, but those of their own congregations, professed enemies
of Christ's Kingdom; what would they do if they were once established by
authority in their several Jurisdictions and Assemblies? and if now they will
admit of none into their several Assemblies, though never so eminent
believers, but upon their own conditions, and unless they will be admitted
members upon such terms as they propound, without either precept or president
out of the Word of GOD for their so doing (which is the greatest tyranny of the
world) how would these men lord it if their government were once established by
Parliament? It is well known and can sufficiently be proved, that godly
Christians and people of approved integrity and of holy conversation, against
whom they had no exception either for doctrine or manners, and who offered
themselves to be admitted members upon their own conditions, yet were not
suffered to be joined members, only because they were poor; and this very
reason was given unto them for their not admission, that they would not have
their Church over*burdened with poor.

And others desiring that their Children might be baptized in their
Congregations, and going to the Ministers of those Assemblies to entreat this
favor, that their children might be baptized among them.

For Answer, it was told them, that they could baptize none but such as were
infants of their joined Members (which is their practice) and wished them first
to be made joined Membert in one of their Churches: Whereupon they thought that
there was no Congregation fitter for them to join to, than to that Pastors
Assembly that had given them this counsel, and therefore they applied
themselves unto him, and desired that they might be admitted joined Members:
for answer, it was replied, that the congregation of which he was Pastor,
consisted of great personages, Knights, Ladies and rich Merchants; and such
people as they being but poor, could not walk so suitably with them; withal
he said, he could do nothing without the consent of the congregation;
wherefore he persuaded them to join themselves to some other congregation
among poor people, where they might better walk, and more comfortably in
fellowship with them, so that the last news I heard of this business, was that
the children were neither baptized nor the poor men admitted to be joint
Members of that congregation.

What their Ministers have done since I know not, but I well perceive, it is as
great a difficuly for a poor man to get into some of their congregations, as
to get into Suttons-Hospitall; and that I conceive to be the only occasion
that makes some walk so long in many congregations before they come to be
admitted members; for if they be rich they are speedily received, nay invited
to be Members.

It is too well known, that many godly and holy people have left their native
country, and transported themselves over into New*England, where this
government is set up, only that they might enjoy the Ordinances there in their
purity; they were believers before they went, and were baptized, and such as
were known before they went thither to be the dear servants of God; but when
they come there (especially if they be poor) they make them walk some a
year, some more, yea, some six or seven before they can be admitted Members of
their Congregations, and they baptize none of those children that are borne
there before their Parents be joined Members; and except they will in all
things conform themselves to their own conditions, they shall never be
admitted.

And some time the man only is admitted, and his wife left out still to walk;
and some time the wife is admitted and the man left out still to walk, and
both these notwithstanding are believers and baptized; and after with a great
deal of difficulty, they are admitted to be Members; a very small offense will
be sufficient to cast them out again, if they be poor. But for stories of
this nature, I do not love to multiply them; but I have heard many of this
kind from those places, and from such as have been in New England, and men
both then and now no way evilly affected either to the place or people, serving
God there.

But it is too notorious, they lord it there over Gods poor Clergies in the
superlative degree, and every man that has but eyes in his head may see it
here in England in their congregations, what difference they make between the
rich and poor, and that they have the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ in respect
of persons, a sin in Saint James his time highly blamed in Christians, James
2. And as in their carriage toward the poor, they are very lofty, and look for
great observance and attendance from them wheresoever they come, so likewise a
little thing will displease them; if they speak a word amiss, it is enough to
be cast out of the Congregation; presidents of this nature might be brought
many: And if all this be not to lord it over Gods Clergies, I know not what it
is; to admit of none, though believers, and already baptized, but such as will
come in upon their own terms, and keep out the poor either altogether, or as
long as pleases them, without any other reason but because they are poor, and
cast them out again upon every slender occasion; I say, if all this be not a
most diabolical tyranny and lording it over Gods Clergies, I refer it to any
moderate man to judge of; and if to unchurch all Churches but their own, and at
one blast to proclaim them all enemies of Christ and his Kingdom, and to deny
all Church Fellowship with them, be not more than a Diotrephian, Prel^ticall
and Papal Authority, there was never any in the world, and if this be not to
lord it over Gods Clergies, there was never any known.

Now I say, if the Independent Presbyters do so timely begin their absolute
lording of it, what would they do if their government were established by
authority? Their Ministry and government is far different from that of
Christ and his holy Prophets and Apostles; for they invited all the poor to
come in and to buy milk, yea, to come in and buy milk without money, Isaiah 55
(...) and Saint Paul for the encouraging of the poor to come in, ^aith, not
many mighty not many noble, but the mean and contemptible things has the Lord
made choice of; intimating unto the poor, that they have as good right to
Heaven as the greatest and chiefest; and our Savior Christ says, come unto me
all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and ye shall find rest unto your souls:
Our Savior has no respect of persons, but the poor are with him as acceptable
as the rich, if they be weary and heavy laden with their sins; for that is
all the condition that Christ requires, in all that desire to be admitted
Members of his Church.

Now when these Presbyters already make so great difference between the poor
and the rich, and between believers and believers, as they will admit none but
at their own times, and upon their own conditions, I do conceive that this is a
most tyrannically lording it over Gods Clergies and Inheritance; which when
they daily do it, and the Presbyters of the Church of England do it not, it is
most apparent that their rule and domination is more prelaticall and more to be
feared than that of the Presbyters of the Church of England; for from the
Independent Presbyters they can never expect any appeal for releife and
redress, whatsoever wrong or injury they have sustained by them; and therefore
there is no just cause why any should so traduce the Presbytery of the Church
of England, as to think they will lord it over the people, from whom they may
ever expect far better measure than ever they can from the Independent
Presbytery, which if it should once be established, would tend to nothing else
but to enslave the whole Kingdom, and to bring in a confusion upon both Church
and State.

But now it will not be amiss before the conclusion, as we have compared the
Presbyters of the Church of England with the Presbyters Independent, both in
regard of their doctrine and discipline; so now likewise here to paragonate
them together, in their proceedings for the advancement of Christ's Kingdom,
that all men may see in that regard also, which of their endeavors tend most
to the advancement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and which of them ought to
be preferred before other, and which of them does more really and truly tend
not only to Gods glory, but to the peace also of the Church and State: For the
Presbyters of the Church of England, they (...) and endeavor, as there is but
one body, one spirit, one hope, one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and
Father over over all, who is above all, and through all, and one true Christian
Religion, Ephesians. 4. so that this only may be established through the three
Kingdoms; and that all erroneous ways of worshipping and serving God, and that
tends to lead men to perdition, and make disturbance in Church and State, may
not publicly be tolerated: The Independents on the contrary, both publicly
and privately, and in all their bitter railing and intolerable Pamphlets, as
that of the Compassionate Samaritan, the Storming of Antichrist, and that of
the Arraignment of Mr Persecution, and in many more of their scurrilous
writings, plead for a toleration of all Religions (under pretense of liberty of
conscience) whatsoever they be, as Judaisme, Turcisme, Popery, Paganism, and
all manner of sects, and for the confirming of this their diabolical tenent,
they bring in the example of the heathen Nations, who suffered all Religions
amongst them; and the example of Poland, Transsylvania and Holland, those
pantheons of all Religions, add tell us of the Parable where Christ commanded
that the Tares and the Wheat should be suffered to grow together till the
harvest, the day of judgment: And use or abuse rather some other places of
Scripture, which as they conceive make all for a toleration of all Religions.

To all which their pretenses, I shall at this time briefly anwer, after I have
set down some grounds out of holy Scripture, and produced some examples of Gods
dear children, friends and servants out of the same, which must be the warrant
of all Christians to follow to the end of the world; for whatsoever was written
before was written for our learning, 1 Cor. 10. Romans 15. and by the Word of
God, and from the example of Gods servants, we are ever taught, that diversity
of Religions amongst Christians ought not to be tolerated.

And first to begin with Abraham, the Father of the faithful, and his seed,
whose examples, all that are his and their children, ought to set before their
eyes for imitation: The Lord called Abraham, as it is in Joshua 24. out of his
Father Terah's house, and from his kindred, when they served other gods and
made a Covenant with him, as it is at large set down in the 12. of Genesis, and
in diverse other places of the same book; and in special in the 17. of Genesis,
verse 1, 2, 3, etc. where the Lord renews his Covenant with him and his seed,
and sets down the conditions of his Covenant with Abraham, which was, that
Abraham should walk before him and be perfect, and that then he would be his
God all sufficient to provide for him and protect him wheresoever he came;
which covenant the Lord ever kept with Abraham and his seed, delivering them
out of the hands of all their enemies, when they served him according to the
conditions of the covenant, walking uprightly before him (as he will do to all
his children to the end of the world, walking in father Abraham's steps) and of
Abraham the Lord says this, in the 18. of Genesis ver. 17, 18, 19. Shall I hide
from Abraham that which I do. seeing that Abraham shall become a great and a
mighty Nation, and all the Nations of the earth shall be blessed in him? for I
know him, that he will command his children and household after him, that they
shall keep the way of the Lord, to do Justice and Judgment, that the Lord may
bring upon Abraham that which he has spoken of him, etc.

In these words, we have Gods testimony of Abraham in the which he gives this
witness of him, that he would command his children and household after him,
that they should keep the way of the Lord to do justice and judgment: Then it
is manifest, that Abraham tolerated neither in his children, nor in his
household any Religion contrary unto that that God had taught him, nor suffered
no idolatry nor Sects in his family; for this had not been to walk uprightly
before God, for it had been unjust dealing with God so to have done; for
Abraham and his seed were to walk perfectly and sincerely before God, and
therefore he would never tolerate all Religions or the worshipping of a false
God, or the worship of the true God after a false manner, which also is
Idolatry, for this had not been to do justice and judgment; but Abraham set up
the true worship of God wheresoever he came, as the whole story of his life
does abundantly declare: And so did Isaac after him, and Jacob after him, as in
the 33. of Genesis does appear, where Jacob said unto his household and to all
that were with him, put away the strange gods that are among you, and be clean,
and change your garments, and let us arise and go up to Bethel, and I will make
there an Altar unto God, who answered me in the day of my distress and was
with me in the way which I went; and they gave unto Jacob all the strange gods
that were in their hands, and Jacob hid them under the Oak that was at Sechem,
and the terror of God was upon the cities which were round about them, and they
did not pursue after the sons of Jacob.

In these words we have a president for imitation, with the fruit and benefit
that does redound to all those people and Nations that set up the true worship
of God, and root out all Idolatry and false worship out of their families and
Countries; for Jacob gives no toleration in his house nor amongst his people
for all Religions, or for any other but that which God himself had appointed;
he sets up the true worship of God, and that only within his Jurisdiction, and
buries all the Idols, of what price and how rich soever they were, and he found
the comfort and benefit of this his so doing; for the Lord for this his
faithful service, blessed him and protected him from the fury of all his
provoked enemies; for the terror of God was upon them all, so that they durst
not pursue him.

And if we take notice in our reading of the holy Scriptures, we shall find and
that through the whole Word of God that the Lord ever followed that people, and
those Kings and governors and their whole Kingdoms and Countries with
special blessings and singular favors that purged their Country from idolatry
and all false worships, and struck a terror into all their enemies round about
them; neither did they ever purge their Countries from Idolatry, and root out
Idolaters, but the anger of the Lord was presently appeased by it; and it is
always recorded to the eternal praise and honor of those Kings, Rulers and
Judges that were most forward in reformation, and that set more thoroughly upon
that good work of reformation; and those that did things but to the halves in
reformation, have not so honorable a testimony in holy Scripture as the other:
and that God has ever been pleased when Idolatry has been rooted out, and
Idolaters put to death, there be many presidents of it in the Word of God.

Amongst others, that in the 32. of Exodus, how highly was God displeased there
with the making of that Calf? and how well was he pleased when execution was
done upon the contrivers and authors of that Idolatry, that place sufficiently
declares; yea, in the 13. of Deuteronomie, the Lord declaring how much he
detesteth Idolatry and all false worship, gives a dispensation to children for
disobedience to their parents (who by his law they are bound to obey) in Gods
matters; so that if those of their nighest relations should go about to entice
any to Idolatry, or to the worshipping of false gods, or the true God in a
false manner, or should endeavor but to bring in another Religion than that
the Lord had appointed, that then they should bring them forth and have justice
done against them; so that God abhors that any Religion amongst his own
people should be tolerated or set up besides that he himself has commanded;
and he had forbid in his law, that any man should make to themselves any graven
Image, or set up any way of worshipping him but that which he himself had
ordained and enjoined, and commanded that they that should attempt any such
thing should be put to death.

We see likewise what Joshua did according to the commandment of God, who ought
to be a pattern to all Christians, and all Christian Magistrates, chap. 24.
verse 14, 15, 16. Now therefore (says he) fear the Lord and serve him in
sincerity and in truth, and put away the gods which your fathers served on the
other side of the flood and in Egypt, and serve ye the Lord; and if it seem
evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose you this day whom ye will serve,
whether the gods which your fathers served that were on the other side of the
flood, or the gods of the Amorites, in whose land ye dwell; but for me and my
house, we will serve the Lord: And the people answered and said, God forbid
that we should forsake the Lord and serve other gods; for the Lord our God is
he that brought us up and our fathers out of the land of Egypt, out of the
house of bondage, etc.

Here we may observe first, that Joshua injoynes them to serve the Lord in
sincerity and in truth, and that they might do that, to put away all their
idols; he gives no toleration of all Religions: and the like may be said of
Joshua, Joshua 24. 15. and that they might with the more alacrity yield
obedience to God's command, he sets his own example before their eyes, with his
resolution, which was, that both he and his household would serve the Lord only
and set up his worship, and all the people likewise assented to do the same,
and gave their reason why they would serve the Lord, and tolerate no other
Religion, because say they, the Lord has brought us up out of the land of
Egypt and out of the house of bondage and made us his peculiar people, and
therefore they resolved to serve him only, and tolerate no other service
amongst them but that which God himself had commanded and appointed: And this
example of Joshua and the people of Israel is left to all the people of God, to
all ages for imitation, whose duty it is to set up the true worship of God only
amongst them, and none but that which Christ their Redeemer, King and Lawgiver
has enjoined them; and therefore all such as would have all Religions
tolerated, do exceedingly forget themselves, and are highly unthankful to
Christ their King and Redeemer.

And if we look into the story of the Judges, the book following that of
Joshua, when this generation was dead, and that they had forgot their covenant,
and began to tolerate all Religions amongst them, they brought down all those
plagues upon themselves by it, that were written in the law of Moses; and for
no other cause, says the holy Scripture, but for that they set up those
Religions the heathens had served their gods by, as is manifest from the sixth
chapter; for when the people cried unto the Lord because of the Midianites; the
Lord sent a Prophet unto them first, who told them that the cause of all the
judgments was, because they had not obeyed the voice of the Lord, but had
served the gods of the nations which he had forbidden them: and afterward he
sent an Angel unto Gideon, and commanded him to break down the Altar of Baal
which his father had made, and to cut down the Grove that was by it, and to set
up an Altar to the Lord: In the first place Gideon was enjoined to root out
idolatry, and then to set up Gods true worship only; here we find no
toleration of any Religion but the true Religion; when they set upon the work
of reformation, and when the men of the City made inquiry after him that had
broken down the Altar and cut down the Grove, and would have put him to death,
it is related, that Ioash the Father of Gideon said to all those that stood
against him, Will ye plead for Baal? will ye save him? he that will plead for
him let him be put to death whiles it is yet morning, if he be a god let him
plead for himself, because one has cast down his Altar: Here we find no
toleration of Baal's Religion, but that they that would plead for him should be
put to death; and surely, those that will plead for a toleration of all
Religions, do no less than fight against God.

But now let us see what Elias did, 1 King. 18. ver. 21. (who was counted as
the Chariots and Horsemen of Israel) with Baals Priests, and what he said to
all those of his times, How long (says he to the people) will ye halt between
two Religions? if the Lord be God follow him, but if Baal be God then follow
him. The holy Prophet would not admit of a toleration of all Religions, but
when God had miraculously manifested from Heaven that Elias his Religion was
the true Religion, and which God in his holy Word had established, all Baals
Priests were put to death, and that by Elias his command, who said, Take the
Prophets of Baal, let none of them escape; and they took them, and Elias took
them and brought them down to the Brook Kishon and slew them there. And so upon
all reformations, all other Religions were cast out but the true Religion, as
we may see through the whole Scripture, as in the stories of the Kings and
Chronicles, and those of Nehemiah and Ezra and through all the Prophets; and
the Lord in the second of Jeremiah complains against his people, That they
had forsaken the fountain of living water, that is, they had forsaken the true
God and served other gods, and forsaken their maker, and had been more
unconstant than the very Heathen, who had not forsaken their idol gods; and
therefore for this their Rebellion and ingratitude, the Prophet denounces all
those plagues that were written in the Law against them, as all the other
Prophe^s did: for there is not any sin in all the old Testament that the Lord
more complains of than that of Idolatry, and the toleration of many Religions
amongst them, as is most abundantly set down both in Isaiah, Jeremiah and
Ezechiel, Daniel, and in all the other Prophets, all which were written for our
learning; so that if the people of God shall imitate them in their sins, they
must look to partake with them in their plagues; for the tolerating of all
Religions would be a just provoking of the Lord our God to anger now, as it was
then. And we have sad experience already, what the tolerating of the idolatry
of the Mass, that Dagon of Ginger-bread, has brought upon us; for God will
not be mocked; if God be God, and the Christian Religion of the reformed
Churches, and which we find in the holy Scriptures, and which was confirmed by
so many signs and wonders, and miracles, be the true religion, then let that
and that only be s^t up amongst Christians, and no other tolerated; for if
they be, they will speedily bring the plagues of God upon the Kingdom, and
confusion upon us all; as we may well perceive by the suffering of them but a
few years, what good effects they will produce: for toleration of all Religions
cannot be pleasing unto God no more in our times, than it was amongst his
ancient people the Jews, and in the Primitive Churches; and therefore all
those that plead for a toleration of all Religions are no friends of Christ nor
Lovers of Religion, pretend what they will; for neither Abraham, Jsaac, nor
Jacob, nor any of the Prophets nor holy men of God would suffer it, neither
would the Apostles ever endureit, but in all their writings they give especial
charg to all the people to take heed of all the false Teachers of their time,
and forewarne them to take heed of them in all succeeding ages, ever describing
them by their crafty dealings, that they should come in sheeps clothing, and
in all seeming holiness and fained simplicity, and therefore that they are the
more to be avoided: And Paul writing to the Galatians, in the fifth Chapter,
wished and desired that the false Teachers were cut off; so far were the holy
Apostles from tolerating all Religions, as in all their Epistles they inveigh
against them, and that continually as false Apostles and Deceivers, and command
all Christians to receive no other Religion but that which they had taught
them, Gal. 1. and bids the people come out of Babylon; and tells them there is
no fellowship with light and darkness; and surely if all the Prophets and
Apostles ^id command all the people of God to come out of Babylon, they never
gave leave to any Christians to set up Babylon amongst them, and to tolerate
the confusion and mingling together of all Religions; for this would be a thing
not only against the Scripture and revealed will of God, but against all solid
reason and sound judgment.

Nay we see that Christ himself in writing to the seven Churches in Asia, and
in them to all Christians in the world, he blames the Angel of the Church of
Pergamus, and that of Thyatira, in the second chapter, in these words, To the
Angel in the Church of Pergamus, write these things, says he that has the
sharp sword with two edges, I know thy works and where thou dwell, even
where Satan's seat is, and thou hold fast my Name, and have not denied my
faith, even in those days wherein Antipas my faithful Martyr, was slain
among you, where Satan dwells: but I have a few things against thee, because
thou have them there that hold the doctrine of B^alam, who taught Balak to cast
a stumbling*blocke before the children of Israel, and to eat things sacrificed
unto Idols, and to commit Fornication: so have thou them also that hold the
doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which thing I hate: repent, or else I come unto
thee quickly, and will fight against thee with the sword of my mouth. And unto
the Angel of the Church of Thyatira write, these things says the Son of God,
who has his eyes like unto a flame of fire, and his feet like fine brass, I
know thy works and charity, and service, and faith, and thy patience, and thy
works, and the last to be more than the first; notwithstanding I have a few
things against thee, because thou suffer that woman Iezabel which calls
her self a Prophetess to teach and seduce my servants, to commit Fornication,
and to eat things sacrificed unto Jdols, etc. and in the 3. chap. ver. 14. Unto
the Angel of the Church of Laodicea write these things, says the Amen, the
faithful and true Witnesse^c; the beginning of the creation of God; I know thy
works that thou art neither cold nor hot, J would thou were cold or hot; so
then because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, J will spue thee out
of my mouth, etc.

Out of the which places, it is sufficiently manifest, that it is ^ thing
highly displeasing unto God, that his people should give a toleration of any
Religion but that he has established; and those that labor for a toleration
of all Religions must needs be lukewarm, neither hot nor cold, which is an
evil the Lord is so much displeased with, as he tells them that he will spue
them out of his mouth; and surely there is nothing that favors more of
licentiousness and carelessness in Religion, and want of zeal to Gods glory
in any men, then when they would bring in a toleration of all Religions: And
many of them can report, that there is no Religion in Holland, where there is a
toleration of all Religions, though it is well known that there are men in
that Country of the native Dutch people, that are as zealous for the true
Religion as any of them, and are as much desirous that tolerations of all
religions amongst them were not there permitted, as they now wish a toleration
of all Religions were suffered here amongst us; for they find by experience
that it is an occasion of all profaneness, and if they should have there the
like occasions of civil combustions as we have, through Gods displeasure for
our sins and ingratitude toward him here in England, I am afraid they would
find the toleration of all those religions amongst them, would prove an
intolerable thing to them, if not the cause of the ruin of their whole
Country. The Lord divert his judgments from them, and grant that they may
never taste of the miseries that we now are acquainted with, but for
tolerating of Popery and Arminianisme, and the prelaticall faction; and without
doubt if the suffering but of these three has so displeased God, the tolerating
of all would give him a just cause of his more hot indignation.

But now to answer to their Objections in order; the Heathens say the
Independents, suffered Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and all the Patriarchs and the
people of Israel where ever they came to exercise their own religion, and
tolerated all religions amongst them. For answer, let them take notice, that no
thank is due to the Heathens for it (as we may see in Genesis the 12. chap.
and the 20. chap. and chap. 26.) but only the glory of that is to be ascribed
to God, who restrained them when they intended evil against them; for he
appeared to some of them in visions, and commanded them not to touch his
anointed people, and forbad them to do his Prophets any harm, and by the
special blessings that he rained down upon his people, and by his miraculous
preserving of them in fiery furnaces and in Lions dens, from the fury of
Savage-beasts, and delivering them so often out of the hands of all their
enemies, he struck such a terror into the heathen nations, that they durst not
oppress his people, so that the singular providence of God, who watches over
them always for good, was their shield and Buckler; so that what they did in
tolerating them and their Religion, was not of their good nature, but it was
Gods special favor toward his own peculiar people, and for the maintenance
of his own cause, and that Religion which they had learned from him; and
therefore those heathenish examples are not for Christians imitation to
tolerate all Religions, who are bound to obey Gods commandments, and to follow
the example of Abraham* Isaac and Jacob, and all the holy Prophets and
Apostles, who all of them have condemned the toleration of all Religions
amongst his people, and have denounced Gods judgments against them for so
doing.

Again, we must consider the principles of the heathen Philosophers, and the
practice of all wicked godless Politicians in all ages; for the Philosophers,
though they were sufficiently convinced by their natural reason, that there
was a God, and that this God was the Author of all good, and the punisher of
all evil, and therefore that he ought to be feared and served of all nations
and people, yet because they by that natural light of understanding (which was
but darkness in them) could not comprehend what that infinite Majesty and
divine being and Godhead was, and were not in themselves able to set down a
description of him, nor how to conceive of that invisible Deity, nor what
worship would be most pleasing unto him (which they could never do without God
himself had revealed himself unto them as he did to his own people) they
served him after some traditions they had received from their Fathers, and left
all nations, cities and families to serve God as they thought best, and
according to their own vain imaginations; and for the Atheistical
Politicians of all ages, all Religions are one to them, who never regard any
one more than another, and therefore tolerate all for their own base ends, and
think it best for the enriching of all their countries (as the experience of
all ages and histor es can sufficiently witness) and many of them do not
refrain to say, that Religion was only brought into the world out of policy,
and to keep people in awe; so that God of his infinite goodness having the
ordering of all men's hearts in his hands, did so dispose of all things, that by
their own principles they should give toleration of all Religions in their
several countries and jurisdictions, so that his people being scattered here
and there through other nations by their sins, yet found this favor, that
they also for the most part enjoyed the liberty of their Religion (though they
met sometimes with most hot persecutions) but all this is ever to be ascribed
to God alone (as I said before) and to his overswaying providence and guidance,
who ever preserved those that trust in him, and served him according to his
revealed will, though it be in Babylon it self, and therefore it is not to be
attributed to the good nature of the Heathen, neither would that toleration now
be tolerable in Christians, who have learned Christ otherwise than to set up
any Religion but that which he the King and Prophet of his Church has taught
them.

But now I will briesly answer to what they pretend out of Scripture, and run
through the several Objections drawn from thence.

And first to begin with that of Joshua 21. where he faith, choose you this
day whom you will serve, etc. In these words, by their favor, there is no
toleration of many Religions, for he was to follow the Law of God, and not to
decline from it, either to the right hand or to the left, Joshua 1. and by that
Law he was forbid to suffer or tolerate any Religion but that which Moses had
taught them; and therefore those words were a mere scrutiny, and to find out
those that were idolaters to punish them, as any wise governor may at any time
make use of the like Querie, to find out men not well affected to Religion, or
to their Country, that by this means they may be brought to condign
punishment: As if now any Officer or Commander under the Parliament should say
to a company of men that he was jealous of, being desirous to discover them
and find them out, choose you this day who you will serve, whether the King or
the Parliament, but for my self and my house we will serve the Parliament:
would not any by and by gather that he spoke this only to find out Malignants
to punish them? Even so Joshua a wise and religious governor did the same, not
that he ever intended to give them a toleration of all religions, for that had
been against the Law of God, and against their own example; for in the 22. of
Joshua, we read that because the people had built but an Altar on the other
side of Jordan, they intended forthwith to make war upon them (a president to
teach Christians that they may fight for their religion) and they had gone out
to battle against them and had destroyed them, had they not given a
satisfactory answer that they had no intent to bring in any innovation in
Religion; and therefore this is but a poor cavil: Now for that they pretend
out of Gamali^ls speech, Acts 5. verse 38, 39. where he says, Refrain from
these men (speaking of the Apostles) and let them alone, for if this counsel
or this work be of men, it will come to naught; but if it be of God, ye cannot
overthrow it, lest happily ye be found fighters against God: Ergo, all
Religions are to be tolerated.

This Objection does sufficiently show that our brethren the Independents that
thus argue, may well be made fellows of Gotham College, as knowing not as yet
their Primer in politics, nor their Catechism in divinity: For who knows not
that it is as easy with God who is of infinite wisdom, out of men's
foolishness to procure safety for his own people, as it was for him, out of
Achitophels wisdom to bring destruction upon himself, and to turn his
wisdom into foolishness; for that which Gamaliel spoke was neither as a wise
man, nor as a Christian; for he would never be thought a wise man that hearing
of any commotion in the Kingdom, and had the power in his hands to suppress
it, should say, if it be of men it will come to naught, but if it be of God, if
we shall oppose it, we shall be found fighters against God, and therefore let us
let them alone; would not all the world think this man a Ninny, that should
thus speak, and a man unworthy to sit in counsel in any State? whereas a wise
man if he hears of any insurrection, he will forthwith use the weapons of his
right hand, and first seek God by prayer and in his Ordinances, and then betake
himself to the weapons of the left hand and use the sword to suppress them;
and this man would be thought a wise man that should so do; and not he that
with Gamaliel should say, if it be of men it will come to naught, and so let
them go on to do mischief: Neither did he answer as a Christian; for what
Christian that should hear of any new monstrous Religion newly printed and
newly come forth (as there are many at this day to be sold about Town and
Country for pence a piece) and should understand that some of those ancient
heresies were again revived, as that of the Arians, Pelagians, or Nestorians,
should say let them alone, for if they be of men they will come to naught, but
if they be of God ye cannot overthrow them, lest you will be found fighters
against God, and so let the seducers go on without questioning them, or
suppressing their heresies; would not every man that has any fear of God in
him say, surely that man that should thus answer, did not speak like a
Christian? for a good Christian like the good Bereans would say come let us sit
down and examine these new doctrines newly brought into the world by the holy
Scriptures, and let us follow the example of the Apostles, Acts 15. in that
assembly and search the Scriptures, and if we find them not to be grounded on
the Word of God, nor to be of God, let us forthwith as God himself has
commanded, suppress them, and not say, without examining of them, as wise
Gamaliel, let them alone; that was not God's method; for God sent his people to
the law and to the testimony, Isaiah 8. and proclames that all that speak not
according to them, it is because there is no light in them, and that all
opinions not grounded on the Word, are but darkness and error, and therefore
they are not to be tolerated or suffered; so that for any man to gather a
toleration of all Religions from Gamaliels speech, is but to prove himself a
mee^ groll; and as little to the purpose is that they urge out of the words of
our Savior, Matthew 22. where answering the Sadduces he says, Ye do err not
knowing the Scripture nor the power of God, verse 29, From whence the
Independent brethren conclude a toleration of all Religions; for our Savior,
say they, only convinced them of their error, and yet tolerated them and
suffered them to enjoy the liberty of their conscience.

I have heard many magnify our Independent brethren for their great learning,
some affirming that they were scholars from their mothers womb, and for my
part I believe it; for ignorance of God and of his holy Word came with all men
from their mothers womb, and if such interpretations of Scripture and such
illations from them, as these be, proceed not from the ignorance of God and of
the Scripture, never any did; for what learned man that knows what Christ's
office was in taking humane nature upon him, when he became a Mediator and the
high Priest of our redemption, would argue as these men do? especially when
Christ has so often in holy Scripture professed of himself that he came then
to save those th t were lost, and not to judge the world; for he has left that
employment till his next coming, when I am most assured these men will have a
great deal to answer for, for so abusing the holy Scriptures to maintain
their own baggatellies: Besides, Christ came to keep the law for us which he
himself had given unto his people and took no way the office of a Judge upon
him, but in scourging out the buyers and sellers out of the Temple, that I
remember, and says, that he came not to break the bruised reed, or quench the
smoking slax, only he had declared his laws unto his people, Malachy the
fourth, by his servant Moses, and the execution of these laws was put into the
hands of the Elders of Israel, whose place it was to punish all seducers, and
who should have performed that work of justice which our Savior declaring does
not give liberty for the tolerating of all Religions, which was against the
revealed will of God; and therefore they that will out of this place argue a
toleration of all Religions, may as well conclude, that Christ tolerated
adultery and injustice, and all manner of wickedness, because our Savior
Christ said unto those that brought the Woman to him, that was found in the act
of uncleanness, he that is without sin amongst you, let him cast the first
stone, and when her accusers were gone, said unto the Woman, Woman where are
thy accusers, go thy way and sin no more. Ergo, Christ gave a toleration for
all Adulterers: and when the young man in the 16. of Luke came to our Savior
and complaining of unjustice done unto him by his brother, and desiring him to
speak unto his brother that he would divide the inheritance with him, to whom
our Savior answered, man, who made me a Judge or a Divider among you? ergo,
Christ gave toleration of all injustice. And because our Savior Christ said in
that Parable of the good seed that was sown and of the tares that sprung up,
that they should let them alone till the harvest, an argument which they much
depend on: Ergo, all wicked men are to be tolerated, and no justice to be done
upon them till Doomsday, and they are to live without molestation, and the
Magistrate ought not to meddle with them, because Christ said, let the good
corn and the tares grow together till the harvest; who would not admire to
hear any man thus to argue, that there should be such either folly or
wickedness in the heart of man, to abuse the holy Scriptures for their own
ends? And who knows not, that it is concluded amongst all learned men, that
Symbolica Theologia non est argumentutiva; and that the Parable inferres no
more, but that it is not for any private man to take upon him the Magistrates
office, or rashly to intrude himself into the place of Rulers and Governors:
But truly all such consequences may as well be gathered from every one of the
above specified Scriptures, as they gather from our Saviors words to the
Sadduces, and from the Parable of Christ for the tolerating of all Religions;
and therefore all such argumentations as these are but poor props to uphold
their Tenent: for God has given us that are christians both the Law and the
Gospel, by which we ought to be guided in the serving of him, and by the which
all Christians are directed what course to take in the punishing of vice, and
for the suppressing of errors and offenders, whether they be delinquents in
doctrine or manners: And although Christians by the Gospel are freed from the
ceremonial Law, yet we are not freed from the substance of it; for he that
said to the Israelites, be ye holy as I am holy, says also to all Christians,
be ye holy as I am holy, 1 Pet. 1. so that although the ceremony be abolished,
yet the substance remains still in force; and although the rigor of the
judicial law be taken away, and Christians are not tied to that manner of
administration of justice, yet the equity of that law does still continue, and
righteous judgments is every where amongst all Christians to be executed, and
satisfaction to be made to all such as have been unjustly damnified; and
although we are freed from the curse, malediction and coaction of the moral
law, yet we are not freed from the obedience of it; so that whatsoever was
commanded in it to the Israelites, or forbidden them, the same is both
commanded and forbidden to all Christians to the ends of the world, and
whatsoever was death by the law of God and nature then, for ought I know ought
to be punished with death now amongst Christians, as blasphemors, wizards,
witches, idolaters, and all such as despise Moses law; under the mouth of two
or three witnesses, if they be people within the pale of the Church, and make
profession of the Christian Religion, for Christians have nothing to do with
those that are without to judge them except they offend against the civil and
municipall laws of the Country and against the laws of nations and nature when
they live amongst them: for Christ came not to change the moral law, but to
ratify it in all things. And although the Sabbath be changed in respect of the
day, yet for the holiness of the first day of the week (which is the
Christians Sabbath) and which is in place of it, I am confident it ought most
carefully to be observed, and that the whole day ought in all sanctity and
holiness to be kept; and besides the fourth Commandment for the sanctification
of a seventh day, we have the example of the Primitive Christians and blessed
Apostles, who always had their meetings on the first day of the week, and
spent the whole day in the duties of piety and charity; for in the 20, of the
Acts we read, that on the first day of the week the Disciples came together to
break bread; that was for the hearing of the Word, and for the administration
of the Sacraments, and for the exercising of all holy duties; and that Paul
preached there until midnight, and that when Eutichus was fallen down with
sleep, Paul restored him to life again to all their comforts; so that here we
have one president, that the whole Lords day wasspent by all those Christians
in the works of piety and charity. Again, in the first of the Revelations
Saint John says, that he was in the Spirit on the Lords day, that is, the
first day of the week, called by Saint John the Lords day, and there the Angel
preached unto him that day, and commanded Saint John to take so much of his
Sermon by writing, as God in his wisdom thought fit to reveal unto his
Church; and he that shall diligently read what is there written, will gather
that the whole day was taken up by Saint John, and spent in hearing, and
writing and meditating of what he had heard; for without doubt Saint John made
it his whole days work to be spiritually employed; and as the holy Communion
is called the Lords Supper, and all the time of that action is holily to be
employed, as being ordained by Christ himself to that end; even so the Lords
day being a day dedicated unro Christ, and ordained by him for holy duties, and
for the hearing of the Word, and for the administration of the Sacraments and
prayer, the whole day ought both privately and publicly to be taken up in the
employments and works of piety and charity, as hearing, reading, meditating,
prayer, repetition of Sermons in their Families, and catechizing and
instructing their children and servants, singing of Psalms, in visiting the
sick and them that are in prison; relieving the poor and necessitated, etc.

These examples of the Primitive Christians are for our imitation, for so Saint
Paul in the third of the Philippians in the 17. verse says; Brethren, be
followers together of me, and mark them which walk so, as ye have us for an
example; for our conversation is in Heaven. And in the 4. chapter, verse 8. he
says, Finally brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are
honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any
virtue, if there be any praise, think on these things: Those things which ye
have both learned and received, and heard, and seen in me* do, and the God of
peace shall be with you. By the which testimonies to omit many more, we are
tied to follow the examples of the Apostles, and to imitate them in all that is
holy and good, and of good report; now it is praise worthy and of good report
to spend the whole Lords day in holy employments, and we have the Apostles
examples, and the Primitive Christians for so doing, and therefore we ought to
spend the whole Lords day in the works of piety and charity; and by this the
sanctifying of the Christian Sabbath, (which is every seventh day) is ratified;
the profanation of the which in the reformed Churches, and in many places
through these three Kingdoms has been one of the causes of all those heavy
judgments the whole Christian world now groans under, and so much more would
the Lord be provoked by the toleration of all Religions amongst us, which
would give just occasion of violating of all the Commandments of God, and of
disobedience both to God and man; for it is most sure, that the Moral Law is
not altered in any thing for substance, and that God that by it enjoined but
one Religion to the Israelites, and commanded them to keep that pure and
undefiled, and to punish all Idolaters, Blasphemers and Seducers, has enjoined
the same to all Christians, and has not suffered or permitted them to tolerate
all Religions or any sects or heresies, which by the Apostle in the fifth of
the Galatians are called the works of the devil, who declares there also
that they that do them shall not enter into the Kingdom of God. So that those
that would bring in a toleration of all Religions have a desire to send men to
the devil; which is one of the greatest impieties and wickednesses that can
be perpetrated by the sons of men. Truly if God had such a care for the
preserving of the very natural life of man, that charissimum animal, as he
made a Law that it should be death in any to tolerate or suffer any beast to
go at liberty and range abroad, if he killed a man, after he had been told
and forewarned of it that it was a dangerous creature, as we may see Exodus 21.
28, 29. where the Lord thus speaks; If an Ox gore a man, or a woman, that
they dye, then the Ox shall be surely stoned, and his flesh shall not be
eaten: but the Owner of the Ox shall be quit. But if the Ox were wont to
push with his horn in time past, and it has been testified unto his owner,
and he has not kept him in but that he has killed a man or a woman; the Ox
shall be stoned, and his Owner also shall be put to death. I say if the
wilful tolerating of but a mischievous creature to go loose after his owner
was informed of the dangerousnesse of it, and that the owner himself was to be
put to death if he killed either a man or a woman after it; how much more may
we think the Lord will severely punish those men that will suffer heresies,
and most dangerous and blasphemous opinions and idolatries to go at liberty,
which with their horns push men into hell it self to the destroying both of
the souls and bodies of the poor people: for in the fifth of the Galatians it
is said, that he^esies and idolatry, etc. are amongst those sins that send
men to perdition. And we are informed by the Law of God of the deadliness of
all sins, but especially of those there named; and God has often taught us
in his holy Law how much he detesteth all false religions, and false worships,
and by a special edict, Exodus 22. verse 20. has informed us saying, He that
sacrifices unto any God save the Lord shall be put to death, so that we
cannot pretend ignorance; and here is no exceptions of either persons or sexes;
and the same Law is reiterated in many more places of holy Writ, and especially
Deuter 13. where the whole Chapter is spent about the punishment of Idolaters,
and such as set up a false way of worshipping God: and for the Moral Law many
of the Independents themselves as I can out of several of their writings
prove, hold that it is not alterable, but it is of the same force now it was
then; and if they grant this as they do, they must likewise acknowledge that
all the sanctions of it and penalties are also in force, and that whatsoever
was death by the Law of God then, is by the same Law death n^w; or else either
God is changeable, or the Law is altered, both which I have yet so good opinion
of some of them as I am confident they will not assert: and therefore they must
necessarily yield unto this, if God and his Moral worship or Law be the same
and unalterable, they must I say then also accord unto this, that whatsoever
was not then to be tolerated in Religion, is not now to be suffered, but
severely be proceeded against. Ye^, Christ himself in his Epistles to the
Church of Pergamos and Thyatiria and Laodic^a, Rev. 2. and 3. as I proved
before, shows by threatening such heavy judgments upon those Churches for but
conniving at and tolerating of Idolatry, and those other filthy abominations
there, and by threatening with all their destruction, and the killing of them
and their children with the sword, and the removing from them the Candlestick,
that is the Gospel, the greatest punishment that can happen to people to be
left in darkness and blindness, and in the shadow of death, and in the
power of Satan, and to be punished moreover with temporal miseries; I say all
these comminations and threats sufficiently declare unto all advised Christians
that Christ the Lord and King of his Church has not altered his mind, but that
that Law is still in force that was made by him to his people of old; yea, he
has farther declared unto hi^ people, Matthew. 5. 17. 19. that he came not to
change the Law but to fulfill it, and that whosoever should teach the breaking
of the least of his holy Laws should be the least in the Kingdom of Heaven

Now by all those his holy Laws made unto his people of old, and by the
practice of all his holy servants and Prophets he has declared how much he
detesteth and abhors the toleration of all Religions, and not only by his
words often reiterated, but he has also declared his displeasure by the
punishment and immediate judgments he laid upon Idolaters, as that before
mentioned in the two and thirtieth of Exodus, where Moses from the Lord, verse
32. said, Who is on the Lords side? let him come unto me* and the sons of
Levi gathered themselves together unto him, and he says unto them, thus says
the Lord God of Israel, put every man his sword by his side, and go out from
gate to gate through the Camp, and slay every man his brother, and every man
his companion, and every man his neighbor: here we find according to that of
Deuteronomy. the thirteenth, that in Gods quarrel, and for the vindicating of his
honor we may neither spare brother, companion or nighest alyes. So that if
God would not then tolerate all Religions, he will now much less endure it
amongst us, especially when he has so often manifest his displeasure against
us, as we may see also Number the ^5. where it is recorded how much he was
angery with his people for going into the sacrifices of the gods of the
Moabites, and for their eating and bowing down to their gods, and for joining
themselves with Baalpeor: for it is said there, that the anger of the Lord was
kindled against Israel, and he said unto Moses, take all the heads of the
people, and hang them up before the Lord against the sun, that the fierce
anger of the Lord may be turned away from Israel; and Moses said unto the
Judges of Israel, s^ay y^^ every one his men that were joined unto Baalpeor,
verse 2. 3, 4 5. This president also we have of Gods displeasure against a
toleration of any false Religion, or false way of worship. So that all such as
ple^d for a toleration of all Religions show that they have either no Religion
at all, or very little zeal for God. Yea, certainly they show themselves all
enemies of Christ's Kingdom, that thus violate his Laws, and trample them
under their feet, and that would have the Kingdom of the Devil set up every
where, and all Religions whatsoever tolerated amongst them, which must needs
provoke the Lord to anger and displeasure against that nation that does so
provoke him.

But how unsufferable a thing then is it in any that have the name of
Christians, that when they should with all their power and might oppose all
innovations in Religion, much more a toleration of all Religions, as some of
them with the hazard of their lives and liberties in former times opposed the
innovations and the novelties of the Prelates, and inveighed against the Book
for toleration of sports and recreations on the Lords day, and cried out
against it as an intolerable violating of Gods Law, and asserted that it was
enough to provoke the Lord to anger against the whole Land, and write books
and divine Tragedies upon Sabbathbreakers, and Profaners of the Lords day, and
those that permitted the profanation of it, which with the godly of those times
was reputed their immortal honor: how unsufferable a thing therefore is it I
say now in these very men to plead for a toleration of all Religions that
could not then tolerate sports on the Lords day, by which not only the fourth
commandment would be brake, but all the commandments of both of the first and
second Table? without doubt they have a great deal to answer for before God;
for by the doctrine we have learned from our Law giver and King the Lord Jesus
Christ, (who is not changeable though they be) they that break the least of
Gods commandments, and teach men so to do (whatsoever they esteem of
themselves, that they set up Christ upon his Throne, and whatsoever opinion men
have of them) they are the least in the Kingdom of Heaven, and have much to
answer for before his Tribunal, for these their wicked dealings; and truly it
exceedingly saddeth my heart when I think of them how fearfully they are
fallen, and what a scandal and blemish they are to their holy profession that
thus Chamelion like change their form upon every occasion.

But how much more is it intolerable then in those men that have the name of
Rabbis amongst those of the congregationall way, and that would make the world
believe they are the only Saints; for those to make themselves merry when the
godly and faithful Ministers of the Gospel out of sorrow and grief of soul
spread before the Lord the blasphemies of the times as good Hezekiah did the
blasphemies of Rahshekah, that it may move the people to mourning and
sackcloth, and to humble themselves under the mighty hand of God for the
diver^ing of his Judgments that do for these their blasphemous tenants hang
over the land; I say how intolerable a thing is it in such men to make a sport
at it, and as Solomon speaks of the wicked in his time, (whom he calls fools to
make a mock at sin? Yet such there are, as Cretensis by name amongst the rest
is one of them who makes himself merry at these blasphemies and writes books
in justification of those wicked and ungodly men, and calls their damnable
practices the infirmities of the Saints, accou^ting of them as Saints and holy
men; whereas the good and zealous Prophet Jeremiah, chapter 9. cries out at the
beholding the abominations of his times, far inferio to those of our days,
saying, Oh that my head were waters and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I
might weep day and night for the slain of the Daughters of my people. Oh that I
had in the wilderness a lodging place of wayfaring men, that I might leave my
people and go from them, for they be all adulterers, an assembly of treacherous
men: And they bend their tongue like their bow for lies: but they are not
valiant for the truth upon the earth, and they know not me says the Lord. Here
we see the posture of the holy Prophet, we find him armed and clad with
mourning to behold the profanation of the truth, and we have here also his
great complaint, that at that time there were not any valian for it upon the
earth If now this glorious Prophet were in the world, and amongst us here in
England, and should behold those damnable blasphemies that are every where
ven^ed by the sons of Belial in these times and should see how few upon the
earth are valiant for the truth, yea how they labor for a toleration of all
Religions how would his spirit be moved and how would his soul be perplexed
within him to see it? and what fountains of tears would he pou e out to the
Lord quenching of the fire of his wrath and indignation against them? but how
much more would it perplex and trouble h^s soul to see any that should write,
yea publish books wherein they do not only make themselves merry at those
blaspnemies and count them the infirmities of the Saints, but proclaim them
Saints that perpet^ate all these wickednesses, and write most scurrilous
^ailing and vilifying books and Pamphlets against his holy servants that are
valiant for the truth, counting them (speaking disgracefully and contemptibly
of them) but thimbles full of dust? without all controversy it would sad his
soul to the very death, and so indeed it should trouble the souls of those that
are truly godly to behold such lawless wickedness not only to go unpunished,
but to find favor and applause even of those that are Masters of the
Assemblies! Truly howsoever out of the infinite patience of God these men are
yet suffered, yet I am most confident he that will come, will come and not tarry
to reveng his own quarrel and the quarrel of his servants that are valiant for
the Truth. And I will take the liberty to say thus much to St Cretensis, that
reverend learned and ever to be honored Master Thomas Edwards who he so much
vilipendeth and slighteth, calling him a thimble full of dust, will walk like a
noble lion, when he like a Curr or Bandogg shall go bawling by him; and withal
I would advise him to take heed of that thimble: For two or three fillips more
of it upon his great noddle may so stagger him as he may happily never recover
again; and for ought I know or can discern God may make half a thimble full
of that dust to put out his eyes, and the eyes of half the Independents and
Sectaries in England; For most assured I am that all such as in the name of the
Lord, (as he does) come out against such notorious enemies of God and his Truth
as Cretensis and his associates are, will be able to confound them all and by
the power of his might be ever strong enough to deal with the whole Army of
them, and with all those grolls and ^ynnies that take their part and appear in
their wicked cause: I will therefore rather advise Cretensis not giant like to
fight any longer against the Truth, but to humble himself for what he has
already done under the mighty hand of God, whom he with his accomplices and
abetters have so highly provoked to wrath and anger against this poor tottering
Kingdom. It is not Cretensis with all his foul language shall ever be able to
bespatter the immaculate reputation of learned and godly Master Edwards who
has in Gods cause ever showed himself valiant for the truth and stood in the
gap against the errors of the times, and has lift up his voice like a trumpet,
which will be for his immortal praises, when too too many of his brethren
(which will not be for their honor) were silent. We find it Matthew 13. ver.
24, 25. When the man had sowed good seed in his field, that whiles the men
slept, his enemy came and sowed Tares among the Wheat and went his way; which
place is worthy to be taken notice of: For in terminis it is said, that whiles
the men slept, this, I say, is to be taken notice of for their dishonor, that
is to say, after they had so wen the good seed and published the truth, the
Ministers and Preachers grew careless and like the people of Laish, Judges 18.
ver. 7. and 10. Where they lived secure and the Magistrates were negligent in
their place, putting no man to shame for any evil they did, which was the
cause of their overthrow as it is there recorded, and will be of ours and the
ruin of the whole Kingdom, if not timely prevented, as being guilty of the
same crime. This indeed through the craft of the enemies has bin one of the
principallest occasions of the overspreading of this leprosy of all the
heresies that now swarm through the whole Kingdom, that the Ministers have not
been so zealous and servent against them as they should have been, and so
valiant for the truth, in the which guiltiness Master Edwards is not involved:
for he has all this time stood valiantly to the truth and showed himself a
man of ^ourage, and that against all opposition, for which he deserves
especially to be honored, and all those likewise that have seconded him, in
discovering the danger of those devilish and damnable doctrines which have so
poisoned the people every where, that if the Lord of his infinite goodness do
not speedily send help and put into the hearts both of Magistrates, Ministers
and all the people now at last to rouse up themselves and show themselves
valiant for the truth once delivered to the Saints which they are commanded to
contend for, Jude 3. they will but the more provoke the Lord to indignation
against the Nation. And in this good work they should set before their eyes the
good example of all those worthy Kings and Governors whose names are recorded
in holy writ to their everlasting honor for their diligence and care in
suppressing of Errors and Idolatries; withal they should lay to heart and
consider that it highly concerns them, if they desire the good of themselves
and the welfare of their posterity and the peace of the whole land, all which
they will be deprived of if they speedily labor not to prevent them; which a
toleration of all Religions can never do; for that must needs provoke the Lord
to jealousy against us all: for if we but duly weigh what the holy Ghost has
made known unto us in many places, then that I now say will be out of doubt:
but omitting many places I will pitch upon one or two, Judges 5, and 8. it is
said there, They chose new gods, then was war in the gates. Here we see when
all Religions came to be tolerated, then was war in the gates. And in the
second of the Chronicles, chap. 15. ver. 3. 5, 6. Now for a long season (says
the holy Ghost) Israel has been without a true God, and without a teaching
Priest, and without Law. And in those times there was no peace to him that went
out, nor to him that came in, but great vexations were upon all the Inhabitants
of the Country. And Nation was destroyed of Nation, and City of City, for God
did vex them with all adversity.

Now the cause of all these miseries and calamities that did come upon all
these people was for their corrupting of their Religion. And this we shall find
through the whole Scripture to be the cause of the wrath of God upon the
Nations for the corrupting of their ways and for the tolerating of Idolatry,
and the adulterating of the true Religion amongst them, as is sufficiently
manifest both from the places above specified, and from the second and third of
the Revelations where the Lord denounces Judgments against the Church of
Pergamos and Thyatira, etc. for but conniving at and tolerating of the false
doctrines amongst them; in the which places as the Lord shows, he is the same
in the time of the New Testament, not changeable, so it should lesson both
people and Ministers, but especially the Magistrates now to add their helping
hand for the suppressing of these damnable and wicked doctrines that are now
every where too much divulged and published. They should also consider what the
Lord says, Zachariah 13. ver. 3. And it shall come to pass (says the
Prophet) that when any shall yet prophecy, then his father and his mother that
bare him, shall say unto him, Thou shall not live: for thou speakst lies in the
Name of the Lord: and his father and mother, that begat him, shall thrust him
through when he prophesies. Here we may take notice that the nighest alyes and
kindred of any false Prophet are not to spare him; and there is most excellent
reason for it; for if the taking away of the natural life of any wan or woman
deserves death by the law of God and Nations; how much more is that punishable
in any man that shall labor to destroy and poison the souls of the people,
which all false teachers do when they spread heresies and damnable doctrines
amongst them? And for this place out of Zachariah, it is acknowledged by the
very Independents themselves that it is a Prophecy pertaining to those that are
under the Gospel and belongs unto all Christians, as instructing them in
their duty what they should do for the suppressing of false Prophets; and they
also do acknowledge that the establishing of pure Religion, and the Reformation
of corruptions in Religion, do much concern the civil peace, confessing if
Religion be corrupted there will be war in the gates, and where Religion
rejoices, the civil state flourishes; all this I say the Independents
themselves accord unto. But they refer it and that truly unto the civil
Magistrate partly by commanding and by stirring up the Churches and Ministers
thereof to go about it, in their spiritual way: partly also, by civil
punishments upon the wilful opposers and disturbers of the same. Yea they
apply that place out of Zachariah quoted by me to the times of the New
Testament (as I said before) and confess that it is prophesied there that in
some cases capital punishment shall proceed against false Prophets, and that
by procurement of their nearest kindred. And moreover they say that the
execution thereof is described Revel. 16. v. 4, to the 7. Where the Rivers and
Fountains of waters (that is the Priests and Jesuits that convey the Religion
of the Sea of Rome throughout the Countries) are turned to blood, that is have
blood given them to drink by the Civil Magistrate. These are the very
expressions of the Independents themselves.

Now if this in their opinion do hold true against the Priests and Jesuits?
whether it does not also hold true against all the erroneous and blasphemous
Sectaries and heretical Teachers, that by murdering the souls of many
thousand innocent people, send them to the Devil, that I leave to the grave
consideration of all those that are zealous for the glory of God, and valiant
for the truth, and to all such as desire to contend for the truth: who ought
ever to set before their eyes the example of all those godly Princes and
Magistrates, the names of which are recorded in holy Writ; and in special it
will be good to consider what Asa and the people of his time did, whose praises
are set down, and what good followed upon it to the whole Land, 2 Chronicles. 15.
verse 12, 13. it is said there, That they entered into a Covenant to seek the
Lord God of their Fathers, with all their heart, and with all their soul, that
whosoever would not seek the Lord God of Israel, should be put to death,
whether small or great, whether man or woman; and they swore unto the Lord with
a loud voice, and with shouting, and with Trumpets, and with Cornets, and all
Judah rejoiced at the oath; for they had sworn with all their heart, and
sought him with their whole desire, and he was found of them: and the Lord
gave them rest round about. Here we may take notice of these two things
especially.

The first, that this their covenanting against all such as should go about to
corrupt Religion, for the punishing of them with death, is left not only for
their eternal honor and praise, and for our imitation, but that it did so
please the Lord that he was found of them.

The second thing observable, is, that he did in a peculiar manner bless
them, and gave them rest round about: so that from thence we learn, that if
Magistrates who are Gods Ministers, and whose place it is, will execute
judgment against all Seducers and blasphemous Teachers, by this they shall
bring glory to God, and procure peace and welfare to their Countries, and
safety to their dwellings. And truly Magistrates should consider their places
who are called gods, and therefore as God has set them an example both in
Exodus 32. and Numb. the 25. the places above cited, in punishing Idolators, so
they also should follow him and the example of good King Asa in so doing. They
may remember also they are called nursing Fathers, and nursing Mothers: and
therefore as nursing and tender Fathers and Mothers will not suffer corrupt and
poisonous food be given to their children, but kill Serpents and Scorpions, and
such venomous creatures, and destroy them that may hurt them; so they likewise
should labor in their particular places to root out all that Generation of
Vipers that poison the people with their heretical and blasphemous doctrine.
The Magistrates should remember also, that they are called Pastors; now no
godly and careful Pastors will suffer Wolves to come into their folds to worry
and destroy their sheep; how diligent ought they likewise to be to keep out
those ravenous wolves, though they come in sheeps clothing, out of their
several Pastures, that would destroy the souls of all their sheep? all these
things I say all Magistrates should lay to heart and duly consider; for their
place it is to whom God has committed the sword, and who ought to watch over
the people for good, and whose neglecting of their duty will be laid to their
charge, and who are to answer for it before God, if through their con nivence
or negligence any evil happen to the people. But if they should wilfully
suffer the corruption of the true Religion, and allow of a toleration of all
Religions, how much would this provoke the Lord to anger against the nation?
We may see how zealous good Nehemiah was in his time, and how undauntedly he
stood to the cause of God, saying, should such a man as I am fly? he was
resolved to maintain Gods truth, which was his Honor to Eternity, and for all
Magistrates imitation, Nehemiah the 13. verse 23, 24, 25. who but seeing that
the Jews had married wives of Ashdod, of Ammon, and of Moab, and but hearing
their children speak half ^in the speech of Ashdod, and could not speak in
the Jews language, but according to the language of each people, it is related
there that he contented with them, and reviled or cursed them, and smote
certain of them, and plucked off their hair, and made them swear by God,
saying* ye shall not give your daughters unto their sons, nor take their
daughters unto your sons, or for your selves; did not Solomon King of Israel
sin by these things, who was beloved of God? nevertheless, even him did
outlandish women cause to sin. Shall we then hearken unto you (says he) to
do all this great evil, to transgress against our God in marrying of strange
wives?

Here we have an example and pattern for all Christian Magistrates, and such
as are in authority to follow. For this was pend for our instruction, upon whom
the ends of the world are come. This example of Nehemiah was wont greatly to be
urged upon Christians for imitation, and that by those of the congregationall
way, and therefore I hope they will not now be displeased, that I make use of
it upon the like occasion, and Magistrates were called upon by them to follow
the pattern of noble and glorious Nehemiah, in making a through Reformation in
all things, and for suppressing of all errors and innovations in Religion, and
in that he would not suffer or tolerate any strange Religion amongst them; for
he but hearing they speak the language of Ashdod, cursed them and reviled
them, and smote them, and beat them also for it, and tore off the very hair
of their faces, so that he laid severe corporal punishment upon them for it.
Now if he would not suffer them in his sight and hearing to speak the
language of Ashdod, he would never have granted them a toleration of all
Religions; for he was another Joshua, fully resolved that he and his
household, and all that were under his command should serve the Lord, and him
only, and that after his way; and he sufficiently there declares his
detestation against a toleration of all Religions, or of giving the people an
indulgence to serve God which way they thought best, and to use the liberty of
their consciences, for he made them all to embrace the true Religion, and to
worship God according as he had commanded in his holy word, which is meant by
that he made them swear by God, which as all the learned know, is ever in the
holy Scripture to be understood of the true worship of God. Now we see godly
Nehemiah not only urges them to embrace the true Religion, and to serve God
according as he himself has appointed, by Arguments and Reasons, setting
before them the miseries and calamities that came upon the whole land by
Solomon's tolerating of all Religions amongst them: but gallant Nehemiah reviled
them, as if he said, you rogues, do you speak in the language of Ashdod, and
then cudgels them into the true Religion, and forces them by stripes, and
corporal punishments to embrace it, which is recorded to his immortal praise,
and for all Christian Magistrates imitation; so that he abhorred the toleration
of all Rel gions: and as David would not suffer a Liar in his house, so good
Nehemiah would not suffer any of a contrary Religion to be under his
government; he had learned this Lesson from God himself, Deuteronomy. 4. and Deuteronomy.
6* and Deuteronomy. 11. and Deuteronomy. 13. etc. This renowned Governor and Magistrate was
not afraid to constrain them to do that which was for the glory of God, and
according to his will, and for the good of their own souls, and for the good
of the whole Land, and the safety and peace of them all: and yet I believe
Nehemiah knew as well what belonged unto tender consciences as any Independents
now living, and he understanding that the heart of man was deceitful above
all things, and desperately wicked, Jer. 17. v. 9. and that conscience being
but a branch springing from that deceitful and desperately wicked root, knew
also that there could be nothing in it but evil, and that continually, and
therefore took that liberty upon him to constrain their wicked consciences to
conform to the commandments of God, and to submit themselves to his most holy
Laws and Statutes, and to that way of worship God had enjoined his people,
which is the duty of all Parents and Magistrates, who by Gods command and this
example of good Nehemiah's may at any time use the rod of correction, and by it
make rebellious and stubborn children and people conform themselves to the
commandments of the Lord, and to his true worship, and this duty they are
bound unto by the Law of God if they urge them to nothing but what God has
declared to be his will in his blessed Word. And truly it is not to be passed
over without serious taking notice of it, how zealous this good Nehemiah was
against all sin and false worship, and how adverse he was to a toleration of
all religions under his government; for hearing them speak but the language of
Ashdod, he by and by reviled them, and fell about their ears, and forthwith
constrained them, and that by stripes to embrace the true worship of God. But
if this good Nehemiah were now living here amongst us, and should hear not
only the language of Ashdod, but the language of hell out of every mouth, and
see the abominable practices of the Sectaries of our times, and should hear
their hellish and blasphemous and heretical doctrines of denying the Trinity,
and the Deity of Christ, and slighting the holy Scriptures, and many such
desperate doctrines, how may we think would his righteous soul be troubled
with it? and how would he bestirre him in cudgelling these fellows into the
true Religion, and making of them serve God according to his own appointment,
and not after their own fantasies as they all now do? without all controversy
good Nehemiah would baste them to the purpose, and all such as should side with
them, and especially he would belabour all such well as should write books in
defense of such, and should call them Saints, and their damnable blasphemies
the infirmities of the Saints. I say I am most confident that were good
Nehemiah in our times, and had he that authority he had then in Jerusalem,
he would baste them all to some purpose, and make, and force them by
cudgelling of them to be conformable to wholesome words; and I am most assured,
he would pull off Cretensis his blew beard, qui ne pilum boni viri habet, and
knock him soundly about his hairy scalp; And St. Quarter-man also he would have
some good slaps as he deserves over his great pate, and all the rest of these
heretical and dangerous Sectaries would by him be constrained with beatings to
yield obedience to the authority of Gods word, and he would make them know
themselves; and this indeed is the duty and place of all Magistrates and
Parents, and Masters of Families, neither to suffer or tolerate such fellows in
their houses nor Countries; for this would but bring judgments upon the land,
much more ought every man to detest all such as should labor to bring in a
toleration of all Religions, when we see what misery came upon all Israel by
Solomon's toleration of them there.

But the Independents say there is no presidents of any corporal punishment
laid upon any under the New Testament for matter of Religion that Magistrates
should follow: but I conceive the example of our Savior may suffice for their
imitation, Who Joh. 2. whipped the buyers and sellers out of the Temple for
merchandising there; and therefore laid corporal punishments upon them. And
truly if the Magistrates now should whip all the buyers and sellers of their
new and blasphemous doctrines out of their several new Temples and Churches, I
am confident it would be very pleasing unto God, and Christ's example would
justify and hold them out in this their so doing: for who can they better
imitate then the King of his Church? Yea we see corporal punishment threatened
against the Church of Pergamos and Thyatira, etc. and afterward inflicted upon
them by God himself for suffering those false Prophets and Teachers amongst
them. Yea we see Act. 13. that Bariesus for but laboring to hinder the
Proconsull from hearing the Gospel, was by Paul stricken with blindness for
it by God himself, to teach all Magistrates that those deserve punishment that
hinder the preaching of the faith; but much more those that corrupt it ought to
be punished. And we have another example of corporal punishment; for when
there was no Magistrate to punish those exorcists, those sonns of Sceva, the
Lord suffered the devil which could not enter into a swine without his
permission, to be his executioner and to lay corporal punishment upon them for
abusing his name and his authority: All which may teach all men how much God is
displeased with all such as corrupt his worship and service, and would bring in
a toleratiou of all Religions, and may serve to instruct all Magistrates in
their duty for the punishing of all false and herericall Teachers and Seducers.

And truly, if ever there were a time that called for an establishment of one
Religion and a settled Government with Uniformity in a Church and State, and a
Suppression of all Heresies, Sects and Factions from the Magistrates hand and a
punishing of all false Teachers, now it is, when by the sad effects already of
divisions and variety of opinions, we may well perceive what ruin will come
upon the three Kingdoms, if there be a toleration of all Religions granted:
for divisions and factions, especially in Religion, have been fatal to
Kingdoms and Commonwealth in all ages, as the holy Scriptures and all
Histories relate. The consideration of which makes me take the liberty to
recite a story I heard of a great Nobleman in Queen Elizabeth's days at her
first coming to the Crown, when there was a mighty Popish faction in the Court
and through the whole Realm as all men know, and when there was as great an
endeavor for the bringing in of a toleration of that Religion, as now there is
for the setting up a Pantheon of all manner of Sects. And such reasons there
were then given for the establishing of the Catholic Religion (as they called
it,) as I believe (if they should all be rehearsed) there is few of those that
now plead for a toleration of all, can give the like; but better I am most
confident they cannon give. For if multitudes of a contrary opinion armed with
strength and power also, and they all furnished with malice and resolution to
put them upon the employment of their strength, had been able to create danger
to the Kingdom if the liberty of their consciences should have been denied
unto them, then there was nothing wanting to terrify a State to condescend to
grant a toleration: but all this could not then prevail, nor all the art of
persuasion they then used as that men of a contrary judgment were rather to be
won with sweetness and lenity and loving persuasions and arguments and
reasons, then by any coercive way which often brought danger unto Kingdoms, and
many arguments more with great worldly wisdom were then produced, which with
many that were real Protestants and then in ^ouncel seemed of some weight: but
at that time there was a brave Nobleman present and a man of great
understanding and as they usually call such a great Statesman; but yet such an
one as was never taken notice of to be any great zealot for Religion on either
side. Yet he demanding of the Council that was then in debate about this
business (the greatest part of which seemed to make profession of the
Protestant Religion and something incline to yield unto a toleration) whether
or no, they thought the Protestant Religion was the true Religion, and that way
of serving God that he had appointed; and the most of them replied, that they
from their hearts and souls believed, that it was Gods Religion, and that which
was taught in the holy Scriptures: Then said this Nobleman, my Lords, set up
and establish that Religion only and no other, do you your duty and labor to
authorize it; and your life for mine, God will help you to maintain his own
honor and cause, against what power and policy soever shall come against you;
for he can infatuate their counsel and enervate their strength and blast all
their attempts in a moment, who is all-sufficient, and against whom no counsel
nor understanding can prevail; for he sits in Heaven and does whatsoever he
pleases; for as there is no Lord or Master that can endure any servant, that
shall comply with his enemies and give equal honor and service to his
adversary that he does to himself, or connive at any so doing; so God will
never like of your service when you worship him, if ye serve the devil also;
which you must do if you set up any other Religion or any other Religion or any
other way of Church Government in the Kingdom, then that you believe in your
hearts God himself has appointed: for as two Religions so contrary one to
another are incompitible with the glory and honor of God, who has said, No
man can serve two Masters; so they will be destructive to the safety of the
Kingdom. And therefore my Lords, says he, as we have but one God, so I
beseech your honors, let us have but one Religion in the Kingdom and one
kind of Church Government amongst us, and that ratified and established by
authority: for if their be a liberty left for every man or every faction to do
what they please, we shall speedily bring down the judgments of God upon the
Kingdom and a confusion upon us all. And many reasons more he gave to this
purpose, by which he so prevailed with the Council that they agreed to give no
toleration for Popery or allow of any faction in Religion, but resolved with
all speed to establish the Protestant Religion. And truly the same argument may
now be used for the establishing of one Religion and one kind of Govrnment.
And as Elijah said to Baals Priests and to the people, If God be God then
follow him, etc. So if this way of worshipping God that is held forth in the
Protestant Churches and has for some generations been taught in the Church of
England, be that way, then it will be for the honor and glory of God and the
safety of the Kingdom that that only be established, which will bring peace
to Church and State and take away all occasions of offense and jarrs amongst
brethren.

For the examples of Poland, Transsylvania and Holland they are no presidents
to other Nations, their politic proceedings are no examples for other
Christian Countries and Kingdoms to follow; for Christians are to live by the
rule of GODS Word, and Christ's their Kings laws, and to follow the examples of
his own people only in their well-doing, and not in their failings; and
therefore we are to follow the example of Abraham, Joshua, Elias, and the other
Patriarchs, Prophets, and holy Apostles, who never tolerated all Religions. Yea
we are commanded in Romans 12. Not to conform our selves to this world, but
that we should be transformed by the renewing of our minds, that we may prove
what i^ the good and the acceptable and perfect will of God.

This Will of God therefore must be the rule and square that we must ever set
before our eyes and hearts in matters of our God, and in points of Religion,
and worship, and not the example ot Poland, and Transsilvania.

Now let us hear what is the good will and pleasure of Christ our Lawgiver
concerning this point of toleration, who challenges, and that of all due and
right to be our Master, saying, Matthew. 23. 8. Be not ye called Rabbi for one
is your Master, even Christ; and again verse 10. neither be ye called Masters
(says he) for one is your Master, even Christ; this reiterating of the same
prohibition, and challenge to be our Master, shows that we are not to make
either men or Angels, or whole Kingdoms or Countries our Masters, but only
Christ, we must always therefore in matters of Religion, have recourse unto
his good word and will, and hear his voice, and therefore let us hear what
the will of Christ is concerning this business of Toleration, who in in the 8.
of Mark 15. speaking there unto his Disciples, and in them to all Christians
(for the Independent Masters hold that the Disciples represented the whole
Christian Church) he charged them saying, take heed and beware of the leven of
the Pharisees, and of the leven of Herod, here we find a treble caveat, a
Charge, and a Take-heed, and a Beware, as if the Lord had said I cannot use too
many words to make them take heed, etc. and of what? even of a Toleration of
any Religion, but the true Religion, and of that Religion Christ has taught
us, by what authority soever it comes ratified unto us, whether by
Ecclesiastical or civil; yea, though it be imposed upon us by the command of
Kings, and Rulers themselves: for says Christ our Master, I charge you all
take heed, and beware of the leven of the Pharisees, and of the leven of Herod.
Now by leven our Savior understands all traditions and doctrines of men, and
injoyns all his Disciples to beware of them, and commands them to take heed of
them, and not to tolerate them amongst them, and that this is his good will and
pleasure he has ratified it when he was in heaven for writing unto the Church
of Thyatira, Revel. 2. verse 20. I have (says he) a few things against thee,
because thou suffer that woman Jezabel, which calls her self a
Prophetess, to teach and seduce my servants, etc. Here Christ has declared
his will and good pleasure, and how much he displeased with that Church, that
she suffered those false Teachers and Seducers amongst them, and that they but
connived at them, and pronounces fearful judgments against both that Church,
and the Church of Pergamos, and that of Laodicea for tolerating the Doctrine of
Baalam, the Nicolaitans, and for suffering those lukewarm Christians amongst
them: so that there is nothing that Christ abhors more then a toleration of
all Religions; but that we may farther yet know what the good will and
pleasure of God is concerning this point, let us hear Paul, who made known
the whole counsel of God to his Church, Act. 20.. Now he in the 17. of the
Acts declares the will of God touching this matter; for after that he had
reproved the Athenians for their superstitions, ver. 22. and undertaken to
teach them the knowledge of the true God, who they ignorantly worshipped, and
the right way of worshipping and serving him, and informing them that he is
not worshipped with men's hands, that is with any of their inventions, and with
what way, or in what manner they think fit, God (says he) is not to be
worshipped after any traditions of men, but according to his own appointments:
and this he challenges by right from all men: as being the absolute Lord of
them all, for he made them; they are (says the Apostle) the offspring of God
and his Generation, and they live in him, and move in him, and have their being
in him, and their breath and life from him; yea, says the Apostle he has
determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation: Now
God says he has given you all these things, that ye should seek the Lord,
that is, that ye should worship him as he is your Lord and King, and to whom
all honor and service of right is due; now then as we are his offspring, we
must not think of God after our fantasy, and set up such a worship as
pleases our selves, or allow of any kind or way of worshipping God that men
please to follow, as you superstitiously do at Athens; no (says the Apostle)
God will be worshipped after his own way, and after his own appointment, and
howsoever God winked at the times of this ignorance, yet now he commands all
men every where to repent, that is, to set up the true Religion, and to worship
him after one way; for (says he) all the nations are now to set up one way of
worship, and if they will not obey this Lord of the whole world, and embrace
that one, and only true Religion, that I teach and preach unto you, then I
tell you plainly, that as God has appointed a day wherein he will judge the
world in righteousness by Christ Jesus, if you will not set up his true
worship, and the true Religion, and the right way of serving him; but will
tolerate all manner of Religions amongst you still, as formerly you have done,
and give liberty to every man to serve God after his own will and pleasure,
and not according to this good will and pleasure of God you shall be eternally
damned, for this is the meaning of the Apostle, so that the will of God must be
our rule for worship, and not Poland and Transsylvania; the will of God (says
the Apostle) must be that we must follow in worshipping and serving him.

Now when by the Word of God, that acceptable and perfect will of his we are
taught that he was displeased with his people the Jews, for tolerating of all
religions amongst them, and that he was highly offended with those christian
Churches in Asia for tolerating the doctrines of Balaam and Iezabel, we are
sufficiently taught and instructed, that Christians ought not to tolerate any
other Religion but that which Christ the only King and Lawgiver of his Church
has taught us, and that whosoever should take that authority upon them to
tolerate all Religions, would be found fighters against God, and such as
deservedly would bring down his judgments upon the Land by it, for if but
conniving at evil and consenting to it be a thing displeasing unto God, how
would the tolerating of it by a Law be abominable unto his sacred and divine
Majesty? for this were to establish iniquity by a Law. We are taught in the
holy Scriptures, that the consenting with a thief makes a man as guilty before
God as the acting of thievery, Psalm. 50 and that they that assented unto
Jezabel in killing the Prophets, made themselves all as guilty as Jezabel her
self, and that the Heathen Romans, Romans 1. verse 32. who knowing the judgment
of God (that they which commit such things are worthy of death) not only do
the same but consent with them that do them; made themselves as equally guilty
as the Actors of them, as Paul in his bill and information put up in the Court
of Heaven against them sufficiently declares; the same did Elias in his bill
of information against the people in his time, accusing them all as equally
guilty of the blood of the Prophets, and destroying Religion as Jezabel, and
only because they consented unto it; They (says Elias) have killed thy
Prophets, and have broken down thy Altars: Which they? all the people that
assented unto her, as well as the Officers and Executioners: And so our Savior
in his time, accuses the people as well as Herod for slaying of John the
Baptist, saying, They have done to him whatsoever they pleased. They, which
they? all the Nobles that sat at Table with Herod, that did not dissuade Herod
from that bloody and tyrannical act, and all the people that liked well of it:
the sin of this Nation who assented unto the bloody Decrees and censures
given in the High-commission-Court, and in the Star Chamber, and in all other
unjust Courts the people that assented unto all their cruel censu^es against
Gods people and liked well of it, are as equally guilty, who would ordinarily
say, that had they been Judges they would have done the like, and that they
were men worthy of death, which made them (I say) as equally guilty as their
wicked Judges and Executioners; as we may see also in those that assented unto
the Highpriests, and to the Scribes and Pharisees in putting to death the Lord
of Life, they made themselves all guilty of his blood, and by that means
brought the curse of God upon them and their children by it to this day, as
well as the Highpriests themselves: a fearful sin, though the world take
no notice of it, and which all these Kingdoms have yet to repent of: Saint
Paul also makes himself as guilty of Stephens blood, as they that stoned him,
saying, When thy holy Martyr Stephen was stoned, I stood by and assented unto
it, and held the garments of those that stoned him: By which he acknowledges
himself equally guilty, and so all those that assented to all the cruelty done
to the people of God in these Kingdoms, and were approvers of their tyranny,
are as guilty as the actors of it, for consenting unto any treason or
conspiracy, or with any malefactors, and all their accomplices, both by the Law
of God, nature, and nations, makes them all guilty before God and men, and as
liable to justice and punishment as those that acted in those malefices; and
therefore those that but assent unto a toleration of all Religions (a sin so
highly displeasing unto God) are as guilty as the Actors of it; and if but
consenting make them guilty, how guilty are they then that use Arguments to
bring in a toleration of all Religions, and abuse the Scriptures to this end,
and plead for it, and would have it established by a Law? surely they are
offenders against divine Majesty in an elevated nature, and have a great deal
to answer for it before God especially when they do it in a most scurrilous
and railing manner, by which they manifest to all the world that they are more
verst and better acquainted with the doctrine of Billings-gate then with the
language of Canaan.

But this may seem a wonderful thing to all judicious men, that that people
which within these six years were afraid of a Surplice, and of the cross in
Baptism, and of any popish ceremony, or of any of their vain traditions and
will worship (which was their honor then) should now plead for the toleration
of the body and soul of Popery, and for all other both Jewish and heathenish
Religions, and all manner of sects, so destructive to that Religion, which the
King of Saints and King of Kings, and the only King of his Church, the Lord
Jesus Christ himself has taught us, and to the peace and quietness of the
Land; this I say, must needs seem a monstrous thing to any moderate minded
Christian: Nay, how unreasonably do these men deal with their brethren? they
plead for a toleration of all Religions here in England, and yet in New England
banish men into Islands from amongst them, for dissenting from them in their new
model of Church Government, and for but dissenting from them in their opinions
about Religion; and h^re amongst us what impious and railing books do they
make against the Ministers for endeavoring to establish that Religion, and
that Church Government that God himself in his holy Word has set down? and
what approbrious names do they give the faithful and painful Preachers and
Pastors of the Church of England, calling them Baals Priests the professed
enemies of Jesus Christ and his Kingdom, the lims of Antichrist, false
Prophets, the brood of Babylon, terming some particular men of them Rabshekes,
others Bauds, others Black mouths, legal Preachers, and stiling all of them
the cursed enemies of Jesus Christ, and think of them as men not worthy to
live, and in express words profess it; and yet these men plead for a
toleration of all Religions, when both by their words and deeds they manifest,
if it were in their power, the first work they would do should be to root us
all out of the Kingdom: so that all men may see, they say one thing and mean
another, that they would tolerate all Religions, but only that which is the
true Religion, and so by that means have no Religion at all, but one of their
own making, which by their new lights they have of late found out, which they
call the straight way to Heaven, and the only way of setting up Christ upon
his Throne, which is nothing else, to say the truth, but to dis-throne him, and
set up themselves and their new model, for who does not see how already they
lord it over all good Christians, not admitting them to the Sacraments; but
upon their own terms, nor suffering their children to be baptized amongst
them, nor so much as suffering any they call Presbyterians to preach in their
new congregated Assemblies: and if this be to give a toleration of any Religion
but their own, let all the world judge: but I say, and will ever by Gods
assistance be able to make it good, in that they plead for a toleration of all
Religions, they are guilty of heinous and foul sins being accomplices, as well
as they that are Actors.

Now then when the Presbyters of the Church of England seek and endeavor in
all their proceedings to establish that Religion which Christ the King of his
Church has taught them and his blessed Apostles, and labor to set up that
Government that was ordained in all Churches to be perpetuated to the end of
the world; in their so doing, they imitate all the Patriarchs, Prophets and
Apostles, and in that they do more advance Christ's Kingdom than the
Independents, who under pretense of liberty of conscience would bring in a
toleration of all Religions and confusion upon us all. Surely, if ever any
Ministers deserved well from the people, the Ministers of England now do, who
by all their endeavors show that they seek to bring them to the knowledge of
God and of his Son Jesus Christ, and to the knowledge of themselves which is
life eternal: For what could men do more than that which they have done, who
have Petitioned the House of Lords and Commons now sitting in the great
Council of the Kingdom, that they might be armed with authority from them in
their several charges, to have the examination of such as shall be admitted to
the Sacraments, that they may be rightly informed in the knowledge of those
holy Mysteries and that ^one that are either ignorant or scandalous in their
lives, may be suffered to communicate at the Lords Table, by which their
endeavor, they show the Christian care they have of their eternal welfare
(for which the people are ever bound unto them) and by the which also they take
away all scandal and occasion of offense to others, which formerly pretended
that the cause of their separating from our Congregations and Assemblies, was,
in regard they could not communicate with dogs and swine, and with the tag
ragge and bobtaile of all the Malignants; for in such terms they usually
express themselves.

Now when the occasion of this scandal and offense is taken away by the care
of the Ministers, and all Superstition and Popish Ceremonies, and all
will*worship is also rooted out, and when the Gospel is truly and faithfully
by them preached, both in season and out of season, and the Name of God truly
invocated and the Sacraments duly and rightly administered, what just cause have
the Independents now either of separation or of traducing either Ministers or
people of being enemies of Christ and his Kingdom; when by all their
endeavors they only seek the advancement of him and his Kingdom amongst
them? I have so good an opinion of all moderate minded Christians, that when
they shall seriously weigh and consider what I have here writ, and truly and
faithfully set down, that those of them that have formerly been alienated from
them, will again, being now undeceived, return every one of them to their own
Pastors, by whose Ministry they have been converted; and that all other
understanding men will not only have more charitable thoughts both of the
Ministers and Believers of the Church of England, but will likewise look more
narrowly into, and examine more diligently all those new ways, and by finding
them out, to be indeed but new, will seek for the old way and walk in it: And
truly it stands all men now in hand that desire the welfare of the whole
Kingdom, yea the safety, tranquillity and felicity of three Kingdoms and the
peace of them all, and the quiet of the Church and the prosperity of Zion, and
indeed the peace of their own families, and a good accord, harmony, love, and
unity amongst brethren, to seek for the old way which has the promise of
peace, which can never be preserved where differences and diversities of
opinions with a toleration of all Religions are allowed of; for they tend to
nothing but disunion and to a violation of all bonds of true and cordial
affection; for they can never love such as they have a command to shun nor
never really affect such men's companies and acquaintance whom they are ever
jealous of, that they will seduce their wives, children, and families;
therefore I say that all people may not only seek for, but find that old way
of peace, shall ever be his prayer that wishes that all men may be saved and
come to the knowledge of the Truth.

AN APPENDIX.
In the which all the reproaches, and truth-gainsaying calumnies, so
injuriously and causelessly cast upon me by my Brother BURTON, my Quondam
Fellow-sufferer, are all wiped away with the sponge of Innocence in this my
true Answer unto him: In the which also, all such passages as he so
exceedingly exaggerates and cries out against in my Preface and Postscript are
cleared from his clamorous surmises, and my Integrity vindicated from all his
traducing Inferences, and forced Conclusions.

Brother Burton,
IN the beginning of your Epistle to the Reader, say you, This answer was long
ago so conceived in the womb, as the slow birth may seem to have outgone his
due time. Truly it had been good for you, and far more for your honor, and
for the honor and glory of God, and for the honor of your holy profession,
that the womb of this your Book had been its grave: for it has not only
given great scandal to many, but sadded the hearts of multitudes of Gods
people that formerly truly loved and honored you. But men that make more haste
then good speed, have cause at leisure often to repent, as you one day must do
for this untimely birth of your deformed and monstrous brat. To the matters of
Argument concerning your opinion in answer to my Book; I have in the foregoing
Treatise made my Reply, in this Appendix I am to make my just defense against
some false accusations and soul aspersions with which you have bespatterd me
through your whole discourse; but should I sum up all the revilings,
scornings, vilifying, unsufferable and unchristian language, which those of
your Fraternity (after I had declared my self to be none of your party, before
any of my Books came forth) did and still do provoke and salute me with, even
in the open streets, to the shame of their profession (yet in the 27. page of
your Book approved of) they would rise to a volume. But I have learned with
the Apostle Paul, to pass through honor and dishonor, through evil report
and good report, as a Deceiver and yet true (2 Cor. 6. 8.) being therefore
nothing moved with their raylings, I spread them before the Lord, and for
brevitie sake will not here repeat them.

I shall only take a note of some (passing by many) of the unbrotherly
reproaches, false accusations, and bitter invectives, poured out from your
self (whose Scholars it may be thought the others are) and I will unfaynedly
answer you, in the words of truth and soberness, and in the spirit of
meekness and love. But first give me leave to say, that from you of all men I
least expected, much less deserved such hard speeches, I having been not only
a sufferer with you (which ingageth a personal respect) but always ready and
forward in the worst and most dangerous times to appear in your defense to my
own great detriment and damage, and as a faithful friend, have stuck close,
and been serviceable unto you since, as can sufficiently be proved when your
protestation protested was questioned; all which challenged a Christian
circumspection, even in reproving of humane frailties.

Now things being thus between you and me, how exceedingly does it aggravate
your offense, in scandalizing my name as you have done? For mine own part,
when out of zeal to Gods Glory, and my servent desire of Syons peace, I write
against that new way you walk in, and justly blamed in general (naming no
man) the unwarrantable writings, and censures published, and laid upon all who
in their judgments dissent from Independents, though truly Godly, affirming,
that they are but converts in part, that they are enemies to Christ's Kingly
office: and set up Christ as a pageant King; that they neither profess nor
confess Christ, but with the Jews say, we will not have this man to reign
over us: observing also in the Frontispices of their Books writ in defense of
Independent errors, these words; Think not that I am come to send peace upon
earth: I came not to send peace but a sword, etc. Matthew. 10. 34 35, 36. and
that in a time of so great distractions, when your party have subtly spread
Schism, Faction, and caused fraction and division through the Kingdom; and
considering withal how ready tumultuous and turbulent people are, especially
upon such advantages as these, to misapply Christ's words (as all men may see,
and by their daily expressions plainly perceive they do) and from that text
are easily persuaded to believe they have good ground and warrant to fight
against their Christian brethren to maintain errors and their own whimsies; I
say, I weighing all these things, when I writ against erroneous and peace
disturbing ways, which I took to be my duty, yet so far was I your fellow
sufferer, from falling at odds with you (as you seem to intimate, page 2.)
that in reproving sin, for which I have sacred Writ to be my warrant, Levit
19. 17. I gave a reverentiall honor to the person, and to manifest my respects
unto your self (because a sufferer) I brought not your name upon the Theater;
error I confuted, the danger of misapplying Scripture I declared, and
reprehended, and so by Gods gracious assistance I ever shall; and will not
connive with any that hold and labor to maintain a way that leads to error
and faction: But so tender I was of your repute, and at so vast a distance from
reproaching you with untruths to render you despicable to men, that your name I
spared to mention, and for my description of a grave man with a white
basket-hilted-beard, a self denying man would have passed it over with
silence, and only made use of it, as a respectfull private reproof. For I
beseech you lay aside your passion, and consider a little, are there not some
others of your judgment, that have as great white beards as your self? which
are basket-hilted beards in my Dialect, a harmless word in it self, and a
word that you know in Love and Mirth I do frequently use to my dearest and
familiar friends, and it was not counted scurrilous or offensive by any other,
nor by your self (to whom I have often used this expression, and you never
reproved me nor were offended at it until now, because I cannot approve of
your writings and way, which God is my witness, before whom I speak, and who
knows the secret intentions of my heart, I would embrace and walk in, were
there in Scripture any command, precept or example for my so doing, but you can
never produce sound Scripture proofs for it. Now Scripture clearly holds out
that way I walk in, practice and maintain.

Brother you were too too precipitate, you need not have made a particular
application in public, and then present your self to the view of the world in
so great a passion, as to let men see and know, you are not able to digest a
merry word; Alas! thousands never saw your book, and of them that have seen and
read it, happily every one took not notice of your uncharitable writings and
opinions; for until you so unadvisedly rushed out, and on the public Theater
proclaimed your self to be the man, very few suspected you would have dealt so
unbrotherly with your brethren (who though they differ from your judgment, yet
are sincerely godly, and have deserved well from you, and laid out themselves
freely, for the good of you, and yours, above all other men) as to pronounce
them emenies of Jesus Christ, or that you would unchristian all holy
Christians, and deny the saving work of grace in them (true conversion) because
they dare not join with you, nor approve of those opinions you have lately
taken up; you have not been so forward at other times to declare your self to
be the man (why now?) surely you conceit the subscribing your name again
thereunto, is a sufficient ground for men to believe, that those passages and
assertions are not erroneous, and that it is a Piaculum in me to question the
matter, time, season, and manner of publishing such things; if so, you mistake
your self exceedingly, for this is an undeniable truth, that you are a man
subject to like passions (and errors) as other men are (Jam. 5. 17.) even your
best friends being Judges. And that I may discover your self unto your self,
I will sum up a few of your passionate expressions, with your unbrotherly (that
I say not unchristian) aspersions, and slanderous accusations brought against
me by name, in your book that you entitle (but how truly) Vindiciae Veritatis,
which before ever I had seen or so much as heard of, being in the Country when
it came forth, one having perused it, briefly and lovingly reproved you and
writ against many unworthy reproaches and slanders contained therein; And I
shall now again take a note of them, and then clear those false accounts
wherewith you have so deeply charged me, which consist of several particulars:
viz.

You account me one that has but fair flourishes of holiness. Page 17. An
Adversary to Christ's Kingdom, and an open enemy and Persecutor of the Church.
Page 18. A Scandalous Walker to the shame of the very name of Christian
Religion. Page 20. Worse then a Heathen, a base and barbarous man. Page 21. One
of the greatest Incendiaries in the Land. Page 25. A dishonest man of a
Serpentine practice. Page 28. A hollow-hearted man of a shallow brain, a man,
not only whose heart is divided, but whose head is, etc. Page 29.
The reckoning in the full sum (by your account) amounts to thus much, that I
am an hypocrite, an unbeleever, a persecutor, a profane, wicked, base and
barbarous man, an Incendiary, a Knave, a Serpent, a Dissembler, an Ignoramus, a
mad Man, etc. Oh that ever such a soul condemning, heart accusing, head
dividing Charge should be drawn up and published by a Quondam Fellow Sufferer!
Is this no railing nor bitter speaking because cunningly uttered by an
Independent? If sober men (who are godly without faction) judge of this your
method, it will appear, and by them be truly voted, you have forgot the promise
you made (page the second); for my part I leave it to the grave consideration
of such.

And I shall now speak a little to your great charge, of which a man might make
a book in Folio, to set forth the sinful sinfulness that lies closely coucht
therein, with your furious smiting at my soul and body, which inforceth me to
say, These are the wounds that I received in the house of my Friend, (Zech. 13.
6.) Yet because from a friend and a Quondam Fellow Sufferer, I presently bound
them up, and should have been very sparing in opening and discovering of them
again, could I have done it without prejudicing the life of my good name, and
obscuring truth; but for the preservation of the one, and the manifestation of
the other, I am constrained not to neglect to lay them open, search their
depth, declare their danger; and what evil effects may ensue, and to pour in
the sovereign Balsome of a good conscience, and lay upon them the plaster of
innocence, which is the only approved remedy for such desperate wounds.

Now for your Bi^^ of Accusations, and Defamations, I here in the presence of
God, and before all men protest against it, absolutely denying the whole
charge, and do affirm, that neither you nor any mortal creature can truly
make any one of the least particulars thereof good against me, although you
have labored hard, and taken a great deal of pains to do it, howsoever in
the opinion of holy, wise, and learned men to little purpose. But waving that
business a little I will first discover the ground of your fury against me, and
then go on.

You preach and write that Independencie according to your practice, is the
only way to advance Christ upon his Throne, and that narrow path which all
Christians are commanded to walk in, but hitherto your confident saying so, is
the strongest Argument you bring to maintain your Assertion. Now in that I
durst not take your bare word, nor no mansliving, have he never such
fairepretences, in Gods matters, but with the Bereans searching the Scriptures,
whether those things were so or no, and finding that way contrary to Gods Word
and Apostoli call practice, having by clear Scripture and Arguments grounded
thereupon, discovered the error of that way out of a Christian remorse and
godly pity to the souls of poor weak tender hearted Christians, who are
easy to be seduced, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine, Ephesians. 4.
14. Exhorted Magistrates, Parents, Masters, and all that fear the Lord in
sincerity, to put to their helping hand to keep the people from wandering into
bypath, and to see that they and their families together do serve our God,
live in his fear, and walk in the ways of his commandments according to
Scripture rule, and the example of the faithful, holy servants of the Lord,
etc.

This forsooth is the ground of your quarrel which I thought fit to mention by
the way of Preface, and for this you accuse me to be an Adversary of Christ's
Kingdom, an open enemy and Persecutor of the Church (and what not?) to which
with a good conscience I answer you scandalize me, for according to the
Apostles exhortation, 2 Timothy 2. 15. I have studied to show my self approved
unto God; nay, further I say, I am ready, (if the will of God be so) to lay
down my life for the Regality, and Kingly office of Jesus Christ, and for the
peace of his Church, but not in your notion having no warrant for it. Brother,
give me leave to ask you the like question which Paul did the Galatians, Gal.
4. 16. Am I therefore (an adversary to Christ's Kingdom, a Persecutor) become
your enemy because I tell you the truth? I appeal to the righteous Judge, to
judge between you and me herein; and pass to other particulars in your
charge, handling them together as they have nearest relation one to the other.
Now where you speak of me as if I were an Hypocrite, and boldly accuse me of
walking scandalously to the shame of the very name of Christian Religion; for
these, and all your other false calumnies God who is the just Judge of all men,
will one day call you to an account; in the mean time let me tell you, though
your accusations be founded as deep as hell, yet neither Satan, who is the
Accuser of the Brethren, Revel. 1^. 10. nor any Instrument that he does work
in, or by, can be ever able in the words of truth to prove your charge; but it
is an old stratagem of Satan, when a man labors to walk uprightly, to fear
God, and eschew evil, thus to accuse him; for when God himself had declared
the integrity of his servant Job, Job. 1. 8. notwithstanding Satan durst accuse
him to be an Hypocrite, and say that if God but put forth his hand to touch all
that he had, he would curse God to his face, Job. 1. 9, 10, 11. and when God
gave Satan power over all he had, verse 12. and Job still blessed the name of
the Lord, he sinned not, nor charged God foolishly, verse 21, 22. yet Satan
went on in accusing Job, and ceased not until God gave him power over his
body, Job 2. 5. 6. yea, his friends, through Satan's instigation, spoke against
him, and condemned him to be a man who had only shows of Religion, or to use
your words, fair flourishes of holiness, Job 4. 6, 7, 8. Job 15. 2, 3, 4, 5.
Thus has Satan dealt with me, God gave him power over all I had, and over my
body, he cast me into prison that I might be tried, Revel. 2. 10. and he
has stirred up such as should have been and seemed to be my friends, to
accuse me for an Hypocrite, a scandalous Walker, and what ever he falsely
suggests unto them, yet still I have, (and will by the grace of God in me)
retained mine Integrity, and with holy Job, I answer you, and all such
Traducers; My witness is in Heaven, and my Record is on high: My friends
scorn me; but mine eye pours out tears unto God, Job 16. 19, 20. Brother
Burton, it cannot be denied, but that you and your party, have brought the same
accusation against me, as Satan, and Jobs friends brought against him; yet as
God reproved them, and accepted of Job, Job. 42. 8. so my God whom I in truth
and sincerity serve with the twelve Tribes of Israel day and night, Act. 26. 7.
has approved, and will accept of me, maugre all the power, false accusations,
Revilings, subtle Wiles, and workings of Satan; for, as the Apostle says, 2
Cor. 2. 11. I am not ignorant of his devises; nay, herein I have comfort,
because I know the faithful servants of God in all ages have been traduced
and accused for Hypocrites, and scandalous Walkers; we read 2 Cor. 10. 2.
that the false Apostles did think, or reckon of Paul, as one that walked
according to the flesh; but as the Apostle speaks to them, in the third verse
of that Chapter, so I say to you, that though I walk in the flesh, yet I do
not war after the flesh, etc. For I have lived in all good conscience before
God until this day, Act. 23. 1. But were all true you have said, and that of
your own knowledge, or could you by the testimony of honest, sober, and
approved Christians, prove me such an one, as you have decyphered me, it had
been a brotherly part, more Saint-like, and would have brought less scandal
to the Gospel, if you had pleased to have made known between you and me,
wherein you conceived, or had been informed, that I walked scandalously; and if
I could not have cleared my self from all such wicked aspertions, and made it
plainly appear, that it was a malicious evil report raised causelessely,
then if you had reproved me sharply, you had done as a Christian ought to do;
For, to reprove sin is warrantable, and an Argument of brotherly Love, Levit.
19. 17. but to receive a false report of me, or slily raise it up, and publish
it in print, before you had labored to restore me in the spirit of meekness,
according to the Apostles exhortation, Gal. 6. 1. or told me my fault between
you and me, and used all such other means to have gained a brother, as Christ
our King and Lawgiver has commanded, Matthew. 18. 15, 16, 17. is an open
disobedience to his Royal Mandates, and does demonstrate, that in all things
you have not (as you pretend) obeyed Christ, nor made his will revealed in Gods
Word your rule to walk by, and therefore you in this have not set him upon his
Throne.

And to that hell-hatcht charge which you have brought against me, cunningly
aspersing me for a scandalous walker, etc.

I answer, that as the Devil spoke in the subtle Serpent and belyed God
himself to our first Parents; so the Inventors of this notorious untruth, who
ever they be, are of a serpentine nature, into whom the Devil is entered, and
having a full possession, speaks in them being subtle and active Instruments
to report Lies; and I am confident that upon due and just examination, it will
appear they are some shameless infamous creatures set a work by the Devil,
and prompted by Sectaries, to defame me; that there by the Gospel, my holy
profession, and the ways of God might be scandalized in blemishing my good
name: and to have it with the more credit received, he has so ordered, That
you must be the Herald to proclaim their Devilish defamations, yet
notwithstanding my innocence triumphs in the midst of black mouths
slanders, being fully assured that God in his due time, will make a clear
discovery of their wicked design, for he is above the Devil: And before the
Lord, that sees the secret thoughts, imaginations, intentions of all men, in
truth and faithfulness I speak it, I can, I do, and by Gods grace ever
shall, wash my hands in innocence; yea, I call upon the righteous Judge, the
God of Heaven and Earth, who knows my innocence to judge between you and me
herein: For, God is my witness, that I have endeavored to walk before him
with an honest, sincere, faithful, and upright heart, ever since he gave me
the knowledge of himself. And during the time I was in the estate of nature,
God by his preventing and restrayning grace kept me from living or delighting
in such sins, whereby any could truly charge me for a scandalous Walker.
Therefore in the presence of this great God, who of his free grace has
Elected, Called, and Justified me through faith in his Son the Lord Jesus
Christ, not suffering me to turn aside, neither to the right hand nor to the
left, out of the paths of truth and that lead to holiness: I solemnly protest,
and hold out my Protestation to the view of the whole World; you have most
injuriously wronged me, in proclaiming me to be such an one; For I am as
blameless and free from your calumniations, as Naboth was from wicked Iezabels
desperate plot, wherewith she took away his life, 1 King 21. 8, 9, 10. etc.
and as innocent as Joseph, from the false accusations brought against him by
his wanton, lascivious, and shameless mistress, Genesis 39. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18,
which makes me bold to say, neither the Devil, any of his Instruments, no nor
your self, in the words of truth, can prove the things whereof you have
accused me.

I shall here conclude my answer to this Charge with the Apostle Paul's words, 1
Cor. 4. 3, 4, 5. But with me it is a very small thing that I should be judged
of you, or of man's judgment: yea, I judge not mine own self. For I know
nothing by my self, yet am I not hereby justified: but he that judges me is
the Lord. Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who
both will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest
the Councels of the heart: and then shall every man have praise of God.

Brother, I have been the larger in my reply to this particular because it is
the foundation and main pillar that may seem to hold up all your other
Calumnies; for if you could prove me to be a Scandalous walker, to the shame of
the very name of Christian Religion, then men might easily be persuaded to
believe your whole Charg; But the foundation being so rotten and unfound, the
superstructure cannot possibly stand.

I now proceed to the fourth particular, and my Answer thereunto is, that no
man of truth, worth, and piety, can justly tax me either with baseness or
barbarism.

For the fifth particular, it is elevated very high, and because you have in
this exceedingly bestirred your self, I am necessitated (for the clearing my
self, and to vindicate the truth of what I have written) to be somewhat large
in my reply, that I may fully answer the Charge you bring against me therein,
which is very great: viz. You accuse me to be one of the greatest Incendiaries
in the Land, and to prove this you quote two passages in one of my books, and
you bring them as two witnesses; for the confirmation thereof, the first is in
my Preface page 28. the second in my Postcript page 45. Now these two witnesses
of your own (say you) want but a Judge judicially to pronounce sentence whether
these words be not of an Incendiary nature and that in a high degree: For who is
so blind as does not clearly see these fiery flashes and flames to fly in the
face of that Army which God has honored with many Crowns of admirable
Victories both at York, at Naseby, and at Lamport, with the recovery of
Leicester, Bridgewater, Bath, etc. so as God has made this despised Army, the
Preservative of City and Country, the Repairer of the breach, the Restorer of
the paths to dwell in. Thus you.

Brother, this accusation has a Tower raised on the same Basis the whole
Fabric of your Charge is founded upon, and the foundation being deep, you dare
build so high as (if it were possible) to overtop truth, not fearing the fall
of your Babel; but God, who is Truth it self, seeing the evil of your
intentions, has confounded your Language, as he did those builders who sought
to get themselves a name, Genesis 11. 4, 5, 6, 7. And therefore it will fall
notwithstanding the height of its Tower. O what a confused relation have you
made to prove me an Incendiary! I assure you in all you have said, men of the
clearest eyesight, nay were they Eagleey'd, they can never discern any truth
where with you make good that Charge which you say is so conspicuous to the
view of all men: For those two witnesses that you produce, thus they speak
(Preface page 28. says) They have the sword now in their hand, and they think
their party strong enough to encounter any adverse and opposing party, and they
profess they care not how soon they come to cutting of throats, and speak of
nothing but the slaughtering and bunchering of the Presbyterians, and therefore
there is just cause given us to think we may expect better quarter from the
very enemies, then from the Independents. (Postscript testifies) that the
Independents boast they have such a party in the Kingdom, (if their own words
may be credited) as they now think by the sword to be able to make their own
laws; and have been frequently heard say, that they had many abbettors in the
Assembly, and in both Houses of Parliament and in many parts through the
Kingdom, besides in all the Armies; and they were all resolved to have the
liberty of their consciences, or else they would make use of their swords,
which they have already in their hands. So that most certain it is the Religion
of too too many of them is a mere faction, etc. Now what these two have
affirmed, can be corroborated by other witnesses, and if in your account he be
an Incendiary that in detestation thereof has set down their words by way of
repetition to discover the danger of permitting such lawless spirits to go on
in their unwarrantable ways, what great Incendiartes are they that have
imagined such things in their hearts and boldly spoken those words with their
mouths? For out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, Matthew. 12.
34. Luke 6. 45. as it can be proved Independents have done; and so much the two
witnesses you spoke of said; and no more; for they accused not that Army, which
God has honored with many Crowns of admirable Victories, etc. But you say,
they cast fiery flashes and flames which do fly in the face of that Army, etc.
Truly this is no other but a false Comment made by your self, from which you
draw an evil inference, and then you cry out (as a man overcome with passion)
saying, these words are not to be born: but I leave (say you) the judgment
thereof to the wisdom and justice of the Parliament, whose former freeing of
you extends not to clear your words from being Incendiary. Thus far you.

Brother, I profess I am heartily sorry to see that you my Quondam Fellow
Sufferer should so much forget your self, as not only bitterly, unworthily,
and most falsely thus to inveigh against me, but also to insinuate into the
Parliament, as if they could not manifest their wisdom and justice, except
they pass their judgment, and censure me according to your bill of
Information. This violent prosecution, and your Canterburian expressions, make
not me alone, but all other solid Christians wonder at your spirit: for you may
please to call to mind, how one once professed he would not pass any sentence
against You, my Brother Prynne, and My self, but left us as he said to the
wisdom and justice of the Court, which was in the judgment of all that heard
his whole speech, to pronounce us so highly guilty, that if the Lords there
present, did not severely censure us, they would show themselves neither wise,
nor just. This president you have exactly followed against me but it will never
Crown your head with honor; and for the Parliament, it is their glory to
slight troublesome informers: for should they hearken to every information
invented and drawn up by the unsatisfied and turbulent spirits of some
Independents, it would cloud their wisdom, and totally eclipse the shining of
their Justice in our Horizon: But you cannot there obtain an Order to have your
Bill taken pro confesso, and gain so much of the Parliament that I should not
answer for my self; therefore I may and will speak for my self in my just
defense and show how unjustly you have accused me; And here I deny your Charg
in every particular circumstance.

But before I return my answer thereunto, you having given me such a Theme to
speak upon, as the due acknowledgement of Gods goodness in raising us up
deliverers when City and Country were sorely afflicted and heavily oppressed on
every side, in speaking of Gods providentiall care and several actings in way
of mercy to his people, I cannot omit (by way of thankfulness to God and men)
to declare how that in the first place City and Country are deeply engaged for
ever next unto divine goodness to honor and highly esteem those Lords,
Knights, Gentlemen, and Citizens who in the beginning of the Kingdoms
troubles, like the Governors of Israel and the Princes of Issachar did offer
themselves willingly among the people. Judges 5. 9. 15. whose very appearing in
the cause was then of such concernment, that as it made the hearts of all who
were truly godly to praise God for them, so thereby God made them the
preservative of City and Country; Insomuch that upon serious consideration we
shall find, that those Noble Lords, and all those brave Commanders that adhered
to them, who as Zebulon and Napthali jeoparded their lives unto the death, in
the high places of the field, and exposed themselves to reproach, Judges 5. 18.
are not to be over looked, and their gallant undertakings obscured under a Sable
cloud of unthankfulness, nor to be buried in the grave of Oblivion.

For, when the Kingdom was in greatest danger, then God made use of them to
preserve City and Country, raising an Army by Land, and setting forth a Navy
at sea, under the commands of the Right Honorable, thrice Illustrious,
Faithful, Valiant, and for ever to be highly honored Lords, Robert Earl of
Essex, and Robert Earl of Warwick, whom he made by sea, and land,
isntrumental for the good and welfare of the Kingdom; and the truth is, at
this day, neither preservation nor safety could have been expected in City
and Country, as things then stood, had not these two Renowned Lords and
Heroes, so nobly and undauntedly appeared in the cause, and undertaken the
charge, and care upon them, one to be Admiral of the Navy at sea, the other
to be General of the Parliaments forces by Land: For this their undertaking
was in such a juncture of time, that had they out of self respects declined
it, unless the Lord by a miracle had withstood and over-throwne our enemies,
City and Country (in all probability) long before this time, would have been
overrun, and possessed by them, and no man should now have had peace in his
going out or coming in: But by the valor, vigilancie, and faithfulness of
our then Noble Admiral, our Seas were safe-guarded, by which means, foreign
enemies were awed, homebred enemies weakened, by surprising many Ships, Arms,
Ammunition, Instruments, and Preparations for war, which were sent over into
England, for the destruction of City and Country; besieged Towns were by him
relieved, as Lyme, Plymouth, etc. So that God made that Noble Lord by Sea* the
preservative of City, and Country, which lay open ready to be destroyed by
cruel and bloody enemies. And as the Earl of War wicke by Sea, so had not the
Earl of Essex, being General of the Parliaments Armies by Land, been an
experienced Commander, faithful to their cause, and with a most Heroic and
undaunted courage stood to the Battle at Edgehill (when by report whole
Regiments ran away, and through fear deserted him) there now would have been
no safety in City and Country. What had become of City and Country when
Bristow was lost, and Gloucester closely besieged, which though it was a long
time, even beyond expectation valiantly maintained by Colonel Massy the then
Governor thereof, that ever to be honored Gentleman, had it not by the care
and valor of that Noble Lord been seasonably relieved, it could not possibly
have held longer out, but must have been delivered up unto the Enemy, and
have been made a prey for the Spoylers, and then what peace or safety would
City or Country have enjoyed? In a word, what had become of City and
Country, if that Army under his command, and so gallantly encouraged by him
had not incountered the enemies of our peace, and through Gods mercy
victoriously discomfited their Forces several times, as at Newbury, and at
other places?

Truly it is by all, that will not manifest to the whole world that they are
ungrateful to God, and unthankefull to men, ever to be acknowledged, that the
Earl of Essex, the Earl of War wicke, with those gallant Commanders, and
Citizens in that Army, and Navy commanded by them, deserve the first place of
honor to be our preservers, some of whose names I shall by and by set down,
though I can never sufficiently set forth their praises and their merits, and
to these many other worthy Generals must be added with all those gallant
Officers and Commanders under them, who commanded several Armies, Regiments
and Companies by Commissions from the Earl of Essex: as the Right Honorable,
thrice Illustrious, Faithful, Valiant, and for ever to be highly honored Lord.

Edward Earl of Manchester. The Earl of Denby. The Earl of Stanford. The
Earl of Peterborrow, General of the Ordnance at Keinton. The Lord Robert,
Lord Martial of the field. The Lord Fairfax, and his son Sir Thomas Fairfax
his Excellency now Captain General of the Forces raised by the Parliament.
The Lord Gray. The Lord Willoughby. Sir William Waller, Major General. Sir
Arthur Haslerig. Sir William Brereton. Sir William Balfour General of the
Horse. Sir John Merrick General of the Ordnance. Sir Philip Stapleton,
Lieutenant General of the Ordnance. Sir Samuel Luke, Colonel, Governor of
Newport-Pannell. Sir Robert Pie Colonel. Sir Edward Dods-worth Knight.
Commissary General for the Musters of the Cavallary, with the Earl of Essex
Lord General His Excellency. Sir John Gell. Sir Edward Peatoe Lieutenant
General of the Ordnance at Keinton. Sir John Meldrum Colonel. Major General
Skippon. Colonel Massy. Colonel Hollesse. Colonel William Davis. Colonel
James Sheefeild. Colonel Thomas Shefeild. Colonel Richard Graves. Colonel
Dolbier. Colonel Brown. Colonel Essex slain at Keinton Colonel Morgan.
Colonel More. Colonel Rossiter. Colonel King. Colonel Poyns. Colonel
Terrell. Colonel Dodson. Colonel Goodwin. Major Hercules Langerish.
All these and many hundreds more, whose names are unknown to me, none of the
which were then Independents, yet whose fame, for their noble chivalry and
gallantry in all their employments, will live when Mortality is dead; and truly
for every one of these I have by name set down, they are all of them men
accomplished for all heroical virtue, and such as of whom severally for their
most excellent service, and several engagements, even in difficultest times* I
could make a large Discourse, and yet that would not sufficiently set forth
their due praises; for these first Actors under-went the heat of the day, and
by their valor quelled the Enemy, as I have heard the Cavaliers themselves
acknowledge; and therefore all those noble Heroes and gallant Commanders, as I
said before, have all of them primary right to that title Isay 58. 12. to be
called the Repairers of the breach, the restorers of our paths to dwell in;
for as much as when we were in great fears and unavoydable ruin did seem to
threaten both Church and State, then God moved all their hearts to appear in
his cause, and made them the preservative of City and Country, Whose
undertakings, performances, faithfulness, valor, and Noble prowess, ought to
be predicated, and recorded, that future generations may know their deliverers,
and admire Gods goodness who gave them magnanimous spirits to appear and
expose themselves to danger for the Kingdoms safety in such a time, when the
people were generally secure, ignorant of the miseries that were like to befall
them, and their posterity, and so deluded with promises and protestations that
the greater part in most Counties, withstood their own good, the peace and
welfare of Church and State. And when the men in England lived delicately, and
had been so long dandled in the lap of peace, that very few, none in
comparison, had ever seen the formidable face of a real fighting Army, nor had
ever beheld the furious countenance of bloody war, whilst she encountreth with
her enemies, but were unacquainted and altogether unexperienced with warlike
affairs, and marshall discipline: yea, when City and Country were in great
distractions and eminent danger, and when all things both by sea and land, were
to be accomplished for the preservation thereof, with all manner of
disadvantages, and the greatest hazard and difficulty, that men could possibly
meet withal; and therefore I say again all these brave men have the primary
right to be called the repairers of the breaches, the restorers of our paths
to dwell in.

And next unto these illustrious ones, I pray good Brother look upon the
famous City of London, and on all the true hearted citizens in it, who stood
close to the Parliament in the most dangerous times, and first rescued their
Members questioned, and preserved them all from the jaws of imminent danger,
and after that exposed themselves their lives, fortunes, and liberties in their
quarrel, and stuck close to their cause, supplying them continually with Men,
Moneys, and Ammunition, and all manner of warlicke accoutrements, without whish
the whole Kingdom had been miserable; Yea, in their own persons in the City
and in the Field they hazarded all their lives in the Parliaments and their
countries service, so as they also may justly challenge a share in the next
place to those noble Worthies above mentioned, to be counted the Repairers of
our breaches, and Restorers of our paths to dwell in; and therefore I shall
desire you Brother, and all those of your Fraternity to give the next place of
honor to this Renowned City. And whiles I am now speaking of such as have
deserved well, and merited the name (under God) of being preservers of our
paths to dwell in: I pray let us not forget out brethren the Scots whose
faithful service deserves eternal gratitude and an everlasting memory, who
also stood in the breaches when we were but in a low condition, who for our
assistance exposed their own lives, fortunes and countries to the fury and rage
of many a potent enemy, and endured incredible hardship at home and abroad,
undergoing many miseries, and that at such a season of the year as was enough
to have killed them, to lie in the field, and made their Country a prey for the
spoilers, who used barbarous and merciless cruelties upon them, many of their
brave and gallant commanders and gentlemen also daily loosing their lives and
wallowing in their own blood, and all for our preservations; and therefore they
may, under God, duly challenge the third place of honor to be reputed the
Repairers of our breaches and Restorers of our paths to dwell in: whose
kindness, brother, I could wish that those of your party may never forget.

And I may not whiles I enumerate those that have deserved the name of
deliverers, omit here to speak of all the faithful Presbyterian Ministers in
this City as well as through Country, those Chariots and Horsemen of our Israel
though now forgotten, many of the which not only ventered their lives in
battle, but by holding up their hands as Moses did when the people of Israel
fought against the enemy, and by the lifting up their hearts and voices to God
with strong cries made all our Armies abroad and our Counsels at home to
prosper, and all our undertakings happily to succeed. Neither is that all, but
by their wisdom vigilance, and powerful and persuasive preaching they were
the principal means under God of keeping the people here and every where in
obedience to the Parliament by resolving their doubts, satisfying their
scruples, and going before the people to their abilities, yea (many of them to
my knowledge out of zeal to the cause) beyond their abilities in all
contributions, animating and encouraging others to bring in their Plate and
Moneys and whatsoever was of price and esteem with them exhorting them now if
ever to stand for their Religion, Lives, Liberties and the Liberty of the
Subject: And as by their endeavors they did exceedingly promote the cause
through City and Country; so many of them did the Parliament very good service
in discovering secret and powerful enemies by which they were disabled to do
mischief. In a word I peremptorily assert it, that next under God the whole
Kingdom are bound to be thankful to the Ministers who strengthened the hands
and hearts of the soldiers everywhere to battle and made them stick close to
their several Commanders and Captains, who without their soldiers could
never have done any thing of moment for our deliverance; and all the people
through the associated Counties especially may thank their painful and
faithful Ministers that they now live in peace and tranquillity under their
several Vines and Figtrees; and therefore the condemnation of those men sleeps
not that for all their Ministers care for them and their pains taken both to
preserve them in a bodily being and for converting their souls, in lieu of
thankfulness do not only reproach them with odious and infamous names, but
would deprive them also of their livelyhoods and take away their tithes from
them. Such ingratitude was never heard of in any nation before, but there was
eminent danger insued upon it; for in the second of the Chronicles the last
chapter, when the Lord sent his Prophets and Servants amongst them early and
late calling them to repentance, and the people despised them, it is related
that they provoked God so much by it, as there was now no remedy and medicine
left to cure the nation: I pray God the same may not happen to this ungrateful
nation, who you brother and your accomplices have enraged against our faithful
and zealous Ministers, who notwithstanding whatsoever the Independent party can
say, may challenge also a share and that a great one in that honor to be
counted the Repairers of our breaches and the Restorers of our paths to dwell
in; and all this before the battle of York and Nazeby, in both which the
Independents did not do all the service as is pretended, and who all of them
have deserved as well from the Parliament and the whole Country as before.

This, brother Burton, being premised, I come now to answer your Charge (which
as I formerly said) I do absolutely deny.

And here I affirm that after these two noble Earls, and other of our
honorable and ever to be highly renowned worthies, ceased from their warlike
employments and commands by sea and land; The Army which God has since made
the preservative of City and Country, It is that Army under the Command of his
Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX (which is employed in all parts and quarters of
this Kingdom) whom with the whole body, I honor, and every particular member
thereof, as they have done worthily. And whereas you accuse me to be an
Incendiary, and say those forecited words are flashes and flames to fly into
the face of that Army, I am ready upon oath to depose, that it is a false
mischievous Calumny conceived in the fiery brain of some Independent, and
brought forth into the world by your strong passion. Further I aver there is
none so blind but they can discern a mystery of iniquity in your expressions:
for it is generally known That there are many more Presbyterians then
Independents in that Army, yea ten to one, which God has now made victorious
every where, and of them as valiant men as ever drew sword, or wore iron, being
experienced Soldiers, gallant Stormers, and as a man may say, even the Cream
of the Kindome, and the whole ^eareth its denomination from the greater part,
or the better, which the Independents are not.

Now looking on the Army as it is united to one head under the command of one
chief General, and whether dispersed East, West, North, South, yet has acted
together to be the Preservative of City and Country, is that the victorious
despised Army you speak of? No, no, you will not hear of that, but you divide
that Army which God has made so isntrumental for the Kingdoms safety, and
you overlook the greatest part thereof as if they were useless men and had
done nothing for the preservation of City and Country; this may prove the work
of an Incendiary indeed, what? will you attribute all the honor of those many
glorious victories which God has crowned the whole Army with, but only to a
part of that Army? This is a derogating and dividing language, yet as in your
writings, so in the public Assemblies, and where ever any Independents preach
or pray, you, and they, agree in this language, saying, It is the godly party,
the praying people, that despised Army, that some speak evil of, that God has
done such great things by. Now none are called nor accounted the godly party
with you and those of your judgment, but Independents and Sectaries; so that
it is plain you give all that Honor which is due to the whole Army, only to
the least part thereof; by which course you endeavor to divide in the esteem
and opinion of men that Army, which God and the State have joined and made one.
But for my part, God is my witness so far have I been from casting fiery
flashes and flames to fly in the face of that Army or any part of it, that I
have, I do, and ever shall acknowledge, all the Worthies of that Army have done
gallantly, and that for their wisdom, faithfulness, valor, and victories
they are ever to be renowned, the whole body have purchased perpetual honor,
and the Kingdom is bound to ascribe to God all praise and glory: But herein
you are failing, when you divide that Army, as by your expressions you plainly
do, and upon all occasions sacrifice to your own net, by which practice you
seek what lies in you to discourage the hearts and weaken the hands of the body
of that Army, and to cast secret Firebrarnds, which may break forth into flames
of discontent, and so cause hot and burning Emulations amongst our valiant and
courageous Heroes, when they hear and see themselves slighted, and quite
stripped of the honor and due praises that God has made them equal shares
of. We read 1 Samuel 18. 6* 7. When the women came forth to meet King Saul, with
joy and singing, answering one another (and as they chanted out their notes,
running division in their songs) said, Saul has slain his thousands, and David
his ten thousands, that their ascribing more to David then to Saul made him
very wrath, and the saying displeased him, (yea it wrought sad effects) yet
they did not ascribe all the honor of the victory to David; for they allowed
Saul his thousands: But you deal not so impartially and ingenuously with that
Army, which God has now made the Preservative of City and Country, etc.
Certain it is such writings, prayers and dividing practices are of a dangerous
consequence, if not of an Incendiary nature. You proceed to double your Charge,
and in the 26. Page of your book thus express your self, further (say you) to
discover your spirit against those Worthies in the Army, you go about to
eclipse the glory of that famous victory at Marston-moore; for speaking
contemptuously of it, you say, some of the Independents stood to it in the
Battle of York, when others of them ran away; for they ran as well as others:
and if they be not Liars all the other Independents had ran away too, and left
the field, if they had known what had happened in the other parts of the Army:
Then you make what construction your own fantasy frames and dictates unto you
upon those words in my Postscript Page 68. after which you go on in your
discourse, saying, I can produce those that were actors in that Battle and are
no Independents, that affirm, there was no running away at all, of those whose
valor you so vilify: yea, though they did perceive how the matter went with
some, as when a whole body flies, a thing with no great difficulty to be
discerned. So you.

Brother, I entreat you take a view of what you have said, and then consider
the incongruity of your relation; for can it be properly said that it is a
discovering of my spirit against those Worthies in the Army, and a seeking to
eclipse the glory of that famous Victory at Marston-moor and a speaking
contemptuously of it, because I say some of the Independents stood to it in the
Battle at York, when others ran away? Let all rational men judge, for surely
there cannot be a greater contradiction, nor more confusion of language. What?
is it a discovering of my spirit against those Worthies in the Army, to say
they stood to it in the Battle at York? Does it not rather crown their heads
with Laurel, and speak honor to their persons who ever they were that did
stand to it in the Battle of either party, whether Presbyterians or
Independents? for as some of both parties did run away, yet divine providence
so ordered it (that God alone might have the glory) that some of both parties
valiantly stood to it; and thus much is in part acknowledged by your self,
when you say, you can produce those that were actors in that *Battle, and are
no Independents, etc. So that by your own confession they were not all
Independents, (no nor the greatest part according to the relation of many, who
were also actors in that Battle) by whom God gave us that famous Victory. Then
this is out of question. I but (say you) those actors affirm that there was no
running away at all, of those whose valor you so much vilify, etc. Brother,
judge not rashly, but assure your self, I have more manhood in me then to
vilify true valor; for I profess I do, and ever shall honor a Valiant man,
whosoever he be. But is speaking the truth, and ascribing to all our Worthies
their due honor without respect of persons, become a vilifying of Valor with
you? this is Independent Rhetoric, and so deep, that every one as yet does not
understand it, neither will I here undertake to unfold the meaning and Mystery
of it; only give me leave without offense to tell you, That if any do affirm
there were no Independents that ran away, when others stood to it in the Batell
at York, their affirmation is most false, though happily unknown to them so to
be: now their ignorance herein may convince you of your error, and bring you
to the knowledge of this truth, viz. that one Wing of an Army, may be
discomfited and flying, yet in the heat of the battle the other Wing being
deeply engaged at that present time, may not know how it fares with them nor
see their flight, and if a whole Body be worsted as the wind may set and drive
the smoke, the engaged party cannot possibly presently discern it. Thus it was
at that famous battle at Marston-moore, as I have been informed by such as were
Actors in that Battle both Presbyterians and Independents. And that some
Independents did then run away as well as others, and of them not a few, nor
all of the meanest rank and quality, is a real truth: But if you will not give
credit to what I say, that you may not hereafter with such great confidence put
in Print false informations as you too too often do, I refer you to Leiutenant
Coll: John Lilburne, who was there at the beginning of that Battle; and for
your better satisfaction enquire of him, whether some Independents did not run
away, and also whether I have spoken any thing concerning that Battle, but
what he himself knows, and has reported for a truth, as can be proved. I
could tell you the names of some Independents that did run away and those not a
few and none of the least esteem amongst you; but I forbear, unless to clear
the truth I am enforced thereunto; for I know, that upon a discomfiture in the
day of battle, gallant men, valiant, and experienced soldiers, have sometimes
been glad to run: And therefore what I there writ in my Postscript, was not to
vilify any, but to give to every man his due honor which you and others of
your Judgment did then, and still do most injuriously rob and wholly strip
them of, who dissent from your opinions; and if ever you, or any of your party,
shall so far prevail with the honorable Court of Parliament, to question me
for those words, I doubt not, but as formerly I have found Justice, so then I
shall find the like, and be cleared both by Lords and Commons, from the
reproach of being an Incendiary.

Truly brother Burton, when I read your lines, and see how much you ascribe
unto men, and how little you speak of God upon all occasions, I cannot but
wonder: for the truth is, in all your language you never speak of your party,
who you call the confiding men, the well-affected in the Army, the godly party,
but you count them and them only the saviors of the Kingdom, the restorers of
our paths to walk in, and this is your own dialect, God is not so much as named
many times to my knowledge in your ordinary discourses: although God has given
a caveat against such expressions and speakings, Deuteronomy. 9. where the Lord
charged all his people by a threefold prohibition that they should not ascribe
the glory or honor of their victories to their own righteousness, or to their
own arm (which is the Independents daily practice to say their party have done
all) to teach all men that there is nothing that more displeases God then to
give his glory to men that can deserve nothing at his hands who is ever to have
the sole glory and honor of casting the horse and rider into the sea; yea in
express words it is often declared in holy Scripture, that God can save by few
as well as by many, and that a King is not saved by the multitude of an host,
and that the horse is prepared for the battle, but God gives the victory; and
all this to teach us ever to give the glory of all victories to God only and
to ascribe the honor to him. Now then when we have so many witnesses that God
is the Savior of his people and the Restorer of our paths to dwell in, and a
special command to give him the praise of it; how is it Brother, that there is
nothing in your mouth more frequent, yea in your Pamphlets and prayers, then
that those men you call the godly party in the Army have done the whole work in
this War, yea and are the only saviors of the people and the healers up of our
breaches and the restorers of our paths to dwell in? robbing both God of his
glory and all the other gallant men that indeed under God did the work of their
due honor and praises, who had in all respects a far greater share in all the
victories obtained against the enemy, as being far better soldiers and
better Christians and valianter men, and the more in number by far ten to one
then the Independent party. And that both at Marston-moore and Naseby, as in
its due place will appear to all future ages.

But because Brother you have particularized the Battle at Marston-moore,
ascribing the glory of that victory wholly to your party, and extremely
wrongfully accuse me about that business, I shall here therefore set down what
I find writ by a stedier hand then yours concerning that Battle, and by such
an one as I know would not divulge an untruth to the world: neither would I
have made use of his testimony, not withstanding I know the truth of it, but
that I am able my self to prove what he has writ by a cloud of witnesses that
were there and received many wounds in that Battle, and against whom there can
be brought no just exception: the words of the Author are these.

In this Battle, says he, (speaking of Marston-moore) diverse gallant men of
both Nations had an honorable share of the Victory: but none I hear of,
without disparagement to any, did appear so much in action that day with
gallantry, as David Lesley.

Here those of the party we spoke of a little before: (viz. the Sectaries and
Independents) to indear themselves to the people, attribute unto themselves the
honor of the day, and stick not to call one of theirs the Savior of the three
Kingdoms, when god knows he that they then did extol so much, did not appear
at all in the heat of the business; having received at the first a little
scar, he kept off till the worst was past. This had not been spoke of at all
(says the Author) if some idle men to gull the world had not given the honor
of the day to those who had but little or no share in it.

And all this that this Author relates can be proved by an Iliad of witnesses
to be true* and as this testimony is true, so many more witnesses, and those
men of reputation, can be brought to prove that the victory has been wholly
ascribed unto the Independent party in other Battles and Skirmishes when they
have been many miles of from the very place; and if there be but any commander
of their party in any employment though he strike but one stroke, then he
carries away all the honor from the rest, and they have their pentionary
penmen both in the Army and at London to do this feat for them, to give them
the praise and honor of it, to indeare themselves into the people, and all to
delude them; and so it was at that Battle; the Presbyterians underwent the
heat of the day, and the Independents challenge the honor. Thus much Brother
you have forced me to speak, and now I go on.

Brother, for the other particulars which to please your self, and set forth
your passion, you charge me withal, I will answer them as they lie. And here I
protest before the Lord, I have never dealt dishonestly, nor Serpent-like with
you nor any creature living, or that ever did live upon the earth: Also that my
heart is sound unto my God, firm, and filled full with Christian Love to all
that fear his Name, and walk before him in truth and sincerity. And for my
brain, it is not so shallow, but that through the wisdom which is given me of
God, who gives to all men liberally and upbraideth not, Jam. 1. 5. I can
discern into the depth of Error, and am able by Gods assistance to make it
appear to all whose eyes are open to see the clear sunshine of the truth, That
the way of your Independency is not grounded on the Word of God, but its rice,
continuance, and increase has for the foundation thereof, only the fantasy,
ambition, private interest, self-seeking, and cunning practices (with a seeming
hollownesse) of some subtle and unstable spirits. And likewise, for the whole
universe, I assure you it never did nor never can bring in a just verdict, and
say, I am a man not only whose heart is divided but whose head is, etc. For
the whole universe has been and is so far from bringing in any such verdict,
that grave, learned, godly, zealous, and holy men (in the Reformed Churches)
have given in another verdict of me, whose Testimonies I can show for my godly
Life, Learning, and blameless Conversation, whilst I lived amongst them
beyond the Seas; and I have the like from the most eminent, godly, learned men
where ever I have inhabited in this Kingdom; yea, many Letters of late time I
have received from godly learned men both at home and abroad that have read my
Books, whose faces I never saw, and by them it plainly appears that the
chief, pious, orthodox, learned men of the whole universe, esteem of me as a
man of piety and learning, and not (according to the Character you have given
of me) as a man not only whose heart is divided, but whose head is, etc.
Therefore I having such a plaster made by such conscionable, skillful, and
learned Physicians and men of reputation, it is approved of by all that are
rational and godly, to be efficacious not only to salve this sore, but to
keep from festering, and perfectly heal up the several wounds I have recived
from you and your fraternity, although you have all cut deep, and many ways,
wounding me in my Religion, in my Reputation, in my good Name, (all which are
more precious unto me, then my life) and then with one blow endeavoring to
divide my heart and head, to make the wounds irrecoverably mortal. But if such
actions proceed from Independent principles, and the new light they pretend to
walk by, does guide you or any of them into these ways, seeing such
instruments of cruelty are in their habitations (to murder innocent men in
their good names, which is greater cruelty and more wrong to an honest godly
man, then to take away his natural life) with good old Jacob Genesis 49. 6. I
say, O my soul come not thou into their secret: unto their Assembly mine honor
be not thou united, etc. Now to conclude my Answer to your Charge, where you
speak of me as if I were mad.

Thus the Prelaticall faction in their time spoke of me and of all who in
sincerity and uprightness of heart opposed their erroneous opinions,
unwarrantable ways and sinful practices: and it is no new thing for such who
wander from the truth to walk in the bypaths of error, and to think and speak
of any that hold out and maintain the truth, that they are mad and besides
themselves; thus Festus thought and spoke of Paul Act. 26. 25. And thus it has
pleased you (cunningly, but more scornfully) to speak of me; yet as the Apostle
replied to him, so I do to you, I am not mad (Brother and Fellow Sufferer) but
speak forth the words of truth and soberness. And here in the words of truth
and soberness I aver, whereas you say, Page 25. there wants but a Judge
judicially to pronounce sentence on the former repeated words in my Postscript,
that it is obvious to all men you assumed the place of a Judge, (though not a
judicial one) and have proceeded so far, not only to pronounce an unjust
sentence against me, but by your usurped authority to judge my heart, which
power is peculiar to God alone Who searches the hearts and tries the reins
Psalm. 7. 9. Jer. 11. 20. and will give to every man according to his ways, and
according to the fruit of his doing, Jer. 17, 10. Revel. 2. 23.

Yea, further I say, there is none so weak-sighted, but they may plainly see,
how you, and other Independents, do make it your masterpiece to use dividing
and traducing language, slighting all men that differ from your opinions, as if
they had neither piety, wit, nor learning in them. And were not you grown very
skillful in these faculties, you would never have falsely accused, sat Judge,
condemned the whole man, and then have turned Executioner, to divide my heart
and head as you have done. For all which the Lord humble you low before him,
giving you repentance not to be repented off; and never lay these your
causlesse, passionate, unadvised, and unbrotherly dealings with me, unto your
Charge.

But before I pass on, good brother give me leave here a little to parley with
you.

You say Page 25. There wants but a Judge judicially to pronounce sentence on
the former words in my Postscript, etc. But that needs not, you have already
done it for your purpose, though not judicially; but it seems you would have me
judged twice for one and the some but conceived offense, which is very tyranny;
yea I must tell you that you have proceeded in your censure already against me,
contrary unto all the laws of God, Nature and Nations, and all humanity; yea by
a more tyrannical law then that of the High Commission Court or Star Chamber,
all which by Gods assistance I shall evidently make appear.

For the manner of proceeding in all Courts of Justice appointed by God (to say
nothing how they never condemn a man twice for one and the same but conceived
crime) was, that none should be condemned but by the mouth of two or three
witnesses. And by the law of Nations their Courts of Justice were ever open to
implead any prevaricators against their laws, observing ever an ordinary way
and manner of proceeding in them, which were appointed by the Statutes and
Ordinances of their several Countries.

Now the conditions and requisites for a Judicial Proceeding, were.

First, that the parties questioned should first be cited and summoned into the
Court, and this was to be done either by Articles or Bill, or Allegation,
Libell or Petition, Information or Accusation exhibited into the Court against
the pretended Delinquent, before any Sentence could pass against him.

Secondly the party accused was to be heard speak and plead for himself before
Sentence might pass against him, except he wilfully neglected the Summons and
so declined his appearance: for so it was ordered by the law of God and
practiced by all his people in the worst times, as we may see in Nicodemus, who
to convince the Jews of injustice in their proceedings against the Lord of
life, said unto Christ's enemies, Does our law condemn any man before we have
heard him? Yea, this was Gods own method before the destroying of Sodom and
Gomorrah, who came down to see and know whether al things were according to the
cry that was come up into the Court of Heaven: And it was the practice of all
Judges and in all Courts of Judicature to proceed secundum allegata and
probata, the parties ever being brought before them face to face, or otherwise
they did not judicially pronounce sentence against them.

Thirdly, all things were to be proved by sufficient witnesses and by men
without exception, such as were people of worth and credit, of no infamous and
beastly life, and by such as bare no grudg or hatred against the party
questioned, and against whom the party accused could pretend no just exception:
for all men know that malice can neither think, speak, or write well of any they
malign (witness your book against me) so that if the party complained against
could make it appear that the witnesses were his mortal enemies, and that they
were men or people of a vicious life and conversation or guilty of any heinous
crimes and offenses, and with* all that they were enemies and implacable
adversaries unto him, there was then a caution in law that such men might be
excepted against, and their testimony was not to be admitted without there were
other more apparent evidence of the truth. And although the High Commission and
Star Chamber were the most corrupt Courts in the Kingdom, yet even in those
Courts there was an appearance of justice in this kind, so that if any man had
any just exception against any man's testimony, if it did not totally overthrow
their witness, which it many times did, yet it so enervated their evidence
that it was never so valid and prejudicall to him as otherwise it would have
been; as you your self can witness it was in my cause in the High Commission
Court, where I making it appear by sufficient witness that Thomas Newcomin and
John Danet, and Richard Daniel had formerly been expunged in the Chancery for
Knaves, and had for that out of malice put me up into it, were all my
adversaries and perjured varlots, their testimony by the whole Court was
rejected, and they were by them all accounted a company of Knaves all over soul
and body, for so some of the Court said of them, and I was only condemned for
my book: And this part of Justice in many causes remained even in those Courts
in the worst of times; and in all Courts of the world there was ever leave and
liberty given unto the accused to make his just defense and bring in the
evidences of his own innocence and non-guiltinesse, and his just exceptions
against both his accusers prosecutors and witnesses, and this by the very law
of nature, for so said Festus, that it was not the manner of the Romans to
condemn any before they had been brought face to face with their adversaryes,
and that they had bin fully heard what they could speak for themselves: for
otherwise if they had condemned any without either of the former conditions,
they had not proceeded according to law nor condemned them judicially.

Fourthly, those that are judged judicially, and according to the Laws of God
and nations, they must ever be within the jurisdiction of that Court, and of
those that judge them, and under their Laws. Neither do any wise Judges take
any cognizance of things without their jurisdiction: and if any should be so
unjust or unadvised to attempt any such thing, the party accused has the
benefit of his Appeal, as we see in the cause of Paul, when he appealed from
the Tribunal of the Jews to Caesar's Bar. And all men know, that the Courts
of one Country do not judge and condemn the subjects that dwell in an other,
and that are under an other government; yea, the Courts secular, and the Courts
Ecclesiastical, even in the same Kingdoms and Commonwealths do not
intermeddle with one an others employments, except it be by special appeal
which is granted unto them by some caution upon just occasions, but they leave
each Court to the managing of those causes that are of special cognizance
there and within their jurisdiction; for otherwise it would breed confusion
speedily in a Country, and therefore those distinct Courts and Jurisdictions
take the cognizance of those things only that are peculiar and proper to
themselves, and within their sphere, and never intermeddle and exercise any
power over others that are out of their jurisdictions, be they never so
facinorous, or accused of never so high a crime; yea, if any information or
accusation be put up against any man into any Court, be it true or false, if
the Judges conceive that the parties impleaded against belong unto an others
jurisdiction they will send them thither to be judged, and decline sentencing
of them; and this method of judgment the very Law of nature teaches all men;
yea Pontius Pilat though a most wicked and unjust Judge, yet understanding that
Christ was of Galilee, of which Herod was the Tetrarcke or Governor, and
conceiving him to be under Herod's jurisdiction he sends him forthwith unto
Herod, intimating that the examination and trial of his cause peculiarly
belonged unto him, if Christ were judicially to be proceeded against. Yea, Paul
himself says, What have I to do to judge those that are without? Those that
were without in Paul's opinion, and under an other jurisdiction, he professed
that he had nothing to do with them.

The fifth thing required for the judicial proceeding and handling of any
cause, is this, that they that are to be Judges may not be both parties,
witnesses, prosecutors, Jury, and Judges in the same cause; for it they be,
they cannot be said judicially to give sentence. All that I now write unto you
Brother, I am confident your conscience tells you is just and true. Now in all
nations and well governed Kingdoms and countries, if there have been any
faylings in either of these conditions and requisites, the subjects have the
benefit of the Law against both their Prosecutors and Judges, and may appeal
unto the King, or supreme Court of judicature in the Kingdom, and crave
justice there against such Judges, and such proceedings, and if they cannot
obtain justice there, God will call them to an account one day for it: for, in
the judgment of all men such proceedings have ever been counted illegal and
unjust, and all those Judges that have at any time given sentence, without
observing those rules and conditions, did never censure any man judicially,
neither can their judgment be said to be judicial in any just man's
understanding.

Now Brother, if your proceeding against me be examined by these rules, and by
such men as are judicious and truly godly without faction, you will not be
thought judicially to have censured and condemned me: for it is most certain
you have not in all the carriage of this business been a judicial Judge; for
in this your sentence you have gone against all the Laws of God and nature;
yea and against the practice of the most corrupt Courts in the world, in that
you have accused me, arraigned me and condemned me, without either Articles,
Bill, Libell, (saving your own Book) allegation or information, and without
any lawful citation into your Court, or any Court, you have also condemned me
before I knew who were my Accusers, and that without hearing me ever speak
for my self; yea, you have condemned and adjudged me an innocent man withou
any lawful witness; for as I am not conscious to my self of ever having done
any thing that deserves convention before any Court of Iud icature in this
world, much less to have sentence given against me, so I am most assured that
if ever these your dealings against me shall be brought to a trial, and a
judicial hearing indeed, as they may be, if the time once grows more quiet; I
shall make it clearly and evidently appear, that the ground of this your
beastly accusation brought against me, viz. that I am a scandalous Walker to
the shame of the very name of Christian Religion, did first arise from one of
the most infamous and notorious creatures, though an Independent, that now
lives upon earth for all manner of villainies, a shame and dishonor to her name
and kindred, known to be one of the most prodigious impudent Whores that is
this day in the world, except the Whore of Babylon; and yet originally and
primarily from that creature, or from such as are as bad as her self, have you
grounded your most unbrotherly and extra judicall judgment against me, and so
you have made your self party, witness, Jury and Judge in this your own
cause, and which is more have condemned one that is in your opinion without,
and out of your jurisdiction; whereas Paul had taught all Christ's Disciples by
a Statute Law from Heaven, that they should not judge those that are without:
now you account me and all the Presbyterians to be enemies of Jesus Christ,
and such Saints as Job would not set with the dogs of his flock, and proclayme
us all the sons of Belial, as your learned Works can sufficiently witness;
and therefore you account us all without, and yet you condemn me, and that in
the face of the whole world, as guilty of all those foul crimes you charge me
with, whereas you had nothing to do with me, I being out of your
jurisdiction: I pray tell me courteous Brother, whether this your proceeding be
to set up Christ as King upon his Throne, and be judicially to condemn any
Brother? when it is apparently manifest by these your actions you transgress
all the Laws of Christ our King, and trample them under your feet? for Christ
has taught all his people and subjects, saying, Matthew. 18. If thy brother
offend thee, tell him of it between him and thee, etc. and again, he has
said, judge not lest ye be judged, and again, there shall be judgment
without mercy to him that shows no mercy; again God has said, he that
condemns the righteous, and he that justifies the wicked, they are both an
abomination to the Lord; whether therefore by all these your proceedings
against me you have not violated all these most holy Laws and Statutes, I
shall leave to the judgment of others. Brother you may remember in the 17.
page of your Book, speaking there what you will do when you come to my
Postscript (which you have finely performed) you ask me whether or no, when
you make mention of it my mind does not misgive me? your words are these, which
when I mention here (say you) does not your mind misgive you? for answer I tell
you no: for I am able to prove every word of that Book by sufficient witness,
and out of the very Independents writings; yea, their daily practices have made
good every period of it, and so far I am that my mind should misgive me at
the mention of it for doing my duty, that I will with all speed print it again
with some little enlargement concerning your New-lights, and other of your
grolleries. But this by the way. But because Brother, you take that liberty to
propound now and then questions to me, I will here also use the same freedom
with you: Therefore tell me I pray the next time I hear from you, whether or
no your mind does not misgive you when I mention your books, and when you
think what you have done against me in thus condemning me, and adjudgeing an
innocent man, and your quondam Fellow-sufferer? Brother had you to deal with
some man, he would recriminate, which would not be for your honor; but for
the present I content my self to have declared my innocence; only by the way
consider what you did to my reverend Brother, Master George Walker, a man to
whom you were so much engaged to; and when I mention him, does not your heart
misgive you? But enough of this.

Now before I conclude this my parley with you; I will say thus much concerning
your new Courts, in your new gathered Churches, if this be your way of
proceedings there, to be witness, party, Jury, and Judge in your own cause,
and when you have given sentence against the innocent if there be no appeal:
then your Courts are worse, and more tyrannical then that of the High
Commission, or Star Chamber; and for ought I know all such arbitrary Courts as
your are, and all such arbitrary and unjust Judges as you are, may as well be
questioned, censured and put down, for all these your illegal, unjust, and
extrajudicall proceedings, as either they or any other tyrannical Courts were;
and truly it concerns the whole Kingdom now seriously to look about them,
and to have a special eye to your Jndependent proceedings and Judgments: for
if they be not timely looked unto, all the repairing of our breaches, and all
the restoring of our paths to dwell in which you make mention of, will be no
such thing to the poor Presbyterians, who cannot already pass quietly in the
streets for you: nor any man avoid your unjust censures, nor the filth both of
your tongues and pens, which you cast in our faces every step we go. The Lord
rebuke you for these your revilings. Truly Brother, I see a divine hand of
justice against you in many passages, though you look loftily, and speak
great swelling words, in all which you breath out hell, and your own shame, the
Lord I hope in time will discover unto you all your vanity, and sinfulness. I
will say thus much of you, that whiles you used the sharpness of your parts
against the common enemy, you were very serviceable to the Church of God; but
now turning the edge of them against your Christian brethren* you have through
their sides both wounded your self, and all those of your party, as I am most
assured they will all assert. Yea, I can ascertaine you of this, that it is
exceedingly admired by many, that you having been some years in captivity
under the Prelates tyranny, should continue such a trewant in the school of
affliction, as not yet to have learned the lesson of patience, so that you
cannot digest a merry word, or but a conceived Jest. But this they are most of
all stranged at, that out of the height and greatness of your spirit you will
strike your enemy, though it be through the sides of Religion, and the
Christian cause; and truly this your dealing with all your Christian brethren,
especially with my self, calls for deep and serious repentance at your hands.

For my part, I freely forgive you, and do profess it is a grief unto my soul
that you have drawn me out with such violence in forcing me to encounter with
you by name; it is true, the erroneous ways, opinions and false lights (under
the name of new) lately held forth, I did and cannot but write against, they
being contrary to sacred writ; yet you my Brother, and Quondam Fellow Sufferer,
I reverenced and did ever love, honor and esteem, and had it not been to wipe
off those black reproaches wherewith you have labored to besmear me all over,
making me appear to the world as a man spotted and defiled with scandalous
walking, an Hypocrite, a Persecutor, a mad man, etc. I profess out of tender
respect to your person, and sufferings, as I have hitherto spared your name, so
I would now have over looked your false aspersions; but seriously considering
the great and deep Charge you have brought against me (wounding truth through my
sides) upon the due deliberation thereof, I plainly perceived without
dishonouring God, and being cruel to my self, I could not be silent, for that
my taciturnity might cause truth and the ways of God to be evil spoken of, and
give an occasion to censorious spirits to vote me guilty of those Malversations
wherewith you so slily and unjustly have accused me; all which my soul hates
and ever did utterly abhor; therefore although I was forwarder to pity your
passion, and more desirous to pass by your miscarriages, then to take notice of
them, or divulg the weaknesses and too too gross failings of you my Brother;
yet your Charge being of a high nature and published in Print, it necessitated
me to reply lest I should seem to approve of the murdering of my good name; So
that merely to preserve the life thereof, you have extracted from me these
lines, that men may know it lies upon you to prove it, (for I stand upon my
justification and protest against every one of your foul Calumnies, as
notorious untruths:) And likewise that all who fear the Lord may be fully
assured, however you have rendered me to the world as one who has a name to
live but am dead, (so that I may stink in the opinion of such as are holy) yet
I do live to my God, who I doubt not will discover the bottom and mystery of
this iniquity. For herein you have dealt with me as the Papists did with
Reverend and Learned Mr John Calvin, raising and publishing untruths, accusing
him for a scandalous walker, and as guilty of abominable sins, making his very
name odious; And by their false reports they blinded the eyes of the people,
causing them still to embrace and continue in Error, and so hardened their hearts
against him, that they would not hearken unto nor believe those precious
Gospel Truths which he maintained; but as their wicked practices were discerned
by all (that with humble hearts received the truth in the love thereof that
they might be saved) so I am confident the Lord Jehovah will bring forth my
righteousness as the light, and my judgment as the noone day, Psalm. 37. 6. And
will cause mine adversaries to be clothed with shame and to cover themselves
with their own confusion as with a mantle, Psalm. 109. 29. that all the World
may see and know your Charg has no truth in it, but is an Independent plot,
invented and spread abroad to defame me and cause the people to suspect, slight
and disregard those sound Scripture truths I hold forth and constantly maintain.

Thus far I have answered your false accusations: And in the presence of God I
solemnly protest this is a true answer.

Brother, I would here gladly dismiss the Reader, for willingly I over look
many of your invectives without mentioning of them; But I find two or three
passages more to which you engage me to speak, for the clearing the truth of
what I have written (in my Postscript Page 68.) concerning Independents; as
also to answer a complaint you have made against me: And lastly to resolve two
quaeries which you have propounded unto me, and in these I shall endeavor
fully to satisfy you and all men.

But first, as a Physician and a faithful Friend, avoiding all flattery; I
cannot but truly relate unto you the dangerous condition I find you in; for I
assure you, I feel your pulse beats very high, and I see you have a vein puffed
up with windy matter, and I perceive you are swollen with pernicious and corrupt
humors, and that Choler exceedingly abounds in you, insomuch as you breath
forth ^^rong revilings and defamings against those that never wronged you, and
make loud exclamations as if I were a man of no Religion, Piety, Wit, or
Learning, because I have (as for truths sake I was induty bound) truly stated
the Question of difference between the Presbyterians and Independents, and made
it appear that INDEPENDENCY is not GODS ORDINANCE, nor grounded on the holy
Scriptures: and that the practice of Independents and the way they plead for,
will prove destructive to Church and State. Now as I am grieved to see it, so I
wonder at the sudden distemper and great heat you are fallen into, which makes
you talk so much, and that against me by name, more then against others;
wherereas before I writ, and since, many have (and one more especially) in part
discovered the sinful practices of Independents, the evil and
unwarrantablenesse of their new way; And how ever you are generally blamed for
rushing out upon the Theater to oppose him by name, it being a work in the
judgment of all wise men fitter for any other man to have undertaken then your
self, because of some more then ordinary tie of friendship between you and
him; yet you have bridled up your fury against his person, although you say in
your Appendix he ranks your words under the head of his first Section,
containing diverse, seditious, scandalous, libellous passages against the
Authority and Jurisdiction of Parliaments, Synods and temporal Magistrates in
general, etc.

Now here is exceeding great wrong done unto you, if your words are not of such
a nature; and might you be the sole Judge, I am persuaded you would pronounce
them not guilty; notwithstanding, you do not revile, vilify, and falsely accuse
the Author thereof; But on me you have let loose your fury and have fallen upon
me so passionately who was once a Fellow Sufferer with you, that it has sadded
the spirits, grieved the hearts, and given great offense unto all that are
truly godly, who walk in that old way and the known paths of holiness, which
Gods word does plainly direct and lead them into, and contrariwise you have
opened the mouths of the wicked and given cause of rejoicing to such as are
without, by your bitter expressions and false accusations brought against me
one of your Quondam Fellow Sufferers.

But Page 26. you please to say, that I have much exaggerated vilifications
upon the Independents: And notorious is that I say in my Postscript Page, 68. as
by experience I know not any Indep^^dent in England,, two only excepted,, that
do not as maliciously and implacably hate the the Presbyterians as the
mortallest enemies they have in the world, etc.

To this Brother I answer, I vilify none, I have spoken the truth; but because
I see you take such great exceptions at these words, I shall prove the truth of
them from your own Tenants, or make it appear you are not the only Saints; for
I have said nothing there, but what the professed judgment of those
Independents I know (I still keep within the bounds of my own knowledge) and
their practice inciteth me to believe: And if there be any Independents that
differ from their judgment and practice, I know them not, (two only excepted,
as I said before): But for those Independents who being in the company of such
as are truly godly, yet because they are Presbyterians, refused in private to
pray or join in prayer with them; and for such who hold and do pronounce all
that walk not in their way to be enemies of Jesus Christ, etc. These
Independents by their opinions and practices do sufficiently prove the truth of
what I said in the forecited words; and therefore you, with all that hold such
an opinion, must disclaim that Independent principle, if you deny the verity
of them; otherwise you will declare to the whole world that you are not so
zealous for Gods glory nor love not the Lord so sincerely, as his faithful
servants have formerly done; and withal you will manifest to all men that you
are more studious to preserve your own honors and reputation then the glory of
God.

For whereas you (with most of the Independents that I know) do hold and
maintain (in your books entitled Vindication, and Vindiciae veritatis) That
the Presbyterians are enemies to Christ's Kingly office, that instead of finding
Christ set upon his Throne in their Congregations, you find there no more but
an Image, such as Michael had made up instead of King David, 1 Samuel, 19. or as
those that in mockery, made of Christ a Pageant-King, striping him, and putting
on him a scarlet Robe, and on his head a Crown of Thorns, and in his hand a
Reed, saluting him with, Hail King of the Jews, with which title over his
head they crucified him. That the Presbyterians neither profess, nor confess
Christ, but say with the wicked Jews, we will not have this man to reign over
us, Luke 19. 14. That they are at the best but Converts in part, etc. which is
to say, they are in King Agripas condition, but almost Christians, Act. 26. 28.
or like Simon Magus still in the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity. And
if this great charge against the Presbyterians be true, which you so
confidently affirm in your books, truly all the Presbyterians are in a more
cursed condition then the wicked Jews were; for why? they know, and say they
do believe, that Jesus Christ is God and man, the only begotten of the father,
full of grace and truth, John 1. 14. who was made of the seed of David
according to the flesh, and declared to be the Son of God, with power,
according to the spirit of holiness by the resurrection from the dead, Romans 1.
3. 4. The Redeemer of his Elect, and chosen ones, Ephesians. 1. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. The
Savior of all that believe in him, Ioh. 3. 15, 16. The blessed, and only
Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, 1 Timothy 6. 15.

Now the Presbyterians knowing and professing that they do believe these
Gospel truths (which the Jews did not know, nor would not believe) if they
notwithstanding are enemies to Jesus Christ, and refuse to set Christ upon his
Throne, but in mockery set up Christ as a Pageant King in their Congregations,
and do as those who saluting him with Hail King, etc. yet reject him, saying,
we will not have this man to reign over us. Then the Presbyterians sin in
the height of aggravation, sinning against their own knowledge, and professed
belief; and all such, cannot but hate Jesus Christ, and are haters of God; for
the Lord Jesus Christ has said, He that hates me, hates the Father also,
(Ioh. 15. 23.) So that consequently, you make them the children of the Devil.
For if God were their Father, they would be so far from being enemies, that
they would love the Lord Jesus Christ, (the Son of God;) this the Lord and
Prince of life has declared, and He makes it his Argument to convince the
unbelieving Jews, that God was not their Father, saying, If God were your
Father, ye would love me, for I proceeded forth, and came from God; neither
came I of my self, but he sent me. If the Presbyterians therefore are enemies
to Christ's Kingly office, and make a m^^ke. King of him who proceeded forth and
came from God, and was sent by him, as you have once and again published in
print, then it must needs be granted they are not the children of God, but the
cursed children of the Devil (Anathema maranatha) because they love not the
Lord Jesus Christ. And from what has bin said, this is further necessarily
employed, that either you, with all that are of your judgment herein, have
falsely accused the Presbyterians (as indeed you have) to be enemies to Christ's
Kingly office; otherwise, if you, and they are a holy people, and such as do
advance Christ upon his Throne, then (I say) I am persuaded the Independents
do hate the Presbyterians; yea, it were an heinous offense in them to love
such whom they hold and judge to be enemies to Christ, and so haters and
enemies to God; for to love any that hate the Lord, is a wrath provoking sin;
this the Prophet shows plainly, when reproving King Iehosaphat, he said
unto him, should thon help the ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord?
therefore is wrath upon thee from the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 19, 2. we find it in
sacred Writ, that Mordecai a holy man, was so far from loving any of Gods
enemies, that notwithstanding all the Kings servants that were in the Kings
gate bowed, and reverenced Haman, for the King had so commanded concerning him;
yet Mordecai bowed not, nor did him reverence, Esth. 3. 2, 3. I suppose none
will give way to such an uncharitable thought, as to think, that Mordecai
would run the hazard of his own ruin, and the destruction of all the people
of the Jews, for want of giving an outward Complement, for that had been but
pride in him so rebelliously to transgress the Kings Commandment: But he knew
Haman to be an Agagite, of the stock and raze of the Amalecks, who were enemies
to God, of whom the Lord had said, that he would utterly put out the
remembrance of Amaleck from under heaven: And had sworn that he would have
war with Amaleck from generation to generation; as he will with all that are
his enemies, Exodus 17. 14. 16. and withal he well remembered how much the Lord
was displeased with King Saul, for sparing and honoring Agag the King of the
Amalekites, in so much that he rent the Kingdom from him for it, and gave it
to David, and only for favoring his enemies, and not destroying him according
to Gods command: therefore Mordecai one of Gods peculiar people, and his
faithful servant, looking on Haman, as he was an enemy to God, hated him, and
would not so much as bow, nor do outward civil reverence unto him: Indeed
maliciously, and implacably, to hate any, is a sin that cries loud in the
ears of God, and of this crying sin, too too many Independents are deeply
guilty, as is very evident, by their raising up false reports, to defame those
who endeavor to walk in the ways of Gods Commandments without hypocrisy;
but to hate Gods enemies is no sin, for it is the fruit of true grace, and an
evidence of sincerity, David a man according to Gods own^ heart, publishes
this as a manifestation of his integrity, that he hated Gods enemies,
appealing unto God, saying, Do not I hate them, O Lord, that hate thee* and am
I not grieved with those that rise up against thee? J hate them with perfect
hatred: I count them mine enemies, Psalm. 139. 21* 22. had not David thus hated
Gods enemies, he could never have cleared his faithfulness to God: And this
is undeniable* that those who David hated with perfect hatred, were not, nor
could not be greater enemies to God, then you have accused the Presbyterians to
be, for you proclaim them enemies to the Son of God, the Lord Jesus Christ,
whom God has anointed to be the King, Priest, and Prophet of his Church, Isa.
61. 1. Psalm. 45. 7. Psalm. 2. 6. Dan. 7. 14. Revel. 17. 14. Psalm. 110. 4. Heb.
7. 27. Deuteronomy. 18. 18. Act. 3. 23. Now whosoever are enemies to Christ's Kingly
office, and will not have him to reign over them, they are open enemies to
God, resisters of his will, and opposers of his infinite wisdom, for he has
given all power unto the Son, Matthew. 28. 18. and all such his enemies he
will command to be brought and slain before him, Luke 19. 27. O Brother,
either give glory to God, and confess you have highly offended in maintaining
such an uncharitable opinion, whereby you condemn all godly, holy,
selfe-denying Christians, that walk not in your way* yea all the Reformed
Churches in Europe; or if you, with other Independents will still persevere in
charging the Presbyterians, to be enemies to Christ's Kingly office, and if you
absolutely believe they are such, then acknowledge, that those Independents
hate the Presbyterians, if not, it may justly be suspected such Independents
are not sincere to God, nor the only Saints, because they do not like holy
David, manifest their integrity; for the Saints show their sincerity in loving
God, with all their hearts, with all their souls, and with all their might,
which Love cannot be set forth more clearly then by their laboring so to
walk^, that their whole Lives and Conversations may be squared according to
Gods Royal will, and the example of his holy Saints and servants; And this is
the will of God, that all men should honor the Son, even as they honor the
Father: He that honors not the Son, honors not the Father which has
sent him, Ioh. 5. 23. but the Independents do not honor the Son, as the
Saints of old have honored the Father, unless they account all the enemies of
Jesus Christ their enemies, and hate them with a perfect hatred. Therefore,
upon due deliberation the whole universe will conclude this truth, and give in
their verdict, that either you and other Independents are too rash and ridgid
in censuring; for it is notorious what you and they hold, teach, and write,
concerning the Presbyterians, viz. that they are enemies to the Kingly office
of Jesus Christ, and make but a mock King of him, etc. Or if the Presbyterians
be indeed guilty of the like enmity against the Lord Christ, as the wicked
Jews were, who crucified him, as you accuse them, then the Independents do
hate the Presbyterians more then they do, or may their mortallest enemies,
because they pronounce these to be enemies to the Son of God, his beloved
Son, in whom he is well pleased; otherwise if the Independents know the
Presbyterians to be so desperately wicked, as you have said, and do not hate
them, then this verdict will be given in, that they are not the only Saints,
and godly party as they speak of themselves, for the Saints hate all the
known enemies of God, and of his Son the Lord Jesus Christ. So then, that
which I briefly gave but a touch of in my Postscript, being thus evidently
proved from your own tenants, both by Scripture and reason, none who do not
make it their delight to cavil, and their work to except against every truth
that is spoken, can considering the grounds, question the verity of what I
there said.

I come now to answer your complaint, and Queries, made and laid down in your
book, page 27. where for the space of four or five lines, you break off your
discourse with me, and to insinuate into the Reader complain of me saying,
He commends the Kings Cavaliers for brave Gentlemen; and he found more favor
from them (which he does ever acknowledge for a singular courtesy) then ever
he found from Protestant Goalers. Thus having complained of my gratitude,
which in all other is accounted a commendable virtue; you begin to parle with
me again, and strictly inquire what was the cause that moved the Popish
Cavaliers to show me favor, and then you raise Questions, viz. was it that
you discovered unto them some of that bitterness of spirit against the
Independents, or some courtly compliance with Papists, preferring them before
Independents or Protestants, that made those Popish Cavaliers so much to
applaud you? Thus you.

Brother for your complaint and quaeries I entreat you be not offended that I
say, had you not been when you framed them, so far transported with causlesse
passion, as it left no place for brotherlo love, truth* well grounded reason or
your own experience to dictate unto you, certainly you would never have thus
complained nor propounded them* therefore I shall repeat my own words, and
whosoever reads them will soon discern how unworthily you deal with me, what a
causlesse abusive complaint have you made, and how little ground or color you
have for the propounding such quaeries, I having there given a reason why the
Popish Cavaliers showed me favor sufficient to satisfy any, that will not
maliciously pretend they are unsatisfied? For in the fourth page of my Defense
I speaking of the clamorous tongues of Independents, and how that after they
understood I differed in opinion from them (before they had seen my books) they
railed against me, raised up false reports and calumniated me, as the greatest
Incendiary in the Kingdom; in all which they most shamefully (as daily still
they do) abused me; thereunto I replied in these words, I have been freed from
that reproach by both Houses of Parliament who adjudged all my sufferings
unjust, as against the Law and Liberty of the Subject. And if it were a thing
that could be any way useful unto me. I could prove by many of the brave
Gentlemen in the Kings Army, who in great Assemblies did acknowledge, when I
was a Prisoner amongst them, that I had great injury done me. Yea, the Papists
themselves have often averred it, that never any Subject suffered more unjustly
then I did, in that I was cast into Prison and fined, for maintaining the
Prerogative Royal of the King against the Pope; and for defending that
Religion which was established by the Laws of the Land: And further added, that
had any Catholic writ as well in defense of their Religion, as I did for the
maintenance of the Protestant Profession, he should have been so far from
suffering for it, as they would not only greatly have honored him, but also
highly have rewarded him for his endeavor; and this that I now write I am able
to prove by a cloud of witnesses: and my unjust suffering in their opinion,
made me find more favor amongst all the Governors that were Papists (which I
do ever acknowledge for a singular courtesy from them) then ever I found from
Protestant Goalers. And therefore whereas the Independents do accuse me for the
greatest Incendiary of the Kingdom, all men may see they speak as untruly, so
most maliciously, etc.

Now these are my words: And herein is observable:

First, that as I say I have been cleared by both Houses of Parliament, from
being an Incendiary, so I mention not, commend, or speak of the Cavaliers, for
their undertakings; I only say, many of the brave Gentlemen in the Kings Army
have also cleared me from that aspersion being convinced that my sufferings
were most unjust.

Secondly that I say many of the brave Gentlemen; I speak not of all the
Cavaliers in the Kings Army; but you silencing my words and omitting to show
the cause which induced me there to speak of them, make your complaint in
General saying, He commends the Kings Cavaliers for brave Gentlemen.

Thirdly, in my forecited words I plainly set down the reason which moved the
Popish Cavaiiers to show me favor, namely, because they were fully persuaded
that I (having writ so much in defense of the Protestan^ Religion, which was
here established) had suffered most unjustly, and contrary to the Laws of this
Kingdom, for my own part, I look to a higher hand in it, but this was the
reason that moved them to demean themselves courteously toward me). Now, who so
deaf as they that will not hear, and who so blind as they that will not see?
for whosoever will hear, see, and read what I have written, and then speak
truly, they cannot but say, that were you not resolved for the venting of your
self to pretend ignorance, the reason there laid down might have informed and
satisfied you, and so have stopped the mouth of your causlesse Quaeries; You
having as little reason to question and examine me upon such interrogatories,
as you have for complaining of me for commending the Kings Cavaliers, (and for
the false Calumnies, which throughout your book you have loaded me withal) but
by these you discover your spirit and what you aim at, to say no more:
Therefore I will give a more full Answer to them, and first to your complaint,
I say, That to affirm there are many of the Kings Cavaliers brave Gentlemen is
a truth; and all ingenuous men, that have been amongst them will confess, they
have met with many of whom it may be said it is ten thousand thousand pities,
that such brave Gentlemen should be so seduced and misled, as to appear in so
bad a cause; and further for my self, know, I am not ashamed nor afraid to
confess, that Popish Cavaliers did use me courteously; and that I might not be
ungrateful to God nor man, I then did, now do, and ever shall acknowledge,
that I found more favor from some of them (which I esteem a singular
courtesy) then ever I found from Protestant Gaolers. Therefore as to the glory
of ^od I there made mention of it, so I shall here set down the particulars and
enlarge my self to show forth Gods goodness unto me therein. For by his
gracious assistance I will never cease to declare how that after I had been
kept in the dungeon seven days and nights in York Castle, and for a year and a
half underwent great inhumanity, was cruelly used, uncivilly and most
unsufferably abused by a professed Protestant Jailer there, a length, by the
Command of the Earl of Newcastle (on purpose, if possible, to augment my
miseries) I was all on a sudden removed from York Goal to Hemsley Castle, in
which he intended evil toward me, but the Lord turned it to good and gave me
favor in the eyes of a profist Papist (Colonel Irington by name) the
Governor of that Castle, who, with all in his family, used me and my servant
very courteously, he supplied me with necessaries (and that freely) and
demeaned himself unto me in every respect as a Gentleman while I remained his
Prisoner, which was but one Month; for when my adversaries heard thereof,
perceiving their design was frustrate, they forthwith removed me to
Knaseb^ough Castle, the Governor and (his Deputy) the Captain thereof being
professed Protestants; where, although in some things, I was not so inhumanelyly
abused as in York Goal, yet there I was kept close Prisoner again, and I assure
you, I found no such courteous usage as I received from the other Gentleman.
Now for my part I am so far from being conscious to my self that I have done
evil in making mention hereof (as by your complaint you would infer) that I
then did, and still do hold my self bound in conscience upon all occasions to
speak of the merci^s of my God unto me, and to make manifest the mighty power
of the Lord JEHOVAH, that so for time to come, if any who fear his name, should
be environed about with enemies, troubled on every side and cast into the depth
of miseries (in man's imagination) as I have been; yet by the many experiences
which I have had of Gods fatherly mercies (the heavenly, soul-ravishing, and
spirit-reviving comforts wherewith the Lord has strengthened and supported me
in my greatest calamity) they may be encouraged to maintain their integrity,
and be confident of his never failing goodness, mercies and loving kindnesses
unto them. For though in my remove, I could expect nothing but increase of
misery, to the outward man, yet to the glory of God I speak it, I found at
that very instant (as at other times) the Lord mightily to uphold my spirit,
filling me with such inward comforts, full assurance of supporting mercies, and
that his grace was sufficient for me, and his strength would be made perfect in
weakness; that in the strength of my God I went willingly and cheerfully not
fearing what man could do unto me. And when I was delivered to Colonel
Irington, to whom the foresaid Earl had sent me; He in my hearing read the
warrant which he had received from him, wherein he was straightly commanded to
keep me close Prisoner, and not to suffer any to see or speak with me; but God
counter-manded this command, and moved the Colonels heart to such compassion,
that he carried himself very nobly and lovingly toward me, and if any
desired it, he permitted them to have access unto me, and gave me liberty to
take the Air, which was a sweet refreshing unto me, being not thoroughly
recovered out of a long and dangerous sickness, whose favors and courtesies I
stand bound in the bonds of thankfulness and civilitie ever to predicate,
whereby all men may take occasion to bless and praise Gods name with me, and I
may manifest my gratitude to him whom the Lord made an instrument of good unto
me, and also that those who have and do exercise cruelty and insult over
Prisoners, may be convinced of their sinful doings, and know, that humanity
and courtesy to all, but more especially to any in distress, is not only
highly pleasing to God, but the honor of a man to the worlds duration. This is
a true Answer to your complaint, wherein I doubt not but I have given
satisfaction to all sober-minded Christians (yea to all that have but common
humanity and understanding) to whom to their great grief it does apparently
appear, that since you walked in your new way, you have accustomed your self
to speak of men that differ from your opinions in a blasting and detracting
language, by which you endeavor to make the virtues that such men are clothed
withal, seem to the ignorant, to be the garments of vice, and to render them
odious, if they will not turn Independents and Sectaries.

I am now come to your quae ies, and here I cannot but confess, I stand
astonished to see the humor you are fallen into, the liberty you take to
calumniate, the strange devices you have to delude withal and the aspersing
discourse that proceeds from you O Brother, Brother, I beseech you recollect
your self, look back and seriously consider whither your anger leads you, and
how passion has darkened your Judgment and quenched that fire of brotherly
love, whose flames would have consumed all your evil thoughts, for love thinks
no evil; surely then you had not the spirit of brotherly love when you
propounded those quaeries, for they are wholly made up with carnal reasonings
and evil surmises, being altogether as void of charity as of Christian
experience: and truly I could wish I might pass them over in silence, but your
publishing and doubling them, as if they were not to be gainsaid, inforc me
(though unwillingly) to reply thereunto, lest by my silence many be deceived
with your false glosses, my sincerity to the truth suspected (by such as know
me not) and God be robbed of his due praise and glory; therefore upon these
considerations I have undertaken the work, and to undeceive the world to your
first quaerie, which is:

Whether I discovered unto the Cavaliers some of that bitterness of spirit
against the Independents.

I answer, this is a cunning deceiveable question, whereby you delude poor
ignorant, harmless people, baring them in hand, as if there were a vast
difference and great disagreement between the Cavaliers and Independents, which
is quite contrary; for there is a direct harmony between the Independents and
Cavaliers of all sorts, whether malignant, or popish Cavaliers, and the truth
is, to speak against Independents to Cavaliers, may purchase displeasure to
any man sooner then gain him favor; for I know, and many can testify the
same, that the Cavaliers do generally applaud the Independents; and indeed
they have reason so to do; for they drive on the Cavaliers great design, with
as much earnestness as themselves, yet they have done it with far more
Jesuitical policy, doing it under the pretense of holiness, and so have
been less discerned by many in their destructive practices. But their cunning
undermining both Church and State, does now daily more and more, very
manifestly appear, and is discerned, and bewailed of all, who have not the eye
of reason blinded with selfe-ends, and by-respects, and for preferments sake
will connive at, and side with any party: But who ever prudentially,
conscienciously, and judiciously examine, and take a view of their proceedings,
they plainly see and confess, that the Independents have exceedingly labored
to set forward, and daily do endeavor, leaving no ways unattempted to effect
that thing, which was and is the Cavaliers grand design, for it is well
known, that the Cavaliers did make it their great, and one of their chiefest
designs to have Bishops, and all the Prelaticall faction continued, that so
Popery, though it were not by a Law set up, and established in this Kingdom,
yet it might be countenanced, and privately authorized by them, which is all
one with the toleration in effect, that the Independents do so plead, seek
after and contend for, calling it Liberty of Conscience: Thus while they strive
to get an unlimited, which is an irreligious and unlawful Liber^y, they set
forward the Cavaliers design to the full, and act for them with all their
power, and should the Independents obtain their desire herein, the greatest
part of the Cavaliers work would be done to their hand; for then Cavaliers,
Papists, Prelates, Malignants, Turks, Jews and Heathens, would all pretend,
that they believe, serve, and worship God, according to the Light they have
received, and as they are persuaded in their Consciences is agreeable to Gods
Word, and Will (and Conscience is a tender thing, and ought not to be forced);
so that by the same rule in equity, a toleration and Liberty of Conscience
cannot be denied to any of them, if once granted to the Independents, and
Sectaries of our times, who for the greatest part of them are as erroneous, if
not worse, in their Doctrine as the Papists and Prelates; many of them as
blasphemous as the Turks and Jews, and live as without God in the world; and
the malignant party knowing this very well, do therefore all of them,
Cavaliers, Papists, and the profanest Malignants in the Kingdom, look upon
the Independents, and speak of them useful as their friends, and unanimously
agree upon all occasions to withstand the Presbyterian government, that way
being too strict and holy for any of them, yea the Independents and they do
all join together as one man, with one voice pleading and crying out for a
toleration, liberty of conscience, or an indulgence without any limitation,
that so every man may believe and serve God as it seems good in his own eyes,
under the name of tenderness of conscience.

Now the Independents practices, and the way they plead for, being thus known
to be very pleasing, and acceptable to the Cavaliers, whether Popish or
otherwise, then surely had I discovered any bitterness of spirit against
Jndependents, it might have exasperated their spirits against me, it could
never have extracted pity or favor, nor have drawn any applause from them;
therefore it is clear, that was not the cause: But know the only cause which
moved some of the Cavaliers (after J had for the further trial of my patience,
and the manifestation of my faithfulness, for a long time endured strict and
close imprisonment in the Goal of York) to show me favor, was the gracious
working, and overruling power of God, who inclined their hearts to deal
kindly with me his faithful servant.

Thus have I given you a true answer to your first Querie, I come now to the
second, which you propound in these words.

Or was it some Courtly Compliance with Papists, preferring them before
Independents or Protestants, that made those Popish Cavaliers so much to
applaud you?

To which I answer* that part of this last Querie, is the same with the former;
for here you speak as if to slight the Independents, were a sure way to
obtain favor and applause from Popish Cavaliers; truly you flatter your self
if you think your subtle dealing herein is not seen, when as it is so
notoriously known, that any man who speaks against Independents may be scorned,
but never applauded by Popish, or any that are Cavaliers; for they applaud the
Independents, whom they hold to be more subtle, and powerful to effect the
thing they chiefly ayms at, and desire then themselves; and it is well known,
and can be proved that they will run and go to do any Malignant a favor,
yea, they will join with the wickedest Cavaliers against a Presbyterian to do
him a mischief. But having cleared this truth in my Reply to your first
Querie, I hasten to the other part of this, where you start the Question,
Whether the favor I received were not by my courtly compliance with Papists,
preferring them before Protestants, etc. To which I answer, that my constant
perseverance in holding forth the true Protestant Religion where ever I lived,
at home and beyond the seas, is sufficiently known to all the godly,
faithful, orthodox Christians, that inhabited in any of those parts where I
have dwelt, and so far have I ever been from any courtly complying with
Papists, or preferring them before Protestants, as some in England at this day
can testify, that when I lived in foreign nations, my zeal was so great for
the Protestant Religion, that with no little hazard I have maintained it; for
all the while I travailed abroad, and continued in Popish Countries, which was
many years, it fared with me as with the Apostle Paul, while he waited at
Athens, Act. 17. 16, 17. my spirit was stirred in me when I saw the Cities and
all the Countries wholly given to Idolatry; therefore carrying my life in my
hand I daily disputed with Papists, and those they accounted the devout
persons, Priests and Jesuits against Popery, maintaining the Protestant
Religion; insomuch, as it was only the goodness of my God that kept me safe,
giving them no power to hurt me; further J answer you, the Books that I have
written against Popery, in Latin, and in English, are yet extant, and they do
witness and will to future generations, that the Author of them disputed
against, and disclaimed Popery, and earnestly contented for the faith which was
once delivered unto the Saints, Iud. verse. 3. yea, the many disputations I have
held with Priests, Jesuits, and people popishly affected in England, not only
while I enjoyed my liberty, but also when by the Prelaticall popish party J was
for maintaining the true Protestant Religion, and standing for the peace and
welfare of my country cast into several prisons, viz. in the Gate House at
Westminster, in the Castle of Launceston in Cornwall, in the Castle, in the
Isle of Sylly, in the Goal of Leicester, in the Goal in the City of York,
in Hemsley-Castle, in Yorke-shire; Lastly in Knasebrough-Castle in Yorke-shire.
Yet through Gods supporting grace, in none of all these prisons, could the
cruelty, pride and fury of men, which in York and Sylly was my daily portion,
either make me forget my integrity, or daunt me in the least; for their rage
and power I feared not, neither did I ever forbear to justify godly
Protestants, nor decline any opportunity to dispute with Papists, but improved
it to the uttermost to show the great idolatry, and vanity of their Religion,
as many who were prisoners with me, in some of the forenamed places can
testify: And I am confident, that the Popish Cavaliers, with whom I have been
a prisoner, and others of them, that have discoursed and reasoned with me in
matters of Religion, will give this testimony, that they ever found me constant
to my principles, unmovable in the Protestant Religion, and as far from
complying with Papists, or preferring them before Protestants, what ever I
suffered or under-went, as light is from darkness in its greatest brightness.

Moreover Brother, I would not that you should be ignorant how that I have
been as frequent in disputations, writ as much in confutation, and at all
times, and in all companies have appeared as forward and earnest against
Papists, and have ventured my life to maintain the Protestant Religion, as
freely as any Independent, I know in England, and that in the worst of times;
yea, when those who are now the chief independent Rabbis, to avoid suffering
for truth, would not stand to appear in her behalf, but went out of the
Kingdom, and like the parents of the man that was borne blind, Joh. 9. 21.
Left her to speak for her self, then J helped to maintain truths cause, and
was not afraid nor ashamed to suffer in so good a quarrel, but resisted her
opposers, Papists, Prelates, Arminians and Formalists in their erroneous
Doctrines, and Popish practices even unto blood. I am become a fool in
glorying, you have compelled me, 2 Cor. 12. 11. for so many reproaches which
you have cast upon me, and such groundless Queries could never have proceeded
from any that had not been guided should I say by a traducing spirit, truly
that word would come short fully to explain and set forth the sinful subtilty
of them; therefore I will not undertake to set down what spirit it was, and
what name it will bear; I shall only show what it was not, and leave it to
such as are godly, wife, and experienced Christians, to spell out the name
thereof: Now it is very evident that it was not the spirit of brotherly love;
that would have silenced yea annihilated such thoughts in the first conception;
for as brotherly love thinks no evil, much less dares it devise, and publish
falsehood; yet more evil, and greater falsehood; then you have not only thought
(as it plainly appears) but published against me, and that deliberately, none
could ever have imagined; for you render me a scandalous Walker (as vile as
vile can be) and here you question whether I have not complied with Papists,
and Popish Cavaliers, and preferred them before Protestants.

Thus with your windy Independent policy you blast my good name, raise
doubts, cloud my sincerity, darken and overshadow my faithful constant
perseverance in the truth and ways of God to make me be thought a man infamous
and of no Religion: but such dealings are absolutely contrary to brotherly
love; therefore it is very clear to the understanding of all, that you were not
guided by that spirit. And as your quaeries were made without brotherly love,
so they seem to be altogether void of Christian experience, being wholly filled
with evil surmises, scrued up to their height by the hand of carnal, reason,
and uttered by the tongue of sinful suspicion. For I beseech you consider how
it comes to pass, that you who have been a Prisoner, one of my Quondam Fellow
Sufferers, when you hear, that I being a Prisoner (under the command and power
of Popish Cavaliers) was courteously used by a professed Papist, should have such
thoughts arise in your heart, and set them forth in Print, to inquire whether
the favor I received from them were not obtained by my courtly complying with
Papists, preferring them before Protestants.

Brother, have you had such experience of Gods power and gracious goodness in
giving you favor two years together in the eyes of some to whom you were
committed Prisoner, and do you now think it so strange as you cannot search out
the reason of it when God has wrought the same thing for me, (one Month) but
suspect that the favor I received was purchased by wronging my conscience?
Surely when you writ these quaeries you had forgot the loving kindnesses of our
God showed to you in your imprisonment, and how notwithstanding for the first
half year, the Governor of Garnsey kept you close Prisoner in very strict
durance (in some things exceeding the rigor of his Warrant); Yet at last God
moving his heart to more humanity, he afterward gave you what liberty the
Castle did afford, suffered you not to want any accommodation that he could
possibly help you unto, and used you courteously all the remaining time of
your banishment. Had you called these things to mind (me thinks) the
remembrance of Gods mercies unto your self would have fully satisfied you in
this particular, and silenced your carnal reasonings, knowing Gods arm is not
shortened nor his power lessened, He is the same God yesterday, to day, and for
ever; therefore (I say) surely you had forgot his loving kindnesses to you, or
else you wilfully stopped the mouth of your experiences and would not permit
them to speak for me, whom you so seek to blot with false reports, ignominy,
and disgraceful language, that even the goodness of God manifestest toward
me, you to obscure with a vail of evil surmises; But that the name of God may
be ever magnified, the world undeceived, and you receive a satisfactory answer
unto your quaeries, know, it was not any courtly compliance with Papists which
procured me favor; I did no such thing; let God be true, and every man a liar;
for to him all praise is due, who in his Word has said, When a man's ways
please the Lord he makes even his enemies to be at peace with him, Prove. 16.
7. This did my God, when I was committed close Prisoner to a Papist, make good
to me his servant (who though in much weakness, do make it the ultimate end of
all my endeavors to please the Lord): Now this was the Lords doing, and let it
not seem mavelous in your eyes, That that God, who called Cyrus by name, made
him a friend to the people of God, though he knew not God, Isaiah 45. 4. Who
sent his Angel and shut the lions mouths that they could not hurt his servant
Daniel. Daniel 6. 22. And delivered the three children out of the fiery furnace
Daniel 3. 26,27, 28. should when he pleased to make his power known, and
prevent the evil intentions of men, cause Popish Cavaliers to show me favor
and to use me courteously: Is any thing too hard for the Lord to do? No surely!
For this and greater things then this, my God has done for me; Therefore the
experiences I have had of his goodness, free grace, rich mercies, and never
failing loving kindnesses, I for ever will extol, predicate, declare, and
speak of, that men may know it is not in vain to serve and patiently wait upon
the Lord our God, nor to rely on him, in the time of their distress, when
they seem to be deprived of all outward comforts and exposed to the greatest
miseries.

Thus I have labored to satisfy your doubts truly, and faithfully to answer
your quaeries. The Lord convince you of your error, and of the reail truth of
all I have herein said, and forgive your unbrotherly practices and bitter
invectives against me, one of your Quondam Follow Sufferers.

Now because my brother Burton has so deeply censured me for my Postscript,
and because all those of his fraternity have upon all occasions so often
reviled me for it, though none but himself ever indeavored to disprove the
least title of it, which they can never do, I intend within these few days to
send it out again into the world something enlarged touching their New Lights,
undertaking before all men to make good whatsoever is contained in it, and much
more concerning their practices.

Imprimatur,

Ja. Cranford.

FINIS

