A POSING QUESTION, PUT By the Wise man, viz. SOLOMON, to the Wisest men.

Concerning making a JUDGMENT of TEMPORAL CONDITIONS.

WHEREIN YOU HAVE The Ignorance of Man (in knowing, What is Good, or Evil, for
man in this Life) DISCOVERED; Together, with the Mistakes that flow from it:
And the great Question RESOLVED, viz. Whether the Knowledge of, What is Good for
a man in this Life, be so hid from Man, that no man can attain it.

Preached at the Weekly Lecture at Vpton upon Severn, in the County of
Worcester, by BENJAMIN BAXTER, late Minister of the Gospel there.

Eccles. 9. 1. No man knows either Love or Hatred, by what is before him.

Eccles. 5. 13. There is a sore Evil I have seen under the Sun, namely, Riches,
Kept for the Owners thereof to their Hurt.

Psalm. 119. 71. It is good for me that I have been Afflicted.

LONDON, Printed for George Sawbridge, at the Sign of the Bible on
Ludgate Hill, 1662.

To the much HONORED, AND TRULY VIRTUOUS, Mrs. PENELOPE LECHMERE; Wife to
Nicholas Lechmere, of HANLY-CASTLE, Esquire
Madam,
AS nothing is more usual, then for those, who write Books, to Dedicate them to
some Person or other: So it is as usual with those that do it, to make known to
the World, the Reason of such their Dedication; and, Why to such a Person.
Among other reasons, none are more frequently alleged, then Eminent Favors
received. Madam, If I would make these the Reasons of my Dedicating this Book
to you, it were sufficient to satisfy any, Why I have pitched upon you, rather
then upon another. I could tell the World, What a grear Debtor you have me to
you, especially in this day, wherein the Hand of the Lord has been, and still
is, very heavy upon me: You have been a Nurse, and very much of a Physician to
me; You have ministered to my Necessities; You have often cheared me with your
Visits; Yea, you left not, till you had found out, an Able and Eminent
Physician, and brought him to me, under whose hands I at present am, waiting
upon God for the Issue. Certainly, these are Favors that are not to be
forgotten; and might very well be alleged, as the Reason of my Dedicating
this inconsiderable Piece to you. But, Madam, under favor, I must tell you and
the world, that this Dedication, neither respects, nor relates to, any of
these. The only Reason, is, truly this, That there is none, can claim such an
Interest in the Book, as your self; and if it be worth seeing the Light, you
must be thanked for it. You were the Person, who, for some years last past, did
with much importunity, solicit me to the Printing and Publishing of these
Sermons; You rested not, till you had obtained a promise from me, of doing it;
When my Copy was finished, you were impatient till it were sent to the Press;
and when it was in the Press, in all your inquiries after it, you were pleased
to Style it by the Name of Your Book. So many ways have you been pleased to
make it your own, that I should have wronged you very much, if I should have
denied you, the right you have to it. And now Madam, having given you this
account of the Reason of my Dedicating this Book to you, I shall next give you,
a brief account of the Book it self. It Treats of a Subject, which few or none
(that I know of) have written of, (I mean) so as to make it the sole Subject,
of a full and just Discourse. It is a Subject, that Universally respects all,
of what Degree or Quality soever, High and Low, Rich and Poor; yea, the
Highest, and the Lowest; The King that Sits upon the Throne, and the Beggar
that fits upon the Dunghill. GOD, the Great Founder, and Framer of Conditions,
has not made all men, equal and alike in respect of Stature, ( Saul, was
taller than the people, by the head and shoulders) no more has he made all
equal, in (...)

(...) such a crowd of Books: But God told not me, what Changes He would make:
And who knows what is good for man, when Providence concealeth much that is
necessary to the Determination. Little thought I, That God was so suddenly
removing so many faithful Guides, and bringing thousands into such a case, in
which, Books must be their most learned, able, powerful Teachers! O what a
mercy is it, that even the Poor, may keep such Preachers in their houses, at so
cheap a rate! That at Home, they may thus have an excellent Sermon when they
please! That they may (yet) without Penalties, hear these silent Preachers,
that are Orthodox, Methodical, Impartial, not bending to the Lusts, and Carnal
Interests of Men: That at home, you may hear a Preacher that will not flatter
you, nor rail at those, that are not for the Interest of a Faction; nor by a
beastly debauched Life, unsay his Doctrine: That by reading more or less, you
may avoid the offense, of the length or shortness of the Sermon: That you may
choose the Subject, most pertinent to your case, and the Discourse that for the
manner is most suited to your Edification! That when you cannot come to a
Powerful Preacher, you may, at any time, read a heartwarming book: That when
you want understanding and expression, prudently to instruct your Families, and
exhort your near Relations, or your Neighbors, you may read to them, or lend
them, a Book that is best suited to their State. I think, Much of the work of
God in England, for men's Conversion, Confirmation, and Consolation, is now to
be carried on by Books.

And though I know some get them, but as Hangings or Pictures, to Adorn their
Rooms, ( ut Petrach.) Alii voluptiti, alii jactantiae libros quaerunt; sunt qui
hac part supellectilis exornant thalamos, quae animis ornandis inventa est,
neque aliter his utuntur quam Corinthii vasis, and tabulis pictis, ac statuis,
etc.) yet, when they are extant, who knows whose hands they may fall into:
And how many by such Books, as unexpectedly have fallen into their hands, have
bin brought to true Repentance and Salvation.

And it is a great-Mercy, that we have such a multitude of Books, that all
agree in the necessary unquestionable Truths of our Religion; when it is a
thing so dangerous to read Books against Books, Errors against Truth; and [
Libri quosdam ad scientiam, quosdam ad insaniam perduxere] some are made Wise,
and some made Mad, by reading Books: And when diversity, and contrariety, so
distract men, as abundance of Cross-wayes do a Traveller. ( ut Petr.) Fallit
saepe viarum multiplicitas viatorem; et qui uno call certus ibat, haeret in
bivio; multoque major trivii est error, aut quadrivii: sic saepe qui librum
unum efficaciter elegisset, inutiliter multos aperuit evolvitque.)

The Papists remedy against the hurt of ill Books, is to deny us the use of
good ones: Their remedy against the mischeifs of errors, is to keep men without
knowledge of the Truth; and to cure squinting to put out our eyes: To escape the
danger of misunderstanding the Scriptures, to keep them from understanding
them, and to lock them up in an unknown Tongue, and to fly from them, because,
they are abused by Heretics: As if Christ should not have said again, [ It is
Written] because, the Devil had said, [ It is Written]. But of the two Evils,
the Vanity is more tolerable, of them that glory in their excellent Libraries;
or of Sabinus, in Seneca, that boasted of his learned Servants; or the Great
Men, that glory in their learned Chaplains, while they are ignorant themselves;
than the Villainy of Licinius, that called learning, The Pest and Poison of the
Commonwealth: Or the Italian Noble Man that Petrach mentions, Fuit nuper,
non in agris, nec in sylvis, sed in maxima, florentissimaque, et (quod stupeas)
urbe Italiae, neque is Pastor, aratorve, sed vir nobilis, magnique apud cives
suos loci, qui juravit se magno pretio empturum, nequis unquam suam patriam
literatus intraret: O vox saxei pectoris! Petr. Perhaps it was some Pope of
Rome.
that would give a very great sum of money, to keep all men of Learning, from
ever coming into his Country; Or the impiety of them, that would banish the
knowledge of the Scriptures, from the laity in the Church of God.

2. And from the matter and manner of this Treatise, I have more special
Reasons to take the publication of it for a Mercy. The Subject is very suitable
and seasonable in these times, when Providence sporteth it self in the affairs
of men, and puzzeleth so many, and is so variously interpreted by the best, and
misinterpreted by the most. This Doctrine of man's uncertainty of what is for
his good, in the matters of temporal concernment, or of the disengaged
Providence of God, is not any where else so fully and methodically handled that
I know of. And it is of very great use, to the correcting of many, and great
miscarriages, and the right ordering of our affections and employments in the
world. How unreasonable is it, That we should be so eager and peremptory in our
desires of that, which we know not, Whether it will do us good or hurt. That we
should be so passionately troubled, for those passages of God's Providence,
which, for ought we know, may be the means of our felicity. O how often do we
foolishly trouble our selves, because God is saving us from greater trouble,
and we do not understand His meaning! Strange! that the knowledge of our
nothingness, and the experience of the fruits of our miscarriages, will not yet
persuade us, to give God leave to Govern the World, without our meddling, or
seeking to take his Work into our hands, and censuring of that, which we never
understood! That we have not yet enough, of the desire of being as gods; having
smarted for it, as we have done! O the folly of those Expositors of the
Prophecies of Scripture, who first overvalue a prosperous state, and conclude
beyond their knowledge, that it is best for us; and then reduce the Promises to
their sense; and grow so confident in their expectations, of outward
deliverances and prosperous times, as to lay their hopes and comforts on it,
and the very credit of Religion it self! And o the madness of those men, that
laying this as their ground work, that fleshly Prosperity is best for them, are
unreconcilable to the ways of Faith and Holiness, and Mortification, because
they square not with this Erroneous Foundation.

These Generals we are certain of; First, That ordinarily Adversity, is more
profitable to the Soul, then worldly Prosperity. Secondly, That all things
shall work together for good, to them that love God. And therefore we have
reason to be most suspicious of Prosperity; but, if we are true Christians, to
interpret all well that is of God.

Did we but know what need we have of mortifying Providence, as the ordinary
means of mortifying Grace, we should rightlier judge of them, then we do. Tanto
quisque ferramentum medici patientius tolerat, quanto magis putridum conspicit
esse quod secat.] Says Greg. He that best knows the rottenness of the flesh,
will best endure the Surgions knife. And happy are we, if that be cured by the
pain of the flesh, which was corrupted by the pleasure of the flesh: [ Si quae
carnis delectatione peccamus, carnis dolor purgamus:]

Marvel not, if, when thou turnest unto Christ, thou seem to be assaulted
with successive Waves, and to be cast into a Furnace, or brought into a Thorny
Wilderness, and compassed with Sorrows, which thou never wast acquainted with
before: As Augustine to his friend, [ Noli admirari frater, si, postquam
Christianus effectus es, mill te undique tribulationes vexant: Quoniam
Christus nostrae Religionis caput est; nosque ejus membra sumus; debemus ergo
non solum eum, sed ejus vitam cumulatissime sequi.] Christ's way, must be our
way; we must be conformed to our Head: We must Suffer with him, if we will be
Glorified with him: The Cross, is the passage to the Crown. The Armies of
Saints, have gone this way in all Generations. [ Similes aliorum respice casus
-- Mitius ista feres.] Ov. Should we expect that Grace should have no Conflict,
no Conquest before the Triumph; but be Crowned, before we have showed what it
can do? Nay, we know not the power of it in our selves, till it be tried. [
Nemo scit, quid potueris; neque tu quidem ipse: Opus enim est ad sui notitiam
experimento: Quid quisque possit, non nisi tentando didicit, inquit Seneca.]

Be not therefore too unmannerly, and foolishly importunate with God for any
outward thing, till thou not only think that at the present it would do thee
good, but also can see as far as to the end, and say, That it will be in the
issue good, and will not cross any greater Good. And marvel not, if God grant
not such mistaking Prayers. Non audit medicus ad voluntatem, sed ad sanitatem,
says August.

What sickly tempers should we be of, yea, what certain death would follow, if
our Father and Physician, should diet us as we desire, and give us what we
would have our selves? It seems a hard saying of Augustine, of Rich men;
Difficile, imo impossible, est, ut praesentibus et futuris quis fruatur Bonis:
ut hic ventrem, et ibi mentem impleat; ut a deliciis ad delicias transeat; ut
in utroque seculo primus sit; ut in terra et in coelo appareat gloriosus: It is
hard, yea impossible, to enjoy both present and future Goods: to satisfy the
belly here, and the mind hereafter; to pass from pleasures unto pleasures: to
be a chief man in both worlds; to be glorious both in Earth and in Heaven.] But
it means no more than Christ meant, in Luke 16. 25. and 18. 25.

O how great a Victory do they get, that overcome the temptations of
Prosperity. Magnae virtutis est cum foelicitare luctari; et magnae faelicitatis
est a foelicitate non vinci: Aug. How few are so happy, who have that which the
world counts happiness, as to escape its sting, and the everlasting misery,
which living after the flesh will procure, Romans 8. 1, 13.

Heu caecae mentes, tumefactaque corda secundis! This makes the Great ones of
the world, to be the Object of grief and compassion to the Wise, and cloudeth
their Honor, and makes them usually esteemed the miserablest men alive,
because they are usually the worst, through the Surfeits which they take from
worldly fullness, and the alienation of their minds from God and Heaven, through
the prevalence of fleshly pleasures: For he is the worst man, that is most
Earthly and least Heavenly; that has most of the World, and least of God upon
his heart: Especially, when the Leprosy of the most brutish Sensuality, and
stinking Lusts, and drunken Pride, and savage Cruelty, are the Symptoms of this
Pernicious Disease.

Luxuriant animi rebus plerumque secundis* Says Lactantius, Ex Prosperitate
oritur luxuria; ex luxuria vero, vitia omnia: sic impietas adversus Deum
nascitur.] Luxury springs from Prosperity, and all Vices from Luxury: And
thus impiety against God is generated.

And it frequently makes the Prosperous so Drunk, that they need no other
enemy: their Disease destroys them, they reel unto their Ruin. Says Seneca,
Res est inquieta Foelicitas, ipsa se exagitat, movet cerebrum: non uno genere
alios in aliud irritat. Et alibi: Multarum urbium in ipso flore luxuriosa
imperia ceciderunt, et quicquid virtute paratum erat, intemperantia corruit.

Seeing then that worldly prosperity is usually so pernicious, and we can never
say before hand, That it is for our good: How unmeet is it, that we should
inordinately desire it, or think we are undone when adversity is our lot? Why
seek we that fullness or greatness, which has, as Augustine speaks, Asperitatem
veram, jucunditatem falsam, certum dolorem, incertam voluptatem, durum laborem,
timidam quietem; rem plenam miseriae, spem beatitudinis inanem: That is, a true
asperity, a false delight; a certain pain, an uncertain pleasure; a hard
labor, a fearful rest; a business full of misery; and a hope ihat is empty of
true felicity.] And, as a leaf, it shakes with every wind: Internal Gripes,
External Rumors; and a thousand Accidents, turn their seeming Paradise into a
Hell: Ade o perexigua sunt, quae fortunatissimis summam beatitudinis detrahunt,
says Seneca. For, as he says in another place, Felicissimi cujusque
delicatissimus est sensus, et, nisi ad nutum cuncta suppetant, omnis
adversitatis insolens, minimis quibusque prosternitur. The most prosperous,
have a delicate sense, and, if all things be not at their beck, being unused to
all Adversity, they are cast down with every triffle.

3. And I am the more inclined to this Recommendation, for the Reverend
Author's sake: God threatens by Sickness, to call him hence; and therefore,
that he may Preach to many, when he is removed from a few, and silenced in the
dust; is that honor to his Name, and that benefit to Men, which I gladly would
Promote. He is an Orthodox, Sober, Peaceable, Divine; that never interessed
himself, with any thing like a Faction: An excellent and most Methodical
Preacher, whose labor is better in the Pulpit, then in the Press: I have often
heard him, and scarce ever heard a Sermon from him, which I thought not worthy
to be published: No, not when he began to Preach, (about 26. years ago). Many
such Humble, Godly, able faithful Laborers, I had the happiness to be a
Neighbor to, in the County where he lives. In the matter and style of this
Book, you may trulier know, than from the Reports of Malice, what Sedition,
what Faction, what Schism or Heresy they Preached: for it was such as this, so
far as I was acquainted. O happy England! That has more Able, Powerful,
Laborious Preachers to spare and lay aside, than any other Nation that I hear
of in the world, proportionably does enjoy. Now, he that has an ear to hear,
let him hear. Yet a little while is the light with you: walk while ye have the
light, lest darkness come upon you: for he that walks in darkness, knows
not whither he goes, John 13. 35.

March 14. 1661. Your Companion, in the hope and patience of Believers, Rich.
Baxter.

THE CONTENTS.
The Text, Eccles. 6. 12. The first part of the Verse,

CHAP. I.
Solomon's Design in the whole Book Discovered.

Man's Felicity consists not in Riches. Proved by Some Arguments; Chap. 5. 4.
more Arguments, Chap. 6.

The words, a Questionary Proposal.

Doct. No man infallibly knows what is good, (and so on the contrary) What is
evil for a man in this life.
The Doctrine Explicated, 1. Of what Good to be understood, Five Distinctions
of good.
2. Of what Men, Of All Good. Bad.




The difference showed, between a Godly man's, and another man's knowledge, of
what is Good or Evil, for a man in this life, in 4. Particulars.

A Godly man's Ignorance, showed in 2. Particulars.

CHAP. II.
Confirmation of the Doctrine, by Scripture. Reason.


The Reason of 2. sorts.

1. Some respecting God. 2. Some respecting Man.
1. Respecting God. God has hid this knowledge from man. Why God has hid it,
showed in 9. Particulars.

CHAP. III.
2. Respecting Man, ( viz.) Man's Inability to know it. This is showed in 7.
Particulars. 1. Man's Ignorance of men's Spirits and Dispositions. 2. Not
knowing how they will manage their Condition. 3. Not knowing, to what Evils and
Dangers, their Condition may expose them. 4. Not knowing, what Snares Satan may
lay in a Condition. 5. Not knowing, what the Wheel is, within the Wheel. 6. The
sudden Change of Conditions. 7. Want of the Right Art, of making a Judgment of
Conditions. Most judge of them

By
Opinion. Sense. Affection.
CHAP. IV.
Questions Resolved.
1. Question, Whether it be lawful to Pray against Afflictions, since a man
knows not, but they may be good for him. Answered 1. Generally, in 4. Things.
2. Particularly in 2 Things.
It is lawful to Pray for the Keeping them off. Taking them off.
1. For keeping them off. But we must Pray for that Not Absolutely. But
Conditionally.
A double praying against Afflictions, viz. The things themselves. The Evil of
the things.
2. For the taking them off; showed in 4. Particulars.
CHAP. V.
2. Question, Whether it be lawful to pray for the things of this life? Since
we know not but they may be for evil to us.

Answered
1. Generally. 2. Particularly.
1. In General, showed it is lawful in 6. things. 2. Particularly, Not to pray
for them Absolutely. Vltimately.

God's Glory chiefly to be eyed, in praying for outward things.

How a man may know, he eyes the Glory of God in praying for outward things;
showed in 4. Particulars.

3. Question, Whether man's Ignorance, of what is good or evil for him in this
life, does warrant him to adventure upon businesses, hand over head, Without
Consideration. Circumspection.
Answered in 6. Particulars.

CHAP. VI.
Application.
1. Information. Of three sorts of Persons, mistaken about Conditions. 1. Some
about a Prosperous Condition, Thinking it good for them. Four Grounds of their
mistake. Their Grounds Examined.
The fallaciousness of them discovered in diverse particulars
CHAP. VII.
2. Some mistaken about an Afflicted Condition. Five sorts of things about
which they are Mistaken. The Grounds of those mistakes Examined. Several
Queries put to such, who so mistake.
3. Some mistaken, in thinking it is good for them, because they are Afflicted.
The Ground of that mistake Discovered. Examined.


CHAP. VIII.
2. Information. That we should be content to receive Evil, as well as Good, at
the Hand of God. Seven Reasons for it. The great Question Resolved, ( viz.)
Whether the knowledge, of what is Good or Evil for a man in this life, be so
hidden from man, that no man can attain to it. Answered; and Directions given:
The Directions of 2. sorts 1. General. 2. Particular.
1. General. Something is to be Known. Done.

1. What is to be Known. 1. Who is the Framer of Conditions. 2. What is the
right way of judging of Conditions. That showed in 6. Particulars.
3. What it is makes a Condition good for a man in this life.

1. An Interest in the Covenant. 2. The Enjoyment of God in a Condition. 3.
Suitableness of Spirit to a Condition. 4. Peace within. 5. Doing the work of
our Condition. 6. Living above our Condition. A twofold living above it,
1. Sinful. 2. Holy living above its Comforts. Crosses.

7. Watchfulness against the Temptations of a Condition.
CHAP. IX.
8. Spirituallizing a Condition. 9. An holy Indifferency of Spirit, in respect
of Conditions. Five Reasons for that Indifferency.
10. Right Behavior in a Condition. Nothing of God's must displease us.
Nothing of ours must displease God.
11. Enjoyment of our selves in a Condition. 12. Adorning our Condition.
Thus for what is to be known, by those that will make a Judgment of Conditions.

2 What is to be Done.
1. Inquire by Prayer, What is the Mind and Meaning of God in a Condition. Two
things to be inquired after 1. God's End 2. Our Duty in it.


2. Searching our selves, What we are in a Condition. 3. Taking a right view of
Conditions. How to take a right view of conditions. 1. View them by
Scripture Light. How the Scripture helps us, in Viewing of Conditions. Showed
in 6. Particulars.



CHAP. X.
2. In Viewing a Condition, take a right standing: Particular Directions about
that. Quest. How a man may know, Whether a Prosperous Condition be good for
him? Answered, 1. If Temporal, hinder not Spiritual Prosperity. 2. Using the
things of that Condition, with right considerations. ( viz.) Of their
Changeableness. Dangerousness. Usefulness. Inferiority. Emptiness. Our own
Mortality. Our Account.
3. Not forgetting the Afflictions of Joseph.

CHAP. XI.
Quest. How a man may know, Whether an Afflicted Condition be Good for him. 1.
He must make a Judgment of himself. Two Questions to be put to our selves in
that Condition. 1. What we do in it. 2. What we make of it.
1. What a man is to do in that Condition? 1. To find out, What an Affliction
comes in Order to. 2. To set in with the Affliction, and to further it in the
work, for which it is sent. 3. To eye our Passions and Affections, more than
our Afflictions. 4. To eye our Sins, more than our Sufferings. Five things to
move us to it.
5. To keep our Hearts open Heavenward. 6. To keep the Ear open to Counsel. 7.
Framing the Heart, to a Pious Submission to God. 8. Laying the Affliction to
heart. A twofold laying Affliction to heart. 1. Carnal, sinful, hurtful. 2.
Spiritual, holy, helpful.

9. Patient Waiting On God. For God.
10. Making all out of God, that we need in that Condition.
CHAP. XII.
2. What do you make of an Afflicted Condition: Affliction is, 1. God's
Furnace, to Melt. Refine.
2. God's School. In a School, there is a Book. Rod.
Affliction is God's Rod, to beat somewhat Into us. Out of us.
Five Queries, concerning what Instructions, Afflictions have Sealed. 3.
Affliction is God's Plough. The work of the Plough, showed in 3. Particulars.
4. Afflictions are God's Physic. What kind of Physic, showed in 3.
Particulars.
CHAP. XIII.
Quest. What Counsel and Direction to be given, concerning the Choosing or
Refusing Conditions.

Directions
General. Particular.
1. General. 1. Be not your own Choosers. Man's unfitness to be his own Chooser
of his Condition. Quest. How a man may know he is not his own chooser. Answered
in 8. Particulars. Quest. Whether Lawful, to wish things had fallen out
otherwise than they did. Answered in several Particulars.
2. Particular Directions. 1. Seek not great things, but only what is
Convenient. The Good of desiring what only is Convenient. 1. It freeth us from
Temptations. 2. It is the most Easy, in respect of a burden of Cares. Duties.
3. It is Safest for us. 4. Most Commodious for us as Christians, whose life is
compared to a Race. Warfar. Pilgrimage.


CHAP. XIV.
Quest. What is to be Accounted Competent. Convenient.
Answered in 4. things. 2. Direction, Seek those things that are good, without
Controversy and Dispute. Quest. What those things are? Answ. 1. In General.
Godliness, which is good and profitable For all Persons. For all Things. At all
Times. For both Worlds.
2. In Particular. This is Good without Dispute. 1. To Eye more the Enjoyment
of God, than Enjoyments from God. 2. To Rejoyee more in the God of our Mercies,
then in the Mercies of our God. 3. To serve God cheerfully, however He serve
us. 4. To keep God, what ever we lose for keeping Him. 5. To remember God and
his Glory, in all our ways. 6. To Consecrate all we have, to His service. 7.
To give the things of another life the Pre-eminence. Wherein giving them the
Pre-eminence, showed in 5. Particulars. 8. What ever a man's condition be in
this life, to fetch comfort from the consideration, of what his condition
hereafter shall be. 9. What ever his Portion be, to make God his Portion.
Reasons, Why we should make God our Portion. 10. To have Sin Pardoned. Set out
in 2. Particulars. 11. To lay up Treasure, where things are Purest. Surest.
12. To seek after Distinguishing Favors. 13. To keep Peace Within, however
things are without. 14 To keep our selves in a continual preparation for Death.
This is showed in 5. Particulars.

READER,
THere is lately Printed a Learned, Pious, and Practical Commentary upon the
whole Gospel of St. Mark; wherein the Text is Logically Analyzed; The meaning
of the Holy Spirit, clearly and soundly Opened; Doctrins naturally Raised; All
seeming differences between this and the other Evangelists Reconciled; And many
important Cases of Conscience Resolved, By Mr. George Petter. Published at the
desire of above 200. Learned Divines, Signified under their Hands.

Also, An Exposition of the whole Epistle to the Hebrews, wherein the Text is
cleared, Theopolitica improved, The Socinian Comment Examined, By Mr. George
Lawson, Rector of More, in the County of Salop.

Also, The Running of the Christian Race with Patience, By Mr. John Brinsley.

All to be sold, by George Sawbridge, at the Sign of the Bible on Ludgate Hill.

A POSING QUESTION.
Eccles. 6. 12. For, who knows what is Good for Man in this Life?
CHAPTER I.
THis Book of Ecclesiastes, is a book full of Discoveries. The great discovery
Solomon makes in it, is this, Viz. What it is upon which the desires of Man
ought to fix, as their utmost End and Rest.

Thereupon, Solomon makes this great Enquiry, Wherein Man's chiefest Good and
Happiness consists?

In it he proceeds 1. Negatively, 2. Affirmatively.


1. Negatively; and so, shows wherein true Happiness is not to be found: And
there you have Solomon discovering the false and counterfeit Felicities of man's
dark heart, and the woeful mistakes of men about their chiefest Good.

This he does more Generally, Particularly.

1. More Generally, in this Proposition, Cap. 1. 2. Vanity of vanities, All is
vanity.

2. More Particularly; In recounting several things, whereon men fix their
Eyes and Hearts, as though happiness were to be found in them.

1. Knowledge, both Natural and Moral. 2. Pleasure, and all the sweetest
earthly Delights. 3. Honor, and greatness of Authority. 4. Riches, and
earthly Possessions.
The three first of these, Solomon discourses of in the four sirst Chapters.
And in the fifth Chapter he comes to examine, and consider of that of Riches.
And having, in the former Chapter, by many Arguments, proved the Vanity of
Riches; he comes in this Chapter to add four Arguments more.

1. A man may have the Possession of them, and yet want the right Use, and
comfortable Enjoyment of them. This you have, in the six first Verses.

2. They are not able to give satisfaction to the Desires of men. This he
proves, Ver. 7. All the labor of a man is for his Mouth, i. e. for the Body,
and the services of It; But the Appetite is not filled. And further confirms
it, Ver. 8. by comparing the Wise and Foolish, Rich and Poor, together. If
there were such contentment, and satisfaction to be found in Riches, why then
Wise men and Rich men should, of all others, enjoy the happiness of it. But,
says Solomon, What has the Wise more than the Foolish? What has the Poor,
that knows to walk before the Living? q. d. What has a painful and
laborious Poor man less of Contentment than the Rich?

3. Riches are unable to preserve from, or protect against, those Evils to
which Man is subject, viz. Sickness, Pain, Grief, Sin, Wrath. Ver. 10. That
which has been is named already, and it is known that it is Man. i. e. Call
him what you will; Wise, Honorable, Rich; why yet he is still but Man, Weak,
Earthy, Frail, Mortal; and so, subject to those Miseries that attend Man.

4. Abundance of Riches has abundance of Cares, Troubles, Distractions,
Disquietments, Ver. 11. Seeing there are many things that increase Vanity, what
is Man the better? q. d. Many, by increasing Riches, think to increase
Happiness; yet they do but increase Vanity: And if so, then Man is so far from
being the better, that he is the worse for them.

Thus, Solomon shows how men are mistaken in thinking Happiness to lie in
Riches; And the ground of this mistake is laid down in the words of the Text,
and that is; Man's ignorance of what is good for him in this life; He thinks
that good, which is evil. For, who knows what is good for man in this life?

The words are a Questionary Proposal. Who knows what is good for man in this
Life? The Interrogation implies a Negation, and so resolves it self into this
universal negative Proposition; No man knows what is good for man in this
life. One great thing, about which the ignorance of man discovers it self, is
this, What is good, and what is evil, for a man in this life.

The Conclusion deducible from the words, is this:

Doct. No man infallibly knows what is good, and ( so on the contrary) what is
evil, for a man in this Life.

In the handling of this Proposition, I shall proceed

By way of Explication. Confirmation. Application.

1. For Explication. So we are to make two Enquiries.

1. Of what Good, this is to be understood. 2. Of what Men, this is to be
understood: And whether every man is concluded under the Ignorance of what is
good for a man in this Life.
1. Consider of what Good this Proposition is to be understood. So the Question
is, Whether no man knows what is good for himself in any particular.

For the better understanding of this, consider, What it is that we call good?
That is Good that all desire. Goodness is, Congruentia rei cum appetitu, It is
the suitableness and agreement of the thing to and with the desire; And hence
it is, that bonum and appetibile; what is good, and what is desirable, are the
same.

Now here is the Question, when every one desires what is good, that, for all
that, no man knows What is good for a man; since every man knows what it is
that suites with his desires.

For the Answering of this Question, we must give-in some Distinctions.

1. Distinction is this;
There is Bonum Reale Apparens

There is Good real, and, Good in appearance. There is that that is truly good,
and that that seems good but is truly evil; There is that that is good, and
that that only seems good.

Now when we tell you, No man knows what is good for a man in this life; It
is to be understood of the former, not of the latter. No man knows what is
really good for him; He knows indeed what is seemingly good for him, what
pleases his carnal appetite and corrupt desires; but what is really good for
him, Man knows not.

2. Distinction;
There is Bonum Jucundum, good pleasing. Vtile, good profitable.

1. There is a Pleasing good, that pleases our Natures, and delights our
Senses.

2. There is a Profitable good; And we must know this, that things may be
pleasingly good, that are not profitably good. Things may be toothsome, that
are not wholesome. A man in the Fit of an Ague, knows, Drinking much would be a
pleasing good to him, when the Physician knows, it would not be a profitable
good and so denies it.

Now the proposition is to be understood of the latter, not of the former.
Every man knows what is a pleasing good. He knows, (as it is said of
Issachar) Rest is good, and Health is good; but he knows not what is a
profitable good for man.

3. Distinction;
There is Good that is so Simpliciter Secundum Quid.

1. There is that which is, in it self, and of it self, good; So Riches, and
Health, and Honor, are in themselves good, being Blessings of God, and Streams
that Issue from that Fountain of Goodness that is in him. And so, on the
contrary, that are in themselves Evil; as Poverty, Sickness, Crosses,
Afflictions, being brought in by Sin.

2. There is that that is good in some respects, et quoad nos, in respect of
us. There is Bonum commodum, a convenient good. That may be good in it self,
that is not good for us; I mean, a convenient good.

So the Proposition is to be understood of the latter, not of the former. A man
may know what is good in it self, when he may not know what is good for him. A
man may know, Riches are good, when yet they may not be a convenient good for
him. Agur's Prayer, Prove. 30. 8. was Give me neither Poverty nor Riches, feed
me with food Convenient. Though he saw, Riches were in themselves good, yet he
questioned whether they were a Convenient good for him; and thereupon desires a
middle Estate, between Poverty and Riches. So that, when we tell you, No man
knows what is good for man in this life, it is to be understood of a
Convenient good.

4. Distinction.
There is good in Respect 1. Of our Apprehensions and Imaginations. 2. Of Gods
Intention.


1. There is good in respect of our apprehensions. So men, have their several
apprehensions of what is good, and what is evil. One man apprehends Honor good
for him, and Riches good for him; And apprehends Disgrace evil, and Poverty
evil. A man apprehends Health good, and Sickness evil, for him.

2. There is good in Gods Intention. And so the Proposition is to be understood
of the latter, not of the former. Though a man may know what is good for
himself in his own apprehension, yet he knows not what is good for him in Gods
Intention. What a man apprehends to be good to him, may be intended for evil;
and what he apprehends as evil, may be intended to him for good, Eccles. 9. 1.
No man knows Love or Hatred by any thing that is before him. The meaning is,
That no man from outward blessings, which are good in our apprehension, can
conclude that God loves him, and intends good to him; And no man from outward
Afflictions, which are evil in a man's apprehension, can conclude hatred, or
that He intends evil to him. So that though a man knows what is good and evil
for him in his own Apprehension, yet he knows not what is good or evil in
God's Intention.

5. Distinction:
There is Good, that is good in a General Notion and Consideration; And Good,
that is good in relation to particular Cases, and to particular Times. So the
Proposition is to be understood of the latter, not of the former. This is
granted, that a man may know what is good and what is evil for him in General;
but a man knows not what is good for him in such a particular Case, and at
such a particular Time. As Hushai said of Achitophel's Counsel, It is not good
at this time; Why so what a man looks upon as good for him, may not be good for
him at such a time. Riches that seem to be Good for a man, yet at some times
may be Evil to a man. As in Plundring times, it was a man's unhappiness either
to be, or to be thought, Rich.

Thus for the first thing, Of what Good this is to be understood.

2. The second thing to be Enquired after, is, Of what Men, this is to be
understood? So the Question is, Whether the Proposition concludes all men,
without Exception, under this ignorance; and excludes all from the knowledge of
what is good for them in this Life?

So the Question is concerning Godly men that are sanctified, and enlightened by
the Spirit of God, Whether are they as Ignorant in this particular, as others?

Answ. There is a great difference to be put between the Spiritual and the
Natural man, in respect of their knowledge of what is good or evil for a man in
this Life. A Godly man, not only knows what is good for a man, in relation to
the Life to come; as Pardon of Sin, an Interest in Christ, etc. but also he
knows more than others do what is good for a man in this Life. He knows, that
many things are good for a man, that are apprehended to be evil; and he knows,
there are many things evil for a man that are looked on as good. Thus David
said, It was good for him that he had been afflicted; when others looked upon
Afflictions as evil, he looked on them as good for him. Agur prayed against
Riches; why, he knew they were evil for him, when others look upon abundance as
good.

So, consider; a Godly man has Four things to help him in the knowledge of
this, that others have not.

1. He has the Spirit of God to instruct and teach him what is good and evil
for a man in this life. When others are only led by Sense, and Opinion, the
Godly man is taught, and led by the Spirit of God.

2. He has the Sanctuary to go into, where he may learn what is Good and Evil
for a man in this Life. There David tells you, that he attained to this
knowledge; and, till he went into the Sanctuary he was ignorant of it, Psalm. 73.
17. -- till I went into the Sanctuary. Till then, he thought it was ill for
good men, that they were afflicted; and that it was good for wicked men, that
they were in prosperity: But when he came into the Sanctuary, he was informed
otherwise.

3. The Godly man has convincing Experience, by which he comes to know what is
good and evil for a man in this life. So that by experience, he knows that to
be good for him, that others think evil, Psalm. 119. 71. It is good for me that
I have been Afflicted. David speaks it from experience.

4. The Godly man has the Promise to help him too, Romans 8. 28. All things work
together for good to them that Love God. So that, being such as Love God, they
know all shall be for Good to them, be it what it will. Though it seem Evil,
yet it shall work for Good.

These things Godly men have above others, whereby they are enabled above
others to know what is Good for them this in Life. And yet, for all this, the
Proposition includes them too, as well as others. It is true, Solomon (it is
probable) means it chiefly of the Natural and Unregenerate man; yet it takes in
the Godly man too, as one that knows not what is Good for a man in this Life.
And that especially in two Cases: 1. A Godly man knows not what is good for a
man, in all things. 2. He knows not what is good for a man, at all times.


1. A Godly man knows not what is good for a man in all things. In this (as the
Apostle speaks) they know but in part. And it appears thus; that they have been
denied in their Requests, Praying for that that God saw not Good for them. Thus
Abraham for Ishmael. Thus Moses requested to have gone into the Land of Canaan.
And Gods denying them these Requests, must be interpreted Gods not seeing that
particular thing Good for them; and that indeed it was not good for them: The
Will of God being the highest Rule of Goodness.

So we find some of the Servants of God have been blinded with passion in some
of their requests; as Elijah and Jonah; and God did not see it good to grant
them what they desired. They Asked they knew not what.

2. A Godly man may not know what is good for him, at all times. Of that they
have been ignorant till they have gone into the Sanctuary, and till experience
has afterward taught it them. Time was, when David, a Godly man, was mistaken
about the Afflictions of Godly men, and the Prosperity of Wicked men; till he
went into the Sanctuary. Till then, he was as Ignorant as other men. So that
till then, a Godly man may be Ignorant of, What is good for man in this life.

CHAP. II.
NOw for the Confirmation of the Proposition.

I shall confirm it by 1. Scripture. 2. Reason

1. By Scripture. So we may gather, from Scripture, two things, that may serve
to assert the truth of this Proposition.

1. Scripture acquaints us with what Disappointments men have met with in those
ways, wherein they have dreamt of nothing but good, and benefit, and advantage
to themselves. How, many have Ruined themselves, by that by which they thought
to have Raised themselves. Scripture gives us many Instances in this kind, of
those whose Table has been their Snare; and what they thought should have been
for their Welfare, has become their Trap, Psalm. 69. 22. And this shows how men
have been mistaken in what is good for them. The Scripture furnishes us with
many Instances; as those of Ahab, in compassing Naboths Vineyard. Gehezi, in
getting the Talents of Silver from Naaman. Achan, in stealing the Wedge of
Gold, and the Babylonish Garment. Haman, in screwing himself into the Favor
and Affection of his Prince. Israel, in asking a King; and in asking Quails.
Scripture shows us how these were mistaken about what was good for them. We may
say of them, this, That, had they known what had been good for them, they would
not have done what they did. Solomon, in Eccles. 5. 13. speaks of an Evil that
he had seen under the Sun, viz. Riches kept for the owners thereof to their
hurt. Surely, if the owners had not thought they had been for their good, they
would not have laid them up.

2. Scripture acquaints us with this; That there have been many, that, contrary
to expectation, have found those things good for them that they thought evil,
and looked on them as Evils. As it tells us of many, that found that to be evil
to them, that they thought to be good for them; so of many, that have found
that to be good for them, that they thought to have been evil. Scripture
furnishes us with Instances in this particular. And here time would fail me to
tell you 1. Of Job, who looked upon himself, as the most Miserable man in the
World; That God had set him as a Mark to shoot at; as if God would make sport
with him. He tells you how God wrote bitter things against him; Yet we see, all
was for his good. And so we see Jam. 5. 15. what end God made with him: so that
we see by that, that Job was mistaken about his Afflictions. 2. David, Psalm.
119. 71. confesses, It is good for me that I have been Afflicted. Consider,
time was, when David did not think so. Time was when David complained of them.
But see, he was afterward of another mind, and tells us, It was good for him
that he was afflicted. In Psalm. 73. (if he were the Penman of it) you find
there was a time when he was envious at the prosperity of the Wicked, and
thought them the happiest men; and he was troubled at the adversity of the
Godly, and thought them the most miserable men; but afterward he confesses
his ignorance and mistake in that particular.


To close up this: If you look upon Heb. 12. you shall find the Apostle
speaking to Christians under Affliction; and endeavors to convince them of
their mistake about Afflictions, and that they looked upon that as evil which
was for their good. You shall find, this is the scope of the Apostle in the
beginning of that Chapter. And then, verse. 7. 8. 9. He tells them they are
Chastisements, and that they bring forth the quiet fruit of Righteousness; q.
d. When you come to taste the fruit of these Afflictions, you will be of
another mind: You will find, contrary to your expectation, that good for you
that you thought evil. You must judge of the Tree by the Fruit; and when you
come to taste the Fruit of Afflictions, you will say, You were mistaken in the
Tree.

Thus for the Confirmation by Scripture.

2. We come to show the Grounds and Reasons of the Proposition, Why no man
infallibly knows what is good for man in this life.

So there is 1. Some Reason of it, in Respect of God. 2. Some reasons of it, in
respect of Man.

1. The Reason of it in Respect of God is this: Because God has hid this
knowledge from man, and therefore, no man knows what is good for man in this
life.

And if any ask, For what reason God has hid this knowledge from man? I Answer.

1. God has done it to maintain his own Prerogative. It only belongs to him
who made the creature to know what is good for the creature. It belongs only to
him who has given life to man, to know what is good for a man in this life. He
knows man best, and knows best what is good for man, whether Riches or Poverty;
Quietness or Trouble; Health or Sickness; Life or Death. This knowledge is too
high and excellent for man. It is not for man to know this, which God has put
in his own Power.

2. God does it to keep man in a state of Dependence on him, and Submission to
him; That man may know at whose finding he is, and at whose disposing, ( viz.)
of that God, who only knows what is good for man. God does it, to take the
creature off from being his own Carver. He will have man look to Him, and seek
to Him, for what is good for him. God has hid this knowledge from man, that
man may pray both for the good things, and against the evils, of this life,
with submission to the will of God. Lord, I know not what is good, or what is
evil for me in this life; and therefore I leave my self to thee; and in those
things submit my self to thee: Thou shall Dispose of me, Thou shall Carve for
me, Thou shall Guide me by thy Counsel, who only know what is good or evil
for me in this life; Thou shall choose my condition for me.

3. God hides this knowledge from man, to magnify and make the Glory of his
Wisdom and Power known, in working contrary to the apprehensions, hopes, and
expectations of man.

So the Wisdom and Power of God shows it self.

1. In a way of Justice, turning good into evil. 2. In a way of Mercy, turning
evil into good.
1. He shows his Wisdom and Power in a way of Justice, causing what was
apprehended by men as good for them, to become evil to them, contrary to their
hopes and expectations. Thus the Lord causes some men's Tables to become their
Snare; and what they thought to have bin for their welfare, to be their Trap.
Thus the Lord lets some men lay up Riches for their hurt, and suffers them to
get Honor to their shame. There is an expression in Mal. 2. 2. I will curse
your Blessings. God can make seeming blessings to become Curses. And in this
his Wisdom and Power are Gloriously seen. God can let a man think he has a
good thing in his hand, and turn it into an evil. And hence it is, some have
cursed their Riches, and Honor, and worldly Greatness, as Charles the fifth,
and Philip the Second of Spain did.

2. He shows his Wisdom and Power in a way of Mercy, in turning seeming evils
into good. That when a man thinks it to be an evil, God turns it to good,
contrary to a man's apprehension, hope, and expectation. Thus, as he can turn
the Rod into a Serpent, so he can turn the Serpent into a Rod: He can bring
good out of evil, and light out of darkness. As he can turn a seeming
blessing into a curse, so he can turn a seeming curse into a blessing. When
Balack would have cursed Israel, Moses tells them, Deuteronomy. 23. 5. God turned it
into a Blessing. Joseph's brethren intended evil against him, but God turned it
into good, Genesis 50. 20. And upon this account it is, that God hides the
knowledge of what is good for a man in this life from man, that he may have a
freedom and liberty of declaring his Wisdom and Power when he please, both in
turning evil into good, and good into evil, contrary to man's apprehensions,
hopes, and expectations.

4. God has hid this knowledge from man, to keep man humble in the midst of his
greatest outward enjoyments. That the great man may not glory in his greatness,
and that the rich man may not glory in his riches; since he knows not whether
they are good for him. When a man considers this with himself, I have Honor,
but I know not whether it be for my good; I have Riches, but I know not whether
it be for my good: how humble should the consideration of this make a man in
the midst of these enjoyments? When he considers, Honor has been many a man's
Snare; Riches, and outward prosperity have been many a man's Trap, and I know
not but they may be so to me: how humble should this keep a man, when he
knows not whether they are for his good? God does it to keep man from
boasting of his enjoyments, Prove. 27. 1. Boast not thy self of to Morrow (says
Solomon:) for thou know not what a day may bring forth. So men must not
boast of their Wealth or Honor, since they know not what they may bring forth.
Thus a man should reason with himself; Why should I be proud of those things
which have proved evil to some, and I know not but they may be so to me?

5. God has hid this knowledge from man, To make man patient in affliction,
and to make him hope in the worst condition: when a man considers thus with
himself, Alas I know not what is good for me in this life: For ought I know,
these afflictions are good for me; and what reason have I then to be impatient
under them? why should I fret and murmur at these dispensations? Do I know what
these Crosses and Afflictions may bring forth? Do I know, but that good may lie
in the womb of them? The Tree may seem bitter, yet the Fruit may be Sweet. The
Rose is Sweet, yet the Tree that bears it, is Thorny. I know not, what Grapes
may grow upon these Thorns, and what Figs upon these Thistles. When Shimei
cursed David, what said David? 2 Samuel 16. 12. It may be the Lord will do me
good for this. God not only knows how to do his people good, but how to do
them good by seeming evils. It is good for me (says David) that I have been
Afflicted. Psalm. 119.

6. God has hid this knowledge from man, To keep men from judging and
censuring one another. To keep the Rich from despising the poor, and to keep
the poor from envying the Rich. If a man knew, that Riches were good for a man
in this life, and that Poverty were evil for a man; then would Rich men look
upon themselves as the only blessed men, and judge of the poor as the only
miserable men. So that, as the Apostle says of eating, Romans 14. 3. Let not him
that eats not, judge him that eats; and let not him that eats, despise
him that eats not; So will the Lord have it to be among men, in this case: He
will not have the Rich and Great Ones of the world to despise the poor; neither
will he have the poor, and such as are in a low condition, to envy the Rich.
And, to prevent this, the Lord has hid this knowledge from man, of what is good
or evil for him in this life. Thou, o Rich man, know not but that thy
riches may be for thy hurt, Why should thou then despise the poor? And what
know thou, O poor man, but thy poverty may be for thy good; and why then
should thou envy the Rich? This is the disease to which Rich and Poor are
subject; The Rich are apt to despise the poor, Jam. 2. 6. And the poor are apt
to envy the Rich, Psalm. 37. 1. And the Lord, for the curing of this disease in
both, has hid this knowledge from man.

7. God has hid this knowledge from man, To let man see that the things of this
life are not the things ( viz.) the only things and the main things, that a man
should look after. He does it to let man know, that outward evils are not evils
to be feared, for they may be for good: And that outward good things, are not
the only good things to be sought after; for they may be for a man's hurt. And
so the reason why God hides this knowledge from man of knowing what is good or
evil for man in this life, is, That he may especially seek after those things
that are good, and fly from those evils that have relation to another life.
Those things that we call good, viz. things of this life, are but things
changeably good; they are things may become evil to a man, and therefore not
the only good things to be sought after; And those things, that we call evil,
are but changeably evil, such evils as may be for good; and therefore not the
only evils to be fled from. There are good things that are unchangeably good,
which are good for a man in relation to another life, and these are the things
mainly to be sought after. And there are evils that are unchangeably evil,
which are evil for a man in relation to another life; and those are the evils
that are most to be feared and fled from.

8. God has hid this knowledge from man, To keep man in a preparation for all
conditions: That since he knows not what is good for man in this life, he may
be prepared for what God sees good for him; that he may be fitted for all the
dispensations and purposes of God concerning him. Solomon says Prove. 27. 1.
Thou know not what a day may bring forth. And why has God hidden that
knowledge from man, but that a man may be prepared for what ever a day shall
bring forth, whether good or evil, mercies or miseries, life or death. Solomon
in Eccles. 7. 14. speaking of prosperity and adversity, says, God has set
them, the one over against the other, that Man may find out nothing after him.
There is Chequer-work in the Dispensations of God toward man in this life.
There is Black and White; There are Fair and Foul, Sunshine and Rainy days
Intermingled; There is Prosperity and Adversity, changes of Conditions. And
mark, God has set the one over against the other, there is Adversity, opposite
to Prosperity; there is a Valley, over against a Hill. And see for what end?
That Man may find out nothing after him. What is the meaning of that? why this,
That man should not know what shall come afterward, or what shall come next,
whether Prosperity or Adversity, that so he may be prepared for both. When God
has set a man upon a Mountain of Prosperity, he cannot assure himself he shall
always stand there; for there is the Valley of Adversity set over against that
Mountain, and he knows not how soon he may be in it. And so, since he knows
not what may be next, God will have him keep himself in a preparation for all
conditions. Phil. 4. 11. The Apostle says, I have learned to be full, and to
be hungry; to abound, and to want. As if he should say, I am prepared for what
God sees good for me; if he see it good for me to be in a low condition, to be
hungry and to want, I am prepared for it, I am prepared for all conditions. And
this is one reason, why God has hid this Knowledge from man, that man may be
prepared for all Conditions. There is an expression in Eccles. 8. 7. Man
knows not, what shall be. And what is the reason that man knows not what
shall be? why this, That man may be prepared for what ever shall be.

9. God has hid this knowledge from man, To show man the vanity of his
thoughts, and to let man see how his thoughts differ from the thoughts of God.
As the Lord says in another case, Esa. 55. 8. My Thoughts are not as your
thoughts. So the Lord will have men know, that his thoughts and man's thoughts,
are not the same in respect of what is good or evil for a man in this life.
God does it to show man his thoughts and the vanity of them. Man thinks that
Riches and Honor are good for him in this life, and God lets him see how he is
mistaken in his thoughts, by their becoming evil to him; And man thinks
Afflictions are evil for him in this life, and God lets man see how he is
mistaken in his thoughts, by turning them to good. Thus God shows man the
mistake and vanity of his thoughts, in respect of what is good or evil for man
in this life. And so the Lord discovers to man the vanity of his thoughts in
this particular, in three things.

1. In thinking those happy, that enjoy the good things of this life; when
alas, poor man knows not but these things are evil for him. Thus the Lord in
turning men's Tables into Snares, shows His Thoughts are not as man's. We read
of some, Mal. 3. 15. that called the Proud, Happy: They thought wicked men were
the happiest men; But God tells them he would have a time to show them the
vanity of their thoughts, v. last. Then shall ye return, and discern between
the Righteous and the Wicked. As if he should say, You shall see, My Thoughts
were not as your thoughts. Men are ready to think, the Rich man the happy man,
and the Great man the happy man. And thus he discovers to man the vanity of his
thoughts, and to let them know, that they know not the thoughts of the Lord. As
the expression is, Micah 4. 12. But they know not the Thoughts of the Lord.

2. In his thinking them the only miserable men that are afflicted; it is usual
with men to do so: And God by hiding from man what is good for man in this
life, discovers to man the vanity of those thoughts. Thus, by making
afflictions good for a man, they come to see they were mistaken in their
thoughts, and find that Gods thoughts were not as their thoughts. God in this,
gives man to see his folly in giving a judgment of those things he knows not.
And to let man see, that while he professes himself wise, he becomes a fool,
Romans 1. 22 That he is mistaken about the intentions of God, since what he
apprehended evil, was by God intended for good. God by this lets men see how
much their apprehensions and His intentions differ. How has the Lord brought
men to acknowledge their folly in this particular. Thus he that was the Penman
of Psalm. 73. tells you at verse. 22. So foolish was I and Ignorant!

3. In his judging of the intentions of Gods heart, by the dispensations and
operations of His hand; And for this reason God has hid this knowledge from
man, to show man the vanity of his thoughts, and his judgings, in that
particular. Though Gods heart and hand go together, yet not always so as men
imagine. Men think, where there is a loving heart, there should be a blessing
hand; and where there is an afflicting hand, there should be an hating heart.
God carries things in a mystery; But God will give man to know, he understands
not that mystery. Man is ready to think, God intends good to that man to whom
he dispenses good things, (I mean) things temporally good; and that he
intends evil to that man, to whom he dispenses things temporally Evil. Now
the Lord by hiding this knowledge from man, will let man see how he is mistaken
in these thoughts, and will let him know, that, with a loving heart, there may
go an afflicting hand; and with an hating heart, an hand that is seemingly a
blessing hand; That there may be good in his intention, when there may be
seeming evil in his Dispensation. When God Afflicts, and Chastises, and
Corrects, Who would think there were good in His Intention? and yet, Heb. 12.
10. He chasteneth us for our profit. Rev. 3. 19. As many as I love, I Rebuke
and Chasten. Remember that, Eccles. 9. 1. No man knows love or hatred by what
is before him; he knows not the Intentions of God by his Dispensations; he
knows not Gods Heart by Gods Hand.

And thus for the Ground in General, Why God has hid the Knowledge of what is
Good or Evil for a man in this life.

CHAP. III.
I Now come to give you the Particular Reasons, why no man knows what is good
for a man in this life.

So the Ground of it is this.

Reason. Man's inability to know what is good for a man in this life. So
consider; Man is utterly unable to make a judgment of Conditions, and
infallibly to say, what is good or evil for a man in this life.

The ignorance of man is great in this particular, and I shall show you it to
be such, that it is not possible for a man, as man, to give a judgment of what
is good for a man in this life. And that in these Particulars.

I. A man knows not what the spirits and dispositions of men are, and
therefore he cannot know what is a fit and convenient good for them in this
life. We know not, what will fit a man's spirit and disposition, unless we know
his spirit and disposition. He knows not the foot, and therefore knows not
what shoe will fit him. No man (says the Apostle) knows the things of a man,
and so he knows not the spirits and dispositions of men. Nay let me tell you
more, Man knows not his own spirit and disposition, and how a condition will
suit with it. Christ told his Disciples, Luke 9. 55. They knew not of what
spirit they were. And then, man knows not, what is a fit and convenient good
for himself. It is with men in this case, as with some that drink Wine, who
find it pleasant, but know not the strength of it, nor the strength of their
own heads to bear it, and so come to be distempered by it before they are
aware. Every man thinks prosperity good for him, when as all men can no more
bear a prosperous condition, then all heads can bear Wine or strong Drink. Man
knows not how a condition will suit with his disposition, till they meet. We
have a Famous Instance in Hazael, 2 King. 8. 13. when he heard what was
prophesied of him, he thought the doing of such things did better suit with the
nature of a Dog then of a Man; and therefore answers, Is thy Servant a Dog,
that he should do so? But what is the Prophets reply? The Lord has showed me,
that thou shall be King over Syria, q. d. The change of thy condition will
presently discover that disposition to be in thee, that now thou will not
believe is in thee.

All men know not what Lions and Wolves lie sleeping in their bosoms, till they
are awakened. Like the Snake in the Snow, that does not stir and hiss, till it
feel the warmth of the fire of prosperity.

Every man is apt to think his head can bear the Wine of Prosperity till he
drink of it. As the Sons of Zebedee answered Christ, when he asked them, Can ye
Drink of the Cup that I must Drink of, and be Baptized with the Baptism I must
be Baptized with, and they answered, We are able. So ask a man, whether he be
fit and able to bear a prosperous condition? whether he be fit for Honor and
Riches? why, he is ready to answer, that he is able; when alas, he knows not
his own spirit and disposition. And therefore, through a suspicion of this,
Agur prayed, Prove. 30. 8. That God would give him neither Poverty nor Riches;
And why he prayed against riches, he gives the reason, lest I be full and
forget Thee. Why, he did not know under what Temptations Riches might bring
him: They might be such strong drink that his head would not bear. And in this
he showed he was Ignorant of his own spirit it and disposition; he was afraid
that Riches would not suit with it.

II. Man is ignorant of this, how Men will manage their conditions, and
thereupon is unable to give, and make a Judgment of them. Man knows not, how
a man will use, and improve his condition. Things prove good or evil to men
according to their management of them. There is an Art of managing conditions,
which most men are ignorant of; a condition that might be for a man's good,
through the ill-managing of it, becomes evil. It is the saying of one, that,
Every thing has two handles. And so it is in respect of Conditions, they have
two handles. And here is the thing, to take Prosperity and Adversity, to take
every condition by the right handle. Now in this the Ignorance of man is seen.
In his taking of things by the wrong handle; and so taking of conditions by
wrong handles, they become evil; whereas if they would take them by the right
handle, that condition might be for good to them that otherwise is not. So man
knows not by what handle men will tak hold of Conditions.

Solomon has an expression, Eccles. 8. 6. To every purpose there is time and
judgment; therefore the misery of man is great on him. The meaning is this,
That, God having put handles to things, and men not laying hold on the right
handle, his not knowing how to do things, and when to do things, makes the
miseries of man great upon him. So it is in respect of conditions; seeming
mercies become miseries, because men know not how to use them; and seeming
miseries would become mercies, if men did but know how to use them.

It is in this case with us as with children, who, if you give them a knife,
know not to make any other use of it then to cut and wound themselves; and so,
most men know not how to make any other use of their conditions, then to hurt
themselves.

And hence it is that no man knows what is good for man in this life, what
condition is good for him, whether a prosperous or an adverse condition,
because he knows not how he will manage his condition.

The wrong Use man makes of Conditions, makes it impossible to man to give a
judgment of conditions. And through this ignorance it comes to pass, that
things prove to be evil for a man, that might have been for good. Upon this
account many a man's Table becomes his Snare, and what might have been for his
Welfare becomes his Trap. Thus by his abusing things, he makes Blessings become
Curses; and so those things become Evil that might have been for Good.

Thus it is in respect of Prosperity. Adversity.

1. For Prosperity; How do many abuse it to the feeding of their lusts, whereby
that becomes evil to them that might have been for good? and so by their ill
managing of a condition, make that condition to become evil to them that might
have bin for good. Why thus they draw evil out of good; as when a Spider draws
Poison out of a Flower, it is not from the Flower but the Nature of the Spider;
that, turns it into Poison.

2. For Adversity; Why there are many that do want the Art of making good out
of evil; and so that becomes evil to them, that through their wise managing of
it might have been for good. Men have learned the Art of making Wind and Water
serviceable to them. We have a Saying of making a virtue of Necessity, and so
there is an Art to make good out of evil: but man knows it not.

That man will never be a good Bowler that knows not how to set the Byasse of
his Bowl. Conditions have their Byasses: and here is the Art and Skill, to set
the Byasse of a Condition right.

III. Man knows not to what Dangers, Evils, and Temptations, men's conditions
may Expose them; and therefore they are not able to give a judgment of
conditions, and to say what is good for a man in this life. We may look upon
those things as good for a man which may expose him to such temptations and
dangers that may be for his hurt and ruin. Remember, there are no outward or
worldly good things, but do expose men to many Evils, Dangers, and Temptations,
and so become evil to a man in this life. Thus we find, Honor, Riches, outward
Prosperity, do expose a man to Envy. As one says of Naboth, It had been better
for him he had not had a Vineyard, it cost him his life. These things have cost
a man his sweetest things, ( viz.) his Liberty and Life. How many men had lived
longer, had they not had such and such things, wherein they seemed to excel and
to be more happy then other men. And so the Historian says of the Roman
Emperors, That they got nothing by their Honor, nisi ut citius
interficerentur, but to be killed the sooner. We read of Esius Proculus, that
he was Slain by Caligula, for being the handsomest Man in Rome. Beauty and
Handsomness was for his hurt. And Seneca was condemned for being too Eloquent,
though, at the Intercession of one of the Emperor's Lemans his life was
spared. And hence it is, a man is not able to give a judgment of things,
because he knows not what their issue may be, and what dangers they may bring a
man under; because experience shows, that it had been good for some men to have
bin without those things, that, in the eyes of some, seemed to be good for
them. That, as our Savior said of Judas, It had bin good for that man, if he
had not bin born; So we may say of some, it had been good for them, if they
never had had Honor, Riches, Beauty, and other things that most men look upon,
as good for a man in this life.

IV. Man knows not what Snares Satan has laid in a Condition, to catch and
entrap a man in; and therefore is not able to give or make a judgment of
outward conditions. Through his devices, that condition may become evil that
seemed to be for good.

Satan is a subtle Adversary, and he seeks to get an advantage against us by
the conditions we are in. He endeavors to make every condition, a Snare and a
Trap to us. He strives to make Temptations out of our Conditions. He knows how
to make use of our Conditions to advantage himself, and to hurt us. And man
knows not what Snares Satan may lay for a man in a condition, and what
advantage he may make of it to hurt a man, and therefore no certain Judgment
can be made of it. Satan is a careful and diligent Observer, as of our
Constitutions, so of our Conditions, and will be sure to suit his Temptations
to them. He has his Temptations for all Conditions, whether High or Low,
whether Prosperous or Adverse.

1. If a man be in a Prosperous Condition, why there are Evils he Tempts a man
to, in that Estate.

And those, both Moral. Spiritual.

I. Moral. So consider these: 1. Pride and High-mindedness. Prosperity inclines
a man to it, and here Satan sails with Wind and Tide, 1 Timothy 6. 17. Charge
them that be Rich in this world that they be not High-minded. 2. Boasting and
Glorying in their Prosperity, with a Contemning of those whose Condition is
meaner, Jerem. 9. 23. Let not the Rich man Glory in his Riches. 3. Injustice
and Oppression, Prove. 22. 7. The Rich Man Rules over the Poor. Or, as it may
be read, Domineereth. 4. Luxury, and Profuseness, and Wantonness. As the
Sodomites. And Dives that fared Deliciously every day.


II. Spiritual Evils there are, to which a Prosperous Condition Inclines a man,
and to which Satan will be ready to Tempt a man: and these are Three: 1.
Forgetting God and forgetting Duty. And upon this Account it was, Agur prayed
against Riches, Prove. 30. 9. Lest I be full, and forget Thee. 2.
Creature-Confidence. We find the Scripture frequent in giving Cautions
concerning that, 1 Timothy 6. 17. That men should not trust in uncertain Riches.
3. Security, We read of the Rich man in the Gospel, Luke 12 19. who bid his
Soul take its ease, it had goods laid up for many years.


Why thus you see a Prosperous Condition has its Temptations; and all these
ways, Satan is ready to get an advantage of a man that is in that condition?

Now who can give a Judgment of a man's Condition when it is Prosperous, when
he knows not but it may cast him into some of these Evils.

2. If a man be in an Adverse Condition, why that has its Temptations too.
When a man's Condition is low, then Satan Tempts him to Murmuring, Discontent,
Impatiency, Envy, use of Unlawful means. And, upon this Account, Agur prayed
against Poverty, Prove. 30. Lest I be Poor and Steal. He saw, that condition had
its Temptations.

Why thus you see, every Condition has its Temptations: and, How shall man be
able to make a Judgment of Conditions, when he knows not what Temptations he
may fall under, by reason of his Condition; when we know not, but Satan,
through his Wiles and Devices, may make a condition evil for a man, that else
might have been for his good; how he may make that Condition his Snare, that
might have been for his Welfare?

V. Man cannot make a Judgment of what is good or evil for a man in this life,
because he knows not, what the wheel is that is within the Wheel. We read
Ezekiel. 1. Of the wheel in the wheel. Consider, there is the outward wheel of
Dispensation that is visible to us, and there is a secret wheel of Providence
within that wheel. So that when we look upon the outward wheel of Prosperity,
or Adversity, we know not what Wheel moves within those wheels. We see how the
outward wheel moves, but we know not what the motions are of the Wheel within;
Its motions may be cross to the wheel without.

1. Consider how it is in respect of Prosperity. There is an outward wheel that
is visible, and seems to move to a man's Honor, Exaltation, and Advancement in
the world; and yet we know not what cross motions the secret wheel of
Providence may have to the External wheel of Dispensation: While the outward
wheel seems to move to a man's Good, and Honor, and Advantage; the inward wheel
(for ought we know) may be moving to a man's Hurt and Ruin. According to the
saying of the Poet, -- Tolluntur in altum
Vt lapsu graviore ruant --
Their lifting up, may tend to their casting down. While the outward wheel may
seem to raise them, and mount them; The wheel within, may move to the undoing
and Destruction of them. We have a notable Instance of this in Haman: There was
an outward wheel moving to his Raising and Advancement, to the setting of him
High in the favor of his Prince, and who (that had looked upon that) would not
have thought, this had been for Hamans good? But see, there was a Wheel within
the wheel, a Cross-wheel that was then moving to Hamans downfall, and Hamans
ruin.

II. For Adversity, why you shall find sometimes the outward Wheel seemingly
moving to a man's Hurt, and Ruin, and Disadvantage, when yet we know not the
motions of the Wheel, that are within the wheel. There may be within that
wheel, a Wheel of Providence moving to a man's good and advantage. Thus it was
in the case of Joseph, when he was cast into a Pit, when he was sold into
Egypt, when he was cast into Prison by his Master; Who would have thought but
that this outward wheel of Dispensation had moved to Joseph's ruin; and yet,
at the same time, there was a Wheel within this wheel moving to the Advancement
of Joseph, and to the making him Ruler over all the Land of Egypt* So in the
case of Job: When he was stripped of all to a Shoo-latchet, when he was bereaved
of his Goods, Cattle, Children, Health, Who would have thought but this wheel
of Dispensation had moved to the Ruin and utter undoing of Job? And yet, at
the same time, there was a wheel moving within this wheel to his good and
advantage, as you may read in his Story. So the Apostle tells us, Jam. 5. 11.
You have heard of the Patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord. God's
end in all was Jobs good, though the outward Wheel of Dispensation spoke it not.

So this is one reason, why a man knows not what is good or evil for a man in
this life; because no man knows the motions of the Wheel of secret Providence,
within the wheel of outward Dispensation. We know not what is the end of the
Lord in a man's Prosperity or Adversity; our sight is not clear and peircing
enough to discern the wheel within, and what Its motions are: When we see a man
Great, and Rich, and Honorable, we cannot say, He is an happy man, and that it
is good for him to be such; because we know not the end of the Lord. And so,
when we see a man poor, and low, and in an afflicted condition, we cannot say,
That man is miserable, or, that it is evil for him; because in this
Dispensation we know not the end of the Lord; we know not how the wheel within
moves.

Reas 6. Man knows not what is good or evil for a man in this life, because
of that sudden and unexpected changeableness that there is in all Conditions.
Man's ignorance of this, disables him to make a judgment of outward Conditions.
If a man could make the things of this life certain, why then he might make a
judgment of them; but, the comfort in them and the enjoyment of them being
uncertain, Who can make a true and perfect judgment of them? The things
themselves are uncertain, and the good in them changeable; and, Who is the man
then that can say, That things, that are so full of uncertainty and so
changeable, are good for a man in this life? Solomon, in Eccles. 7. 14.
speaking of Conditions, says, God has set Prosperity and Adversity one over
against the other, as a Valley over against a Mountain: So that, when a man
looks upon himself as set upon the Mountain of Prosperity, he sees a Valley
of Adversity over against him: why, he sees a change of his condition before
him; and though he stand at present upon the Mountain of Prosperity, yet he
sees below him a Valley of Adversity, which he knows not how soon he may
descend into. And, who can say, Prosperity is good for him, when he sees
Adversity over against him?

So consider: upon this account, it is impssioble that a man should make a
perfect judgment of Conditions.

Since 1. Conditions are Changeable. 2. The Good and Comfort in a Condition is
Changeable.

1. The Condition is changeable. An Honorable, Rich, and Prosperous Condition
is changeable: and then, what is man the better for being in such a condition?
Psalm. 49. 20. Man being in Honor continues not. And yet see, Men had other
thoughts verse. 11. Their inward thoughts was, that their houses should continue
for ever. They thought, It was good for a man to have Houses and Possessions,
because they looked upon these things as constant, and enduring, and lasting;
They thought their Inheritances lasting, and that they should leave them to
those that would continue their memory for ever, that is, to their Children;
which are, but the Parents multiplied and continued. Which, as one says, is
but Nodosa Aeternitas, a knotty Eternity; as when one thread is spun and
broken, then another thread is knit to it: Thus men dream of a continued
Succession. But what says the Psalmist? This their way, is their folly; for
man being in honor continues not. Consider, there is a changeableness in all
outward conditions; there may be a sudden turn of Providence. Job the Richest
man in the East, lost all (as it were) in an instant. All the wit, and care,
and industry, and providence of man, cannot hinder the Providence of God from
making conditions changable. And considering this, Who can say, This or that
condition is good or evil for a man, when he knows not how that condition may
change? What if a prosperous condition should change? why then, it had been
better a man had not known it; It making a man but more miserable to have been
happy, and then to be miserable.

2. Though the Condition it self should continue, yet the comfort in the
condition is changeable: why, the things of a condition, that seems good and
comfortable and desirable, are changeable. The things of such a condition may
become a Cross, and Burden, and Vexation; such a changeableness there is in the
comforts of a condition that seems good for a man. Augustus had three
Daughters, and all of them very lewd; and he was used to call them his Tria
Carcinomata his three Ulcers or Botches; And was used to say, Vtinam aut
caelebs vixissem, aut orbus periissem, I would I had lived unmarried, or died
without Children. Life and Light are two of the sweetest things, and yet a man
may outlive the comfort of them; they may prove a burden to a man as to Job
(Job 3. 20) Why is life given to the Afflicted, and light to the bitter in
Soul? Let me tell you; Those things, that are looked on as the greatest earthly
comforts, may become a man's Burdens and Afflictions.

Reas. 7. Man cannot make a perfect judgment of what is good for him, and so on
the contrary what is evil for him in this life; because there are but few that
have the right Art and way of judging of Conditions; and so are apt to call
good evil, and evil good; and so are disabled from knowing what is good for a
man in this life. I shall name some of those ways, by which most judge of the
good or evil of a Condition.

1. Opinion. 2. Sense. 3. Affection.
I. Most judge of Conditions by Opinion; they take things to be as they account
them. It is Opinion that makes things to be good and evil, to some, that, if
rightly considered, are not so. Thus Conditions are looked upon as good or
evil, according as they are in our Opinion. It was the saying of Seneca, Levis
est Dolor, si nil Opinio adjecerit, The misery would be little, if our Opinion
did not add to it. Opinion is a leight judgment of things, by which things are
good in the imagination, but never arrive at the understanding to be made
Reason. It is an ill Guide, and therefore some call it the Guide of Fools, when
Reason is the Guide of the Wise. Most men judge of Conditions by Opinion, and so
it is impossible they should make a right Judgment of Conditions, of what is
good or evil for a man in this life. And therefore, we find the Scripture
setting it self to oppose and cross the Opinions of Men, in relation to what is
good and evil for a man in this life.

Jam. 5. 1. Howl ye Rich Men, etc. Now it is the Opinion of most, that Rich men
have cause to Rejoice.

Prove. 15. 16. Better is a little with the Fear of the Lord, then great
Treasures with Trouble. This crosses the general Opinion of men.

Psalm. 37. 16. A little that a Righteous man has, is better then the Riches of
many Wicked. Now the Opinion of the World is, That much, is always better then
little.

One place more, Eccles. 7. 2, 3.

Verse. 2. It is better to go to the House of Mourning, then to go to the house
of Feasting. But most men think not so. Verse. 3. Sorrow is better then
laughter. But this crosses the general Opinion of men.

II. Another way by which men Judge of the Good or Evil of Conditions, is by
Sense. They judge of the good and evil of things, according as they are pleasing
or displeasing to their Senses. They judge of Conditions as many do of Meats,
who judge of them by the taste, and so take them to be Wholesome that are
Toothsome: And so, on the contrary, those meats Unwholesome that are Unpleasant.
And therefore, the Apostle tells those, Heb. 12. 11. how they were mistaken
about their Condition, which was then a Suffering Condition; No Affliction
(says he) for the present seems Joyous but Grievous. Why, Sense at the
present can feel no good in it, But afterward it brings forth the quiet
Fruit of Righteousness. This way of judging deceived Eve: She saw the Fruit was
desirable, it looked fair to the Eye. Thus many are deceived about their
Conditions. They are like the Book St. John eatt, As Honey in the Mouth, but in
the Belly, as bitter as Gall. Thus men look upon Conditions, whether they are
Honey in the Mouth; they look no further, whether they may not prove Gall in the
Belly. Why, thus most judge of Conditions by Sense; and while they judge so, it
is impossible for them to know, what is good or evil for them in this life.

III. Some make a judgment of Conditions, by their sinfully-sensual Affections,
and so account that good for them in this life, that suits with their Lusts and
Inordinate Desires. Thus men come to be beguiled with the appearance of Good,
instead of Real Good. Most men take the word of their Lusts, and corrupt and
sinful Desires, concerning what is good for them. As Sampson said, Give her me,
for she pleases me well. Since the Fall, man rather consults with his own
Corrupt desires then any thing else, and makes them his Oracle; at which, he
enquires about the good and evil of things: and while they seek to that Oracle,
it must needs follow, that Good must be rejected under the Notion of Evil, and
evil looked upon as desirable under the Notion of good. Affections
sensually-sinful, are woefully blinded in judging of Conditions.

CHAP. IV.
HAving Explained and Confirmed the Point, I come now to Resolve some
Questions, that may be put, in Relation to the Truth delivered.

1. Question, Whether it be lawful to Pray against Afflictions, Since no man
knows what is good for a man in this life; and so in praying against them, we
may Pray against, and Deprecate that, that (for ought we know) may be for out
Good?

2. Quest. Whether it be lawful to Pray for outward and worldly good things, as
Riches, etc. Since we know not, but we may pray for what is evil for us?

3. Quest. Whether our being ignorant of what is good for us in this life, does
not warrant us, to undertake things, and adventure on them hand over head, or
at hap-hazard (as we say) or at adventure, without any Circumspection,
Consideration, Prudential Foresight or Providential Care, as in Marriage, etc.
Why, some may say; I know not what is good for me in this life, and therefore,
Let it happen how it will. So the Question is, Whether this Truth, do not deny
and destroy all Care of Providence?

I shall Answer to these in order.

1. Quest. Whether, according to the Truth delivered, it be lawful for a man to
Pray against Afflictions, Since he knows not but that he may Pray against his
own good. Since, some by Experience have found, It was good for them that they
were Afflicted.

Answ. Some have bin of this Opinion, that, It is unlawful to Pray against
Afflictions; and that it was not the Error of Tertullian, to say, Afflictions
were to be sought for, and desired; and said, That men ought to be so far from
praying against them, that they ought to pray for them and desire them. But
this I look upon, as one of his Errors.

I shall give an Answer to the Question.

1. General. 2. Particular.
I. General. So I Answer; That, notwithstanding it so falls out that
Afflictions are good for a man, yet they may be lawfully prayed against. And
this Truth I shall clear up to you, by four things.

1. Afflictions are, in their own Nature, Fruits and Effects of Sin, and such
as Nature abhors; such are Sickness, Poverty, all sorts of Losses and Crosses;
they were brought in by Sin. The Apostle says, Romans 5. 12. Sin entered into the
world, and Death by Sin. Death is there put for, All Miseries. As Life in
Scripture is put for all Good; so Death is the Topic for all Miseries, being
called the King of Fears; and so the King of Evils, being the King of
whatsoever is fearful to man, and what Nature abhoreth. As Death, so all Evils
(as Death's attendants) came into the world by Sin. Sin was the Mother, and
Afflictions of all sorts are the Daughters. So then, looking upon them under
this Notion, as the Effects of Sin, they may be prayed against. When Sin came
into the world, these Evils crowded in with It; and when Sin shall be no more,
these Miseries and Evils shall be no more, Rev. 21. 4. There shall be no more
Death, etc. The Thread follows the Needle. Sin was the Needle, that drew in
with it the Thread of Miseries and Afflictions. Man had never known what Losses,
and Crosses, and Miseries, and Afflictions had bin, had it not been for Sin.

2. Afflictions of themselves, do us no good; of themselves, they do not make a
man better. The Good by Afflictions comes from a Superior Work, from those
admirable Influences and Concurrences of the Spirit of God, on, and with, the
Afflictions. As our Savior said, Man lives not by Bread only: So, man is not
amended by Afflictions only. Put a Stone into the Fire, it comes out a Stone
still. No water, either hot or cold, will make a Blackmore White. Empty Vinegar
from Vessel to Vessel, it will be Vinegar still. So, let a man be emplyed, from
Condition to Condition, he is still the same. We know, the Plough breaks up the
Earth, but of it self does not better it; it leaves it as it was, there is
nothing put in by the Plough: If the Husbandman Dung it, and cast in good Seed,
when he has broken it up with his Plough, then there is like to be a Harvest,
else there is nothing but Weeds and Nettles. The Plough of Afflictions may
break our Bodies, and Estates, and Spirits; but there will be no Harvest
without something more, without an Heavenly Influence; Afflictions will bring
forth only Briars and Thorns. The Expression of the Psalmist, is, Psalm. 94. 12.
Blessed is the Man whom thou chastenest and teach out of thy Law. It is then
happy, when Correction and Instruction go together.

3. As Afflictions are fruits of Sin, and of themselves do no good; so
oftentimes, through Man's Corruption, they prove occasions of Sin. They are so
far from making men Better, that they often make men Worse. I have showed
before, what Evils are incident, both to a state of Prosperity and Adversity.
Satan knows, how to make Afflictions to become Temptations: And therefore we
find this to be the Reason, why Agur prayed against Poverty, Prove. 30. 9. lest
I be Poor and Steal, and the Name of God be taken in Vain; q. d. Poverty may
put me under a Temptation of using Unlawful means, to the Dishonor of God.
Thus, Afflictions prove sometimes occasions of Sin; and we are taught to Pray,
That we may not be led into Temptation.

4. Consider again this, That the Saints and Servants of God have prayed
against Afflictions: So, they have prayed for 1. The Preventing of them, and
Keeping them off. 2. The Removing them, and Taking them off.


1. For the Preventing them, and keeping them Off. Thus did Agur, Prove. 30. 8,
9. where you have his Prayer; First, Against the Evils of Sin, Ver. 7. Take
from me Vanity and Lying. Next, Against the Evils of Affliction, Ver. 8. Give
me not Poverty.

2. They have prayed for the Removing them, and taking them off. And those have
done it, who got as much good by their Afflictions, as any under Heaven. Thus
David, Psalm. 39. 10. Take away thy Stroke from me. Psalm. 119. 22. Turn away
Shame and Reproach from me. Thus did Job, Job 9. 34. Let him take away his Rod
from me. Job 13. 20, 21. Withdraw thine Hand from me, etc. Where, he Prays
for Gods taking away his Afflicting Rod, and for his withdrawing his
Afflicting Hand. And these Two men, got as much good by their being Afflicted,
as ever any did.

Thus, in General, You see what we Answer to the Question, Whether Evils of
Affliction may be Prayed against?

II. We come to give a more particular Answer to the Question; And tell you,
That though we say, It is Lawful to pray against Afflictions; yet it must be
with the Observation of some Rules, and Cautions, and Directions. That, as our
Savior said in another case concerning Hearing; Take heed, how ye Hear; So in
this case of praying against Afflictions, we say, Take heed how ye Pray. So
consider; There is a double praying against Afflictions, as I told you before:
1. For the Keeping them off. 2. For the Taking them off.


1. For the Keeping them off. So, there is a Twofold praying for the Keeping
off Afflictions.

1. Absolute. 2. Conditional, and with Submission.
1. Absolute. When men Pray, that, in no Case, the Evil may happen to them; so
making their Will a Law to God's. This praying against Afflictions, is
Unwarrantable and Unlawful. We must know; for Moral Evils of Sin, we may pray
absolutely against, but not so against the Evils of Affliction.

2. There is a Praying against them, that is Conditional, and with Submission
to the Will of God; This is Lawful. Our Savior himself prayed that the Cup
might pass from Him, but adds this, Not my Will, but Thine be done. Our praying
against Afflictions is then right, when there is a sweet Submission of our
wills, to the Will of God: So, that though we know that Afflictions are
grievous to our Natures; yet, because we know not, what the Decrees and
Purposes of God are concerning us; and not knowing, but that He may see them
good for us, and make them good to us: we do sweetly submit our wills, to the
Will of God, and Proclaim Liberty to Him, to deal with us as He please. And
herein is the Work of Grace seen, that, though Nature desires wholly to be
freed from them, (they being such things as are bitter to It;) yet a Christian
leaves himself wholly to the Will of God, and says, Not my Will, but Thine be
done. When Christians see the Cup of Affliction preparing for them, or coming
toward them, they must pray against it, only as our Savior did. It is then
right, when in praying against Afflictions, we pray absolutely that God may be
Glorified; but for the things that concern our selves, we pray with Submission
to His Will. Thus Christ did, John 12. 27, 28. Save me from this Hour, but for
this cause came I to this Hour. Father, Glorify thy Self. Our Savior is
absolute in that request of his, That His Father would Glorify his Name, and
received an Answer; But for the other Request, he sweetly submitted to His
Father's Will. Thus does a Gracious Heart pray absolutely, that God may be
Glorified, (let it be in Relation to himself) which way the Lord please. Thus
in desiring freedom from Affliction, though a Gracious Heart looks upon it as
desirable to Nature, to be freed from Losses, and Crosses, Sickness, and
Poverty, etc: Yet he looks upon Gods Glory as, That, that is to preferred
before its own worldly Welfare, Ease, Quiet, Contentment, and Comfort. Whereas
some may say, that Agur prayed absolutely against Poverty, Prove. 30. 8, 9. Give
me not Poverty, etc. We Answer, that though it looks like an absolute
Request, yet it is not: If we look upon the Reason of the Request, Verse. 9. we
shall find that he prayed absolutely, only in relation to Gods Glory. For, the
Reason why he prays against poverty, is this, lest I be Poor and Steal, and
the Name of God be taken in Vain. Where see, that he only prays against
Poverty upon this account, lest it might occasion him to Sin, and Dishonor
God. Agur does not say, lest I be poor and Steal, and be Whipped, and Stockt, or
Hanged; but, lest the Name of God be taken in Vain.

2. Concerning the keeping off, of Afflictions. There is a praying either
against, 1. The Things themselves. 2. The Evil of the things.


1. Against the Things themselves. For that, we say, as formerly, We ought not
to pray Absolutely, but with Submission.

2. There is a praying against the Evil of the things. So we may pray
absolutely against the Evil of the Evils, though we may may not pray absolutely
against the Afflictions, yet against the Sting of the Affliction. The Apostle
Paul, calls Sin, the Sting of Death; and it is the Sting of every Affliction:
and against the Sting, we may pray absolutely.

Thus for the first, concerning praying for the keeping off of Afflictions.

2. Concerning praying for the taking off Afflictions. So, these Rules are to
be observed.

1. We must not put our wills, as a Law to God's. Then it is right, when, while
we desire God to remove the Affliction, we get our hearts willing to bear the
Affliction, if God will have it so. 2. In praying for the removal of them,
there must be a Submission to the Will of God, in relation to all
Circumstances; to wit, the time and manner of removing. We must submit to his
Wisdom for the means, and be content to wait his Leisure, for the time of
taking them off. 3. We must choose rather Affliction, than Sin; and pray more
for the taking away of Sin, then the taking off Affliction. It was a Pharaoh
that prayed only for the taking off of Affliction, Exodus 10. 17. Pray to the
Lord your God, that He may take away from me, this Death only. He was only, for
having his Judgment taken away, not his Sin. 4. We must pray more, for God's
Sanctifying Afflictions to us, then for his Removing them from us. That the Rod
may do its work for which it is sent, before it be taken off; that we may be
bettered by the Affliction, before we are freed from the Affliction.
Thus in Answer to the First Question.

CHAP. V.
The Second Question.
IF a Man know not, What is good for a man in this Life; Is it then Lawful for
a man to pray for the things of this Life, viz. Riches, etc? Since he knows
not, but they may be Hurtful for him. His prosperity may be his Ruin, his
Table may be his Snare; and that which he thought was for his Welfare, may
become his Trap. To this Question I shall give an Answer 1. In General. 2. More
Particular.


I. In General, I Answer thus: That it is Lawful to pray for the things of this
Life; although we know not, whether they are good for Man in this Life. There
are these Arguments to make it good.

1. Riches, and Health, and the Comforts of this Life, are in themselves
Blessings of God. They flow from Him, who is the Fountain of Good; and are, in
themselves, Streams that issue from that Fountain, and speak His Goodness.
They are some of those things, by which, He that is Good (as the Psalmist
speaks) does good to his Creatures. Acts 14. 17. God left not Himself without
Witness, in that he did Good, and gave them Rain, and Fruitful Seasons; filling
their hearts with Joy and Gladness. So, upon that account, they may be prayed
for.

2. The things of this Life may be prayed for, In that our Savior has taught
us to pray for our Daily Bread. Where, by Bread, is meant all those Good things
that are necessary for this Life. Bread is there a Comprehensive word, being
the Staff of Life; And so called the Staff of Bread. And by a Synechodoche it
is put for All, both Necessary and Comfortable supports of man's Life. Now,
being to pray for our Daily Bread, we may pray for what is Necessary and
Comfortable for Life.

3. Outward Good things are necessary for our Uses, and for our Well-being in
this World. Mat. 6. 32. Your Heavenly Father knows, that you have need of all
these things. In Prayer, there is a making known of our Needs and Wants to God;
not only Spiritual, but Temporal too; not only those that relate to our Souls,
but also to our Bodies. The Apostle bids us, Phil. 4. 6. In nothing be careful,
but let your Wants be made known to God. Then no doubt, but we may Lawfully
pray for all Comfortable, and Suitable supplies to our Wants.

4. These Outward things do not of themselves Hurt. Of themselves they make
none Evil. Outward things are to Men, as they are to Them. It is not from the
things Themselves, but from Lusts within that they become Evil. The Poison is
not in the Flower, but in the nature of the Spider: So the Evil of Outward
things, is not in the things Themselves, but from our Lusts, that turn them
into Evil. It is not men's Possessions, but men's Corruptions that make them to
become Evil to them. When a man's Table comes to be his Snare, the Creatures are
not to be blamed, but a man's own Lusts. The Apostle, 2 Pet. 1. 4. speaks of the
Corruptions that are in the world through Lust. The World, and the things of
the world are the Object; but the Cause why they become Evil to us, is Lust.
The Fault, why men are Covetous, or Sensual, or Effeminate, is not in Gold, or
Wine, or Women; but in Men's Sensual Affections, and naughty Dispositions. So it
is Observable, when St. John, 1 John 2. 16. does Sum up, what of the World is
opposite to the Love of God, He does not name the Objects, but the Lusts. He
does not say, What ever is in the World is Pleasure, or Honor, or Profit; but
he names, The Lusts of the Eye, The Lusts of the Flesh, and the Pride of Life;
And these are not of the Father, but are of the World. (i. e.) These are not of
God, as Riches, and Honor, and outward things are; but of that world, that man
has made within himself, by his own Corrupt desires, and Sensual Lusts and
Affections. By this you see, The Evil is not in the things themselves, but in
our selves; We find, they are such things as are Consistent with Grace and
Holiness. We read of Abraham's and Jobs Wealth and Riches. St. Austin, speaking
of these Worldly things says, Dantur bonis ne putentur mala, dantur malis ne
putentur summa bona. It is a certain Truth, That God never gives any thing in
it self Evil, to those that are Good; so, neither does he give the chiefest
good Things, to those that are Evil. So that when these things become Evil to
men, it is from a man's own Corruptions. When men make these things, the Bellows
of Pride, the Fuel of Uncleanness, the Instruments of Revenge; This is not
from themselves, but man's making use of them for such ends, for which they were
not Ordained. So when the Gospel calls upon us, to Renounce the World, The
meaning is not, That we should cast the things of the World out of our
Possession, but out of our Affection. To be Rich, is not Inconsistent with
Religion, it is man's abusing of Riches, etc. that makes them Evil to us.

5. The things of this life, may be helps to Christians, to further them in
doing good: though they be seeming hindrances; yet, by a wise Improvement, they
may become great Advantages, for the performing of Works both of Piety and
Charity. If a man have but the Art, of placing these things aright, They may
help a man toward Heaven. As we see it is with a Trunk of Money; Let a man put
it upon his Head, it boweth him down; But let him put it under his Feet, it
lifts him up. It Is the Apostle's Command, in 1 Timothy 6. 18. to those that are
Rich, that they be Rich in Good Works; Letting them know, That they have an
opportunity put into their hands, of doing good with their Wealth. See what our
Savior says, Luke 16. 9. Make you Friends of the Unrighteous Mammon. But, why
does our Savior call it, The unrighteous Mammon? Not because Riches are so in
themselves, but because of men's either Evil getting, or using of them. q. d.
Things that many men abuse, and so make them the Riches of Iniquity; may be so
employed, as to be helps to further good. And therefore, it was a hard saying,
and Censure of a Father (although I confess it is sometimes true) Omnis Dives
aut iniquus, aut iniqui Haeres, Every Rich man is either an Oppressor, or the
Son of an Oppressor.

6. Wealth and Riches, and the Things of this Life, are the things that come
within a Promise. It is said of him that fears the Lord, Psalm. 112. That
Wealth and Riches shall be in his House (i. e.) when God sees it good for him.
For all Temporal Promises must be understood with an Exception. The Rule is
this, concerning such Promises, That they do not Intimate what ever shall be,
but what ever befalls a Godly man shall be a Blessing. The Fruit of a
Promise, shall not be the Fruit of a loser Providence; but to a Godly man, they
are the Fruits of a Promise, and therefore may be prayed for.

Thus for the Answer in General.

II. The Particular Answer is this. Though we said, and have showed, that it is
lawful to pray for outward things, yet it must have its Rules and Limitations,
and that upon this Ground, That we know not what is good for a man in this
life. Concerning praying for outward things, we must know this, they must not
be prayed for; 1. Absolutely. 2. Ultimately.


1. Absolutely. In praying for outward things, we must not pray for them, but
with a Submission to the Will of God. In praying for them, we must take need of
making our wills a Law to God's. For, as I showed you before, That the Evils of
this life, are not Evils to be absolutely prayed against; so neither are the
things of this life, absolutely to be prayed for. Then it is Right, if, when
you are begging of them, you can find in your heart to be without them, if God
will have if so. As for those Good things that relate to another Life, they are
to be absolutely prayed for; but, for the things of this life, we are not to do
so; we must not so desire them, as not content to be denied. This was Rachels
sin, in her desire of children, Give me Children or else I dye. She would have
no Nay, but she must have children, and she paid dear for it, for she died in
Childbearing; she would die if she had not children, and she died in bringing
forth a child, whom she called Benoni. Thus Israel would have no Nay, but they
must have a King. And thus the hearts of many, are so set upon the things of
this life, that they cannot brook a denial of them; and think God does not love
them, if He do not grant those Requests they make for them.

2. In praying for outward things, as you may not pray for them Absolutely, so
you are not to pray and seek for them, Ultimately, but to make them Subordinate
to Gods Glory. It is lawful to pray for Health, and Wealth, and the good things
of this Life; but it is to be done, with a respect to the Glory of God, that we
may be enabled the better, to Serve and Honor Him with them; and not that our
sensual desires, and sinful lusts, may be satisfied, Jam. 4. 3. The Apostle
tells us, of some that did Ask; but he tells us, that their End was not
right; for they did ask, that they might consume it upon their Lusts. This
asking is Evil and Unlawful. How many are there, that would have God bestow
that upon them, that they would bestow upon their Lusts, as Health, and long
Life; that they may live the more Pleasantly, Wealth, that they may fare
Deliciously every day; Great Estates, that they may Raise Themselves and
Families, that they may be somebody in the world, and may lord it over others.
It is not right, when men desire outward things, that they may live more
comfortably, and not Serve God more cheerfully.

Quest. But some may Ask, How may I know, in praying for the things of this
Life, that I have a respect to Gods Glory; since the Heart of man is so
Deceitful?

Answ. By these things, it may be known.

1. He that makes Gods Glory his End, in seeking these things, is as much in
begging Grace to Use them for God, as he is to have them. Where the desires of
a man, after these things, are right, they are not single desires after the
things themselves, but conjoined and coupled with desires of Grace; whereby he
may be enabled to serve and honor God with them. This is his most earnest
Request, That, if God put any such price into his Hand, he would give him a
Heart to make use of it for his Glory. Prove. 3. 9. Honor God with thy
Substance. So, this is the great Request of those that eye the Glory of God, in
their begging the things of this life; That, if God see it good to bestow those
things on them, that he would give them to honor Him with their Riches, with
their Health, and with all their Worldly Enjoyments. When it is otherwise, our
praying for them is not right. There are many that only look after the things
themselves, but never beg for Grace, by which they should make a right
Improvement of them. Then it is right, when a man desires rather to be denied
the Things themselves, than Grace to use them; when he can say, Lord give me
not Riches, give me not Honor, give me not Worldly Possessions, if thou do not
withal give me a Heart to use them to thy Glory.

2. This speaks it, When a man can take a Denial, and be content to go
Without them, when God will have it so. This shows man's respecting the Glory
of God, above the things themselves. Such an one sits down contented, when God
is pleased to cross his desires, and to deny him his requests: When he beggeth
Health, and Wealth, and the good things of this life, and is denied; he lays
his hand upon his mouth, and concludes, that, God did not see those things to
make for his Glory, nor for the good of him that begged them. We read of
Balaam, Number. 22. when he was sent for by Balak, that he gave out, he would not
eye the offers that Balak made him, but only the Command of God. Yet, when he
was told, He should not go, he enquires again, and again, till at last God bid
him go; which shows, he eyed more the Promotion and Advancement he expected
from Balak, then the Command of God. So some, in seeking the things of this
life, are so impatient, that, though the Lord have denied them once, and again,
yet they will be asking them again; It is good for men to do so, in seeking
after the things of another life, but not in seeking after the things of this
life.

3. This speaks it, When, in praying for the things of this Life, he prays
only for such a measure and proportion of them, as may least expose him to sin.
By this, a man shows, in seeking of them, he has en eye to the Honor and
Glory of God. Such an one seeks not great things for himself, but only what is
convenient. It was Agur's prayer, Prove. 30. 8. That God would feed him with
food convenient. If you ask, why he prayed for convenient Food, and a
convenient Estate, the Reason was this, Because he saw danger in extremes; in
Poverty on the one hand, and Riches on the other. He saw, To be very Rich, or
very Poor, was very dangerous, and would put under great Temptations. q. d.
Lord I would not be Rich, because it is hard to be Rich and Good; and I would
not be poor, because it is hard to be poor, and not to sin. Therefore he
prays for such an Estate as did best suite with holiness, and would least
expose him, to temptations unto sin; this speaks his eying the Glory of God. He
prays against Riches, and abundance, but it is not upon this account, because
they may make a man envyed, or cause cares and troubles, for he that increases
Riches, increases them: But it is purely upon another account, (viz) the Glory
of God, as appears by his Reason given, verse. 9. Lest I be full and forget
Thee, and say, Who is the Lord? Which shows, that it was Gods Honor and Glory,
that he did Respect. So when he prays against Poverty, he does not make this
his Reason, lest I be despised and trodden under foot, but, lest the Name of my
God be taken in Vain. So that what he prayed for, was in Relation to Gods
Glory. So it is with him that eyes the Glory of God, in seeking the things of
this life; he seeks not great things for himself, but only what is
proportionable and convenient. He knows, A shoo too big for his foot, may
hinder him in going, as well as a shoo that is too little: A Staff, you know,
is a help to a man when he walks; but a bundle of Staves, both hinder and
burden. It is good for men, in seeking the things of this life, to seek only
what is fit and convenient, that they may be the better fitted to be
serviceable to their God, and to run the Race that is set before them. Suppose
a man were to run a Race, and many Suites were laid before him to take his
choice, some of cloth of Gold, etc. he would not choose the most Gorgious, but
the most Convenient, lest otherways he lose the Race.

Quest. Some may Ask, What is a convenient Estate?

Answer: 1. That which Nature requires. Nature is content with a little. It
was the Saying of a Wise man, He that lives according to Nature, will find a
little, Enough; and He that lives according to Opinion, will never have
Enough. And it was the Saying of a Gracious man, Having Food and Raiment, let
us therewith be Content. 2. That is Convenient, that is suitable to the Estate
wherein God has put us. Some need not so much as others do; and it is their
Happiness, if they knew it; as it is for a man to see without Spectacles, and
to walk without Crutches. It was the saying of Socrates, when he saw great
Riches carried through a Town, How happy am I, that I can live without all
this? 3. That is Convenient, that is requisite for the comfortable Maintenance
of our Families. The Apostle says, He that Provideth not for his own House, is
worse than an Infidel. Yet Solomon says, There was a man, That had neither
Son, nor Brother, and yet there was no end of his Labors.


4. This speaks our respecting Gods Glory, in our seeking the things of this
life, Our using the Things for God, when he has bestowed them on us, and has
granted us our desire. Do you not spend them upon your Lusts? Do you not say to
the Wedge of Gold, Thou art my Confidence? Do you not make them the Fuel for
Lusts, and Instruments of Revenge? You may know, what your Hearts were in
Desiring them, by the Use you afterward make of them. Remember, Lust is an
earnest Craver; and will pretend, That what it beggs, is for God, till it has
what it desires. It is good for Christians then, to put the Question to
themselves, What God has the more from them, for that they have received from
Him?

To close up the Answer to this Question; Let me tell you, Although it be
lawful to pray for the things of this life; yet not Principally and Primarily,
but with respect to the Inferiority of their Nature and Uses. Remember still,
These are not the Chief things to be sought after. Mat. 6. 33. Seek first the
Kingdom of God, etc. We ought, in our Prayers, to give the precedence, and
preeminence to Spiritual good things. Heavenly things are to be preferred
before Earthly; and we are to place them in our Prayers, as God has placed
them. Though we may Lawfully pray for the things of this life, yet we pray
Unlawfully, when we are more earnest for them, than for the things that relate
to another life. God took it well from Solomon, when he was left to his choice,
and bid to ask what he would, he only asked Wisdom. He did not ask Riches, nor
Long Life, nor the Life of his Enemies. Yet God gave him Those. The way to have
the things of this World, is, chiefly to seek after the things of another
World. These things you may pray for Absolutely, viz. Grace, and an Interest in
Christ, and Pardon of Sin, and all Soul-Mercies; and all the Good things that
relate to another life. We read of some, in Hos. 7. 14. that howled upon their
Beds, for Corn and Wine. Those were the things they only sought after; and
their Prayers was but a brutish Cry, compared to the howling of a Dog. A
gracious Soul pants after the things of another Life, when others pant only
after the things of this Life. The Prophet speaks of such, Amos 2. 7. who pant
after the Dust of the Earth: But David's Soul panted after God, Psalm. 42. 1. So
pants my Soul after Thee, O God. Then it is Right, when we pray for the
things of this Life, with a serious consideration of their Lowness, and
Baseness, and Inferiority, being compared with the things of Eternity, and
another Life.

Thus for the second Question.

The Third Question, is This:
WHether our being Ignorant of What is good for us in this Life, does not
warrant to adventure on, and undertake things (as we say) Hand Over-head, or at
all Adventure; without Circumspection, Consideration, prudential Foresight, or
providential Care. As in the business of Marriage, and of managing all our
businesses and affairs in this Life. Some may say, I see I know not what is
good for me in this life: And therefore, the thing I am about, notwithstanding
all my Prudence, and Care, and Circumspection, may (for ought I know) be for
Evil to me; and, without all this Care and Circumspection, may be for Good to
me. So the Question is, Whether this Truth does not destroy all Prudential and
Providential care about the management of the Affairs of this Life.

Answer. No such matter: It makes nothing against that. And that, we shall show
in these following Propositions; which I shall briefly name.

1. Divine Providence does not destroy Humane Prudence; Which is so much
commended by Solomon, in his Book of the Proverbs. 2. Gods Providence does
sometimes make up man's Improvidence. But that is no warrant at all, for a man
therefore to be Improvident. 3. It is a Tempting of God, when we neglect the
Means, for bringing to pass the End. 4. It is creating Crosses to our selves;
and, for which we must only thank our selves. We are not called to bear Crosses
of our own making, but of God's sending. 5. It is made one of the Characters of
a Righteous man, That he guides his Affairs with Discretion, Psalm. 112. 5. 6.
There is almost a whole Chapter spent in the Commendation of a Virtuous Woman's
Prudential and Providential care in providing for her Husband, Children, and
Family; as you may see, Prove. 31. 7. Such a Conclusion would justify that
profane Saying of some, That if they are Ordained to be saved, they shall be
Saved, let them live as they list. These separate between the Means and the
End. When as God has appointed the Means as well as the End. So do such, in
respect of the Affairs of this Life; that lay aside Prudence, And say, If God
see it good for me, it shall be Good.
Thus for the Third Question.

CHAP. VI.
The Application.
1. IT is useful by way of Information. If this be true, that no man infallibly
knows what is good for a man in this life; why, then it is not to be wondered
at, that we find men so woefully mistaken in their Judgments, about Conditions,
and God's outward Dispensations. The Prophet speaks of some, that call evil
good, and good evil: So man, through his ignorance, of what is good for him in
this life; is apt to think that condition good for him, that is evil; and that
condition evil for him, that is good. We read Job 11. 10. Vain man would be
wise. So, ignorant man would be thought wise, in the knowing of things that are
above him, and beyond his line, and that come not within the Sphere of his
knowledge. Though he know not, how to make a Judgment of Conditions, yet he will
be offering at it; nay as confidently undertake it, as Astrologers and Gypsies
do, to tell people their Fortunes. But we may say of men in this case, as the
Apostle does of those, Romans 1. 22. Professing themselves to be wise, (...) they
became fools. So while men profess themselves to be so wise, as to know what is
good for a man in this life, they have but showed themselves fools; as has
appeared by their gross mistakes about Conditions. The Heathens of old, though
they thought themselves wise, yet showed themselves fools in their Opinions,
concerning the Chiefest Good, (which did amount to the number of 288.) And such
fools do men show themselves in their Opinions, concerning inferior good
things, and what is good for a man in this life. But, as the Lord says of the
customs of the people, Jer. 10. 3. That they are Vain: So, may we say of the
Opinions of people, concerning conditions. Solomon speaks of some, Eccles. 7.
10. who would undertake to make a Judgment of Times, and did ask, Why were the
former times better than these? But Solomon tells such, They did not enquire
wisely concerning them. (i. e.) They were but fools in thinking so. So there
are many that inquire not wisely concerning conditions, and what is good and
evil for a man in this life.

I shall acquaint you with three sorts of persons, that are thus mistaken about
outward Conditions.

1. Some there are, that, looking upon Honor and Riches, and such things as
are in themselves good, from thence conclude, They are things good for them;
and if they have them, conclude it is well with them. 2. Some there be, who
looking upon Afflictions, as things evil in themselves; conclude from thence,
that it is evil for them in this life, that they are Afflicted. 3. Some there
are, who hearing that it has been good for some that they have been Afflicted,
do from thence conclude, that, because they are Afflicted, their condition is
good. Thus there are some, that think the better of themselves, for their being
Afflicted.
I shall speak somewhat, to show, How all these may be mistaken.

1. For the first. Some there are, that think, because Honor, and Riches, etc.
are good things in themselves, that therefore they are good for them. Give me
leave to show you, How woefully such persons may be mistaken in doing of it. I
shall present you with some of those false Grounds and Principles, upon which
such go, who make such a judgment; ( viz.) Four, 1. That must needs be good for
a man in this life, that is in it self, and in its own nature good. 2. That
must needs be good for man in this life, that suits with, and answers to, a
man's desires. 3. That must needs be good for a man in this life, that has been
good for others. 4. That must needs be good for a man in this life, that God
gives and bestows upon a man in this life.


I shall spend a little time, in the examining these Grounds, to see whether
such a Conclusion may be built upon them.

1. The First is this. That must needs be good for a man in this life, that is
in it self good.

Answ. It follows not: That which is good in its self, may be a convenient good
for me, or you, or other. That, that makes a good thing, to be a convenient
good to us, is its suitableness to, and agreeableness with, our Constitutions,
Spirits, and Dispositions. Here is the mistake of many, that when they hear,
that Honor, and Riches, etc. are things good in themselves, they presently
conclude they are good for them; without considering, whether they are a
convenient good, never examining how they suit with their Spirits and
Dispositions. The Apostle, speaking of the Creatures, that God has made and
ordained, for the nourishment and preservation of mankind, tells us, 1 Timothy
4. 4. That every Creature of God is good: So, Flesh is good, and Fish is good,
and Wine is good; yet we know, it may not be good for some to eat Fish, and for
some to drink Wine; Wine, that is in it self good, yet it is not good for him
that is in the fit of a Fever. So that here lies the mistake, Men distinguish
not, between what is good in it self, and good for them. Thus it is with most;
they look upon the things of this life, without themselves, but look not inward
upon their own Spirits and Dispositions; which Agur no doubt did, when he
prayed against Riches, and that God would feed him with food convenient.

2. Consider this, That a thing may be good in it self, that may become evil to
a man in this life, through his Abuse of it; and therefore it follows not,
that, that is always good for a man in this life, that is good in it self:
Things good in themselves, may through man's corruption be abused. The Apostle
Jude, speaks of some, that turn Grace, into Wantonness: And if the corruption
of man may rise so high, to abuse that, that is placed in the highest Rank of
good things; then much more, to abuse those good things, that are of a lower
and inferior nature. It is observable, that we are most apt to offend in
licitis, in those things that are in themselves lawful; because we are there
least suspicious of danger. We suspect not the things, because they are in
themselves good, which, through our abuse of them, become evil to us. The
Flower is in its own nature, sweet and good, but through the Venomous nature of
the Spider, what is drawn from it, is turned into Poison. So it is in this
case, men's corruptions make those things Evil and Poisonous, that are in
themselves good. We must know, Outward things are to us* as we are to them; our
outward, are according to what our inwards are; things good in themselves,
become evil to us, when through our corruptions, they are made to be but food
and fuel for our Lusts. It may be said of many, It was ill for them, that they
were so Great, and so Rich; had they not been so, they had not been so bad, and
so wicked. Solomon says, The prosperity of fools, destroys them. One of the
Fathers, wrote thus to one, Monacho fervido, Abbati tepido, Episcopo frigido,
Archiepiscopo dissoluto. To the Zealous Monk, the lukewarm Abbot, the cold
Bishop, and the dissolute Archbishop. Thus we see, that some are the worse for
their outward.

Thus for the first Ground of men's mistakes about Conditions. Now for the
second.

2. Ground of men's mistakes about Conditions, is this, That must needs be good
for a man in this life, that pleases him, and suits with his desires. And
hereupon many do infer this, That it must needs be good for them in this life,
since it is that they desire. Now I shall show you, how wofully-mistaken such
persons may be concerning their condition, that say, It is as I would have it.

Consider this, That a man's having what his heart desires, does not at all,
speak the person good. For we shall find, in Psalm. 73. That those were as bad,
as bad could be, that yet had what heart could wish. It does not always speak,
that that is good for us, which falls out according to our desires. Men's
desires may be corrupt, and inordinate, and carried out after things that are
evil for them. We read of the Israelites, Psalm. 78. 29. They required meat for
their lusts, (and see what follows) they had their heart's desire. But by the
event, you will find, it was not good for them. So by this you see, this is a
false ground that men go upon, in making a Judgment of Conditions. And this the
very Heathens saw by light of nature. Philip of Macedon, had on one and the
same day a Son born; the winning of a Prize, by his Chariots, at the Olympian
Games; and a Victory his Army had the same day obtained. He was so daunted with
the News being so good, that he feared a mischief would ensue; and therefore
desired the Gods, to mix some Adversity with it. Remember, the things of this
life, though they suit with our desires, are so far from being good for us,
that it were good for us sometimes, that our desires were not granted. How many
are there, that have blessed God for such a Providence! Providence does
sometimes cross a man, and turn him out of the way of his desires, for his
good. As Possidonius, in the life of St. Augustine, has a memorable Story, He
going to Visit a place, with his guide, mistook his way, and so escaped the
hands of some bloody Donatists, that lay in wait to take away his life. God
sometimes leads his people, out of the way of their desires, for the avoiding
of some danger, that may lie in the things desired.

Thus for the Second Ground, upon which men go, in making a Judgment of
Conditions.

3. Ground upon which men go, in making a Judgment of Conditions, is this: That
must needs be good for a man in this life, that has been good for others. If
they were good for Abraham, etc. Why may they not be good for me? And here I
shall show you, how upon this ground many are woefully mistaken about Conditions.

It follows not: I told you before, that the things of this life, are so to us,
as we are to them. Those Godly Men that had those things, had hearts and
spirits fitted for them. It does not therefore follow, That we have. It is, as
if a man should say, This Shoo fits such and such a man's foot, and therefore it
will fit mine. We are not to look so much upon the condition, as the Graces
that belong to the Condition. Had Abraham a prosperous condition? Consider
withal, what Graces he, and others had, and see whether you have the same.
There are Prosperity-Graces, and Adversity-Graces; without which, neither
Prosperity or Adversity is good for a man. The condition was not simply good
for them, but as they were furnished with such graces as made them fit for
their condition. In a word, Consider this, The things of this life, as of
themselves, they never did any man hurt; So, let me tell you, Of themselves
they never did any man good, I say of themselves. Their doing a man good,
comes from a higher Good; and that is, Grace to Improve them for the Glory of
God, and our own and others good. There was never any man made better, by his
being Rich; but many that have been Rich, have been the better for their being
Gracious, with their being Rich.

4. Ground that men go upon, is this: That must needs be good for a man in this
life, that God bestows upon a man in this life. But Honor, and Riches, etc.
are God's Gifts and Dispensations; therefore must needs be good for a man in
this life.

We shall a little examine this Ground, and show how men may be woefully
mistaken, that from those premises make such a conclusion. Their mistake lies
in this, Their not considering, How God is said to bestow these things.

1. They distinguish not, between what God gives ex Largitate out of his
Bounty; and as He is good to all: and what He gives ex Promisso, by Promise.
And the not considering of this, is one great cause of men's being mistaken, in
making a judgment of a prosperous condition. So that, as our Savior told the
Sadduces in another case, That they did err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor
the Power of God. So we may say of these, That they err, not knowing the
Scriptures, and the Intentions of God in the bestowing outward things. While a
man has the things of this life, bestowed on him by God, only out of Bounty,
he cannot say, They are good for him, till he find, they come in by Covenant
and Promise, as I shall show you more largly afterward. When Esau asked Jacob,
Whose Children are these? He answered, These are the Children that God has
Graciously (or, in Mercy) given me. No man can say, These are the Riches, and
this is the Prosperity that God has in mercy given me, till he finds they flow
from another Fountain, than that of general Bounty. Luther said of the Turkish
Empire, That, how great soever it was, yet it was but a Crust, that the great
Housekeeper had cast to a Dog. Remember, it is the Covenant that forms a Mercy.

2. They distinguish not, between things in the Dispensation, and in the
Intention of God. Hence arises the Mistake. Many judge of the Intention, by the
Dispensation; and if such things be dispensed, that be in themselves good, they
presently think they are intended for good to them. Whereas, Solomon tells
such, Eccles. 9. 1. No man knows love by any outward thing, etc. Not by
Riches, nor Honor, nor by outward Prosperity. Gods Hand, and Gods, Heart does
not always go together. His Hand may seem to make for men, when His Heart is
against them; as on the contrary, His Hand may seem to be against men, when his
Heart is not. We read, Jer. 32. 41. When God said, He would do his People good,
He would do them good with his whole Heart, and with his whole Soul. We find,
Psalm. 78. 29. God gave the Israelites their heart's desire, they had what they
would; But see what follows, While the meat was yet in their mouths, the
Wrath of God came upon them. Remember this, The best good things of this life,
may be bestowed in Anger, Hos. 13. 11. I gave them a King in mine anger.

3. They distinguish not, between Gods Giving Hand, and Gods Sanctifying Hand.
Between the Things given, and Grace that fits for the Using of them. God
sometimes gives the Things, when He gives not the Grace to make a Right use of
them. There are some, who, if they find but a Giving Hand, look no further,
whether there be a Sanctifying Hand, or no. Know this, While you look upon a
Giving Hand only, you can never make a right Judgment of a Prosperous
condition, till you look upon the other Hand, viz. the Sanctifying Hand. Till
you find, that with Prosperity, you have also Prosperity-Graces given too.

4. They distinguish not, between what comes in by a Permissive providence,
and by an Approving providence. As there is Gods Permissive and Approving Will,
so it is in respect of Providence, as relating to the good things of this
life. Some men have them only by a permissive providence. Some there are that
God makes Rich, as it is said, God made Abraham Rich; some God permits to be
Rich, and hinders them not. Thus, some by sinful, and unjust, and unlawful
Means, get the things of this life, when God approves not of it, Hos. 8. 4. God
says, They set up Kings, but not by Him; and Princes, but He knew it not. The
meaning is, That He approved it not. There is a disposition in men, (what
course soever they take to compass the things of this life) to draw God unto a
liking, and approbation of what they do, (let it be never so unlawfully done)
As those, Zach. 11. 5. Blessed be the Lord, for I am Rich. How much do men
father upon God, as his Gifts and Blessings, which they have got by their own
injustice and oppression?

Object. But some will say, Is it not the Blessing of the Lord that makes
Rich? And, if I am Rich, must I not say, It is by the blessing of the Lord?

Answ. It is true, and the place, is, Prove. 10. 22. The Blessing of the Lord,
it makes Rich, and adds no sorrow with it. This is a truth. And yet it
follows not from hence, that, Those that have Riches, and outward things,
have them as a Blessing. This will appear, if you consider, what is meant by
Rich in the Text; It is not the having the things, but comfort, and
contentment, in the things, that speaks men Rich. So you find, the latter words
in the Text are Exegetical, and expound the former, ( viz.) He adds no sorrow
with it. There are three Vultures that commonly feed upon a Rich man's heart, (
viz.) Care in getting, Fear in keeping, and Grief in losing. But now the
Blessing of the Lord, drives away all these. So that it does not follow, That
the bare having of the things, is the Blessing, but the having the Riches of
Contentment with them. So that the meaning is this, That it is the blessing of
the Lord, that gives Comfort and Contentment with the things; and this is that
indeed, that speaks a man truly Rich. Many have Gold and Silver, and
Possessions in abundance, and cannot be said to be Rich, because they have not
the comfortable use of them, and contentment with them. So that it is the
Comfort and Contentment, that is that Blessing that makes Rich.

Thus I have examined the Grounds, upon which many go, in making a Judgment of
a Prosperous Condition. And from all that has been said, their Mistakes will
appear, by considering of these following Queries.
1. Who knows, or can say, That those things are good for a man in this life,
that bad men have had, as well as good; and for the most part, the greatest
portion of them? Upon this ground, the very Heathens were drawn to a contempt
of those things, because they saw, that for the most part, they were in the
hands of those, that were the worst of men. Seneca could say, Who would esteem
of Riches and Honors, when he sees them cast, in hoc coenum in has sordes,
upon such Dung-hills; speaking of Honors conferred upon Sylla. Who would
esteem of Beauty, (says another) which a Whore may have, as well as an honest
Woman? Jer. 12. 1. The Prophet observed, That the way of the Wicked did
Prosper. And Psalm. 73. That the worst of Men, had waters of a full Cup wrung
out to them, and had what heart could wish.

2. Who knows, or can say, That is good for a man in this life, that never
made a man Good? Where is the man that can come forth and say, That his Riches
and Honors, did ever change his heart or reform his life?

3. Who knows, or can say, That those things are good for a man in this life,
that have made many men worse, through their Abuse of them? To how many have
they become a Trap, and Snare, and occasions of Sin? How many men has
prosperity undone? Nehem. 13. 20. Did not Solomon, King of Israel, sin by those
things? yet among many Nations there was none like him, Beloved of his God. How
Conscientious was David, when he was David the Persecuted? but how careless,
when he was David the King? It is observed of Rome, That it was never more
Wicked, then when it was most Flourishing. And it is observed of the Church,
That it had least Purity, when it had most outward Prosperity.

4. Who knows, or can say, That those things are good for a man in this life,
that are things so uncertain? They come and go, pass and run, like a River. The
Apostle calls them uncertain Riches, 1 Timothy 6. 17. Solomon tells us, They
make themselves Wings, and fly away. Prove. 23. 5. Yea, their being is so short,
that they are said not to be; for so says Solomon in the same Verse. Why will thou set thy heart upon that which is not?

5. Who knows, or can say, That is good for a man in this life, that cannot
in the least cure a man's vanity, or add any thing of worth, or excellency to
him? When he has all the things of the world, yet he is still but vain and
empty Man; he is still Adam, weak, frail, fleshly, and still vain. Hence it is,
that Solomon shows, that Riches cannot be a man's happiness, Eccles. 6. 10.
That which has been, is named already, and it is known that it is Man: (i. e.)
Call him what you will, Great, or Rich, or Honorable, yet he is Man still, (i.
e.) crazy, frail, mortal man; outward things do not amend his nature and
constitution. This the Psalmist tells us, Psalm. 39. 5. Surely, every man at
his best estate, is altogether vanity. At his best estate, let him be never so
happy, in respect of worldly estate, yet it does not cure his vanity, he is
still but vanity.

6. Who knows, or can say, That that is good for a man in this life, that
will do a man no good in the time of his greatest need, and straits, and
exigencies? Prove. 11. 4. Riches profit not in the day of Wrath. And we have
seen this made true in the former days of common Calamity. In all Changes, we
have seen, The Greatest, were the greatest Sufferers. Great Winds, shake most
the tallest Cedars, and throw down the strongest Oaks. We read, 2 Kings 24. In
that Captivity, the Richer Jews were carried away, when the poorer sort were
left to till the land.

7. Who knows, or can say, That that is good for a man in this life, that
fills the life with so many cares, and exposes to so many dangers, and
troubles, and disquietments? How many are there, whose wealth has cost them
their lives? It had bin good for Naboth, he had had no Vineyard. And it was
said of the Roman Emperors, That they got nothing by their Advancement, but ut
citius interficerentur, That they might be killed the sooner. How many men are
there, that had been happy, had not their prosperity destroyed them? And this
is another Argument, that Solomon uses to prove, that a man's happiness lies
not in Riches. As you may see Eccles. 6. 11. Seeing there be many things that
increase vanity, what is man the better? So, How can those things, that
increase cares and troubles, make Man the better? Psalm. 39. 6. Man disquiets
himself in vain; he heapeth up Riches, and cannot tell, who shall gather them.
Nay, Solomon tells us, Eccles. 5. 3. That he had seen Riches laid up for the
owners, to their hurt. Antigonus said of his Crown, That if a man knew what
cares were wrapped up in it, he would not think it worth taking up. Nay, one
says of life it self, Nemo vitam acciperet si daretur scientibus.

8. Who can say, That is good for a man in this life, that makes the entrance
into Eternal Life so difficult? This our Savior shows, Luke 18. 24, 25. That
it is hard for a Rich man to enter into Heaven. Nay, he makes it not only hard,
but in a manner Impossible; When he says, It is easier for a Camel to go
through the eye of a Needle. Our Savior means it, of those that have Riches,
and trust in them.

Thus for the first sort of persons, who think, It is good for them in this
life to have Prosperity.

CHAP. VII.
2 THere are some think, Afflictions are ill for them in this life; and
conclude, it is ill with them, because they are their Portion in this life.

I am now to show you, that many are woefully mistaken in that. I shall name to
you five things, that men look upon as evil for them in this life. About which
they may be deceived; and they may be for good to them.

1. God's hiding his Face from them. 2. God's suspending, and deferring his
Answers to their prayers. 3. God's denying their particular suits. 4. God's
depriving them of many dear comforts. 5. God's exercising them, with many sad,
and great Afflictions.
We shall a little consider of these things; and whether men may not be
mistaken about them, and take them to be evil for them, when they are not so.

1. Many think this evil for them, To have God hide his Face from them. And
indeed, we find the Godly in Scripture, complain of it, as one of the sadest
things. Yet let me tell you, such desertions, and the withdrawings of the light
of Gods Countenance, for a time, may be for Good. That as Christ said to his
Disciples, It is good for you that I go away. So it is sometimes good for the
People of God, that He turns his Face away. Although it is not a pleasing good,
yet it may be a profitable good.

1. By way of Correction. The Father's frowns are sometimes necessary, though
the Children will not say so. The sleighting of Divine Favors, causes God to
withdraw His Favor, by way of Correction.

2. By way of Instruction. So His hiding His Face from his People, teaches
them these things.

1. Where their strength lies; That in His Light, they see Light: That He is
the Fountain of Comfort, and that the happiness of lower Spirits, lies in Him,
who is the Chief of Spirits. How know you, that the Branch of the Tree has
nourishment from the Root? Pluck it away from the Tree, and it suddenly
withers. Let but the Nurse, leave the child to it self, and it quickly
falls. 2. It teaches men to prize God more, and to long the more after Him.
As in the Nothern parts, where the Sun is long absent, people will get upon the
tops of the Mountains, to epsy and discover its arising; and happy is he, that
can first see it. For this end, God sometimes hides His Face, that his People
may with more longing, look after the breakings forth of the Light of His
Countenance.
3. By way of Prevention. So God hides His Face.

1. To prevent pride, and to keep His People humble. 2. To keep them from
trusting in habits of Grace.
4. By way of Probation. So by this, God tries his concerning two things.

1. Whether they can love a hiding God? 2. Whether they can walk dutifully,
when God walks strangely? Isa. 8. 17. I will wait upon Him, that hides his
face from the House of Jacob. He resolved to walk dutifully, though God walked
strangely.
Thus you see, that Gods hiding his Face from His people, may be for Good.

2. A second thing, that many look upon as Evil for them, is, God's suspending,
and deferring Answers to their Prayers. Of this, the Godly have complained in
Scripture, That they did Cry, and God did not Hear. And yet let me tell you,
this may be for Good.

1. To make His people to be more earnest Suitors at the Throne of Grace. As we
read of the Blind man in the Gospel, when he cried to Christ to have mercy on
him; and being rebuked, he cried the more earnestly. 2. To make the Mercy, the
more welcome when it comes. Merchants look for the greatest return, by that
Ship that is longest abroad. God keeps a mercy the longer in his Hands, to
enrich it the more; and to send it forth, as a Bride adorned for her Husband.
One cluster of grapes, when ripe, is better then many when they are green and
sour. Abraham waited long for a Son; but it was, that his Son might be the
greater Blessing to him.
3. This is that, some look upon as evil for them in this life; Gods denying
them their particular suits. God is pleased sometimes, not only to delay His
Answers to our Requests; but also to deny them: and yet this may be for good.
God always hears his people, and answers them for their profit, though He
does not always answer them according to their wills. As the Physician hears
the Patient's request, Non ad voluntatem, sed ad sanitatem; He respects not so
much the Patient's will, as his health. The Patient calls for drink, but the
Physician gives him a Sirup, or a Julip, which is better. We many times, like
the Sons of Zebedee, ask we know not what: Instead of bread, we sometimes ask
stones. God hears to our profit, and Answers, though not always according to
our wills. Upon this account, Abraham's request, on the behalf of Ishmael; and
Moses request, to enter into the Land of Canaan, were denied. Yet they were
heard in another thing, and their requests granted in another way.

4. This is another thing, that men look upon as evil for them; Gods depriving
them of many dear comforts: as when He takes away a Wife out of our bosoms, or
breaks an Olive branch off from about our tables, etc. This is looked upon by
us, as evil, and yet it may be for good.

1. It may be to make us to live more to Him, and to lean more on Him; and to
seek for that in Him, which we sought in the creature. God sometimes pulls
away our worldly stays and props, to make us depend more on Him, in whom our
strength and comfort lies. 2. He sometimes takes away our comforts, to return
them better, as he did Jobs. Gods pulling down, is sometimes for this end, to
build up better. To make that of Marble, that before was but of Brick. He
sometimes takes a comfort out of our hands, to deliver it again to us, with
Interest and Advantage.
5. Some look upon this as Evil; Gods exercising them with many sad and sore
Afflictions. And some of the Grounds that they go upon, are these:

1. That Afflictions are Arguments of Divine Wrath. 2. That they are Useless.
3. That they are Bitter, and Burthensom to Nature. 4. That they are the Fruits
of Sin.
We shall Examine these Grounds, on which many go, in making such a Judgment of
an Afflicted Condition.

1. Say some, Afflictions are Arguments of Divine Wrath, and Divine Hatred; and
therefore not good for man in this Life: since such, as upon whom Afflictions
fall, are as it were marked out by God, as the Objects of His hatred.

Now let us a little examine this, and search whether it be so; and upon
serious and strict Examination, we shall find, It is an Error, being contrary
to Scripture-Truth, Eccles. 9. 1. They who say so, condemn the generation of
the Just; we finding, that most precious Saints, whom God tendered as the Apple
of his Eye, have seen and felt, great Afflictions. Noah, who found Grace in the
Eyes of the Lord, yet saw a World drowned. Job, of whom God gives a most high
Character, for his Piety and Uprightness, was stripped of all to a Shoolatchet.
David, a man after Gods own Heart, was bred up in the School of Affliction.
Yea, Jesus Christ himself, who was the Beloved Son, yet was, Vir Dolorum, A man
of Sorrows. You shall find, that to some, the Scripture makes Afflictions to be
Arguments of Divine Love, Prove. 3. 12. Whom the Lord loves, he Corrects, as
a Father does his Son, in whom he delights. And Jesus Christ speaks of
them, as Arguments of Love, Rev. 3. 19. As many as I love, I Rebuke and
Chasten. It is true, God delights not in Afflicting; but he loves His Children;
and that Love moves Him as a Father, to Correct and Afflict them for their
Good. He were a cruel Father, that would suffer his Child to die for want of a
little Physic. So that it is a gross Mistake, to think that Afflictions are
always the Wounds of an Enemy. But of this, more shall be spoken afterward.

2. Some have this Conceit; That an Afflicted condition is an Useless
condition; and therefore not good for a man in this Life. They look upon
Afflictions as things that a man may be very well without.

We shall a little examine, whether this be true, or no. Many indeed say,
concerning Afflictions, as those did concerning Nazareth, Can any Good come out
of Nazareth? So, Can any good come out of Afflictions? We must know, That
Afflictions are as necessary for us, as our Daily Bread. It is strange, yet it
is true, These Thorns will bear Grapes, and these Thistles will bear Figgs: And
there is a Day, when the Saints of God shall say, They could not have been
without such and such Afflictions; and that It was good for them that they were
Afflicted. Some Trees there are, whose Root is Bitter, yet their Fruit, Sweet.
A natural Eye sees no Good in them, and tastes no Sweetness: And indeed, the
Spiritual man, does not always, at present, discern what Advantage comes by
them. We must know, those Creatures that we look upon as Venomous, and Noxious,
are yet useful for some Ends, and some Respects: Thus, even Toads, etc. The
skilful Apothecary knows how to make Vipers and Scorpions, Medicinal. Enquire
of the Saints of God, and they will tell you, from their own Experience, What
good Afflictions have done them; and that they were Chastned for their Profit,
Heb. 12. 10. Afflictions seem to be but dry Rods; yet, like Aaron's Rod, they
have found them bringing forth both Blossoms, and Fruit.

3. Some say, Afflictions are bitter, and burthensom to Nature; and therefore
conclude, they are not good for a man in this Life.

We shall a little examine this, to see whether there be Truth in it. The
Premises are granted, That they are Bitter and Grievous to Flesh and Blood; and
the Apostle grants it, Heb. 12. 11. But the Consequence is denied, That what is
Bitter and Grievous to Flesh and Blood, is therefore Evil for a man in this
Life. And therefore we are to distinguish, between what is Toothsom, and what
is Wholesome: Between things, that are Pleasingly, and Profitably good. Things
may be Profitably good for us, that are not Pleasingly good. Those things are
sometimes most Wholesome, that are least Toothsom. There be sweet and honied
Poisons that Destroy. And there be bitter, and distastful Medicines that do
Cure. We know Wormwood is a Bitter herb, and yet Wholesome, and Useful for Man.
Some things may be sweet in the Mouth, that yet are bitter in the Stomach. Heb.
12. 11. The Apostle says of Afflictions, though they are Grievous, yet they
bring forth the quiet fruit of Righteousness. Here is the Difference between
the Evils of Sin, and of Affliction.

The Evils of Sin, they are Sweet in the Mouth, but bitter afterward; but the
Evils of Affliction are bitter in the Mouth, but sweet in the Close.
Afflictions indeed are bitter, but oftentimes, the bitterness arises from our
own Spirits. When our Taste is Vitiated, some things seem to be Bitter to us,
that otherwise would not be so. It Is our Spirits, that many times Imbitter our
Condition, and make our Chain much Heavier, than other ways it would be. There
are many Afflict themselves, when they are under an Affliction. As it is with a
Bird, when it is gotten into a Room, or Chamber, it might do well, if it sat
still, till the Doors and Casements were opened; but, till then, with flying
against the Walls, it does but hurt and bruise it self. To close up this:
Physicians do observe, we are most apt to Surfeit of those things that are most
Sweet and Luscious. And we find, Solomon, the Wisest of Men, prefers bitter
things, before Sweet. Eccles. 7. 3. Sorrow is better than Laughter. Ver. 4. It
is better to go to the House of Mourning, than to the House of Feasting.

4. Some say, That Afflictions are the Effects and Fruits of Sin; And therefore
not Good for a man in this Life.

We shall a little Examine this Ground. It is true, That Afflictions, were, at
first, Fruits of Sin. But we must make a Difference, between what they were at
First, and what Jesus Christ has made them, to His People now. It is true,
they were at first, the products of Sin; but to the People of God they are now
Changed and Altered. We must Distinguish between what is Sinfully Evil, and
Penally Evil. What is Sinfully Evil, is Unchangeably Evil; but Afflictions are
but Penally Evil, and may be made good. We must know, As there is a
Regeneration of Persons, so of Things: To him that is Born again, All is Born
again; As his Outward Comforts are born again, so all his Outward Afflictions.
It is true, the Evils of Afflictions were first Conceived in the womb of Sin,
and Sin brought them Forth: but there is the womb of the Covenant, and of the
Promise, where they are New-formed; and out of which, those things that were
Punishments, come forth Privileges; and what was Loss, comes forth Gain. We
read, Romans 5. 12. Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin. We see Death
came in by Sin. Death, which is the King of Fears; and so its Attendants with
it, viz. all Miseries and Afflictions whatsoever.

Thus, at first, they were conceived in, and came forth of, the womb of Sin:
but the Covenant, and Promise, have changed and altered them; it turns
Miseries into Mercies, and Punishments into Privileges, and Evil into Good. 1
Cor. 3. 22. All is yours, (says the Apostle to Believers;) and among other
things, he names Death: where he makes Death one of the Believer's Privileges,
put into the Believer's Charter. And the same Apostle, Phil. 1. 21. says, To
him to Die, was Gain. Death, in respect of its first Birth, was Loss; but
being born again, it becomes Gain. And as Death, which is the King of Fears,
(and so the chief of Evils;) so likewise, all other Evils are Gain to a
believer. Romans 8. 28. All things work together for Good, to them that love God.

Thus we have examined the Grounds, that those go upon, in making this
Judgment, of an Afflicted Condition; That it is Evil for a Man in this Life.

I shall Conclude with these Queries:

1. Who knows, or can say, that, That is Evil for a man in this Life, that God
inflicts upon the best in this Life. We often find the cup of Gall and Wormwood
going round about the Saints Tables. We usually find it the Diet-drink, with
which God does Physic his Dearest Children: With the same Sword wherewith He
destroys his Enemies, He sometimes wounds his Friends; and all this for their
Good. We find, the Godly ones of Judah were carried Captives to Babylon, as
well as others: they lost their Houses, Estates; were taken out of the Land of
their Nativity, and carried into a strange Land: And yet the Lord says of
them, Jer. 24. 5. That he had sent them into Captivity for their Good.

2. Who knows, or can say, that, that is Evil for man in this Life, that may be
consistent with Happiness. An Afflicted Man may yet in this Life be a happy
Man. As Man, at his best Estate, is but Vanity; so there are, that in their
worst Estate may be Happy. A Man may be Great, and Rich, and yet Miserable:
And, a Man may be Poor, and Afflicted, and yet Happy. Job 5. 17. Behold, Happy
is the Man whom God Corrects. It seems to be a strange thing, and therefore a
BEHOLD is put to it. A strange Sight, to see an Afflicted Man, and yet a
Blessed Man! Sense and Reason wonder at this Conjunction, That Affliction and
Happiness should both Kiss the same Person. Psalm. 94. 12. Blessed is the Man
whom thou Chastnest, etc. So that a Man may be a Chastised man, and yet a
Blessed man.

3. Who knows, or can say, That those things are evil for a man in this life,
that, by experience, have been found, to have been the means of doing many
good. Though Afflictions of themselves have not done it, yet, being Sanctified,
and Instruction going together with them, they have wrought a Gracious and
wonderful Change. How many may say with David, That it was good for them, that
they were Afflicted. We read, of Moses his Rod, what Miracles it wrought. The
Rod of Affliction works Miracles, when God works with it. How many Proud
ones, has Affliction Humbled? When Manasseh was in Briars, then he sought God.
How many Ignorant ones, has Affliction taught? They have Learnt that, in the
School of Affliction, that they never knew before. Sir Thomas Palmer, upon
Tower Hill, when he came to Dye, (pointing to the Tower) said, I have learnt
more, in yonder dark Corner of the Tower, then ever I learnt in all may Life.
How many wild, and unruly Spirits, has Affliction tamed? Those, that in their
Prosperity, have been, as Wild Asses, used to the Wilderness, that none could
turn them back: Yet in their Month of Affliction, they have been found and
taken. Jer. 31. 18. Ephraim says, Thou have Chastised me, and I was Chastised.
(i. e.) I was bettered by the Chastisment. He was, as an unruly Bullock,
unaccustomed to the Yoke. But Afflictions have made him to submit, and tamed
him. How many Wandering ones, has Affliction Reduced and brought into the Way?
Psalm. 119. 67. Before I was Afflicted, I went astray: but now I keep thy
Statutes. Many have been out of the Way to Heaven, and have been brought into
it, by Gods Guiding with this Rod. It was Affliction, that made the Prodigal
find the way to his Father's house. We read of those that were with Paul in the
Ship, when they suffered Shipwreck, Acts 27. 44. that some upon Planks, and
some upon the broken pieces of the Ship, got safe to Land. So, many have been
brought to Heaven, upon the broken pieces of an Estate; and must say, (as one,
once said) They had been undone, if they had not been undone. How many
worldlings, has Afflictions Weaned from the world? By being crossed in the
creature, they have come to discern the Vanity that is in the creature, and to
have their hearts taken off the creature. Here we taste Affliction, (as a Father
says) Tanquam amaritudinem in where materno. We are apt to hang on the breasts
of the Creature, and Afflictions are the Wormwood, by which God Weans us from
them.

Lastly, How many Sinners, has Affliction stopped, who else, had run headlong
into Hell; if God had not made a Hedge of Affliction in their way? We read, Hos.
2. 6. I will (says the Lord) hedge up thy way with Thorns, and thou shall not
find thy paths. God sometimes, makes a hedge of Thorns, whereby sinners are
stopped; It is happy for a man to meet with such a stop, though the hedge be
made of Thorns.

4. Who knows, or can say, That, that Condition is Evil for a man in this
life, in which the People of God are best. This is to be considered, that
wicked men, are worst, in their best worldly condition; and a Godly Man, is
best, when his outward condition, is worst. As one says of the English Nation.

Angliea gens est optima flens and pessimaridens. The English Nation, is best
when it Weeps, and worst when it Laughs.

Thus for the Second sort, of those that are mistaken about Conditions.

3. There are another sort, that are grossly mistaken on the other hand; And
such are those, who think it cannot but be well with them, because they are in
this life Afflicted. Thus some think, they are the better, and the happier,
upon that account. And here lies the mistake, because they hear, Afflictions
have done some good; and that some, have been able to say, That it was good for
them, that they were Afflicted; and thence Conclude, That they are happy,
because their Condition, is such a Condition: Never considering, (what I said
before,) That Afflictions of themselves, never did any man good; and that
conditions are to us, as we are in those conditions. Some, because they Suffer
in this world, think it is an Argument, that they shall be freed from Suffering
in another world; as if God could not make two Hells for them. We must know,
when the Scripture speaks of Rejoicing in Affliction, it is not to be
understood, that merely Afflictions are matter of Joy. those that think, they
are happy because they are Afflicted, and that their Condition is low in this
world, may be sadly mistaken. It is said, Mat. 5. 3. Blessed are the poor in
Spirit, etc. It is not said, Blessed are all that are poor in Purse. Let me
tell you, Some men's sufferings here, are but the forerunners of those that are
to come, and so may be but the beginning of sorrows. We must know, that upon
the very Toothache of a Reprobate, (as one says) Hell is Engraven. Every
Lazarus, is not taken into Abraham's bosom. Those may want a bit of bread here,
that may hereafter, cry as Dives did, for a drop of water, to cool their
tongues. A man may be poor in this world, and poor in the world to come. There
are a sort of poor, that are the worst of people under* Heaven, being Ignorant,
Stubborn, Profane, Vicious, Despisers of God, His Sabbaths, Ordinances,
Ministers, People. And indeed, for the most part, the poorest sort, are the
worst of people, and the most Licentious; there being nothing of knowledge, or
politic Restraints, or civil and ingenious Education, to keep them in, and
hold them back. To conclude this, Happiness is not the portion of every
Afflicted man in this life. It is not Affliction, but Affliction Sanctified,
that makes a man Happy by it.

Thus for the First Information.

CHAP. VIII.
The Second Information.
IF no man knows, What is good for a man in this Life, then it Informs us,
That we should be as ready to receive evil, as well as good, at the Hands of
God. We are not to be our own Carvers in respect of Conditions. When Job was in
his sad Condition, the Devil stirred up his Wife, to tempt him to Blasphemy,
and Impatiency. But see what answer Job returns to her, Job 2. 10. Thou
speak as one of the foolish Women, etc. Where First, He Reprehends her.
Secondly, He Instructs Her. Shall we, says he, receive Good at the Hands of
God, and not receive Evil; (q. d.) Have I, for so many Years, received so many
good things, and blessings, from the Hand of God; and shall I not now, receive
these Crosses and Afflictions? Now, receiving Evil from the Hand of God, stands
in this, In a Sweet, and Patient Submission, to the Will and Dispensation of
God; being content, with what God sends, whether it be good or evil, and that
upon these Considerations.

1. That God knows, what is better for us in this life, then we do; since no
Man knows, what is good for man in this life.

2. That Good and Evil, come both, from one and the same God. It is the Lord
that gives, and that takes away. As we have Blessings, by Divine Donation, so
Afflictions, by Divine Ordination. It is God, that brings not only Men, and
their Comforts, but also Men, and their Crosses, together.

3. As Good and Evil, come from the same God, so they may come from the same
Affection in God; They may both come from Love. The Apostle James, puts this
Question, Can a Fountain send forth sweet water and bitter? Jam. 3. 11. Yet
from the same Fountain of Divine Love, may issue the sweet Waters of Comfort,
and the bitter Waters of Afflictions. The same Love, that moves a Father, to
bestow an Inheritance on his Child, moves him also, to Correct his Child.

4. All Evils, come from a God, that has a Sovereign Power over us, and may do
with us, what he pleases. A God that may give, and take away; and who can say
to Him, What do Thou? A God that has Right to all that we have, and so may
take away what he please. In taking away, he takes away, but what is His own.
It is observable in Scripture, That the Lord claims an Interest, in all that
belongs to Man, ( viz.) The Earth, and the Fullness thereof; and so, whatsoever
it affords to man, Whether Fields, full of Corn; or Foulds, full of Sheep; or
Orchards, full of Fruit; or Stables, full of Meat. The very Cattle, and the
Beasts of the Earth, are the Lords, Psalm. 50. 10. All the Beasts of the Forest
are mine. The Beasts of the Forest, are of a wild nature, and commonly know no
Master; and yet of these, The Lord says, they are His: So also, He says of
Gold, and Silver, Hag. 2. 8. Thy Gold and Silver, is mine. Yea, the Wool, and
the Flax we have. Hos. 2. 8. He says, It is His. So that God, in taking away
any thing from us, takes away but what is His own.

5. All Evils, come from the Hand of a Powerful God, with whom there is no
Contending. When a great Philosopher was chekt, for yielding in a Discourse he
had with Adrian the Emperor, he gave this Answer, Should I not yield to him,
that has Thirty Legions at command? There is no Contesting with Sovereignty,
no Resisting Omnipotency, no Striving with our Maker. The Earthen Pitcher, by
striking against a Rock, does but dash it self to pieces.

6. All Evils, come from a Righteous God, that can do His creature no wrong,
Genesis 18. 25. Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do Right? Romans 3. 5. Is God
Unrighteous, (says the Apostle) that takes Vengeance? And he answers it,
with a God forbid. So we may say, Is God Unrighteous, that sends Affliction?
God forbid, Deuteronomy. 32. 4. All His ways are Judgment.

7. All Evils come from that God, that can bring Good out of Evil, and Light
out of Darkness; that can turn Water into Wine, and make us Spiritual Gainers,
by Temporal Afflictions. He sometimes pulls down, to build up better; and
sometimes takes away, when He intends a greater Good.

Thus for the Use of Information.

We now come to the Resolution of this great Question, Whether the knowledge, of
what is good for a man in this life, be so hidden from man, that it may not in
some measure be attained to; And if so, What Directions are there, for the
attaining of this Knowledge?

Answ. Though the full and perfect Knowledge of what is good for a man in this
Life, be so hidden, That a Man cannot make a Judgment of others conditions,
yet we grant that he may make a judgment of his own Condition. And here I
shall give in, some Directions to help Men, in making a Judgment of their own
Condition.

1. General. 2. Particular.
I. General Directions.

1. Something is to be Known. 2. Something is to be Done.
I. Something is to be Known, before we can make a right Judgment of our
Condition. So the things to be Known, are these:

1. Who is the Framer of our Conditions; Who it is Ordains and Appoints them,
and puts us into them? It is not, as the Heathen thought, Quisque fortunae suae
faber, That every Man is the Framer of his own Fortune; and so of his own
Condition. Conditions are Divine Allotments. Misery (says Job) springs not out
of the Dust. And the Psalmist tells us, That Promotion comes neither from the
East, nor from the West; but God is the Judge: i. e. He is the great Orderer,
and Disposer of Conditions: He puteth down One, and sets up Another. It
comes not from the East or West; It comes not from Earth, nor from Man; but it
is God, that brings a Man, and his Condition together, and that Frames it for
him. And it is impossible, that ever any Man should make a true Judgment of
his Condition, That does not first Know, who is the Framer of it.

2. We must know the right way of making a Judgment of Conditions. Except we
know that, it is impossible, but we must be Mistaken. And, I shall give you
some Particulars concerning that: 1. In Judging of Conditions, Take heed of
being Overhasty. Hasty, and Rash Judgment, is seldom Right. We are to Weigh,
and Consider well of a Condition, before we make a Judgment of it. A
Condition, at the first Blush, may seem otherwise then it is. The Good, and so
the Evil, of a Condition, does not appear presently; It may lie at the Bottom
of it. The good of Affliction does not appear presently: but the Apostle,
says, Heb. 12. 11. It yeildeth the quiet fruit of Righteousness, (...), to
them that are exercised thereby. So, that we must be Exercised in a Condition,
before we can make a Judgment of a Condition. And the Apostle, in that
Chapter, tells us, That an Afflicted condition, at the first sight, seems
grievous, and not joyous: but, afterward (says he) it brings forth the quiet
fruit of Righteousness. This was the Error of Job's Friends; they were too
hasty in making a Judgment of his Condition: and so, it is no wonder they were
so Mistaken about it. 2. In making a Judgment of Conditions, you must not
judge of the Person by the Condition, but of the Condition by the Person. Some
there be, that judge of Persons, by the Condition; As the Barbarians did of
Paul, when they saw a Viper hanging on his Hand; Surely, this Man is a
Murderer, etc. Thus, some judge of Persons, to be Good, or Evil, according as
their Conditions are. So, they judge those to be Good, whose condition is
Prosperous; as those in Malachi, Mal. 3. 15. called the proud Happy. And, so
they look upon those as Wicked, who are in an Afflicted condition. Thus, Job's
Friends did judge of him, by his Condition. Now, the right way of making a
Judgment of Conditions, is, To Judge of Conditions by Persons. To a Wicked
man, every condition is Evil: And, to a Godly man, every condition is Good.
That, as the Expression is, Tit. 1. 15. To the Pure, all things are Pure: So,
to those that are Good, all things are Good. If he has Prosperity, it causes
Thankfulness; if Adversity, it works Patience. Romans 8. 28. All things work
together for Good, to them that Love God. So that we must know, we are to judge
of Conditions, by the Persons. When one came to Austin, and told him of one
that came to a strange End, he presently asked, But, how did he Live?
Intimating, That, a man was not to be judged of, by the manner of his Death, if
he were Godly in his Life. 3. In making of a Judgment of Conditions, you must
judge of them, by what Men are to, and in, their Conditions. I have told you
before, A condition is to a Man, as he is to, and in, his condition. It is, as
a Man mannageth his condition. Would you know, whether Prosperity be Good for a
Man? You must see how he does manage that condition; and how he does carry, and
deport himself in it. If he demean himself Proudly, and make the Things he
enjoyes, to be Fuel for his Lust; you may conclude, his condition is Evil for
him. So, on the contrary; Would you know, Whether an Afflicted condition be
Evil for a Man? Mark how he Behaves himself in that condition; If Foolishly, if
Impatiently; Either on the one hand, Despising the Affliction; Or, on the other
hand, Murmuring at it: You may know, that it is Evil for him. Of this, I shall
speak more afterward. 4. To make a Judgment of Conditions, We must Know our
Spirits, and Dispositions. Now, we cannot know the Spirits, and Dispositions of
others; but we should labor to know our own, which we may know; and thereby
come to know what is good for us in this Life. Some there are, That will
undertake to make a Judgment of a condition, without ever eying, or
considering their own Disposition. It is with some Men, as it is with some that
sit at the Wine: when they have drunk so many Cups, yet they call for the other
Quart, and the other Pint, when they have Drunk too much already; not
considering what their heads will bear. Consider, as all heads, so all
dispositions are not alike. This Agur acknowledged in that prayer of his, Prove.
30. 8. Give me not Riches. He looked upon them, as a heady and intoxicating
Drink, which was too Strong for him. The Prophet speaks of some, that are
strong to drink Wine. Now a man of a weak Brain, that will make their measure
his, is easily overtaken. We are apt to eye the prosperous condition of
another, and to think such a condition is good for us; and to desire, to have
our condition made after that Fashion and Mode. But this is, as if the younger
child should cry, to have the coat of his elder brother, which would be too
long for him, and ready continually to make him fall. 5. In making a Judgment
of a condition, we must judge of it, by the relation it has to another
condition, viz. that which is Spiritual and Eternal. The saying is, that what
is the first, and best, in every thing, is the Rule of the rest: So the best
condition, must direct us, how to judge of lower conditions. That condition is
good for a man, that makes his Spiritual Condition the better: This is the
fault of many, they judge of conditions, without considering how they stand in
conjunction with, or opposition to, their Spiritual and Eternal Condition. We
may safely conclude, that that Condition is good for a man in this Life, that
is an advantage to him, in relation to another Life. Many, little consider
this. We should put the question to our selves, in every condition, Am I the
better for being in this Condition, in relation to the Spiritual and Eternal
Good of my Soul? Does it hinder, or further my growth in Grace? Does it hinder,
or further my Salvation? Does it set me, nearer Heaven, or nearer Hell? 6. In
making a Judgment of Conditions, we must make use of Faith, and not Judge, by
Sense and Opinion, not by Appearances; Those that Judge so, will never make a
Right Judgment of Conditions. An Eye of Faith will see Good, in that wherein an
Eye of Sense, yea of Reason too, can see none, Heb. 11. 26. It is said, By
Faith, Moses refused to be called the Son of Pharoahs Daughter, etc. Where see,
what he refused ( viz.) to be called, the Son of Pharoahs Daughter; which
seemingly, was the greatest Honor and Advancement, that a man could attain
unto; And then see what he chose, ( viz.) to Suffer Affliction with the People
of God. One would have thought, he had chose the Evil, and refused the Good.
But by an Eye of Faith, he saw Evil in that, that Sense and Reason would have
told him was good; and Good in that, that they would have told him was Evil. It
is observable, in Mat. 5. that all the Beatitudes are affixed, to unlikely
conditions: Blessed are the poor in Spirit. Blessed are those that are
Persecuted for Righteousness Sake. Blessed are ye, when men Revile, and
Persecute you, and speak all manner of evil against you, falsely for my Names
sake. This is to show, that the Judgment of the Word, and the Judgment of the
world, are contrary. Faith will show you, that the men of the world, are
infoeliciter foelices miserable in being happy. And the Children of God, are
foeliciter infoelices, happy in their being miserable. So that, as the Apostle
says, Without Faith, it is impossible to please God: So, without Faith, it is
impossible to make a judgment of conditions. I shall close this, with an
Answer, given to one, that passed his censure upon a picture, as ill drawn,
when it was not so; Si meos oculos haberes, non ita diceres, If thou had mine
eyes, thou would not say so. Faith teaches a man, to make another Judgment
of Conditions, then Sense or Reason does.


III. Those that will make a judgment of a condition, must know another thing,
( viz.) What it is makes a condition good, and what makes a condition evil for
a man in this life. I shall in some particulars show, What it is, that makes a
man's condition good for him in this life.

1. An Interest in the Covenant. Where there is that Interest, there is an
assurance that all is good, and all is for good. When we once come to know our
Interest in the Covenant, we may then make a judgment of a condition. I showed
you before; we are not to judge of persons, by their conditions, but of
conditions, by the persons, Psalm. 25. 10. All the ways of the Lord, are Mercy
and Truth, to them that keep his Covenant. So it is to them that have an
Interest in the Covenant. All conditions fall under a Promise, when the
Scripture says, All shall work together for good. An Afflicted condition it
self, falls under that promise. So when it is said, No good thing, will He
withold from them, that walk uprightly. Afflictions themselves, come under
that promise. If Afflictions be good for them, they shall have them; and if
they have them, they may be assured they are good for them. It is the Covenant,
and Promise, that helps us, to make a right Interpretation of all conditions,
and of all the Dealings of God with us in this life.

2. That which makes a condition good for a man in this life, is the Enjoyment
of God in a Condition; and so we may conclude, that that condition is good for
a man in this life, in which he enjoys God. The best condition, without God in
it, is evil; and the worst condition, in which we enjoy God, is good. God is
the chiefest Good, and that condition must needs be good, in which we enjoy the
chiefest Good. Look upon the worst of outward conditions, it is the best, if
there be an enjoyment of God the more in it. This was the ground of Moses
choice, Heb. 11. 26. that he choose rather, the suffering of Affliction with
the People of God, then the enjoyment of all the Pleasures and Treasures of
Egypt. He saw, God was to be Enjoyed in that Condition. So that by this, we may
make a judgment of conditions: That condition is good for a man in this life,
in which he enjoys the chiefest Good. The Apostle says, 2 Cor. 1. 5. As our
Tribulations abound for Christ, so our Consolations abound through Christ. When
one sees Christians abound in Tribulations, he would think their condition
evil; but when he comes to see their Consolations abound in that condition, he
must needs conclude it good. To close up this, There is no condition good,
without the enjoyment of the Chiefest Good. He that enjoys God in a condition,
enjoys Him, whose Favor is Life, and whose Countenance is a Sun, to enlighten
the darkest condition. It is the Sun, that makes day, let the Stars be never
so many, and shine never so bright, yet it is night still. So it is in respect
of conditions, let a man enjoy never so much of the creature, yet without the
enjoyment of God, it is but a dark condition. It is His Countenance, that makes
the darkness of a condition, to be light about us, Psalm. 18. 28. He shall make
my darkness, to be light. Mic. 7. 7. Though I sit in darkness, the Lord shall
be a light about me. So that that condition is good for a man in this life,
that God enlightneth, and shines upon, with the beams of His Countenance.

3. That that speaks a man's condition Good for him in this Life, is, The
suitableness of his Spirit to his condition. When the Spirit is not above the
condition. As it is to be observed in a Married condition; the sweetness of the
condition lies in this, In the Suitableness of their Spirits. So, in every
condition, the sweetness, and goodness of it, lies in the Suitableness that is
between our Spirits, and our Condition. We see how it is with some, That their
spirits are above their condition; their spirits are High, when their condition
is Low; and upon this, their condition does not please them. And this is the
cause of much Discontent, because their spirits suit not with their condition.
This is the great thing we are to look to; In making a judgment of conditions,
to search, and find out, How our spirits suit with our condition. Whether we
can say, as the Apostle does, Phil. 4. 11. I have learnt, in every estate to be
Content. He had a spirit fitted for every condition. So then, when your spirits
and conditions suit, it is one thing, by which you are to make a judgment of
your condition.

4. That which makes a condition Good for a man in this Life, is, Peace within.
What ever the condition be Without, if there be peace Within, it makes it good
and sweet to him. Want of that imbitters a condition. Solomon says, A good
Conscience is a continual Feast. It Feasts a man, and makes him Merry in all
conditions; and so makes the worst Outward estate and condition to be good and
sweet to him. Isa. 48. 22. There is no peace, says my God, to the Wicked. Put
him into what condition you will, he has no Peace in that condition; and that
spoils all.

5. That, that makes a condition good for a man in this Life, is, Doing the
Work of his condition. Conditions have their several, and suitable
Improvements. In every condition, a man should put such a Question to himself,
as the Prophet puts, Mich. 6. 8. And now, What does the Lord thy God require of
thee? So, in every condition we should put this Question to our selves; What is
it that the Lord requires me do, as the work of my condition? The Apostle James
tells us of Duties suitable to conditions, Jam. 5. 13. If any man be Afflicted,
let him Pray; If any man be Merry, let him sing Psalms. An Afflicted condition
has its Duties, and a Prosperous condition has it is: And by doing the Work,
and performing the Duties of a condition, we make a Judgment of it, Whether it
be good for us in this Life.

6. That, that makes a condition good for a man in this Life, is, His living
above his outward condition. When, though there be a suitableness of spirit to
the condition, yet he takes not up with his condition, but fetches in his
Contentment from some higher thing. What is it, that makes a Prosperous
condition Evil to some? Surely this, they look no further than their condition;
They look no higher than Riches and Honor, etc. and seek for all their
comfort, and contentment from them. And likewise, What is it that makes an
Afflicted condition Evil to some? Surely this, they have their Eye only upon
their Condition; they look no higher than their Troubles, and Crosses, and
Afflictions. They see nothing beyond their condition; as Hagar, when she was
wandering in the Wilderness, and the Water in her Bottle was spent, she
concludes, that She, and her Child, must Die: as though the Bottle was all that
she, and her Child, had to live upon; when yet, there was a Fountain near, but
she could not see it. Let a man's condition be what it will, yet it cannot hurt
him, if he live Above it. Prosperity cannot hurt that man, who makes God his
All, in a condition. There is an Expression, Job 20. 22. concerning a Wicked
man; That in the midst of his Sufficiency he shall be in Straits. Thus it is
with some men, Let their condition be what it will, yet in the midst of it they
are in Straits: the Reason is, Because they live no Higher than their
condition. In the midst of their Prosperity, and Sufficiency, they are in
straits, by reason of their many Cares, and Fears, and perplexing Thoughts, and
unsatisfied Desires; and if so in Prosperity, much more in Adversity. Now, a
man that lives upon that, that is Higher than his Condition, has such sweet
In-comes of Joy, and Peace, and Comfort, and Contentment in every Condition,
that he is never in any Straits. Hence it is, the Apostle tells us, 1 Timothy 6.
6. Godliness, with Contentment, is great Gain: Or, it may be read thus,
Godliness is great Gain, with Contentment; i. e. It brings Gain with
Contentment. Now, what is Godliness? It is an Heavenly impression, and
propension in the heart and soul of a Man, whereby it is, in all conditions,
carried toward God. Now, what ever a man's condition be, Godliness will make it
Gainful, and that with Contentment. Our Savior told his Disciples, when they
urged Him to Eat, John 4. I have meat to eat, that ye know not of. So it is
with such a man, that lives upon God, and Christ, he has, in every condition,
that comfort, and contentment, that the World knows not of. Thus the Apostle
Paul lived above his condition, 2 Cor. 6. 10. As Sorrowful, yet always
Rejoicing; As having Nothing, yet possessing All things. q. d. Men look upon
us, as those that are in a sad condition, being Poor, and having Nothing; but
we live upon something that is above our condition. So that every condition is
good to him, that has something to live upon above his condition. That, as it
is in respect of Ordinances, so it is in respect of Conditions, We are, in the
Use of Ordinances, to live above them, and to seek to find God in them: So in
conditions, we are to live above them, and to seek to God, for that comfort and
contentment that sweetneth a condition. Before I leave this, I must tell you,
there is a twofold living above ones condition.

1. Sinful: Arising from Haughtiness of Spirit. 2. Holy: Proceeding from
Heavenliness of Spirit.
1. Sinful: When a man's Heart, and Spirit, is not contented with its present
Condition; when his spirit is above his condition, and he thinks his condition
too low, and mean for him. This is Sinful.

2. Holy: When a man has such a Heavenly Spirit, that causes him, not to take
up with the things of his Outward condition; but lives upon Higher things. And
this stands in Two things.

1. Living above the Comforts of a Condition. 2. Above the Crosses of a
Condition.
1. Living above the Comforts of a Condition. It is thus with a gracious heart:
when the outward condition is comfortable, yet he lives upon something above
the comforts of his condition. It is the Apostles Counsel, 1 Cor. 7. 29. etc.
Let those that have Wives, be as though they had none, and those that rejoice,
as though they rejoiced not. He lives upon higher things, than the comforts of
a Wife, So that it is, as if he should have said; The comfort in a Wife, was
nothing, in respect of the comfort he finds in God, and Christ. And so he
sees, that in his condition, there is nothing to rejoice in, in comparison of
higher things. As Christ said to his Disciples, Rejoice not in this, That the
Devils are subject to you; But rather rejoice in this, That your Names are
written in Heaven.

2. Living above the Crosses of a Condition: The Apostle says, 1 Cor. 1. 29.
Let them that weep, be as though they wept not. To show, that Christians,
should live above the Crosses of their Condition, enjoying that that makes them
weep, as if they wept not.

7. That, that makes a condition Good for a man in this Life, is, Watchfulness
against the Temptations that attend a Condition. There must be standing upon
our guard in Conditions, and watching against Temptations. Conditions (as I
have showed you formerly) are attended with Temptations. There are Temptations,
that attend a Prosperous, and an Afflicted condition. Satan lays snares for
us in every Condition; but cannot hurt us, if we but once know his Devices. He
is subtle, and loves to Fish in all Waters; and so he lays Snares in all
conditions. This then speaks a condition Good, when we Watch against the
Temptations of a Condition. The Apostle writing to Timothy, a young man, 2 Timothy
2. 22. bids him fly the lusts of Youth. Youth has its Lusts, and
Conditions have their Temptations, which we ought to Watch against. A
Prosperous condition has its Temptations, and an Afflicted condition has its
Temptations. The Apostle, 1 Timothy 6. 17. bids him, Charge them that are Rich in
this World, that they be not High-minded; and that they trust not in uncertain
Riches: Which shows the Temptations that attend that Condition, viz.
High-mindedness, and trusting in Riches. An Afflicted condition has its
Temptations too, Heb. 12. 5. Where, writing to them that were in an Afflicted
condition, he exhorts them to avoid two Extremes, in ver. 5. My Son, Despise
not the Chastning of the Lord; neither faint, when thou art Rebuked of him. In
an Afflicted condition, we are apt, either to Despise the Affliction, or to be
too much dejected and cast down under the Affliction: And therefore, ver. 12.
he bids them lift up the hands that hang down. So James 5. he speaks to
Afflicted ones to be Patient, and stablish their Hearts. And ver. 9. says,
Grudge not one against another, Brethren. The word is (...), Groan not one
against another. In it, there is an Exhortation to them, to watch against the
Temptations that attend an Afflicted condition. Some think* the Apostle there
forbids Murmuring Groans, which arise from our being discontented at
Providence: This is one Temptation. Some think, they are Vindictive Groans,
proceeding from Revenge, and Stomach against those that were the Instruments of
our Affliction: This is another Temptation. Some think, are meant Envious
Groans, proceeding from their Envying at those, that suffered less than they
did: This is another Temptation. Thus we see, That all Conditions have their
Temptations. And this is that, that speaks a condition Good for a man; when, in
his Condition, he is watchful against the Temptations of it; avoiding the
Snares of it. Satan observes wind and tide in his Temptations; he observes
the wind and tide of a Condition. He observes, whether the wind that blows,
be a warm Southerly wind of Prosperity, or an cold Northerly wind of Adversity;
and accordingly he suits his Temptations. It is the Condition that makes the
Temptation in season. He seldom tempts a poor man to pride: And therefore it is
made, by Solomon, a prodigious sight, Eccles. 10. 7. to see Servants on
Horseback. So he seldom tempts Rich men to Steal; the reason, is, Because such
Temptations are unsuitable to their Condition.

CHAP. IX.
8. THat that makes a condition Good for a man in this Life, is, Spiritualizing
a Condition; when there is an extracting something that is Spiritually good out
of our outward, and temporal Conditions. Alchymists tell us, There is an Art,
of turning baser Metals into Gold: So there is a Heavenly Art, of
Spiritualizing temporal Conditions, and turning them into Heavenly Advantages.
The Gracious man is the true Alchymist, that can extract something that is
Spiritual, out of that which is Temporal; and what concerns another Life, out
of the things of this Life. We must know, there is an Art of Byassing
conditions. A Bowl runs according as you set the Bias; so conditions are
according to the Bias you put upon them. When a condition is Spiritually
Biased, it moves a man Heavenward: Consider how it is with Sailors; though
they have a Side-wind, yea, a Wind that seems to blow against them; yet they
have an Art of setting their Sails so, that they will make an advantage of
those Winds. So Grace, will teach every Man, so to manage his Condition, that,
let the Wind of it blow from what place, or quarter it will, yet it shall be
Advantageous to him, for the carrying him on, toward his desired Haven, which
is Heaven. We must know; Outward conditions are common to Good and Bad. But
here lies the difference; The Godly man, from a Heavenly Principle, makes a
Spiritual Advantage of his condition, when another does not. Some, when they
are in Prosperity, or Adversity, (being Carnal) understand not the Art of
making a Spiritual Advantage of a Condition.

We know, there are some actions that are common to Men, and Beasts; As to Eat,
Drink, and Move, etc. The Beast does it, and Man does it. Now where is the
difference? In this, when Man does them, they are Reasonable Actions, they are
guided with Reason, and moderated by Reason; but when a beast does them, they
are the actions of a beast, and so they are but brutish. So it is in respect of
conditions, they are common to good, and bad; but here lies the difference. A
Godly man, being endued with a Principle of Spiritual Wisdom, makes a Spiritual
Advantage of his condition, be it what it will; when the other, having no such
principle, knows not how to do it. It is with Godly Men, in their worldly
conditions, as it is with the Planets, which have a motion of their own,
contrary to that Rapt Motion of the Heavens, whereby they are carried, and
whirled about, in twenty four hours. So it is with Godly men, in their
conditions, they are carried about as the world is, in respect of conditions.
In respect of their outward, they are in the same condition with others,
sometimes Rich, sometimes Poor, sometimes High, sometimes Low, sometimes in
Prosperity, and sometimes in Adversity: But in these conditions, they have a
different motion from others; being directed by Grace, and the Spirit of God,
they move Heaven-wards. Even in those conditions, that seem to carry them
down-wards, they have a motion upwards. We know in Scripture, Prosperity is
called a Mountain; and Afflictions are compared to, and called Waters. As for
Prosperity, which is called a Mountain, Grace teaches a man, to get on the top
of it, from whence he may see Heaven the better, as Moses did the Land of
Canaan, from the top of Mount Pisgah. Some there are, when their Mountain is
made high, they set it between them and Heaven. And alas! what can a man see,
when he is at the bottom, and foot of a Mountain? When a man, is on the top of
a Mountain, then the Face of the Heavens, lies open to his View. Then a man
may conclude, A prosperous condition is good for him, when it is not a
Mountain, to hide Heaven from him, but to raise him up, more toward Heaven. So
for an Afflicted Condition: Afflictions, are in Scripture, compared to Waters.
Thus it is with some, when they come into these waters, they sink, and are
overwhelmed. These waters run over them, and drown them. But with a Godly Man,
it is otherwise; he swims upon these waters, and is like Noah's Ark in the
Deluge, the higher the waters were, the more it was lifted up, toward Heaven:
So the rising of these waters of Affliction, do but lift a Godly man up, nearer
to Heaven. So then, if a man would make a judgment of conditions, he must see,
whether they are Spiritually good for him, by what Spiritual Extraction he
makes out of them, and what Spiritual Advantage he makes of them.

9. That that makes a condition good for a man in this life, is, An holy
indifferency of Spirit, in respect of conditions. When it is indifferent to
him, what condition he is put into, submitting to the Will of God, and
resolving, Gods Will, shall be his. Then is a condition good for a man, when
his Spirit is brought to this indifferency. In respect of Salvation, he is
Absolute; but in respect of outward conditions, whether to be high or low, he
is indifferent, and says, Let it be as the Lord will. When there is this
submission to God in a condition, then it is good. Some there are, that have
indeed, an indifferency of Spirit, in relation to Spiritual, and Eternal Good
Things; but none, in relation to those good things that are Temporal. They are
indifferent, whether they have Grace, or not, etc. But concerning the things of
this life, it is with them, as with Rachel concerning children, They must have
them, or else they dye. Then it is right, when there is an indifferency of
Spirit, in respect of outward things. When our hearts are not set, on this or
that, worldly thing; but we are indifferent, whether we have it or not. If God
will give them the things of this life, such Spirits will be thankful; if God
deny them, to them, such Spirits will be content. Such a Spirit had the
Apostle, Phil. 4. 11, 12. Not that I speak (says he) in respect of want, for I
know both how to be abased, and how to abound, etc. And tells us withal, that
he had learned, in every condition, therewith to be content. (q. d.) As for
these outward things, it is indifferent to me, whether I have them, or have
them not; I will not be my own Carver, but am content, with whatsoever
condition God shall put me into. A Gracious Spirit, is indifferent about all
things, save-only those, that concern the good of his Soul. As that Martyr, Mr.
Bradford, answered, when one asked him at parting, What he would have to the
Queen, No more but this, said he, Tell Her Majesty, If she will give me my
Life, I will thank Her; if she condemn me to Perpetual Imprisonment* I will
thank her; If she will Banish me, I will thank Her, If she will Burn me, I will
thank Her. Herein the indifferency of his Spirit appeared; that, let the Queen
deal with him, how She pleased, it would please him, and he should therewith be
content. Thus it is with a Gracious Spirit, It is content to be in what
condition God sees best for him. And this indifferency arises from the
Consideration of these things:

1. From the consideration of Outward conditions, and the Things of them, that
they can neither make a Man truly Happy, nor truly Miserable. Riches, and
Honor, and such things, cannot make a man truly Happy. A man may be Rich, and
yet a Reprobate. Happiness lies in higher Things, and higher Enjoyments* And
so likewise, Troubles, and Crosses, and Afflictions, cannot make a man truly
Miserable. It is Sin, not Sufferings, that does that. This Chrysostom knew, by
returning that Answer to the Empress, who Threatened what She would do to him;
Tell Her, (said he) Nil nisi peccatum timeo, I fear nothing but sin.

2. From the consideration of this, That he is not at his own disposing, but at
God's, who may do with him, what he will, and put him into what Condition He
pleases. He knows, he is not to be the Framer of his own Condition, and
therefore, leaves it to the Great God, to choose and Frame his Condition for
him.

3. From the consideration of this, The changeableness of Conditions; He
considers this, If I should have Prosperity, it may quickly turn to Adversity,
God having set the one, over against the other. And the consideration of this
changeableness, is one thing that helps, to put the Spirit upon this
indifferency.

4. From the consideration of this, That he knows not what condition is good
for him in this life, and thence concludes, that that condition must needs be
best for him, that God sees best.

5. From the consideration of this, What relation he has to the world, that he
is but a Pilgrim, and Stranger here, only Traveling through it, toward his
Home. And so looks upon conditions here, only as his Inn, in which he is to
Lodge. From this consideration, arises this indifferency of Spirit. He is
indifferent concerning his Inn, when he considers, It is not his Home; if he
be well accomodated, it pleases him, if not, yet he is contented, considering
this, I am not to dwell here. Conditions to Gracious Spirits, are as weather is
to Travelers, whether it be Fair or Foul, being on his Journey homewards, he
is content.

10. That that makes a condition good for a man in this life, is, A man's
behavior in his condition. Then it is right, when nothing from God,
displeases us; and nothing from us, displeases God. When we are contented,
with all the Lords dealings with us; and make it our care in a condition, that
our carriage may be such, that it may not displease him. Some there are, that
if God put* them into a prosperous condition, and waters of a full cup are wrung
out to them, it pleases them well. But then, in that condition, it is not
their care to please God; they abuse their Prosperity, to Pride, and Luxury,
Gluttony, and Drunkenness. As it is said of Jesurun, Deuteronomy. 32. He waxed fat,
and kicked. Some there are, that if God put them into an Afflicted condition,
are not pleased with what God does, neither do they please Him, in what they
do, in that condition. As those Dispensations of God, are unpleasing to them;
so their behavior, in that condition, is such, that it is most displeasing to
God. How many do Fret, and Murmur, and break forth into the indecencies of
passion, against God? As that Wicked King of Israel said, This Evil is of the
Lord, why should I wait any longer? So consider, Then a condition is good for a
man;

1. When nothing that comes from God, displeases him, let him put him in what
condition he will. Let God set him up, or cast him down; let Him feed him, with
pleasant bread, or with the bread and water of Affliction; Let Him set him upon
the Throne, or on the Dunghill; Let Him be a giving God, or a God taking away:
Yet he is not displeased with Gods dealings with him. You may remember, what
Eli said, when the sad News was brought him, concerning what God would do by
him and his house; his Answer was, 1 Samuel 3. 18. It is the Lord, let him do
what he will. Thus did Hezechiah, Isa. 39. 8. Thus did Job, when he received
the sad News, concerning the loss of his Children and Goods, said he, The Lord
gives, and the Lord takes away. Blessed be the Name of the Lord.

2. When we displease not God in a condition. When we are so careful of our
behavior, that we say, as David did, Psalm. 39. 1. I said, I will take heed to
my ways, etc. He there, takes up a full resolution, of not giving liberty to
his Tongue, to utter an impatient Word, or Syllable. So then, if we would know,
whether the condition we are in, be good for us in this Life; we must enquire
concerning these two things.

I. Whether God's dealings with us, please us; and our carriage, in our
condition, please Him? The Truth is this, Most of us, desire that God would
please us in our conditions, and give us, what we desire. As Sampson said of
the Woman of Timnah, Give her me, for she pleases me well. So say some, Give
me this, and that, put me into such a condition, for it pleases me well. But
here is the Sin, They have no care to please God, in their condition. It is
with them, as with the people of Israel, who asked meat, for their lusts. And
as those, of whom the Apostle James speaks, They ask, that they may spend it
upon their lusts. So that, a condition is then good for us, when nothing from
God, displeases us, and nothing from us, displeases God in the condition. II.
That that makes a condition good for a man in this life, is, a man's enjoyment
of himself in his condition. An holy and comfortable enjoyment of a man's self,
in a condition, speaks his condition good for him. The enjoyment of God, and
the enjoyment of our selves, in a condition, makes a condition good for us.
1. Concerning a prosperous condition, How many have lost themselves in that
condition; that, as we say of those, whom Wine, or Strong Drink has overcome,
that they are not themselves. Some, are so overcome with their prosperity, that
we may say of them, they are not themselves. In the midst of their enjoyments,
they enjoy not themselves: They possess not, but are possessed. The world does
possess them. They are, at best, but Servants, and Slaves to the world. The
world enjoyes them, but they do not enjoy themselves. Solomon tells us,
Eccles. 6. 2. of a man, to whom God has given Riches, but not power, to eat
thereof. Such a man, is a very Slave to what he has, and cannot find in his
heart, to serve himself with it. They suffer the world to eat out their very
hearts, with Cares, and Troubles, and Thoughtfulness, so that they enjoy not
themselves. Know this, that a quiet, and a comfortable enjoyment, of a man's
self in a condition, is a good, and a sweet thing.

2. Concerning an Afflicted condition. How many are there, that do not enjoy,
but lose themselves in that condition? There are many, when they are losers in
the world, do lose themselves to both, by their Impatiency, Murmuring, and
Fretfulness. Our Savior says, Luke 21. 19. In your patience, possess ye your
Souls, (i. e.) possess ye your Selves. It tells us, that an impatient man,
does not possess, nor enjoy himself. It is with an impatient man, as it is with
some children, when you anger them, by taking away what they have in one hand,
they throw away, what they have in the other hand too. Thus Satan tempts some,
to throw away themselves, when they find, that other things are taken away; and
so they lose themselves in a condition. Let me tell you, that condition, in
which a man enjoyes Himself, is good; in which he enjoyes his Reason, and
regulates his Affections, and Passions by it. As Solomon said, That in the
midst of his Aberrations, his Wisdom remained with him. (i. e.) he had his
Judgment, and Understanding about him. We should bring our Affections, and
Passions, to the Examination of Judgment, and Reason. If he rejoice, it
teaches him, to put this question to himself, What reason have I for it? And
if he grieve, What reason have I for it? Is the thing worth my joy? and worth
my sorrow? So, to close up this, enjoyment of a man's self, consists in this, in
a sweet tranquillity of Spirit, and temper of Soul; which neither Prosperity,
nor Adversity can alter. It is an equal Mind, in unequal Conditions.

12. This makes a condition good for us in this life, Our Adorning our
Condition. There are many, that are a shame to their conditions, doing that,
which is unbeseeming their condition. No man need to be ashamed of his
condition, if he be not a shame, to his condition. The Apostle speaks of
Adorning our Generation, Phil. 2. 15. Among whom, ye Shine as Lights, in the
midst of a crooked Generation. So should a man adorn his condition: Though it
be Dark, yet he should Shine in it.

Quest. Wherein stands the Adorning of a man's Condition?

Answ. In the Exercising and Acting the Graces of a Condition. The Stars in the
Firmament, are an Ornament to it. So the Firmament of our Conditions, has its
Graces to Adorn it; the shining forth of which, is the Adorning of the
condition. There are prosperity-Graces, and adversity-Graces, and the acting of
these Graces, is the adorning of the condition. A prosperous condition has its
graces, by the acting and exercising of which, a gracious Heart does Adorn it.
So an Afflicted condition, has its Graces, which adorn it. It is sad to see,
how many are a shame, to their conditions; there being no appearance of grace,
shining forth, suitable to their condition. We must know, as all Relations, and
Conditions, have their Duties, so their Graces. Magistracy has it is: They must
be men, fearing God, Ruling in the fear of God, hating Covetousness. Ministry
has it is Graces, As the Apostle shows at large, in his Epistle to Timothy:
Which Graces, are for the Adorning of their Professions. So conditions have
their Graces too, by which they are Adorned. A thankful Spirit, and a public
Spirit, and a bountiful, and enlarged heart, adorn a Prosperous Condition. As
on the contrary, a patient, and meek, and humble Spirit, submitting wholly, to
the Will of God, adorns an Afflicted Condition. As a man by Unthankfulness, and
Self-seeking, etc. shames a Prosperous Condition: So some, by their Impatiency,
and Fretting, and Murmuring, etc. shame an Afflicted Condition: Of whom, we may
say, They shame their conditions, and their conditions are a shame of them. How
many are there, that have made their condition to be evil spoken of, by being a
shame to their condition.

Thus I have finished the first sort of General Directions, concerning what is
to be known of those, that will make a right Judgment of Conditions.

2. I now come to give you in, General Directions, concerning what is to be
done, by those that will make a right Judgment of conditions.

1. He that will make a right judgment of his condition, must be much in
inquiring of the Lord by prayer, what his mind, and meaning is in a condition.
As prayer is the means, by which we come to know the mind and meaning of God,
in his Word, so also in his Works, and so in those conditions he puts us into.
We read of Jeremiahs inquiry, concerning the prosperous condition of the
wicked, Jer. 12. 1. Why does the way of the wicked prosper? We are indeed, to
take heed, of putting absolute Interrogatories to God; as if he were bound, to
give an account of His Providence to us. Yet we may lawfully go to Him, in a
humble way, to see what is His Mind, and Meaning in a Dispensation, and in a
Condition. It is our Duty, to get as near God as we can, to know this. This is
one thing, Job, in his Afflicted condition, did desire of God, Job. 10. 2. Show
me, wherefore thou contendest with me. (i e.) what this Affliction means?
whether it proceed from love, or hatred? whether it intend good, or evil? Are
you in a prosperous condition, and would you make a judgment of it, whether it
be good for you? Or in an Afflicted condition? The way to make a judgment of
your condition, is, to be much in seeking to God by prayer, to know His mind,
and meaning in a condition. Although the Apostle speaks of prayer, as a Duty,
most suitable to an Afflicted condition, Jam. 5. 13. If any among you be
afflicted, let him pray. Yet let me tell you, Prayer is a duty, that suits with
every condition. As we are to enquire into the meaning of God, concerning
Afflictions, so concerning a Prosperous condition: if he puts us into it, we
are to beg of Him, the interpretation of the condition. Many there be, that
never say, as Rebecca did, Why am I thus? In these enquiries concerning
conditions, we must know, we are not so much, to enquire after the reasons of
Gods dealing so with us, as of our duty, what we are to do in that condition.
So then, prayer is a means, by which we must come to make a judgment of our
condition. We should get as near God as we can, to hear what He speaks
concerning our condition. As it is the Psalmist's expression, Psalm. 85. 8. I
will hark, what the Lord will speak. So we should harken, What the Lord will
speak, concerning our condition. There is no man, can give a right judgment of
an earthly condition, till he hear something from Heaven, concerning it. There
was of old, this custom among the Romans, That it was not lawful, to propose
any matter of moment in the Senate, priusquam de Caelo observatum erat, before
their Wizzards had made their Observations from the Sky, and Heavens. What they
did Impiously, and Superstitiously, we ought to do Piously, in respect of
conditions ( viz.) Not to make a judgment of them, till we have heard from
Heaven, concerning them. It is not by the observation of the houses of the
Planets, or their Aspects, or their Oppositions, or Conjunctions; such an
observation is forbid by a voice from Heaven. But we are to hearken, what the
Lord speaks to us, concerning our conditions; and Prayer is the means, by
which (though we are on earth) we have an answer from Heaven. The Jews had two
means, by which they received Answers from God. First, by the Mouth of the
Prophets, when the Spirit came upon them. Secondly, by the Priests, when they
put on the Breast Plate of Judgment. Those ways of Understanding the Mind of
God, are ceased. We have the Word to go to, and Prayer, to make use of, Jam. 1.
5. If any man lack Wisdom, let him ask of God. The Apostle speaks there, of a
man in an Afflicted condition, and speaks to such in an Afflicted condition, as
those that need Wisdom, both for the managing of their condition, and for the
making a right judgment of it. He tells them, what they must do, they must
ask this Wisdom of God. It is as if the Apostle should say, When you are in
such a condition, you need wisdom.

1. Wisdom, to discern God's end in it, and to find out the meaning of God, in
a Dispensation. When we receive outward good things, from the Hand of God, or
Afflictions, whether it be for good, or evil; It tends much, to the quieting,
and and satisfying our Spirits in a condition, when we can find out, what is
God's end in it.

2. Wisdom, to find out our duty in a condition. There are seasonable, and
proper duties, which belong to, and become every providence and dispensation.
Now here is Wisdom, to find them out, and to know what we have to do in our
condition. It is said of the men of Issachar, 1 Chronicles. 12. 32. They had
understanding of the times, and knew what Israel ought to do. So, there is
wisdom required of a man, to know what to do in every condition. As one, being
invited to a Feast, asked the Philosopher, who was his Tutor, How he should
behave himself; Remember thou art a King's Son, (i. e.) Behave thy self, as
becomes thy Birth, and Dignity. So here is Wisdom, to know the duties of our
condition, and accordingly to behave our selves.

3. Wisdom, to regulate, and moderate our affections, and passions, in a
condition. That a man be not too much taken with the comforts, nor too much
troubled with the crosses of a condition. Now for the attaining of this Wisdom,
the Apostle gives this Direction, that we must ask of God.

2. He that will make a judgment of his condition, must be much in searching
himself, to see what he is in a condition. I have said before, The condition is
to be judged of by the person, and that conditions are to men, as they are to,
and in, their conditions. Here is the mistake of many, they go to make a
judgment of their conditions, before they make a judgment of themselves. Our
Savior speaks, in Mat. 7. 3, 4. of them that see a Mote in their Brothers
eye, and discern not the Beam that is in their own eye. They would go about to
reform others, before they reform themselves. Thus some would go to make a
judgment of conditions, before they make a judgment of themselves; and that
Ignorance is a Beam in their eyes, that keeps them from discerning a condition.
There are some (as I have showed you) to whom every condition is a Curse; and
some, to whom every condition is a Blessing. The great thing we are to do, is,
to see of which number we are. Psalm. 77. we find Ver. 1, 2. David was in an
Afflicted condition, and see what he does in that condition. First, he sought
the Lord, Ver. 2. In the day of my trouble I sought the Lord. He made his
Addresses to God. Secondly, he fell upon a search of himself, Verse. 6. I
communed with my own heart, and my spirit made diligent search. Where we see,
he both sought the Lord, and searched Himself. So that before a man can make a
perfect judgment of a condition, there must be a searching of himself. There
must be a communing with his own heart. We must understand our selves, before
we can understand our condition. Eccles. 9. 2. No man knows love or hatred,
by what is before him. When a man looks only upon the outward Dispensation, (
viz.) Riches, and Honor, on the one hand; and Crosses, and Afflictions on the
other: A man may pore upon these, all the days of his life, and yet be never
the wiser; he may stare on them, till his eyes drop out, and yet not know,
whether they are good, or evil for him, whether they speak love or hatred. But
then you will ask, What should a man do in this case, that he may know? He must
not look so much on things without him, as things within him; he must not so
much eye, what his condition is, as what he is in his condition. It is not for
a man to look what God does without, but he must look what God has done within
him; to know the meaning of an outward Dispensation. Has God made you one of
His? has He shed his Love abroad in your hearts? has He given you, the New
Name, which none knows, but he that has it? have you, the Engravings of
Heaven on your Spirits? have you Love to Jesus, written upon your hearts? and
Holiness to Jehovah, upon your Foreheads? By this, you may know the meaning of
a condition. As it was said of Luther, That he knew, what was done in Heaven,
by what was done in his own heart. Much more may we know the meaning of what is
done on earth, by what is done within us. The outward Dispensation is dumb, and
says nothing of it self, in respect of Love and Hatred; it is something within
a man, that must speak that. There is an expression, Psalm. 25. 14. The Secret
of the Lord, is with them that fear Him, and he will show them His Covenant. We
must know, in Gods Dispensations, there is a Secret; a Secret of Love, and a
Secret of Hatred, and this lies hid in the Dispensation; so that a man, may
look long enough upon the outward dispensation, and not see the Secret, that is
in the dispensation. Now the Godly Man, and he that fears God, knows this
Secret of a Dispensation. God shows such a one His Covenant, so that he finds
all coming in by Covenant, let it be what it will, whether outward Blessings,
or outward Afflictions. In a word, Those that will make a judgment of their
outward condition, must know, that all is Good, to those that are Good; and all
is Evil, to those that are Evil. Wrath, and Hatred, and Hell, are written on a
wicked Man's outward mercies, and on a wicked Man's outward miseries. Hell is
Engraven, on the very Toothache of a Reprobate. As on the contrary, Love is
written, not only upon the Mercies, but also upon the Miseries, of a Godly Man.
Blessedness is engraven upon his Afflictions, and Persecutions. So you see,
that he, who will make a judgment of his condition, must first make a judgment
of himself.

3. He that will make a judgment of his outward condition, must be sure, to
take a right view of his condition. The not doing this, is one great reason,
why so many have been so grossly mistaken about conditions, calling Good, Evil;
and Evil, Good. We know, when a man's judgment is asked, concerning the goodness
and value of a thing, he will first view it, before he gives his judgment of
it. So we must do concerning conditions, view, before we judge. But you will
ask, How may a man come to take a right view of his condition, that he be not
mistaken about it? For Answer to that, take these Directions.

1. He that will take a right view of a condition, must view it by Scripture
Light. David was mistaken, about conditions, till he went into the Sanctuary,
and by the Light there, he saw, what he did not before discern. Many men, set
up false lights, and view conditions by them, ( viz.) the Judgment and Opinions
of others, and their own Apprehensions and Imaginations; These are Glasses,
through which, many look upon conditions, which make but false Representations.
Some tell us, In the Optics, there is a Glass, that will represent a foul
dirty way, so green and pleasant, as if it were covered with Carpets. Through
such false Glasses, do many view their conditions. There are Magnifying
Glasses, that will represent the Object, far bigger then it is; that will make
a small Fly, seem a Hornet; a Straw, a Staff; and a grain of Mustard Seed, a
Bean. Such a Glass, a man's own apprehension, and imagination is, in the viewing
of his condition. They make the things of a condition, seem bigger to us, then
they are. Thus sometimes, the comforts of a condition, and the crosses of a
condition, are represented to us, bigger than they are. Now, he that will take
a right view of a condition, must lay aside these false lights and glasses, and
must view his condition; by Scripture Light. And that for these reasons:
1. The Scripture will help a man, to make a true discovery of the things of a
condition. The Scripture gives us the best account of what the things of a
prosperous condition are, ( viz.) Riches and Honor, etc. And it gives us the
best account, what Losses, and Crosses, and Afflictions are. As for the first,
The Scripture tells us, They are all but Vanity. And that the best things of
this world, stand upon two lame Legs, ( viz.) Uncertainty, and Insufficiency.
Nay, it is observable, it does not tell us the vanity of outward things, only
Notionally, but delivers it to us as a Truth, that has been Experimented and
Tried, by those who both had a Will, and also Ability, to make the Experiment.
Thus you find Solomon did; and, in the Book of the Ecclesiastes, we have him,
giving in his Experiments, concerning the best of outward things, in this short
Sentence, All is vanity. And then for Afflictions, the Scripture sets up a
Light for us, for the taking a right view of them. And tells us, what
Verdicts have been passed, by those who have had Trials of them. Among others,
David, who said, It was good for him, that he was Afflicted. To close this:
Scripture Light, in respect of this particular, must needs be a great advantage
to a man, in his taking a view of his condition.

2. The Scripture will help us to view a condition, by discovering to us, What
those things are, that make a condition good, and without which a condition is
not good. The Scripture is much, in making out to men, what it is, that is good
indeed. Solomon, in his Ecclesiastes, shows the mistakes of men, concerning
Happiness, and makes it appear by Experience, that it did not lie in Honors,
or Pleasures, or Riches, etc. And Observe how he closes his Book, with a
discovery of that, wherein man's Happiness lies, Chap. 12. 13. Hear the
conclusion of the whole matter, Fear God, and keep his Commandments, for this
is the whole duty of man. It is the Totum hominis, the whole, and the All of
man. The Scripture, does not only discover to men, what the good and evil of
this world is; but also, what it is, that is good indeed, without which, a
condition is not good, and with which, a condition is not evil. It shows a
man, That, without controversy, this is good for a man in this life, ( viz.)
Pardon, and Peace, and Union with God, and an Interest in Jesus Christ, etc.
Thus the Scripture helps a man, in viewing, by directing him to discover,
what is good indeed, and makes a condition good to a man. It holds out a clear
light to a man, by which he may find out, what it is, that speaks his condition
good. Augustine said, of Tullies Works, They were once sweet to him, but now he
found, no sweetness in them, because he found not Jesus, mentioned in them. The
Scripture directs us, in the viewing of a condition, to do, as a man does, when
he comes into a Richly-furnished-Shop, seeking after some rare piece of ware;
though many be brought to his hand, yet he lays them all aside, till he find
the piece he desires, and looks for. So it is in viewing the good of a
condition, the Scripture will direct a man, to lay all aside, till he come to
discern, that which is good indeed. In a prosperous condition, when Honor, and
Riches, etc. come to hand, it teaches him, to put the question to himself, Are
there not better things then these? So in an Afflicted condition, it teaches a
man, to lay his Crosses, and Troubles, and Afflictions aside, and to put the
question to himself, Whether there be not greater evils than those? And whether
evils of Sinning, be not greater, than evils of Suffering. The Scripture
teaches a man, to view a condition, as Samuel did the Sons of Jesse, to find
out David, whom the Lord had chosen. Jesse brings forth his Eldest Son, Samuel
said, That is not he: he then, brought his seven Sons before him, And Samuel
answered, Neither has the Lord chosen any of these: and then he comes to
David, who was the man looked after. In taking a view view of conditions, we
must know, the Rule is this, In viewing a Prosperous Condition, you may see
Honor, and Riches, and other things of the world, passing by you; But, put
them by, bid them stand aside: Tell them, They are not the things, that make a
man happy. So, in the taking a view, of an Afflicted condition, many evils may
present themselves to us; But the Scripture tells us, That these are not the
evils, that we are to look upon, as the worst of evils.

3. The Scripture does thus help us, in taking a view of our conditions; It
unvayles conditions, and unfoldeth the Mysteries of a Condition; without which,
a man cannot take a right view, nor make a right judgment of his condition. We
find David, stumbling at the prosperity of Wicked men, and at the adversity of
Godly Men; He knew not, what to think of it, When he saw waters of a full cup,
wrung out to the one, and waters of Affliction to the other; he began to think,
that he was on the wrong side, and that he had made a wrong choice: And these
words were coming out of his mouth, That he had cleansed his heart in vain. (i.
e.) He was about to say, It was in vain for him, and others, to be Godly, if
thus they were dealt with, in this life; if they must be afflicted, and
chastned, while wicked men have, what heart can wish. Now, how came David, to
have his Judgment rectified, concerning these Dispensations of God? He tells
us, He went into the Sanctuary, and there he understood the Mystery of these
Dispensations: There he found the Riddle Unfolded, and these Providence
Unvayled. The Word of God, will help us, to Interpret the Works of God. It will
help us to see within the vayl of a condition, and to see the Wheel within the
wheel. It will teach us, not only to look on the Motions of the wheels without,
but will show us, the Motions of the Wheels within. Jer. 12. 1. he puts the
question, Why does the way of the Wicked prosper? He viewed their condition,
and wondered at it. It was a mystery to him, that such men should prosper, that
did deal very Treacherously. The Prophet did not at first understand the
Mystery; Had he gone into the Sanctuary, he would have found, The way of the
wicked did not prosper. And he found it afterward, as appears verse. 3. Pull
them out, as Sheep for the Slaughter, etc. q. d. Lord, I partly see into the
Mystery of this Dispensation; I find that their prosperity, is but a preparing
them, for the day of Slaughter. That thou do deal with them, as men do with
those Beasts they intend for the Slaughter; They put them into the fattest
Grounds, and the best Pastures. Scripture teaches a man, in viewing a
condition, to view it upon both sides: and indeed, till a man do so, he will
never make a right view of a condition. Conditions are like that Cloud, by
which God guided the Children of Israel through the Wilderness; they have their
bright, and their black side. Some in viewing a condition, look only upon it is
bright side, when the condition may have a black side. So, some in viewing a
prosperous condition, look only upon the bright side, whereas, if they looked
upon the other side, they would find it black, and dismal. So concerning an
adverse condition, some look only upon the black side, and see nothing but what
is sad; whereas, if they looked upon the other side of their condition, they
might see It Bright, and Gilded with Love.

4. By Scripture Light, we see another thing, ( viz.) How to improve a
condition. We can never take a right view of a condition, till we view It with
it is Improvements. It is in viewing, and making a judgment of conditions, as it
is in a Husband-man's viewing of Lands; He considers, Whether they are to be
Improved. Though they seem Bare, and Barren, yet he considers, Whether they
may not be improved to be worth so much an Acre. So, the right viewing of
conditions, is, to view them, with their Improvements. Now the Scripture
helps us in this particular.

1. It will show us, How the Saints of Old, improved their conditions. How they
Husbanded, both Prosperous, and Adverse Conditions, and what they made of them.
And thus it helps us, to view a condition with It Is Improvements. As the
Scripture shows us, What the Saints of Old, were in their several
Generations, so what they were in their several Conditions; when they were
High, and Low; Rich, and Poor. It shows us, How Job Improved his Condition,
when he was Job the Wealthy, and Honorable; And how he Improved his condition,
when he was Job the Miserable and Afflicted. It shows us, what David made of
his condition, when he was David the King, and when he was David the
Persecuted. Plutarch wrote a Treatise, to show, How a man might get profit by
an Enemy. The Scripture is nuch in showing us, how to make profit of
conditions, and that by setting before us, the Improvements that others have
made of them.

2. The Scripture teaches us, the Art of improving them. It not only shows
us, that they are improvable, but withal shows us, how we may improve them.
There is a Story of a Roman, who was Accused of Witchcraft; The Reason given
was this, That when his Neighbors Land brought forth little, his brought forth
abundantly, though there was but a hedge betwixt them. So this was the Charge,
That by Witchcraft, he drew all the Strength, and Fatness of their Soil into
his, and by that means, Enriched his own Land, and Impoverished theirs: Being
brought before the Judges, be brought forth all the Tools, and Instruments,
which he used in the Tilling, and Manuring of his Land: and answered, Haec sunt
veneficia mea, These are my Witch-crafts; And withal, told his Judges, I am at
Work, when my Neighbors are asleep; I Work, when they Play: They are
negligent, and use not that kind of Husbandry that I do; and this is the true
Reason, why my Crop exceeds theirs. Concerning conditions, it is thus, There is
such an Art of improving them, that some may be great Gainers, when others get
nothing by them. This Art the Scripture teaches us, How to make a Spiritual
Advantage of Temporal Conditions. This is an Art, that Philosophy teaches not.
Indeed, Philosophy teaches the Art of Moral improvements of conditions, but
not Spiritual; Scripture only teaches that. Alchymists tell us, There is an
Art, of turning Baser Mettalls, into Gold. Philosophy goes thus far, to teach
us the Art, of turning conditions (as I may say) into Brass, or Copper, or
Silver; but it can never teach us the Art, of turning them into Gold; The
Scripture only teaches that. Whosoever reads the Works of Tully, Seneca, and
others of that sort, shall find indeed, excellent Directions, for the Moral
improvement of conditions; but as for a Spiritual improvement, they tell you
nothing. That was above their reach, and their light did not attain unto it.
Now this great Art, the Scripture teaches; it teaches a man the Art, of
making Thorns, bear Grapes; and of making Thistles, bear Figgs. ( i. e.) When
a condition is Thorny, and Prickly, the Scripture shows a man, that he may
gather sweet and pleasant Fruit, from the Thorns, and Thistles, of his
Condition. As the Apostle says, Heb. 12. 11. That Affliction yields the
quiet Fruit of Righteousness. Where you see Thorns, bearing Grapes. In a word,
The Scripture teaches a man the Art, of Sailing by the Wind of a Condition,
let it blow from what quarter it will. It is reported, That those that Sail
into the Indies, find in some places, the Winds blow constantly for six Months
one way, and for the other six Months, quite contrary. Let the Wind of a
condition, blow which way it will, either from the North, or from the South;
yet the Scripture teaches a Christian, the skill of setting his Sails so, as
that they shall further him in his Voyage toward Heaven.

5. By Scripture Light, a man comes to discern the dangers of a condition. To
discover what Rocks, and Shelves, are in the Sea of every condition, that he
may know how to avoid them. A man can never take a right view of a condition,
till he has viewed it, with it is Dangers, Snares, and Temptations. Of these,
the Scripture makes a Discovery two ways.

1. By way of Caution. So it Cautionates men, concerning the dangers of a
Condition, both Prosperous and Adverse. As you may see, Deuteronomy. 6. 11, 12. and
Deuteronomy. 8. 11, 12, 13. When thou have eaten, and art full; Take heed thou forget
not the Lord thy God. Forgetfulness of God, is that, that is to be taken heed
of in a prosperous condition. The Scripture is frequent in giving such
Cautions, 1 Timothy 6. 17. Psalm. 62. 10. Jer. 9. 23. Let not the Rich Man glory in
his Riches, etc.

2. The Scripture presents us, with the Examples of those, that have
miscarried, and fallen by their conditions. It shows us, against what Rocks,
some in their Sailing, have dashed their Ships. Deuteronomy. 32. 15. Jesurun waxed
fat, and kicked. Neh. 13. 26. we find how Solomon miscarried in his Prosperity.
Nebuchadnezzar said in that condition, Dan. 4. 30. Is not this great Babel that
I have built, etc? In Scripture, you have the Saints set out to us, as in their
Graces, so in their Sins. You have heard (says the Apostle) of the patience of
Job; so from the same Scripture, we hear likewise of his impatiency. As it
acquaints us with the pride of Israel, when they were in their prosperity; so
with their murmuring, and repining, when they were in adversity. 2 Chronicles. 32.
25. it is said of Hezechiah, After he was recovered, that he rendered not again,
according to what the Lord had done to him; for his heart was lifted up.

6. Scripture Light, discovers another thing concerning Conditions; And that
is this, What are the Alloys, and Correctives, of a Condition; without the
knowledge of which, we can never take a right view of Conditions. On the one
hand, the pleasantness of a condition may deceive us; and, on the other hand,
the seeming ill-favouredness of a condition, may make us mistaken, in making a
judgment of it. The Scripture discovers this to us, What are the true
Correctives of a Condition? What may allay the Sweetness, and Pleasantness of
Prosperity, that they be not too much lifted up? And what will correct the
bitter ingredients of an Afflicted Condition, that they be not too much
dejected and cast down? It is sometimes with men in conditions, as it is with
those that go to Sea, of whom the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 107. 26. They mount
up to the Heavens, and they go down again to the depths. So it is in
conditions. A man in a prosperous condition, when the waters of a condition are
full, he is apt to be high, and high-minded: But he must know, waters of a
condition may fall, and that conditions have their depths. There are the full
Tides, and the Ebbs of a condition. It is sometimes full Sea with a man; the
comforts of a condition, flow in a pace, and then a man is apt to be lifted up.
And then there is the ebb of a condition, when there is a decrease, and
diminishing of those comforts; and then men are apt to faint, and be cast down.
Now, Scripture Light discovers to us, what helps we have in this case. We
know how it is with Fishermens Nets, They have Lead, to make them sinck; and
they have Cork at them, to make them swim. And both these are in Scripture, put
upon outward conditions.

1. For a Prosperous Condition, There is Lead put upon it, to keep a man Low,
and Humble; and to Sink him in that condition. The Scripture tells us, of the
Vanity of Riches, and Honor, etc. It tells us, of the Brevity, Uncertainty,
and Insufficiency, that is in the Best of outward things. Withal, it acquaints
us, with the Temptations, Cares, Troubles, Disquietments, wherewith those
things are attended. It tells us, That the increasing of them, is but the
increasing of Vanity, and Vexation of Spirit. Again, it tells us this, That a
man's happiness lies not in them; that a man may have them, and yet be
miserable; and that, being vanity, they cannot cure a man's vanity. Now this is
some of the Lead, that the Scripture puts to a prosperous condition, to keep
men low, and humble in it. The consideration of these things, are as Ballast to
a Ship, which makes it Sail eevenly, and steadily. When a man is in a
prosperous condition, his spirit is apt to be lifted up; and so it needs
Ballast, to keep it from Fleeting at random, upon the waters of prosperity. Now
the Scripture is much in showing, what it is that should keep the Spirit low,
in a high condition. Thus, 1 Timothy 6. 17. Charge them that are Rich in this
world, that they be not high-minded; and that they trust not in uncertain
Riches. (Observe); There is the Ballast, and there is the Lead, to keep down
the Spirit in a Rich condition, ( viz.) They are uncertain Riches, 1 Cor. 7.
29, 30, 31. Brethren, the time is short, and the fashion of this world passes
away. q. d. Remember, The time is short, for your enjoying of the comforts of
this life, and the fashion of the world goes away; the world is upon Gate; and
Marrying, and Buying, and Selling, etc. will shortly have an end. I shall close
this, with that place, Jam. 1. 10. Let the Rich rejoice, in that he is made
low; The Expositions of the place are diverse, but without doubt, the meaning of
the Apostle is this, (when he says) Let him that is Rich, rejoice in this,
that he is made low. That is, There is no Rich man, but has reason to be low,
and humble, if he does rightly consider his condition. And that this is the
meaning, appears by the following words, For as the flower of Grass he shall
pass away. i. e. The beauty and glory of his condition, is but fading, and
vanishing, like the Flower of Grass. Here is Lead, to make the Spirit sinck, in
a high and prosperous Condition. 2. Concerning an Adverse Condition, There the
Scripture comes in with Cork, to make it Swim, and to keep up the Spirit of a
man in that condition. That we may not be too much cast down; it has it is
Correctives for the crosses of a condition, and somewhat to allay the
bitterness of such a condition. It presents us with somewhat, that helps to
keep the head above water, and to keep a man from drowning, when the waters of
Affliction overflow. Scripture puts somewhat under, to hold up the Spirit in
that condition; ( viz.) Promises, and Comforts, suited to such a Condition;
With God's End in Afflicting; With the sweet Fruit of Afflictions; With what
Good many have gotten by their Conditions; With what Afflictions are, being
compared with the Glory that is to be Revealed. These considerations are as
Cork, that the Scripture puts to an Adverse Condition. 2 Cor. 1. 5. As our
Sufferings for Christ abound in us, so our Consolations through Christ abound.
Those Consolations are Cork to the Condition. The Apostle says, Jam. 1. 9. Let
the Brother of low degree rejoice, in that he is exalted. He speaks there, to
Christians that were in a low, and Suffering condition. And see, there was
Cork, to make them hold up their heads, and swim in that condition; (says the
Apostle) he is Exalted. According to to the Original it is, (...), in his
sublimity, being a brother, he is a Member of Christ. And the Apostle sets
before Christians, the Dignity and Honor of their Spiritual Estate; to
Counter-poyse the Misery, and Obscurity of Afflictions. Thus the Scripture
shows a man, How he may be preserved from the dangers, of the heights and
depths of conditions; that neither prosperity may lift him up too high, nor
adversity cast him down too low; but that a Christian may have an equal Spirit,
in unequal conditions. There is nothing we have in a Prosperous Condition, but
we have it by Divine Donation: And why should a Christian then be lifted up,
when he has nothing but what he has received? And there is nothing befalls
us in an Afflicted Condition, but what is by Divine Ordination; and why should
we then fret at it? To close this, The Scripture teaches a man, how to keep
himself Sober in Prosperity, that he be not overcome with the Sweet and
Pleasant Wine of that Condition: And also, Sober in Adversity, that he be not
overcome with the Gall and Wormwood of that Condition. The Scripture speaks
of a Drunkenness, that is incident to an Afflicted condition, Isa. 51. 21. Hear
thou this, thou Afflicted, and Drunken, but not with Wine.
Thus for the First Direction, for the taking a right View of Conditions. It
must be done by Scripture Light.

CHAP. X.
II. HE that will take a right View of a Condition, must take a right Standing
for the Viewing of it. Conditions must be viewed at a due and convenient
Distance. It is in the viewing of a Condition, as it is in the viewing of a
Picture; the Art in Drawing, is best discerned at some convenient distance. The
reason why many are mistaken about their Conditions, is, Their setting their
Conditions too near them, when they take a View of them. Thus they set the
Comforts of a condition, and the Crosses of a condition, so near to them, that
they cannot take a right View of them. It is with men, in this Case, as it is
with a man in the midst of a great Wood, or in the midst of a great City. When
he is at some distance from them, he has a fuller View of them, than when he
was in the midst of them, because his sight is bounded, and terminated, that he
can see but a little way. He sees, it may be, but a Street, or some part of a
Street; When, being but at some convenient Distance from the City, and having a
little advantage of Ground, he has a full view of the City, in respect of
Greatness, Length, Circuit, etc. Thus it is, in respect of conditions; When a
man is in the midst of the comforts of a condition, in the midst of his Honor,
Wealth, and Prosperity, he sees but a little way, and cannot take a full View
of his condition. So it is, when a man is in the midst of his Crosses, and
Afflictions, he discerns but a little of his condition. And thus, not taking
a right View of their Conditions, they make a false Judgment of them. Solomon
has a passage, Prove. 18. 1. Through desire, a man having separated himself,
seeks, or intermedleth, with all wisdom. The words are diversely interpreted.
In the Margin we read thus, He that separateth himself, seeks according to
his desire, and intermedleth in every business. The meaning seems to be this,
That a man, that seeks after Wisdom and Knowledge, has his retirements; His
desire of Wisdom, makes him sometimes come off from his secular employments,
and set them at a distance from him. It makes him sequester himself from all
his worldly Businesses, that he may seek after Wisdom; and that he may be the
freer for Study, and Meditation, and a consideration of things, What they are.
Thus it is, in respect of Conditions. If a man will take a right View of his
condition, and will get Wisdom, to make a judgment of it; he must, for a while,
(as I may say) separate himself from it, and look upon it at some Distance. The
Apostle gives this Direction, for the taking of a right View of conditions, 1
Cor. 7. 29, 30, 31. Let those that have Wives, be as though they had none; and
they that Rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; and they that Possess, as
though they possessed not, etc. This shows us, that then we take a right View
of things, when we look on them at a distance. Those things are worst seen,
that we are on the same side with. An House is best viewed, when we are on the
other side the Street. So it is in respect of Conditions; we should view the
condition, as though we were not in the condition. And so for an Afflicted
condition, we should view it at a distance. Let them (says the Apostle) that
weep, be as though they wept not. Thus the best view of a condition, is, To
look upon a condition, to view it upon the other side of the Street, to view it
at a Distance. It is oftentimes Self in a condition, that hinders from taking
a right View of a condition. If we could separate our selves from our
Conditions, and look upon them, as other men's Conditions, and not our own, we
should take the better View of them. There was a Nobleman of this Nation, who
had three of his Sons drowned together in the River of Trent: The Father had
not, as yet, received the sad tidings of their Deaths. It was thought good he
should be prepared for the tidings, before they came. Upon this account, was
that Learned, and Prudent Prelate, Bishop King, desired to go to him. He very
wisely managed the business. He did not, at first, tell the Nobleman what was
befallen him; but fell upon a General discourse of an Afflicted condition, and
so gave the Nobleman a view of his condition afar off. The Nobleman assented to
all the Bishop said, and answered, That if God should bring him into such a
condition, he did hope, he should be content, and submit to His will. Upon
this, the Bishop brings the condition nearer to him, and puts this Question
to him: Admit the Lord should take from you, your worldly Enjoyments, your
outward Comforts; and should break off the Olive-Branches from about your
Table. The Nobleman answered, That he hoped he should be therewith content.
Upon this, the Bishop came nearer, and told him, It was his condition, That his
Sons were drowned; and therefore desired him to do as he had said* If he had,
at first, showed him what was his condition, he had been at a loss, in taking
a View of it. Herein was the Prudence of the Bishop seen, In giving him a View
of it at a distance. So the best way for the taking a right View of conditions,
is, To view them at a distance.

Thus for the general Directions, concerning What is to be Known Done
by those, That will make a Judgment of Conditions.
I come now to the Particular Directions, Concerning the making a Judgment of
Conditions: And so, how a man may know, What is good for him in this life. So
here we are to show, How a man may make a Judgment, both of a Prosperous, and
Adverse Condition.

1. Concerning the making a Judgment of a Prosperous condition. The Question
is this:

Question. How may a Man know, That a Prosperous condition is good for a man in
this Life?

Answ. By these things a Man may know it.

1. If outward prosperity, be no hindrance, to Inward and Spiritual Prosperity.
It was the Wish of St. John, concerning Gaius, 3. Epist. V. 2. I wish thou
may Prosper and be in Health, even as thy Soul Prospers. Some think, that
Gaius had a Sickly Body, but an Healthy Soul. The contrary is seen by many,
They have Healthy, and Prospering Bodies, but Unhealthy, and Unprospering
Souls. Thus it is with many, They have Prospering Estates, but Poor, and
Unprospering Souls. Their outward, eat up their inwards; As Pharaohs lean
Kine, did eat up the Fat. There are many, whose worldly Riches, do eat up their
Spiritual. Though they are Rich in the world, yet they are not Rich toward
God, and in respect of their Souls. How many are there, whom outward Fullness
causes to despise the Honeycomb of the Gospel? Remember this, When a man's
outward condition, is accompanied with the Soul's improsperity, it is naught
for him. When, in a prosperous condition, men are thoughtless of their Soul's
prosperity; This speaks a condition Evil for a man.

2. We may know it thus, If we use the things of a Prosperous Condition with
right Considerations, 1. Of their Changeableness. 2. Of their Dangerousness. 3.
Of their Usefulness. 4. Of their Inferiority. 5. Of their Emptiness. 6. Of our
own Mortality. 7. Of the Account to be given.


1. If we use them, with a right Consideration of their Changeableness. Some
there are, who, when they are set upon a Mountain of Prosperity, think their
Mountain to be so Strong, that it cannot be Removed. This was David's fault,
when he said in his Prosperity, He should never be removed, Job tells us,
That in the day of his Prosperity, he thought of Adversity. He looked upon the
things of his condition as changeable, and so he found them to be; when of the
Richest man in the East, he became the poorest man in the world. We must know,
The best things of a condition, are mutable: The Comforts of a condition, may
become Crosses. Children are looked upon as Comforts; And yet we read of
Augustus, that he had three Daughters, and that they proved such crosses to
him, that he was wont to call them, His Tria Carcinomata, His three Ulcers or
Botches: And he was often heard to say, Vtinam vel coelebs vixissem, vel orbus
periissem. Oh, that I had either lived Unmarried, or dyed Childless. It is then
right, When we use the things of a Prosperous Condition with right
Considerations of their Vanity, Brevity, Mortality, Mutability. There was an
Ambassador from a Great Prince, that had this Sentence Engraven upon his Watch,
which he read once every day, Favor may turn into Disfavour, and Grace into
Disgrace. But of this, I have spoken in a former Tract.

2. When we use the things of a prosperous condition, with the consideration of
their dangerousness; that they are things in which men Usually sin, and in
which they may Easily sin. When we consider, what snares and temptations attend
that condition; and thereupon, we become more watchful. But of this we have
spoken before, and shall but touch it here.

3. When we use the things of a condition, with the right consideration of
their Usefulness; that as they are things useful, so to consider, what use we
make of them. As they are easily made matter of sin, so they may be made matter
of duty. In this the excellency of a gracious heart is seen, in making Duty out
of that, out of which others make Sin. Luke 16. 9. Make you friends (says our
Savior) of the unrighteous Mammon. Where Riches are called Unrighteous Mammon,
as for other reasons so chiefly for this, Because they are the things that men
easily, and usually sin in. Yet our Savior shows, they have their
usefulness, When he says, Make you friends of them. So then, Would a man know,
whether prosperity be good for him; I would ask him this, What use he does make
of the things of a prosperous condition? Prosperity is to a man, as a man uses
it: 1 Cor. 7. 31. The Apostle speaks, of using the world, as not abusing it.
Now, a thing is then abused, when it is not put to the use for which it was
given; but put to wrong uses. Thus there is an abusing of the world, and the
things of a prosperous condition, when we put them to wrong uses. Thus, many
abuse their Honor, and abuse their Riches, etc. when they make this use of
them, To feed their lusts, to hearden their hearts against God and His Word, to
raise their Names and Families, to Oppress their Brethren, to make them proud,
and high-minded: This is making that use of them, that they were not given for;
and this is abusing them. God never gave these things, to be food for men's
lusts, to feed their pride, and to feed their covetousness. He never gave
Riches, and Honor, and Possessions to men, to make them proud, and
high-minded. Thus, many abuse the good things of this life; Their Wealth, their
Apparel, their very Meat, and Drink; by putting them to other uses then God
intended them for. As the Lord complains, Hos. 2. 8. She did not know, that I
gave her Corn, and Wine, and Oil, and multiplied their Silver, and their Gold,
which they prepared for Baal. They put those things to other uses, then God
intended them for. God never gave those things for that end, To serve Baal, and
their Idols with them. Thus we see, how the Lord tells Israel of her
mis-using, and abusing the things of her Prosperity, Ezekiel. 16. 10, 11, 12, 13.
He tells her, what He had done for her, how He had Clothed her with
Broidered Garments, and fine Linen, and Silk; He had decked her with
Ornaments, Chains, Bracelets, Jewels, and Gold; He gave her fine Flower, and
Honey, and Oil. Now see, to what uses she put these things, you shall find, to
such uses as God never intended them for; as you may see, Verse. 16, 17, 18, 19.
of the said Chapter, They bestowed all upon Idols. The Lord says, Jer. 7. 31.
Of their burning their Sons, and Daughters, in the fire, and Sacrificing them
to the Idols, that he commanded them not, neither came it into his heart. So we
may say, that many put the things of this life, to that Use that God never
commanded, neither ever intended. So then, in a prosperous condition, we should
put this Question to our selves, What use we make of the things of the
condition? In a prosperous condition, Two things are to be eyed by us, for the
making a right use of the things of the condition.

1. Precepts. 2. Patterns.
1. Precepts in the Scripture, commanding us to what use to put the things of a
prosperous condition. The Scripture abounds in them, Prove. 3. 9. Honor the
Lord with thy substance. Deuteronomy. 28. 47. where we may see, what is our Duty by
the Threatening. Because thou did not serve the Lord with joyfulness, and
gladness of heart, for the abundance of all things; Therefore, etc. Where see,
What is a man Duty when he is in a prosperous condition? It is this, When God
gives abundance of all things, that we should serve Him with joyfulness, and
gladness of heart. God does not give abundance to men, that they should live
more proudly, but that they should serve Him more cheerfully. When He enlarges
our estates, He expects the enlargment of our hearts toward Him in Duty, and
Service. 1 Timothy 6. 18. Charge them (says the Apostle) that are Rich in this
world, that they do good, and be ready to distribute, willing to communicate.
And Verse. 19. Laying up in store for themselves, a good Foundation, etc. Where
he shows, what uses men should put their Riches to, ( viz.) to do good with
them, to feed the hungry, to cloth the naked. And then, to lay up a good
Foundation for the time to come. Some men make only this use of their Riches,
to lay a foundation of Greatness for themselves, and families, and posterity,
for time to come in this world; but neglect laying a good foundation for
themselves to Eternity.

Thus for the Precepts of the Word, concerning the Use we should make of the
things of a prosperous condition*

2. We must eye Patterns, and see what uses the Saints have made of the things
of a prosperous condition. Thus you have David's example, 2 Samuel 7. 1. when God
had given him peace, and prosperity, he considers how he might honor God,
with what God had given him; and so resolves upon building a House for God:
And when he found it was the mind of God, that he should not do it, but his son
Solomon; he thereupon, did bequeath his Gold, and his Silver, to Solomon for
that use; and stirred up the Princes, and Nobles, to do the like, 1 Chronicles. 29.
12. Riches and Honor (says he) come from thee: and ver. 13. All things come
from Thee, and of Thine own have we given Thee. Thus you may see what use Job
made of the things his prosperity, Job 29. 12, 13, etc. You will there see,
what use he made of his Honor, Power, and Wealth.
4. When we use the things of a prosperous condition, with a right
consideration of their Inferiority, and Subordination, in relation to higher
things. This consideration, will keep us from setting our Hearts, and
Affections on them. It will make us set Honor and Riches, and the Best things
of this Life, upon the footstool, and not upon the throne of our Hearts. In a
prosperous condition, we are to set the things of it in their due place. Some
there are, who set them so high, as though they were the only things; when, as
they are but bona Scabelli, the good things of the Footstool. It is then Evil,
when we have a higher esteem of them, than we ought to have. Remember, These
are not the things that are to have the preneminence. The Apostle exhorts us,
Col. 3. 1. To those seek things that are Above; and ver. 2. To set our
affections on the things Above, and not on the things of the Earth. He speaks
there of two sorts of Things; There are (...), the things Above; And (...), or,
as the Apostle says, (...), the things of the Earth: And bids us Seek, and
set our affections upon the things that are Above. He uses two words, viz.
(...), which notes, seeking with the whole strength, and endeavor; And (...),
which notes, The minding of those things with the whole Soul. This shows, a
man is not to look upon the best things of this Life, as those things that are
the Best. They are to have no more degrees of Affection, then there are degrees
of Good in them. It was good Counsel, that one gave to a near Relation of mine,
concerning his Horse; When she saw him too much taken with him, she said, Sir,
love a Horse, as a Horse. So we should the Creature, but as the Creature; and
the things of the world, as the things that are inferior to the things of
another World. So, then it is right, when we use the Good things of this life,
with a consideration of their Inferiority.

5. When we use the things of a prosperous condition, with a right
consideration of their Emptiness and vanity. When your condition is fullest,
yet you look upon the things of your condition as empty, and that will not give
satisfaction to the Soul. As their Inferiority speaks them unsuitable, to the
spirit of man; so their emptiness, speaks them unsatisfactory. It is happy
with a man, when he is in a high condition, that he can look upon the things of
his condition, as low things; and when he is in a full condition, to look upon
all the things of this condition, as empty. When God changes our condition,
then (it may be) we can do it. Then we can say, Now I see, that Honor, and
Riches, are but vain and empty things. But it is best, when a man can, in the
height of his Prosperity, give such a Censure of them. When Gilimer, King of
the Vandals, was brought prisoner before Justinian, sitting in Majesty upon his
Throne, he cried out, Vanity of vanities, all is vanity. This he did, in his
Adverse Condition, when he stood prisoner at the Bar. They were the words of
Solomon; but uttered by him, when he was in the height of his Prosperity, and
when he sat upon the Throne. The consideration of the emptiness, and vanity,
that is in the best things of a prosperous condition, will keep a man from
taking up with them: It will keep a man from being deceived by them, as
promising more than they can perform. Our Savior speaks of the deceitfulness
of Riches, Mat. 13. 22. the Greek word, is, (...), the imposture, and fallacy
of Riches. It signifies, a drawing out of the way. So there is a deceitfulness
in the things of a prosperous condition; they are apt to draw a man out of the
way, to look for comfort, and contentment in them, when it is not to be found.
This consideration, will prevent those Dreams that a man is apt to have in that
Condition. As we read, Isai. 29. 8. of the dreams of the hungry and thirsty
man, that he Dreams he Eats and Drinks, but when he awakes, his Soul is empty.
Some there are, that Dream of contentment, and satisfaction in their condition,
that at last find it but a fantasy, and a dream. Those then, that would make
a Judgment of a prosperous condition, must put the question to themselves,
Whether they use the things of their condition, with a consideration of their
emptiness? We say of Wells, when they want Water, that they are empty, though
they may be full of other things; as Mud, and Sand, and Stones. So the best
things of this World, are but empty things; because they have not that in them,
that the Soul seeks after, and that will give satisfaction to the Soul. There
is no Satisfaction, where there is not Suitableness. These things were never
made for the Soul; and therefore they can no more satisfy it, than you can
fill a purse, or a chest, with Learning.

6. Do you use the things of a prosperous condition, with this consideration,
viz. Of your own Mortality? Then it is right, when we consider, As the brevity
of Worldly things, and that they have an end; so, when we consider our own ends
also, this consideration, will make us sober in the use of them. 1 Pet. 4. 7.
The Apostle exhorts to Sobriety, in the use of the things of this Life, upon
this ground, viz. The end of all things is at hand; be ye therefore Sober.
Where, by Sobriety, is meant, A moderate use of the things of this Life; and
the Motive to enforce it, is this, The end of all things is at hand: The end of
your worldly Enjoyments, the end of your Lives, and the end of the World it
self. This is the Misery, that many in a prosperous condition, as they consider
not, What the things of their condition are, viz. Corruptible, and Changeable;
so they consider not, What themselves are in their condition, viz. Frail, and
Mortal creatures. Some there are, that so use the things of this Life, as if
they should, for ever, live to Enjoy, and Use them. The Psalmist tells us,
What man is at his best estate, Psalm. 39. Surely every man, at his best estate,
is altogether Vanity. A prosperous condition is, then, Ill for a man, when it
makes him forget his own condition; and it is good for a man, when it holds an
agreement with a dying state. 1 Cor. 7. 29. Brethren, (says the Apostle) the
time is short, etc. As if he should say, You have but a short time to enjoy
these things, To enjoy Wives, and Possessions, and all the things of this Life:
As you know not how soon they may be taken from you, so you know not, how soon
you may be taken from them. The time is short. The time, in respect of the
things themselves, and their continuance, is short, and the time of your lives
is short. If those, that lived in the beginning of the world, gave themselves
so much to the building of Cities; it was not much to be wondered at, because
they had more time before them, then we have, who live in these latter ages.
They, by common course of nature, lived 500. 600. 700. years; but our time is
short, it is drawn into a narrow compass; And the consideration of this, will
help us to be sober, and moderate, in the use of the things of that condition;
and make us look upon Honor, and Riches, and Relations, as things that we must
shortly part with. It will help us, to use them with weaned affections, as a
Traveller does the pleasures of his Inn; he stands not to build himself a
house at every pleasant place he passes by; he considers, he is on his
Journey, going to his Home. It is good for a man in a prosperous condition, to
have thoughts of his Long-Home, whither he is going. So then, the great
question we should put to our selves, is this, Whether our using the things of
this life, be such, as holds an agreement with a dying State? Jam. 4. 13, 14.
The Apostle speaks of some, that would go into such, and such a City, and
there live, and get gain: Whereas (says he) you know not what may be on the
morrow; for what is your life? It is but a Vapor, etc. As if he should say,
You consider not your own Frailty, and Mortality; if you did, you would not be
so Carnally-confident as you are. Remember in a prosperous condition, you are
those that dwell in Tabernacles of Clay, whose foundation is in the Dust, and
whose breath is in your Nostrils; dwelling in an open house, and ready every
moment to depart. Remember you must go down to the Grave, and the glory of your
condition shall not descend with you, Psalm. 49. 17.

7. Do you use the things of a prosperous condition, with this consideration,
That they are things for which you must give an Account? I showed you before,
that they have their usefulness, and men must give an account, How they have
used them. We must know, a prosperous condition has many burdens, ( viz.) of
Dangers, Temptations, Cares, Duties; and here is the greatest of all, that of
an Account: Romans 14. 12. Every one of us, shall give account of our selves to
God. By giving an account of our selves to God, is (no doubt) employed; A giving
an account of our selves, in relation to our conditions, ( viz.) What we have
been? What we have done? How we have demeaned our selves in our conditions?
What Glory we have brought to God? What Good we have done to others? We read,
Mat. 25. There were Talents delivered, and the Master called his servants to an
account, how they had used, and improved those Talents? Some make these Talents
to be of five sorts.

1. Those of Nature, ( viz.) The Members of the Body, and Faculties of the
Mind. 2. Wealth, 3. Authority; as Power, and Offices. 4. Knowledge; as Arts, and
Sciences. 5. Grace.
So then, the outward things of a prosperous condition, are things to be
accounted for, and then they become evil to a man, when they cause him to
forget his account. Remember; We are accomptable to God, for whatsoever we have
from God. The World is but God's great Family, He is the Great House-holder,
and every man must give an account to Him of the things wherewith he is
entrusted. We read, Luke 16. 2. How the unjust Steward is called to an account;
Give account of thy Stewardship, etc. Every man is a Steward, and has somewat,
wherewith he is entrusted. Some have the things of the world, as Honor,
Wealth, Authority, etc. Some have those things that concern the Body, as
Health, Strength, Beauty. Some have those of the Mind, as Wisdom, and
Understanding. Now concerning All, there is a strict Account to be given. To
whomsoever much is given, of them shall much be required. God expects, our
Duties should be answerable to our Advantages that we have in a condition. We
find the Altar that Solomon made, was four times bigger then that of Moses; if
you compare 2 Chronicles. 4. 1. with Exodus 27. 1. Moses his Altar was, five Cubits
long, and five Cubits broad; but Solomon's Altar, was twenty Cubits long, and
twenty Cubits broad, Now what is the reason of the difference? Surely this,
Moses was in an unsettled condition, but Solomon in a peaceable and flourishing
Estate. And God expects, that our duties and services should be answerable to
our worldly advantages. Let me tell you, this consideration of an account you
have to give, will keep you humble in a prosperous condition; will put you upon
improving the things of your condition, for the glory of God, the good of
others, and your own benefit; considering, they are things you are to give an
Account of.

Thus for the second thing, whereby a Judgment is to be made of a Prosperous
Condition, Whether it be good for a man in this Life.

III. Then is Prosperity good for a man in this life, When it does not make him
to forget the Afflictions of Joseph. It is then Evil, when our Prosperity makes
us to forget those that are in Adversity. The Lord speaks of such, Amos 6. 1.
They were at ease in Sion; ver. 4. They did lie upon beds of Ivory. They did
eat the Lambs out of the Flock: They did Chaunt to the sound of the Viol, (they
had their Music too.) Ver. 6. They drank Wine in Bowls, (they had their Wine
too, and that in Abundance.) And they did Anoint themselves with the chief
Ointments, (they had their precious Ointments, so that nothing was wanting.)
Now, What is their Sin all this while? Why this, They were not grieved for the
Afflictions of Joseph. This was their Sin; Their Prosperity had taken away the
sympathy, and fellow-feeling they ought to have had of Joseph's Afflictions.
Their Fullness, made them to forget his Wants. Let me tell you, Prosperity is
evil for a man, when it makes him forget the Afflictions of others. It was Evil
for those, That they were at ease in Sion; and, that they had their Ivory Beds
to lie upon, and their Lambs and Calves to feed on; and their Music to delight
them in; but were not mindful of Joseph's Afflictions: And therefore see how
they are threatened, ver. 7. They shall go captive with the first that go
captive: i. e. God would first fall upon them. It is said of Dives, Luke 16.
19. That he was clothed in Purple, and fared Deliciously every day: But
Lazarus could not partake of so much, as the crumbs that fell from his Table.
We may safely conclude, That, that man's Abundance is naught for him, that makes
him to forget the Wants of others: That, that man's Prosperity is naught for
him, that makes him to forget the Afflictions of others: That, that man's Ease
is evil for him, that makes him to forget the Troubles, and Disquiets of
others. Heb. 13. 3. The Apostle charge them, that they should remember those
that are in Bonds, as if they were bound with them. q. d. Though you are at
Liberty, yet let not your Liberty destroy that sympathy, and fellow-feeling,
you ought to have of your brethrens Bonds, and Miseries. This sympathy the
Apostle calls for, Romans 12. 15. Rejoice with them that rejoice, and weep with
them that weep. q. d. What ever a man's particular condition is, It should not
hinder him from sympathising with others in their conditions. Rejoice with them
that rejoice. As if he should say, It may be your particular condition is Sad,
and you have cause to Weep, in respect of your own particular; yet if it go
well with the Public, and the people of God in general, You ought to rejoice
in their rejoycings. And then (says the Apostle) weep with them that weep. q.
d. It may be, your particular condition may be a Rejoycing-condition, nothing
aileth you, you want for nothing; Yet, if the Church, and People of God, be in
a sad condition; You are to Weep with them. Job tells us, he did so in the
days of his Prosperity, Job 30. 25. Did not I weep for him that was in
trouble? Was not my Soul grieved for the Poor? This he did, when he had no
cause to Weep in relation to himself, his condition being a Rejoicing
condition. You may see, how, in the height of his prosperity, he did sympathize
with those that were in Affliction, Chap. 29. ver. 6, 12, 13, 15, 16.

To close this, Let our Condition be never so Prosperous, we ought to Bleed in
others Wounds, and to be Afflicted in all, wherein they are Afflicted.

Thus I have finished the First thing, viz. How a man may know, Whether a
Prosperous condition be Good for him in this Life.

CHAP. XI.
2 I Now come to show you, How a man may make a Judgment of an Adverse and an
Afflicted condition; whether it be good for him in this life. For let me tell
you, That as it is not good for all, that they have Prosperity; so neither is
it good for all, that they are Afflicted.

Now, that you may know, whether an Afflicted condition be good for you,
Consider this.

I. In General, I shall mind you of what I have before said, ( viz.) That he
that will make a judgment of his condition, must first make a judgment of
himself. So that, to you that are in an Afflicted condition, I have two
questions to put.

1. What you do in your condition? 2. What you make of your condition?
1. When God puts you into an Afflicted condition, What do you do in that
condition? What is your carriage, and behavior in the condition? Is it such,
as becomes such providence and dispensations? Does your behavior become your
condition?

Quest. You will ask, What is a man to do in an Afflicted condition, that he
may be able to make a judgment of it, Whether it be good for him?

Answ. Do you do the work of your condition, and perform the duties of your
condition? Then it is good for you.

Quest. But then you will ask, What is the work, and what are the duties, that
he is to do in an Afflicted condition?

Answ. I shall show you that, in some Particulars.

1. This he is to do, To endeavor the finding out of this, ( viz.) What every
Affliction comes in order to. When God puts us into an Afflicted condition,
it is in order to somewhat; and it is our duty, to search out the mind and
meaning of God in it. Some there are, that walk up and down (as I may say) in
that condition, without ever inquiring, For what end it is they are Afflicted.
As those, Isa. 5. 12. They regarded not the work of the Lord, nor the
operations of his Hands. We must know, Afflictions are some of God's
Operations. As it is God that brings a man and his comforts together, so a
man and his crosses; and every cross comes in order to somewhat. The Refiner
kindles his fire in his Furnace, in order to the refining of his Metal. The
Physician gives Physic in order to Health. Remember, Every Affliction, is in
order to somewhat. It comes with a message from God. Now, our great work is to
find out, what the Message is, Affliction brings. When a man brings us
Letters, we do not look on the back side only, and the superscription, but we
look upon what is contained within, and what they import. So it is in respect
of Afflictions, They bring us (as I may say) Letters from God, and a Message,
in order to somewhat. The thing we have to do, in an Affliction, is, not only
to look upon the endorsment, and outside of the Affliction; but we must break
it up, and see what is written within. I told you formerly, We must go to God
to know the meaning of a condition; Dan. 5. 5. We read of a hand writing, and
the King, and all were troubled, to know the meaning of what was witten. In an
Afflicted condition, there is a handwriting upon it. The great thing we have
to do, is, to enquire what is the meaning of it, and for what end the
Affliction comes. Thus it is with many in Affliction, they never inquire after
the meaning of an Affliction, though it comes with Letters and Messages; yet
(as I may say) they put them in their pocket, as Caesar did those Letters that
forewarned him of his Death, when he was going to the Senate. Plutarch, tells
of the Governor of Thebes, when a Letter was sent to him from Athens, to
discover a Plot that was against him, which was that night to be Executed; and
the Messenger told him, that the Matter, contained in the Letter, was of high
Concernment, and that he must read the Letter presently; His Answer was,
Weighty matters for to morrow, and that night he was Slain. Thus, some never
look into the Letters, that an Affliction brings us, and so despise the
Affliction. Lam. 3. 40. the Afflicted are there directed, what to do in their
condition, Verse. 39. Why does the living man complain? This we should not do.
But then see, what we should do, Verse. 40. Let us search and try our ways,
etc. This is some of the work we have to do in an Afflicted condition. As the
Lord spoke to Josuah, when the men of Israel fled before the men of Ai, Josuah
casts himself down before the Lord, but the Lord bids him rise up and search,
for there was wickedness committed. As you may read, Josh. 7. 10. Where the
Lord shows him, what was his duty, ( viz.) To search out the sin, for which
that defeat came.

2. This is another thing we are to do in an Afflicted condition, ( viz.) To
set in, and join with the Affliction, and to further it in the work for which
it is sent. We must do by Afflictions, as we do by Physic; we do not only take
Physic, but we also join with it, to further it in it is working; we keep our
Chamber, we take Broth, we forbear Studying and Working; and all this is to
further it is working. Afflictions, are Physic that God gives us: and then it
is right, when we join with the Physic, and further and help it in it is
Operation. When a Physician administreth Physic, to a diseased Patient, there
are three things considerable, ( viz.) The Physician, the Patient, and the
Disease. And where any two of these join together, down goes the third. If the
Physician and the Patient join together, down goes the Disease; if the
Physician and the Disease join together, down goes the Patient; if the Patient
and the Disease join together, down goes the Physician. So it is in respect of
an Afflicted Condition: There is the Patient, the Physic, and the Disease. Now
what is the reason, that the Physic of Affliction does some persons no good?
Surely this, The Patient and the Disease join together. This the Prophet
tells us in the case of Babylon, Jer. 51. 9. We would have healed Babylon,
but she would not be healed. Where you find the Patient, taking part with the
Disease. Thus, many in an Afflicted Condition, take part with the Disease, and
not with the Physic. Affliction comes, to set men's hearts and the world,
men's hearts and their lusts, at greater distance; but here is the misery, that
most men take part with their Lusts, and not with their Afflictions, to further
them in the work for which they are sent. They do, in respect of the Rod, as
they do in respect of the Word. When they should take part with the Word,
against their Sins; they take part with their Sins against the Word: So, when
they should take part with the Rod, against their Lusts, they take part with
their Lusts, against the Rod. Thus did those, Isa. 1. 5. Jer. 5. 3. They joined
with the Disease, and did all they could to obstruct the operation, and working
of the Physic of Affliction. This (as I may say) is a crossing our Crosses,
and afflicting our Afflictions; when we hinder them in their working. And this
speaks an Afflicted condition evil for a man in this life. It is said of Ahaz,
That in his Affliction, he transgressed more and more; This is naught.

3. This is another work of an Afflicted condition, ( viz.) to eye our Passions
and Affections, more than our Afflictions. To have an eye upon our hearts, more
then upon our hurts. Some, when they are in an Afflicted condition, spend all
their time in poring upon their afflictions, as though that were the only work
of their condition: whereas the great work they have to do, is, to eye their
own hearts and spirits. Some look altogether without, when they should look
within. It is our own passions in an Afflicted condition, that are our greatest
Affliction. If the house within be kept dry, we need not much to care, what
tempests are without. We many times complain of that, that is without us; when
indeed, the cause is within us. As we see it is with a sick man, he complains
of the uneasiness of the Stool he sits upon, of the Bed he lies upon, of the
unsavoriness of the Meat he eats; when the cause is inward. Were but his
ill-humours removed, and purged away, the same Stool, and Bed, and Meat, would
content him. When God puts men into an Afflicted condition, the reason why to
some it is so troublesome, is, from within, from their own spirits and
dispositions. If they could but subdue their passions, and bound their spirits,
the condition would be well enough. Poring upon Afflictions, is like a man's
poring upon rough and tempestuous Waters, which makes his head giddy, and
himself Sea-sick: So it is with some, they do but distemper themselves, by
looking altogether upon their Afflictions. Thus it was with Job, (Job 2.) You
find him poring upon his Afflictions. And then see what the effect was, Chap.
3. he opened his mouth, and fell a cursing the day of his birth. Satan indeed
thought to make him fall a cursing his God, but he was deceived; yet he fell to
cursing the day of his birth, which was toomuch. The great work a Governor of
a City has to do, when he hears that the Country about him are up in Arms
against him, is, to look to the Town within, to see that there be no tumults
and risings within. It is good for us in a day of Affliction, to look to this,
that our passions do not raise a Mutiny. It was the saying of a Heathen, Intus
si recte, ne labores, Thou need'st not trouble thy self, if all be well within.

4. This is another work of an Afflicted Condition, ( viz.) To eye our Sins,
more than our Sufferings and Afflictions. Many in an Afflicted condition, eye
their Afflictions, but not their Sins. They look upon what God does against
them, but consider not, what they have done against Him; which if they did, it
would make them complain more of their sins, then of their sorrows. It would
turn their tears into another Channel; and cause them to spend those tears upon
their Sins, that they spend upon Afflictions. Lam. 3. 39. Why does the living
man complain, a man for the punishment of his sins? In their Afflicted
Condition, they were full of complaints, as we see, Verse. 2, 3. etc. But here
the Prophet gives a check to them, q. d. We complain of our Afflictions; our
eyes are altogether upon our Sufferings; Oh, but consider, Man suffers for
his Sin. We should eye our Sins, more then our Sufferings, Psalm. 51. 3. David
says, his sin was ever before him. It is thus with some in an Afflicted
Condition, that their Sufferings are ever before them, and not their Sins. When
God Afflicts them, they can say, We are the persons that feel Affliction from
God: but consider not, how they have sinned against God. The good of the
consideration of our sins in an Afflicted Condition, has these benefits
attending it.

1. It will make us Justify God in all our Afflictions. To acknowledge that all
his ways are equal, and that he is righteous in all that he has brought upon
us, Dan. 9. 14. There is an expression of Eliphaz, Job 4. 17. Shall mortal man
be just with God? There is a principle of pride in every man by nature, which
is apt to show it self in the lowest condition; so that we are apt to have
better thoughts of our selves, then of God himself; and to think, We are more
just then God, when he lays Affliction on us. Thus those, Ezekiel. 33. 20. They
said, The way of the Lord was unequal. It was from looking only upon His ways,
and dealings with them, without considering their own ways, and how They had
dealt with him.

2. As it will help us to clear Gods Justice, so to admire his Mercy, in that
he does punish and afflict us, less then our iniquities do deserve. As the
confession is, Ezra 9. 13. They had been in captivity 70. years, and yet though
their captivity were long, they saw cause why they should admire the Mercy of
God toward them. Looking upon their sins, they saw their Sufferings were less
then they did deserve.

3. This will help us to Adore the Wisdom of God, in making Afflictions to
become cures of, and remedies against, Sin. Afflictions at first came in as
punishments for sin. While we look only upon our Afflictions, we discern not
the wisdom of God in sending them, and ordering them for our good; but when we
eye our Sins, as well as our Afflictions, then we find, they are sent to cure
the Soul of some disease, as pride, and worldliness, etc. This will put a man
upon putting this question to himself, Does not this Affliction come to cure,
and kill my corruptions? Has not the Lord sent it to take me off the creature,
and to imbitter it more to me? Has not God done this to cure the Tympany of
Pride, or the Dropsy of Covetousness, or some Creature-Surfet? And hereupon a
man falls upon admiring, and adoring the Wisdom of God, in making Afflictions,
Cures for our Corruptions.

4. Eying Sins as well as Afflictions, will help us to possess our Souls in
patience, and to suppress all risings and smoakings of passion, to which we are
subject in a day of Affliction. And this it will do, by giving us to see that
our Afflictions are less then our iniquities do deserve; and then there is
great reason we should bear them patiently, when we know we have deserved
greater. Why should he not patiently endure the akeing of teeth, that knows he
has deserved the gnashing of teeth? and the burning of a fever, when he
knows he has deserved Burning in Hell? This will help to make us patient,
when we lose a comfort, ( viz.) the consideration of this, that we have
forfeited all our comforts, and deserve to be deprived of all.

5. Eying our Sins as well as our Afflictions, will make the burden of
Affliction much the easier, and leighter. What is the cause that to some,
Afflictions are so heavy? It is, because their sin is so leight to them.
Remember this, The heavier we find our Sins to be, the higher we shall find our
Afflictions to be. Affliction must needs be heavy to those, who eye nothing but
Affliction. When we compare Evils of Suffering, with Evils of Sinning, we shall
find them to be leight, although they be never so great. The reason why many
complain of the burden of their Affliction, is, because Sin is no burden to
them. Where Sin is found to be heavy, Affliction will be found to be leight.

Thus for the fourth thing we have to do in an Afflicted condition.

5. We are in an Afflicted Condition to do this, ( viz.) To keep our hearts
open, and enlarged, in the midst of outward straitnings. Afflictions are
straitnings. As God deals with Nations, Job 12. 23. He enlarges them, and
straitneth them again. So he deals oftentimes with particular persons. And
afflictions are their straitnings. God binds up the face of our Comforts. As
the expression is in Job, that by the frost, he binds up the face of the
waters: So by the Frost of Affliction, he binds up the face of our Comforts.
Our work then is, To keep our hearts thawed, and open, when our outward are as
it were Frozen up. It is our work to see, That in the midst of our outward
straitnings, our hearts be not straightened toward God. It must be our work to
keep our hearts open, when the Lord shuts us up by Affliction. Gods Afflicting,
is called Gods shutting up, Deuteronomy. 32. 30. Except the Lord had shut them up.
Sometimes a man and his comforts walk together. God sometimes turns a man
loose among his Comforts, to walk at large in the enjoyment of them. And then
sometimes the Lord separates between a man and his comforts, and builds a
wall between them, that they cannot come at one another. Thus the Church
complains, Lam. 3. 17. Thou have removed my soul far from peace. And again,
Lam. 3. 5. He has builded against me, and compassed me about with gall and
travel. And Verse. 7. He has hedged me about that I cannot get out. Here the
Church complains of her shuttings up by Affliction. There is a double hedge
that God makes about a man, ( viz.) an hedge of Protection, that no Evil can
come at him; (Thus he did about Job.) And then a hedge of Affliction, that no
Good can come at a man, This is a hedge of Thorns. Thus the Church complains,
Lam. 3. 9. He has enclosed my ways with hewn stone. She was shut up with
such a Wall which speaks strong and impregnable Afflictions. Now the work we
have to do, is, To see that in the midst of our shuttings up, our hearts be
not shut up toward God. Jam. 5. 13. If any be Afflicted, let him pray. Where
the Apostle shows what is to be our work in an Afflicted condition, ( viz.)
Prayer. Several Conditions, have their several Duties. In Prosperity, we are to
give Thanks; in Adversity, we are to Pray. Eliphaz charged Job, Job 15. 4. That
in the day of his Affliction, he did restrain prayer before God; That he had
inward restraints, when he was under outward restraints. It is our work in an
Afflicted Condition, to watch against that. Prayer is the Duty that is proper
for an Afflicted Condition, and that suits with such providence. And this is
some of the work we are to do in that condition, ( viz.) to Pray. We read, Isa.
26. 16. In trouble they have visited Thee, they poured out a prayer when thy
chastening was upon them. It is Calvin's opinion, that there the Prophet
shows, what was the behavior of Gods People, and what they did in the day of
their affliction and trouble, ( viz.) they did Visit the Lord; and so showed
the confidence they had in God. q. d. Lord, whereas Afflictions drive others
from thee, and set them at a further distance; yet thy people draw nearer to
thee, and seek the more after thee. Here is the work in an Afflicted Condition,
To visit God, and to pour out a Prayer before Him. Afflictions are God's
Visitations, and when God visits us with his Afflictions, we should visit Him
with our Supplications. When He pours forth our Comforts, and emptieth us of
them, (for so God's Afflicting is called, a pouring out) it is then our Duty to
pour out a Prayer before Him. David made this the work of his condition, Psalm.
142. 2. I poured out my complaint before him, I showed him my trouble. So Psalm.
18. 6. In my distress I called upon the Lord, and cried to my God. And this the
Lord calls for, as that which we are to do in an Afflicted condition. Psalm.
50. 15. Call upon me in the day of trouble. It is some ease to us, when a
trouble falls upon us, that we have some friend to repair to, into whose bosom
we may pour out our complaints. This is the great Privilege, that in an
Afflicted condition we have a God to go to; to whom we may make known our
condition, and show Him our trouble, as David did, Psalm. 142. 2. In that
condition, it is one great thing we have to do, to go to God, to beg of Him
what we need for the condition: viz. Shoulders of Patience for our Burdens,
and a gracious Improvement of our Conditions. Christians, you must know, an
Afflicted condition is then good for you, when your hearts are kept open, when
you have inward Enlargements, in the midst of your outward straitnings.

6. The work of an Afflicted Condition, is this, viz. To keep the Ear open to
Counsel and Instruction. Some there are, so taken up with the thoughts of their
Condition, that they will not hearken to Counsel. As Marius the Roman said, He
could not hearken to the Laws, for the rattling and noise of Arms. So the noise
of Troubles, will not suffer some, to hearken to the voice of Counsel. And so
David confesses that it was his case, Psalm. 77. 2. His Soul refused comfort.
Elihu, Job 36. 8. shows how it is with Godly men when they are in Affliction.
And then Verse. 10. He opens their ear to Discipline. We must know, Satan is
a great Enemy to the doing the work of our Condition; he endeavors to make us
turn our Conditions into Sin, and not into Duty. He does all he can, to stop
our Ears against hearing Counsel and Instruction. Remember, when you are in
Affliction, there comes some Instruction with it. Now Satan endeavors to open
the Eye, but to stop the Ear; he keeps the Eye open, to look upon the
Affliction; but he keeps the Ear shut, and stopeth it, that it may not hearken
unto the Instruction. The best way in an Afflicted Condition, is to keep the
Eyes shut, and the Ear open. Not so much to look upon the Affliction, as to
hear Instruction. Micah 6. 9. Hear ye the Rod. He does not say, See ye the Rod,
but, hear ye the Rod. When men are under the Rod, their eyes are open enough to
see the Rod; they can point to the Affliction, and show what it is. But the
great thing they are to do, is to hear the Rod. The Rod has a Voice, which
should be hearkened to. When an Affliction comes, it comes (as I told you
before) with some Message from God; It comes with some Instruction; and that we
are to hearken to: We should hear what God will speak, as David said in another
case, Psalm. 85. 8. When we see a flash of Lightning, we then prepare our Ears
to hear a clap of Thunder. When we see the Affliction, we should have our Ears
open, to hearken to what follows. We read of Eliah, when he was in the mouth
of the Cave 1 King. 19. 12. There came a strong Wind that brake the Mountains;
After the Wind came an Earthquake; After the Earthquake, came a Fire; After
the Fire, came a soft still Voice. Remember, after the noise of Afflictions,
there comes a Voice; and we should hearken to that Voice. Psalm. 94. 12. it is
said, Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, and teach him out of thy Law.
The happiness of a man lies not in his being chastened, but in his being
taught and instructed by his Chastisement. A mute and dumb Affliction is Evil
for a man; and it is our deafness, that makes the Affliction dumb, when a man
hears not the Affliction speak. So then, in an Afflicted Condition, we are to
hearken to what God says, as well see as to what God does.

7. Another work of an Afflicted Condition, is this, ( viz.) Framing the heart
to a pious Submission. To get the heart into a submitting Frame. And this not
only out of Necessity, but out of Duty. It is excellent, when we can bring our
Hearts to a quiet Submission to the Will of God, in all these Providence and
Dispensations. It must not be only a Necessary Submission. Such a Submission
is this, When a man parts with a Comfort upon this consideration; If God will
take it away, I cannot help it; I am content to part with it, since it cannot
be otherwise. Thus they submit to their Condition, and yield to the parting
with a Comfort, when they see they can keep it no longer. And this is that
Submission that some rest in, and think it sufficient to say, There is no
remedy. But now there is another Submission that has more of Grace in it. And
that is, when God calls for a Comfort from us, there is free Resignation of
it up to God. As we read of Abraham, When God called for Isaac, he presently
resigned him up to Him. And this Submission proceeds from Faith, which works
a Christian to the denying of himself, and to a complying with God in that,
that is seemingly contrary to his own desires and content. Thus we read, Heb.
11. how Abraham, by Faith, offered up his only begotten Son. By a hand of Faith
he presents again to God, That Blessing he received from Him. Faith teaches a
man to receive a Mercy from God, and to be thankful; and to part again with it,
and to be content: And this not out of necessity, because they can keep it no
longer, but there is a free resigning of it up to God. Consider, the difference
between these Submissions, is such, as is between the death's and ends of men.
Some men, when they see they must dye, and that there is no remedy, do yield
out of necessity; and so their Soul's are as it were taken from them. As the
expression in the Gospel is, Thou fool, this night shall thy Soul be taken from
thee. Whereas a Godly man, makes his Soul a Free-will-Offering to God. As our
Savior did his, Father into thy hands I commend my Spirit. And as Stephen did
his, Lord Jesus, receive my Spirit. It is said, Prove. 14. 32. The Wicked is
driven away in his Wickedness. (i. e.) He is thrust, and forced out of the
world, whether he will or not. But the Righteous has hope in his Death; and
that hope makes him to Resign, and give up his Soul to God: As we read of
giving up the Ghost.

8. This is another work we have to do in an Afflicted Condition, ( viz.) To
lay to heart the Affliction. When God puts a man into an Afflicted Condition,
This is one thing God expects from him, Eccles. 7. 14. In the day of Adversity
consider. In Isa. 42. 25. the Prophet complains of Jacob, That when God
poured out upon him the Fury of his Anger, and the Strength of Battle: And it
had set him on Fire round about, yet he knew it not; and it burned him, yet he
laid it not to heart. According to the Original, it is thus, He did not put it
upon his heart. It is an Hebrew Phrase, and notes diligent consideration of
Affliction. Now that you may not be mistaken about this, you must know, There
is a double laying to heart of an Affliction.

1. Carnal, sinful and hurtful. 2. Spiritual, holy and helpful.
1. There is a Sinful laying of Afflictions to heart. When a man takes those
burdens that lie upon his outward, ( viz.) His Person, Estate, etc. and
lays them as a burden upon his Spirit; whereby a man troubles himself, when
God troubles him. When he lays his troubles without, so to heart, as to
trouble himself within; this is Evil. This is forbid, John 14. 1. Let not your
hearts be troubled. The word in the Original, signifies such a trouble, as is
in water when the mud is stirred up; or as the Sea is, when it is troubled with
a Storm or Tempest. As we read in Scripture of the troubled Sea, that it is
Waters cast forth Mire and Dirt. It also signifies such a trouble as is in an
Army, when it is Routed and Disordered; there is nothing but Fear, and
Distraction, and Confusion. So says our Savior, Let not your hearts be
troubled. (i. e.) Take heed of so laying your troubles to heart, as to trouble
your Hearts; to distemper your Affections, and so to blind the Judgment, that
you can see and discern things no better, then a man can in muddy water. This
laying of Afflictions to heart is unlawful; when they are laid to heart, to
disquiet and distemper the Heart, and to raise a Storm in the Soul, to make it
a troubled Sea; casting forth nothing but the mud of impatiency and discontent.
Take you a glass of water that has some mud in it, and let it stand still, the
mud settleth at the bottom, and the water above is clear; but shake this water,
and then the mud arises, and there is confusion; and the water that before was
clear, becomes muddy. So it is with our hearts and affections, there is mud at
the bottom, and when they come to be stirred by Affliction, then the mud
arises. This we should take heed of, of laying Afflictions so to heart, as to
stir up the mud of impatiency and discontent.

2. There is a laying of Afflictions to heart, that is Spiritual, holy and
helpful; This is a laying them to heart, not for the troubling, but for the
bettering the heart. Not for the making of the Spirit more Distempered,
Impatient, Weak, and unfit for Duty; but for the making of it more Holy, and
Humble, and Submissive; this is a right laying of Afflictions to heart. It is
then right, when there is an applying of the heart to the Affliction; to find
out what use and benefit may be made of it. When we lay the Affliction to the
heart, not to distemper it, but, as a plaster, to heal the diseases and
distempers of it; ( viz.) to heal it is Pride, and Worldliness, and Vanity, etc.
It should be with us, in considering of, and laying Afflictions to heart, as
with the Be which alights on a Flower, and leaves it not till she has made
something out of it; even out of the very blossom of a Thistle, she will get
somewhat. So it should be, in respect of an Afflicted Condition, There should
be such an application of the heart to it, as to get somewhat out of it, for
the bettering of the heart. Solomon tells us, Eccles. 7. 2. It is better to
go to the House of Mourning, then to the House of Feasting: For this is the end
of all flesh, and the living will lay it to his heart. Laying to heart the ends
of others, is the making somewhat out of them, that is good and profitable for
our selves. It is our Duty to lay to heart the Afflictions of others, much more
our own. The Lord tells Babylon, Isa. 47. 7. That she said, She should be a
Lady for ever, and did not lay the Afflictions of his people to heart. As she
laid them not to heart by way of Sympathy, so not by way of Improvement. So
then, to close this, Laying afflictions to heart, stands in this, In having
Impressions made upon our Spirits, suitable to the Providence and the
Dispensation. We read of Ahaz, That in his Affliction he transgressed more and
more, 2 Chronicles. 28. 19. God brought Judah low, and Ahaz was put to his shifts;
he gave gifts to the King of Assyria, yet he helped him not. And Verse 22. In
the time of his distress, he did trespass more against the Lord. And it is
said, This is that King Ahaz! The meaning is, That the Affliction did not make
an Impression upon his heart, suitable to the Providence and Dispensation. To
close this, It is then right, when our Hearts answer to Providence, in laying
Afflictions so to heart, as to make suitable Impressions.

9. This is some of the work we have to do in an Afflicted Condition; We are
patiently to expect and wait upon God; Waiting is one of our Duties in an
Afflicted Condition. We are to wait upon God for comfortable Supports in it,
and a seasonable Deliverance out of it; Isa. 8. 17. I will wait upon the Lord,
that hides his Face from the house of Jacob. The Prophet resolved to walk
dutifully, when God walked strangely. We shall find in an Afflicted condition,
This is the Duty, that is Commanded, Commended, and Practiced by the Saints in
that Condition. It is commanded, Psalm. 27. 14. Wait on the Lord and he shall
strengthen thy heart; wait I say on the Lord. Lam. 3. 26. It is good that a man
should hope, and quietly wait for the Salvation of the Lora. It is spoken there
in reference to an Afflicted Condition. And so we find the Godly have made it
their work in that condition to wait. David tells us, He waited patiently for
the Lord. Consider, Waiting is an Act of Patience drawn-out. The Scripture has
two Expressions concerning it, viz. Waiting on God. Waiting for God.

Waiting on Him for Comfort in Affliction; And waiting for Him, to deliver out
of Affliction. Thus did the people of God, Isa. 25. 9. Lo, This is the Lord, we
have waited for him, and he will save us. This is some of the work we have to
do in an Afflicted condition, ( viz.) To wait on God, and to wait for God.
Affliction is apt to make us short-breathed. To make us weary not only in
waiting, but weary of waiting. This we should look to, That though we are weary
in waiting, yet not to be weary of waiting. It was the saying of that wicked
King of Israel, 2 King. 6. 33. This evil is of the Lord, why should I wait any
longer? The great work we have to do in an Afflicted Condition, is, To wait
upon God. I have told you before, It is God that brings a man and his
Afflictions together; and as it is He that opens a fore-door, to let a man
into that condition, so it is He that must make a backdoor, to let a man out.
There are many that would make a backdoor of their own; but God is wiser then
they, and knows how to deliver them. Job 14. 14. All the days (says he) of my
appointed time, will I wait till my change come. And this is some of the work
we have to do in an Afflicted condition, ( viz.) To wait till our change come.
Now waiting upon God in Affliction, stands in these two things,

1. In a Silence of Spirit. A waiting Spirit is a Silent Spirit, it makes no
Noise or Clamor, Lam. 3. 26. It will wait quietly for the Salvation of God.
Psalm. 62. 1. My Soul, wait thou upon God. According to the Original, it is, Be
Silent before God. Where there is waiting upon God, there is no murmuring;
There are no impatient expressions; There is a deep silence of the Soul in
respect of passion, though not in respect of Prayer. There is a speaking to
God, but not against God. A waiting Soul, is a praying, but not a passionate
Soul. Remember; When God's hand is upon our Backs, our hands should be upon our
Mouths. 2. In a sweet Submission of Spirit to God, waiting God's time for
Deliverance. There is our time, and there is God's time. As Christ told Mary,
Mine hour is not yet come. This is Waiting, to stay the Lords leisure, and to
wait His time. It was wickedly spoken by that King of Israel, Who said, This
evil is of the Lord, why should I wait any longer? Whereas, on the contrary, he
should have argued thus, This evil being of the Lord, therefore there is reason
I should wait.
10. Another work of an Afflicted Condition, is this, To make all out of God,
that we need in that condition. Living on God, and living by Faith, are some of
the great Duties that concern that Condition, Isa. 50. 10. Is there any that
walks in darkness and has no light? Let him stay himself upon his God. While
we are in a prosperous condition, we have Creature-props and stays, and we are
too apt to stay our selves upon them: And therefore the Lord pulls them away,
to make us stay our selves upon Him. As the Lord speaks, Isa. 3. 1. Behold, I
take away the stay and the staff, etc. The Church, in the day of her
Affliction, made all out of God, Mic. 7. 8. Though I sit in darkness, yet the
Lord shall be a light about me. Faith will help us to look upon God as an
Universal Good. We know there are many particular things, and (as it were)
pieces of comforts, that must concur, to make a man's outward condition good.
Our good here below, is a Compounded good; A Wife is a part, and Children a
part, and Riches a part, and Health a part, etc. But a man by an Eye of Faith,
sees that God is all this, and more. As Elkanah told Hannah, Am not I better
to thee then ten Sons? So the Lord is more to a Christian, then all worldly
Enjoyments. The things of the world (though enjoyed in the greatest measure)
can never make a Condition comfortable without God: But the enjoyment of God,
will make a condition comfortable without them. It was David's course, to place
God as his Strength, where greatest danger was: The Lord (says he) is the
strength of my life: His Life was in greatest danger: And it was his way, to
fetch supplies from God in his greatest wants. When he wanted a Rock, a
Fortress, a Comforter, a Deliverer; he made the Lord all these. And this is
some of the work we have to do in an Afflicted condition.

Thus we have finished the First thing, by which a man is to make a judgment of
an Afflicted Condition; whether it be good for him in this life or not? ( viz.)
By considering what he does in that condition.

CHAP. XII.
2 WE come now to show you, that you are to make a judgment of your condition,
by what you make of your condition, and what you have gained by it. The great
Question you are to put to your selves, is, Whether you are Spiritual gainers
or losers by your condition? The truth is this, Every Temporal condition is
Evil for a man, by which he is a Spiritual loser. In an Afflicted condition,
all will confess they are Temporal losers; They will tell you, they have lost
Houses, and Estates, and Wife, and Children, and this, and the other Comfort:
But the Question is, Whether you are Spiritual gainers, by your temporal
losses. I have told you before, An Afflicted condition, is a condition that may
be improved to Spiritual advantages: Although it seems a barren condition,
yet it is improveable. Isa. 41. 19. God said, he would plant in the Wilderness,
the Cedar, Shittah Tree, and the Myrtle Tree, etc. He speaks there of making
the Wilderness Fruitful. An Afflicted condition, is a Wilderness-condition, and
we should see what Fruitfulness there is in it. It is sometimes with
conditions, according to what the Psalmist speaks in another case, Psalm. 107.
34. He turns a fruitful land into barrenness. And Verse 35. He turns a
Wilderness into Springs of Water. There are some conditions, that seem
outwardly fruitful, ( viz.) Prosperous conditions: And these sometimes are
turned into barrenness; some are spiritually barren in that condition. Some
there are, whose condition is a Wilderness, and yet this condition is turned
into springs of water, and is made fruitful. Christians should see, Whether
they are fruitful in the land of their Affliction. You have a passage, in Genesis
41. 52. That Joseph called his Sons Name Ephraim, For (says he) God has made
me fruitful in the land of my Affliction. Christians should look, what fruit
their Afflicted condition bears, and what they gather from it. It is a
condition planted with Thorns and Thistles; but I have told you before, That
there is a Spiritual Art, of gathering Figgs, from these Thorns; and Grapes,
from these Thistles. God, in Afflicting, intends our profit, and gain, and
good, Heb. 12. 10. It is our work, to see whether we profit by Afflictions. We
can never say, An Affliction is good for us, till we can say, This Affliction
is for my profit. And, as David did, It is good for me that I have been
Afflicted.

This having been spoken in General, I shall now come to show you in some
particulars, how you may know, Whether you are gainers by an Afflicted
condition.

Before I come to speak to them; You must consider, under what Notions and
Names, the Scripture presents them to us: By which you may see, What is God's
aim, and end, in sending them. And we should see, whether the Affliction has
done that work upon us, that answers to the Ends and Intentions of God, for
which he sent it. Now that will be discovered thus, by considering these things.

1. Affliction is God's Furnace, Isa. 48. 10. I have chosen thee in the Furnace
of Affliction. Isa. 31. 9. When God Afflicted Jerusalem, he is said, To have
his Fire in Sion, and his Furnace in Jerusalem. Affliction is God's Fire and
Furnace. Now, what is the Fire and Furnace to do? It is to Melt, and Try; and
Refine, and Purify. Christians, in an Afflicted Condition, are to see, Whether
the Furnace has done this work upon them? Whether it has Purified and Refined
them? They are to consider, what they were when they went into the Furnace, and
what they are when they come out. We read, Zach. 13. 9. God says, he would
bring a third part through the fire, and he would try them as Silver is tried.
Job ( chap. 23. 10.) says in his Afflicted Condition, When he has tried me, I
shall come forth like Gold. (i. e.) Pure and Glistering. He should come forth
better then he went in. This is the great thing we have to do, to see whether
we come better out of the Furnace of Affliction, then when we went in; whether
we come forth like Gold. The Furnace does two things.

It 1. Melts. 2. Refineth.

1. It melts that, that is meltable; And we are to see, What melting work
Affliction has done upon us. Some are not melted, because they are as stones
in the Furnace. Cast a stone into the Furnace, it goes in a stone, and it
comes forth a stone. It is heated, but is not melted. There are many come out
of an Affliction, the same they went in. It is said of Pharaoh, at the end of
every Plague that befell him, That his heart was hardened. He went in hardened,
and so he came out; he went a stone into the Furnace, and so he came forth. It
is our great work in an Afflicted condition, to see how we come forth, to see
whether Affliction melts us. There is an expression, Psalm. 107. 26. Their
hearts melted because of trouble. We should see, Whether Afflictions do melt
our hearts? Whether it has melted a Proud Heart into Humility? An hard Heart
into Softness? A Rebellious Heart into Obedience? Ephraim confesses,
Affliction wrought this work upon him, Jer. 31. 18. Thus you are to see, What
Affliction has wrought upon you by way of melting.

2. You are to see, What Affliction has done by way of Refining and Purifying.
That is the other work of the Furnace, ( viz.) To Refine. It is to separate the
dross from the Silver; and to take away impure mixtures. When you went into the
Furnace you went in dross, but do you come forth as Gold? Some come forth but
dross. The Lord speaks of such, Jer. 6. 29, 30. They went in dross, and so they
came out. Verse. 29. The Bellows are burnt, the Lead is consumed in the fire,
the Founder melts in vain. The Lord there speaks of Himself, as a Founder
that has taken much pains, to little purpose: He had burned his Bellows, but
all was in vain, the wicked were not taken away. Verse. 28. They were Brass and
Iron. God looked that they should have been Silver and Gold, when they were in
the Furnace. Gods Furnace of Affliction, is, for a Transmutation of Metalls, to
turn Iron and Brass, into Silver and Gold: But they were base and corrupt
still. At best, they were but Reprobate Silver; As the Prophet styles them,
Verse. 30. Reprobate Silver shall men call them: Or as it is in the Margin of
your Bibles, Refuse Silver; Such Silver, from which the dross would not be
separated by the Fire of the Furnace of Affliction; so they came out of the
Furnace as they went in. We read, Ezeck. 24. 12. God had set Israel on the
fire, but yet her great scum went not out of ber. It began to boil up, but it
did not boil out. Verse. 13. They were not purged. They came off the fire as
they went on. The great work you have to do in an Afflicted condition, is, To
see what Refining work Affliction has done upon you.

2. Affliction is God's School. Now in a School, there is a Rod and a Book: The
one for Correction, the other for Instruction. Thus it is in God's School of
Affliction, Psalm. 94. 12. Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, and teach
out of thy Law. Whom thou chastenest, There is the Rod: And teach out of thy
Law, There is the Book. This we are to do in an Afflicted condition, To see
what God's Rod has made us to learn out of God's Book. The Rod comes for two
ends, 1. To drive somewhat out of us. 2. To drive somewhat into us.


1. The Rod comes to drive somewhat out of us. Solomon tells us, Prove. 22.
15. Folly is bound (or riveted) in the heart of a Child, but the Rod of
Correction drives it away. The Rod is to whip Folly and Stubbornness out of a
Child; and when it does this work, then it is good. We are to see, What the Rod
has driven out of us. There is folly bound up in all our hearts, and we must
see, Whether the Rod of Affliction has driven it away. Ephraim makes this
confession, Jer. 31. 18. Thou have chastised me, and I was chastised; I was as
a Bullock accustomed to the yoke, etc. There was an unruly and untamed spirit
in Ephraim, but the Rod of Affliction subdued it: As he acknowledged, Verse. 19.
Surely after I was turned, I Repented. The Rod gave him a Turn, and he was
Reformed by it. Our great Work in an Afflicted Condition, is, To see what the
Rod has driven out of us; And whether, when we were out of the way, it has
whipped us into the right way. David says, Psalm. 119. 67. Before he was
Afflicted he went astray. David was a Rambler till God whipped him. But now I
keep thy Precepts. q. d. I was a very careless observer of thy Precepts, but
now thy Rod has whipped it out of me.

2. The Rod comes to drive, and beat somewhat into us. It comes to set on
Lessons and Instructions. Correction comes for this end, To set on
Instruction. You have a passage of Elihu, Job 33. 16. Of God's speaking once or
twice, and man perceives it not. Verse. 16. Then he opens the ears of men,
and seals their Instruction: (i. e.) When men will not hear, God comes with
Afflictions, and opens their ears, and sets on his Instruction with a
Witness. God's Corrections, are to Seal his Instructions. Instructions many
times make no impression, till the Rod comes and Seals them, and puts the Stamp
upon them. The question we are to put to our selves in an Afflicted Condition,
is, What Instruction the Affliction has Sealed to us?

1. Can you say, The Rod of Affliction has Sealed an Instruction to you
concerning God, What he is? We read of Manasseh, 2 Chronicles. 33. 12. When he was
in Affliction, he besought the Lord his God, and then (says the Text) he knew
that the Lord was God. No doubt but he knew it before, but he heeded it not,
till the Affliction came and Sealed the Instruction to him.

2. What Instructions has Afflictions Sealed concerning your selves? Can you
say, We have often heard, What a Proud, and Stubborn, and Perverse-Creature,
man is; Like a Bullock unaccustomed to the Yoke. Such a creature I my self am,
apt to forget my God, and to forget my self: But alas! I took no notice of
these Instructions. But now Affliction has opened mine Ear, and Sealed this
Instruction.

3. What Instructions has Afflictions Sealed concerning the Creature? I have
often been instructed of the Vanity of the Creature, of the Emptiness that is
in all worldly Comforts, of the Uncertainty that is in Riches, and all worldly
Enjoyments: And have been called upon, to use all these things with weaned
Affections, and right considerations of their Brevity, Mortality, Mutability.
But these Instructions I heeded not in the day of my Prosperity. But now my
Affliction has Sealed these Instructions. I now see what the creature is, and
what all worldly things are, ( viz.) Vanity and Vexation of Spirit. When Solon
the Wise, came to visit Croesus the Rich, Croesus showed him his Wealth, and
asked him, Whether he thought him not the happiest man living? Solon answered,
Nemo faelix ante obitum; Thou may be unhappy for all this, before thou
die. Croesus did then but laugh at what Solon said. But afterward, when he
had lost the Battle against Cyrus, and had his City taken, and was bound to a
Gibbet over a Great Pile of wood, to be burned in the sight of the Persians; He
cried out aloud, O Solon, Solon! Cyrus asked him the meaning of it; He
answered, That Solon had told him this before, but he believed him not. We are
to see, Whether Affliction has Sealed this Instruction concerning the
creature's vanity.

4. What Instructions has Affliction Sealed concerning Sin? Can you say, I
have been informed of the Evil of Sin, what a bitter thing it is, That though
it be sweet in the mouth, yet it will be Gall and Wormwood in the end. These
Instructions I have often heard, but heeded them not. But now Affliction has
Sealed these Instructions. It has given me to see, The Evil of Disobedience,
Pride, Covetousness, and of overloving the Creature, etc.

5. What Instructions has the Rod sealed concerning Duty? I have heard, out of
Gods Word, much concerning my Duty, What I ought to do; but I was a careless,
and forgetful Hearer.

1. I have heard, it was my Duty, In a Good day, to prepare for Evil days. But
this Instruction I heeded not. I could not believe there would be a change in
my condition: But now Affliction has sealed this Instruction. 2. I have heard,
that this was my Duty, To pity others in their Miseries, and to have a
fellow-feeling of others Afflictions. But these I heeded not. I did not
remember the Afflictions of Joseph. I was not afflicted in the Afflictions of
others: But now the Rod of Affliction has sealed that Instruction. 3. I have
been Instructed concerning Obedience, viz. That it should be close, and
conscionable: But alas! I heeded not the Instruction: I was loose, and formal,
and took that liberty to my self, that the Word did not allow. But now the Rod
has sealed this Instruction; It has taught me to be more strict, and close in
my Obedience, as it did David, Psalm. 119. 71.
Thus we are to see, Whether the Rod of Affliction has sealed these
Instructions, Psalm. 94. 12. Blessed is the man whom thou chastnest, and
teach out of thy Law. Then it is right, when with Affliction, and
Correction, there goes Instruction; and when the Rod of affliction seals
instructions out of the Law.

3. We have Affliction presented to us under another Name and Notion, ( viz.)
That it is God's Plough, Psalm. 129. 3. Every Instrument in Affliction, is
God's Plower: And every Affliction is God's Plough, that makes Furrows upon
our Backs, our Estates, and Families. Now consider, What is the work of the
Plough? It is to break up the Ground, and to fit it for the Seed, that it may
bring forth a Crop. Now, how shall we know it was good for the Land that it was
Plowed? but by the Crop it brings forth. If it bring forth nothing but Weeds,
or Briars, or Thorns, we cannot say, That it was good for that Land, that it
was Plowed. Joh. 15. 1. God is compared to a Husbandman. Now a Husbandman
has two things to look to.

1. His Field. 2. Vineyard.
For his Field, he has a Plough: For his Vineyard, he has a Pruning-knife.
Afflictions are both these.

1. Afflictions are God's Plough for his Field; And whoever are the Instruments
in Afflicting, they are but God's Plow-men. An Husbandman has his
day-labourers under him: So has God, some that labor about the Ear, the
Heart, and the Inward-man: And these are his Ministers, 1 Cor. 3. 9. We are
laborers together with God; ye are God's Husbandry, or God's Tillage. And then
God has another sort, that deal about a man's outward, and those are, Such
Instruments as he makes use of, in Afflicting. An Husbandman in his Field,
has some to Plow, and break up the Earth: And he has some to Sow, and cast
abroad the Seed. Those that Sow, are his Ministers, who by their Preaching,
cast abroad the Seed, when the Plough of Affliction has broken up the Ground.
It is not the Husband-man's work, to be always Plowing, he has his time to be
Sowing too. As you may see, Isa. 28. 24. God's Afflicting, may well be compared
to Plowing, and that in these respects.

1. Plowing alters and changes the face of the Earth. If you Plowe up a
green Meadow, you alter the Face of it: It Is Verdure, and Greenness, and Beauty
is gone. The Plough turns a pleasant Meadow, into a fallow Field. Thus
Affliction changes the face of a man's condition. It turns a Naomi, into a
Marah, Naomi signisieth, pleasant, and Marah bitter. Ruth 1. 20. It is said, in
Mic. 3. 12. Sion shall be Plowed as a Field. Sion had been as a beautiful
Meadow, Fair, Green, and Pleasant; But God by Afflicting her, would make her
look like a Fallow-field. Thus, you find the change, God's Plough of
Affliction, made in Job's condition: It quite altered the face of it. Job 29.
2, 3, 6, etc. he shows you, how fair and flourishing his condition was,
before God's Plough went over him: But Chap. 30. He tells you, what a change
it had made of the face of his condition.
2. The Plough overturneth the Earth, and lays the bottom uppermost. It
turns that downward, that was upward, and that upward, that was downward. So
does Affliction, Where that Plough comes, it hides that that was green, and
turns it out of sight, ( viz.) our Comforts, and casts earth upon them. As
the expression is, Isa. 24. 1. Behold, the Lord makes the Earth empty, he
makes it wast, he turns it upside down. This the Plough of Affliction does
when it comes, It turns our comforts and worldly enjoyments, upside-down.

3. The Plough where it comes, makes furrows: And makes such marks and
prints on the earth, that a man may know where the Plough has gone: So that we
can, for along time after say, This ground has been Plowed. So Afflictions
make furrows, and leave marks behind them, upon a man's Estate, and Body, and
Family, and Relations; that one may say, Here has the Plough of Affliction
has gone. Thus it did upon Shiloh, Jer. 7. 12. Go ye to my place which was in
Shiloh, etc. And see what I did to it, for the wickedness of my people Israel.
This was a long time after God had inflicted his judgments upon Shiloh, yet she
lay as a Fallow-field still.

The great work we have to do, is this, To see, What work the Plough of
Affliction has done. You must know, Plowing is a relative work; It is in order
to some other, and some further thing, as to Sowing, and to Harvest. We are to
see, Whether our Affliction have been followed with a fruitful Crop. I have
told you before, The Plough of it self does no good, there must be something
else, or else there will be no Harvest. There must be Sowing as well as
Plowing. This we are to do, to see, Whether we are Sowed, as well as Plowed.
And to see, What Crop is brought forth, and grows in those furrows of
Affliction? Whether it be not weeds and hemlock, as the expression is, Hos. 10.
4.

4. We are to look upon Afflictions, as God's Physic, and as those Physical
means and remedies, that God uses for the curing of our diseases. As
Physicians have their ways of curing corporal Diseases, by Diet-drinks, and
Sweatings, and Purgations: So the Lord has his Ways and Means of curing our
Spiritual Diseases. As there are diseases to which our bodies are subject, (
viz.) Surfets, and Fevers, and Dropsies, and Consumptions; so there are the
like in our Spirits. It is the saying of one, That there is no Beast on the
Land, but it has it is like in the Sea: So, there is no disease belonging to
our Bodies, but our Souls are spiritually subject to. There is the Tympany of
Pride, the Dropsy of Covetousness, the Consumption of Envy, the Fever of
Passion: The Spirit has it is Surfets and Distempers. Now, Afflictions are some
of those means and remedies God makes use of, for the curing these Diseases.
The great thing we are to enquire after, is, What work the Physic of
Affliction has wrought upon us.

1. Afflictions are God's Diet-drink. It is made up with Gall and Wormwood. So
the Church tells us, Lam. 3. 19. So Isa. 30. 20. we read of the Bread of
Affliction, and the Water of Affliction. Psalm. 80. 5. We read of the Bread of
Tears, etc. Physicians give things to their Patients, that may not be
toothsome, yet may be wholesome. We are to see, What Operation this Diet-drink
has had upon us, Whether it has weaned us from the world. There is a Disease
Physicians call Pica, which is a desire to feed upon Trash: As some Women and
Children, will eat Earth, and Coals, and the Clay of Walls. Such a Disease we
are all suctject to, having a strong appetite and desire after low earthly
things, too base for the Spirit to feed upon. Now can you say, This Diet-drink
of Affliction has cured you of this Disease? 2. Affliction is God's
Phlebotomy, his blood-letting. God's Afflicting is His taking some blood from
us. And when God does it, He does it in the right Vein. When He takes away
Riches, and Honor, etc. then he bloodeth us in one Vein. When he takes away
Wife or Children, Then he lets us blood in another Vein. We are to see,
What good our Blood-letting has done us, Whether it has taken down our high
Color, and our high Looks? We are to see, Whether it has taken away any of
our corrupt Blood? Whether it has cured our Ranckness of Pride, and
Feaverishness of Passion. There is an Expression, Isa. 17. 4. That the glory of
Jacob should be made thin, and the farness of his flesh should be made lean.
(i. e.) God would let them blood by His Afflictions, to cure their Pride, and
all their other Spiritual Diseases. 3. Afflictions are God's Purgations, To
purge out of us Peccant and Malignant Humors, They come to purge out of us
Pride, Covetousness, etc. We are to see, Whether Afflictions have purged us,
not only by moving these corrupt humors, but by removing of them. Isa. 27. 9.
By this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged. This is our work, To see what
sinful humors affliction has purged away. How many Purges has God given to
some by Afflictions, and yet they have not removed Obstructions. Afflictions
are to remove Obstructions: to make way for the Word to come to the Heart. It
comes to the Ear, but the work of Affliction, is, to make way for it to come to
the Heart. The great Question, we are to put to our selves, is this, Whether
Affliction, has opened a way for Instruction to come to our Hearts? St.
Bernard told a brother of his that was a Soldier, and a man of a Dissolute and
Profane life; When he saw him slight the good Counsel he had given him, He
clapped his hand on his side, and said, One day God will make way to this heart
of yours, by some Spear or Lance. (i. e.) He should receive some Wound in the
Wars, and then he would think of his Admonitions: And so it fell out.
CHAP. XIII.
Quest. SOme may ask, Since I know not what is good for me in this life, What
Counsel or Direction can you give me concerning Conditions, ( viz.) for the
choosing or refusing a condition; so that I may not do what is contrary the
Will of God, and to my own good?

Answ. For Answer to this, I shall give you in some Directions, with which I
shall conclude this Subject, and they are of two sorts.

Some General. Particular.

1. General. You must not be your own choosers of conditions, but let God
choose for you. As the Psalmist's expression is, Psalm. 47. 4. He shall choose
our inheritance for us. It is good for us, not to be our own choosers of
conditions, but to let the Lord choosers for us. It is an excellent thing, and
that that speaks much Submission to the Will of God; When in respect of outward
conditions, we can say, Lord, Thou shall choose for me. There are many that are
discontented if they may not be their own choosers; And say, (as Rachel did
concerning children) Give me this, or give me that, or else I dye. Herein is
the pride of man seen, That he must have, what he would have, or else he thinks
it not well, and is ready to charge God foolishly. Thus it was with Jonah,
because he could not have his will in the destruction of Nineveh, and in the
enjoyment of his Gourd; he presently flies ont into passion against God
himself: As you may read, Jonah 4. When God repented of the evil concerning
Nineveh, it displeased Jonah exceedingly, and he was very angry. And see, In a
pett he would dye, Verse. 3. Take away my life from me, for it is better for me
to dye then to live. What was the cause of all this? Jonah could not have his
will in the destruction of Nineveh; and so thought it was better to dye, then
not to have his will: So far did passion transport him. And then concerning the
Gourd, Verse. 6. We read, how it sprung up to shadow Jonah, and he was exceeding
glad of the Gourd. But when the Gourd was smitten, and withered, Jonah was
exceeding angry; And says, Verse. 7. It is better for me to dye, then to live.
Yea, he proceeds so far, as when Verse. 9. God asked him, Whether he did well
to be angry for the Gourd, as to answer, I do well to be angry even to the
death. Now, what was the cause of all this? But only this, That Jonah could not
have his own will, and be his own chooser. So the great direction, is this, Let
the Lord choose your condition for you, and let it be as the Lord will. We are
apt to be our own choosers, and this causes much sin and sorrow. Thus we read
of those, in Jer. 42. After the death of Gedaliah, the Forces under Johanah,
were in a great strait, Whether they should stay in the Land of Judah, or go
into the Land of Egypt. They resoved at first, the Lord should choose their
condition for them; And thereupon they come to the Prophet, to enquire of God
what they should do; And resolved what ever Answer they had from God, whether
it were Good, or whether it were Evil, they would hearken to it. As you may
see, Verse. 3, 5, 6. But we find, for all this, they resolved to be their own
choosers, and to have their own wills: And the Prophet tells them, That they
dissembled in their hearts, when they sent him to enquire of the Lord. For when
God had choosen for them, and told them what He would have them do, viz. Not to
go into Egypt, they would none of his choice, but into Egypt they would go.
This is that we are to take heed of, of being our own choosers of Conditions;
but let the Lord choose for us. So take notice of these moving considerations,
Why we should make the Lord, the chooser of our conditions, and not be our own
choosers.

1. Now in Gospel Times, we are not under a Distinct Covenant for Temporalls as
the Jews were. The Law was to the Jews, a Conditional Covenant for Temporalls,
( viz.) for outward Prosperity, and long Life, and temporal Happiness in the
Land of Canaan. We find the Old Testament, runs most upon temporal
promises. As we may read, Deuteronomy. 28. Lev. 27. And hence it was, the people of
God in those times, did so much stumble at the Prosperity of wicked men, and
the Afflictions of Godly men; As David, Jeremiah, Habakkuk, and others did. But
now under the Gospel it is otherwise. Since the coming of Christ in the Flesh,
and his pouring forth of Spiritual Blessings upon His Church, by the
Holy Ghost; He does not feed his People, with the hopes of those things that
are temporal. The New Testament runs most upon Spiritual promises: Only here
and there, some Temporal ones are inserted, and intermixed; which (we must
know) are to be understood with an exception; and that they shall be performed,
both when, and as, God sees good. They do not always intimate what shall be,
But only this, That, what ever be, it shall be for good. So then, having a
Covenant made up of better promises, then those that are temporal, it should
make us willing to be at God's disposing concerning temporalls. It should make
us say, Lord, seeing thou have by Covenant, settled the highest things upon me;
Deal with me for outward as thou will.

2. A second moving Consideration is this, Our unfitness to be the choosers of
our own Conditions. Such is our folly and ignorance, that, if God should leave
us to our own choice, we should make a very foolish choice. We should choose
conditions, as little children do Books, when they come into their Fathers
studies, ( viz.) by their gilt Covers, and the gay Pictures that are in them.
So would many choose conditions, rather by what they seem, then by what they
are: rather by the fineness, then by the fitness of a condition. As a child
chooses a Coat, he looks not so much at this, Whether it be fit, as whether it
be fine and trimm. If God should leave us, to choose our own conditions, we
should be apt to choose unfit conditions for our selves. Our choosing, would be
like a child's in an Apothecaries shop, who chooses the most painted box, when
it may be, there is nothing but Rats-bane and Poison in it. We are apt to judge
of Conditions, by their outside, and never look what is within the condition.
That man that looks no further then upon the outside of a condition, will never
make a right choice. He will be of the number of those, of whom the Lord
speaks, Isa. 7. 15, 16. Who were apt to choose the evil, and refuse the good.
We are indeed children in making a choice of conditions: Ready to take
Rats-bane for Sugar, Hemlock for Parsley, and the Berries of deadly Nightshade
for Cherries. As there is need for a great deal of Spiritual Wisdom, to judge of
conditions; so also to choose conditions. The consideration of our weakness
and folly, should move us, to make the Lord our chooser for us. How quickly
should we undo our selves, if the Lord left us but to our own choice. We should
instead of Bread, choose Stones; instead of Fishes, choose Serpents; instead of
Food, choose Poison; and instead of Blessings, choose things Burdensome; and
instead of what is Really Good, we should choose only what is good in
Appearance. Men would choose Conditions, as many do Wives, ( viz.) by their
outward, not their inwards. They choose Rich and Fine, rather then fit Wives;
Whereas the comfort of Marriage, lies in fitness and suitableness of Spirit.
The fineness of a Shoo, is not that that makes it easy, but the fitness; so it
is not the fineness of a condition, but the fitness that makes it good.
Plutarch, tells us this Story of a Roman, He put away his Wife; his Friends
thereupon asked him, What fault he found with her? Is she not Honest? Is she
not Beautiful? He putting out his Foot, showed them his shoo, and said, Is not
this shoo new? Is it not finely made? And yet none of you know where this shoo
pincheth me. So, if we should be left to choose conditions by their outside, we
should choose that condition that does look fine, but yet may prove evil and
uneasy to us.

3. A third moving consideration, is this, We have a God that is Infinitely
Wise, and therefore there is great reason, we should leave the choice of our
condition to Him. He made man, and therefore knows what is best for man: He
formed man, and therefore knows how to frame his condition. Psalm. 103. 14. He
knows our frame. It is there meant, of our outward frame, ( viz.) The frame
of our bodies: But it is true of our inward frame, ( viz.) the frame of our
Spirits. So, He must needs know best, what condition is best for us.

1. He knows what is in man. It is said of Christ, (which speaks his Divinity)
Joh. 2. 25. He knew what was in man. God knows man's inwards, and knows what
outward will best suit with him. He that made us, knows what condition is best
for us. He that has taken measure of our Bodies, best knows how to fit us
with a Garment: And he that has measured our Foot, best knows how to fit us
with a Shoo. And God that knows our Spirits, knows best what condition will
sit them. Heb. 12. 9. He is called, The Father of Spirits. They come from Him
who is the highest SPIRIT, as from the Fountain. And he is called, Number. 16. 12.
The God of the Spirits of all flesh. He is the God of Spirits, and therefore
must know the temper of Spirits, and what condition will best suite with them.
As He that has the Measure of our Bodies, is the fittest to make a Garment for
us; and he that has the Measure of our Foot, is fittest to make a Shoo for us:
So he that has the measure of our Spirits, is most fit to choose our
conditions for us.

2. As He knows what is in man, so He knows what is in conditions; He
knows what Effects they will have upon men. As he knows our Spirits, so he
knows what conditions will agree with them. We are so ignorant, that if we
were left to choose a condition, we should choose that, that may be unsuitable.
It is with many in choosing conditions, as it is with some in drinking Wine,
who (as I have told you before) swallow it greedily because it is pleasant, but
consider not it is Strength and Operation, and so become Intoxicated and Drunken
by it. This shows, He is fittest to choose our condition for us, that
knows, both what is in us, and what is in conditions; and knows how our
hearts and conditions will suit when they meet. We read of Hazael, That he knew
not the Operation, that Honor and Promotion, would have upon his Spirit: When
he returned this Answer to the Prophet, Am I a dog, that I should do this? How
many have destroyed themselves, by choosing those things, whose Operations they
knew not. We many times know the Names, when we know not the Natures, and
Properties, of things. We know Prosperity by Name, when yet we know not it is
Operations. We know Conditions as some know Herbs, ( viz.) their Names, but
not their Virtues; but the Skilful Physician knows them. God knows what is
in Conditions, and what Operation and Work, they will have upon our Spirits;
And therefore is fittest to choose our condition for us.

4. A fourth moving consideration is this, God's Sovereignty and Lord-ship over
us. He is an Independent Majesty, and we are dependent Creatures. We have a
common saying, That beggars must not be choosers. We are all beggarly
creatures, that have nothing but what we receive from God. We live on Him, and
depend on Him every day, for our daily bread. Now, to be our own choosers of
conditions, suits not with this. He is a proud and saucy beggar, that will be
the chooser of his own alms. We must know, God has put us all into a state
of dependency. This should keep us humble, and work us to a submission unto the
will of God, and to be disposed of by Him. We read of Pharaoh, how he forgot
himself in this particular, Ezekiel. 29. 3. He waxed proud, because his Land was
watered by the River Nilus. Thus it was in that Country, They had not showers
from Heaven, as other Countries had: For, Nilus at a certain time did overflow,
and so did enrich the Land. Upon this, Pharaoh thought, that he depended not
upon God, for the fruitfulness of his Country; and presumes to say, Is not the
River mine? We must know, we are all dependent creatures: What we have, was
first in God's Hand, before it was in ours: As what we give to a beggar, was
first in our hands, before it was in his.

5. A fifth moving consideration, is, Our own unworthiness. What do we
deserve? We forget this, when we would have our own wills. When we would
choose our Conditions, may not the Lord Answer us, as we do a proud beggar,
that is not contented with his alms, Why, what do you deserve? Let God put us
into what condition he will, we should consider, It is better then we do
deserve. It is the confession of Jacob, Genesis 32. 10. I am less then the least
of all thy mercies. Who is it, that can look upon himself as such, and yet
stand upon it, to have what he will?

6. A sixth moving consideration, is, To let the Lord choose our condition for
us, is the way to have comfort in our condition. There is no loss in it:
Whereas we shall be losers, in being our own choosers. There is comfort in
leaving our selves to God, to choose our condition for us. Let the condition be
never so uncomfortable, yet this puts comfort into it; That it is the
condition, that God has chosen for me, and so must needs be best for me. A
man's condition may be such, as may not suit with his own Carnal will and
desires; yet, this is that, that gives comfort to a Christian, When he can
say, This is not a condition that is of my own choosing, but the Lord has
chosen it for me. We read of Abraham, when the Lord called him out of his own
Country, he went forth, not knowing whither he went, Heb. 11. Abraham did not
lose by doing this, and by making God his chooser of a place for him. To close
this; Know, you will be no losers in the end, in letting the Lord choose your
condition for you. Remember what Moses told Israel, Deuteronomy. 8. 16. That God did
all that he had done to them, to do them good at their latter end. We may be
assured, when we leave it to God to choose our condition for us, it shall be,
first or last, good for us.

7. A seventh moving consideration, is this, They have always been losers, that
have been their own choosers of conditions. Look through the Scripture, you
will find that they were, at first or last, unhappy in their choice: And that
those, who would have their own wills, had, in the end, no cause to rejoice.
We read of Rachels passionate wish, Give me children, or else I dye. And what
got she by it? She died in Childbearing. We read, Psalm. 78. 18. of those,
that required meat for their lusts. God gave them meat for their hunger, but
they must have meat for their lusts. And see what came of it, Verse. 30. While
the meat was yet in their mouths, the Wrath of God came upon them, etc. I shall
refer you, to Jer. 42. 10. Jer. 43. 9, 10. Jer. 44. 26, 28. Where you may see,
What those got, that would be their own choosers. Remember, this makes a
condition a snare to us, When it is a condition of our own choosing. 1 Timothy 6.
9. (...); They that will be Rich, ( i. e.) Rich whether God will or no: Who
make it their aim, and design, and full purpose to be Rich, come of it what
will, we may see, what comes of it, ( viz.) They fall into temptations, and
into snares.

Quest. But how may a man know, that he is not the chooser of his own condition?

Answ. In General. Consider this, Conditions are the higher and lower Rooms and
Seats, in this great House of the World. As you know at a Table, there are the
higher and lower Seats. As we read, Math. 23. 6. That the Pharisees did love
the uppermost Seats at Tables. We are apt to affect the higher conditions, but
we should look to this, Whether the place we sit in, be the place of God's
choosing? Whether we did not place our selves? But, whether it be the place
the great Master of the Family placed us in? According to the Counsel of our
Savior, Luke 14. 8, 10. It is said of Jesus Christ, in respect of his Priestly
Office, Heb. 5. 5. He glorified not himself to be made an High Priest. (i. e.)
He did not place himself in that Office. It was not an Office of his own
choosing, but he was called to it by the Father. We should consider, Whether
we do not take the Honor to our selves, of placing our selves in conditions?
We read, when Elijah was threatened by Jezabel, 1 King. 19. 3. He fled for his
life to Beersheba which belonged to Judah; he fled out of Israel, and thence he
went to Horeb, and came into a Cave. See Verse. 9. Behold the word of the Lord
came to him, And he said to him, What do thou here, Elijah? And so he asked
him again, Verse. 13. What do thou here, Elijah? And we find he could give no
good account of his being there. We should consider when we are in a condition,
What account, we can give to God of it. What answer we can make, when we are
asked, How came you there? When we are either in a Prosperous or an Adverse
condition, and are asked, How we came there? what answer can you give? Can you
say, Lord, It is the Condition that thou have chosen for me; and I am here by
thy Disposal and Appointment?

Now, this having been spoken in General; I shall come to show you in some
particulars, How a man may know, that he is not the chooser of his own
condition.

1. He that is not his own chooser, is not guided by his own Counsel, but by
God's Counsel. He consulteth more with God, concerning a condition, then with
his own Heart and Spirit. It is thus with many; when they look upon conditions,
they fall to Consulting with their own Carnal Hearts, and Carnal Friends, and
to consider, What is for their outward Ease, and Pleasure, and Profit: But say
not, as David did, It is good for me to draw near to God. They ask not Counsel
of God, concerning their Condition. Ezr. 8. 21, 22. when Ezra was to go from
Babylon to Jerusalem, he asked Counsel of God. It is said, He proclaimed a Fast
at the River of Ahava, to seek of God a right way for them, and their little
ones, and for all their substance. Where you may see, They would have God
choose their way for them. We read, 1 Samuel 14. 36. When Saul made the Motion of
going after the Philistines, and to fall upon them by night, The people
answered, Do whatsoever seems good to thee: But the Priest said, Let us draw
near hither unto God. (q. d.) Let us not be our own Counselors, but let us ask
Counsel of God. Now in asking Counsel of God concerning a condition, we are to
look to this, That it be, 1. Without Dissimulation. 2. Without Self-Reservation.


1. Without Dissimulation. We read of those, Jer. 42. that would have the
Prophet inquire of God for them: They made as though they would Steer their
Course, by his Counsel. But yet we find, they would be their own choosers. For
the Prophet tells them, Verse. 20. You dissembled in your hearts, when you
sent me to enquire of the Lord. They sent to enquire of God, when they were
resolved before what to do. 2. Without Self-Reservation. Of this were those
guilty, Jer. 42. 6. Though they said, Whether it be good, or whether it be
evil, we will obey the Voice of the Lord. (i. e.) Let God's answer be what it
will, we will hearken to it. And yet we do find, That, because the Lord's
Answer did not agree with their wills, They would not hearken to it. So that we
see, When they made that promise to the Prophet, it was with this Reservation,
Provided, that the Answer that comes from God, be answerable to our desires.
Thus they became their own choosers, and rejected the Counsel of God, to their
own destruction.
2. This speaks, we are not our own choosers of Conditions, ( viz.) When
Lawful means are not neglected; nor Unlawful means used.

1. When Lawful means are not neglected, for the avoiding of the Evils of
Affliction. There are many that do create crosses to themselves. We are to bear
those Crosses that God lays upon us; but we are not to make our own crosses.
There is little comfort, in bearing a cross that is of our own making. It is
one thing, when God makes us sick, or poor, etc. And another thing when we make
our selves so, by the neglect of means. 2. When Unlawful means, are not used to
mend and better our outward condition. Some there are that God has placed low:
And, not being contented, they fall upon the use of unlawful means, to raise
themselves: And will not wait for the Invitations of Providence till God bid
them sit up higher. There is an expression, Prove. 28. 30. He that makes haste
to be Rich, shall not be Innocent. There is a making haste to be Rich. Some
will not keep the Road, but will break Hedges, and think to find a nearer way
to be Rich, by the use of unlawful means.
3. This speaks, we are not our own choosers of Conditions, ( viz.) When
cross-Providences do not discontent us. When what pleases God, pleases us.
When we can say, as Job did, Shall we receive good at the hands of God, and
shall we not receive evil? It is then right, When what pleases God, pleases
us. There is a known Story, of the answer that a Shepherd returned to some
Travailers, who asked him, What weather they should have? Such weather as I
please, says he; and told them, The weather would be such as God pleased, but
what pleased God, pleased him. It is then right, When what pleases God,
pleases us.

4. This speaks, that we are not our own choosers of conditions, ( viz.) When
outward good things are prayed for, and outward evils are prayed against, With
submission to the Will of God. Our Savior tells us, John 5. 30. He came not
to seek his own will, but the Will of Him that sent him. And when he was to
drink of that bitter Cup, though he had prayed, it might pass from him; yet he
adds, Mat. 26. 39. Not my Will, but Thine be done So John 12. 27. Father
(says he) Glorify thy self. When he had prayed before, to be kept from that
hour, yet he comes in with this, Father, Glorify thy self. (q. d.) What ever
becomes of me, Yet Father, Glorify thy self. We should Imitate Jesus Christ in
this, and say, Lord, Let not my will, but thy Will be done. We should in
praying, either for outward good things, or against outward evils, say, as
those did, Acts 21. 14. The will of the Lord be done. We have an expression, 1 John 5. 14. This confidence we have, that if we ask any thing according to his
Will, he hears us. This is the way to be heard, when we ask not only
according to his Revealed Will, but with Submission to his Secret Will. The
Rule for the right using of the great Ordinance of Prayer, is, Asking according
to the Will of God. It is not asking according to our own wills. It is not to
ask what we will, for that is to be our own choosers. In prayer, there is a
making known of our desires to God, both for the bestowing the good things that
we need, and averting the evils that we fear; and, in all this, there must be a
submission to the will of God. In the best of Saints, there is Grace and
Nature. Nature would have it is will, but then Grace comes, and causes a
submission to God's will; And says, as our Savior did, Let not my will, but
thine be done.

5. You may know, you are not your own choosers of Conditions, by this, ( viz.)
When you are not too careful about the Issues, and Events of things. It is thus
with some, They can be content to use the Means; but trouble themselves, about
the Issue, and Event. Some are content, that God should prescribe them the
Means, but they would appoint the Success. When we can use Means, and leave the
Issue to God, without a distrustful thought, then it is right. We have an
expression of Joab's, 1 Chronicles. 19. 13. When the children of Ammon came against
David, he sent Joab forth with his Army to give them Battle; and the Counsel
that Joab gave to his brother Abishai, was this; Be of good Courage, and let us
behave our selves Valiantly for our People, and for the Cities of our God; and,
let the Lord do that which is good in his sight. q. d. Let us use the Means,
and leave the Issue, and Success, to God. Joab knew, that the issues of War,
were in the hands of God, and therefore left them to Him. Our thoughtfulness
about the Issues of things, proceeds from a desire that is in us, to be our
own choosers. This is forbidden, Phil. 4. 6. In nothing be careful. The care
forbidden, is about the Issues and Events of things: And such a Care bespeaks a
fear, that things will not fall out according to our Desires, and Expectations;
and speaks our desire of being our own Choosers.

6. This speaks our not being our own Choosers of a condition, ( viz.) When we
have a Promise, and can rest upon Providence to bring it about, without showing
the way, how to do it. Remember, we are to serve Providence, but not to go
before it. When we go about, to teach Providence its way, How to bring to pass
a Promise, this speaks a desire in us, of being our own choosers. Thus it was
with Rebeccah, when the promise was concerning her Sons, That the elder should
serve the younger: Yet she could not be content with that, but must devise a
way of her own, how to bring it to pass. As if God needed her Sin, and her
Shifting, to bring to pass, what he had promised. Providence needs not our
Midwisery, to bring to pass Gods Purposes. Concerning them, we may say, as the
Egyptian Midwives did of the Israelitish women, That they were lively, and were
Delivered before the Midwives came to them. So, let me say of Providence, and
Promises, They need not our help, for their being Delivered. The truth is, we
are too apt to mix our Wisdom with God's, and to direct his Providence how to
Work. Job 38. 2. ( Says God) Who is this, that darkneth wisdom, with words
without knowledge? How many be there, that darken providence with their own
sinful Inventions? As though they would teach God, how to bring to pass, and
perform his own Promises. It is then right, When we can wait upon God, for the
performance of his Promises in his own Way; And this speaks, We are not our own
choosers.

7. This speaks we are not our own choosers of a condition, ( viz.) When we can
wait God's time (if it be sad), for the change of it. There is an Expression of
the Lord's, Jer. 49. 19. Who will appoint me the time? Some there are, that
will presume to appoint God the time, when He shall alter things, and change
their conditon. We read, John 2. At the Marriage of Cana when they wanted wine;
Christ's Mother said to him, They have no wine, Verse. 3. But he answers her,
Verse. 4. Mine hour is not yet come. Thus we would set God the time, of changing
our Water into Wine. When we need a Mercy, then is our time to seek it; but we
are to wait God's time for the bestowing of it. We are not to set God a day,
but wait. As Habukkuk said he would do, Hab. 2. 1, 2, 3. He would get him into
his Watchtower. He knew the Vision was for an appointed time, and so would
wait God's time, for the deliverance of his people.

8. This speaks, we are not our own choosers of conditions, ( viz.) When the
Issue and Success, and Event of things, does not discontent us. Of this I have
spoken before, and therefore do but touch it. Bernard has a passage,
Quadr-Serm. 6. Enitendum ut sit nobis cum Deo una voluntas; and, quaecunque ei
placent, placeant and nobis, We ought to endeavor, that our wills may be one
with God's; and that whatsoever pleases Him, may please us. But of this I have
spoken before.

Quest. But some may ask, Whether it be lawful for a man to wish, that a thing
had fallen out otherwise then it did? As when a loss or cross befalls us,
Whether we may lawfully wish, it had not been so?

Answ. I shall speak somewhat to the Answer of this Question. So, we must
distinguish between things that are 1. Offensive to God. 2. Troublesome to us.


1. For things that are Offensive to God, We may lawfully wish they had not
been. We find the Lord himself wishing that, Psalm. 81. 13. O that my people
had hearkened to me, and that Israel had walked in my way. So that, To wish,
that those evils that offend God, had not been, is lawful. 2. There are Evils
Troublesome to us. And about them lies the Question, Whether it be lawful for
us to wish, whether such evils had not befallen us.
For answer to that: Though in some cases it may be lawful, yet I shall show
you in some cases it is unlawful.

1. When the wish proceeds from an unwillingness to be under the Cross. We
may sit down and bewail the state of things, and so may wish things were
otherwise then they are; but then we must see, that this proceeds not from
delicacy of spirit, and unwillingness to be under the Cross. A Christian should
love to suffer, though he loves not that which he suffers. 2. The wish is
Evil, when it proceeds from Murmuring and Discontentedness of spirit, with
the Providence and Dispensations of God. Then to wish, such and such a thing
had not been, is sinful, and a kind of secret blasphemy; When we fall upon
censuring God's Administrations: This is to make our selves wiser than God.
Now consider in what cases we may wish things had not fallen out, so as to
make such wishes lawful.

1. When they are not Absolute, but Hypothetical. When the wish is only thus;
If God had been so pleased; or, If the Lord had seen it good. 2. When it is
only by way of bewailing the state of things, but yet there is a willingness to
submit to God. 3. When in these our wishes, we mix Faith with our Tears; and,
under black and sad Dispensations, we believe that God is good, and good to us.
As the Psalmist says, Psalm. 73. 1. Yet God is good to Israel. To close this:
We are to consider two things, 1. We may wish that, that God wills not, and yet
not sin. As the deliverance of a people from Judgment, whom God intends to
Destroy. 2. We may sin in wishing, and desiring what God wills, (I mean in
respect of His Secret Will) as the death of a Father, a Child; and Husband, a
Wife: For whose lives we may lawfully pray, when they are sick, though it may
be the will of God that they shall dye. This yet to be with a Submission to His
will, though not yet Revealed.

Thus I have given you Directions in General, concerning your choosing of
conditions.

I now come to give you in some particular ones.

1. Seek not great things for your selves, but desire only things that are
convenient. We are apt to have our longings after things that are unfit for us.
We read of those, Romans 1. 28. Who did things that were not convenient. So there
are many, who desire things that are not convenient, Jer. 45. Verse. the last,
The Lord gives Baruch a sharp reproof for this, And seek thou great things
for thy self? Seek them not. We should still remember Agur his wish, Prove. 30.
8. Feed me with food convenient for me. According to the Original, it is, Feed
me with the bread of my allowance. (i. e.) that that is my proportion.
Tremelius renders it, Demensum, mine allowance. Some think, that Demensum
signifies, a monthly proportion of food, deriving the word a mense: Some
think, it is a metiendo, from measuring. So Agur prays for his measured
allowance, ( i. e.) such an allowance as did suit with the necessary occasions
of his life. We read of Jacob, when he was going to Padan-Aram, Genesis 28. 20.
that he vowed a vow; And see what he desires of God? It is, bread to eat, and
raiment to put on. He desires not Honor, and Riches, and great things, but
things necessary and convenient. He desires not delicates, (as the children of
Israel did) to be meat for his lust, but bread for his hunger: If thou will
give me (says he) bread to eat. And then he desired not clothes for his pride,
but raiment to put on, (viz.) clothes to cover his nakedness. The Apostle, Romans
12. 16. among those Aphorisms or Aphoristical, precepts, he gives concerning
practice, he gives some concerning conditions, Mind not high things, but
condescend to men of low estate. Mind not high things, (...). And whereas our
Translation reads it, condescend to men of low estate, in the Greek, it is
only, (...), and may be rendered, low Things. And so the Antithesis requires
that it should be the neuter gender, answering to (...), high things. It is as
if the Apostle had said, Mind not high things, but condescend to low things.
The same Apostle says, 1 Timothy 6. 8. Having food and raiment, let us be
therewith content. Contentment is the rest of the Desire; having that that is
necessary and convenient, we should desire no more. And the Apostle gives the
reason, Ver. 7. For we brought nothing into this world, neither may we carry
any thing out.

Here I shall do Two things: 1. Show you the Good of desiring only what is fit,
and convenient. 2. How a man may judge of Convenience, and how he may know what
is convenient for him.


I. Consider the Good of desiring what is only convenient, and of that
condition that is fit for us.

1. It is the condition that is freest from Temptations, and so the best
condition. The temptation commonly lies beyond the line of convenience. The
Apostle says, 1 Timothy 6. 9. That they that will be rich, fall into many snares,
etc. When men are not content with necessary things, and convenient things; but
they must have Great things, and an Abundance; they lay themselves open to, and
fall under, many temptations. This Agur does acknowledge, Prove. 30. 8, 9. In a
Storm, that Ship is in least danger, that carries the lowest Sail. The things
of this Life, are things we easily sin in; Great things make us liable to great
Temptations. And this is one reason, why the apostle exhorts, that Prayer
should be made for great Persons, viz. For Kings, and such as are in Authority,
1 Timothy 2. 2.
Christians, you are to observe, there are two sorts of persons the Tempter is
ready to work upon, and to get advantage of; 1. Of such as are in a High
condition. 2. Of such as are in a Low condition.


1. Such as are in a high condition; who sail with Top, and Top-gallant. Hence
it is, that our Savior says, It is hard for a Rich man to enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. It is rare, to find Great men, and Rich men, Good men.

2. Such as are in a Low condition, and are Discontented with it; That would
have higher, and fuller Sails: i.e. Better, and greater things. These through
their discontedness, lay themselves open to Temptations. It is observed of
Witches, who have given themselves up to the Devil; that they are (for the most
part) such as are Old, and Melancholy Women especially, and such as are of the
poorer, and meaner Sort: And one reason of it, is, Their being discontented
with the means of their condition. Remember this, Our being contented with
things convenient, without seeking great things for our selves, will free us
from many temptations. There is a Story of a Roman, that had great Bribes sent
him, and other great Rewards promised him: The messenger that brought them,
found him at Dinner with a dish of Turnips. He gave this Answer to the
messenger, Carry back your Presents: he that can be content with such Fare,
needs them not.

2. A convenient estate is, the estate that is most easy. Those are fit things
that are most easy; that shoo is the easiest, that fits our foot. It is said of
Abraham, Genesis 13. 2. that he was very rich. The Hebrew word rendered rich,
signifies Heavy, viz. Abraham was very Heavy. Great things are burthensom, and
heavy things; when things convenient are not so. They are attended with a
double burden.

1. A burden of Duties 2. A burden of Cares.
1. A burden of Duties. Much will be required of those, to whom God has given
much of the things of this Life. The more Honor and Riches any have, the more
Duty is expected.

2. A burden of Cares. Great things are attended with great Cares, and great
Fears. Eccles. 5. 12. The sleep of a Laboring man is sweet, but the abundance
of the Rich will not suffer him to sleep. The Rich man's care of getting, and
his fear of losing, depriveth him of his rest. It is with such, as it is with
those troubled with that disease called Ephialtes, or Nightmare; they feel a
burden in their sleep, and think they have a Mountain lying upon their breasts.
Know this, A Convenient estate is the most easy, and is not attended with
those troubles and burdens, as Great things are. We know, Garments that sit
close to us, are easiest for us. A loose garment, as a Cloak, etc. in a windy
day, becomes troublesome. A staff is a help to a man in his Journey, but a
Bundle of staves is a burden. From all this, you may gather, That a convenient
estate is the most easy.

3. A convenient estate is the safest, and most secure, in respect of outward
dangers. It makes us less liable to Envy, and Hatred. The Historian said of the
Roman Emperors, That they got nothing by being Emperors, nisi ut citius
interficerentur; but that they were killed the sooner. Low Trees stand in those
Tempests that overturn the tall ones. Great things do but set us upon a
Pinnacle, from whence we are ready, every moment, to fall, and break our Necks.

4. Consider this, Things convenient, are most commodious for us as Christians.
Do but consider, what Christianity is compared to, in Scripture; and you will
find, That great, and superfluous things, do not suit with it. It is compared
to three things.

To a Race. To a Warfar. To a Pilgrimage.
1. To a Race. 1 Cor. 9. 24. Know you not, that they that run in a race, run
all, etc. They knew it well, for the Isthmian-Games were at Corinth, Verse. 24.
So run that you may obtain. This shows that Christianity is a Race: Now when
a man is to run a Race, he chooses that habit that is most leight. Some have
lost the Race, by the over-burthening of themselves. It is thus with some, They
never know when they have enough: And never consider, Can I run this Race with
all these cumbersome things about me? They load themselves with thick clay,
which unfits them to run that Race. This made our Savior say, That it was hard
for a Rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. That man that desires only
convenient things, has advantage of him that burtheneth himself with things
unnecessary and superfluous. The Apostle says, Heb. 12. 1. That we should cast
off what presses us down, and run with patience, the race that is set before
us. The things of this life, are things that are burdensome and heavy, and
must needs make us run the Race with the more difficulty. I shall conclude
this, with a Story I have heard of a Pluralist that had two Benefices: He being
visited by a Minister upon his Deathbed, and speaking of his hope of going to
Heaven: The Minister Replied, Our Savior tells us, That narrow is the way,
and strait is the gate that leads to life. And do you think to enter Heaven,
with two Steeples on your back?

2. Christianity is compared to a Warfar. As you may see, 1 Timothy 1. 18. 1 Timothy
6. 12. Now, how is it with such men as go to War? They entangle not themselves
with the Affairs of this life. 2 Timothy 24. A loaded Soldier, full of spoil and
plunder, is unfit to fight. Convenient things are most fit for
Christian-Souldiers; and when we desire things beyond the line of convenience,
we forget that by our profession we are such.

3. Christianity is called a Pilgrimage. Christians are said to be Strangers
and Pilgrims. Travelers desire not to burden themselves with things
unnecessary and cumbersome. I told you before, a staff in a Journey is helpful,
but a bundle of staves is burdensome. It was the manner of the Jews, to wear
long garments: But when they were to go a Journey, they did truss and tuck them
up, that they might not hinder them in their Journey. A long garment is apt to
make us fall. Convenient things are most suitable for us, as we are Pilgrims.

Thus, you see the good of things, only-Convenient.

CHAP. XIV.
WE now come to answer another Question, that some may Ask, concerning, What is
convenient? that so they may know that they desire not things unfit, and
unproportionable.

Answ. There are many that hearken to the voice of Covetousness, but not of
Conscience; and so are mistaken in their judging of what is competent, and
convenient for them. We must know, Covetousness knows no competency, but is
still crying, Give, Give. The Greek word for Covetousness, is, (...) an having
of more. When it has this, and that, and the other thing, yet it never has
enough. A covetous man never knows what is his demensum, and due proportion;
and so, never content. I shall show you in Four particulars, How you may judge,
What is competent, and convenient for men in this Life.

1. That that Nature requires, viz. Meat and Drink to nourish and feed the
Body, and Clothing to keep it warm. Among the Rules that Wise men give for the
regulating of our desires, This is one* that we should desire naturally,
according to Nature; and indeed, they make it the Fundamental rule. Nature is
content with little, when Covetousness is content with nothing, let a man have
never so much. It was the saying of Philip of Macedon, when once he had had a
fall upon the earth; being risen up, and having viewed the Impression his body
had made upon the ground: Oh (says he) how little, by Nature, serves us, and
yet whole Kingdoms will not content us. Nature is content with few things: This
the Heathens knew. Socrates could say, when he saw great Treasures carried
through a City: O, how much can I be without! It is the saying of Seneca,
Parabile est quod natura desiderat, et expositum ad manum est; admanum est quod
sat est. That is ready at hand, that nature desires, and will suffice it.
Remember, Nature is contented with a little, and Grace with less.

2. That that is fit for the Estate wherein God has set us. This is another
rule, given for the Regulating of our desires, ( viz.) That we are to desire,
by our Relation; ( i. e.) in reference to the place wherein God has set us. We
must know, that competencies are not all of one size and measure: That that may
be a competency for one, may not be so for another. We must know, there are
distinctions of persons. God has made some to be high, and some low. As in the
world, he has made Mountains and Valleys; so there are in the world, men of
several Degrees, and Estates, and these have their several Competencies,
Conveniences, and Proportions. Agur (no doubt) was a man of quality, (some
think he lived in the days of Solomon, others think in the days of Hezekiah).
He prays for what was convenient for him. Then a man exceeds the line of
convenience, when he desires things that are above the State, Calling, and
Condition, wherein God has set him.

3. Those are convenient things, that are necessary for us, in relation to the
Charge we have, and for the maintaining of our Families. The Apostle, 1 Timothy 5.
8. says, He is worse than an Infidel, that provideth not for his own,
especially those of his own house. Solomon has an observation, Eccles. 4. 8. I
have seen (says he) a man that has neither Child nor Brother, and yet there
is no end of his labors. (viz.) he never has enough, although he has none to
provide for, but himself.

4. Those things are convenient, that are apparently needful, for the future,
and the time to come. The Scripture condemns not a care of providence but
commends, and commands it, 2 Cor. 12. 14. The Fathers ought to lay up for the
children, etc. As we read of Joseph, Who foreseeing the seven years of
famine, laid up Corn before hand. To close this: only seek after things that
are more for usefulness then delight; and things whereby you may be made more
serviceable to your God, and things that suit with the present condition of
times. This was Baruch's failing, of which the Lord tells him, That in sad,
and evil times, he sought great things for himself.

Thus for the first. That we should not seek great things for our selves, but
things Convenient.

2. Seek after those things, that are, without doubt and dispute, and without
controversy, good for a man in this life. When a man seeks after Riches, and
Honor, etc. There is some question to be made, Whether these things are good
for him? But there are some things, that, without dispute, are good for a man
in this life. The Apostle has an expression, 1 Cor. 9. 26. I therefore so run,
(...), as not for an uncertainty. I have told you before, it alludes to the
Isthmian-Games, where Running, and Wrestling, were the chiefest Excercises. And
he tells you, that those that run those Races, though they run for a Crown,
yet it was but for a corruptible Crown: They did but run for that that was
uncertain and corruptible; but he, for those things that were certain and
incorruptible.

Quest. Some may ask, But what are those things that are good without doubt,
without controversy, for a man in this life?

Answ. Though we are not able to tell you concerning outward things, What are
good for a man in this life? Yet we can tell you, of some things that are
indeed good. Those things are of two sorts*

1. General. 2. Particular.
1. General. Godliness is good for a man in this life, and that without
controversy. We find, how much the Scripture does Magnify and Extol it, as that
that is absolutely and really Good. It speaks that of Godliness, that it never
speaks of Riches, or Honor, or any worldly thing, 1 Timothy 4. 8. Godliness is
profitable to all things, having the promises of the life that now is, and of
that that is to come. This the Scripture never said concerning any worldly
things. Profit we know, is that that most men look after. And we say, Those
Arguments drawn ab Vtili, from Profit, are the most moving. Now we see,
Godliness is profitable for all things, not only for the life to come, but for
this life too; It is profitable.

1. For all persons: the things of this world are not so. Godliness is
profitable for High, and Low; for Old and Young; for all Sexes, Men, and Women;
for all Relations, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants.

2. It is profitable for all things: For all the Actions and Businesses of your
lives: For all Religious Actions: For all Civil Actions: You cannot Buy or
Sell, nor converse with men as you should, without this: Yea, it is profitable
in respect of natural Actions, you cannot Eat, nor Drink, nor do any other
thing to the glory of God, without Godliness.

3. It is profitable at all times. It is profitable in Health, in Sickness, in
the time of Youth, and of Old Age; in the time of Peace, and in the day of
Trouble, when Riches will not profit. As Solomon tells us, Prove. 10.

Lastly, (which is the chief) Godliness is profitable for both worlds. It is
profitable in relation to this world. It has the promises of this life. And it
is profitable, in relation to the world to come. It has (as the Apostle
tells us) the promises of that life that is to come. In Scripture, there are
no such promises made to any man, as he is Great, and Rich, and Honorable, but
as he is Godly. To close this, The Scripture speaks this of Godliness, That
it is gain with contentment, 1 Timothy 6. 6. Which shows, how it differs from
all worldly gain. Godliness is great gain with contentment. Covetousness may be
gain, but it is without contentment: But Godliness is gain, with contentment:
It is gain in the midst of losses: It makes a man contented, whether he has
little or much.

To Covetousness, there is nothing that is enough: But Godliness, shows a man
enough in God; which makes him say, not only with Esau, I have enough; but to
say with Jacob, I have all. Now for Particulars.

1. It is good for a man in this life, to eye more the enjoyment of God, then
enjoyments from God. This is good without controversy, and without dispute.
Some there are that possess much in this life, but never put this question, Do
I enjoy God, with the things that I receive from him?

2. It is good for a man in this life, To rejoice more in the God of his
Mercies, then in the Mercies of his God: Some rejoice in this, That their Corn,
and their Wine, is increased, and that they have goods laid up for many years:
This speaks worldliness, not Godliness. Godliness teaches a man to rejoice
more in the Creator, then in the Creature: More in the Fountain, then in the
Stream: More in the Sun, then in the Stars. Psalm. 4. Thou have (says David)
put more joy into my heart, than they had, when their Corn and their Wine
increased.

3. This is, without dispute, good for a man in this life, ( viz.) To serve God
cheerfully, however He serve us, and deal with us. Selfishness will teach us to
serve God, while he serves us. He shall have Duty, while we have Mercies: He
shall have Work, only while we have Wages; according to the Ancient Proverb, No
penny, no Paternoster. Godliness will destroy this mercinariness. Satan would
persuade the Lord, that Job did serve him only upon that account; but he found
it otherwise.

4. This, without dispute, is good for a man in this life, ( viz.) To keep God,
whatsoever we lose for keeping Him: And to please Him, whomsoever we displease.
Wordliness will teach us, to keep Him, while we can keep our worldly
pref^rments: But Godliness will teach us, to keep Him, though we lose all for
keeping Him.

5. This, without dispute, is good for a man in this life ( viz*) To remember
God in all our ways, and to eye his Glory in all the Actions and business of
this life. 1 Cor. 10. 31. Whether you eat or drink, or whatsoever else you do,
do all to the Glory of God.

6. This, without dispute, is good for a man in this life, ( viz.) To
Consecrate all his outward things, and enjoyments, to the Service of God. We
read, 1 King. 20. 3. When Benhadab sent this message to Ahab, Thy Silver and
thy Gold is mine: Thy Wives and thy Children (even the Goodliest) are mine.
Ahab returned this Answer, I am thine, and all that I have is thine. So it is
good for a man to serve the Lord, with the things that he enjoyes, as those
things that are His. We read, How those in the primitive times, Acts 4. 35.
that had possessions, sold them, and laid them down at the Apostles feet. So it
is good for a man, To lay down all (as I may say) at the Feet of God.

7. This is good for a man in this life, without dispute, ( viz.) To give the
things of another life the pre-eminence. This our Savior shows us, in Mat.
6. 33. Seek first the Kingdom of God, and it is Righteousness, etc. We are to
set Heaven, above Earth, and Heavenly things, above all worldly things. It is
not good for a man, to give the things of this life, the upper hand of the
things of Eternity. We find, how Jesus Christ has placed things, Prove. 3. 16.
(viz.) Length of days on the right hand, and Riches and Honor on the left.
The right hand is given to Eternity, and the things of Eternity; when Riches
and Honor, etc. are set at the left hand. We read of Joseph, Genesis 48. 14. When
he heard his Father Jacob was sick, he came with his two Sons, to visit his
Father, and presented them to him, to receive a blessing from him: But that Son
that he brought to his Fathers right hand, he put his left hand on. Thus it is
with many, They set those things at the right hand, that Jesus Christ sets
at the left. It is good, when we see the things of this life, striving to get
the uppermost place, To bid them come down, and sit lower.

Some may ask, What is it that speaks our giving the things of another life,
the Pre-eminence? Answer,

1. When we give them the pre-eminence, in respect of Esteem. When they are the
things most prized and esteemed by us: As David said, Psalm. 84. 10. That one
day in God's Court, is better than a thousand. It is good for a man in this
life, to think meanly of the things of this life, in comparison of the things
of another life. In Isa. 40. 17. When God's infinite perfections are looked on,
all the things of this world are as nothing: All Nations before him are as
nothing, and they are counted to him less then nothing. So should we make
account of the things of this life, as nothing, in comparison of that life that
is to come.

2. Giving them the pre-eminence, in respect of Affection, Collos. 3. 2. Set
your Affections on things Above, and not on the things of the Earth. It is good
for a man in this life, to have his Affections weaned from the things of this
life, and wedded to the things of another life. Though we have the things of
this life in our hands, yet those things should not have our hearts. Remember,
our Affections were made for better things, than things below.

3. Giving them the pre-eminence, appears in respect of pursuit, ( viz.) When
the things of another life are chiefly sought after: According to the command
of our Savior, Mat. 6. 33. Seek first the Kingdom of God. Joh. 6. 27. Labor
not for the meat that perishes, etc. The things of another life, are the
things that are primarily, and principally to be sought after.

4. Giving the things of another life the Pre-eminence, appears by this, (
viz.) in making the things of this life serviceable, to those of another life.
The Lord said concerning Esau, and Jacob, The elder shall serve the younger.
Thus many make the things of Heaven, to serve their inferiors; giving the
better hand to the things of this life.

5. Giving the things of another life the Pre-eminence, will appear by this, (
viz.) The Advantages, and disadvantages that relate to another life. When an
Heavenly advantage is more to us, than an Earthly one; And when an Heavenly
disadvantage, is more to us than a temporal one. It will appear thus, When we
do that, that is to our disadvantage, when the disadvantage only concerns this
life, and the thing done, concerns the life to come. This did Moses, in
forsaking Egypt, He did that that was seemingly disadvantagious to him, in
relation to this life. We read of those, Heb. 11. 35. They accepted not
deliverance. The meaning is, They accepted it not, upon the terms upon which
it was offered. To have had deliverance was a temporal advantage: But to have
accepted it upon those terms, (they found) would have been an Eternal
disadvantage to them. Upon this account, did the Martyrs of Old, refuse life
when it was offered them: They saw a temporal advantage cloyed with an Eternal
disadvantage.

Thus for the Seventh thing, that is good for a man in this life.

8. This is good for a man in this life, without dispute, ( viz.) So to live,
and so to walk, (what ever his condition be) as that he may fetch comfort from
the consideration, of what his condition in another life shall be. Some there
are, that being in a prosperous condition, draw all their comfort from it. Of
such David speaks, They have their Portion only in this life: They comfort
themselves only with what is their Portion here, without considering what their
condition will be hereafter. It is thus with gracious ones, (what ever their
condition be) They can say, My refreshment and comfort, flows not from the
things of my condition, and the Springs below: But from the consideration of
this, ( viz.) What my condition shall be in Heaven, and so from the Springs
Above. Thus in the saddest condition, we find the Saints of God, have comforted
themselves with that. As you may see, 2 Cor. 5. 1. Heb. 11. 10. Romans 8. 18.
Heb. 10. 34. Heb. 13. 14. Heb. 4. 9. To close this, It is good, when our
present condition in this life, is sweetened with the consideration, of what it
shall be in another life. It may be, our house does not please us, but it is
comfortable to think, we shall have a Palace. It is the Psalmist's expression,
Psalm. 66. 12. Thou broughtest us through Fire and Water, yet thou broughtest us
forth into a Wealthy place. Remember, that the Wealthy place, that is beyond
our condition, gives a gracious Heart comfort, in the worst of temporal
conditions.

9. This is good for a man in this life, without dispute, ( viz.) What ever his
portion in this life be, To make God his Portion. Let his Portion be a Portion
of Comforts, or a Portion of Crosses: It is good to have a Portion above all
this, ( viz.) The God of all comfort. As Jacob said to his Son Joseph, when he
was a dying, Genesis 48. 22. I have given to thee, one Portion above thy Brethren.
It is good in the best outward condition, when we can say, I have a Portion
above all this. We find in Scripture, the Saints of God, comforting themselves,
with this and that.

1. When they had somewhat else to glory in. 2. When they had nothing else to
glory in, or fetch comfort from.
1. When they had something else to glory in, and fetch comfort from: When
they have had a large portion of outward; yet they have rejoiced in this, That
the Lord was their Portion. Thus David, Psalm. 16. 5, 6. Psalm. 119. 57.

2. The Saints have Gloried in the Lords being their Portion, when they have
had nothing else to boast of. Thus did the Church, when in a sad condition,
Lam. 3. 24. The Lord is my Portion, says my Soul. This the Church spoke, in
the day of her Captivity. You must know, God is the best Portion. Were a man's
portion in this life, as larg as from Sea, to Sea; were it as Glorious a
Portion as Solomon's was, yet it is nothing, except we have the Lord for our
Portion. God is a Soul-Portion, and must needs be the best Portion; Which will
appear, if we consider these things.

1. Excellency. The Soul is an Excellent thing; and base things, (such as the
things of the world are) can never be a fit portion for the Soul. God is
Supereminently, and Unconceaveably Excellent; and therefore, in Scripture,
Great and Excellent things (according to the Original) are called the things of
God. 2. Spirituality. The Soul is a Spirit. God is a Spirit: And nothing but a
Spirit, can be a portion for a Spirit. The Soul is the spirit created, and God
is the Spirit Creating: And nothing can be the portion of Spirits, but he that
is the God and Father of Spirits. 3. Infiniteness. Nothing but what has
Infinite Fullness in it, can be the Soul's Portion. There is an Image of God's
Infiniteness upon the Soul: It Is desires are Infinite, and so needs an Infinite
Portion. 4. Everlastingness. The Soul lives for ever, and seeks an
everlasting Portion. When Basil was tempted by the Emperor's Lieutenant, with
offers of Money, and Preferment: He returned this Answer, Give me Riches that
will last for ever, and Preferment that will endure to Eternity. God is a
Portion for ever. Psalm. 73. 26. He is my Portion for ever. He is the Soul's
Portion in this life. As David speaks, Psalm. 142. 5. Thou art my Portion in
the Land of the living. And he is the Soul's Portion in the world to come: As
the Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 15. God will be all in all. There he will be
such a Portion as is above Expression, above Comparison, above present Sense
and Feeling, above Desire, above Hope and Expectation, above Imagination.
10. This is good for a man in this life, without dispute, ( viz.) To have Sin
pardoned. Psalm. 32. 1. Blessed is the man, whose iniquity is forgiven, and
whose sin is covered. He sets not the Crown of Blessedness, upon the head of
the Rich man, or the Great man; but on the head of that man, whose iniquity is
forgiven. Pardon of sin, is radically every good thing. When Israel had
committed that great Sin, the first thing Moses prays for, is pardon of their
sin, Exodus 30. 32. Pardon of sin, is that, without which

1. The best worldly condition, cannot make a man happy. Let him be a Rich man,
a Great man; yet he is not a happy man, except his iniquity be forgiven, and
his sin be pardoned. Worldly things, cannot mount a man above the evil that is
in sin, and so he must needs be unhappy. It is said of Naaman, That he was a
Great, and Honorable man, but he was a Leaper; that imbittered all. So, let a
man be what he will for his outward condition, sin unpardoned will spoil all.
What comfort has a Great man, if he has the Stone in the Bladder, or the
Gout? So, when sin is unpardoned, it imbitters the comforts of the best worldly
condition. If we could extract the quintessence of all outward comforts, into
one Catholic and Universal comfort, yet it would do nothing, to cure the evil
of sin. 2. The worst worldly condition, cannot make a pardoned man Miserable.
The comfort of a pardoned condition, is such, as is not to be over-topped by
any discomfort in any worldly condition. Our Savior speaking to the man, sick
of the Palsy, says, Mat. 9. 2. Son, be of good comfort, thy sins are forgiven
thee. Pardon of sin, is the greatest comfort. Isa. 40. 1. Comfort ye my people,
(says the Lord). And one thing wherewith they were to be comforted, was this,
That their iniquity was pardoned. Could we extract, out of all worldly Evils,
the quintessence of them, into one Catholic and Universal Misery (As it is
reported of Caesar-Borgia, That he was so skilled, in the Art of Poisoning,
that he could contract the Poison of a hundred Toads, into one drop): Yet all
this would not amount to the Misery that attends sin.
11. This is good for a man in this life, without dispute, To lay up Treasure
there, where things are Purest, and things are Surest, ( viz.) To lay up
Treasure in Heaven: According to our Saviors Counsel, Mat. 6. 19, 20. Lay not
up for your selves, Treasures on earth, where the rust, and moath does corrupt,
etc. Some may ask, But is it not good for a man to lay up Treasures on earth?
Let me tell you, It is not good for you, to have those for your only Treasure.
They are Treasures that Rust may corrupt, or Thieves Steal. But would you know,
what is good for a man indeed, in this life? It is, laying up Treasure in
Heaven. There things are Pure, no Rust to Corrupt them; and there things are
Sure, no Thieves to Steal them. It is Wisdom in treasuring up of things, not to
reflect upon the place from which we are going; but upon the place, to which we
are going. Were a man only for this life, and were this world only, to be his
continuing City; then it were somewhat, to lay up Treasures here: But remember,
this life is but a passage to another; and it is good to lay up our Treasure
there, whither we are going. It should be with us, as with a man that is
removing into another Country; He sends his Treasure before hand thither, and
keeps no more about him, then what will serve him for his Removal. So, that
without controversy, this is good for a man in this life, To lay up Treasure in
Heaven.

12. This is good for a man in this life, without dispute, ( viz.) To seek
after distinguishing Favors. Conditions in themselves, are un-distinguishing,
Eccles. 9. 1. We should, therefore, look after those things that speak
distinguishing, and not common, Love, Psalm. 4. 6. There be many that say,
(says David) Who will show us any good? But Lord, Lift thou up the light of
thy countenance upon us. This is a distinguishing thing: Corn, and Wine, and
Oil, are not. But the light of God's countenance is. Christians, remember, that
the outward things of a condition, are but common, without the Graces of the
Condition.

13. This is good for a man in this life without dispute, ( viz.) To keep peace
within, however things are without. A good Conscience, is a good thing for a
man in this life. An Heathen could say, as I told you before, Intus si recte,
ne labores, If all be well within, never trouble thy self. Solomon says of a
good Conscience, that it is a continual Feast. A good Conscience is an Heaven,
and an evil one, is an Hell in this life.

14. This is good for a man in this life, without dispute, ( viz.) For a man to
keep himself, in a continual preparation for Death. This is good for a man
without controversy. And it will appear by these particulars.

1. It is not good for a man to live one hour in that estate, wherein he dare
not dye. Dare you dye in an Unbelieving, and an Unregenerate Estate? 2. It is
good for a man to dye daily, and to keep himself in a dying disposition. When
the Apostle says, Pray continually, The meaning is, That we should still keep
our hearts in a praying Frame. So, when we speak of dying daily, The meaning
is, That by daily meditation of, and preparation for, Death, we should dye
daily. A Lion seldom seen, is the more terrible. 3. It is good for a man in
this life, To do every thing so, as that it may hold an agreement with a dying
condition. This is that we should look to; Whether, in seeking the things of
this life, we seek them so, as that our seeking, holds an agreement with a
dying state? Do you use the world, as though you used it not? Do you do every
Duty, as if it were your dying Duty? 4. It is good for a man in this life, To
live every day, as if it were his last day; and to be doing that every day,
that we should be found doing at our last day. Some think that good at Death,
that they looked not upon as good in Life. O that men would consider, that what
is good at the last hour, must needs be good every hour! As on the contrary,
What is evil at Death, must needs be evil in Life. 5. It is good for a man, so
to live, that when he comes to die, he may have nothing to do but to die. It is
a folly in many, to put off all, till Sickness and Death come. Solomon calls
upon men, Eccles. 12. 1. To remember their Creator in the days of their youth.
It is a madness in people, to leave the hardest work, to the worst and weakest
State. To close all: Let me tell you Christians, That it is said of David, that
after he had served his Generation, by the Will of God, (or, as some read it)
After he had served the Will of God in his Generation, he fell a sleep. How
many fall a sleep, before they do their work? And put off their bodies, before
they put off their sins.
FINIS.

