You see his Shadow and his outward Looks,
Such was his face, which yet is but the rind:
To know him better you must read his Books,
You Will wonder at his gifts, and noble mind.
portrait of Bricius Bauderon

THE Expert Phisician: Learnedly treating of all AGVES and FEVERS.

Whether Simple or Compound.

Showing their different Nature, Causes, Signs, and Cure, viz.

A Feverish Heat. The differences of Fevers. A Diary Fever. A Burning
Fever. A continual Putrid. A continual Tertian. A continual Quotidian. A
continual Quartan. An intermitting Quartan. Fevers annexed to Quartans. A
Semitertian Fever. An Hectic Fever. Confused Erratick Fevers. Malignant
pestilent Fevers, etc.
Written originally by that famous Doctor in Physic, Bricius Bauderon, and
Translated into English by B. W. Licentiate in Physic by the University of
Oxford.

Published for the general good of this Nation, and may be put in practice with
facility and safety.

Printed at London by R. I. for John Hancock, and are to be sold at the first
shop in Pope's Head Alley, near the Exchange. 1657.

The Epistle to the Reader*
Courteous Reader*
THere are no Diseases more frequent in this Nation, none more difficult of
Cure, than Agues and Fevers, so that they are Proverbially called, The Scandal
of Phisicians: Fernelius, who was thought to have writ best against them, was
himself destroyed by one; neither has there yet been published any remedy so
saving, as their fiery darts are killing.

Accept then of this Balsome, gathered from the choice Gardens of the Greeks,
Latins, Arabians, by the hands of that incomparable Dr. Bricius Bauderon,
whose age and experience works more on my faith, than the unfathomed Arcana of
the modern Febrifuga; he was eighty years aged when he writ this Tract, and
had fifty years confirmed by his Practice, what in one months time thou may
now be master of; his painful long-teeming Birth wants nothing but thy embraces
to cherish it, it has been for many years cloystered up in the French and
Latin tongue, though desired by ambitious heads as a choice purchase; few
private Studies could boast of its possession, which encouraged me to set it
forth in this English Garb, in which it is entire, though not so splendid; more
profitable, though not so beauteous: Such emunct nostrils as shall snuff at
it, are like those my Author speaks of, that will swound at the smell of a Rose;
suburban wits, that breath best in the worst Air; or like some unclean
Creatures, that thrive best in standing Pools; but I leave them, and commend
the ingenious to the Work it self, methodical, facil, and perspicuous enough to
benefit the meanest capacity, yet satisfy the highest; read and be convinced.

Thine, B. W.

The Contents of every Chapter.
Chapter 1. Treats of a Feverish heat. Chap. 2. Of the differences of
Fevers. Chap. 3. Of the Division of Fevers. Chap. 4. Of the Circuit of
Fevers. Chap. 5. Of the Constitution of Fevers. Chap. 6. Of the Four times of
Diseases in special. Chap. 7. Certain Physical Rules for practice Chap. 8. Of
a Diary Fever. Chap. 9. Of an unputrid Synochus. Chap. 10. Of a continual
putrid Fever. Chap. 11. Of a Burning-feaver, and continual Tertian. Chap. 12.
Of the Cure of these Fevers. Chap. 13. Of a continual Quotidian Fever. Chap.
14. Of a continual Quartan. Chap. 15. Of an intermitting Tertian. Chap. 16. Of
the Cure of a spurious intermitting Tertian. Chap. 17. Of an intermitting
Quotidian. Chap. 18. Of a Quotidian Fever from salt Phlegm. Chap. 19. Of an
intermitting Quartan. Chap. 20. Of Fevers annexed to Quartans. Chap. 21. Of
confused, compounded, and erratick Fevers. Chap. 22. Of a Semitertian Fever.
Chap. 23. Of a Hectic Fever. Chap. 24. Of Malignant and pestilent Fevers.
Chap. 25. Of the Cardiacal Fever. Chap. 26. Of the Fever from Crudity.
Special observations for the Readers more easy apprehension.
REader, for thy better understanding of the quantity of Weights used in this,
and other Physic Books, in Compounding of Medicines, observe this brief
direction; That,

A Grain is the quantity of a Barley Corn. A Scruple is twenty Barley Corns.
Three Scruples contain a Dram. Eight Drams contain an Ounce.

The expert Phisician, Learnedly treating of all Agues, and Fevers, whether
Simple, or Compound,
CHAP. I.
Of a Feverish heat.
A Fever is so called from the Latin word Forveo, Of the Name.
because it is a Fervor or Heat affecting the Body; the Gr^eks call it (...),
that is to be inflamed or taken with a Fever, sometimes it is called (...)
(...), that is a fiery habit, or fiery disposition of the Body, and by
Hippocrates in the first Book Epidem Commen. 3. text 18. (...)* that is, fire
it self.

It is a praeternatural heat kindled in the heart, The definition of a Fever.
as in its proper subject, primarily and per se hurting our actions, which heat
by the mediation of blood and spirits, through the Veins and Arteries, is
diffused through the whole body.

Now, The division of heat.
all heat is either Natural, or ascititious, the Natural is either implanted
and fixed, or elementary and fluid, and a Fever cannot consist in either of
these, because the implanted is fomented by the primogenious moisture, whose
original is heavenly, and once depeculated or wasted, cannot be repaired; nor
in the elementary, because this by its temper does help and cherish the
implanted, and further it in concocting and assimilating the nourishment which
is to be converted into our substance; this heat Phisicians call influent,
because with the spirits and blood from the heart, it is carried by the Veins
and Arteries to all parts of the body; a feverish heat then is in the
ascititious says Galen, Comment. on the sixth book, Epidem. Hippo. text the 28.

An ascititious heat is Threefold; The division of ascititious heat.
the first in respect of the other is said to be simple, that is a bare
exuperancy of heat, which is thus engendered* the Elementary or fluent heat by a
daily increase receding from its temper and mediocrity becomes excessive, so
that that which was natural, by degrees becomes unnatural, and therefore
vicious, and offensive to nature, does hurt her operations; and in this
ascitious heat are your Ephemerae or Diary Fevers, and unputred Synochus. The
second heat different from the former is acrid and mordent, arising from
putrified matter, which though it be not very burning hot, yet favoring of the
condition of the matter from whence it proceeds, is praeternatural and
burdensome to the implanted heat, and in this are putrid Fevers both continual
and intermitting, compound, erratick, and confused. The third ascitititious
heat is wholly malignant and pernicious, caused from some venenate or pestilent
matter, not from the exuperancy of its quality, as the first, nor from
putrefaction, as the second, but is substantially different, and inimicous to
the vital and implanted heat.

CHAP. II.
Of the differences of Fevers.
SEeing that all Fevers are caused by an ascititious heat, and not by a
natural, as was said before, it is necessary we take their differences first
from the essence of heat, then from the subject in which the Fever is, or from
the manner of the motion of heat, or from the cause of the Disease, or from the
matter, or symptoms.

The first difference then is from the essence of the praeternatural heat, From
the essence.
by which some action is always hurt, because there is a recession from the
natural state, and by how much the greater and more vehement this heat is, by
so much the greater ought the Fever to be accounted; as for example, a (...),
that is, a Burning fever may be said to be greater than any other Fever,
because its heat being more intense it appears more acrid and mordent than any
other humoral Fever; but on the contrary, if you compare it with an Hectic,
it is less than that, because this possesses the very substance of the heart,
but that the Humors near unto it.

Another difference may be taken from the subject wherein the Fever is, From
the subject.
as for example, by how much the nobler the part affected is, by so much the
more vehement the Fever, as that Fever which proceeds from a Frenzy,
peripneumony, or inflammation of the Lungs, or from a Plurisie by reason of the
parts affected, shall be far more dangerous than that which follows an
inflammation of the Reins, Spleen, or Foot; besides, the Fever is
proportionate, or improportionate in relation to the subject, and thence shall
be esteemed greater or less, as a Burning fever is proportionate in a Body hot
and dry, of youthful age at Midsummer, or in a hot and dry region, and
consequently less dangerous than the improportionate, which should happen to an
aged body, cold and moist in the Winter season, and in a cold and moist
Country, as Hippocrates does excellently note it, Aphor. 34. Sect. 2.

The Third is from the manner of the motion, From the manner of the motion.
and motions here, is nothing else but a swift or slow transition from one
subject to another; the swift motion is as often as the heat passes from a
crasse thick subject, to a tenuous one, as for example; as often as an
intermitting Fever does pass into a continual or other putrid one; and on the
contrary, the slow motion is as often as an Ephemera or putrid fever
degenerates into a Hectic, for the Spirits are easier set a fire than the
Humors, and these easier than the solid parts of heart and body; likewise an
unputrid Synochus being neglected, does easily pass into a putrid one, and so
of other sorts of Fevers.

The Fourth is from the efficient cause, From the efficient cause.
which is threefold, the one evident, the other internal, the third occult;
the evident is drawn from those Six non-natural things, as from the air,
inanition or repletion, etc. the internal from fluxions on the stomach or
lungs, obstruction, crudities, or putrefaction of humors, etc. The occult
cause may be double, external, and internal, the external as the contact of a
Torpedo, impure copulation, the use of malign and venenate medicaments, etc.
from whence are Fevers epidemical, endemical, sporadical, and pestilential,
says Hippocrates and Galen, the internal cause is hard to be discovered,
because besides the putrefaction, there is a certain venenate air, or breath,
which is for the most part unknown to us, whether it depend on the element of
Stars, and therefore is called by Hippocrates, Quid divinum, as was that
sweating sickness in Britain, which did not only depopulate England, but
Germany and France.

The Fifth difference is from the matter, From the matter.
which consists either in the spirits, or the humors, or the solid parts, and
these three Hippocrates in the sixth of his Epidem. last Section, text 19.
calls (...), that is, containing, contained and impetuous bodies.

The containing, The containing.
are the solid parts in which are caused Hectic Fevers, both universal and
particular, they first invade the substance of the heart, then equally the
other parts: these primarily and per se, possess the substance of some private
part, from whence they are communicated to the heart, and to the rest of the
solid parts, as to the Lungs, Midrist, Stomach, or Liver, etc.

The contained, The conta^n^d.
are the four Humors which offend either in quantity or quality, in quantity
as often as these Humors are more or less enflamed in the heart without
putrefaction, and hence are the Epacmastical, Acmastical, and Paracmastical
Fevers; in quality, in relation either to touch, sight, or taste, according to
Hippocrates, as by the touch of the Pulse, some are judged mordent, others
mild, and temperate in comparison with others; others appear moist as bilious
Fevers, such as are your continual tertians, or burning Fevers, all which are
mordent, especially about the state of the Disease, and before the Crisis; the
m^lde ones are such as the true Diary Fever, which ends with a sweat or
moystness, and your unputred Synochus, and (...), that is moist, of which Galen
makes mention against Lycus; for these in respect of other Fevers are called
mild and temperate. To the sight are referred the red ones, as the unputred
Synochus, which is from a more fervid blood, the white ones as Quotidians, the
livid as Quartans, Syncopal, or Pestilential Fevers; others are arid and
horrid to the eye, as the colliquating Hectic, and that of the second or third
degree. In relation to taste, some are said to be sweet, as those from natural
Phlegm, and many bloody ones, which even after putrefaction retain some
sweetness; others are bitter as the bilious, others salt, as those from salt
phlegm, and the hybernal causes, or winter burning Fever.

The impetuous are the vital, The impetuous.
animal, and natural spirits; in the vital spirits is caused a Diary of one
day, if the spirits be tenuous, of more days, If they be crasse; but more of
this in its proper place. Some Fevers are long, others short; some diurnal,
others nocturnal; some ordinate, others inordinate; some periodical, others
erratical, according to the condition of the Sick, the quality of the morbous
matter, or its quantity and motion.

The Sixth difference of Fevers is taken from their Symptoms, From the Symptoms
as often as a part is possessed with an inflammation, and these Fevers are
always continual, whether blood, choler, or phlegm superabound; if blood, the
Fever is called Phlegmonodes, if choler, Erysipelatodes, and Typhodes, or
burning; and they have another name or appellation from the part affected, as
from the Liver Hepatica, from the Spleen Splenica, from the Bladder Cystica,
from the Throat Cynanchica, from the Head Phrenitica, Lethargica, Comatosa,
from the Lungs Pneumonica, from the Side Pleuritica, from the Midriff
Diaphragmatica, from the Womb Hysterica, from the Stomach Stomachica, etc.

CHAP. III.
Of the division of Fevers.
ALL Fevers of what sort soever are either Essential, or Symptomatical, the
Essential is either simple, compound, confuse, erratick, pestilent, or of
malignant nature.

The Simple is either in the spirits, The simple Fever.
or humors, or solid parts; chiefly in the vital spirits, then in the animal
and natural (if there be any such) is the true Ephemera which lasts but one
day, but longer if the spirits be crasse. In the Humors are engendered diverse
Fevers, of which some are continual, others intermitting, and of the continual
some are from the Humors not putrefied, others from putrid humors, and these
either from the humors equally, or inequally putrefied.

Those which are from the humors not putrefied are from the blood inflamed in
the heart by a preternatural heat, An unputred Synochus.
which by the greater veins diffused into the habit of the body, does
primarily, and per se hurt our actions. These differ from an Ephemera
nominally, and in respect of the matter not really, nor in way of cure, because
the one is in the spirits inflamed, the other in the blood unputrefied; both
may proceed from the same external causes, and the same method and remedies
serve for the cure of both, they are continual, and have but one accession,
although there be three sorts of them distinguished by their several names.

The first is, The Homotonos.
when the heat remains equal and alike to it self, through the whole course of
the Fever, and how much is inflamed anew, so much is presently dissipated, and
this the Greeks call Homotonos, or of equal tenor.

The second is, The Epacmastic^.
when the late inflammation is greater than the dissipation, and then the heat
gathers strength, and grows stronger, and this is called Epacmastical, or
increasing.

The third is, The Paracmastical.
when there is more dissipated, then is afresh inflamed, and it sensibly
declines till it end, and by the same Greeks is called Paracmastical, or
declining; and this Synochus may last seven days, but an Ephemera transcends
not the third day unless the spirits be crasse; full bodies which abound with
blood, and fare deliciously and live idly, and those in hot and moist, or
temperate regions, are most subject to the unputred Synochus, for the most part
it ends with sweating or moystness, as an Ephemera, which wants not its danger,
if you neglect bleeding.

Fevers which are in the putred Humors are either from equal, The putred
Synochus.
or inequal putrefaction; if the Humors be equally putrefied in the great
Veins, the Fevers are continual, and are threefold distinguished by the same
names as the unputred Synochus; for the first is Homotonos, when the
putrefaction remains equal and alike to it self through the whole course of
the Disease, and how much putrefies so much is emptied; the second
Epacmastical, when the putrefaction from the beginning to the end increases;
the ast Paracmastical, when the morbifical humor is from the beginning to the
end by degrees diminisht. The^^ three have no remissions, or exacerbations
apparent at intervalls (because the Humors are equally putrefied in the great
Vessels) as are in those which proceed from the Humors inequally putrefied in
the same Vessels, of which in their proper place; neither have they any
intermissions as are in the exquisite intermitting Fevers, but last till the
whole putrefaction is discussed; their sigues are like to those of the unputred
Synochus, but more conspicuous, because they are from putred matter, but those
from the effervescency of heat.

The latter Phisicians use the word (...), The Synechis.
for every continual Fever caused from the Humors inequally putrefied in the
great Veins, to difference it from (...), which signifies the same, if you
respect the etymology of the word. This Synechis, or continual Fever, has
diverse appellations according to the site of the Humor which does unequally
putrefie; if in the great Veins near to the heart, a (...) or burning fever
is engendered, but if in the other Veins further off, a continual Fever is
caused, which has its denomination from the predominant humor, viz. if
Natural choler putrefie, there will follow a bilious Synechis, which every
other day shall have its exacerbations and remissions, and in the morning
especial shall be most remitted, but without intermission, from whence is a
continual tertian; if Natural phlegm putrefie in the veins, there shall be a
continual quotidian, which likewise every day at set hours shall have its
remissions and exacerbations; if a melancholy humor putrefie, there shall be
a continual quartan, which every fourth day shall have its intension and
remission, but no intermission.

Amongst those Fevers which are caused from Humors inequally putrid,
Intermitting Fevers.
there are some others which differ from the continual, both in matter and
site, and are called intermitting, for the matter of continual Fevers is
natural, but that of intermittings is excrementitious; the seat and matter of
the continual, is in the great Veins, but that of the intermitting without
them, as in the Liver, Stomach, Spleen, Intestines, Mesentery, and habit of the
body, so that if excrementitious choler putrefie, it is called an intermitting
tertian, because it recurres every third day, begins with rigor, and sometimes
with vomiting, if it be exquisite, whose fit is twelve hours, or less,
according to the quantity of choler producing it, and is terminated with
Sweats, then ends in an apyrexy, or perfect infebricitation, and the fuel of
this Disease is principally in the Liver; likewise if excrementitious phlegm
putrefie, out of the great Vessels is caused an intermitting quotidian, whose
fit is eighteen hours by reason of its coldness, crassness, and clamminess, and
it begins with a coldness of the Nose, Ears, Hands, and Feet, and is
terminated with a moisture, and not with sweat as a tertian, the fountain of
this is the Stomach, if glassie phlegm putrefie in the same place; there is
another kind of Fever which the Greeks call (...), the word is derived from
(...), which is mild, and (...) the Sea, because as that at first seems smooth
to the Mariner, and by and by is tossed with most horrid Tempests, so this
Fever at first invasion is gentle, and so takes root, and a little while after
precipitates the sick into most desperate dangers, or as Aegineta would have
it, it is derived from the Adverb (...), that is, gently, and (...), heateth;
to this kind may be referred those from Rheum, and that which accompanies
the Green Sickness, but of them in their place. If a melancholy
excrementitious Humor putrify there, it begins with horror, and sometimes
with vomiting, as a tertian, and the fit is twelve hours, or more, or less,
according to the quantity of the Humor, and recurres every fourth day, and
therefore is called a quartan, which is the longest of all Fevers, and has
its seat in the Spleen; and so much for Fevers in the Humors inequally
putrified, whether continual, or intermitting; and though Hippocrates and Galen
make mention of a Quintan, Sextan, Septan, and Nonan, we must not think they
proceed from any next kind of Humor, but are to be referred to a Quartan,
and to be cured by the same method, only the difference is that a Quintan is
caused from an atrabilarious humor, and is the worst of all, fullest of
danger, and of the greatest essence, says Galen, Commen. on the third Section
of the first Book Epidem* but the rest are from a melancholy humor.

A Hectic Fever (although it be in the solid parts) is to be reckoned
amongst the Simple Fevers, A Hectic
it differs from a pestilential, in that it is free from any venenate or malign
quality, from the Humoral, that is free from putrefaction. A Pestilent Fever
is likewise numbered amongst the Simple, though it differ from them by its
venenate, contagious, and pernicious quality, by which it contaminates our
substance, and amongst malignant Fevers may be numbered, those from
vitellinous, aeruginous, and prassinous choler, according to Galen, and
Hippocrates, and Avenz^ar in his Theisir, A Leipyria is placed also amongst
malignant Fevers by Hippocrates, in his Epidem. and Progno. 2. Lib. 3. and by
Galen in his Comments upon those Books, it differs from an exquisite cause by
its malignity, and is always deadly, according to Galens Commen. on Aph^ris.
48. Sect. 4. and c. 4. of his Book of Inequal Distempers, it kills the fourth
day, or sooner, and follows great inflammations of the Viscera, so much of
Simple Fevers.

A Compound Fever is that which is made either of two intermittings mixed,
Compound Fevers.
as a double tertian, a double and triple quartan, or of a continual and
intermitting, as a hemitritaean, or a Hectic with a putred make a Compound
Fever, and so likewise of many others.

The confused is as often as two or three Humors do putrefie together, The
Confuse.
whether in the great Veins, or out of them* and in the same place begin
together, and end together, for this mixion ingenders no compound but a
confused Fever, and the one cannot be known from the other, because the signs
are so confused from whence it has its name, as for example, if Choler and
Phlegm putrefie together in the great Veins, there shall be two continual
Fevers in the same place, which make a confuse, and no Compound Fever; on the
other side, if the same Humors putrefie with melancholy in the lesser Veins
altogether, and in the same place, there shall be two or three intermittings,
which mixed do likewise produce no compound, but confused Fever; so a double
continual tertian will be confused, and not compound, because the putred matter
is contained in the same place.

The Erratick, The Erratick.
or inordinate Fever is that which observes no type, or order of other Simple
Fevers, whose humor putrefies in diverse places, and moves from one place to
another, from whence is the diversity of the fits; sometimes it intermits four
days, sometimes eight, and sometimes more, and then recurres; sometimes it
comes sooner, and is called praeoccupant; sometimes moves slower, and is called
retardant; and so much for essential Fevers. A Symptomatical Fever, though it
be continual, yet differs from the former, because its matter is not contained
in the greater Veins, neither has it any exacerbations, or remissions, but
depends on the inflammation of the part which it possesses, from whence it has
its name, as is observed in the second Chapter.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Circuit of Fevers.
TO find out the Reason of the Circuits of intermitting Fevers is of no small
moment amongst the Learned, for what one allows, another reprobates, every one
applauding his own fancy; leaving then their nicities, I shall declare my
own opinion, having premised somewhat for elucidation of what shall follow;
all the parts of the body are endued with four Faculties, to wit, the
Attractive, Retentive, Alterative, and Expulsive, and as long as these are free
from any fault, man lives in perfect health, and when one of these is too
strong for the other, he is affected with various Diseases* as if an excrement
be inherent to any part, and cannot be expeld from it by reason of its
weakness, it becomes burdensome to it, because it is neither discussed nor
removed; or if by reason of its coldness, crasseness, or clamminess, it
obstruct the passages through which it ought to be expeld, it putrefies, and
causes a Disease, and the heat contracted by putrefaction is very offensive to
the heat, and first of all occupies and infests the Spirits, because they are
tenuous, then the Humors, because they are more cra^^e; and last of all the
solid parts, and this heat from the heart through the Arteries dispersed to the
whole body generates a Fever* and hurts our actions. The cause then of the
shortness or length, of the anticipation or tardation of the Circuits, may be
taken from these Six things viz. From the Species of the Humor, from the
quantity, quality, habit of the Body, disposition of Strength, and complication
of Fevers.

There are four Humors in the Body, From the Humor.
one of which exceeds the other in quantity and quality, as if pure blood
putrefie in the great Veins, (which is hot and moist) it begets a continual
Synechis, if out of those Veins, it produces an intermitting, its thinner part
is turned into choler, and the crasser into melancholy, as Alexan. Aphrodis.
learnedly notes.

Another cause of the circuits is from the quality of the Humor, From the
quality.
and weakness of the part where the excrement is heaped up; as phlegm next to
blood exceeds other Humors in quantity, and being cold of quality, and moist,
crasse, and clammy, by its frigidity it resists putrefaction, and by reason of
its crasseness and clamminess is not so easily resolved as blood, and hence are
the length of its fits, and by reason of the relics and imbecility of the
part, new excrement is heaped on it, thence are new fits which recurre every
day; and if yellow choler putrefie in a part, it causes the like, though more
difficultly than phlegm, by reason of its dryness, by which it more powerfully
resists putrefaction, and because it is a tenuous humor, and not crasse, it is
far more easily resolved than phlegm, and leaves less relics behind it in
the affected part; and hence is it that its fits (which it causes) do sooner
end in an infebricitation, and greater time or interval is required for a new
accession, but because the part is debilitated by the former excrement, it
readily receives the new, which putrefying as before causes a new fit, neither
sooner nor later than the third day, and lasts twelve hours, and is therefore
called a tertian, because it recurres every third day. The melancholy juice
retained in a part does not so easily putrefie as other Humors, by reason of
its two qualities which resist putrefaction, viz. frigidity and siccity, and
therefore it intermits two days, and returns every fourth day; and though the
former matter be emptied, yet there is a weakness and disposition of the part
(as in the other) to receive a fresh humor, from whence follows a new fit,
which for the most part lasts twelve hours, sometimes more, sometimes less,
according to the quantity of the humor oppressing the part.

The quantity of the Humor, Object. against this opinion.
whether much or little, cannot of it self be the cause of the longitude, or
brevity, anticipation, or tardation of the fit, it is true, a great quantity
does oppress the part, and a small is quickly resolved; but that alone cannot
be the efficient cause, because the same motion is observed to be from a small
and great quantity, and that it is so, let choler or melancholy be found in
any part of the body putrefied, it is most certain that choler will move
neither sooner nor later than the third day, nor melancholy than the fourth,
therefore the quantity of the Humor alone cannot be the cause of the circuits,
or of the longitude, or etc, of feverish fits.

But rather the quality is the cause of the length or shortness of the
anticipation, From the quality.
or post-position of the fits, which your epileptical insults seem to
manifest, for they proceed not so much from the quantity of the humor, as from
the quality offensive to the brain, and thus Women's courses flow at set
months and days, not by reason of the quantity of the blood, but quality,
whether they be much or little, unless somewhat intervert the course of Nature;
and so we must judge of the Humors, in which there is a certain occult
quality, unknown to us, which causes phlegm every day, yellow choler every
third day, and melancholy every fourth, to grow furious, and be moved;
Hippocrates seems to favor this opinion in his Proaemium to the first Book of
Prognostics, where he thus Prophecies, (...), etc. whether there be nor
somewhat Divine in the Disease, which according to Aristotle, in proportion
answer to the Element of Stars; now the starry Element is said to be that which
operates beyond the order or power of the Four Elements, and is scarce
comprehensible.

The habit of the body whether dense or rare, From the habit of the body.
may be the cause too, of the length or shortness of the fits, but the
anticipation or tardation may be referred to the substance of the matter, or
to the multitude or paucity; the substance is either crasse or tenuous, if
crasse and clammy the fits shall be longer, if tenuous shorter; if to the
multitude, or paucity, a little is easier dissipated and resolved than a great
deal, from these two then, the anticipation or tardation of the fits may be
caused.

The Fifth cause of the Circuits may be from the strength, From the strength.
for if the alterative and expulsive faculty of every part be strong, they will
cast off all the excrement to the parts destined for it by Nature;
contrariwise, it they be both weak, that remaining does by degrees putrefie,
because it is not discussed, and so it moves sooner or later according to its
quantity, or quality, or both together, and the paroxysmes are longer, or
shorter.

The complication of Fevers may change the course of Circuits, From the
complication.
because some are from a cold Humor, crasse and clammy, others from a hot and
tenuous; so the one is moved, corrupted, and resolved sooner, the other later,
from whence is the shortness or length of the fits; besides our diet, whether
good or bad, if in tempestivous does help or hurt much, or the Patients
intemperancy, and irregularity.

The efficient cause of putrefaction is either external, The cause of
putrefaction.
or internal; the external does chiefly depend on corrupt meats, or evil juice,
which can no way be corrected by the help of Nature, and which are apt to
corrupt and affect the Viscera; the internal cause is either from obstruction,
or the occursion of putrid things, for obstruction, caused by crasse and viscid
Humors hinders perspiration, and so the Humors retained, and neither
discussed, nor cooled, do easily putrefie though they be good, and hence a
Fever; of the same force is that obstruction which proceeds from a plenitude
of the Vessels, which is above our strength; for they therefore putrefie
because they cannot be concocted, nor governed by our enfeebled strength. The
occursion of putred things does first corrupt the Spirits, then the Humors, as
the filthy exhalations, and putrefaction of vapors, drawing in the Air from
the Gallical Elephantiacal, and of those infected with a putrid or pestilent
Fever.

CHAP. V.
Of the Constitution of Fevers.
SEntentious Hippocrates in the 12th. Aphorism of the first Section, reduces
the times of Diseases to two, viz. the (...) and the (...), that according to
Galen in the first Book of Crises, What the catas^a^^^ it.
chap. 4. is the constitution of the whole Disease, or its duration conscribed
within its four times, viz. the beginning, increase, state, and declination,
the knowledge and distinction of which times is so necessary for a Phisician,
that without it he can neither prognosticate aright, nor prescribe proper diet
or remedies.

The signs of these four Universal times are taken from the Idaea, From whence
are the signs of these tim^s.
or species of the Disease, from its motion, from the nature of the fits, from
the figure of the body, from the strength of the Patient, from the season of
the year, and age of the Patient, from the pulse and rigor, from the hour of
the fit, and the vehemence of the symptoms, from the length or shortness of
the fits, from the nature of the evacuations, from the crudity or coction of
the Urine, and of the Humors causing the Diseases.

The Idaea or species of the Disease is chiefly taken from its motion: From
whence is the Idaea of the Disease.
for a swift motion shows that the state will be quickly, and a slow motion
that it will fall out later. Thus a burning Fever by reason of its essence is
said to be vehement, and quickly comes to its state; and a pestilent Fever by
reason of the governing faculty it affects, is vehement, and has a speedy
state, and an inflammation of the Lungs, by reason of the dignity of the part,
speeds to its state.

From the nature of the fits you have these Signs, 2 From the fits.
if they be short, the state is near; if long, afar off.

From the Figure of the body, 3 From the figure.
if the face with the Hypochondria be suddenly extenuated, it denotes the
Fever to be acute, and of swift motion, but if the body be not impaired, it is
a sign of its longitude.

If at the beginning the Sick be more than ordinarily weakened, 4 From the
strength.
it shows the Disease to be acute, and of swift motion; if otherwise, to be
diuturnal.

If the season, 5 From the season.
age, region, custom, and diet of the Patient be all agreeing, the Disease
shall be short; if otherwise, long; as for example, if a young choleric body
at Midsummer, in a hot Country, feeding high, on meats of good juice, and
drinking pure wine, should be taken with a tertian, it shall sooner leave him,
than if he were an old man in a cold Country, and Winter season, fed with cold
and moist meats, and seized on by the same Disease, and thus a Winter quotidian
would be longer to him than a Summer one.

If the pulse be frequent, 6 From the pulse.
swift, and great, it declares an acute Fever of quick motion.

If the rigor be long, 7 From the rigor.
it shows the length of the Disease, because the Humor is putrefied out of the
great Vessels, if short, it shows the contrary.

If it always invade at the same hour the Disease will be long, 8 From the
hour.
because it shows the Humor to be fixed, and hardly to be eradicated, but if it
anticipate, or come later, it will be shorter, and be more easily extirpated;
sometimes the quantity of the matter is the cause of the anticipation, as the
paucity is of the tardation.

The vehemence of the Symptoms in the fit does indicate the vehemence and
velocity of the morbificall matter. 9 From the Symptoms.


If the later fit last longer than the 10 From the duration of the fits.
former, it shows the augment, if shorter, the declination of the disease.

If in a former fit there was an evacuation made by sweat, 11 From the
evacuation.
and yet the next fit be as long, it denotes the length of the Disease from the
quantity of the matter.

If at the beginning, 12 From the urine.
the Urine be coct, the Fever will be short; if crude, long; for the Urine is
of good judgment in Fevers continual, or intermitting. That water is tenuous
in which appear no contents, but is of white color, and denotes crudities; but
if it be meanly crasse with white contents, smooth, and equal, it shows
coction, and the brevity of the Fever.

If the matter be not contained in the greater or lesser Veins, Signs when
the matter is out of the veins.
but in the Stomach, then the signs are to be taken from the dejections or
stools, if in the instruments of respiration, from the spittle; if in the
habit of the body, from the sweat; Hippocrates in the first and second Book of
Prognostics; but that these four times may the better be distinguished, we
shall set down some examples of particular Diseases, by which you may guess
of the rest.

The beginning of a Fever is then said to be, How to distinguish the four
times of Fevers.
when the humor in which the Fever does consist is crude, the augment when it
begins to be concocted, the vigor or state of the Disease is most vehement when
it appears most concoct, the declination when all Symptoms do abate; or in a
word, an obscure concoction determinates the beginning, a manifest, the
augment, a perfect the state.

The beginning of a Phlegmon is, The fo^^ times of a Phlegmon.
when the part is filled with blood, the augment when the fluxion ceases, and
the blood collected putrefies, from which putrefaction is caused a heat, and
from that heat a greater diffusion, distending the part more, though there be
no new afflux, the vigor is when it is turning to pus, the pain and hear
being greater, the declination when the pus flows forth, or is digest and
resolved.

The beginning of an Ophthalmy is, when there is a deflux of a thin, Signs of
the times of an Ophthalmy
crude, copious humor to the eye, the augment is when the humor is more
crasse, and has some signs of coction, the state is when it is yet crasser,
and less, when the eyelids are glued together like to those that sleep, the
declination when all things are more gentle, without the distinction of these
times, the remedies reckoned up by Hippocrates, Apho. 31. Sect. 6. would little
avail this Disease.

The beginning of an Ulcer is, when the sanies is watery thin and incoct, The
four times of an Ulcer.
the augment when it is less and thicker, the state when the Pus is tenuous,
white, and equal, when crass and little, the declination; these four universal
times of Diseases are not always equal, nor comprehended within a set number
of days, not only in diverse Diseases, but in the same, one is sometimes
longer, sometimes shorter, and not always equal. Besides these signs, the
anticipation of the fit does declare the augment of the Disease, as the
tardation does declination, though it is not universally so; for some
quotidians, tertians, and quartans (by a certain propriety of the Disease) have
from the beginning to the end always anticipated, as others have always been
more tardant. If the fit anticipate, and be longer than usually, and more
vehement, and the intermission shorter, more impure, and the feverish heat
increased, and the Symptome^ (...) it more grievous, they denote the state; but
if it be shorter, slower, more simple, and the Symptoms less, they argue a
declination of the whole Disease. The like observation may be made of
Symptomatical Fevers, which arise from the inflammations of the Viscera, whose
times are the same with those of Phlegmons. All this is to be understood of
(...) Diseases, and not of those lethal which run not through all these times
manifestly, because some kill in the beginning, others in the augment, others
in the state, and seldom or never in the declination, unless the Disease be
malignant, and the strength so deject, that it cannot expel the morbifical
humor though it be concoct.

CHAP. VI.
Of the four times of Disease^ in special.
IN the former Chapter we treated in general of the constitution of the whole
Disease, now of the Paroxysme or Fit, having first told what time is, and what
a Paroxysme; a Period, or Circuit, and what a Type, and wherein they differ.

Time is the number or measure of motion according to priority, What time is.
and posteriority, says Aristotle in the fourth of his Physics, but Galen in
his Book to Thrasybulus describes it otherwise, for he says. Time is an
alteration of the morbifical matter, made either by the natural or
preternatural heat, since the times of Diseases are essentially measured by the
mediate passions caused in the living parts of our bodies, and those in
relation to coction.

A Period is the time of intermission and remission, What a period is.
when a Fever returns from one place to the same again, as for example, if a
Tertian Ague begin the tenth hour with rigor, and the third day return the
same hour with rigor, it shall be an intermitting tertian; if a Fever begin
with cold, it shall be an intermitting quotidian; if with horror, a quartan.

In the Period, What is the type.
Paroxysme, or Circuit is concluded the Type, which is nothing else but the
order of intension, or remission, comprehended in the period, which denotes
both the time and species of the Disease, says Galen.

The matter of intermitting Fevers is sometimes moved from one place to
another, The time of intermitting Fevers from moveable matter.
sometimes moves not, but rests quiet in a part, now when the matter is moved
the times of intermitting Fevers are Six, viz. The beginning, the inequality,
the increment, the state, declination, and integrity, or interval.

The Fit or Paroxysine is divided into the accession, The division of the fit.
which is the worser part of the whole Circuit, beginning from the first
invasion and lasting to the state, and remission, which is the more benign
part, says Galen in his Commentary on Aphoris. 12. Sect. 1. and Chap. 3, 4, 5.
of the times of Diseases; now to the accession belong the four first times, to
the remission, the two last, which are now to be explained.

The beginning is, The first time.
when the matter begins to be moved, and Nature has not yet begun to work upon
the matter.

The inequality, The second time.
when the matter begins to putrefie, and putrid vapors assault the heart, and
a feverish heat is diffused without the heart, which whiles it is expanding,
Nature gives battle against the matter.

The augment is, The third.
when the heat is equally expanded throughout all parts, and the heat is more
intense, and Nature re-acts on the morbifical matter.

The state is, The fourth
when there is an omnimodal equality in the feverish heat, that is when the
heat is extended through all parts in an equal degree.

The declination is, The fifth.
when there is a gradual inequality of heat, or when the heat is diminisht, and
Nature overcomes, and the seaverish heat forsakes the heart, and invades the
extreme parts and feet.

The integrity is, when the Fever is quite off The Sixth.
but these Six may very well be reduced to Four, because the former of the
inequality is reduced to the beginning, the latter part to the augment, and the
integrity is no time of the Fever, but of the Period; and so much of Fevers,
whose matter is moveable from place to place. Now let us speak of that matter
which is not moved, but remains in a part, by reason of its weakness, that it
cannot expel it, and therefore putrefies, and causes a putrid Fever, which
the matter being emptied does intermit, but because the imbecility of the part
is still remaining, and certain seminaries of the former matter, therefore a
new excrement is easily received, which being corrupted causes a new fit.

The beginning of these fits is, when the superfluity begins to putrefie, The
times of these putrid are but four.
the augment when the fuliginous putrid matter assaults the heart, and the
humors contained in it are inflamed, so that its innate heat is made fiery
hot, the state is when this fiery Fervor is brought to the height, and the de
bate is strongest between the feavourish heat and Nature, the declination is,
when Nature overcomes the fiery heat, and expells it (if the matter be
tenuous) by sweat if the pores be open, and the expulsive faculty strong, or by
Urine if those passages be open, or by the stool if the matter be crasse,
which is the way appointed by Nature for such excrements.

The beginning of these Diseases is known from the pulse rare and slow, The
signs of the times of these Fevers.
from a plumbeous or sublivid color, a coldness of the extreme parts,
ssoath, sadness, pain, and profound sleep, the heat being retracted to the
heart, and the brain refrigerated, from their eyelids scarce moveable, the
matter moving outward and molesting them, from their salivation caused by the
concussion of the rigor or horror, the salival matter residing in the
glandules about the root of the tongue, being expressed by it.

When a dry Cough is caused, The augment.
the thinner part of the moisture falling into the rough Artery, it being
ineffectual and vain, the sick is worse affected, and then is the augment with
a great pulse frequent, and the heat expanded to all the parts.

The state follows when the heat is consistent at its height, The state.
neither increased nor diminisht, the Symptoms vehement, the Pulse greater,
swifter, and more frequent then ordinary.

If the declination tend to death, (which is very rare) the pulse is weak, The
declination.
unequal, and inordinate, but if to health, then all Symptoms are remitted,
and strength daily increased.

These Four times are to be observed both in sal^brous Fevers, and mortal,
but in different respects; in the third Chapter we told you, that salubrous
Fevers were either in the Spirits, or in the Humors, or in the solid parts.

In the Spirits is a Diary, From whence the times of a Diary.
whose times are not taken from the matter, nor from the symptoms, but from
the essence of the preternatural heat kindled in the vital spirit of the heart.
The whole fit of this Fever is twenty four hours, sometimes shorter or longer,
according to the quantity of the febrish heat, crasseness of the spirits, the
strength of the sick, or thickness of the skin, but if it be exquisite, it
speedily runs through its four times.

The Humors may be inflamed without putrefaction, Fevers without
putrefaction of the Humors.
and cause a continual Fever, which has but one fit, and that longer than a
Diary, whose four times are taken from its essence, and from the matter, viz.
(the fervid blood hurting our actions) whether it be homotonous, epacmastical,
or paracmastical; and these four times may be distinguished though short, and
the matter not moveable from place to place. Next, let us examine the Sings by
which the Four times of Fevers which arise from the Humors equally putrefied,
whose matter is quiet and immovable may be distinguished, and afterward of
those inequally putrefied; we will speak first of those whose matter putrefies
in the great Veins, and if equally there shall arise a threefold continual
Fever, which come not alike to the integrity or interval, and end with one
fit, and has no periods, yet has its four times distinguishable; The first is,
when through the whole course of the Disease, the measure of putrefaction is
alike, and the Greeks call this Homotonos; the second is, when the putrefaction
is greater than the dissipation, and this is called Epacmastical; the third is,
when the dissipation is greater than the putrefaction, and is called
Paracmastical, and their four times are distinguished by their intention, and
remission, and putrefaction; if the Humors which are contained in the great
Veins do unequally putrefie, it is either the thinner part of the blood, or
choleric blood which putrefies, and it causes a continual tertian, or phlegm,
or the cruder part of the blood, and causes a continual quotidian, or the
crasser part, of the blood, and makes a continual quartan, of which more at
large in their proper places; the times of these Fevers may be distinguished
from what is aforesaid, if the Humors putrefie out of those greater Veins,
the Fevers shall be intermitting, and their four times shall be more evident
than those of continual, because the matter moves from place to place, and they
are terminated by urine, sweatings, vomitings or looseness.

Mortal Fevers seldom have four times, The times of mortal Fevers.
for some kill in the beginning if they be pe^acute, and the Patient weak;
others kill in the augment, when the Sick is stronger; others in the state,
when they are yet stronger, and the Fever is less acute, as Galen shows in
his first Book of Crises, chap. 2. and Hippocrates in the first Book of his
Epid. Sect. 2. Text 45. says, No man dies in an universal declination, for
coction signifies a speedy indication, and security of health; the reason is,
because in the declination of a Paroxysme, or fit, the morbificall matter may
not be overcome, and so death may follow, either from the weakness of the
faculty, or from the malignant quality, or from the quantity of the Humor
wherewith Nature is overwhelmed, or by some error of the Phisician, though
signs of coction do appear; to prove this, Avicen in Book 4. fen. 2. tract 1.
chap. 98. brings for an example the small Pox of Children, in the declination
of which sometimes death follows, not by reason of the Pockes which are in
declination, but by reason of the Fever, and malignant quality annexed.
Another example there is, that a man may dye in the declination of a Synochus,
not by reason of the essence of the Fever, but by neglect of the malignant
matter the cause of it, or being preposterously handled, as Galen notes in his
third Book of Crises; these four times of Diseases according to Hippocrates and
Galen can no more be described by a certain number of days, and hours, than
the decretory days can, by reason of the various temper of the Humors, and
the diseased, as shall further appear in the next assertion, for an acute
Disease has shorter times and a Chronical longer.

The four times of a Hectic Fever are not taken from the matter, The times of
a Hectic.
nor from the Symptoms, but from the essence of the preternatural heat which
works upon the primogenious humidity of the heart, whose beginning is when the
feverish heat begins to work on the rorid substance of the heart; the augment,
when it begins to consume it; the state, when the humidity is consumed; the
declination, on, when that native humidity begins to be restaurated.

CHAP. VII.
Certain Physical Canons, or Rules for practice.
ALL Rules for Curing are taken either from the Disease, or from its Efficient
cause, or from the nature and situation of the affected part, or from the
Symptoms; from the Disease, as a Fever, whose preternatural heat is in the
Spirits, Humors, or solid parts, and is not simple, but conjugate, viz. hot
and dry, which according to Hippocrates axiom, (...), (...), that is, things
are cured by their contraries; that is, by coolers, and moistners, and this is
the first Canon. The second is taken from the morbifical putrid matter, which
requires an ablation, or removing. The third from the nature and site of the
affected part, as if the brain be affected, it requires other remedies than
the Lungs, and this other than the Stomach, Liver, Spleen, Guts, Reins,
Bladder, or Womb, from the Symptoms, if they be great with imminent danger of
life, as if a Syncope be accidental to a Fever, we must oppose that, omitting
for a while the cure of the Fever; but if they be small, we must respect
both, so that we principally attend the Disease. The feverish beat both of
continual and intermitting Fevers arising from a putrid filth, cannot safely
and wholly be extinguished, before the putrefaction be repressed, and the
impurity taken away, for the method of curing requires this, that first we
remove the cause, then the effect, unless something more urgent forbid it; the
impure Humor then is first to be purged forth, and then if any extraneous
heat be left, either in the Humors, or parts, it is to be extinguished, and by
preparatives, and things opening obstructions to be removed; but against this
Doctrine it is objected, That things cooling do per se increase obstructions,
incrassate the matter, and hinder its evacuation, and the stipation being
increased, and the fuliginous vapors included, the putrefaction is doubled. On
the other side, aperient, detergent, and purging Medicines are all almost hot,
and therefore per se are bad, and intend the Fever; In this difficult case we
must use the temperate Roots, such as are the sharp Dock, Grass roots,
Butchers Broom, and Asparagus, which open obstructions without any manifest
heat, and do not increase the feverish distemper, and so the worst is
prevented, If the body be strong this method is strictly to be observed, that
is, to remove the efficient cause, and thoroughly to open the obstructions with
the aforesaid aperitive means, and then the putrid humor is to be purged,
although the Fever be a little exasperated by the Medicine that does it; but
when by the fire of the Fever the strength is much resolved, then we are to
use cooling Medicines both inwardly and outwardly as Juleps, Epithems, etc.
which with all possible speed may extinguish the heat, omitting a while the
cause, for it is not safe to increase the Fever by such things as cut off the
cause, lest life depart with the Disease, but it is better in my judgment to
extinguish the burning Fever, though you somewhat transgress against the
cause, but in curing of putrid Fevers, the first place is due to the cause,
that part of the matter be emptied, then to imitate Nature by preparing it,
which when by her assistance it shall appear to be coct, then it possible to
eradicate it, that the Fever be not diuturnal; the emptying of the matter may
be either by bleeding, or purging at the very beginning if nothing hinder.

Bleeding in all putrid Fevers, Of Bleeding.
especially the continual, is not to be neglected, says Galen, in the
eleventh of his Method of curing, having premised a cooling Glister, or
Suppository, if the Patient were bound; nor in intermitting Fevers when there
is a plenitude, or pulsative pain in the head, or tossing of the body with a
suffocating heat, lest it degenerate into a continual Fever, or the
putrefaction spread wider, and it is to be done on the intermitting day, or at
the time of remission in a continual Fever, provided age and strength allow
it; if the Fever be very vehement and urgent, to let blood in that violence is
to kill the Patient, says Celsus; and if the body be weak, let blood a little
at a time, so the strength will not be impaired, because part of the burden
with which Nature was oppressed being taken off, she does the more easily bear
the rest, and with less force tame and subdue it, says Galen; and we ought
not so much to estimate the years as the strength of the diseased.

A late Writer has published, that Bleeding ought to be celebrated in all
Diseases, which I cannot allow, though I admit it in most, but more sparingly
when the Fever is from a cold humor, lest by its refrigeration the crudity be
doubled, and do not easily admit of concoction, if the Disease will suffer it,
the best time for bleeding is the Spring, if not, it may be administered at any
time of the year, if strength permit, especially if there be a plenitude,
suppression of the Courses, or Hemorrhoids.

If the Sick be bound in body, before you let blood, give a Suppository, or
Glister, or eccoprotical Medicine that is gently purging, lest that the putrid
matter should be rapt, or forced from the first region of the body into the
greater Veins, and so inquinate the blood, and make it more impure; the same
is to be observed before we give a peritive medicines.

Purging is to be used at the beginning, Purging*
if the matter be turgid, Aphor. 10. Sect. 4. in Diseases very acute; purge
the first day, if the matter invite to excretion, for delays in such cases are
dangerous, and it must be done by some minorating Medicine, that part of the
impurity being taken away, the remainder may the more easily be concocted, for
according to Hippocrates Aphoris. 22 Sect. 1. we ought to move that which is
concoct, and not the crude matter, nor at the beginning unless it be turgid,
and for the most part it is not, and afterward to purge with a stronger
Medicine, unless it be done by the benefit of Nature; neither are we always to
wait for the concoction of the Humors, especially where the matter is turgid,
and with its fluctuating motion running from place to place perturbes the whole
body, as it happens in the most acute Diseases.

If the Fever be continual it is better to purge at the time of remission,
whethe it be in the morning or evening, than at the time of its exacerbation,
or upon an odd or decretory day, if strength give leave, otherwise they are
first to be refreshed with nourishments of good juice, and those rether liquid
than solid, because those are of easier distribution, and then we are to use
meanly purgers appropriate to the humor; but if the Fever be intermitting,
then purge on the day of rest, or upon the fit day, if the fit come not till
after Dinner, at which time the humor is moved by Nature to expulsion, the
strength having first been repaired by nourishments, for then it is easier, and
with less pains driven forth, being in motion, as I have found by experience in
curing of Quartans, as often as I gave Physic on the fit day; besides, it may be
confirmed by reason, for that purging be instituted according to Art, we must
consider the motion of Nature, whether she tends upwards or downwards, and the
season of the year, and the inclination of the Sick, for if it be Winter, and
the Patient aged, and vomit easily, and his stomach be full of crude clammy
phlegm, He ought to have a Vomit, says Polybius, in his Book of good Diet,
which is falsely ascribed to Hippocrates the Great; for the Six Winter months
purge by the upper parts: on the other side, If he vomit not easily he is not
to be forced, says Galen, and after him Aetius, but is to be Purged
downwards, by some Medicine accomodate to the morbifical humor, at first
purging those purgers which have an astriction with them ought not to be used
as Myrobalans; juice of Roses, and the Sirrups compounded of them, especially
if there be obstructions which usually accompany putrid Fevers; and in purging
of the humors we must be careful to use such preparation, that the passage be
made open, Hippo. Aphoris. 9. Sect. 2. (...), etc. that is, when we would purge
a Body, we must make it fluxil, that the humor to be emptied may yield, and
be obedient to the traction of the medicament, for if the passages be
obstructed, and putrefaction caused for want of ventilation, then before we
purge we are to use incisive Medicines for the crasse humors, detergent for
the clammy, and so to clear the obstructions; and sometimes we are to appease
and allay some heady humor (which ought not to have been purged) that by its
furiousness and fervor, it rush not on some principal part, or by its acrimony
exulcerate where it passes.

The manner then of preparation, is to be proportioned to the humor, for the
mitigation of the Disease; as for example, in acute Fevers we use Sirrups and
Apozems, which are made of such things as are attenuating and cooling, or which
are detersive, and not very hot, as you may see in the second part of my
Enchiridion, but in diuturnal slow Fevers, which phlegm or melancholy
ingenders, stronger and hotter means are required; and those fierce humors
which bleeding will not temper, nor purging carry away, we must bridle, and
obtund with refrigerating Medicines, not of thin substance lest they be more
exagitated, nor of crasse because they hinder evacuation, but of a middle
nature, which have a little austerity, or acidness, or both joined with them,
such as are your Omphacium, juice of Sorrel, Pomgranate, or Citron, by which
the acrimony and putrefaction of choler may be retunded, and the heat kindled
in the humors, be impeded from spreading any further. If besides the
putrefaction there shall be any suspicion of venenosity, we must mix with the
former such things as by a similitude of substance do repress it, whether
inwardly or outwardly applied, which shall be described in our Tract of
malignant and pestilent Fevers; detergent and attenuating Medicines are to be
fitted both for preparation of hot and cold Humors, because both Humors by
their clamminess, or crasseness may obstruct, as is manifest in vitellinous
choler; if a detersive, and attenuatory faculty be joined with a cold quality,
as in Succory, it is the more efficacious, and of more frequent use than that
joined with a hot quality, as in Wormwood, Hyssope, Origanum, and that is to
be used in hot Diseases, these in cold with mulse, and not with plain water,
especially when the heat is sluggish, and the means not easily inflamed; but on
the other side, with cooling Medicines we at once resist both the fervor of
choler, and heat of the Fever, and prepare the vicious humor which does
foment it before we purge, by a diverse quality* as more at large in the Second
part of our Enchiridion. There are some that stoutly maintain the opinon of
Avicen, That thin choleric humors ought to be incrassated before they be
purged; which opinion seems to contradict Hippocrates and Galen, and may thus
be reconciled. If sincere, or excrementitious choler be thin, it is not to be
incrassated before purging, but presently to be cast forth, for so it easily
yields to the attraction of the Medicine, and thus the opinion of the Greeks is
true; but if the same choler be crasse and tenacious, as the vitellinous is,
then it is to be attenuated and deterged, as Avicen would have it, otherwise it
cannot be driven forth, but by force and damage to the Patient; but if it be
mixed with blood, then we are to expect concoction from the benefit of Nature,
but the Fautorers of Avicen object against the opinion of the Greeks, That
unless the thin humors be incrassated, they will be fixed in our members,
penetrating into the most retired parts of our bodies; to which objection some
answer, If the choler be infixt it will grow thick, and cause obstructions, and
then extenuating and detergent, and not incrassating Medicines are necessary,
or by attenuating remedies Nature is helped to excerne the noxious humor by
urine or sweat; neither does the strength of this Argument reach to preparation
before purging; shall that which is crasse then be attenuated, and that which
is tenuous incrassated? Galens opinion is, that That which may return to its
natural state be altered, as by incrassating the thin (viz. in Diseases of the
Breast) and attenuating the crasse, but not so in preparation, or alteration
before purging; and by this distinction the Greeks and Avicen may be made
friends. Others give other Reasons against Avicen thus, The first Natural
action is Attraction, to which thin Humors are most obedient, and most readily
follow the medicament; the second is a kind of violent expulsion, by which also
thin Humors are most easily driven forth, therefore they are not to be
incrassated.

There are three sorts of purging Medicines, some purge by Traction, such as
Hippocrates, and the ancient Greeks used, as Euphorbium, Lathiris, Elaterium,
Scammonium, Colocynthis, Helleborus, etc. which we use not now, unless in
great Diseases, or in small quantity mixed with other things, and corrected, and
on rustic bodies, whom gentler Medicines will little or nothing move, and not
in continual Fevers sprung from a hot cause.

Others purge by smoothing, or suppling, as Manna Call. Cassia Egypt, Sena,
Polypody, Sirrup of Violets, etc.

Others purge with astriction, as Rhubarb, all the Myrobalans, juice and Sirrup
of Roses, which we use when the parts are to be strengthened, and there is no
obstruction which they may prejudice; he that is to take a Purge in them morn,
let him not take Sirrop of Poppies over night, or dissolve Treacle, or new
Mithridate in it, because the cold quality they have from Opium does hinder
purging, according to the experience and authority of Galen in his twelfth
Book, De Theria. to Piso. In the state of the Disease abstain from purging,
that Nature be not called from her work, but commit the whole business to her,
because then all Symptoms are most violent, otherwise you add evil to evil,
especially if a Crisis be near, Hippoc. Aphor. 29. Sect, 2. (...), etc. at the
height is is best to be quiet; and in the next Aphoris. (...), etc. at the
state of Diseases all things are most vehement, and therefore abstain from
medicaments, or any way to move or irritate Nature, etc. Aphor. 20. Sect. 1. If
the Crisis be perfect all is safe, and no more is to be done, but if there be
any thing left, it is to be removed by Medicine for fear of a relapse, Aphor.
12. Sect. 2. that of Diseases which is left within after Judgment, does
usually cause a return of the Disease; upon a critical day if there appear no
signs of coction, but of crudity, though there be an excretion even in the
state of the Disease, it is not to be trusted to, neither ought we to fear
those evil accidents which happen not according to reason, but the noxious
humor is to be emptied that the Disease return not, Aphoris. 27. Sect. 2. if
any light thing happen besides reason in acute Diseases, we are not to trust to
it, nor to be diffident if a greater business happen not according to reason,
for such things are very uncertain, and of no long continuance, the whole
matter of a Disease then cannot be rooted out, unless concoct and after the
state, when those preter-rational Symptoms are abated, and Nature is assisting
to us; on the contrary, if there appear signs of a vasal plenitude, or of
crudity, we must abstain from purging, and neither provoke sweat, nor urine,
lest the vicious humors, so moved, be carried into the greater Veins, and
exasperate the Fever, and make it more contumacious; by what remedies urine
and sweat are to be moved, I have taught in my Enchiridion, in the first,
second, and third Chapters of the Second part. These are the chief and general
Canons to be observed in curing of Fevers, whether continual or intermitting;
other rules we shall set down in their proper place, now for their cure in
special.

CHAP. VIII.
Of a Diary Fever.
THis Fever Hippocrates calls (...) that is, flatuous, Of the name.
and the other Greeks (...), because it continues but a day, rather than from a
Fish Aristotle makes mention of in his Fifth Book of Animals, about the end of
the nineteenth Chapter, but the Latins call it a Diary, which sometimes is
extended to more days, when the spirits inflamed are crasse, which if not
resolved it degenerates sometimes into a putrid Fever, sometimes into a
Hectick^ or malignant Fever, says Galen.

The causes of this Fever are either external, Of the external causes.
or internal; the external are taken from the Six Non-natural things, as from
the Air too hot and dry in the Summer, or the heat of the Country, or the hot
and dry temperament of the Patient, as the Picrocholous or choleric natures,
whose spirits are easily inflamed, from whence is an Ephemera; sometimes by the
cold air, or use of aluminous Bathes, the skin is condensed, so that the
fuliginous exhalations which should be excerned through the skin are repressed,
and so the spirits are easily inflamed; sometimes it is from drinking of Wine,
Drunkenness, long Sleeps, or continual Watchings, overmuch labor, hard
riding, idleness, or want of exercise, from the motions of body or mind, as
from Anger, Fury, Hunger and thirst, Suppression of some hot humor, as of the
Courses, or Hemorrhoids, from the contract of some Feverish body, from an
actual or potential cautery applied to a choleric or plethorick body, from hot
meats, acrid Medicaments, salt things, and the like.

The internal causes are obstructions, Of the internal causes.
whether caused from without, or within; from an external cause, as from the
thickeness of the skin, from within, as when a sharp distillation from the
brain falls upon the heart through the Arterial veins, which inflames the
vital spirit, whence is a Diary Fever. Sometimes other viscera are obstructed,
as the Messentery, Liver, Spleen, Reins, Bladder, Womb, and when these are
obstructed first of all, the Natural spirits not being ventilated grow hot, and
by their power alter the spirits of the heart, and increasing their heat beyond
the bounds of Nature cause a Fever.

Another internal cause is the inflammation or swelling of the Glandules, which
makes a Diary, Hippocrates Aphoris. 55. Sect. 4. (...), etc. that is, all
Fevers from swellings are bad, except the Diary, and he says the same, Epid.
2. Sect. 3.

The Signs are taken from the efficient causes, Of the Singes.
whether they be originated from things external, or internal; if it proceed
from an external cause, you may know from the relation of the sick; if from the
internal causes, by the heat, pulse, and urine, Hippo. 6. Epid. Com. 1. text
29. and Galen in the first to Glanc. chap. 2. and 9. and 10th. Method of
Curing, chap. 4. for if it be exquisite the heat is mild, and gentle to the
touch, which ends with a madidness or sweat; the pulse is swift and frequent,
but equal and temperate (in case it be not joined with a putrid or Hectic
Fever) except in that which proceeds from anger, sadness, hunger, crudity,
thickness of the skin caused by cold, for then the diastole is greater, and
swifter than the systole, the substance, color, and sediment of the urine
differ little from that which is Natural, Galen to Glan. And its fits are very
easy, if it arise from the inflammation of some Bubo, or from the suppression
of some humor, the urine shall be higher, and thicker, with a little sediment,
and that crasse and crude; it invades with rigor, and easily degenerates into
an unputrid Synochus, if the Sick be plethorical; or into a Synechis, if he be
Cacochymous, or into an Hectic, if it be neglected, or ill cured.

Such are most subject to it, Who are subject to it.
as are picrocholous and of a hot and dry temperament, and in the Summer time;
if it be exquisite, it is cured by the benefit of Nature alone, and for the
most part its fit is twenty four hours, but sometimes lasts till the third day,
when the vital spirits are most crasse, if it be prorogued longer it is not
exquisite, but is either an unputrid Synochus, or joined with a putrid Fever,
into which it easily degenerates.

The rule for Cure is not taken from the matter, The Cure
because there is none, but from the essence of the Fever, which consists in
the preter-natural heat, which ought to be remedied by coolers, and moystners,
for the faults of the spirits cannot be taken away by purging or bleeding,
because here is neither cacochimy nor plenitude; Hippocrates in the Fourth part
of his Book of Diet in acute Diseases, and Galen in his Book of Procatarctical
Causes, cured Menander sick of a Diary caused by heat, with Paregorical, and
Diaphoretical Medicines, as Baths, Frictions, and Ointments.

We use Baths when we intend to relax the skin, The profit of Baths.
call forth tenuous fullginous vapors, and change the habit of the body, but
in the declination of the Fever, with gentle friction, that we may cause
sweats, and the fumid excrements may be discussed, and then especially when
there is no crudity in the chief Vessels, nor inveterate obstruction of the
viscera, nor hardness or weakness, lest that the crudity be carried into all
parts of the body; if none of these things be, then the Sick may safely wash,
otherwise not, least that the obstruction and weakness of the viscera be
increased, and the tumor, if there be any.

It is good against the thickness and obstruction of the skin, from cold or
astringent causes; if a Diary have its rise from dryness and heat, let the Bath
be lukewarm, and not hot, having first emptied the belly if it were costive
with a Suppository, or cooling and moystning Glister, least it degenerate into
a Hectic, or Synochus. If from the thickness of the skin by reason of too
great cold, or by use of aluminous Baths, Diaphoretical, and Paregorical
Medicines must be boiled in the water, for those take away obstructions, and
provoke sweats, being of a hot and tenuous substance, and cause the cooleness
of the water to penetrate the deeper, but these being temperate or hot in the
first degree, and of thin substance, as the Roots of Marsh Mallows, Fenugreek,
Flowers of Camomel, Melilot, and Elder, by these means the closeness of the
skin is to be made open, least perspiration being hindered, the Humors be
inflamed together with the Spirits, and so a putrid Fever ensue to the great
damage of the diseased.

The ancients used Bathing more for delight than health, which custom is now
out of use.

We in France use Baths of plain water, or with a decoctron of Plants, not for
pleasure, but for the cure of an Ephemera, because they moysten, contemperate
the feverish heat, and empty acrid vapors. To wipe off the sweat is good,
with gentle frictions with warm Oil, because it opens the pores of the skin,
and calls forth the spirits from the center to the circumference, but too
vehement does stop them up.

Ointment and Frictions are not good for such Diaries as proceed from tumors
inflamed, or from labor, because there is no need of evacuation; Frictions are
good in those from obstruction and repletion, but not in those from inanition,
though Galen did use gentle frictions in all Ephemeraes before the Bath or
Ointment, that the discutient water or oil might pierce the deeper; and the
same Galen in other procatarctical causes uses contrary remedies, as for labor
he commands rest, for watchings sleep, for anger calmness, for sadness joy, and
for venery chastness; these have no need of Frictions, only anoint them with
Oil of Violets, and smooth over the body in the remission, and before meats*

If it be from Drunkenness, command a Vomit, if from cold, use Diaphoreticks;
if from obstruction of the viscera, incisive and aperient Medicines; if from a
Catharre, purge next day; if from an Ulcer or Bubo, we must attend the cure of
Ulcers and Tumors, and so of the rest.

The Diet is to be ordered according to the variety of the cause, if hot
weather be the cause of the Diary, and the Patient be young, and his viscera
good without obstruction, plethory, or cacochymy, of soluble body, and
choleric constitution, at the declination of the Fever, he may be cured with
plentiful drinking of cold water, if otherwise the Cure is to be altered; you
must not nourish him in the augment or vigor of the Fit, but in the end, or
out of it, Hippo. Aphor. the 11. Sect. 1. (...), etc. If you weigh the cause of
the Disease, the strength of the sick, the age and sex, you must nourish him
with meats of good juice, altered with cooling Herbs, which nourish speedily,
oppose the feverish heat, but stick not in the pores of the skin, for the
whole body ought to be fluxil and transpirable, Hippoc. at the beginning of
the sixth Book of his Epidem. Sect. 6. and for this the chief thing is the
juice, or cremor of Barley.

If it proceed from anger, watchings, labor, immoderate venery, hunger,
sadness, then we must nourish the sick with flesh brothes, etc. if from
crudity, gluttony, or from suppression of some Natural excrement, constipation
of the skin, ulcer, tumor, or great pain, then let the diet be thinner; and
if with the Fever there be a plethory, or cacochymy, that must be taken off by
bleeding, this by purging, not for any urgency of the present Fever, but for
fear of a putrid; in brief, in all Diaries, whatsoever is the cause, the
nourishment must be Medicamental, and if the body be bound it must be thus
loosened.

Take of boiled Honey an ounce, Mouse turd, powder of Hiera, and salt gem, each
two scruples, and make a Suppository; or else make this Glister.

Take of Mallows, Violet leaves, Borage Lettice, each one handful, Prunes
twelve, of the four greater cold Seeds each two drams, water-Lilly-flowers, and
Roses, each a small handful, boil them in water to a pint, streine it, and
dissolve in it Cassia, with Sugar, and the Simple Diaprunes each six drams, or
as much of Galens Hiera and Diaphaenicum, if the Patient be a Seaman, Porter,
Carter, etc. and the Diary proceed from cold, with honey of Violets, Roses, or
Mercury, and oil of Water Lillies, each an ounce and half, and give the
Glister; after this, if the sick be plethorick, or full of blood and young, or
the Haemorrhoids or Courses be suppressed, draw six or eight ounces from the
right axillary vein, as strength shall allow; but if the Patient refuse a
Glister, then in the declination of the Fever give this following potion.

Take of Melon-seeds pilled one dram, of Tamarinds two drams, Cassia nexly
drawn one ounce and a half, infuse them in the common purging decoction all
night over warm embers, streine it, and dissolve with it Sirup of Violets or
Roses of nine infusions one ounce, and give this potion betime in the morn.

Or instead of this you may give an ounce and a half of Manna of Calabria,
dissolved in a little fresh broth.

It the Diary flow from the thickness of the skin, or the use of Alume-baths,
then this following Bath made of Paregorical, and Diaphoretical things will be
good.

Take of Mallows, Violets, Saponarie, Succory, wild Endive and Lettice, each
six handfuls; new Roses if it be spring, or dried, if summer, four handfuls of
Wormwood, and Centaury the greater, each two handfuls, Marsh-mallow roots
sliced, or bruised a pound, of Fenugreek-seed, and Saltnitre, each two ounces,
boil them in a hundred pints of water for a Bath, into which let the sick
enter at the declination of his Fever, and drying his body let him go to bed,
and there sweat an hour or two after.

CHAP. IX.
Of an unputrid Synochus.
AN unputrid Synochus has no small Analogy with an Ephemera, for both are
without putrefaction, and have but one Fit until their end; but they differ
thus, an Ephemera is essentiated in a preternatural heat inflaming the vital
spirits, and an unputrid Synochus in the blood preternaturally calified in the
heart without putrefaction; is is differenced from a Hectic, because this it
in the solid parts, from a putrid Fever by its putrefaction.

The heat of a Synochus if compared with that of an Ephemera is acrid, if with
that of the putrid, gentle, because the blood is of a temperate nature; the
conclusion then may be, What a Synochus is.
that a Synochus is a continual Fever, proceeding from redundancy of blood,
heated beyond measure by a preternatural heat, but without putrefaction hurting
our actions.

The causes are not unlike those of an Ephemera* but more vehement; the
principal are the denseness of the skin, or filth obstructing the pores, and
incarcerating fuliginous excrements, etc. which prohibiting the eventilation of
the blood, do so inflame it, or the suppression of some evacuation, as of the
Courses, Haemorrhoids, or from excess and fury; thus the vital spirits are
first inflamed by reason of their tenuity, then the blood, which inflammation
the Greeks call a Phlogosis; but under the name of blood you are to understand
the four Humors contained in the greater Veins, which as often as they are
inflamed without putrefaction they cause this Synochus, full bodies that fare
well, and live idely, are most subject to it, etc.

This Fever for the most part lasts till the seventh day begins with a
coldness, The Signs
and ends with sweat, with a red urine, the pulse strong and swift, there is no
danger in it unless some error be committed, and then it degenerates into a
putrid Synechis, whence follows death, unless prevented by large bleeding; the
whole body; but especially the face is dyed with blood, weariness possesses the
limbs, the veins are turgid, the temples beat, the head aches, and often a
deep sleep surprises, with difficulty of breathing; the skin is soft, perfused
with moisture, and a gentle heat.

The cure is taken from the essence of the Fever, The Cure.
and cause of the Disease; the essence being hot and dry indicates contrary
remedies, and the cause, its removal; First then, let the diet be thin,
cooling, and moystning Hippoc. Aphoris. 16. Sect. 1. (...) a moist diet is good
for all feverish bodies, especially for Children, and those accustomed to such
diet, as Cock broth, or of Lamb, or Veal, alterd with cooling Herbs, and
Barley waters, etc. or some acid sirrups, as of Limons, Citrons, Pomegranats,
etc. Galen reckons amongst the chief remedies of this Disease bleeding till we
faint if the body be open, otherwise to premise this Glister.

Take of the leaves of Violets, Burrage, Lettice, Purslaine, each a handful,
Prunes sixteen, of the four greater cold Seeds each two drams, boil them in
water to ten ounces, the dissolve of simple Diaprunum and Sugar each six drams,
Honey of Violets, and Oil of Water Lillies each an ounce and half, and make a
Glister, it cools, moystens, purges, and prevents a putrid Fever, then let
blood, for the Veins being emptied that attract much cold art (to avoid a
vacuum) into the room of the blood, by which the rest of the blood is cooled,
and reduced to its ancient state, the fire extinguished, and the putrefaction
inhibited, because both the Natural and preternatural heat are seated in the
blood and spirits: then use this Apozeme.

Take the Roots of Sorrel, Grass, Butchers Broom, and Asparagus, each an ounce
(these roots resist putrefaction, and by their tenuity of parts open
obstructions without any manifest heat) of both Succories, Lettice, Burrage,
Purslane, or Liverwort, each a handful, Prunes sixteen, Endive seeds half an
ounce, of the four greater cold Seeds each two drams, of Violet, and
Water-Lilly-flowers each a small handful, boil them in three pintes of Water to
a pint and half, streine it, and add of the compound sirrup of Endive, or of
Oxysaccharum simple four ounces, and Aromatize it with white Sanders for four
or five days.

After the seventh day you may give this Purge; A Cholagoge.
Cinnamon a scruple, Rhubarb four scruples, Try pherae, Persicae three drams,
Cassia newly drawn an ounce, infuse them one night in part of the Apozem over
warm embers, then streine it, and add of sirrup of Violets of nine infusions
an ounce and half.

CHAP. X.
Of a continual putrid Fever.
A Synechis, Fevers from Humors equally putrefied.
or a continual putrid Fever is twofold, the one where the Humors are
equally putrefied in the great Veins, the other when inequally; from those
equally putrefied arise three sorts of Fevers, as did in a Synochus unputrid,
viz. the Homotonous, Epacmastical, and Paracmastical, and these have no
manifest intermissions, as intdrmitting Fevers, nor remissions, and
exacerbations, as those which proceed from the Humors unequally putrefied in
the great Veins.

When the Natural Humors do unequally putrefie in the great Veins, it is
either natural phlegm (which is nothing else but the cruder part of the blood)
which as often as it putrefies it causes a continual Fever, which is every
day at set hours intended and remitted, from whence it has its name of a
continual quotidian.

If natural choler putrefie in the Veins near to the heart, it causes a
(...), or Burning-feaver; if in places more distant, either upward or downward,
a continual tertian is produced, which every third day is intended and
remitted, but intermits not, because the putrid matter is contained within the
great Veins, and not out of them.

Lastly, if a melancholy humor putrefie there, every fourth day it has its
remissions and exacerbations.

The external causes are like those of an unputrid Synochus, The Causes.
but stronger; the internal are obstructions, either in the greater Veins, or
in the skin, or in the small Veins of the Liver, or habit of the body, which
hindering perspiration the Native heat is extinguished, and hence putrefaction,
the parent of this Fever.

The sig^es are taken from the mordent heat, The Signs
urine, and pulse; the urine is crasse, red, turbid, faetid, and without
sediment, the pulse not only great, vehement, and quick, but unequal and
inordinate.

A Crisis does usually happen in all Diseases one of these six ways, viz. How
many ways a Crisis may be.
by bleeding at the Nose, or by Vomiting, or by looseness, or by sweats, or by
urine, or by parotides in malignant and pestilential Fevers; if by chance
Nature attempt a Crisis on the sixth day, although signs of coction appeared
in the urine on the fourth, yet it is dubious, and fore-tells a relapse; but if
with signs of coction the Crisis be with fainting, or any other grievous
Symptoms it portends death; or if a looseness seize at the beginnig, and the
Fever continue in the same state with signs of crudity, it presages death,
because Nature is overwhelmed with the plenty of matter; on the other side, if
the Fever be abated by the looseness, the sick well enduring it, and breathing
freely, he shall escape; if spots appear the fourth, day, either black or
livid, death is at hand, for they denote some malignant quality, which had they
been red only, and the Patient strong with signs of coction, there were good
hopes; this Fever is most gentle in the morn.

The Cure consists in evacuation, The Cure.
and alteration; evacuation is to be made by bleeding, and that at the
beginning for fear of suffocation or swounings, but if the Patient sweat, or
have the Haemorrhoids, or a Haemorrage, or the Courses appearing, then the
whole business is to be committed to Nature, but if they flow but sparingly,
and the Fever be not mitigated bleed notwithstanding; the second part of the
Cure consists in alteration of the Humors, by cooling and opening without any
manifest heat, and restraining putrefaction, as with the forementioned apozem;
besides, use this cordial powder.

Take of red Corral, The cordial powder.
and the fragments of the five precious Stones finely powdered each a scruple,
the bone of the heart of an Heart, or of an Ox, (for they are both of the same
virtue) half a dram, of Pearl a dram, sugar of Roses a sufficient quantity, and
four leaves of Gold, let it be dissolved in broth or ptissan, or in the
decoction of Sorrel roots.

Take of the powder of Balm and Saffron each a scruple, An Epithem for the
heart.
Water-Lilly-flowers, red Roses, and Grana Tinctorum, each two scruples, powder
of Diamargaritum frigidum four scruples, red Wine two ounces, Scabious,
Bugloss, and Purslane-water each five ounces, apply it to the region of the
heart, with a thick red cloth.

Take of the Conserve of Burrage and Marigold flowers each an ounce, A Plaster*
confection of Alchermes a dram, spread them on a searlet cloth, and apply it
after the Epithem.

Take of the Cerot of Saunders, A Liniment for the Liver.
and ointment of Roses by measure each an ounce, oil of Roses an ounce, then
wash them often with Rose Water, adding half a scruple of Camphore, bath the
part with a Linen cloth, let it be cold in Summer, lukewarm in Winter, with
three ounces of the white ointment of Galen, and half a scruple of Camphore,
anoint the reins and loins once an hour.

CHAP. XI.
Of a Burning-Feaver, and continual Tertian,
THese Fevers differ not in matter nor cure, Fevers from humors unequally
putrefied.
but in their name and seat; both are caused by a choleric blood, putrefied in
the great Veins, the Viscera being well; that in the Veins nearer to the
heart, as in the ascending trunk of the Vena cava, and in the arterial Vein,
and coronal of the heart; this likewise in the great Veins, but more distant
from the arme-pits to the groine. A Burning-feaver is so called (...) by way of
eminency, because it is so great a fire in the heart.

This Burning-feaver, The division of these Fevers.
as also a continual Tertian is twofold, exquisite, and not exquisite; the
exquisite is from choleric blood putrefied as before, the non-exquisite is,
when besides choler, salt phlegm, or ichors are putrefied with it, and this
causus happens two ways, the one when the Veins dried by the heat of Summer
do attract to themselves choleric ichors which are acrid, as we being
destitute of good food, make use of worse; the other way is, when ichors and
other humors are cast from some strong part upon a weaker, and not ventilated,
do putrefie; thus likewise a continual tertian is twofold, the exquisite from
choleric blood, the non-exquisite from the admission of phlegm, melancholy,
or ichors.

The external causes are the hot air, The external Causes.
inspiration of putrid vapors, a choleric distemper, drunkenness, sadness, by
calling the heat from the circumference to the center, etc.

The internal are either antecedent, Causes internal.
as obstructions from crasse and viscid humors which hinder perspiration, by
which means even good humors putrefie; or a plenitude, either quoad vasa, which
distends the Vessels, or ad vires, which cannot be concocted and governed by
nature. Or continent, as the putrid humor it self, which inquinates the pure
blood of the heart, not the whole mass at once, but that which is next it, and
so by order of succession.

The cause of a not exquisite continual tertian is the mixture of salt phlegm,
The causes of a not exquisite continual Tertian.
or ichors, putrefying in the Veins of the Midriffe, which proceed from the
ascending Trunk of the Vena cava, or from the veins of the mouth of the
stomach which flow from the Splenical trunk of the Porta, and make the
stomachical coronary, or else it flows from the hungry Gut, or the simous part
of the Liver; the signs of both legitimate, and illegitimate, are almost alike.

The pathognomonical are taken from the burning heat which choler produces,
Signs Pathognomonical of a causus.
and the unspeakable thirst, the acrimony of the humor continually molesting
the heart and stomach, unless by chance a thin humor fall from the brain, and
moysten the tongue.

Signs assident or concurring are the dryness, Signs assident.
blacknness, and roughness of the tongue from the adustion of the humor pain
of the stomach, Dreams, delirations, difficult breathing, the Lungs or Midriffe
being inflamed, etc. sometimes it begins with a gentle rigor, sometimes with
Vomiting, sometimes with sleepiness if it be exquisite, sometimes with horror,
if it be spurious by reason of the mixture of choler and phlegm, at the
beginning the urine is crasse and turbid, the pul^e small and unequal.

The signs of an exquisite tertian have great analogy with those of an
exquisite causus, Signs of exquisite Tertian.
only they are more mild; the not exquisite are distinguished by rigor, not by
reason of the Fever, but the expulsive faculty of the greater Veins, which
empty themselves into the less, and these into the habit and sensible parts;
this Fever because its morbifical matter, is more distant from the heart, then
that of a Causus, does not with equal force and assiduity afflict it, but has
its exacerbations and remissions every other day.

If the parts about the heart be distended without pain, Prognostics
they signify an inflammation; if with pain at the beginning, death. If the
signs be grievous, it kills the fourth or seventh day; if good, security is
promised the same days; if a rigor happen on the critical day, the Patient
being weak it is death, but if strong, the Disease shall end with sweat.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Cure of these Fevers.
LEt it be temperate, The Air.
or if too hot, be cooled with irrigations on the floor, and spreading cool
Herbs, as Lettice, Vine leaves, Willow, Oak, Rushes, etc. with green flowers of
Water Lillies, Roses, Violets, let vinegar of Roses dilute with Rose Water,
sucked up by a Sponge be often ^eld to the Nose; let the Linen contrary to the
vulgar opinion be often changed, lest its filth foment the Fever.

Let his drink be boiled water, His Drink.
with sirrup of Vinegar, or ptissan, or water and sugar, with a little juice of
Pomegranats, Citron, or Lemons; if you fear a Delirium, use the Alexandrine
Julep, or sirrup of Violets, and Water Lillies.

If the Fever be spurious, and the Patient aged and weak in a cold air, a
little Wine dilute, with boiled water and sugar, with a toast may be allowed;
let his food be liquid, cooling, and moystning, as Chicken, Veale, or Lamb
broth altered with Purslane, Lettice, Sorrel, Burrage, Bugloss, Violets,
Marigolds, with the greater cold Seeds, and white Poppy-seed, or Barley-water,
acid Fruits, as Barberies, Strawberies, Rasberies resist putrefaction; if he
be much enfeebled, Gellies, and Analepticks must be used.

Let blood as soon as you can, Bleed.
but if he be bound in body give this Glister first.

Take of Violet leaves, A cooling Glister.
Mallows, Lettice, Gourds, Burrage, each a handful, Prunes sixteen, of the four
great cold Seeds each two drams, red Poppy-flowers, or Water-Lilly, and Roses,
each a small handful, boil them in Whey or Water to a pint, streine it, and
dissolve of Diaprune simple, and Cassia newly drawn (if it be exquisite, if not
of Diaphenicum, each six drams, honey of Violets, and oil of Water Lillies,
each an ounce and half, or so much of oil of Cammomel if it be not exquisite,
and make a Glister.

Take of Melon-seeds one scruple, A Bole.
Rhubarb grosle powdered, if you would purge choler by stool, or fine powdered
if by urine, four scruples, Cassia newly drawn six drams, let him take it with
Sugar, and an hour and half after take fresh broth.

As often as Cassia, A Rule to be observed.
or any other purging Medicine is infused, the Dose is to be doubled, and where
you fear obstructions, never purge with those things that have an astriction,
as Myrobalans, Roses, and the sirrups made of them; but instead of them use
Manna, Cassia, or sirrup of Violets of nine infusions; next, alter the humor,
with Juleps which inhibit putrefaction.

As take of sirrup of Endive compound three ounces, A Julep.
Succory and Purs^ane water each half a pint, but if they be spurious take of
Oxysaccarum compound, which has the opening roots in it, and a little juice of
Pomgranates, after signs of coction, purge forth the humor thus.

Take of Cinnamon a scruple, A Purge for Choler
Rhubarb four scruples, Tamarinds two drams, Diaprune solutive six drams,
infuse them all night on warm embers in a decoction of the opening roots,
strein it, and add sirrup of Violets of nine intusions, or of Roses solutive,
with Agarick; if the Fever be illegitimate, an ounce and half, and give the
potion* in a Spurious causus, take so much Diaphaenicum which purges phlegm and
choler; but if the Patient have a pain in the stomach, and be nauseative, let
him take a Vomit so he be not tabid, or narrow chested.

CHAP. XIII.
Of a continual Quotidian Fever.
(...) and (...) the Juniors call it, Of the Name.
because it has no intermission, and to distinguish it from (...), which is,
an intermitting quotidian.

This Fever differs from an intermitting both in matter and seat where the
phlegm putrefies, because a continual one proceeds from Natural phlegm
contained in the great Veins, which is nothing else but crude blood, which in
time may be changed into good blood, How a continual and intermitting differ.
being of taste sweet, or insipid, arising from the cold and moist part of the
chyle, and as often as this blood is putrefied by a preter-natural heat in those
Veins, the other humors incorrupt is caused a continual quotidian; but an
intermitting is caused from excrementitious phlegm, putrefied by a
preter-natural heat out of those great Veins, viz. in the veins of the habit
of the body, in the Liver, Spleen, Messentery.

The external causes may be taken from the air, External causes.
cloudy, cold and moist, from a phlegmatic nature, the winter season,
drunkenness, ill diet, as entrals of Beasts, etc.

The internal causes are a cold, distemper of the stomach, and of the meseraick
veins, which send the chyle incoct to the Liver, old age, cold humors falling
from the head to the stomach.

This Fever begins not with coldness, The Signs.
as an intermitting, because the matter is putrefied in the great Veins, but
with vaunings and stretchings, for the most part it invades at night, the heat
is less acrid and mordent than in a continual choleric Fever, because the
humor is colder, the urine at first is white, crude, and crass, the pulse
slow, and rare, being oppressed with a crass vapor raised from the phlegm; the
sick are sleepy, their Hypochondria stretched with wind, their stools white,
their sweat none, or very little, and clammy, this Fever is usually lasting,
being from a cold tough humor, often brings to a Cachexy, or Dropsy; if the
beginning be long, so will be the increment, and whole progress of the Disease;
for the Cure, let him use a good diet, shunning those things which engender
crasse juyces, then purge the first region of his body with these following
remedies.

Take of Barley, A Glister.
Mercury, Violets, and Mallows, each a handful, Fennel, and Carret-seeds, each
three drams, the tops of Dill, and flowers of Cammomel each half a handful,
boil them in water to a pint, streine it, and dissolve of Galens Hiera, and
Benedicta Laxativa, each six drams, honey of Rosemary, and oil of Camomel,
each an ounce and half, and so give it.

If the Sick be apt to Vomit, let him take this.

Of the juice of Radish roots, A Vomit
and honied water each two ounces, powder of Asarum a dram, let him drink it
warm.

Take of Succory, A Purge for the Phlegm.
Barley, and all the capillary Plants, each half a handful, Raisins stoned
eight, four Prunes, of the Cordial flowers a small handful, boil them in water
to two ounces, then infuse the Electuary of Diacarthamum half an ounce, Cassia
newly drawn an ounce, Agarick Trochiscate a dram, streine it, and dissolve of
sirrup of Roses solutive an ounce, give the potion. Take of Agarick Trochiscate
a scruple, of imperial Pills a dram, with honey of Roses, make eight Pills to
be given after midnight.

The first region of the body being thus cleansed, Bleed.
open the basilick vein of the right arm, and draw blood according to the
strength, age, season, region, and impurity of it, because this being a
continual Fever, bleeding is good for this as well as others.

Then give this Julep, A Julep.
Oxymel simple, and sirrup of Maidenhair, each an ounce and half, Fennel, and
Endive water each half a pint, condite it with Cinnamon.

Take of Fennel, An Apozem.
and Parsley roots cleansed from the pith, Butchers Broom and Asparagus each an
ounce, of Maudlin, Succory, Endive, the common capillary Plants each one
handful, the less Sea Wormwood half a handful, Raisins stoned twenty, Figgs
twelve, Endive seed half an ounce, Aniseeds two drams, Bugloss and French
Lavender Flowers each a small handful, Rosemary half a handful, Water and Honey
two quarts, boil away half, then clarify the colature with honey of Roses, and
sirrup of the juice of Endive each two ounces, and condite it with Cinnamon.

The matter being thus coct, Pills*
give Pills of Agarick, and simple Hiera each two scruples, and Trochiskes of
Alhandal two grains, if they want a quickner make them up with honey of Roses,
and gild them; give them after the first sleep; next day give this Bolus three
hours before dinner, old Mithridate two scruples, conserve of Rosemary flowers
two drams with sugar.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of a continual Quartan.
(...), that is, a quartan Fever so called, Of the Name.
because every fourth day it is exasperated, and remitted if it be continual;
but if intermitting, recurs every fourth day; these two differ both in matter
and seat, the matter of a continual quartan is Natural melancholy putrefied in
the great Veins, the other humors remaining good; but the matter of an
intermitting, is excrementitious melancholy, putrefied out of the great Veins
in the Spleen, or mesentery. A continual quartan is twofold, exquisite, or
spurious; exquisite, when Natural melancholy putrefies alone; spurious, when
other humors putrefie with it in the great vessels, and this is most frequent.

The causes are either from a laborious life, The Causes.
a cold and dry temperament, a declining age, the autumn, or an unequal air,
and meats producing melancholy, as Swines flesh, Hares, Salt Fish, Oysters etc.

The chief signs are taken from the substance of the Fever, The Signs.
or nature of its heat, from the actions hurt, which appears by the inequality,
swiftness, slowness, or rarity of the pulse from the excrements and urine, this
Fever begins without horror, because the peccant matter is contained within
the great Veins, the urine is various, but for the most part crude, by reason
of the coldness of the morbifical humor, little or no sweat, by reason of the
paucity of the matter, little thirst, and the tongue inclining to black.

A continual quartan, Prognostics.
whether exquisite or spurious, is deadly in old men, especially if it follow
an intermitting one, or a burning Fever illcured, a spurious quartan if it
take in the Summer is for the most part short, but if in the Autumn it is long;
for the Cure, first use meats of good juice, rather liquid than solid, altered
with Burrage, Bugloss. etc.

Use Currants, Pine Nuts, The Cure.
Figgs, Vinegar, though it be incifive is not good in this Fever, because by
its coldness and dryness it conduplicates the humor, but were it in the Spleen
it were commodious.

At the beginning use gentle Purgers, A Rule for purging.
because by the strength of strong Medicines the humor grows thicker, and the
thinner part being dissipated, the terrene faeces remain indissoluble, but in
the declination use stronger; if the body be bound give first this Glister.

Take of Mallows, A Glister.
Violets, Orech, Burrage, Bugloss, each a handful, Flax and Fenugreek-seed each
half an ounce, of the four great cold seeds, and Fennel-seed, each two drams
(for melancholy people are windy) of the tops of Dill, Camomel, Melilot,
Elder, each a small handful in the colature, dissolve of Catholicum and
Diasena, each six drams, honey of Violets, and oil of Lillies each an ounce
and half, give the Glister.

Take of Polipody of the Oak six drams, A purge for Melancholy.
wild Saffron seeds and Sena each three drams, Dodder of time two drams,
Anni-seeds four scruples, Cloves two, boil them in Whey to three ounces, then
infuse of Diasena, or Diacarthamum six drams, streine it, and add sirrup of
Violets of nine infusions, or sirrup of Apples an ounce and half, and give it.
The body being thus emptied, let blood at the left basilick vein, with a large
Orifice.

If the sick be inclined to Vomit, A Vomit*
then give him of the powder of the middle rine of a Walnut, or of Broom-seeds,
or of the roots of Asarum four scruples, with the decoction of Reddish roots
make a vomit, or Nettle-seed poudered given in Mulse or Whey will do the like;
some give three or four grains of Stibium prepared, which I allow not but in
rustic bodies.

Take of the sirrup of the juice of Fumitory three ounces, An altering Julep.
Endive, and Burrage-water each half a pint.

Take of the roots of Bugloss two ounces, An Apozem.
sharp Dock-grass, Butchers Broom, Asparagus, and Liquorice, each an ounce, of
the middle rine of Tamarisk, and Ash, or Elder, each half an ounce, of
Fumitory, Hops, common Endive, Succory, Milt-waist, Balm, each a handful,
Prunes fourteen, Cuscute and Purslane-seeds, and the four great cold Seeds each
two drams, flowers of Tamarice, Broom, Burrage, Elder, each a handful, boil
them in order in a sufficient quantity of water, then add the juice of sweet
Apples three ounces, a sufficient quantity of Sugar, Aromatize it with a dram
and a half of the powder of Galens Laetificans, with part of this decoction,
you may make a magistral sirrup by adding Purgers of melancholy, by which the
Morbifical humor may be purged epicrastically; to strengthen the viscera use
this.

Take of the Electuary of Hyacinth, Lozenges.
or confection of Alkermes half a dram, powder of Diatriasantali, and Galens
Laetificans each a dram, white Sugar dissolved, and boiled in Fumitory water
four ounces, and make it into Lozenges of two drams weight, with the conserve
of Succory flowers, and Milt waist each three drams, and give one, three hours
before Dinner. If the Spleen require it, use this Ointment.

Take of Gum Elemi, The Ointment for the Spleen
and juice of Tobacco each an ounce, Oil of St. John's Wort, or Elder, half an
ounce, of Rosen and Gum Amoniake dissolved in Vinegar of Capers, and yellow Wax
each two drams, on the fire add powder of long and round Birthwort, and
Cyclamen root each a dram, make an ointment.

CHAP. XV.
Of an intermitting Tertian.
(...) is taken by the Greeks in general for every intermitting putrid Fever,
which ends, and returns again, but Hippocrates especially calls this Fever of
which we now treat, (...), because it recurs every third day, it differs from
the continual, of which we have spoken, not essentially, but in matter, seat,
because their matter putrefies not every where, but in the lesser veins which
are in the stomach, liver, mesentery, guts, spleen, womb, and habit of the
body; an intermitting Tertian is twofold, exquisite or spurious, the exquisite
is from excrementitious choler, which being manifold, there are many
differences in Tertians.

The matter of an exquisite tertian offends either in quantity or quality; the
quantity is either great or small, if great, either it putrefies in one place,
or in diverse at once; if but in one place, it causes an exquisite tertian,
which exceeds not seven Fits; but if the quantity be small, it shall end the
fourth or fifth fit.

If the matter offend in quality, as the choler is more or less hot, the whole
constitution of the Disease and the fits shall be longer or shorter, milder,
or more tedious, for pale or excrementitious choler is sarre more mild then
yellow, and this, then vitellinous, porracious, or aeruginous, but the
ceruleous is the hottest of all.

If choler putrefie in diverse places together, Whence a double Tertian.
and the same day, then is caused a double intermitting tertian, whose fits
return every third day, and are exacerbated, although they assault every day,
and intermit, because that which is putrefied is every fit emptied either by
sweat, vomit, or stool. The spurious one by the mixtion of phlegm or
melancholy, is longer than that from excrementitious choler only, and lasts
according to the nature of the humor mixed, and by the Patients intemperance
has lasted from the Autumnal to the spring aequinox.

The causes of the exquisite are all hot and dry, The Causes.
as a hot Summer, hot aliments, hunger, thirst, labor, strong wines, hot
liver, and temper, etc. The causes of a spurious one are idleness, effeminacy,
winter season, cold and moist diet, obstructions, plenitude, etc.

The heat of an exquisite Tertian is more acrid and mordent than that of the
spurious, The Signs
through its four times, it begins with rigor, and often with choleric
vomitings, and ends with an universal sweat; when the rigor is off, the heat
is like a light fire, burning with difficult breathing, the urine at first is
somewhat red, of mean substance, and in the lower part seems thin, in the
upper opacus.

The signs of a spurious one are horror, from the mixture of choler and
phlegm, a heat more obscure than that of the exquisite Tertian, and more
manifest than that of an exquisite quotidian, a pulse small and slow, which if
it grow daily harder, the Fever shall last many months, bitterness of mouth,
pain in the vertebra's, with inflation of stomach, and loathings of meat
sometimes trouble them.

Before we let blood let the first region of the body be emptied by a cooling
Glister, A Caution.
or minorating purge before described, lest the morbifical humor be wrapped into
the greater veins, and so we cause a continual Fever instead of an
intermitting; let blood on the intermitting day with a small Orifice, to
prepare the humor.

Take of Oxysaccharum simple, A Julep.
and sirrup of the juice of Endive, each an ounce and half, Succory, and
Purslaine water each five ounces, then purge him thus.

Take of Cinnamon a scruple, A Purge for choler.
Rhubarb four scruples, Tamarinds two drams, Diaprune solutive, or Electuary of
Psyllium six drams, infuse them all night over warm embers in an opening
decoction, then add sirrup of Roses an ounce, give it on the intermitting day,
or these pills.

Take of Diagridium four grains, Pills*
Rhubarb a scruple, of Pills Aureae a dram, make them up with sirrup of
Succory, and give them after the first sleep

Take conserve of Succory flowers, A Bolus.
and of Violets, or Water Lillies each two drams* powder of Diatriasantalum
scruple, with Sugar make a bole to give next morn to allay the fire in the
bowels.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Cure of a spurious intermitting Tertian.
THis Fever is more frequent than the exquisite, because men indulge too much
to their Genius, and its Fits and whole constitution is longer, by reason of
the mixture of tough, crasse phlegm, or melancholy, the Fits are sometimes
twenty, twenty four, or forty hours, and then it is called an extense tertian;
let the diet be incisive, and detersive, and somewhat refrigerating, the broths
be altered with Endive, Burrage, Parsley, Wood Sorrel, Purssaine, and a fourth
part of Hissop or Savoury, give Gellies which nourish much in small quantity,
and because they are quickly excerned, repeat them often, and sometimes give
this powder.

Take of Galens Laetificans two drams, A Cordial powder.
the Analeptick or Resumptive powder half an ounce, pure Sugar six ounces,
leaves of Gold six, dissolve it in broth it wonderfully restores strength, if
the Patient be nauseative.

Take of Nettle-seeds a dram, A Vomit.
sirrup of Tobacco, or simple Oxymel an ounce, give it warm in mulse after
meat, because it troubling the aeconomy of the stomach, it better exonerates it
self with the meat, if occasion be for a Suppository.

Take of Honey boiled an ounce, salt Gemmes, and Mouse-turd each two scruples.

Take of Cinnamon a scruple, A Suppositary.
Agarick Trochiscate two scruples, Rhubarb four scruples, simple Oxymel and
Diaphaenicum each six drams, infuse them all over warm embers in a fresh
infusion of Damask Roses, streine it and give it.

If strength and other things allow it, A Purge
let blood on the intermitting day.

Blood, says Avicen, is a brideler of choler, both in respect of its quantity
and quality, for there is more or it, and being temperately hot and moist, it
does moderate the acrimony of choler, and experience tells us, that those that
are sick of a continual tertian, and the phrenitical, are best toward morning,
because blood has then the dominion, and worst toward night when phlegm
rules, and therefore in Asia those that were let blood presently became
phrenitical, or delirous, and not those which were not; but that region is
far hotter and dryer than Europe, then give this Julep.

Sirrup of Vinegar compound, A Julep.
and honey of Roses, each two ounces, Endive, Succory, and Agrimony water, each
half a pint.

Take of the five opening Roots cleansed and bruised each an ounce, An Apozem.
infuse them in a small quantity of simple Oxymel on the embers four hours, the
herbs Succory, Endive, Liverwort, and the cappillary Plants each a handful,
Penni-royal, Origanum, or calamint, each half a handful, Liquorice scraped and
bruised two drams, Raisins stoned twenty, Prunes eight, Endive seed three
drams, Melon, Anise, and Fennel-seed each a dram and half, the three Cordial
flowers, and Chamomel, each a small handful, Time half a handful, boil them
all in order with the Oxymel and roots in two quarts of water till a third part
be wasted, clarify it, and aromatize it with Cinnamon.

Take of Cloves half a scruple, A Purge.
Agarick Trochiscate two scruples, Rhubarb and Tamarinds each four scruples,
Diaphaenicum six drams, infuse them in part of the apozem and give it.

Take of conserve of Succory flowers, Citron Pill candied each two drams, old
Methridate half a dram, give it with Sugar three hours before meat.

Take of Pills Imperial, A bolus.
a dram, of Agarick a scruple, Diagridium four grains, make them up with honey
of Roses.

To strengthen the Liver, Lozenges for the Liver.
take of the powder of Diatriasantalum two drams, conserve of Succory-flowers,
and Citron pill condite each three drams, pure Sugar dissolved and boiled in
Agrimony water, four ounces, make Lozenges of two drams weight, and give one
every morn; if melancholy be joined add those things before mentioned for it,
instead of Phlegmagoges.

CHAP. XVII.
Of an intermitting Quotidian.
THis Fever is caused from excrementitious phlegm putrefied, and every day
has new fits with a refrigeration or chilness, the place of putrefaction is
the smaller veins and habit of the body, and chiefly the stomach, which is
always almost affected in this Fever; sometimes it is in the mesentery, the
simous part of the Liver, Spleen, or Womb; but if it putrefie out of the
smaller veins, it does not cause a Fever, but some other Malady, as if it be
putrid and stinking in the Brain, or in the Lungs after Cathars, and Astma's,
or in the Womb, from whence is a Woman's Flux; or in the Guts, from whence are
Worms, or in the bladder or reins, where it is dried into stones of diverse
colors.

By phlegm is here meant any cold and moist humor produced in us, which may be
putrefied from a hot or cold cause, that putrefied from heat, or the mixture of
a serous moisture becomes salt, from cold if remiss is caused acid phlegm, if
intense, the glassie or albugenious, from these several sorts of phlegm are
engendered various Fevers.

A Quotidian Fever is twofold, The division of this Fever.
the one from excrementitious phlegm which is of sweet taste, or insipid for
the most part produced in the stomach, which when it putrefies in the lesser
veins makes an exquisite Quotidian; the other is, when some other humor
besides phlegm putrefies with it, and it is called a bastard quotidian; let the
Phisician be careful he coufound not a bastard Tertian, or double intermitting
Tertian, or a triple Quartan, which have their fits every day with an
intermitting quotidian, for their cure is far different, and distinction
difficult.

The causes of this Fever are not unlike those of a continual quotidian; The
Signs
gapings and wretchings precede this Fever, with a coldness of the external
parts, as of the Nose, Fingers, Ears, Hands, and Feet: with a pain in the
stomach, seldom with rigor, but with a gentle horror, the pulse inequal,
inordinate, slow, and weak at first, afterward more vehement and swift; the
urine first thin, white, and crude, afterward thick and turbulent; sometimes
they vomit phlegm, have acid belchings, swellings of the Hypochondria, pale
faces, and little thirst; it usually seazes after noon, toward the evening or
night; its fits are for the most part eighteen hours, and therefore it is
called (...) that is, partaking of both day and night, its intermission is
impure by reason of the quantity, crasseness, and clamminess of phlegm which is
left by the former fit, and is the cause of the following, because it is not
breathed forth by sweat as in a tertian; this pituitous humor is hardly
enflamed and moved, but the matter being coct, the vehemence of the fits cease,
as in all other wholesome sicknesses, its heat is not burning, but meanly acrid.

The signs of a bastard quotidian are confused, Signs of a bastard Quotidian
by reason of the excrementitious choler, or melancholy putrefying with it,
but if choler be mixed, you may know it from the Vomitings, stools, urine,
pulse, and a more acrid and mordent heat, for some choler will be cast up, the
excrement will be yellow, and the water tinct with choler, the pulse inequal
and more frequent than in the exquisite, the fits shorter, with thirst and
bitterness of mouth; if melancholy be mixed consider its signs, with the
Spleen illaffected.

Let the diet be hot and drying, The Cure.
incisive and detersive; let the drink be decoction of Sarsa Parilla root,
sirrup of Vinegar, or Hydromel; moist meat that is substantifically moist is
good for all Fevers, says Hippocrates, as broths of euchymous flesh altered
with Parsley, Fennel, Hyssop, Savory, Marjoram, Sage, Time, with a little
Endive, Purslaine, or Burrage, if it be spurious, the meat is easily corrupted
by a feverish heat, as milk by the hot air; let them sleep in the
declination, and not in the beginning of the fit, if the sick be nauseative
give a vomit, and then what follows.

Take of Soap an ounce, A Suppositary.
powder of simple Hiera, Agarick, and Salt Gemmious each a dram, seeds of
Coloquintida a scruple, beat them in a Mortar with juice of Mercury, make
Suppositaries, and dry them up for your use.

Take of Origanum, A Glister.
Pennyroyal, Calamint and Mercury each a handful, seeds of Dill three drams,
Agarick two drams, Chamomel and Dill flowers each half a handful, boil them in
water to a pint, honey of Roses, oil of Nuts, each an ounce and half,
Benedicta Laxative, and Hiera, or Diaphaenicum each half an ounce, make a
Glister.

Take of Polipody of the Oak bruised half a dram, A purging Potion.
wild Saffron seeds, and Sena each two drams, Calamint half a handful,
Anniseed a dram, two Figgs, flowers of Time a small handful, boil them in
water to three ounces in the Colature, infuse of Diacarthamum six drams over
warm embers, sirrup of Roses solutive, with Agarick an ounce, and give it; if
it be Spring time, and the body young, or any evacuation suppressed, open the
right axillary vein, then give this Julep.

Oxymel compound four ounces, A Julep.
Sage, Betony, and Succory water (if choler be mixed) each five ounces.

Take of Cocheae Pills, Pills.
and of Agarick each half a dram, powder of Hiera a scruple, Agarick
Trochiscate four grains, Trochiskes of Alhandal two grains, or if choler be
mixed, of Diagridium two grains.

Take of Diarrhodon and Galangal each a scruple, A Condite
Trochiskes of Wormwood two drams, Citron pill condite with Honey an ounce,
Conserve of Sage, and Rosemary flowers each two ounces, cover it with Gold, let
him take half an ounce three hours before dinner.

Take of oil of Wormwood, A Liniment.
and Mastick each an ounce, oil of Nutmeg half an ounce, mix at the time of
use a few drops of red Wine, and anoint the stomach.

Take of the plaster of Mastick two ounces* A Plaster.
of Ladanum an ounce, powder Wormwood two drams, red Roses a dram, Mace two
scruples, reduce them to a mass, and make a scutiforme plaster for the
stomach, an Epiala being from glassie acid phlegm requires the same Cure, only
stronger remedies.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of a Quotidian Fever from salt Phlegm.
(...), Of the Name.
that is, a salt or salsuginous Fever, is of the nature of Quotidians, so
called because it is caused by salt phlegm, as a Winterburning Fever is,
according to Hippocrates, but according to Galens explication of that place, it
is so called in relation to touch, and not unto taste, because like Salt it
causes an itching mordency both in the body of the sick, and the hand of the
Physician touching it, which is thus, when fuliginous and very adust excrements
are cast forth through the habit of the body and skin, it is distinguished from
other Fevers by its horror, thirst, and salt taste, by urine and pulse, and
continuance of the fit, says Hippocrates, by reason of its heat from
putrefaction, or the mixture of some serous humor which is salt, rather than
of choler which is bitter, and not salt, as Avicen thought.

It is cured by the same remedies as an intermitting quotidian, The Cure.
tempering them with Succory, Hops, Fumitory, the four great cold seeds, etc.
with incisive, attenuating, and detersive things, as sirrup De Bisantiis, and
compound Oxysaccharum; we are not to expect concoction for purging the
morbifical humor, which is so crasse and tough that it will be a long time
first; purge therefore in the augment and state, but gently premising to every
Purge its preparative, your Catarrhall Fever is of the kind of quotidians,
and is cured almost with the same medicines.

CHAP. XIX.
Of an intermitting Quartan.
(...), or a Quartan Fever, is so called, because it returns every fourth
day, it is twofold, exquisite or spurious; an exquisite intermitting, differs
from a continual, both in matter and seat, because this is from a Natural
melancholy putrefied in the greater Veins, and that from an excrementitious
melancholy, cold and dry, putrefying, chiefly in the Spleen, then in the
Liver, mesentery, and habit of the body; a spurious one is as often as
excrementitious, melancholy putrefies with choler, or phlegm in the same
place, and sometimes choler and phlegm putrefie apart, and degenerate into a
quartan.

The chief signs are a rigor at the beginning and augment, The Sign^
and horror, with a shaking of the whole body, as if the flesh and bones were
broken; the urine at first white, thin, crude, and various, afterward crasse
and black.

This Fever is the longest of all intermitting Fevers; Prognostics.
the Falling Sickness is cured by a quartan, if neglected it causes a schirrus
of the Spleen and Dropsy; if it degenerate into a double or triple quartan it
is bad, but if into a continual it is lethal.

The sum of the Cure consists in gentle Medicines, The Cure.
whether Glisters or Purges often repeated, and by degrees ascend to stronger,
for he that acts otherwise from a simple or double quartan, makes a triple or
continual one, whence is death; this is confirmed by Galens story, who contrary
to the opinion of the Physicians of his time, in the midst of winter, cured
Eudemus the Philosopher of a triple quartan by the use of Treacle, by which
Medicine preposterously used be fell into it, for as long as signs of crudity
appear, we are not to use Diuretics, nor Sudorificks, lest by that means the
corrupt humor be forced into narrower passages, from whence it is not easily
removed, but grows more furious; such excretions then are not to be used but in
the declination.

If the quartan be from choler adust, then to the following remedies add
things cooling, but if from phlegm, then things incisive, attenuating, and
detersive.

If the Fever be exquisite, the melancholy humor diffused through the whole
body, vinegar and its sirrups are naught, but if it be contained in the spleen
only, it is good.

Take of Mallows, A Glister
Violet leaves, Burrage, Fumitory, Hops, each a handful, Prunes twelve, Endive
seeds half an ounce, of the four great cold Seeds each two drams, Violet and
Elder flowers each a small handful, boil them in water to a pint, in the
colature, dissolve of Cassia, with sugar and Diaprune simple, each six drams,
honey of Violets, and oil of Lillies each an ounce and half, give it.

Take of the pulpe of Cassia six drams, A Bole so melancholy.
powder of Sena a dram, of Aniseed, a scruple, of Cloves two grains, with sugar
make a bole.

Take of Polipody of the Oak bruised six drams, A Purge for melancholy*
Fumitory, Hops, Burrage, each half a handful, Prunes four, figgs two, the seed
of Dodder, of Vetches, Anise, and Purslane each half a dram, boil them in
water to four ounces, in the colature, boil of Sena leaves two drams, Aniseed
a dram, whole Cloves two, express it, and infuse of Catholicum, and
Diacarthamum each three drams, again express it, and dissolve sirrup of
Fumitory, or Epithimum an ounce, give this potion four hours before in broth,
upon the fit day rather than on the other, because the matter being terrene and
sluggish, will hardly yield; but on the fit day the humor being in motion, it
is then most easily expelled, I speak by experience, contrary to the common
opinion.

Take of pills of Fumitory a dram, Pills.
powder of Sena, and Agarick Trochiscate, each half a scruple, with sirrup of
Fumitory, make pills.

If Nature tend upwards give of Antimony prepared and powdered three grains,
Vomit.
Conserve of Violets three ounces, with Sugar make a bole to be taken on the
fit day; or infuse six grains of it in White Wind all night over warm embers,
strain it, and give it before the horror.

Amatus Lucitanus boasts, he has cured many with a draft of Rose Water
warmed, and given at the insult of the fit, and some with happy success give at
the insult five or six grains of Pepper in a cup of generous Wine; if the
Patient be young with full veins, and it be spring time, let blood of the
axillary vein in the left arm.

Take of the roots of sharp Dock two ounces, An Apozem for choler adust.
Butchers Broom, Asparagus, Grass, and Liquorice each an ounce, the middle
rine of Ash and Elder each half an ounce, Succory, Endive, Hops, Fumitory,
Burrage, Agrimony, Burnet, Miltwaist, Mercury, each a handful, Prunes twelve,
new Figgs eight, Endive, Purflane-seed, and the four great cold ones, each two
drams, the three Cordial flowers each a small handful, boil them in two quarts
of water till a third part be consumed, clarify it with sirrup of Pomgranates,
and Endive compound, each two ounces, and aromatize it with yellow saunders.

Take of Succory roots an ounce and half, An Apozem for salt phlegm.
Grass, Butchers Broom, Asparagus, each an ounce, infuse them in simple Oxymel
all night over warm embers, and then boil them in two quarts of water with
Burrage, Endive, Hops, Fumitory, Origanum, Calamint, Agrimony, each a handful,
Mercury and Maidenhair, each half a handful, Liquorice scraped and bruised
half an ounce, Raisins stoned twenty, Figgs eight, seeds of Purssane, Arise,
Dodder of Vetches, and the four great cold ones, each two drams, flower of
Tamarisk, Broom, and Violets, each a handful, being taken off the fire add
the Oxymel, wherein the roots were infused, strain it, and clarify it with
Oxysaccharum, compound two ounces, and aromatize it with powder of
Diatriasantalum.

Take of Polipody of the Oak bruised six drams, A Purge for (...) phlegm.
Sena half an ounce, Dodder of Time two drams, Annis^ed a dram, true black
Hellebore two scruples, whole Cloves two, boil them in part of the former
Apozem to three ounces, then infuse of Catholicum and confection Hamech each
half an ounce, in the colature dissolve sirrup of Fumitory the greater, A purge
for phlegm and melancholy.
or of Apples an ounce, and give it.

Take of Cloves three grains, Aniseed two scruples, Agarick Trochiscate a
dram, Turbith bruised four scruples, Sena two drams, infuse them all in part of
the Apozem, with an ounce of Oxymel simple, upon warm embers, to the
expression, add of Diacarthamum, and Catholicum, each three drams, sirrup of
Fumitory the greater, an ounce.

Take of old Treacle four scruples, A Bole
Conserve of Bugloss flowers or roots three drams, give it with Sugar.

Take of Cloves three Grains, A Purge for choler adust.
Cinnamon a scruple, Anniseed half a dram, Rhubarb, Tamarinds, and Sena each a
dram and half, infuse them all night in Whey over warm embers, with the
Electuary of the juice of Roses half an ounce, streine it, and add sirrup of
Violets of nine infusions an ounce and half, give it.

Take of the Conserve of Tamarisk, An Opiate
or Broom flowers two ounces, Conserve of the roots of Smallage, Miltwaist, or
Maidenhair, each anounce, powder of the Trochisks of Capers, and of Dialacca,
or Diacurcuma, each a dram, make an opiate, give half an ounce on the
intermediate days, drinking a little White Wind after it.

Take of Trochisks of Capers, Lozenges.
and Wormwood, each half a dram, root of Jallop a dram, Crocomartis two drams,
Conserve of the roots or flowers of Bugloss six drams, Sugar dissolved in
Milte-waist water and boiled, four ounces, make Lozenges two drams weight, take
one every intermitting morn, and drink after it a little White wine.

Take of Gum Elemi an ounce, A Plaster for the Spleen.
Wax half an ounce, Colophonia, Turpentine, and powder of long Birthwort, and
Caper bark, each two drams, Flower-de-luce, Cammels Hey, Nard Indian, and
Myrrh each a dram, Styrax Calamite half a dram, Whitewine as much as will
serve to dissolve the gums, make a mass, of which spread a Plaster on Leather
in the figure of a Neats tongue, and apply it to the Spleen, it softens and
resolves its hardness, or the Chemical Oil of Amoniacum, with some few drops
of sharp Vinegar does more powerfully resolve any hard tumor of the spleen.

CHAP. XX.
Of Fevers annexed to Quartans.
THe Quintan, Sextan, Septan, and Nonan Fevers differ not from intermitting
Quartans, either in matter or cure, but in the quantity of the humor, and
disposition of the body, rather than from the rising, setting, and congression
of some Stars, as the Astrologers would have it; all these Fevers have their
name from the motion they observe returning upon the fifth, sixth, seventh, or
ninth day.

The cause of these circuits depends not only on disordered diet, The Causes.
or the relics of the morbifical matter not emptied, nor on the quantity,
quality, or crasness and clamminess of the humor, nor on the influx of the
Stars, or disposition of the body, but rather from the starry Element, which
Hippocrates calls something Divine, when a quartan is caused from very crasse
and tough phlegm, and a melancholy humor very crass, it may then be extended
beyond the fourth day, says Paulus Aegi. and Rhasis speaks of those returned
every tenth day, and once a month; that the quantity and quality of both
humors, and disposition of body do contribute somewhat, none will deny, but
the cause of the Circuits, Histories do report to be referred to the element
of Stars. Pliny speaks of Antipater the Poet who lived very long, and every
year on his Birthday had a Fever; Galen says, he has seen Quintans but
obscurely, but Avicen boasts he has seen many, but they are rarely contingent.

Hippocrates presages thus of these Fevers, Presages.
the Nocturnal is not dangerous, but long; the Diurnal is shorter, and
sometimes they bring to a Consumption; the reason is, because the night is
likened to Winter, at which time cold humors move, and because in the night
season remedies cannot conveniently be administered; a Quintan is the worst of
all, for to the sound or tabid it is death, because it is vehement, proceeding
from an atra-bilarious humor, and not from a melancholy juice; a Septan is
long, but not lethal, and so a Nonan.

The Cure differs not from that of an exquisite or spurious quartan.

Take of the leaves of Sena three drams, A powder for an intermitting quartan.
the roots of true black Hellebore one dram, of Anise-seed, Dodder of Time,
Diagridium each half a dram, Mastick, and salt Gemmeous each a scruple, Cloves
half a scruple, make a fine Powder, give a dram in a little White Wind on the
fit day in the morn early once a week.

CHAP. XXI.
Of confused, compounded, and erratick Fevers.
ALL these are of the kind of essential Fevers, and differ not from the
precedent, neither in matter nor putrefaction, for they are all putrid, but in
the seat and motion of the morbifical humor.

A confused Fever is so called from the seat, Of a confused Fever.
when humors do equally putrefie in the greater or lesser veins; as if
choler and phlegm do putrefie together in the greater veins, there shall be
two continual Fevers, because these two humors mixed do putrefie in the same
place, beginning and ending together, and by reason of this mixtion they cannot
be known distinctly, or apart, because their signs are confounded, from whence
this Fever has its name; likewise if both those humors putrefie in the
lesser veins which are in the habit of the body, or in the Stomach, Liver,
Mesentery, Spleen, or Cuts, together in the same place, there shall be two
intermitting Fevers, which mixed do constitute a confuse, and not a compound
Fever.

On the contrary, A Compound Fever.
A compound Fever is as often as the humors do inequally putrefie, not in one
place (as the confused) but in diverse places together, whether in the greater
or lesser veins; and this Fever has its name from the predominant humor, as
in a bastard Tertian where choler predominates; likewise if there be more
phlegm or melancholy humor, it shall then be called a bastard quotidian, or
quartan, which Fevers are com-Pound, and not confused, because their matter
putrefies in diverse places, and they begin and end at diverse hours, because
every one has its several essence, seat, and motion; also two quotidians, and
a double tertian, and a double or triple quartan, are Compound Fevers, as
often as their matter putrefies in diverse places; and thus a semi-tertian which
is compounded of choler putrefied in the greater veins, from whence is a
continual; and phlegm out of them, whence is an intermitting Fever; or of
phlegm putrefied in the greater Veins, and choler out of them, and is called
a Hemitritaean; thus also a Hectic Fever with a putrid, do make a Compound
Fever, because the efficient cause of a Hectic is in the solid parts, and of
the putrid in the humors, but an Ephemera joined with other Fevers makes no
compound, otherwise there could be no simple Fever; the symptoms also which
accompany Fevers constitute no compound, one because they are not of the
essence of Fevers, though they increase, foment, and prolong them.

The Erratick Fever is so called, Of the Erratick Fever.
because its fits observe no proportion, for their beginnings are inordinate,
resembling no species of any certain simple, or compound Fever; an Erratick
Fever then is of no certain species, for it is neither quotidian, tertian,
nor quartan, nor much less a continual, for being so called from the uncertain
insult of the fits, it is plain it cannot be continual, though it may be
joined with a continual, as well as other intermitting Fevers; an erratick
then is from no certain kind of humor as other intermittings are, but either
from the humors confounded together, and unequally premixt, and putrefying in
the habit of the body, or from one humor but changed from it self and passing
into another, for how much the humors are changed in the body of the sick, so
much are the circuits of the fits varied; and blood is most of all transmuted
when it putrefies, part of it passing into yellow choler, part into black.

The causes of these Fevers are many, The Causes.
one is the inequality of Summer and Autumn; another when a humor begins to
putrefie in a particular part, and another flows to it from other parts, which
was before bounded in them, or was redundant in the whole body; a third is
error in diet, quantity, or quality of the humor, strength of the Patient,
etc. they are long, and of evil judgment; he that would distinguish them
rightly must be well versed in the knowledge of simple Fevers, both continual
and intermitting.

The signs of Compound Fevers differ not from those of the simple
intermitting, as a double intermitting tertian begins as a simple with rigor,
and sometimes with vomiting, and ends with sweat; Compound Fevers are seldom
of diverse intermittings, but if it happen the first days, they are scarce
discernable.

Compound Quartans begin with horror, as the simple intermittings, and they
are the longest of all, they are thus distinguished; a double quartan grows
furious two days, and is quiet the third, the fourth, and fifth; again is
furious, and so consequently a triple quartan every day begins with horror,
but every fourth day the Fever is more grievous, as if it were a simple
quartan.

Every intermitting Fever of diverse kind may be complicate with another of
the same kind, if it be in diverse places, as if a quotidian be mixed with a
tertian, on one day there shall be two fits, but on the next only one, that of
the quotidian; and on the third day there shall be two, on the fourth but one,
and so forwards, the one shall begin with coldness, the other with rigor.

If a quotidian be mixed with a quartan, then the fourth day there shall be two
fits, one with coldness, the other with horror, on the other days but one,
that of the quotidian. If a tertian and quartan concur, the first insult shall
be of the tertian with rigor, the second day there shall be no Fever, the
third day the tertian shall recur, on the fourth a fit of the quartan, on the
fifth another of the tertian, on the sixth none, on the seventh there shall be
a double fit, one of the tertian, and another of the quartan, and so on. If a
putrid Fever be joined with a Hectic it makes a compound, because the heat of
this possesses the substance of the heart, that, the humors.

The signs of both are taken from the pulse hard and unequal, from the urine,
mordent heat, and manner of their motion, if it be bilious the invasion will be
every third day, if a quartan, every fourth, if a quotidian, every day, either
with rigor, horror, or coldness; and the exacerbations, and remissions of the
putrid Fever will be at its set hours.

CHAP. XXII.
Of a Semitertian Fever.
THis Fever Hippocrates calls the horrid Fever, from its horror, or violent
shaking, it is a Compound Fever, and is twofold, exquisite and not exquisite,
that is made up of a continual quoridian, and an intermitting tertian, for it
is more easy for a quotidian to be continual than a tertian, and its fits are
longer than those of a tertian.

Besides, The signs of a Semitertian.
the horror is not every day, but every other day, when then the fits both of
tertian and quotidian meet together, and are confounded, but on the middle
days there is only a refrigeration proper to the quotidian, the reduplications
are every third day, not such as a tertian, but dimidiately like them, because
the type of the tertian is changed by the phlegm of the quotidian.

This Fever is sometimes caused from a continual tertian, and intermitting
quotidian, and not from two continuals, or two intermittings, as Archigenes and
Celsus would have it; whose opinions were they true, it would not be
horrifical, as Hippocrates and Galen describe it, for horror proceeds from
rigor and cold mixed.

The Non-exquisite is twofold too, Signs of a non exquisite Semiter^ian.
the one when choler predominates, the other when phlegm; if choler prevail,
there is a rigor and no horror, and it comes sooner to its state without many
reduplications, the heat is more acrid, with vomitings, and dejections yellow,
etc. but if phlegm predominate, there is rather a chilness than horror, and
many reduplications, with phlegmatic excretions, less heat* etc. these Fevers
are frequent in Aethiopia, Italy, and other hot Countries, the gentlest of them
is twenty four hours, the middle sort thirty six, the strongest forty eight; if
it be exquisite every third day it is horrifical, the pulse hard and unequal,
and so the heat, the urine crass and turbulent; sweats in these Fevers are
bad, because they are symptomatical, and not from Nature conquering, etc.

This Fever is reckoned amongst the deadly, Pr^^nosti^^s.
and sometimes lasts a whole month; sometimes degenerates into a Hectic,
sometimes to a Dropsy, by reason of the many obstructions; sometimes it is
shorter, when the matter is little, and contained in the common ducts.

For the Cure, A Purge.
if need be, first give a Glister, then take of Cinnamon half a dram, Agarick
Trochiscate two scruples, Rhubard four scruples, honey of Roses and
Diaphaenicum each an ounce, infuse them in a decoction of Succory, Hyssop,
Liquorice, Raisins stoned, Figgs, Anni-seed, flowers of Time, Bugloss, and
Elder, all night over the warm embers, streine it, and give it at the time of
remission.

Take of the simple sirrup of Vinegar four ounces, A Sirrup against thirst.
use it with the decoction of Barley, or with Ptis^an made of Barley, Raisins
stoned, Figgs, and Liquorish, or with a decoction of Sorrel roots, or Water
and Sugar, if Vinegar displease, use sirrup of Pomgranates.

In a spurious one if choler predominate, let your cholagoges exceed the
Phlegmagoges, and so on the contrary; if the stomach be offended, give
gastrical Medicines, and so of other parts.

Take of Sorrel, An opening Apozem.
Grass, Butchers Broom, and Asparagus roots, each one ounce, of both
Succories, Fumitory, and the Capillary Plants each a handful, Liquorish six
drams, Prunes twenty, Figgs twelve, Endive-seed three drams, Anise two drams,
Elder and Burrage flowers each a small handful, Time half a handful, boil them
to a pint, and add honey of Roses and Oxysaccharum simple, each two ounces,
clarify it, and aromatize it with powder of Diarrodon Abbatis.

In the declination provoke sweat and urine, the Disease being contumacious is
exasperated by strong Purgers, and yields not to gentle, but by mean ones
often repeated is overcome; bleed if the Sick be plethorick, young, and
strength give leave, etc.

Other Compound Fevers being caused from putrid matter are cured by the same
method, and the same remedies as bastard intermittings are; the confused
Fevers if from putrid matter in the greater Veins, are cured as continual
Fevers, if not as intermittings; the Erratick as bastard intermittings,
quotidian, tertian, or quartan.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of a Hectic Fever.
(...), Of the Name.
that is, a Hectic is taken for every Fever that is hard to be removed,
whether it be from phlegm or melancholy, and is opposed to the Schetick Fever
which is easily removed, it has its name from (...), which is a habit, because
it is stable and permanent.

For a Hectic Fever is a preternatural heat kindled in the solid parts, The
Definition.
which first occupies the substance of the heart, and then diffuses it self
into the rest of the solid parts of the body, through the Veins and Arteries.

This Fever is continual, The Division.
and has but one fit from the beginning to the end, without any intermission
or remission, unless it be joined with a putrid Fever; every Hectic is Smple,
or Compound, that is either universal or particular; the universal is that
which first seazes on the substance of the heart, then on the other parts and
this is seldom; a particular one is that which first invades the substance of
some private part, and at last the heart; and this is frequent, as of the Lungs
in a Ptissick, of the Midriffe, Liver, etc. A Compound one is that which has a
putrid Fever joined with it; a Simple Fever is further divided into three
degrees, the first is, when the body of the heart, and the other solid parts
are newly inflamed, and this degree lasts as long as the substantifical and
radical moisture does conglutinate the terrene parts, and is sufficient to
nourish and foment the fiery heat, as Oil does the flame of the Cotton in a
Lamp, and this is hard to be known, but easy to be cured.

The third and worst sort is called (...), because it has adjoined a hot and
dry Consumption, and is then when the humor is wholly wasted, and all the
solid parts are as it were burnt, and turned into ashes, as the Cotton of the
Lamp is for want of the affusion of more Oil, for thus the substantifical
moisture being quite spent, the native heat is extinguished, and cannot be
restaurated by Euchymous aliments, and this degree as it cannot be hid, so it
cannot be cured. The second degree is of a middle nature between them, and how
much the nigher or further to the first or last, is by so much the easier or
harder to cure, they all differ only gradually.

The causes external are from the Six Non-natural things as the hot Air, The
Causes.
long Hunger, Watchings, suppression of Excrements, etc. the internal are from
a bilious temperament, a continual Fever ill cured, as a causus and continual
tertian, and not from a quotidian or intermitting tertian, from a Prisick
lientery, or such Diseases in which the nourishment being incoct, or ill
concoct, does not humectate the solid parts, which being destitute of their
aliment, and conceiving a more acrid and feverish heat, grow hot and dried.

The first degree may be known by the preter-natural heat, Signs of the first
degree.
if at first touch of the Artery it be acrid and mordent; if after drink or
meat a heat presently flushes in the face from the sublation of vapors, this
heat is at first so gentle that the Sick deny themselves to be feverish, for
things done by degrees cause no pain, says Hippocrates; as Plants at their
first sprouting are easily pulled up, but are hardly known unless by the
skilful Herbarist, so this degree is easily cured, but hardly discovered,
unless by the learned Phisician.

The signs of the second kind are not only from the mordent heat of the pulse
being felt, Signs of the second degree.
but in the soles of the feet, and palms of the hand; besides, the pulse is
harder and dryer than in the former, because the feverish heat works not only
on the rorid substance of the heart, but on its primogenious humidity, whence
nourishment failing, the Sick necessarily falls away, the urine is higher
colored by reason of the intense heat, depopulating not only the heart, but
habit of the whole body, but less high than if a putrid were joined with it;
this degree has a great latitude, and so is accordingly known, or cured.

Signs of the last degree are a weak pulse, Signs of the third degree.
small, and frequent, and hard from dryness, the urine has some fatty
substance swimming in it like to Cobwebs, which denotes a quolliquation of the
similar parts, the eyes are hollow, their humors being wasted, the temples
fallen, the substantifical humor of the muscles being consumed, the forehead
dried, the nayls crookt, the eyelids scarce moveable, the Hypochondria
distended, the skin hard and dry, cleaving to the bones, the fleshy substance
being wasted. A Hectic seldom possesses Children, often young choleric
bodies, and old men that are of a hot and dry temper, and those that are long
necked, and narrow breasted, etc. those that have a Hippocratical face are past
cure, and such as have a looseness.

The cure of the first degree differs little from that of a Diary, The Cure.
for it proceeds from the same manifest causes, but more vehement, which are
inherent in the habit of the body, and therefore requires stronger remedies;
let the diet be euchymous, liquid, cold, and moist, and incrassating to hinder
dissipation, as Broths altered with Lettice, Purslane, Marigolds, Violets,
Burrage, Wood Sorrel, Spinach, etc. let the drink be ptissan, or water boiled
with sitrup of Maidenhair, or the Alexandrine Julep with a little Vinegar, if
it proceed from an Ephemera; old age may be allowed a little small Wine at
meals.

Take of the leaves of Mallows, Violets, Burrage, A Glister.
Lettice, each a handful, Prunes twelve, the four great cold Seeds each three
drams, Water-Lilly-flowers and Violets each a small handful, boil them in
water, and in a pint of the colature dissolve of simple Diaprunes, and Cassia
with sugar each six drams, honey of Violets, and oil of Water Lillies each an
ounce and half, make a Glister, if you would have it nourishing too, then boil
them in the broth of a Weathers head, or in Capon broth, with the yolks of eggs.

If the stomach be foul, A Potion.
take of Manna of Calabria an ounce and half, sirrup of Roses solutive, with
Rhubarb if choler abound, or with Agarick if phlegm, and give it in a little
Chickenbroth, or ptissan, stronger remedies must not be used. To correct the
acrid heat, and dryness.

Take of sirrup of Vinegar simple, or Oxysaccarum, or of the juice of Endive,
or Poppy, if the Patient rest not, three ounces, Bugloss and Wood sorrel water
each six ounces, make a Julep.

Baths are good which by their warmth open the passages, Baths.
and draw the blood to the habit of the body, if you give a cup of Asses milk
with sugar of Roses to them whiles they are in it; then to prevent sweating
anoint the back bone, and the emunctories, and extreme parts with this
Liniment.

Take of oil of Violets, A Liniment.
or Water Lillies, or sweet Almonds, and oil of Roses, or Myrtells, each three
ounces, mix them for your use.

If you mix in broth a little of this condite, A Condite
and give it before meat, you will profit much, viz. Conserve of Violets, and
Water Lillies, and the bark of the roots of Bugloss, condite each an ounce, of
the resumptive Powder newly prepared three drams, or instead of it Melon and
Cowcumber-feeds each a dram and half, powder of Diatriasantalum, and
Diamargaritum Frigidum, each half a dram, sugar of Roses sufficient, make a
condite and cover it with gold.

The second degree is also cured by euchymous diet and alteration, The Cure of
the second degree.
with liquids, because they are sooner and easier distributed into the habit of
the body, and do more plentifully nourish, says Hippocr. (...), etc. if the
Hectic proceed from the ptissick, or continual Fever, you must recurre to
their proper Chapters, likewise i^ from the inflammation of some viscus, or the
guts, etc.

Take of the resumptive ointment two ounces, An ointment for the breast.
oil of sweet Almonds one ounce, powder of Florentine, Flower-de-luce four
scruples, Saffron a scruple, anoint the breast and back warm; if there be a
looseness anoint the belly with Unguentum Comitissae: all this while let him
take every morn at four of the clock half a pint of Asses milk warm from the
Teat, with two spoonfuls of sugar of Roses powdered, wash his mouth and sleep
upon it, if he stepped not before.

This milk because it is more serous, The choice of Milks.
deter^ive, and cool, is best in a Ptissick, but if you would nourish, Woman's
milk is best; if consolidate an ulcer, then Cowes or Sheeps milk because it is
more cheesie and butyrous.

The third degree being incurable by the consent of all, The third degree.
I shall speak but little of it, let their Chamber be large that they may
breath the cool air, let their meat be very nourishing and often taken in small
quantity, especially Women's milk, let the drink be ptissan, or small Wine,
cause rest, with Diacodium, or a Pill of Cynogloss, or Laudanum, use cooling
moystning, and nourishing Glisters, and Juleps, to moderate, if not extinguish
the fire in the solid parts. Take of the confection of Hyacinth, or Alkermes
four scruples, Pearl two scruples, fragments of the Five precious Stones, and
red Corral finely poudered each a scruple, powder of Diapenidium without the
species the weight of them all, of the finest Sugar an ounce, fix leaves of
Gold, make a powder, and dissolve a spoonful in every small quantity of
ptissan, or what else you give, it wonderfully restores the lost strength.

A Compound Hectic is hard to know, A short cure of a Compound Hectic.
unless to the Learned, who can distinguish the form and type of every Fever;
this is cured by bleeding, if there be a plenitude, or the Courses, or
Hemorrhoids be suppressed, or by gentle Purgers if there be a Cacochymie no
ways respecting the Consumption, but the Plethora, or Cacochymy, says
Hippocrates and Galen.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of Malignant and pestilent* Fevers.
(...), The division and difference of malignant Fevers.
that is, of malignant Fevers, some are essential, others symptomatical; the
essential have a great analogy with putred Fevers, from which they differ not
in matter, but only by a malignant quality venenate and contagious, either
produced in us, or induced into us; they differ also from Hecticks, not by
macilency, which in these is caused by degrees in them speedily, which
variously waste the substance of the body, as the Leipyria, Syncope, etc. of
which in their place.

The Symptomatical Fevers are those which follow the inflammations of the
Viscera, and Burning-feavers, from which they also differ by their malignant
quality, as the essential also do.

A Leipyria is twofold, Of a Leipyria Fever.
the one essential, the other symptomatical; the essential is caused from
glassie phlegm cold in the third degree, collected in the bowels, though with
some mixture of choler, yet notwithstanding that it may putrefie, the heat is
called from the external parts, to the internal, in which is kindled no small
fire, hence it is that the inwards burn, and the outward parts are cold, from
whence if a thirst follow, it is deadly the fourth day, or sooner, says
Hippocrates.

This is cured as a continual quartan, The Cure.
and if symptomatical as a causus, or continual tertian, with this caution,
that to all remedies both internal and external, we mix something cordial,
which may retund the venenate and malignant quality without any manifest heat.

A Syncopal Fever has its name from the Symptom, A Syncopal Fever.
because the diseased are troubled with faintings and swounings; by reason of
the exact sense and hurt of the mouth of the Stomach.

The efficient cause is either crasse phlegm putrefied in the stomach, The Cause
with some malign or venenate quality, which carried upwards to the mouth of
the stomach does (...) and wound it, from whence is pain and faintings, and
sometimes a Syncope, that is, a sudden loss of strength, with sweats more or
less; sometimes it is from aeruginous choler which is wholly pernicious, whose
vapor carried to the mouth of the stomach does wound it, from whence are
faintings, Convulsions, and death, unless it be vomited up, as Galen mentions
in a young man; this Fever is very rare, and observes the type of a quotidian,
which is worst toward the evening.

If it come from prassinous or aeruginous choler, The signs from prassinous
choler.
the signs are taken from a hot and dry season of the year, from a young,
mac^lent, and bilious body, or from a continual burning fever, or tertian,
with a malignant quality, which usually kills before the fourth fit; that from
aeruginous choler is worse, the pulse is swift, from the abundance of heat,
inequal from the multitude of the obnoxious humor oppressing Nature, hard from
the dryness of the Humor and Vessels, small from the weakness; the parts about
the heart and whole body seems puffed up, and tumid, the color is vitiated, in
some white, in others livid or black, the belchings are acid if from phlegm,
bitter from porraceous choler, the eyes prominent, the tongue acid and black,
they are best when quiet and unmoved.

The humor is to be carried away by gentle Clisters, The Cure.
and purged epicrastically, always adding Cardiacal Medicines against the
malignant and venenate quality, and if the Patient be nauseative give a vomit.

Take a sufficient quantity of broth, A Glister for phlegm.
and boil in it Mercury, Balm, and Burrage, each a handful, the tops of Dill,
with Cammomel, and Me^^lot-flowers each a smalhandful, course Bran two Pugills,
Figgs twelve, Aniseed two drams, streine it, and dissolve of Hiera an ounce,
honey of Mercury, and oil of Cammomel, each anounce and half, the yolks of two
Eggs, and give the Glister.

Take of Mallows, Violets, Barrage, A Glister for ae^uginous choler.
Purslane, Balm, each a handful* Prunes sixteen, of the four greater cold
Seeds each two drams, Water-Lilley-flowers a handful, dissolve in the colature
Diaprunum simple, and Cassia with Sugar each six drams, honey of Roses, and
oil of Roses, each an ounce and half, give it at the time of remission.

Take of Manna of Calabria, A minorating Purge for phlegm.
and sirrup of Roses solutive, with Agarick, each an ounce and half, drink it
in a little fresh Chicken broth, boil in the broth three drams of Citron pill.

Take of Cinnamon a scruple, A purge for choler.
Rhubarb four scruples, Tamarinds two drams, Cassia newly drawn an ounce and
half, infuse them all night over warm embers in Chicken-broth, in the
decoction of Succory, Purslane, Citron-seeds, Bugloss, and Water-Lilly flowers,
strain it, and add sirrup of Violets of nine infusions, or of Succory, with a
double quantity of Rhubarb, or of Roses solutive an ounce and half, give the
potion.

Take of Agarick Trochiscate for phlegm, Rhubarb for choler, Pills.
half a dram, imperial Pills a dram, with honey of Roles, or sirrup of Violets,
make them up.

Take of the sirrup of Citron pill Conserved, A Julep for phlegm.
and of sower Pomgranates each two ounces, Balm, and Bugloss water each six
ounces.

Take of Bugloss roots two ounces, An Apozem.
dried Citron pill one ounce, it flagme abound, but of Sorrel, and Grass roots,
if aeruginous, or prassinous choler, each one ounce, Succory, Endive,
Purslane, Lettice, Burrage, Scabious, Devils-bit each a handful, Balm, and
French Lavender for phlegm, each half a handful, Raisins stoned twenty,
Liquorish six drams, Prunes for choler eight, white Poppy, and the four
greater cold Seeds or Cardu^s Benedictus, and Aniseed, each two drams for
phlegm, the Cordial flowers a Pugil, boil them in water to a pint, add sirrup
of Pomgranates three ounces (which is good for them both) make an Apozem, and
aromatize it with a dram and half of Saxafras; if you would make a magistrall
sirrup in one part of the decoction without sirrup, infuse of Cloves a scruple,
Agarick* Trochiscate an ounce for phlegm, or Cinnamon a dram, and Rhubard an
ounce and half, for choler, strain it, and boil it gently to a sirrup with
Manna, and sirrup of Roses, each half a pound, the dose is two ounces in a
decoction of Burrage, or broth twice a week.

CHAP. XXV.
Of the Cardiacal Fever.
THis Fever has its name from the heart, and is of the same kind with
malignant and colliquating Fevers, The signs
and not much unlike to the Syncopall; there is a great heat with it, and the
face looks red, great strivings of the heart, little and frequent breathing,
insomuch that they are compeld to sit upright, like the Orthopnoical, and are
pained on the region of the heart; the Disease inclining, they have a thin
sweat, a cold breath, and then follow syncopes, and death.

The cure is the same with that of a Burning-feaver, The cure.
both for cooling and moystning diet, and for bleeding, premising the Glister
there described, if the body be bound; in alterating the humors add a fourth,
or sixth part of hot Alexipharmaca, by reason of the malignant and pernicious
quality that is impressed, and then empty the humors with Manna, Cassia, etc,
allay the thirst with Julep of Violets, or Poppies.

Amongst malignant Fevers are reckoned also those that do variously impair
the substance of the body, whether by degrees or speedily, Typhodis Fever.
as the (...), etc. the (...) is a kind of Fever, in which by reason of the
excessive heat, the sick seem to be suffocated, and may be called an
crysipelatose one, and is cured as a continual tertian.

(...), that is, the moist Fever is so called, because presently after the
first day the sick begin to sweat, and by sweating their strength is so wasted,
The moist Fever.
that they find little or no benefit by it, in the year 1528. this Fever
spread it self from England into France, and in short space killed the stoutest
men by sweating, all remedies against it being invalid the French named it
Suette and numbered it amongst the Pestilential, by reason of its malign and
venenate quality, the Greeks call it (...).

(...) is called by Hippocrates, The restless Fever.
the restless implacid Fever; in this the sick are always tossing, changing
their posture of lying, loath all things, are distended in the Hypochondria,
thirst, watch, or are delirous in their sleep.

The internal cause is a crass, The signe^.
acrid, and bilious humor, imbibed in the coats of the stomach, sometimes it
is from internal pains, The Cause.
the pulse suddenly fails, and the use of all remedies is prevented; let the
diet be incisive, refrigerating, and moystning, and if occasion be, give this
Glister.

Take of Violet leaves, Gourds, Purslane, and Nettles, each a handful, the four
great cold Seeds, and Nettle-seed, each two drams, Camomel and Violet flowers,
A Glister.
each a pugil, boil them in water to a pint, and in the colature dissolve
Diaphaenicum, honey of Roses, and Oxymel simple each an ounce, oil of
Water Lillies an ounce and half.

To allay the thirst, use the juice of Pomgranates, or Citrons, or the sirrups
made of them, etc.

Take of Cinnamon a scruple, Rhubarb four scruples, Cassia newly drawn an ounce
and half, A Potion.
infuse them in the infusion of Damask Roses, or in the decoction of Succory,
Marigolds, Burrage, Prunes, with Nettle-seed, and the Cordial flowers, streine
it, and give it; procure sleep with sirrup of Poppy, and a little Diamargaritum
frigidum.

(...) is called by the Latins the Colliquating Fever, The Colliquating
Fever.
by whose vehement heat not only the fat, but the flesh and substance of the
solid parts are melted away, and this is of the kind of malignant Fevers; it
is caused two ways, the one when the colliquationis by degrees, as in
Hecticks, and the Marasmus; the other, when both fat and solid parts are
suddenly dissolved, and this is a most grievous and dangerous disease, it
differs from a Marasmus because in this, that portion of flesh which is
colliquated is always like a vapor, breathed forth by insensible
transpiration, but in the colliquating Fever it flows to the belly in the
species of a bilious stinking crass humor, the external causes are, watchings,
sadness, malignant Medicines, etc. and this is not lethal. The cause.


The internal cause is a fervid heat with a malignant quality which does not
always dissolve the body by insensible transpiration, but sometimes by manifest
excretions.

The signs are rusous, The signs
crass, stinking dejections, sometimes fat and viscid, with a spume or froth
which indicates heat, the nose grows sharp, and the eyes hollow, which latter
signs if they appear at first, we are not to meddle; Hippocrates proposes two
remedies, the one the cremor of Barley, the other cold Water, with acid sirrup
made up with Sugar, and not with Honey; give Glisters if occasion be, or
eccoproticks, for the first region of the body, with opening and cooling
decoctions, if there be obstructions, and condites, and cardiacal powders, as
are described in the Chapter of a continual tertian.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of the Fever from Crudity.
(...), that is, a Fever from Crudity, Of the Name.
though the word Crude be applied to various things, yet in this place it is
taken for a raw cold humor, contained in the first passages, or in the whole
body; this Fever differs from an Epiala, not in matter, nor in the place of
putrefaction, but in malignity, and therefore is not void of danger, especially
if it be joined with an inflammation of stomach or liver, for sometimes it is
without them.

If the crude humor putrefie in the first passages there will be a
nauseousness, The Signs.
sower belchings, with idleness, or unseasonable exercise, as Venery presently
after meat, etc. if it be in the whole body the urine will be thin, and
watery, the contents divulsed, the color pallid, plumbeous or livid, the whole
bulk somewhat swelled, the pulse unequal, obscure, with a dullness of the
senses; make a Glister with Hiera Catholicum, honey of Roses, oil of Camomel,
decoction of Mallows, Mercury Origanum, Dill, etc.

Take of Catholicum an ounce, A minorating purge.
infuse it all night in the infusion of Damask Roses, streine it, and add
sirrup of Succory, with Rhubarb duplicated, an ounce and half, give it in the
morn; if strength and age permit, and a high tinct urine require it, let blood
in the axillary vein in small quantity, with a narrow Orifice.

All attenuating things used must not be very hot, A Rule.
lest the Fever be increased.

Take of sirrup of Vinegar, A Julep.
and juice of Endive, each two ounces, Succory and Wormwood-water each six
ounces.

Take of Grass-roots, An Apozem.
Butchers Broom, and Asparagus, each an ounce, of Succory, Agrimony, Endive,
the Capillary Plants, and Sea-wormwoode ach a handful Origanum, and Balm each
half a handful, seeds of Carduus Benedictus, Citron, and Anise, each two drams,
flowers of Bugloss and Time, each a pugil, boil them in water to a pint, with
Oxymel simple three ounces, make an Apozem, and aromatize it with Cinnamon.

Take of Cinnamon a scruple, A Purge.
Rhubarb four scruples, Catholicum half an ounce, Cassia newly extracted an
ounce, infuse them in part of the Apozem, and to the expression, add sirrup of
Roses, with Agarick an ounce and half, give the potion, and give no stronger;
take of the Conserve of Citron pill three drams, old Mithridate, or Treacle, or
Aurea Alexandrina, a dram with Sugar, give the Bolus next day three hours
before meat.

Books printed, and are to be be sold by John Hancock, at the first shop in
Popes-head-Alley next to Cornhil.
A Book of Short-writing, the most easy, exact, lineal, and speedy method,
fitted to the meanest capacity; composed by Mr. Theophilus Metcalse, professor
of the said Art.

Also a Schoolmaster, explaining the Rules of the said Book.

Another Book of new Shorthand, by Thomas Cross.

A Coppy-book of the newest and most useful hands.

Four Books lately published by Mr. Thomas Brooks. Preacher of the Gospel at
Margarets New Fish-street.

1 Precious Remedies against Satan's Devices; or, Salve for Believers and
unbeleevers Sores, being a companion for those that are in Christ, or out of
Christ, that slight or neglect Ordinances, under a pretense of living above
them, that are growing in Spirituals, or decaying, that are tempted, or
deserted, afflicted, or opposed, that have assurance, or want it, on 2 Cor. 2.
11.

2 Heaven on Earth; or, A serious Discourse, touching a well-grounded Assurance
of men's everlasting happiness, and blessedness; discovering the nature of
Assurance, the possibility of attaining it, the Causes, Springs, and Degrees of
it, with the resolution of several weighty Questions, on Romans 8. 32, 33, 34.

3 The unsearchable Riches of Christ; or, Meat for strong men, and Milk for
Babes, held forth in two and twenty Sermons, from Ephesians. 3. 8. preached on his
Lecture Nights at Fish-street-hill.

4 His Apples of Gold, for Youngmen, and Women; and, A Crown of Glory for Old
Men and Women; or the happiness of being good betimes, and the Honor of being
an old Disciple, clearly and fully discovered, and closely and faithfully
applied:

The Godly Man's Ark, or City of refuge in the day of his Distress. Discovered
in diverse Sermons, the first of which was preached at the Funeral of Mistress
Elizabeth Moore. Whereunto is annexed Mistress Moors Evidences for Heaven,
composed and collected by her in the time of her health, for her comfort in the
time of sickness. By Ed. Calamy. B. D. and Paster of the Church at Aldermanbury.

The Covenant of Gods Free Grace unfolded, and comfortably applied to a
disquieted or dejected soul, 2 Samuel 23. 5. By that late Reverend Divine, Mr.
John Cotton of New England.

The Ruin of the Authors and Fomenters of Civil War; as it was delivered in a
Sermon before the Parliament at their monthly Fast, by Mr. Samuel Gibson,
sometime Minister at Margarets Westminster, and one of the Assembly of Divines.

The New Creature, with a description of the several marks and characters
thereof, by Richard Bartlet.

FINIS.

