IMPRIMATUR Haec Concio in 1 Pet. 2. 15. Guil. Sill, R. P. D. Henr. Episc.
Land. a Sacris Dom.

Ian. 28. 1677/8.

Page 1. the last line but one, for earnestly read earnest.

A SERMON PREACHED Before the Right Honorable Sir FRANCIS CHAPLIN, Lord Mayor
OF LONDON, AT GVILD-HALL Chapel, November the 18th. 1677.

By WILLIAM BATTIE, Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON, Printed by E. Flesher for R. Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred
MAJESTY, at the Angel in Amen-Corner. 1678.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in God, ANTHONY, By Divine Providence LORD BISHOP
Of the Diocese of NORWICH.
My LORD,
THis Sermon had never been more public then the Preaching of it made it, had
it not been complained of, and represented by some of the Governors of the
City of London, for a Sermon that deserved to be Censured, as reflecting upon
the Government of the City. Your Lordship being my Diocesan, I have here
presented your Lordship with the whole of what was preached; humbly submitting
my self and my Sermon to your Lordship's Censure. It may be suspected, that I
have suppressed in the printing, something that was preached; which I have not
done: something may be added, but nothing is diminished: so that if there be no
Reflections upon the Government of the City in my Sermon now, there were none
then. My Discourse, as my Text did direct me, was wholly to the Governed.
Directions to Governors as Governors, from me, would have been presumptuous,
and therefore I used none. There is one Expression indeed in my Sermon to this
purpose, That were Laws duly executed, men durst not despise and affront the
Government so as they do: which Expression, if it reflect any thing, it is
Praise and Applause to the Government and the Laws we are governed by; and
only wishes, that the Mean whereby Government attains its End, were sometimes
looked a little better after. Reflections either upon the Government, or
Governors, I ever thought improper for the Pulpit. Nay, I have ever hated them
from the time that Pulpits were turned by such doings into Drums, to beat up
for Sedition and Rebellion; remembering what the dismal Consequences of them
have been to this Church and State. I am so unwilling to reflect upon any, that
I am not pleased that the Vindication I have made of my self, by the printing
of my Sermon, will reflect, as it will, upon the Misrepresenters of it,
accusing them (except my pressing Subjection to Governors be reflecting upon
the Government) of the breach of the Ninth Commandment. But the Slander I had
not at all weighed, but that it reflects upon the Government my sly Accusers
seem so tender of. For the Government will be suspected to be in evil
Circumstances, if it shall be found inconvenient to press due Subjection unto
Governors: and men will be made to fear that we are in such Times again as we
were in about the time of the Scotch Invasion, when they who appeared for the
Government, by adhering to their lawful Governors, were accounted the
Delinquents; whilst others were accounted the best Subjects, (as it is observed
by him that has lately writ the Life of Archbishop Bramhall) when their Swords
were drawn against him who could only grant them Commissions, and their
Scabbards thrown away. My Lord, my appealing to your Lordship is in a right
line; and my presenting your Lordship thus publicly with my Sermon, for as
much as I do it in my own Defense, it will (I hope) in part excuse the Defects
of it, of which I am so Conscious, that the Requests I had of Friends had not
prevailed with me to publish it, if I had not had this Provocation. For the
thing that I believe gave Offense, my declaring that the Execution of the Laws
is the best Expedient to preserve them from Contempt: my Opinion herein I shall
never retract: and your Lordship's Government, from the time of your Lordship's
Translation to the Diocese of Norwich, has very much confirmed me and others
in it. And the Experience the Clergy have, that it is not Preaching and Writing
will so preserve the Peace, as the Governors interposing himself to see the
Laws observed, does oblige the whole Body of the Clergy, to desire heartily the
long continuance of your Lordship's Government over us, and particularly

Your most obedient Servant, William Battie.

A SERMON Preached before the Lord MAYOR, November. 18. 1677.
1 S. PETER II. 15. For so is the Will of God, that with Well-doing ye may put
to silence the Ignorance of Foolish men.
WE do not in any of the Apostles Epistles meet with any particular Addresses
to the Magistrates of the Age they lived in; yet the Duty of Subjection unto
Magistrates is frequently enjoined all Christians whatsoever. Husbands and
Wives, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants, have all the special Duties
of their several Callings taught them in the Apostles Writings: but for
Magistrates, though their Office is nowhere so vindicated as by the Apostles,
yet the Persons under Subjection are the persons only who are taught their
Duty; which is Subjection: A Duty our Apostle (as also the Apostle S. Paul) is
very earnest in the pressing upon the Christians of that Age; and the more
earnestly (as is thought) for these two Reasons.

1. To prevent the Danger the new-converted Gentiles might be in of being
leavened with the old Leaven of the Jews; viz. a perverse and froward
Disposition unto Magistracy. A Leaven that had so soured that Nation, that in
the vogue of the world they were accounted for no better then Pests of Nations,
and Enemies of Mankind; because they were stubborn and stiff-necked to
Authority, as Moses long before had found them. 2. Again, the Apostles are
thought to be the more earnest in the pressing of this Duty, writing in the
Reign of the Emperor Nero, whose many monstrous Wickednesses, and particular
Malice against Christians, were likely to endanger the ensnaring of them into
Temptations to despise and oppose his Authority; and that to the great Scandal
of their Religion: the Devil needing nothing more to nip the Christian Religion
in the bud, then to get it voiced in the world for a Licencer of Sedition and
Rebellion, in case the Supreme Governor be vicious. For this allowed, who is
so short-sighted as not to foresee, that in succeeding Ages the Heads of
Factions have nothing more to do to promote their Treasonous Designs, but to
get the Supreme Governor represented to the People for an Idolater, or a
Tyrant. And if then by Arms or Money they can get him in their power, if they
cut him off, it is but writing over his Statue, Exit Tyrannus; and all is
salved. Well, the Apostles (to let the World know, the Gospel allows no
Disobedience upon any such account) do the more earnestly press Subjection to
Authority, at the time the Roman Empire had as wicked a Governor as ever
before or since.
And in the Verses before my Text he calls for this Subjection to Authority, of
whatsoever Rank or Degree; whether it be to the King, as Supreme; or unto
Governors, as unto them that are sent by him. And having thus laid before them
their Duty unto Magistracy; in the words of the Text, and in the following
Verses, he enforces it, First, by laying down the strongest Argument that can
be alleged for it, this in the Text: and then, by removing the great Objection
made against it by Libertines, of whom the Apostles had then a great Jealousy.
They would needs fansy themselves to be made so free by their Religion, that
they were now no longer to be the Servants of Men. As to this Objection,
suggested in the words, as free, in the next Verse, the Apostle answers it, by
giving them to understand, that Christ's Free men are still God's Servants: so
that their Liberty could be no Cloak for them to be Seditious and Malicious;
for why? it was only a Liberty to serve God. And how it is the Will of God,
that we express the Fear we have of him in the Honor we have for our King, and
in the Love we have for our Brethren, we are acquainted in the seventeenth
Verse, where they are enjoined all together: Love the Brotherhood. Fear God.
Honor the King.

The Text is plainly an Exhortation to primitive Christians, so to behave
themselves toward their Superiors, as to keep up the Reputation of their
Religion, and disperse the Scandals cast upon it by Ignorant and Foolish men.

In the whole Verse we have these things considerable.

1. The Persons who were to silence others, and who consequently were evil
spoken of; Ye Believers. 2. The Persons who spoke evil of them; Ignorant and
Foolish men. 3. The Duty of those who were evil spoken of, toward them who
spoke evil of them; which was, to put them to silence. 4. The Expedient whereby
they were to do it; Well-doing. 5. The grand Motive of this, and every other
Christian Duty; it is the Will of God we do it; For so is the Will of God.
I. For the First, the Persons that were to silence others, and that
consequently were apt to be traduced by the World, they were the Christians of
the purest Age of the Church; Infant-Christians, as I may call them with
respect to the Age of the Gospel Church at that time; Christians almost always
under the Lash of Persecution, and so, for that reason, besides the
indispensable obligation which Christianity laid upon them to secure their
innocence, could not choose but be very innocent, and far from daring to
intermeddle with the Affairs of those Powers that kept them so much in Slavery.
Poor Doves! the Roman Eagle kept them too much in awe to venture, if they had
been willing, upon tampering with State Affairs: and yet all the Tumults and
Seditions of the Times were sometimes fathered upon them. Nero sets Rome on
fire; and the poor Christians, as Tacitus in his Annals tells us, ( in usum
nocturni luminis) must be made Bonefires of, as the Authors of it. Whence we
learn, that Innocence is no security from Infamy, and that the Best of men are
not exempt from the basest Calumnies. No: it has ever been the Fate of the
best Religion, and the zealousest Asserters of it, to undergo the World's
harshest Censures. But one righteous man in Sodom, and he was accounted the
Trouble-town. He had the Zeal to oppose their not-to-be-named Lewdness; and
thus they deride him for his pains, Genesis 19. 9.
This Fellow came in to sojourn, and he will needs be a Judge. The great
Prophet Elijah, that alone asserted the Worship of the true God in the time of
an universal Defection from his Worship to Idolatry, 1 King. 18. 17.
was therefore called the Troubler of Israel. And how does good Jeremiah bemoan
himself on this Account? Jer. 15. 10.
Woe is me, my Mother, that thou have born me a man of Strife, and a man of
Contention to the whole Earth. I have neither lent on Usury, nor have men lent
to me on Usury, yet every one does curse me. And when the Lord of the Vineyard
last of all sent his Son into the World, the very Original of Innocence, who,
as in the twenty second verse of this Chapter, did no Sin, neither was Guile
found in his mouth; how was it the World esteemed of him? no otherwise then it
was long before prophesied by Isaiah; Isa. 53.3.
He was despised and rejected of men, we hid as it were our faces from him, he
was despised, and we esteemed him not. He was accounted a Wine-bibber, nay a
Sorcerer, a man that cast out Devils by the help of the Prince of Devils. And
if the great Master of the whole family of Heaven and Earth was thus aspersed,
it is not to be imagined, that his Servants after him should fare any better at
the World's hands. Matthew. 10. 25.
And he himself tells them so beforehand; lest, when they met with this Usage,
they should think it very strange, to be so requited for their labor of Love
unto the World. How basely do the Jews abuse the great Apostle of the Gentiles
by their Orator Tertullus, calling him a Pestilent fellow, a mover of
Sedition, Acts 24.5.
and a Ringleader of a Sect? And S. Paul himself at large tells us, how
himself and the rest of the Apostles were accounted of in the World: 1 Cor. 4.
13.
We are made as the Filth of the world, and the Offscouring of all things unto
this day. So far has Innocence and Integrity ever been from exempting the best
of God's Servants from the World's harshest Censures.

II. Now in the next Particular, which is, the Persons who are to be silenced,
we have the Reason whence it is that Good men cannot have the World's good
word. The Persons to be silenced are, Ignorant and Foolish men. And this gives
us the true account of it, and plainly tells us, that it is the Ignorance of
Evil men that makes them speak evil of those that be Good. Fools, who know
least, are usually given to speak most, and oftenest, and what comes next the
tongue's end. And indeed the words of Fools come no farther off then from
whence you hear them, being in labris nata: whereas the words of Wise men are
said to come e sulco pectoris, from the ground of the Heart. And therefore no
wonder if Fools speak so readily, and so at random as they do, of things and
persons that oft-times they have no knowledge of: which thing is not only
their Folly, but their Shame also, in the opinion of Solomon, Prove. 18. 13.
who tells us that he that answers a matter before he hear it, it is a Folly
and a Shame to him.

Now this being the Cause why Evil men speak evil of those that are Good, their
Folly and Ignorance, we may lawfully infer these two things from it.

First, That it is certainly not the Wisdom of those that would be accounted
wise men, to receive and harbor, or at all to hearken to the Reports of such
persons. It argues an empty hollowness of Mind in men, like Echo's to catch at,
and to return every noise and sound they hear; or a Mind full, if of any thing,
of mischievous sly intents. And indeed, even all the Mischief of evil Reports
happens from such persons: the Clamours of foolish persons generally doing no
hurt, till persons in repute for Wisdom and Worth begin to listen to them. The
Receiver here is as bad, if not worse then the Thief. When one officiously told
Simonides how evil things men spoke of him, he made him this Answer; Et quando
tu tandem desines me auribus calumniari? And when will thou leave slandering me
with thy Ears? Most excellent and highly worthy our imitation was the way of
Constantine the Great in this point, who burnt the mutual Accusations of his
Clergy, telling the Complainants, he wished his Cloak large enough to cover all
their Faults. Were all men of his humor, the Devil's work of raising and
spreading Slanders would go but slowly on in the world: were there no
Receivers, there would be fewer Thieves. Let such then as would go for
understanding men and sober Christians, Prove. 25. 23.
put on the angry Countenance at the hearing of all slanderous Reports, which,
as the Northwind drives away Rain, repells the Calumnies of a Backbiting tongue.

Secondly, We learn here what little Cause they have to be troubled, who make
Conscience to discharge the Duties of their several Callings conformably to the
Laws of the Church and Kingdom they belong unto, (whether Subordinate
Governors in the Church and State, or such as be in Subjection only,) if now
and then they meet with some harsh Censures for so doing; considering what it
is they are to be imputed to, the Ignorance of Foolish men. Nemo patitur
Praejudicium ab iis quibus non est Iudicium: Can we suffer by their Opinion who
have no Judgment? Let no man's heart fail him then, nor incline him to a poor
pusillanimous Compliance with the Humors, to avoid the Clamours, of Foolish
men.

Falsus honor juvat, and mendax infamia terret:
Quem, nisi mendosum, and mendacem? -- Hor. Epist. Lib. 1. Ep. 16.

That of S. Ambrose is Encouragement enough against all their scornful
Censures. Amb. de Interp. Lib. 2. Ca. 2.
Si fuerit Praejudicium in seculo, non erit in judicio Dei; The Prejudices of
the World prejudice us nothing before God. No Wind shakes the Earth but the
Wind within it. If we keep our Consciences calm and clear concerning our due
Subjection to God's Law and Man's, we need not fear the shaking by any Wind
without us: and what shaking happens, a good Conscience will so recreate us
therein, that we shall not need at all to value it.

III. Now for the Third thing, the Duty of those who are evil spoken of toward
them who speak evil of them, which is, to silence them; (...), os occludere, to
shut the Mouths of evil speakers. In 1 Cor. 9. 9. it is rendered muzzle: Thou
shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the Corn. But now may
some say, Who is sufficient for this thing? Is it not a kind of impossibility
that is here put upon us? Were foolish Men as tractable as Oxen, the matter
might be thought feasible: But Solomon represents them for persons wholly
untractable; Prove. 27. 22.
Though thou bray a Fool in a Mortar, among Wheat with a Pestill, yet will not
his Foolishness depart from him.

In Answer; Here we are to distinguish of Fools according to the Distinction we
have of Ignorance. There is Ignorantia purae privationis, and Ignorantia pravae
dispositionis, an Ignorance of Weakness, and an Ignorance of Wilfulness: So
there is the weak Fool, and the wilful Fool. Now the weak Fool is the reputed
Fool, but the wilful Fool is the Fool; the Fool that Solomon found would take
no impressions. None so blind as they that will not see. Some are blind through
Ignorance, some through Interest; in whom the God of this World (to use the
Apostle's words) has blinded their Eyes; being preingaged by their Interests,
they will not judge sincerely of Things and Persons. Malunt nescire, (as
Tertullian in his Apology has it) quia jam oderunt. Now to stop the mouths of
such from speaking evil of us, is a very hard task. To stop the mouths of such
from speaking evil of us, who stop the mouths of their own Consciences whilst
they speak evil of us, is a work that never was nor will be done, nor is it
expected from us. All that is required of us here, as at all practicable by us,
is, that, with the Apostle, we so demean our selves, that we commend our selves
to every man's Conscience in the sight of God; and this is practicable: to
order our selves so, that whereas wilfully Ignorant men speak evil of us, as of
evildoers, they may be ashamed and confounded, at least in their Consciences,
when they accuse our good Conversation.

To put the case in their Compliance, who are Magistrates or Ministers, with
the Commands of their Superiors; Can we imagine that any in their Consciences
do blame them for it? especially when they shall consider that the Oath of God
is upon them, whereby they have solemnly bound themselves to the Obedience of
those Commands? No, they do it not: and only in a conscientious observing
such Commands shall they stop the mouths of men's Consciences. And if by not
observing of them, out of a poor pitiful cringing to be popular, they study to
stop men's mouths from hard words, they shall therein open the mouths of their
own Consciences, and the Consciences of others, justly to accuse them: and they
are only weak Fools, who will not account them for very Hypocrites and
Dissemblers with God and the World.

But now for such whose Ignorance has not this tang of Malice in it, and who
indeed know nothing of Things and Persons, but as they have seen them at a
distance, and through the Prospective of other men's Prejudices, and the
Misrepresentations of their partial Guides; it is possible by degrees to stop
the mouths of such: as the same Tertullian in his Apology, Simul ac desinunt
ignorare, desinunt odisse: The Cause being mere Ignorance, as the Cause is
taken away, the Effect cease; and the silencing of them then is feasible. And
where it is but possible, we are to endeavor it, as the Apostle counsels; 2 Timothy 2. 25.
In meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if peradventure God will
give them Repentance.

But now here the Question will be, How must we do it? Suppose they accuse us
for our good Conversation toward our Superiors, our peaceable Subjection to
their lawful Commands, what Expedient is there in this Case? The Text tells
us, it is Well-doing. We are never while we live to expect it in that way, that
some would have men to believe to be the Meekness and the Moderation the
Apostle requires, viz. by forbearing our selves the doing our several Duties
conformably to the Commands of our Superiors; and by the allowing, the coaxing
and applauding those who oppose themselves, in their Prejudices and
Misapprehensions. For why? this does not remove the Cause of their Prejudices,
their Ignorance; and so is no more the way to cure them of their Prejudices,
then it is the Rider's way to make his Horse leave starting at the things he is
afraid of, by running him away from them; which the Rider never does, but
brings him nearer to them. In like manner, that they who speak evil of us may
neither accuse us, nor the things they are so apt to take offense at, it must
not be our way, to humor them in their Shiness and Dislikes, but in all the
ways of Peace and Meekness, to persuade them wishly to see into the
inoffensiveness of the things, and the little cause they have to startle at
them: and then, which is the Expedient of the Text, to set them an Example for
their Duty in our own Well-doing, which is the Fourth Particular.

IV. This is the way the Apostle prescribes; a way so clearly the only way to
return wicked men's Reproaches to the best advantage to our selves, that very
Heathens have hit upon it. Diogenes being asked by one, how he might best
revenge himself of an evil Tongue; he makes this Reply, Si teipsum quam maxim
Bonum and Honestum virum praestiteris: Thou will best acquit thy self of his
Reproaches, if in all things thou shall behave thy self as becomes an Honest
and an Upright man. Now, Well-doing is a very comprehensive word, as the
Psalmist says of its Rule, the Command of God; it is exceeding broad, and may
be thought to put upon us the whole Duty of Man. And indeed, without walking so
as the Grace of God teaches us, righteously, godly and soberly in this evil
World, we do not come up to the Duty of Well-doing, nor shall we silence
Gainsayers; especially such of us as through our Callings are more in the Eye
of the World, and who are sure, though but Earthen Vessels, to have fewest
Grains of allowance given us. But of Well-doing taken in this Latitude,
Well-doing in the Text only means a Branch, our walking righteously toward
our Superiors. For the Apostle having immediately before commanded them to
submit themselves to every Ordinance of Man, he here tells them, that in so
doing they would put to silence the Ignorance of Foolish men. The thing plainly
meant then, is Submission to Authority, according as he had directed them. And
calling this, as he does, Well-doing it self, we may well account it a
considerable part of it: and we may lawfully infer upon it, that it is very
much our Duty to give this Subjection to our Superiors. And that it is so, we
have this farther in the Text to assure us of it, That it is God's will we do
it: which is the Fifth and last Particular in the Text.

V. It is the Will of God we submit our selves to Authority. And this I called
the grand Motive of this Well-doing: for it is that, beyond which we are not to
enquire for any other; God's Will being, as the only Rule, so the only
supreme Reason of our Obedience. And upon the account of this Motive alone, we
are sufficiently assured, that it is not left to our Wills as an Arbitrary
thing, and in our Choice whether we will do it or no: but that it is a matter
of necessity, as the Apostle S. Paul is most express in it, Ye must needs be
subject. Romans 13.5
This is such a Motive, that as there can be no higher assigned, so there needs
no other. Only we are in such an Age, wherein (for want of good Discipline)
Disputing has turned Obeying out of Doors; so that, except God reveal his Will
in the terrible way he did upon Mount Sinai, we are not careful to hearken to
it; especially if our Wills be crossed by it. But, as our Savior has told us
long since, We have Moses and the Prophets, the ordinary way; and other
Revelation there will be none, till God reveal himself from Heaven in flaming
Fire, taking Vengeance upon the Transgressors of his Will.

Let this then satisfy us to persuade us to Obedience, that it is the Will of
God, and thus revealed to us. But if this will not prevail with us, let it
serve for a farther Motive, to consider, that in the great Day, when God will
reveal himself in that terrible manner, of which the Apostle tells us 2 Thessalonians.
1. 8. it shall then go hardest with Despisers of Government, as S. Peter tells
us, 2 Ep. 2.9, 10. where he says that chiefly Despisers of Government, among
others, are reserved to the Day of Judgment to be punished. (...). The Simple
Verb ((...)) in Scripture is rendered to mind, to savor, to affect; so that the
Compound may well be rendered persons that do not mind, that will not relish,
that do not affect Government, (...). The same word (...) is used by S. Jude,
when in the same manner he denounces Judgment (in the eighth Verse of his
Epistle) against such persons; which we render there Dominion: but there we
have another word for despise, (...) which word, says Beza, signifies to
depose or remove a thing out of its place. But the same Persons are meant in
both places; and there is no more difference between S. Peter's Despisers, and
S. Iude's Deposers of Government, then between brute Beasts, (to which S. Jude
in the tenth Verse compares them) when under restraint, and when at liberty,
which then shake off the service they had no mind to before. They who are S.
Peter's Despisers, no Relishers of Government, will, when it lies in their way,
(as Experience has shown this Nation) be S. Iude's Deposers, Deposers of
Government and Governors too: but both shall be reserved unto Punishment;
chiefly such, says S. Peter; and says S. Jude, to the Vengeance of eternal
Fire.

And the case being thus with Despisers of Government, it would be well done by
Governors, not to give them the least occasion for it. This is according to S.
Paul's advice to Timothy: 1 Timothy 4. 12.
in stead of exhorting the People not to despise Timothy, he advises Timothy
not to let them do it: his meaning is, 1 Timothy 3. 15.
that he would have Timothy so to behave himself in the House of God, as not to
give them the least occasion for it.

Well, the Despisers of Government bringing that Mischief they do to the
Societies they belong unto, and heaping to themselves such Wrath against the
Day of Wrath, it is an Office of Mercy to them (besides what it is to the
Government) in Governors, to their power to restrain them: which they may do,
(and I think are bound to do, as they would not partake in their Sin) in
looking after the Execution of the Laws. For were Laws duly executed, men durst
as well eat Fire, as affront Authority, and play with Penal Statutes. Witness
how tame, not long since, England, Ireland, and Scotland too, were made and
kept by a small number of the Inhabitants, without a Toleration of Popery or
Prelacy.

Well, if this will not prevail with us, to make us submit unto Authority, that
it is the Will of God we do it; Consider we within our selves of this other
Motive, How we shall be able, if we will not do his Will, to endure his Wrath,
which we see Despisers of Authority have no hopes of escaping, but upon these
Presumptions, that there is no Credit to be given to the Holy Scriptures, no
Life to come, nor Day of Judgment to be hereafter.

The Duty of Subjection is thus enforced: and there are but few who do not, at
least in words, own it to be due to Magistrates: but, how far, and wherein,
lies all the Controversy.

Some there be who are against the Magistrate's meddling at all in Matters
Ecclesiastical. Quid Imperatori cum Ecclesia? was the Objection of Donatus, an
old Separatist; What has the Emperor to do with Matters concerning the
Church? To which Objection the Reply Optatus made was then judged fully
sufficient, The Commonwealth is not in the Church, but the Church is in the
Commonwealth; and consequently, the Governor of the Commonwealth is Governor
also of the Church.

But that which meets with greatest opposition at this day is this, That the
Magistrate should give Commands in things indifferent pertaining to the Worship
of God. But this men quarrel at without any color of Reason for the same: For
these things are the peculiar Province, as to Church-concernments, wherein the
Legislative and Executive Power of the Magistrate is exercised. Things of
Divine Institution do require our Submission by warrant from a Superior and
Paramount Injunction, and cannot be accounted Humane Ordinances or Things
indifferent: But as to these other things, we have sundry Ordinances in the
Holy Scriptures. Esther 9. 20. we find a religious Festival appointed by
Mordecai, without any Command from God for it. And in the Book of the Maccabees
we read of another Festival instituted by Judas Maccabaeus and the Jews, which
was afterward approved of by Christ's presence at it. And in the New Testament
we find the Rulers of the Church imposing their Commands in things indifferent,
Acts 15. 20.
as they thought expedient for the present good of the Church. The things
indeed are called necessary: Verse. 28.
but considering what some of these things were, it is plain they were only
called so, with relation to their End; being at that time judged necessary,
though not in their Nature, yet in their Use, for the present quiet and
composure of Differences in the Church. And as soon as the black Cloud of
Persecution was dispersed by Constantine the Great, this Authority, in matters
Ecclesiastical, was assumed by the Monarchs of the Christian World, and very
much to the Satisfaction of the Fathers of the Church in those times. Felix est
necessitas (says S. Augustine) quae nos cogit ad meliora. And thus he advises
the Powers then in being, Foris inveniatur necessitas, and intus nascetur
voluntas; Let there be a Power without, and there will be a Will within.

And what is very considerable here, The Injunctions of Superiors in these
things have never been disliked, but by the Factions they have run cross to. If
Calvin's Opinion will weigh any thing with the Men who now oppose themselves,
and scruple in these matters, we have it at large in his Epistle to the Duke of
Somerset, the Protector in the days of Edward the VI. where he advises the
Protector in these words: Statum esse Catechismum oportet, statam
Sacramentorum Administrationem, publicamque Precum formulam; There ought (says
he) to be a set Catechism, a set Form for Administration of Sacraments, and a
set Form of public Prayers, from which it may not be lawful for the Pastors
of the Church to depart and vary as they please. And that, (as he tells us) for
these Ends: That the Ignorance of some may hereby be relieved, the wanton
Lightness of others in affecting and meditating Novelties restrained; and then,
that the Agreement among your selves, and with other Reformed Churches, may be
known to the World. Which be all very good Ends; and the bare mentioning of
them is enough to satisfy any, that Calvin did not think the Forms useful
only for those Times, and as things then stood, (as Separatists at this day
persuade their Proselytes) but for succeeding Ages also. For in what Age may it
not be necessary to have these good Ends looked after? And in the same Epistle
he tells the Protector, he understood there were two sorts of Seditious
persons in this Kingdom then, (who have continued ever since, and been as very
Thorns in the side of the Government from that time to this, as ever the
Canaanites were to the Israelites.) The one sort (he tells him) were those, who
would by no means forgo the Superstitions of Rome: the other sort he styles
Cerebrosi and Phrenetici, Brainsick Phreneticks, who, under a pretense of
Gospel-Liberty, endeavored the introducing (...), all Disorder and Confusion
into the Church; wherein (to use his own words, though something harsh)
excitantur a Satana nominatim, they are prompted by the Devil himself, that the
World may take offense at the best Religion, as the Fomenter of Rebellion in
the State, and Confusion in the Church. This is his Censure: and as severe is
his Direction; (but it is Calvin's) Merentur quidem tum hi tum illi Gladio
ultore coerceri, Both these sorts of Seditious persons deserve to be restrained
by the Sword which God has put into thy Hand. And Beza's Opinion is the same
also in these matters: Beza Epist. 24. ad Peregrinarum in Anglia Ecclesiarum
Fratres.
What Laws the Magistrate makes in things indifferent, for the sake of Order
and Decency in the Church, they are to be observed of all Godly men; and they
so far bind the Conscience, that no Knowing and Understanding man can, without
Sin, either do what is forbidden, or omit what is commanded.

And after the Copy of these great Men, did the Presbyterians of the late Times
write; The bare Injunctions of Parliament were held Canonical in these Matters
when time was. They are the words of a known Tractate Licensed by Mr. Downham;
No man that is endowed with right Reason, but will acknowledge there is a
Necessity of a Government. If of a Government, then, of Uniformity; else it
will be confused. Therefore there is a Necessity of suppressing all
Conventicles, and that all men should observe such Order, Time, and Place, and
public Gesture, as the Parliament, by the Advice of the Assembly, shall
appoint, And no man that has any use of Conscience in any thing, but must
acknowledge that he is to obey the Laws of the Land in which he lives in all
indifferent Things, or else he is Turbulent and deserves Censure, even for
matters concerning Worship.

Thus far that Author, who was not alone in the opinion, in the late Times,
that the Supreme Power may give Command in these things. Whence it appears,
That they who could not endure the Constitutions of their Superiors in these
Matters, could (when they became Superiors themselves) call for Constitutions
agreeable to their own Minds in the same Matters: and consequently, (as Mr.
Ienkins expresses it in a Sermon before one of the Vsurper's Parliaments) That
the reason why men cry out against Government, is not, because they would have
no Government; Policy of Princes, pa. 37.
but, because they would have it in themselves; or they desire to burn the Rod,
that they may play the Wantons the more freely.

Now if the Magistrate has power to command in these things, it is our Duty to
observe their Commands: and the common Objections many make to excuse
themselves, can have no weight in them. And here it may not be amiss to take
notice of two Objections against this Obedience.

1. It is objected, That Obedience in these things has ever given Offense; and
therefore we are at liberty, and freed, by the Example of S. Paul, to obey, or
not to obey, who in 1 Cor. 8. 13. tells us, If meat make my Brother to offend,
I will eat no flesh while the world stands, lest I make my Brother to offend.
This is much insisted on; but very weakly, if the Magistrate have power to
command, and if it be our Duty to obey. For thus there is a great deal of
difference between the Apostle's eating Meats sacrificed to Idols, and our
obeying our Superiors in these things. The Apostle by eating might offend some
of the weaker sort; but by not eating he could offend none. Now this holds not
in our observing the Commands of our Superiors. By observing of them we may
indeed offend some weaker ones, (who could never yet tell us what would please
them;) but it cannot be said, that by the not observing of them we shall offend
none: for our Obedience being thus grounded, we thereby give just Offense to
the greater sort of men, and the more considerable, to the King and his
Council, by whom these Injunctions have been established: and so in being
pleasers of some men, we shall be found the Enemies of Christ, in whose name we
are commanded this Submission; and in the conclusion we shall really offend our
Brother, by not obeying our Governors, so as the Apostle was resolved he never
would. For thus we become a Stumbling Block to him, the thing the Apostle
cautions against by his own Example, Verse 9. of that Chapter; we shall
endanger the emboldening of him by our Example, (as the Apostle's words are;)
we shall increase his Dislike of his Duty, and confirm him in his Disobedience.
And this is Vrsin's Opinion, Ursin. loc. Theol. in 3. praecept. Scandalum datum
est, in rebus adiaphoris Errores in animis infirmorum confirmare.
To add Confirmation to erroneous Opinions in the Minds of the weak about
indifferent things, is giving Offense.

2. Again, it is objected, We must not do the things we doubt of; so that we
are discharged and excused, while we doubt of the Lawfulness of our Obedience.

Now, here two things would be considered. First, whether the Doubting that in
these days is alleged, is not pretended only. Secondly, whether Doubting here
is any Discharge or no.

1. It would be considered, whether the Doubting that is now alleged, is not
only pretended; and the rather, because Beza himself suspected it, Beza Epist.
8. ad D. Edm. Grindallum Episc. Land.
when he writ to Bishop Grindall, then Bishop of London, in the Year 1566.
Having a little before told the Bishop, that it was very much his Judgment,
that the Rites necessary for the sake of Order and Decency ought to be
retained; he farther tells him, that Infirmity at that time must needs be
pretended only, when the Gospel had then for so many years been preached and
received, and confirmed by the Blood of so many excellent Martyrs. But to lay
down some Rules, whereby we may give some Judgment in the thing, whether the
Doubting men allege, to excuse themselves, be sincere or no.

First, The words of Beza offer one Rule to us, and question the sincerity of
those Doubtings, where men have had sufficient opportunity of being fully
instructed in the things they doubt about. He thought Eleven years a fair time:
and what may we think of Ten times as many more years, that have passed since
those illustrious Martyrs (as he duly styles them) confirmed what they
preached, and the Orders they legally obtained in these things, with their
Blood? At the time the Gospel was first divulged by the Apostles, until such
time as the Jews might be satisfied concerning the Liberty of Christians from
the Rites of the Law of Moses, with consideration to their Weakness, the
Apostles did not presently use their Liberty: but S. Paul circumciseth Timothy;
and, by the advice of the Apostles, Acts 21. 23, 24. he went into the Temple,
to purify himself according to the Law of Moses. But when sufficient Means and
Opportunity was once enjoyed, they do no such thing; but Saint Paul withstood
Saint Peter to the face for doing it, Gal. 2. 11. And we do not read that
Saint Peter did justify to Saint Paul's face his fear of the Use of his
Liberty.

Secondly, Men may, if they will, examine themselves in the Sincerity of their
Doubtings, by the care and pains they have used (according to the time they
have had for it) to get their Doubtings resolved: which thing, if their
Doubtings be sincere, they will force them to; and if they do not, there is not
one dram of Sincerity and real Tenderness belonging to them. For Doubting, and
forbearing Obedience here, is a kind of Murmuring against our Superiors, as if
they commanded us that whereby we might sin in obeying them. And will any
sincere honest man think so evil of his Governors, and their Predecessors,
without enquiring what cause he has for it? especially when he shall consider,
that the greatest gain his Governors can have by his Obedience, is the Peace
of the whole Society, in whose common Welfare the Loyal Subject shall have his
equal Share with the Magistrate who commands.

Thirdly, Whereas they pretend they are full of Doubting in yielding Obedience
to these Commands, to assure themselves they are sincere, they may examine
themselves by this Rule, which is truly taken from the nature of Doubting, By
considering what the thought, and care, and fear is, they have had about
refusing Obedience. For, Doubting only on the one side, is no real Doubting:
For in such Doubting the Mind is in bivio, uncertain, and in suspense, and
questions the one side as well as the other, not knowing which to take; but
fears sinning by Obeying, and fears sinning by not Obeying. So that if men
only doubt Obedience to their Superiors Commands in these things, and never
doubt on the other side, their Doubting is only Pretense; they are determined,
fixed, and set, say what they will; their Doubtings are only Prejudices, taken
up on trust from their partial Guides, who, for gainful Ends, may cherish them
in their Doubtings; their Craft by which they live being in danger to be set at
naught, should their Proselytes once be cured of their Doubtings. And were they
not blinded by their Prejudices, in stead of Doubting, where they pretend they
do, they would have a suspicious Eye on the other side rather, where private
Interest is the Directour.

But, 2. It would be considered, whether, if men do really doubt, their
Doubting is an Excuse for their Disobedience.

Now as to this, We may conclude, from the nature of Doubting, that it does no
such thing. For of Doubting, here it must be granted, that the sum of it is
this, I may probably sin in this Submission: (probably, I say; for Certainty it
cannot be, and Doubting too.) Now Submission being stated and agreed, as I have
shown you, to be the Magistrate's Due, and our Duty, bare Doubting cannot
discharge us from it: a Probability of sinning cannot discharge a man from
obeying a plain Precept. A thing indeed merely arbitrary and in my power, (as
to recreate my self with any lawful Game,) if I doubt about it, or offend
others with it, I must forbear; there is only the crossing of my own Fancy and
Will therein, of which no evil can come: But in things commanded, and so taken
out of my power by the intervening Command of Man, and by the Command of God
that backs that, requiring our Obedience for his sake, my Doubting, or the
Offense others may take, is no Excuse here; for, thus we should oppose Liberty
to Necessity, Charity to Duty, the bare fear of offending the weak, to the
certain offense of the higher Powers; nay, we should do more for Man's sake,
then for the Lord's.

Now to come to a Conclusion. A Duty thus grounded, and against which so little
is to be objected, ought cheerfully to be observed by us: And being proposed,
as it is, for a thing whereby we shall credit our Religion, those words of the
Apostle, Philip. 4. 8. Whatsoever things are of good Report, if there be any
Virtue, if there be any Praise, suffice to persuade us to it. Let who will
expect, by their Scruples about this Duty, and their Shiness of it, to gain the
name of men of stricter Sanctity, and men of Conscience; let us seek the Honor
that comes of God only, and do the Honor we can to our Religion, only in
the way that God in his Word directs us.

It is descending to lower Motives, to mention the Honor we ought to have to
the Memories of the Religious Governors of our Church, who were the worthy
Instruments in our Reformation. But I am unwilling to pass it by, because they
who at this day are the greatest Sticklers against the Subjection I have been
speaking of, do all pretend to have a great Veneration for them.

Now, how was it our Savior advised the Jews to show the Honor they had for
Abraham and Moses, but in the approving of their Works and Sayings? Well, the
things our Submission is required in, are their Works, and such, as we may
confidently affirm this of them, that they were not devised nor enacted rashly,
but upon good Deliberation, and out of pure Design to settle us in Unity. Nor
were they ushered in by Rebellion, as were the Covenant and the Directory: and
they had the Approbation of all the Reformed Churches then in being. Calvin did
pass upon them his Valde probo. And if we may expound one Epistle of his by
another, what he calls tolerabiles Ineptias, in his Epistle to the dissenting
Exiles at Frankford, without mentioning what they were, are the things that in
his larger Epistle to the Duke of Somerset he finds fault with particularly,
and they are, Prayers for the Dead, Exorcisms, the use of Chrism in Baptism,
and Extreme Unction; which since the beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth
have been left out of all our Common-Prayer-Books. I say, the Injunctions of
our first Reformers were not mutinous, nor the Product of hasty inconsiderate
Zeal; but enacted as soberly and as regularly as could be imagined, and with
good Design to settle us in Unity and Peace, which then was, and at this day
can be our only Countermine under Heaven, against all the Plots and Policies
of them who (ever since the time our Princes have rightfully enfranchised
themselves from the Usurpations of the Court and See of Rome) have sought our
Ruin by all Arts and Methods, but chiefly by Dividing of us.

Again, we ought not to forget what the Apostle minds us of in the following
Verses, the Honor we are owing our present Governors: and wherein do we so
show it, as in submitting in this manner to their Ordinances?

And here it would be considered, that as at first these Injunctions were
wisely established, and with good Design for the securing of the Peace of the
Church and State; so, they have not been reinforced since His Majesty's happy
Return, but upon the experience of an Inundation of Misery and Confusion,
wherewith we were overflowed through the pulling down of the Wall these Laws
were to us. In the pulling down whereof, they who had the next hand in it to
the Jesuits, the Presbyterians, were soon made sensible of the Oversight they
had committed. I am apt to believe, they never repented them of it. For Mr.
Love, upon the Scaffold, justified what he had done that way. And Mr. Ienkins,
some years after, in the Sermon before mentioned, praised God for it in these
words, Policy of Princes, pa. 33.
Praised be that God who has delivered us from the Imposition of Prelatical
Innovations, Altar-Genu-flexions, and Cringings, with Crossings, and all that
Popish Trash and Trumpery. And truly, (I speak no more then I have often
thought and said) The removal of those insupportable Burdens countervails for
the Blood and Treasure shed and spent in these late Distractions. (And the
King's Blood, and the King's and Church's Revenue were part.) Nor did I as
ever yet hear of any Godly men that desired it, were it possible, to purchase
their Friends or Money again at so dear a rate, as with the return of these, to
have those Soul-burthening Antichristian Yokes re-imposed upon us: and if any
such there be, I am sure that desire is no part of their Godliness; and I
profess my self in that to be none of the number. And Mr. Faircloth, in one of
his Sermons before the Parliament upon the seventh Chapter of Judges and the
twenty fifth Verse, intercedes with the Parliament for the laying of the Wall
down, even with the ground, in these words; Extirpate all Achans with
Babylonish garments, Orders, Ceremonies, Gestures, let them be rooted out from
among us: We, even all the godly Ministers of the Country, will be with you.
But, though they repented them not of the pulling down of the old Wall, they
were extremely troubled they had not secured their own Enclosures from
succeeding Tides; and great was their fear of farther Breaches, through
Toleration, as their many solicitous Applications to the Powers then in being,
to prevent them, do declare. Which because they carry in them an Acknowledgment
of the Confusion they had brought these Kingdoms into, by laying wast the
ancient Government in Church and State, I am fully assured, that it was not
their opinion then, that Toleration would be the means to deliver us out of
those Confusions. And it may not be amiss to remember them of some of them.
Policy of Princes, pa. 33.
Mr. Ienkins, in the Sermon before mentioned, having observed, that it was
looked upon as a Blessing, that they were in Days that men might be as good as
they pleased, (which had then been lately Dr. John Owen's words in one of his
Sermons) he entreats the Parliament in these words, I beseech you, as you love
your own Souls, and as you dread the Anger of him, whose Anger if kindled but a
little, blessed are all they that put their trust in him, let not men be
suffered to be as wicked as they please. Verse 3. Page 117.
And in his Commentary upon S. Jude, he thus contends with Magistrates: They
who reign by God, should reign for him. How unreasonable is it, that people
should be Lawless only in Religion? Shall it not be indifferent whether men
will pay a Tax, and shall it be indifferent whether they will ever hear a
Sermon? And then he mentions Artaxerxes his Decree, Ezra 7. 26. as if he would
have had it decreed after the manner of the Medes and Persians, that men should
be confined to hear him and his Brethren, upon the penalty of Death,
Banishment, Confiscation of Goods, and Imprisonment; for so runs that Decree.
And lest they should boggle at these things, in any sense of their Obligation
to Moderation, he thus cautions them as to this: Page 121.
How soon learned is the Wisdom of shunning Troubles, of Self-preservation,
and tame Silence, when Religion is endangered? ( i.e. when Presbytery was in
danger of being worsted by the After-Subdivisions) and how easily, but, alas!
how falsely, is this called Moderation? And in his Sermon before mentioned he
has these words: Page 23.
Because no Conscience can be touched, must all Practices be suffered? And Dr.
Manton, at the same time, in his Comment upon the eleventh Verse of S. Jude,
Page 402, and 403.
warning Magistrates to be aware of the followers of Corah, (to use his own
words) of Factious and Seditious persons, compared to Cain, as he observes
well, because of their Cruelty, and to Balaam, because of their Covetousness;
he assures the Magistrates, That the Danger of the latter Times would not be so
probably from a second Deluge of Antichristians, as from Seditious
Insurrections of Sectaries, who, though they seem to be meek and full of Love,
while their Party is contemptible; yet when they grow considerable, they appear
in their Colors. The Antichristian Party carries things by Power, and Worldly
Greatness: but this Party is a creeping Party, that gets into Houses. This is
the Party from whence I fear such Danger and Disturbance. And the same sense
and fear of Toleration and Sectaries had the Ministers of the Province of
London; witness their Subscription to a Book called, A Testimony to the Truth
of Jesus Christ; and to our Solemn League and Covenant: in which Book, this is
mentioned, among others, for one abominable Error, viz. Page 22.
That little can be done, unless Liberty of Conscience be allowed, for every
man, and sort of men, to worship God in that way, and perform the Ordinances of
Christ in that manner, as shall appear to them most agreeable to God's Word.
And the Trouble they had, to think what other Reformed Churches would say of
them, should this take place, they thus expressed: Is this England, which
Covenanted to Extirpate Popery, Prelacy, Superstition, Schism, etc? and after
so long Travail, has she now brought forth an hideous Monster of Toleration?

In these, and many the like Expressions that might be alleged, we see that,
how little soever it was the Presbyterians repented them of the first Breach
they themselves had made, they were yet so sensible of the Confusion they had
brought upon this Nation by it, that they were utterly against Toleration, as
that which would certainly endanger more Breaches. But all their Applications
to the Usurpers, and all their Endeavors this way, were no better, nor other,
nor less vain, (till God, by restoring us our KING, built up the old Wall again
for us) then theirs, who take no care to secure their Lands from an Inundation,
till the Sea has made a Breach into them. A Neighbourly Agreement beforehand,
to put to all hands, where there was the greatest appearance of Danger, might
have prevented the Mischief; but the Breach once made, he only who sets Bounds
to the Sea can help here. Well, this was our Condition, by Breach after Breach
we were overflown with Confusion, in the words of the Psalmist, we were brought
very low; and God helped us, when we were very hopeless of it from any other
hand; and, in a manner even miraculous, he has made up our Wall again for us,
by giving us our Judges as at the first, and our Counselors as at the
beginning.

Now, as Samuel exhorts the Israelites, Let us fear the Lord our God,
considering what great things he has done for us; and let us honor the
Authority by which he has done it, and express it in the Honor we are ready
to pay to all their Commands in the observing of them, and to their Commands in
the things I have been speaking of in particular; and the rather, because we
cannot be truly accounted any other then Despisers of Authority, if we oppose
our selves here: for the things most of them are such, as it is very likely we
should do them of our own heads, were there no Appointments about them. What
other are, Kneeling at Prayers, Kneeling at the Sacrament, and the having our
Heads uncovered in the time of Divine Service and Sermon, and the like? For men
to oppose themselves in such things, they will never satisfy any rational
person, that they object and scruple and disobey upon a Conscientious Account;
but out of an untoward Principle of Opposition rather, whereby some men are
inclined to dislike some Circumstances in Religion, merely upon the account of
their Establishment by Authority: which surely is despising of Authority, and
argues a very cross and sullen temper of Mind, and such as is not to be
humoured; especially when we shall consider how great a matter a little Fire
did here kindle. It is not long since these Kingdoms were all in a Flame, and
here it was they took fire first, in these Chips, the Dissatisfactions of men
about these Indifferent things; many persons very inconsiderately preferring a
little Pleasing of themselves, a small portion of private Satisfaction, in
being admired for persons of a Purer way, and having many Followers, before the
public Peace and Safety of the Church and State. Let the burnt Child dread the
Fire. Take we warning henceforth, never to be so far wedded to our own private
Persuasions, as not to consider, that where the public Peace and Safety of the
Church and Kingdom are concerned, it is most meet for us to strike Sail, and to
give place, and above all things, Romans 14. 19.
to follow after the things which make for peace, as the Apostle counsels, even
concerning these Indifferent things; for of them had he been discoursing; as
the observing of Days, and the eating of Meats. In these things we are so to
order our selves, as to endeavor the promoting of the public Peace, by
reasoning with our selves, about these things, in this manner, and behaving our
selves accordingly: I am of this Opinion, but my Brother is of another; but by
whose Opinion the public Peace shall be best promoted, let that Opinion by all
means have the place, and be yielded to. For what thing in this World is
comparable to universal Peace and Accord amongst Christians, who have one God,
one Faith, one Hope, one Baptism; so many Obligations to be at one amongst our
selves? Next to Glory to God on high, in the estimation of the blessed Angels,
comes Peace on Earth. The sweet Singer of Israel, as wanting words to express
its Excellency, breaks out into this Admiration of it, Psalm. 133.1.
Behold, how good and how pleasant it is, for Brethren to dwell together in
Unity. Let those who have the like Esteem for it, follow the things that make
for it, by submitting to the wholesome and innocent Constitutions that were
devised purely for the conserving of it. Which that we may all of us do, and
so by our Peaceable Conversation put to silence such as speak evil of us, as of
evildoers, The God of Peace give us his Grace to enable us thereunto, for the
Merits and sake of Jesus our Peacemaker, the Prince of Peace, to whom, with
God the Father and God the Holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory, Adoration and
Thanksgiving, henceforth and for ever.

Amen.
FINIS.

