ADDITIONAL NOTES ON THE Life and Death OF Sir MATTHEW HALE, THE LATE
Universally Honored and Loved LORD CHIEF JUSTICE OF THE KINGS BENCH.

Written by Richard Baxter, at the request of Edward Stephens, Esquire the
Publisher of his Contemplations, and his familiar Friend. And Published by the
urgency of others.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Janeway, in Queens-head Alley in Paternoster Row.
1682.

NOte, that this Narrative was written two years before Dr. Burnet's; and it is
not to be doubted, but that he had better information of his Manuscripts, and
some other circumstances than I. But of those Manuscripts directed to me, about
the souls Immortality, of which I have the Originals under his Hand, and also
of his thoughts of the Subjects mentioned by me, from 1671. till he went to die
in Gloucestershire, I had the fullest notice.

READER,
SInce the History of Judge Hale's Life is published (written by Dr. Burnet very
well), some men have thought, that because my familiarity with him was known,
and the last time of a man's Life is supposed to contain his maturest judgment,
time, study and experience correcting former oversights: and this great man*
who was most diligently and thirstily learning to the last, was like to be
still wiser, the notice that I had of him in the later years of his Life should
not be omitted.

I was never acquainted with him till 1667. and therefore have nothing to say
of the former part of his Life; nor of the later, as to any public affairs,
but only of what our familiar converse acquainted me: But the visible effects
made me wonder at the industry and unwearied labors of his former Life.
Besides the Four Volumes against Atheism and Infidelity, in Folio, which I
after mention, when I was desired to borrow a Manuscript of his
Law-Collections, he showed me, as I remember, about Two and Thirty Folio's, and
told me, he had no other on that Subject (Collections out of the Tower-Records,
etc.) and that the Amanuensis work that wrote them, cost him a Thousand pound.
He was so set on study, that he resolvedly avoided all necessary diversions,
and so little valued either grandeur, wealth, or any worldly vanity, that he
avoided them to that notable degree, which incompetent judges took to be an
excess. His Habit was so course and plain, that I, who am thought guilty of a
culpable neglect therein, have been bold to desire him to lay by some things
which seemed too homely. The House which I surrendered to him, and wherein he
lived at Acton, was indeed well situate, but very small, and so far below the
ordinary dwellings of men of his rank, as that diverse Farmers thereabout had
better; but it pleased him. Many censured him for choosing his last Wife below
his Quality: but the good man more regarded his own daily comfort, than men's
thoughts and talk. As far as I could discern, he chose one very suitable to his
ends; one of his own judgment and temper, prudent and loving, and fit to please
him; and that would not draw on him the trouble of much Acquaintance and
Relations. His housekeeping was according to the rest, like his Estate and
Mind, but not like his Place and Honor: for he resolved never to grasp at
Riches, nor take great fees, but would refuse what many others thought too
little. I wondered when he told me how small his Estate was, after such ways of
getting as were before him: But as he had little, and desired little, so he was
content with little, and suited his Dwelling, Table and Retinue thereto. He
greatly shunned the visits of many, or great persons, that came not to him on
necessary business, because all his hours were precious to him, and therefore
he contrived the avoiding of them, and the free enjoyment of his beloved
privacy.

I must with a glad remembrance acknowledge, that while we were so unsuitable in
places and worth, yet some suitableness of judgment and disposition made our
frequent converse pleasing to us both. The last time, save one, that I was at
his house, he made me lodge there, and in the morning, inviting me to more
freqnent visits, said, No man shall be more welcome: And he was no dissembler.
To signify his love, he put my name, as a Legatee in his Will, bequeathing me
Forty shillings. Mr. Stephens gave me two Manuscripts, as appointed by him for
me, declaring his judgment of our Churchcontentions, and their cure (after
mentioned). Though they are imperfect, as written on the same question at
several times, I had a great mind to Print them, to try whether the common
reverence of the Author would cool any of our contentious Clergy: but hearing,
that there was a restraint in his Will, I took out part of a Copy, in which I
find these words; I do expressly declare, That I will have nothing of my own
Writings Printed after my Death,, but only such as I shall in my Lifetime
deliver out to be Printed. And not having received this in his Lifetime, nor
to be Printed in express terms, I am afraid of crossing the Will of the Dead,
though he ordered them for me.

It showed his mean Estate, as to Riches, that in his Will he is put to
distribute the profits of a Book or two, when Printed, among his Friends and
Servants. Alas! we that are great losers by Printing, know that it must be a
small gain that must thus accrue to them. Doubtless, if the Lord Chief Justice
Hale had gathered money as other Lawyers do that had less advantage, as he
wanted not will, so he would not have wanted power to have left them far
greater Legacies. But the Servants of a self-denying mortified Master, must be
content to suffer by his Virtues, which yet, if they imitate him, will turn to
their final gain.

God made him a Public Good, which is more than to get Riches. His great
judgment, and known integrity, commanded respect from those that knew him; so
that I verily think, that no one Subject since the days that History has
notified the affairs of England to us, went off the stage with greater and more
Universal Love and Honor; (And what Honor without Love is, I understand not.)
I remember, when his Successor, the Lord Chief Justice Rainsford, falling into
some melancholy, came, and sent to me for some advice, he did it, as he said,
because Judge Hale desired him so to do; and expressed so great respect to his
judgment and Writings, as I perceived much prevailed with him. And many have
profited by his contemplations, who would never have read them, had they been
written by such a one as I. Yet among all his books and discourses, I never
knew of these until he was dead.

His resolution for Justice was so great, that I am persuaded, that no wealth
nor honor would have hired him knowingly to do one unjust Act.

And though he left us in sorrow, I cannot but acknowledge it a great mercy to
him, to be taken away when he was. Alas! what would the good man have done, if
he had been put by Plotters, and Traitors, and Swearers, and Forswearers, upon
all that his Successors have been put to? In likelihood, even all his great
wisdom and sincerity, could never have got him through such a wilderness of
thorns, and briars, and wild beasts, without tearing in pieces his entire
Reputation, if he had never so well secured his conscience. O! how seasonably
did he avoid the tempest, and go to Christ!

And so have so many excellent persons, since then, and especially within the
space of one year, as may well make England tremble at the Prognostic, that
the righteous are taken as from the evil to come. And alas! what an evil is it
like to be? We feel our loss. We fear the common danger. But what Believer can
choose but acknowledge Gods mercy to them, in taking them up to the world of
Light, Love, Peace and Order, when confusion is coming upon this world, by
Darkness, Malignity, Perfidiousness and cruelty. Some think, that the last
conflagration shall turn this Earth into Hell. If so, who would not first be
taken from it? And when it is so like to Hell already, who would not rather be
in Heaven?

Though some mistook this man for a mere Philosopher or Humanist, that knew him
not within; yet his most serious description of the sufferings of Christ, and
his copious Volumes to prove the truth of the Scripture, Christianity, our
Immortality, and the Deity, do prove so much reality in his Faith and Devotion,
as makes us past doubt of the reality of his reward and glory.

When he found his belly swell, his breath and strength much abate, and his
face and flesh decay, he cheerfully received the sentence of Death: And though
Dr. Glisson by mere Oximel squilliticum, seemed a while to ease him, yet that
also soon failed him; and he told me, he was prepared and contented comfortably
to receive his change. And accordingly he left us, and went unto his native
Country of Gloucestershire to die, as the history tells you.

Mr. Edward Stephens being most familiar with him, told me his purpose to write
his Life: and desired me to draw up the mere Narrative of my short familiarity
with him; which I did, as follows: but hearing no more of him, cast it by:
But others desiring it, upon the sight of the published History of his Life by
Dr. Burnet, I have left it to the discretion of some of them, to do with it
what they will.

And being half dead already in those dearest friends who were half my self, am
much the more willing to leave this molehill, and prison of earth, to be with
that wise and blessed Society, who being united to their Head in glory, do not
envy, hate or persecute each other, nor forsake God, nor shall ever be forsaken
by Him.

R. B.

Additional Notes on the Life and Death of Sir Matthew Hale.
To my worthy Friend, Mr. Stephens, the Publisher of Judge Hale's
Contemplations. SIR,
YOU desired me to give you notice of what I knew, in my personal converse of
the Great Lord Chief Justice of England, Sir Matthew Hale. You have partly made
any thing of mine unmeet or the sight of any but your self and his private
friends (to whom it is useless), by your divulging those words of his
extraordinary favor to me, which will make it thought, that I am partial in
his praises. And indeed that excessive esteem of his, which you have told men
of, is a divulging of his imperfection, who did overvalue so unworthy a person
as I know my self to be.

I will promise you to say nothing but the truth; and judge of it, and use it as
you please.

My acquaintance with him was not long: and I looked on him as an excellent
person, studied in his own way, which I hoped I should never have occasion to
make much use of; but I thought not, so versed in our matters as our selves. I
was confirmed in this conceit by the first report I had from him, which was his
wish, that Dr. Reignolds, Mr. Calamy and I, would have taken Bishoprics, when
they were offered us by the Lord Chancellor, as from the King, in 1660. (as one
did). I thought he understood not our case, or the true state of English
Prelacy. Many years after, when I lived at Acton, he being Lord Chief Baron of
the Exchequer, suddenly took a house in the Village. We sat next seats
together at Church for many weeks, but neither did he ever speak to me, or I to
him. At last, my extraordinary friend (to whom I was more beholden than I must
here express), Sergeant Fountain, asked me, why I did not visit the Lord Chief
Baron? I told him, because I had no reason for it, being a stranger to him; and
had some against it, viz. that a Judge, whose Reputation was necessary to the
ends of his Office, should not be brought under Court-suspition, or disgrace,
by his familiarity with a person, whom the interest and diligence of some
Prelates had rendered so odious as I knew my self to be with such, I durst not
be so injurious to him. The Sergeant answered, It is not meet for him to come
first to you; I know why I speak it: Let me entreat you to go first to him. In
obedience to which request I did it; and so we entered into Neighbourly
familiarity, I lived then in a small house, but it had a pleasant garden and
backside, which the (honest) Landlord had a desire to sell. The Judge had a mind
to the house; but he would not meddle with it, till he got a stranger to me, to
come and enquire of me, whether I was willing to leave it? I told him, I was
not only willing, but desirous, not for my own ends, but for my Landlord's
sake, who must needs sell it: and so he bought it, and lived in that poor
house, till his mortal sickness sent him to the place of his Interment.

I will truly tell you the matter and the manner of our converse. We were often
together, and almost all our discourse was Philosophical, and especially about
the Nature of Spirits and superior Regions; and the Nature, Operations and
Immortality of man's Soul. And our disposition and course of thoughts, were in
such things so like, that I did not much cross the bent of his conference. He
studied Physics, and got all new or old books of Philosophy that he could meet
with, as eagerly as if he had been a boy at the University: Mousnerius, and
Honoratus Faber, he deservedly much esteemed; but yet took not the later to be
without some mistakes. Mathematics he studied more than I did, it being a
knowledge which he much more esteemed than I did; who valued all knowledge by the
greatness of the benefit, and necessity of the use; and my unskilfulness in
them, I acknowledge my great defect, in which he much excelled. But we were both
much addicted to know and read all the pretenders to more than ordinary in
Physics; the Platonists, the Peripateticks, the Epicureans (and specially
their Gassendus), Teleius, Campanella, Patricius, Lullius, White, and every
Sect that made us any encouraging promise. We neither of us approved of all in
Aristotle; but he valued him more than I did. We both grealy disliked the
Principles of Cartesius and Gassendus (much more of the Bruitists, Hobs and
Spinosa); especially their Doctrine de Motu, and their obscuring, or denying
Nature it self, even the Principia Motus, the Virtutes formales, which are the
Causes of Operations.

Whenever we were together, he was the spring of our discourse (as choosing the
Subject): and most of it still was of the Nature of Spirits, and the
Immortality, State and Operations of separated Souls. We both were conscious of
humane darkness, and how much of our Understandings, quiet in such matters,
must be fetched from our implicit trust in the goodness and promises of God,
rather than from a clear and satisfying conception of the mode of separated
Souls Operations; and how great use we have herein of our Faith in Jesus
Christ, as he is the Undertaker, Mediator, the Lord and Lover of Souls, and the
actual possessor of that Glory. But yet we thought, that it greatly concerned
us, to search as far as God allowed us, into a matter of so great moment; and
that even little and obscure prospects into the Heavenly State, are more
excellent than much and applauded knowledge of transitory things.

He was much in urging Difficulties and Objections; but you could not tell by
them what was his own judgment: For when he was able to answer them himself, he
would draw out another answer.

He was but of a slow speech, and sometime so hesitating, that a stranger would
have thought him a man of low parts, that knew not readily what to say (though
ready at other times). But I never saw Cicero's Doctrine, de Oratore, more
verified in any man, that furnishing the mind with all sorts of knowledge, is
the chief thing to make an excellent Orator: For when there is abundance, and
clearness of knowledge in the mind, it will furnish even a slow tongue, to speak
that which by its congruence and verity shall prevail. Such a one never wants
moving matter, nor an answer to vain Objectors.

The manner of our converse was as suitable to my inclination as the matter.
For whereas many bred in Universities, and called Scholars, have not the Wit,
Manners or Patience, to hear those that they discourse with speak to the end,
but through List and Impotencie cannot hold, but cut off a man's speech when
they hear any thing that urges them, before the later part make the former
intelligible or strong (when often the proof and use is reserved to the end),
liker Scolds than Scholars; as if they commanded silence at the end of each
sentence to him that speaks, or else would have two talk at once. I do not
remember, that ever he and I did interrupt each other in any discourse. His
Wisdom and accustomed Patience caused him still to stay for the end. And though
my disposition have too much forwardness to speak, I had not so little Wit or
Manners, as to interrupt him; whereby we far better understood each other, than
we could have done in chopping and maimed discourse.

He was much for coming to Philosophical knowledge by the help of Experiments:
But he thought, that our new Philosophers, as some call the Cartesians, had
taken up with many Fallacies as Experiments, and had made as unhappy a use of
their trials, as many Empericks and Mountebanks do in Medicine: and that
Aristotle was a man of far greater experience, as well as study, than they. He
was wont to say, That Lads at the Universities had found it a way to be thought
wiser than others, to join with boasters that cried down the Ancients before
they understood them: For he thought, that few of these contemners of
Aristotle, had ever so far studied him, as to know his Doctrine, but spoke
against they knew not what; even as some secular Theologues take it to be the
way to be thought Wise men and Orthodox, to cant against some Party or Sect
which they have advantage to contemn. It must cost a man many years study to
know what Aristotle held. But to read over Magirus (and perhaps the
Conimbricenses or Zabarell), and then prate against Aristotle, requires but a
little time and labor. He could well bear it, when one that had thoroughly
studied Aristotle, dissented from him in any particular upon Reason; but he
loathed it in ignorant men, that were carried to it by shameful vanity of mind.

His many hard questions, doubts and objections to me, occasioned me to draw up
a small Tract of the Nature and Immortality of man's Soul, as proved by Natural
light alone (by way of Questions and Answers): In which I had not baulked the
hardest Objections and Difficulties that I could think of (conceiving that
Atheists and Sadduces are so unhappily witty, and Satan such a Tutor, that they
are as like to think of them as I). But the good man, when I sent it to him,
was wiser than I, and sent me word in his return, that he would not have me
publish it in English (nor without some alterations of the method); because
though he thought I had sufficiently answered all the Objections, yet ordinary
Readers would take deeper into their minds such hard Objections as they never
heard before, than the Answer (how full soever) would be able to overcome:
Whereupon, not having leisure to translate and alter it, I cast it by.

He seemed to reverence and believe the opinion of Dr. Willis, and such others,
de Animis brutorum, as being not spiritual substances. But when I sent him a
confutation of them, he seemed to acquiesce, and as far as I could judge, did
change his mind; and had higher thoughts of sensitive Natures, than they that
take them to be some evanid qualities, proceeding from contexture,
attemperation and motion.

Yet he and I did think, that the Notion of Immateriality, had little
satisfactory to acquaint us with the Nature of a Spirit (not telling us any
thing what it is, but what it is not). And we thought, that the old Greek and
Latin Doctors (cited by Faustus Rhegiculis, whom Mamertus answers), did mean
by a Body or Matter (of which they said Spirits did consist), the same thing as
we now mean by the Substance of Spirits, distinguishing them from mere
Accidents. And we thought it a matter of some moment, and no small difficulty,
to tell what men mean here by the word [ Substance], if it be but a Relative
notion, because it does substare accidentibus and subsistere per se, Relation
is not proper Substance. It is Substance that does so subsist: It is somewhat,
and not nothing, nor an accident. Therefore if more than Relation must be
meant, it will prove hard to distinguish Substance from Substance by the notion
of Immateriality. Souls have no shadows: They are not palpable and gross; but
they are SUBSTANTIAL LIFE, as VIRTUES. And it is hard to conceive, how a
created Vis vel Virtus should be the adequate conceptus of a Spirit, and not
rather an inadequate, supposing the conceptus of substantia Fundamentalis (as
Dr. Glisson calls it de Vita Naturae), seeing omnis Virtus est rei alieni
Virtus.

Yet he yielded to me, that Virtus seu Vis Vitalis, is not Animae accidens, but
the Conceptus formalis Spiritus, supposing substantia to be the conceptus
fundamentalis: and both together express the essence of a Spirit.

Every created being is Passive: For recipit in fluxum causae primae. God
transcendeth our defining skill: But where there is receptivity, many Ancients
thought there was some pure sort of Materiality: and we say, there is receptive
Substantiality: And who can describe the difference (laying aside the formal
Virtues that difference things) between the highest material substance, and the
lowest substance, called Immaterial.

We were neither of us satisfied with the notions of Penetrability and
Indivisibility, as sufficient differences. But the virtutes specificae plainly
difference.

What later thoughts, a year before he died, he had of these things, I know
not: But some say, that a Treatise of this Subject, the Souls Immortality, was
his last finished work (promised in the end of his Treatise of man's
Origination); and if we have the sight of that, it will fullier tell us his
Judgment.

One thing I must notify to you, and to those that have his Manuscripts, That
when I sent him a Scheme, with some Elucidations, he wrote me on that and my
Treatise of the Soul, almost a Quire of Paper of Animadversions; by which you
must not conclude at all of his own judgment: For he professed to me, that he
wrote them to me, not as his judgment, but (as his way was) as the hardest
Objections which he would have satisfaction in. And when I had written him a
full Answer to all, and have been often since with him, he seemed satisfied. You
will wrong him therefore, if you should Print that written to me as his
judgment.

As to his judgment about Religion; Our discourse was very sparing about
Controversies. He thought not fit to begin with me about them, nor I with him:
and as it was in me, so it seemed to be in him, from a conceit, that we were
not fit to pretend to add much to one another.

About matters of Conformity, I could gladly have known his mind more fully:
But I thought it unmeet to put such questions to a Judge, who must not speak
against the Laws: and he never offered his judgment to me. And I knew, that as
I was to reverence him in his own Profession, so in matters of my profession
and concernment, he expected not, that I should think as he, beyond the Reasons
which he gave.

I must say, that he was of opinion, that the Wealth and Honor of the Bishops
was convenient, to enable them the better to relieve the poor, and rescue the
Inferior Clergy from oppression, and to keep up the honor of Religion in the
world. But all this on supposition, that it would be in the hands of wise and
good men, or else it would do as much harm. But when I asked him, Whether great
Wealth and Honor would not be most earnestly desired and sought by the worst
of men, while good men would not seek them? And whether he that was the only
fervent seeker, was not likeliest to obtain (except under some rare
extraordinary Prince)? And so whether it was not like to entail the Office on
the worst, and to arm Christ's Enemies against him to the end of the world
(which a provision that had neither alluring, nor much discouraging temptation,
might prevent), he gave me no answer. I have heard some say, If the Pope were a
good man, what a deal of good might he do? But have Popes therefore blessed the
world?

I can truly say, that he greatly lamented the negligence, and ill lives, and
violence of some of the Clergy; and would often say, What have they their
Calling, Honor and Maintenance for, but to seek the instructing and saving of
men's Souls?

He much lamented, that so many worthy Ministers were silenced, the Church
weakened, Papists strengthened, the Cause of Love and Pretty greatly wronged and
hindered by the present differences about Conformity. And he has told me his
judgment, That THE ONLY MEANS TO HEAL US WAS, A NEW ACT OF UNIFORMITY, which
should neither leave all at liberty, nor impose any thing but necessary.

I had once a full opportunity to try his judgment far in this. It pleased the
Lord Keeper Bridgman to invite Dr. Manton and my self (to whom Dr. Bates at our
desire was added), to treat with Dr. Wilkins and Dr. Burton about the terms of
our Reconciliation and Restoration to our Ministerial liberty. After some days
conference, we came to agreement in all things, as to the necessary terms. And
because Dr. Wilkins and I had special intimacy with Judge Hale, we desired him
to draw it up in the form of an Act, which he willingly did, and we agreed to
every word. But it pleased the House of Commons, hearing of it, to begin their
next Session with a Vote, That no such Bill should be brought in; and so it
died.

Quer. 1. Whether after this and other such agreement, it be Ingenuity, or
somewhat else, that has ever since said, We know not what they would have? And
that at once call out to us, and yet strictly forbid us to tell them what it is
we take for sin, and what we desire.

2. Whether it be likely, that such men as Bishop Wilkins, and Dr. Burton, and
Judge Hale, would consent to such terms of our concord, as should be worse than
our present condition of division and convulsion is? And whether the
maintainers of our dividing Impositions, be all wiser and better men than this
Judge and that Bishop were?

3. And whether it be any distance of opinion, or difficulty of bringing us to
agreement, that keeps England in its sad Divisions, or rather some men's
opinion, that our Unity it self is not desirable, lest it strengthen us? The
case is plain.

His behavior in the Church was Conformable, but prudent. He constantly heard
a Curate, too low for such an Auditor. In Common Prayer he behaved himself as
others, saving that, to avoid the differencing of the Gospels from the
Epistles, and the bowing at the name Jesus, from the names, Christ, Savior,
God, etc. He would use some equality in his gestures, and stand up at the
reading of all Gods Word alike.

I had but one fear or suspicion concerning him, which since I am assured was
groundless: I was afraid lest he had been too little for the Practical part of
Religion, as to the working of the Soul toward God, in Prayer, Meditation,
etc. because he seldom spoke to me of such Subjects, nor of Practical Books, or
Sermons; but was still speaking of Philosophy, or of Spirits, Souls, the future
State, and the Nature of God. But at last I understood, that his averseness to
Hypocrisy made him purposely conceal the most of such his practical thoughts
and works, as the world now finds by his Contemplations and other Writings.

He told me once, how God brought him to a fixed Honor and Observation of the
Lords Day; That when he was young, being in the West, the sickness or death of
some Relation at London, made some matter of Estate to become his concernment;
which required his hastening to London from the West: And he was commanded to
travel on the Lords Day: but I cannot well remember how many cross accidents
befell him in his journey; One Horse fell lame, another died, and much more;
which struck him with such sense of Divine Rebuke, as he never forgot.

When I went out of the house, in which he succeeded me, I went into a greater,
over against the Church-door. The Town having great need of help for their
Souls, I Preached between the public Sermous in my house, taking the people
with me to the Church (to Common Prayer and Sermon) Morning and Evening. The
Judge told me, that he thought that my course did the Church much service; and
would carry it so respectfully to me at my door, that all the people might
perceive his approbation. But Dr. Reeves could not bear it, but complained
against me; and the Bishop of London caused one Mr. Rosse of Brainford, and Mr.
Philips, two Justices of the Peace, to send their Warrants to apprehend me. I
told the Judge of the Warrant, but asked him no counsel, nor he gave me none; but
with tears showed his sorrow: (The only time that ever I saw him weep). So I
was sent to the common Goal for Six Months, by these two Justices, by the
procurement of the said Dr. Reeves (His Majesty's Chaplain, Dean of Windsor,
Dean of Wolverhampton, Parson of Horseley, Parson of Acton). When I came to
move for my release upon a Habeas Corpus (by the counsel of my great friend
Sergeant Fountain), I found, that the character which Judge Hale had given of
me, stood me in some stead; and every one of the Four Judges of the
Common Pleas, did not only acquit me, but said more for me than my Council (
viz. Judge Wild, Judge Archer, Judge Tyrel, and the Lord Chief Justice Vaughan);
and made me sensible, how great a part of the Honor of His Majesty's
Government, and the Peace of the Kingdom, consisted in the Justice of the
Judges.

And indeed Judge Hale would tell me, that Bishop Usher was much prejudiced
against Lawyers, because the worst Causes find their Advocates; but that he and
Mr. Seldom had convinced him of the Reasons of it, to his satisfaction: And
that he did by acquaintance with them, believe that there were as many honest
men among Lawyers, proportionably, as among any Profession of men in England
(not excepting Bishops or Divines).

And I must needs say, that the improvement of Reason, the diverting men from
Sensuality and Idleness, the maintaining of Propriety and Justice, and
consequently the Peace and Welfare of the Kingdom, is very much to be ascribed
to the Judges and Lawyers.

But this Imprisonment brought me the great loss of converse with Judge Hale:
For the Parliament in the next Act against Conventicles, put into it diverse
clauses, suited to my case; by which I was obliged to go dwell in another
County, and to forsake both London and my former habitation; and yet the
Justices of another County were partly enabled to pursue me.

Before I went, the Judge had put into my hand Four Volumes (in Folio), which he
had written, to prove the Being and Providence of God, the Immortality of the
Soul, and life to come, the truth of Christianity, and of every Book of the
Scripture by it self, besides the common proofs of the whole. Three of the Four
Volumes I had read over, and was sent to the Goal before I read the Fourth. I
turned down a few leaves for some small Animadversions, but had not time to
give them him. I could not then persuade him to review them for the Press. The
only fault I found with them of any moment, was that great copiousness, the
effect of his fullness and patience, which will be called tediousness by
impatient Readers.

When we were separated, he (that would receive no Letters from any man, about
any matters which he was to judge) was desirous of Letter-converse about our
Philosophical and Spiritual Subjects. I having then begun a Latin Methodus
Theologiae, sent him one of the Schemes (before mentioned), containing the
Generals of the Philosophical part, with some Notes upon it; which he so
over-valued, that he urged me to proceed in the same way. I objected against
putting so much Philosophy (though mostly but de homine) in a Method of
Theology: but he rejected my Objections, and resolved me to go on.

At last it pleased God to visit him with his mortal sickness. Having had the
Stone before (which he found thick Pond-water better ease him of, than the
Gravel-Spring-water), in a cold Journey, an extraordinary Flux of Urine took
him first, and then such a pain in his side, as forced him to let much Blood,
more than once, to save him from sudden suffocation or oppression. Ever after
which he had death in his lapsed countenance, flesh and strength, with
shortness of breath. Dr. Willis, in his lifetime, wrote his case without his
name, in an Observation in his Pharmaceut, etc. which was shortly Printed after
his own death, and before his Patient's: but I dare say it so crudely, as is no
honor to that book.

When he had striven a while under his disease, he gave up his Place, not so
much from the apprehension of the nearness of his death (for he could have died
comfortably in his public work), but from the sense of his disability to
discharge his part: But he ceased not his studies, and that upon Points which I
could have wished him to let go (being confident, that he was not far from his
end).

I sent him a book which I newly published, for reconciling the controversies
about Predestination, Redemption, Grace, Free Will, but desired him not to
bestow too much of his precious time upon it: But (before he left his Place) I
found him at it so often, that I took the boldness to tell him, that I thought
more practical Writings were most suitable to his case, who was going from this
contentious world. He gave me but little answer; but I after found, that he
plied Practicals and Contemplatives in their season; which he never thought
meet to give me any account of. Only in general he often told me, That the reason
and season of his Writings (against Atheism, etc. aforesaid) were, Both in his
Circuit and at home, he used to set apart some time for Meditation, especially
after the Evening public Worship every Lords Day; and that he could not so
profitably keep his thoughts in connection and method, otherwise, as by writing
them down; and withal, that if there were any thing in them useful, it was the
way to keep it for after use: And therefore for the better management, for the
accountableness and the after use, he had long accustomed to p^n his
Meditations; which gave us all of that nature that he has left us.

Notwithstanding his own great furniture of knowledge, and he was accounted by
some, somewhat tenacious of his Conceptions (for men that know much, cannot
easily yield to the expectations of less knowing men), yet I must say, that I
remember not that ever I conversed with a man that was readier to receive and
learn. He would hear as patiently, and recollect all so distinctly, and then
try it so judiciously (not disdaining to learn of an inferior in some things,
who in more had need to learn of him), that he would presently take what some
stand wrangling against many years. I never more perceived in any man, how much
great knowledge and wisdom facilitate additions, and the reception of any thing
not before known. Such a one presently perceives that Evidence which another
is incapable of.

For Instance, The last time, save one, that I saw him (in his weakness at
Acton), he engaged me to explicate the Doctrine of Divine Government (and
Decree), as consistent with the sin of man. And when I had distinctly told him,
1. What God did, as the Author of Nature, Physically. 2. What he did, as
Legislator, Morally. And 3. What he did, as Benefactor, and by special Grace.
4. And where permission came in, and where actual operation. 5. And so, how
certainly God might cause the effects, and not cause the volitious, as
determinate to evil, (though the volition and effect being called by one name
(as Theft, Murder, Adultery, Lying, etc.) often deceive men). He took up all that
I had said in order, and distinctly twice over repeated each part in its proper
place, and with its Reason: and when he had done, said, that I had given him
satisfaction.

Before I knew what he did himself in Contemplation, I took it not well, that
he more than once told me, Mr. Baxter, I am more beholden to you than you are
aware of; and I thank you for all, but especially for your Scheme, and your
Catholic Theology. For I was sorry, that a man (that I thought) so near death,
should spend much of his time on such Controversies (though tending to end
them). But he continued after, near a year, and had leisure for Contemplations
which I knew not of.

When I parted with him, I doubted which of us would be first at Heaven: But he
is gone before, and I am at the door, and somewhat the willinger to go, when I
think such Souls as his are there.

When he was gone to Gloucestershire, and his Contemplations were published by
you, I sent him the confession of my censures of him, how I had feared that he
had allowed too great a share o^ his time and thoughts to Speculation, and too
little to Practicals; but rejoiced to see the conviction of my error: and he
returned me a very kind Letter, which was the last.

Some censured him for living under such a Curate at Act on, thinking it was in
his power to have got Dr. Reeves, the Parson, to provide a better. Of which I
can say, that I once took the liberty to tell him, that I feared too much
tepidity in him, by reason of that thing; not that he needed himself a better
teacher, who knew more, and could overlook scandals; but for the sake of the
poor ignorant people, who greatly needed better help. He answered me, That if
money would do it, he would willingly have done it; but the Dr. was a man, not
to be dealt with; which was the hardest word that I remember I have heard him
use of any. For I never knew any man more free from speaking evil of others
behind their backs. Whenever the discourse came up to the faultiness of any
individuals, he would be silent: but the sorts of faulty persons he would blame
with cautelous freedom, especially idle, proud, scandalous, contentious, and
factious Clergymen.

We agreed in nothing more than that which he often repeateth in the Papers which
you gave me, and which he often expressed, viz. That true Religion consists in
great, plain, necessary things, the life of faith and hope, the love of God and
man, an humble self-denying mind, with mortification of worldly affection,
carnal lusts, etc. And that the calamity of the Church, and withering of
Religion, has come from proud and busy men's additions, that cannot give peace
to themselves and others, by living in love and quietness on this Christian
simplicity of faith and practice, but vex and turmoil the Church with these
needless and hurtful superfluities; some by their decisions of words, or
unnecessary controversies; and some by their restless reaching after their own
worldly interest, and corrupting the Church, on pretense of raising and
defending it; some by their needless ceremonies, and some by their
superstitious and causless scruples. But he was specially angry at them that
would so manage their differences about such things, as to show, that they had
a greater zeal for their own additions, than for the common saving truths and
duties which we were all agreed in; and that did so manage their several little
and selfish causes, as wounded or injured the common cause of the Christian and
Reformed Churches. He had a great distaste of the books called. A Friendly
Debate, etc. and Ecclesiastical Polity, as from an evil Spirit, injuring
Scripture Phrase, and tempting the Atheists to contemn all Religion, so they
might but vent their spleen, and be thought to have the better of their
adversaries; and would say, How easy is it to requite such men, and all
parties to expose each other to contempt? (Indeed, how many Parishes in England
afford too plenteous matter of reply to one that took that for his part; and of
tears to serious observers)?

His main desire was, That as men should not be peevishly quarrelsom against
any lawful circumstances, forms or orders in Religion, much less think
themselves godly men, because they can fly from other men's circumstances, or
settled lawful Orders as sin; so especially, that no humane additions of
Opinion, Orders, Modes, Ceremonies, Professions, or Promises, should ever be
managed to the hindering of Christian Love and Peace, nor of the Preaching of
the Gospel, nor the wrong of our common Cause, or the strengthening of Atheism,
Infidelity, Profaneness or Popery; but that Christian Verity and Piety, the Love
of God and man, and a good life, and our common peace in these, might be first
resolved on and secured, and all our additions might be used, but in due
subordination to these, and not to any injury of any of them; nor Sects,
Parties, or narrow Interests be set up against the common duty, and the public
interest and peace.

I know you are acquainted, how greatly he valued Mr. Seldom, being one of his
Executors; his Books and Picture being still near him. I think it meet
therefore to remember, that because many Hobbists do report, that Mr. Seldom
was at the heart an Infidel, and inclined to the Opinions of Hobbs, I desired
him to tell me the truth herein: And he often professed to me, that Mr. Seldom
was a resolved serious Christian; and that he was a great adversary to Hobbs
his errors; and that he had seen him openly oppose him so earnestly, as either
to depart from him, or drive him out of the Room. And as Mr. Seldom was one of
those called Erastians (as his Book de Synedriis, and others show), yet owned
the Office properly Ministerial. So most Lawyers that ever I was acquainted
with, taking the word Jurisdiction, to signify something more than the mere
Doctoral, Priestly power, and power over their own Sacramental Communion in the
Church which they guide, do use to say, that it is primarily in the Magistrate
(as no doubt all power of Corporal Coercion, by Mulcts and Penalties is). And
as to the Accidentals to the proper power of Priesthood, or the Keys, they
truly say with Dr. Stillingfleet, That God has settled no one form.

Indeed, the Lord Chief Justice thought, that the power of the Word and
Sacraments in the Ministerial Office, was of Gods institution; and that they
were the proper Judges appointed by Christ, to whom they themselves should
apply Sacraments, and to whom they should deny them. But that the power of
Chancellors Courts, and many modall additions, which are not of the Essence of
the Priestly Office, flows from the King, and may be fitted to the State of
the Kingdom. Which is true, if it be limited by Gods Laws, and exercised on
thing only allowed them to deal in, and contradict not the Orders and Powers
settled by Christ and his Apostles.

On this account he thought well of the form of Government in the Church of
England; (lamenting the miscarriages of many persons), and the want of
Parochial Reformation: But he was greatly for uniting in Love and Peace, upon
so much as is necessary to Salvation, with all Good, Sober, Peaceable Men.

And he was much against the corrupting of the Christian Religion (whose
Simplicity and Purity he justly took to be much of its excellency), by men's
busy additions, by Wit, Policy, Ambition, or any thing else which
sophisticateth it, and makes it another thing, and causes the lamentable
contentions of the world.

What he was as a Lawyer, a Judge, a Christian, is so well known, that I think
for me to pretend that my testimony is of any use, were vain. I will only tell
you what I have written by his Picture, in the front of the great Bible which I
bought with his Legacy, in memory of his Love and Name, viz. Sir Matthew Hale,
That unwearied Student, that prudent Man, that solid Philosopher, that famous
Lawyer, that PILLAR and BASIS of JUSTICE (who would not have done an unjust act
for any worldly price or motive), the Ornament of his Majesty's Government, and
Honor of England; the highest faculty of the Soul of Westminster* Hall, and
pattern to all the Reverend and Honorable Judges; That godly serious practical
Christian, the lover of goodness and all good men; a lamenter of the Clergies
selfishness, and unfaithfulness, and discord, and of the sad divisions
following hereupon; An earnest desirer of their Reformation, Concord, and the
Churches peace, and of a REFORMED ACT of UNIFORMITY, as the best and necessary
means thereto; That great contemner of the Riches, Pomp and Vanity of the
World; That pattern of honest plainness and humility, who while he fled from
the Honor that pursued him, was yet Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench,
after his being long Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer; living and dying,
entering on, using, and voluntarily surrendering his place of Judicature, with
the most universal Love, and Honor, and Praise, that ever did English Subject
in this Age, or any that just History does acquaint us with, etc. etc. etc.
This man so wise, so good, so great, bequeathing me in his Testament the Legacy
of Forty shillings, merely as a Testimony of his respect and love, I thought
this book, the Testament of Christ, the meetest purchase by that price, to
remain in memorial of the faithful love, which he bare and long expressed to
his inferior and unworthy, but honoring Friend, who thought to have been with
Christ before him, and waits for the day of his perfect conjunction with the
Spirits of the Just made perfect,

Richard Baxter.


