A SEASONABLE WORD OF ADVICE Unto all the SAINTS in ENGLAND.

Whereby they are exhorted to beware of Satan's subtilties, and hold fast the
words of sound Doctrine.

By J. B. a lover of the Truth.

LONDON, Printed by T. C. and are to be sold by George Wilford in
Little-Brittain, near the Lame-hospitall. 1655.

To all the Saints in England, who desire to acquaint themselves with those
Scriptures which do discover the secret ways of Satan, by which he does seek
to deceive in these last days.
Christian friends,
WHose welfare I heartily desire; do not despise this friendly Exhortation,
which was written with much Care, and Fear. Fear, least I should write any
thing which should not be the Truth of God; Fear, least I should omit the
writing of any Truth: Fear, least I should grieve the Spirit of any Saint;
Fear, least I should neglect to acquaint the Saints with the Subtilties of
Satan. (The Lord having put it into my heart to consider them.)

In all Ages the Divil has sought to deceive the Elect. 2 Cor 11.1^.15.
And if in the Apostles days there were deceitful workers, who transformed
themselves into the Apostles of Christ: if Satan transformed himself, then,
into an Angel of light: and if his Ministers did, then, transform themselves
as though they were the Ministers of Righteousness: we may be assured, that in
these days, and Ends of the World, he will leave no way, or means
unattempted, by which he may seduce.

If they who lived in those last times in which the Apostles were, 1 Pet. (...).
(even they who were kept by the Power of God through Faith unto salvation) had
their Faith tried; do the Saints now think to escape the like Trial? assuredly
Friends, our faith will be tried; even that Faith, by which we shall be brought
unto that Salvation, which is prepared to be shown in the last Times: that we
may be found unto Praise, and honor, and Glory, at the appearing of Jesus
Christ.

1 Timothy 4.1.
In the last days many will depart from the Faith; for many will, then, give
heed to Doctrines of Divils, and Spirits of Errors. And indeed none will stand
and continue in those Days, in the Faith; but they who have the Anointing, 1
John 8.18, 19, 20.
the holy Spirit of God in them. All others will fall under the Deceptions of
that antichristian Spirit, which then will be found in the world. For they who
never were really of God, will then depart from him. If they had been of him,
they would have continued with him.

If these be the last Days: If Satan will now endeavor to deceive those who
profess the Lord Jesus: If it be a difficult thing to discern, in these
Times, the Subtilties of Satan: If he will leave no way unattempted: and if his
Rage and Malice will increase, the nearer the End of his Kingdom will approach:
then, the more Reason have all those that fear God, to be circumspect in all
things; and to provoke one another, not only to attain unto the knowledge of
our Lord Jesus Christ, but to observe, with diligence, the cunning practices of
Satan. For, a good soldier will not only have respect unto that kingdom he
fights for; and to the Commands of his General: but will, with all
Circumspection, prudently watch over every motion of his Enemy.

And that I may move you hereunto, I shall desire all the Saints of God to
consider this Exhortation of the Apostle.

1 Pet. 5.8.
Be sober, and watch: For your Adversary the Divil, as a roaring Lion, walks
about, seeking whom he may devour. In which Scripture there are two parts. 1. A
double Exhortation: Be sober, and watch. 2. The Ground or reason thereof, which
is likewise twofold: the first is exclusive to the Text, and is to be found in
the fourth verse, being drawn from the Saints glorious appearing with their
great Shepherd. For thus says the Apostle, When your great Shepherd shall
appear, you shall receive an incorruptible Crown of Glory. And then in the
fifth verse he exhorts them to humility; in the seventh verse to cast their
Care on the Lord; and in the eight verse to be Sober and watch. The second
Reason which moved the Apostle to exhort to Sobriety, and vigilance, is
included in the verse: and is, Because their Adversary the Divil, as a roaring
Lion, walks about, seeking whom he may devour. From the Premises we may
safely draw this conclusion, that The nearer the time is unto the Appearing of
the great Shepherd, and the nearer the Kingdom of Satan is to an End: the more
the Divil will endeavor to ensnare the Saints, and manifest his Rage against
them.

First, this will appear by what is written in this fifth chapter of the first
Epistle of Saint Peter: where the Apostle, from the consideration of the next
appearing of Christ, and Rage of Satan; does admonish the Elect, both the
shepherds, and the sheep, to Circumspection, and Diligence.

Secondly, the Truth of this Doctrine will appear from that which we find
written by Saint John, The Divil is come down unto you, and has great wrath,
knowing that he has but a short time. Rev. 12.12. for, by the Power of Christ,
(who overcame Satan) Satan the Accuser of the Brethren (who are by him tempted
unto sin, and by him accused thereof) was cast down; v. 10. and his wrath does
increase, because he knows his time is but short. But short in the account of
God; and in comparison of that eternal weight of Glory, which shall be given
unto those who overcome his Temptations. And if his Rage will increase, as his
Time will decrease; then the Elect, who live in the last Days, must expect to
be assaulted more fiercely by him, then the Saints in former Ages have been. But

Thirdly, The truth hereof is experienced at this Day. For, although it must be
confessed, that Satan does not at this Time move such heavy Persecutions
against the Bodies of the Saints, as he did in former Ages: yet he has in
these days put on more angelical Forms, and shapes to deceive, then in any
former time.

These things being considered, I will (by the Lords assistance) declare,

1. Two Snares which Satan does lay in these Times to entrap, deceive and
delude the Saints.

2. Many cunning waits by which he does attempt this Work.

3. The End that Satan aims at, the Advantage he gets, and the
Inconveniences the Saints run into, when they are deceived. And

4. The Remedies which the Lord has appointed, both for the prevention of some
that they fall not; and the Recovery of others that are fallen.

The first Snare (which I shall mention) that Satan lays for those that
profess Christianity, is To bring them into a wrong understanding of the
Scriptures, and so in time to wrest and pervert them. 2 Pet. 3.16. which he
does,

First, by causing them to hold to the opinions of their Forefathers, although
they be never so contrary to the Word of God.

In all Ages men have highly esteemed the Traditions of their Forefathers. And
whether they were such as concerned divine worship, or civil manners, they
always had a reverend esteem of them; embracing them for their Antiquity. It
being accounted a great Heresy, among the generality of men, to question the
Judgment of their Ancestors concerning any law, or Custom approved of, or
exercised by them: as if long continued use, or allowance of any thing, could
make that lawful and good, which in it self is unlawful, and discommendable:
or that the Judgment of ancient men, who lived in former Ages, were not to be
questioned by succeeding Generations. This makes men so loath to leave off
(nay even to reason or consider the lawfulness of) the traditions of their
Elders. And hereupon it is, that most men in the world can give no better an
account, and Reason of their pinciples upon which they ground their salvation,
and eternal welfare; then this, thus my Forefathers did: thus they worshipped
God: and thus they believed: and so will I. Are we wiser then our Forefathers?
did not they understand the Scriptures as well as we? were they not as learned
as we are? Here Satan takes Advantage. And to nourish Ignorance, hereby, in
them; he does suggest many Arguments unto them, to strengthen, and confirm
them in this rediculous Error. Whereas Reason will dictate this, that no man
ought to allow, or approve of any thing implicitly. Agreeable hereunto is that
inconsiderate Custom among men, to pin their opinions upon the Judgments of
other men, living in their own Time; whom they account learned, and juditious.
The great Design of Satan, in all these things, is to hinder men from
searching into the Scriptures; knowing that they are the only light to guide
us in this dark Age; and Touchstone, to try the Spirits, in our selves, and
other men. For, take men off from this, (from the search of the Scriptures) and
it is an easy thing to impose any thing upon them: as easy, as to deceive a
blind man in the choice of Colors. Satan having thus deluded any, and brought
them into this Snare; how freely will they receive any colorable
Interpretation of Scripture? and how apt will they be to wrest and pervert the
same, according as he shall tempt them thereunto?

A second way by which Satan brings men to a misunderstanding of the
Scriptures, and a perversion of them; is by persuading them to consult with
their own Reason; in finding out the mind of God, concerning spirtual things.

This Satan effects, by taking Advantage of an Excellency which men suppose
they see in natural Reason* by which they think they are able to discern of
spiritual Truths. But can the Creature, who has all his knowledge conveyed
unto him by sense, know those things which the senses cannot reach unto? How
can the Eye discern that which it has not seen? or the Ear that which it
has not heard? or the heart that which never came into it? Can Reason tell a
man (without divine Manifestation) what God has prepared for those that love,
and fear him? these things Reason cannot inform us of; neither can the spirit
of a man know them, but they must be revealed by the same Spirit which was in
Jesus Christ. By the Spirit which naturally is in us, we are capable of knowing
those things which belong to our Generation: but no more. And if a man's Spirit
cannot know the things of other Creatures; much less can it discern the things
of God, even those Mysteries which were determined by him before the world
began. For it is a certain Truth, that the natural Man knows not the things
of God. 1 Cor. 2.9, 10, 11.

And although the Scriptures are written in no other words, then such, with
which we do usually speak one unto an other; yet it is no easy thing to
understand the mind of the holy Ghost therein. Some words are allegorically,
others mystically, others literally to be understood: some all these ways.
Some expressions are typical: others comparative: and others prophetical: some
prophesies hold forth things past: some things present: and others things to
come: some all of these. Yet there are some, (and too many such there are) when
they read a Text of Scripture, will take upon them, by the consideration of the
very words, to declare the meaning and purpose of the holy Ghost therein.
Hereby the world is filled with so many ill begotten opinions.

Others say, look into that Light which is in you: (meaning the Light of
Reason) walk by that Light. What need (say they) have men to look into the
Scriptures, or to preach the word; while they have a light within them? When
as, alas, the light of the natural man; as Reason, knowledge, and the like (as
to the things of God) is darkness; Ephesians. 5.8. until the Lord (by a
supernatural work of Grace) do enlighten them: and then they are said to be
Light in the Lord; or as the Apostle, in an other place, Ye are the children of
the Day, and not of the night. 1 Thessalonians. 5.5. that is, ye are not now in a
natural and unregenerate Condition; but newborn, and enlightened by the
Spirit of God. By ascribing that unto Reason, which only is the work of the
Spirit, they force the Creature to depend upon his own strength: they put him
upon a work which he is not able to do: they cast their Eyes only upon
self-sufficiency, and neglect a dependence upon God by Faith; they lay the
whole weight of the Duty of a Christian, upon the performance of some outward
things, which consist chiefly in Touch not: Taste not: Handle not: in perishing
services: and in the Doctrines and commandments of men, by which they are
deceived; because there is in these things a show of wisdom; in voluntary
Religion, and humbleness of mind, and in not sparing the body, Col. 2.21, 22,
23.

Satan having caught any in this Net, brings them hereby to a neglect of
comparing Scripture with Scripture. They often read the Word, but they judge of
it by their own Reason: which Reason, they call the Light which God has given
them. And demand of them, why they interpret Scripture thus or thus; they will
answer, that their Reason tells them so. And so by not comparing Scripture
with Scripture, they remain not only ignorant of the true meaning thereof; but
they fill the world with a multitude of heretical Notions; perverting the
Scriptures, when, and how they please.

Secondly, hereby Satan makes them to contemn all Interpretations of
Scripture, which their Reason will not allow of. And if the Truths of God,
contained in the word, be declared unto them; they are so wedded to their own
Judgments, that they have neither Patience to hear them, nor consider them.

Thirdly, Hereby Satan seeks to destroy their Faith; causing them to remain
in unbelief of those things which their Reason cannot approve of. For if Faith
come by hearing, then they that stop their Ears against any thing but the
dictates of their own carnal Reason; must needs remain weak in the Faith. And

Fourthly, Hereby he causes them to put private Interpretations upon the
Scriptures; applying them at their pleasures to particular Times, Places, and
Persons. Whereas the Scriptures and divine prophesies, as they came not in old
time by the will of man; but holy men spoke at they were moved by the holy
Ghost: so they are not to be interpreted according to the will of man, with any
private Interpretation but according to the mind and spirit of God; which we
can only find out by searching the Scriptures, and comparing spiritual things
with spiritual.

A Third way by which Satan brings many to a misunderstanding of the
Scriptures, and a perversion thereof; is, by keeping them in Ignorance of the
present Dispensation they are under; hereby causing them in Gospel Times, to
walk chiefly by the Rule of the Law; and to look for the performance and
accomplishment of those things in their Days, which are not to be fulfilled
until future Times.

This Satan does, by making use of Ignorant and unfaithful shepherds: who
knowing not the Scriptures themselves, or unfaithfully dispencing them, sometimes
contrary to the Convictions of their own hearts, Light, and knowledge (to
maintain their temporal Advantages, and to keep up the principles of their
artificial and scholastic Theology) do impose such Doctrines upon the world,
that they lay the weight of a man's Justification upon his duties and
performances: thereby destroying (as far as in them lies) the Faith of our
Lord Jesus Christ. And although in their Doctrines and words they will speak of
Justification by Faith; yet in their works and practizes they deny it. Laying
heavy burdens (works and duties) upon men, which neither they nor their
forefathers were able to bear. And hereby Satan causes them, either to omit,
or pervert, and wrest those Scriptures which hold forth Justification freely by
Faith, in Christ, without the works of the Law.

Secondly Satan does, by his Seducements and subtle Suggestions, cause many to
mistake diverse prophetical Scriptures, as to Time: by persuading them, that
the accomplishment of those Promises will be in their Days. And this he does,
by taking Advantage of an earnest desire, which is in many professors, to see
the fulfilling of those things which are contained in those Prophesies: because
they are persuaded that, thereby, the Lord would be exceedingly glorified. And
therefore the Saints in these Times should very carefully watch over their
Zeal; which in most men is rather a passion, then a Grace: especially if it be
fixed upon a wrong Object. The Jews were Zealous of the Law of Moses; but
being ignorant of the Law of the Gospel of Christ, their zeal was dissalowed
of by the Apostle: saying, Romans 10.2.
they have a zeal but not according to knowledge, for they being ignorant of
the Righteousness of God, went about to establish their own Righteousness.
And so far did this zeal hurry them, that they persecuted the most precious
Saints of Jesus Christ. Thus Paul persecuted the Church. Luk 9.51, to 56.
Phil. 3.6. and thus Satan took Advantage against the Disciples, working upon
their Zeal, who were then Ignorant of their present Dispensation and work
which Christ was then to do in the world. For when Jesus Christ was to go to
Jerusalem, (on a certain time) he sent some before him, who prepared his
lodging in a Town of the Samaritans. The Samaritans (being professed Enemies to
the Jews) finding that Christ intended to go to Jerusalem to worship, refused
to receive him. Whereupon, James and John (moved with Zeal, taking for example
Elias the prophet, but being at that Time ignorant of the work which their
Master then came to do) moved the Lord to command fire to come down from heaven
to consume the Samaritans. But the Lord answered, Ye know not of what Spirit ye
are of, for the Son of Man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them.
And assuredly Satan does work thus in the world, taking advantage of a great
zeal which is in many Saints; who are zealous of the glory of God, and tender
of his honor: who set before them the Examples of many Zealous Saints, who
were acted by an immediate hand of God: and they call for fire, Judgments,
blastings, and wrath upon many, whom they see do dishonor God; and as they
conceive do carry on the work of Satan, against Christ. Not considering, that
yet we are under the tenders of the Gospel; and a door of mercy is open unto
all men. To all sorts of sinners: (excepting those who sin against the holy
Ghost) to whoremongers, and Idolaters, to drunkards, and blasphemers; so that
he that is a persecuter of Christ and his Saints to day, may be a converted
Paul to morrow: Not considering, that the day of wrath, vengeance, and utter
destruction is the Day of the Lord: the Day of his next coming, and appearing.
Until which time, his Disciples should be merciful; as their father which is
in heaven is merciful: who makes his Sun to arise on the evil and good, Mat.
5.44, 45, 46.
and sends Rain on the Just and unjust. Wherefore, the Saints in these Days
should watch over their zeal; and have a Care that it be bounded with love on
the one hand, and knowledge on the other: and be circumspect that they fix
their zeal on a right Object; according to that of the Apostle, It is good to
be zealous (or earnest) in a good thing. Gal. 4.15, 16, 17 18.
We should zealously love, when the Lord would have us do good; but we should
not hate zealously, when the Lord would have us to love: nor Curse, when he
would have us to bless: nor deprecate any, when he would have us to pray for
all Men.

Satan having caught any in this Snare, that is, blinded their Eyes, that they
are not able to know the things that belong to their present Dispensation: and
having wrought upon their zeal, and fixed it upon a wrong Object; In the first
place, he does deprive the Saints (who are thus deceived by him) of many gospel
Comforts, which do arise from the apprehension of the Love of God, grounded
upon free Grace; and applied unto us by, and in Jesus Christ.

Secondly, hereby, that is, by altering the nature and property of true zeal,
(which is always attended with love, knowledge, and humility) he increases
spiritual Pride in them; which may be thus discerned, when they begin to have
low thoughts of all men but of themselves; and of such as agree with their
Judgments: when they separate themselves from their Brethren; supposing them
to be Low, flat, dead, backward, and less zealous in the work of God then
themselves: when they will pass a Judgment upon others; and say this man is
guilty of the sin against the holy Ghost, this man is fallen from the Faith, and
his former professions; this man is an hypocrite, this man is a Persecuter of
the Saints, this man is not to be prayed for, this man ought to be cut off:
again, by reason of this Spiritual Pride, they bitterly curse and speak against
those whom they look upon to be the Enemies of Christ; and such as oppose, and
(as they conceive) persecute them. Neither can they, by reason hereof, hear any
brotherly admonition, although never so lovingly and friendly urged; but they
fly out into Impatiency, Indignation, Censuring, uncivil gestures, and,
perhaps, bitter Expressions against those who cannot Close with their
Judgment, or do oppose it.

A fourth way by which Satan does deceive in these Times, causing many to
pervert and misunderstand the Scripture; is by tempting them, and drawing them
to put allegorical and mystical (as they call them) Interpretations upon
prophetical, and Doctrinal Scriptures.

This work Satan effects, by taking Advantage of the Excellency of humane
learning in many men. By which they do not only scorn to deliver themselves,
in their discoursing, preaching, praying, or writing, according to Scripture
Language: but they will find out quaint Expressions, high Rapturs, and Notions
admired by many; which must be called the Dictates of the holy Ghost; and an
excellent Spirit of Utterance; which does prove in a little Time, (as this Age
has experienced) to be only carnal and artificial. But they will not content
themselves with the abuse of Scripture by unwarrantable words; but the whole
Scripture, and every part thereof must be looked upon as an Allegory: and so
they will make of it what they please. Hereupon much Confusion has arisen; by
reason of many vain disputations, and the divulging of fantastical Notions.
Every one of these men making what they please of God, Angels, Resurrection,
heaven, the word, divine union, Anointing, Law and Gospel, And hereupon, the
late King Charles was made God the father: the then Parliament, God the Son:
and the Laws, the Holy Spirit: in a Book entitled the Leaves of the Tree of
Life. With many other horrid Blasphemies.

We should take notice of those Scriptures which the holy Ghost does take
allegorically; but we ought not to allegorize any Scripture, which the holy
Ghost would have us to understand literally.

Again, Satan causes men to misunderstand the Scriptures, by putting a Mist
before their Eyes; so that they cannot see afar off. And this he does effect,
by causing them to look no further then their present Dispensation. For
although they may there discern the Truth: yet, if they look no further; they
shall never see all the Truth. They look upon all things in Scripture with a
Spiritual Eye; but see not that those things, or many of them (which are
prophetical) shall be really accomplished. And hereupon some see no
Resurrection, but the rising to newness of Life: no Coming of Christ, but by
his Spirit: no Reign nor Kingdom of Christ, but by his Spirit in the heart of
his Saints: No Canaan, but the Kingdom of heaven.

Satan by bringing many into this Snare, (although he cannot destroy their
Souls) yet while they lie under this Cloud; he does trouble them with vain
Disputations, and contentious Arguings, in defense of their present thoughts,
and Apprehensions of the Scriptures, and keeps them in darkness, and
ignorance, of many excellent, and comfortable Truths. But

Lastly Satan does draw many to misunderstand, and pervert the Scripturs, by
holding forth the mind of God in unwarrantable Expressions, and words which
Man's Wisdom teaches. Therefore the Apostle said, If any consent not to the
wholesome words of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy 6.3, 4, 5.
and to the Doctrine which is according to Godliness; he is puffed up, and
knows nothing, but doteth about Questions and strife of words: whereof comes
Envy, strife, railing, evil surmising, and vain Disputation of men of corrupt
mind, and destitute of the Truth. And assuredly there is much in that
Exhortation of the Apostle unto Timothy, 2 Timothy 1.13.
keep the true Pattern of the wholesome words which thou have heard of me in
Faith and Love. For

When Satan has brought any into this Snare; when men will not read the
Scriptures that they may be able to understand the language of the holy Ghost:
then, he (Satan) sends them to buy their knowledge at the shop of humane
learning; and teaches them this Principle, that is, That humanity is a help
to Divinity: that Grammar causes men to write and speak of the things of God
congruously: that Logic inableth men to find out the Truths of Divinity, and
to reason the more ^blie: that Philosophy directs them to the reason and
Cause of things: and that by the force of Rhetoric men may more excellently
utter and express themselves, when they speak of Scriptural and divine
Mysteries. And hereupon (they will tell you) it was that Isaiah (a learned man)
wrote a more excellent Style then the rest of the Prophets: and Paul (who was
bred at the feet of Gamaliel) was more eloquent; and delivered himself in
better Language, then the rest of the Apostles.

Being brought into this Snare, they vilify and reproach the Scriptures; and
say that they are dark, obscure, and imperfect in themselves: and therefore it
is necessary that men should look upon them by the Candle of humane learning.

Hereby Satan takes them off from the study of the Scriptures; and sets
them upon the Search of the Knotty schoolmen: the contradictory Counsels:
nay, hereby he directs them to heathen Poets: Ethnic Philosophers: and
fabulous Moralists, to find among their writings, what the mind of God should
be concerning this or that Scripture.

Hereupon the world has been filled with many larg volums of vain, and
unprofitable Disputations, and Controversies.

Hereby many have been a long time learning, but never have come to the
knowledge of the Truth.

And hereby many heresies have arisen; and the Scriptures have been wrested
into as many forms, as there are Notions or varieties of opinions among men:
to the delusion of some, but utter destruction, and irreparable and
irrecoverable Loss of others.

And thus much shall suffice to have been written concerning the first Snare
which Satan does lay to entrap, and ensnare many deluded, and only formal
professors of Christianity: and if it were possible to deceive the very Elect.
For Satan knows if the foundation be taken away, the building must of
necessity fall: if the Eye be put out, the whole body must be dark: and if he
can deprive men of light; they must walk in darkness, and stumble, and fall.

The second Snare that Satan lays for those that profess Christianity, is by
his seducements; to cause them to give heed to Dreams, and visions,

And this Satan does, by moving them to apply those Scriptures, which promise
that men shall Dream Dreams, to their present Generation. When men, in these
Times, will desire of the Lord those things, which he has declared shall not
come to pass until after Ages; it is just with him to give power unto Satan,
to delude such by Dreams and visions. These things are not to be expected, in
and during the time of the Kingdom of Satan.

If the Lord denied S. to appear unto his people, the Jews, because Evils were
in the Land, shall we who are Gentiles, and live in the time of Satan's
Kingdom, and in mystical Babylon, where all evil does abound, and is committed
with an high hand, look for such appearances? certainly we should deceive our
selves if we do so. For the Lord will give unto his people, during the Reign of
Satan, and while such Iniquities are committed, Night for a vision, and
Darkness for a Divination; the Sun shall go down upon their Prophets, and the
Day shall be dark over them.

But for full Satisfaction in this thing, that is, to know the time wherein the
Lord will manifest himself unto his people by Dreams and Visions: there is one
plain Scripture, upon which many others are grounded, that will direct us
herein. We shall find it in the Prophecy of Joel, Joel 21. to 28.
where the Lord says, He will do great things for his People, then the
Children of Israel shall rejoice in their God, He will give them the Rain of
Righteousness; then their Barnes shall be full of wheat, and the Presses shall
abound with wine and oil, and they shall never be ashamed. AFTERWARD, the
Lord will power out his spirit upon all flesh, and their Sons and their
Daughters shall prophecy, and their old men shall DREAM DREAMS, and their
young men shall see VISIONS. So that we are not to look for the pouring out of
the Spirit, as the Prophet has foretold; nor Revelations, by dreams and
visions; until the Promise be fulfilled to the Jews; and the Saints be
delivered out of Babylon.

When the Lord delivered the Jews into the hands of the King of Babel, Jer. 27
9. and 28.8.
he told them that they should be subject to him Seventy years: yet there were
some who did promise great things unto them before that time, but the Lord said
Hear not your Prophets nor your Soothsayers nor your DREAMERS, nor your
Inchanters, nor your Sorcerers, which say unto you, you shall not serve the
King of Babel: Let not your Prophets and Soothsayers which are among you
deceive you, neither give Ear to your Dreams, which you Dream; for they
Prophecy a Lie in my Name, I have not sent them. So I may say, the people and
Sheep of the Lord are now in mystical Babylon, where the Lord has appointed
they shall remain and continue in a scattered Condition, until their Shepherd
come and gather them: and whosoever, they are that pretend that the Lord has
by DREAMS and visions made known unto them, that those things which he has
foreshewn by the Scriptures should not come to pass until the next Coming of
Christ; shall be accomplished before that time: (in our Age and Generation)
they are not to be believed. For by such means Satan seduceth the world, that
is, he does reveal unto many, by Dreams and visions, those things which the
Lord by his Prophets has spoken should come to pass; that they who wait for
such Promises, may the more easily be deceived. But, this is his Design: he
deceives them in a Circumstance of Time, Places, and Persons; and by such
Dreams and visions keeps them from searching the Scripture, that thereby
they may acquaint themselves with the Lords Time.

This work Satan does effect, by taking Advantage of a Disposition which is in
the Saints; and which is naturally in all men, viz, to give Credit and easy
belief unto any who will promise those things which they desire, and would
have come to pass. And by this means, Satan deceives both the Dreamers, and
those that give Credit unto them. This was not the practice of the Apostle
Saint Paul: for he spoke not as they who Please men, 1 These. 2.4, 5.
but God. Neither did he use flattering words.

Another Policy of Satan, is to reveal, by Dreams and visions, many things
which have, and will come to pass. For when any can say, I had such and such a
thing discovered unto me by a Dream or a vision; and I spoke of it long before
it was fulfilled, and afterward accordingly it came to pass: this does
persuade those that hear of such Dreams, that all other things which they
afterward Dream of, will undoubtedly come to pass.

This is a way by which Satan has wrought in these Times. I will instance in
one Foster, who was reported of, by those who very well knew him, to be a great
Professor; a man of able Gifts, upon whom it pleased the Lord to let Satan
loose, and in January 1650. Satan assaulted him thus: I am the Lord of Hosts,
the holy one of Israel. I am come unto thee. Then, many visions were showed
unto him, which, since, came to pass. As the dissolving the Parliaments, and
other things. But Satan deceived him as to times, and Persons. Many times he
was cast into Rapturs and Trances; during which Time he sang Hallalujahs, and
Praises: prophetically repeating many things, which are written in the
Scriptures, of the coming of Christ and the Destruction of his Enemies. The
vanities of these, and many other his visions, Time has already discovered.
Therefore we should be wary how we give Credit unto such Spirits; although they
foreshew such things as do accordingly come to pass.

The ways by which Satan does effect this, that is, by which he draws men in
this Age to give heed unto Dreams and visions; is, first, by taking men off
from the Rule of the Word; persuading them, or Rather (by his cunning
Suggestions) tempting them to try the Word by the Spirit of these Dreamers, but
not to try their Spirits, by the Rule of the Word.

Job 1.6. and 2.1.
Secondly, by causing them when they Pray, to pray amiss. For it is certain
that the Saints do never solemnly set themselves apart to Pray, but Satan is at
their Righthand. He is an invisible Enemy, and therefore, my beloved friends,
take it not ill if I acquaint you with his Deceivings. Nay if the Sons of God
do but assemble together, he will be among them. [The Sons of God] whether
Angels or Saints: for both are the Sons of God. And Satan will be among them
(you may be assured) not as an Idle Spectator; but as an accuser. Rev. 12.10.
The time of prayer is the time of Satan's Temptation: especially when the
Saints, at extraordinary times, meet to Pray together. We find it was thus
with Jehosua; for when he stood before the Angel of the Lord, (most probably
when he prayed to Christ for the Church, and the welfare of the Saints) Satan
stood at his right hand to resist him. Zach. 3.1.

Thirdly, Satan does seek to ensnare the Saints, when he does endeavor to
persuade them to look upon these Dreamers as infallible Guides. And thus Satan
does stir them up to Reason with themselves; some things they have dreamed
which have come to pass: which things are declared in the word, therefore they
are of God: they who Dream these Dreams are People that fear God: they have
eminent Gifts: they could not do such things if they were not acted by a
further Spirit and power then their own. From these and such like things, many
conclude that their Dreams and visions are of the holy Ghost; and therefore
they ought to be the Rule, and Ground of their Actions, Prayers, and
Performances. But if men did mind that which the Apostle prophesied of, they
would not be too forward to do so. For Saint Paul did foreshew, that in the
latter Time, some should depart from the Faith; and give heed unto Spirits of
Errors, and Doctrines of Divils. 1 Timothy 4.1. for this is Truth, that
whatsoever Spirit does set men upon the doing of those things that are contrary
unto the word of God; we should not be guided by it.

Satan is very busy, even among the best of the Saints: and therefore they
cannot be too watchful. Wherefore I shall endeavor to try the Spirits, that
are in the world; even the Spirits of Delusion; comparing them with the
commands of the Spirit of God. The Spirit of God says, search the Scriptures.
Joh. 5.39. and compare Spiritual things with Spiritual. 1 Cor. 2.13. but the
Spirit of delusion says; Judge of Scripture by natural Reason, which is the
Light that God has set up in you. The Spirit of God says, no Scripture is of
any private Interpretation: 2. Pet. 1.20. the Spirit of Delusion says, you may
make any Interpretation of Scripture, either mystical, prophetical, literal, or
what you will. The Spirit of God says, let every one esteem others better then
themselves: Phil. 2.3. the Spirit of Delusion says, I am more holy then such
an one: I am more instant in Duties then such. The Spirit of God says Judge
nothing before the time, until the Lord come. 1 Cor 4.5. the Spirit of
Delusion says, this man is guilty of the Sin against the holy Ghost: this man
is fallen from Grace: this man is not to be prayed for; this man is a hypocrite.
The holy Ghost says, bless and Curse not: Romans 12.14. the Spirit of Delusion
says, Curse such an one for he has persecuted the Saints: The Spirit of God
Says, Let Prayers be made for all men: 1 Timothy 2.1. the Spirit of Delusion
says, we may Pray for those who are our Enemies, but not for those who are the
Enemies of Christ.

I could try these Spirits in many other Particulars; but I will endeavor by
the Scriptures, to try the Spirits of those who say they Dream Dreams, and
see visions of God; but are false Dreamers. 1. Such Dreamers say they do
Dream in the Name of the Lord, when they prophecy the vision of their own
heart. Jer. 23.25, 26. 2. By their Dreams they cause the People to forget the
Name of the Lord. v. 27. (they give more heed unto their Dreams then unto the
Word of the Lord) 3. These Prophets have sweet Tongues, and say, Thus says the
Lord, and make the People to err by their Lies, and their flatteries:
deceiving them v. 31.32. Jer. 29.8. 4. They speak vain things, and comfort in
vain, Zach. 10.2. and 5. These false Dreamers cause many to despise Government,
and speak Evil of them that are in Authority Jude 8.

Having thus showed how we should try the Spirits that are in the world: I will
declare how these Temptations, and cunning Practices of Satan may be prevented.
Therefore

In the first place, the Apostle does exhort to Sobriety. Sobriety does not
only consist in the moderate use of Meat and drink, but in believing, Loving,
and trusting in the Lord. He is a sober Christian that continues steadfast in
the Faith: that abides in the commandments, and trusts in the Lord. 1 Thessalonians. 5 6, 7, 8. He is a Sober Christian that is endued with wisdom, and
Gravitie. Tit. 1.8. not given to wantones, and Levity, He is a Sober Christion
that will not give confidence to the Dreams and delusions of men; but does trust
on the Grace that is brought unto him, by the Revelation of Jesus Christ: 1
Pet. 1.13. that walks by the Rule of the Word, which was written by the
Inspiration of the holy Ghost, and Revelation of Jesus Christ. He is a Sober
Christian who is not careless or negligent; but vigilant, and instant in
Prayer. 1 Pet. 4 8. He is a Sober Christian that arrogateth not unto himself
those Gifts which he has not: nor boasts of those Gifts which he has. Romans
12.3. He is a Sober Christian who lives Righteously as toward men; and godly
as toward the Lord, in this present world. Tit. 2.12. So that this exhortation
of the Apostle is very necessary; for that in it is contained those Duties,
which hold forth stability, and Constancy in our Resolutions. Because that
Satan takes great advantage against those who are unstable minded 2 Pet. 2.14.
not endued with Sobriety.

Secondly, the Apostle does exhort to vigilance, or Watchfulness. To watch
over our hearts: over others: over the drawings out of our affections: over our
Zeal: over our Principles: over the world, and over Satan. To watch because
the Coming of Christ is uncertain. Mat. 24.42, 43, 44. To watch, Rev. 3.3.
least Satan take Advantage of our weakness in the Faith. 1 Cor. 16.13. To
watch over our Prayers continually, Col. 4.2. To watch in all things. 2 Timothy
4.5.
And if a Christian ought to watch in all things; even in the Least things,
much more over the malice Rage and Subtilty of Satan.

Thirdly, (that the Saints may avoid the Designs of Satan) the Apostle
exhorts to prayer. Prayer and watchfulness must always go together: Watch
and Pray, Mar. 13.33. Be ye Sober watching in Prayer, 1 Pet. 4.7. Sober and
Steadfast in our resolutions: watchful over every enemy: and earnest in Prayer
to call for divine assistance.

If Satan does tempt the Saints when they pray, and God does require that they
pray according to his mind, and will, then it is their duty to try and weigh
every Petition which they put up, by the Word: and not to desire any thing of
the Lord but what the word does allow of: for the word is the Revelation of the
mind and will of God. The holy Ghost does help the Saints to call for those
things only which are agreeable to the mind and will of God; that is, to his
Word. And if their hearts be drawn out to other things, they are not to give
heed unto the motions of their hearts. Also in their Prayers, the Saints should
have respect not only to those things which God has promised; but to the
Times, Places, and Persons to which they relate. Otherwise the Lord may draw
out their hearts as to the thing promised: but Satan may tempt them to pray
amiss as to circumstances.

A Fourth remedy to prevent the designs of Satan, is to hold fast to the
Faith: resist Satan steadfast in the Faith, 1 Pet. 5.9. says the Apostle Peter.
So likewise St. Paul exhorts, Above all take the shield of Faith, wherewith
ye may quench the fiery Darts of the wicked, Ephesians. 6.16. He that is Sober will
not easily be tempted. He that is Vigilant will not easily be surprised with
the subtilties of Satan: he who has the spirit of Prayer, will mightily
prevail against Satan: and by Faith the Saints are guarded against every
assault of Satan.

Besides these two great Snares there are six erroneous opinions, which Satan
has drawn many Saints to take up upon the mistake of diverse Texts of Scripture.

The first is, they do hold that it is the duty of the Saints to call for
Judgments, and divine vengeance upon their Enemies, as being the enemies of
God. So they say Elias did. 2 Kin. 2.24. whereas we have an express Rule to
the contrary, Bless I say, and curse not. To. 12.14. for which they allege
that which is written in the Revelation, where the Souls which lay under the
Alter cried, How long Lord, holy and true do thou Judge, and avenge our blood
on them that dwell on the Earth? which words, by the very poynting of them, do
appear to be spoken by way of Interrogation, rather then by way of Deprecation.
For, hereby, the Saints do rather desire to know how long it would be before
the Lord would Avenge them of their Enemies, then call for vengeance upon them.
Another Text they produce, to prove that the Saints may call for judgments on
the heads of wicked men, is, because it is said Rev. 11 6. the witnesses of
Jesus have Power to shut heaven, to turn water into blood, and to smite the
Earth with plagues as often as they will; which I suppose they did not by
cursing and bitterness; but by patient bearing of afflictions; and forgiving
(heartily) their Enemies. Hereby they put vengeance into the hand of God, and
heaped coals of fire upon their Enemies. Prove. 25.21, 22.

Secondly, many do now hold, that in the Apostles Days the Saints were to
look upon the Magistrate as the Ordinance of God; but in these Times they are
not so to esteem of him. And the Reason they say is, because then, he received
his Power from God; but now the Beast, the great Monarchy, receives Power from
the Dragon. which is a Delusion (in the main) for in the Apostles Days, the
Roman Monarchy, as governed by heathen Emperors, (being the Beast that came
out of the Sea.) received, then, power from the Dragon Rev. 13.2. as well as
the Roman Monarchy, governed by Popes, (which was the Beast that came out of
the Earth Rev. 13, 11.) who did exercise all the Power of the first Beast. v.
12.14. This is quite contrary to the rule of the Gospel; which commands the
Saints to yield obedience to Magistrates, to Principalities, and Powers. Tit.
3.1, Romans 13.1. 1 Pet. 2, 13, 14. And if the Israelites, (while they remained
in heathenish Babylon) were commanded to seek the prosperity of the City
(wherein they lived) and to pray unto the Lord for it: because in the Peace
thereof they were to have Peace. Jer. 29 6, 7. I suppose it is the duty of
every Christian (in what place soever of mystical Babylon he live in, until the
time Come in which the Lord has appointed to deliver his people thence) to
Pray Earnestly for those who are in Authority, and for the peace of the Nation
wherein they live. For, to stir up those who profess Religion against the
higher Powers is a slieght of Satan to move them to Insurrection, and
Rebellion: (as he did in Germany by many lying visions) to their shame and
Reproach, and scandal to Religion. The main End that Satan aims at, in
seducing those who profess Godliness, to revile and rebel against the Civil
Power; is, thereby to deprive them of their Liberty of assembling, and meeting
together. (An unvalued mercy for hereby (by their reproaching the Magistrate)
the Magistrate (being provoked) does move Persecution; for which, many times,
both he and the whole Nation is plagued: and many real and guiltles Saints do
suffer for the offenses of some deluded Professors. Hereby the Name of God and
Religion is dishonored: and the Propagation of the Gospel hindered, by those,
who think themselves the only Persons who carry on the work of God, more
then any other in their Generation.

Thirdly, this Error is frequent among those who profess Religion, they say,
they ought to Pray for their own Enemes, but not for the Enemies of Christ. As
if any were an Enemy to the Saints, and not an Enemy to Christ. What Injury is
don to them, is don to Christ. He that persecuteth them persecuteth the Lord
Jesus. Acts 9.4. and 22.7. and 26.14, and 22.8. and 26.15. so that if the
Saints were not to Pray for the Enemies of Christ, they could not pray for
their own Enemes. If the one were forbidden, the other (precept) could not be
kept. Besides, Christ prayed for his Enemies. Luke 23.34. and Stephen prayed
for the Persecutors of the Saints. Act. 7.60. and our Savior declared that all
Sins and Blasphemies (except against the holy Ghost) should be forgiven unto
men. Mar. 3.28, 29. then if all Sins wherewith men sin against Christ be
remissible, or pardonable: they may be prayed for. 1 John 5.16, 17. The Rule
then, is not only to pray for men as they are Enemies unto us, but as they are
Enemies to Christ.

And indeed hereby Satan does seek to destroy a Saint, and frustrate all
Graces in him. If a man should loose a Leg, or an Arm, or any other Limb, he
might notwithstanding live many years: but if a man's Heart were wounded, he
would suddenly dye, although all the rest of his body were safe: So if Satan
can work any to forsake Charity; he knows then, that the rest of their
Graces (if they had all other) would not Advantage them. 1 Cor. 13.1, 2, 3. for
Love is the very being of a Saint: and the true Image of God. So that under
color of hating of the Enemies of God, Satan seeks in these last Times, to
deface the Image of Christ in the Saints.

To make this pass the more current, he does mind them of that which David
says, I hate those that hate thee. Psalm. 139.21, 22, 23, 24. where first, this
was spoken prophetically of Christ, who knew all those who were Enemies unto
God, appointed unto destruction; and therefore he could distinguish the
irreconcilable Enemies of God from his Saints: so that he knew whom to pray
for, and whom to hate, but the Saints cannot do this, therefore they must
follow the Rule; and Pray for all men. If they be worthy, their Prayers and
welwishes remain with them: if not, they return to them again, Luke 10.5, 6.
and secondly, in the time of the Law, they knew who were the Enemies of God,
and who were not: they knew that only the Seed of Abraham were friends, and in
Covenant with God, and that all the rest of the world were his Enemies, whom
they were to hate. Therefore it was that the Prophet said to Jehosophat,
would thou love them that hate the Lord? therefore the wrath of the Lord is
upon the, 2 Chr: 19.12. But when Jesus Christ suffered, then the partition wall
was taken away; and since that time, there is neither Jew nor Gentile,
Circumcision nor uncircumsion, but a new Creature. Now the Gospel is tendered
to all; and so far as the mercy of God does extend; (which is to all) so
far our mercy should reach, Luke 6.35, 36.

Fourthly, Satan would persuade the Saints that they are the little Stone spoken
of in Daniel; which must break the great Image. And because the Kingdom of
Christ must be set up in the days of those Kings spoken of in Daniel;
therefore Satan would persuade them that before the coming of Christ they must
oppose the Kingdoms of the world and powers thereof: and so endeavors to
stir them up to insurrection and rebellion: contrary to that in Daniel; The
Horn shall make Battle against the Saints, and prevail, until the ancient of
days come, and the time approached that the Saints possessed the Kingdom,
Dan. 7.21, 22. So that until Christ come the Horn must prevail, and the
Saints must not have a Kingdom, and until Christ come to set up his Kingdom:
the little Stone or Kingdom must not break the Image in pieces.

Fifthly, Satan tells them that they must bear testimony against all
ungodliness, and that is truth: but he would hereby stir them up to bear
their testimony in such a way, that they may justly be esteemed to be railers,
revilers, Incendiaries to rebellion, disswaders of diverse from their obedience
to the Magistrate. Whereas Michael, when he strove against the Devil, and
disputed about the body of Moses, durst not blame him with cursed speaking: and
hereby he stirs them up to all bitterness, and uncharitableness, and to
look upon none as brethren, but those who are of their own Judgments and
opinion in all or most things; and they whom they look upon otherwise, they
suppose are the enemies of Christ, and therefore they ought not to pray for
them.

Lastly, Satan in these last times stirs up the Saints to Judge of one
another by their outward actings, whether they be natural failings, or such
things as they do amiss by reason of the subtle, frequent, and powerful
temptations of Satan. And to this purpose there is a Text very much abused,
which is, By their fruits you shall know them, Math. 7.20. And indeed by the
actions we may see what, for the present, is in the poor, sinful, and corrupt
heart: yet hereby we cannot Judge of any ones interest in Christ:
notwithstanding, from this Scripture Satan does tempt and provoke many very
hardly and unchristianly to censure others: nay not only to pass a Judgment
on their actions; (wherein there may be a mistake by reason of
misrepresentation, misapprehension, misunderstanding, misinformation, and the
like) but of their intents and purposes: (when none is able to judge of the
sincerity of the heart but only the Lord) nay of their spiritual condition
(when no man can tell whose name is written in the Book of life, and whose not:
it being a secret which God has reserved unto himself) and to strengthen them
in this unchristian practice, Satan moves them to Judge of others by the
Letter of the Law: and then they say they have a warrant for what they do. As
sometimes they Judge a man to be a backslider, from his former professions:
(and who can say he is not a backslider) and then they censure him a Castaway,
alleging that in Luke, He that puts his hand to the Plough and looks back
is not fit for the Kingdom of God, Luke 9.62. And sometimes they Judge a man
of hypocrisy, and then they look upon him as utterly lost, alleging that in
Job, The Hypocrites hope shall perish, Job 8.13. Not considering that by the
works of the Law no flesh shall be justified, and if the Lord should Judge
them that thus Judge others, by the letter of the Law, their condition would be
very sad. Not considering that they whom they Judge may belong unto Christ;
(for ought they know) not considering that Christ is tender of the temptations
of his Saints, and that he might be so, he was in all things tempted in like
sort: not considering that although the unjust (of whom Peter speaks 2 Pet.
2.9, 10. shall be reserved unto the day of Judgment, yet the godly shall be
delivered out of temptation. Therefore Brethren we should not Judge one another
by the letter of the Law, but by the rule of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, which
bids us to Judge no man neither our Brethren nor those who are without. For
we are not under the Law but under grace.

Thus Satan by these fallacies and delusions and such like does break in sadly
among the Saints, and those who profess Religion in these last Times.

And now having discovered many Subtilties of Satan, and the way by which they
may be perceived and by mercy prevented; I will lay down some particulars, as a
Rule for the Saints to walk by, in the Last Times; which indeed is their
Generation work.

They must continue in the things which are contained in the Scriptures. 2 Timothy
3.14, to 17. they must be diligent, and peaceable, without spot, and
blameless, and grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of Jesus Christ, 2 Pet.
3.3, 14, 18. they should edify themselves in their most holy Faith, they
should pray in the holy Ghost, they should keep themselves in the Love of God,
looking for the mercies of Jesus Christ; and have compassion of some in putting
difference Jude 18. to 22. watching, and preparing themseves for the Coming of
Jesus Christ. Math. 25.1, to 14, They must love their Enemies, bless them that
Curse them, and do good to them that hate them: praying for them that
despitefully use them, and persecute them, Math. 5.43, to 48. They should
bless and Curse not. Being defrauded they should entreat. 1 Cor. 4.12, 13.
They should not revile the Gods, nor Curse the Rulers of the People. Exodus
22.28. They should show out a good Conversation, by their works, with meekness
and wisdom. Jam. 3.8, to 18. They should not speak evil of their brethren, nor
Judge them. Jam. 4.11, 12. Romans 14.4, 10, 13. Math. 7.1, 2. Joh. 8.15, and 12,
47. They should Judge nothing before the time, until the Lord Come. 1 Cor. 14.
15. and as they ought not to Judge their brethren, so they should not Judge
those that are without. 1 Cor. 4.12, 13. They should forgive their Enemies.
Math. 6.14, 15. They should not be tossed, and carried too and fro, with Every
wind of Doctrine; but speak the Truth in Love. Ephesians. 4.14, 15. They should
pray for all men, for Kings and all that are in Authority, according to the
Rule of the Apostle. 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3.

If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, even the words
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the Doctrine which is according to Godliness;
he is proud knowing nothing. 1 Timothy 6.3, 4. whosoever abides not in the
Doctrine of Christ, has not God; and if any come and bring not this Doctrine,
receive him not, neither bid him God speed. 2. Job. 10.11. for there are some
that pervert the Gospel of Christ; but if any (though an Angel from heaven)
Preach any other Gospel, then what Christ and the Apostles have preached, let
him be accursed. Gal. 3.7, 8.

Neither, beloved friends, be ye too credulous of all those things which you
hear spoken by the most precious Saints, until you try them by the
Scriptures. For Satan has not only Power to enter into the Saints before
their conversion, Mar. 16.9. but has great power to tempt them, after the Lord
has called them. Math. 16.23. and over those who are only seeming Professors,
(although they may be endued with many excellent gifts of the Spirit) he has
Power even to tempt them, to their utter Destruction. Act. 5.3.

Yet here is the Comfort of the Elect, that there is a time appointed in which
Satan shall be trodden underfeet. Romans 16.20. and until then, (notwithstanding
Satan does endeavor to winnow them like wheat) they shall be preserved by the
Intercession of the Lord Jesus. Luke 22.31, 32.

It is a difficult thing to know the depths of Satan. Rev. 2.24. for he takes
Advantage not only against the sins of the Saints, but of their best Gifts. As
of their zeal, knowledge, desires after God, and of their very Prayers: but
especially of their coldness of Love, and want of Charity. 2 Cor. 2.1, to 12.
Therefore, Brethren, often consider, and endeavor to the utmost to practice
the Apostles Rule, and Exhortation; Be sober, and watch, for your Adversary the
Divil, as a roaring Lion, goes about, seeking whom he may devour.

FINIS.

