A TREATISE CONCERNING the free grace of God the Father, and of the love of
Jesus Christ.

In which is contained the Fountain of precious Consolation to all the Saints
beloved and redeemed.

PSALM. 46 4. Yet there is a river whose streams make glad the city of God:
even the sanctuary of the tabernacles of the most High.

By TIMOTHY BATT.

LONDON: Printed by T. P. and M. S. for Ed. Blackmore, at the Angel in Paul's
Churchyard 1643.



TO THE BELOVED Churches in God the FATHER, and in JESUS CHRIST the blessed
Redeemer, living in Transylvania, sanctified in Christ Jesus, grace and mercy
be multiplied from God our Father, and from Jesus Christ whom he has sent.
DEarly beloved, seeing we are bound, by the dear love of Christ, not to
conceal the mind of Christ, and that we are not our own, but every one bound by
the bond of dear affection, to tender the good one of another, not only in
temporal, and common affairs, but also in spiritual and celestial matters;
and not to retain as churlish Nabal, but rather dispense as Booz, unto Ruth; I
therefore upon the aforesaid considerations am determined according to the
strength and power which Christ has given unto me, to bring to the view of the
Saints, this heavenly Doctrine of free grace, of vocation by the Spirit, of
Adoption, of Mediation by the Lord of life, and glory; of Reconciliation by his
blood; of sanctification, by the Spirit; of union through faith and love, and
of glorification through that sweet communion which we shall enjoy in him who
is the Lord of life and blessedness for ever. To whom shall I present these
lines? except to you who know the mystery of life and salvation, who are
heirs and coheires with God in Christ, who have interest in all that is the
Fathers, and Jesus Christ's whom he has sent, and walk in the light, as Christ
is the light of truth, and Redemption. I am persuaded of your entire loves and
affections to the Word of life and salvation; and that nothing is so dear unto
you as to hear of the praise of your beloved. In the true knowledge of what is
Christ's, consists the true solace of heart, joy in conscience, and contentment
of mind. What joy? what peace? what consolation can be without this knowledge?
that God communicates to his grace, undeserving: that they are called from the
kingdom of Satan, to the kingdom of Christ: that they who were slaves, and
captives of hell, are made the brethren of Christ, that they are united to the
beloved Christ, from whom they receive their being, and well-being, that they
are sanctified by the Spirit of life, which frees them from the law of sin,
and death; that they are clothed with the royal robes of Christ, and that they
shall for ever dwell with Christ, in the heavenly Jerusalem. This fountain is
as Gileads balm, and Damascus rivers; As a continual spring, of the sweetest
repast: as a fountain of overflowing pleasures, and the delightsome
delectation of all the faithful. Has eyes seen, has ears heard, or mind
conceived the admirable joys, that God has laid up for them that love him? or
has eye seen, ear heard, or mind conceived the singular consolation which
comes from the knowledge of these to the Saints through the hand of a Mediator?
Was Jacob joyful because Joseph was yet alive? was Isaac comforted because of
Rebeckah his wife? and may not the Saints be consolated in this divine love and
favor through the testimony of the Spirit?

O the height of favor, O the deepnesse of love, O the breadth of grace, and
the longitude of free immense, and in comprehense mercy of God to his poor
servants, that the clouds are discussed, the mists and foggs of darkness
dispersed, and the Saints behold the mirror of divine glory in the face of
Jesus Christ! I confess (beloved brethren) that my talents in number answers
his who had but two; and the composure of these lines are as the gleanings of
the vintage: yet doubt I not of your loving and sweet acceptance, therefore I
rest upon your loving acceptance: yet will I never rest, nor cease day and
night imploring and beseeching the Father of supereminent grace, and bounty,
to seal these spiritual and heavenly benedictions to your souls, wishing your
strength like Judah's; your blessing like Joseph's, and your triumph like Gads,
through the good will of him who was in the bush; and the sweet pleasure of him
who died on the Cross: that so you may be preserved from misery, unto
eternal felicity, through the Son of everlasting righteousness and glory; to
whom be ascribed all glory, and honor for ever and evermore. Amen.

Yours in all love, and dear affection in the Rock Christ, TIMOTHEUS BATT.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
Christian Reader,
THou art not ignorant that the barren ground is not answerable to the
fruitful soil, notwithstanding through the dewie drops, which comes from the
clouds, it yields fruits for the use of man; Though that the expressions of
lines do not superabound with the sweetness of phrase, or curiousness of
style, yet according to the strength which from Christ I have received, I have
not been wanting for thy use or benefit: Insensible creatures express
according to that which to them is communicated; and shall not man, who is a
sensible creature, express according to communication? The divine and abundant
love of God, binds not only life, but pen to move, if it may make for his
glory, and the honor of Jesus Christ, whom he has sent; Both the great and
little foxes run abroad to obscure the doctrine of grace and justification: It
is neither known to the Papists, nor taught in the Churches of Arminians, it
is our Crown, and dignity, not only to hold forth the Word of life and
salvation by preaching, but also by writing. Light is given to the Sun, that
the lower region might be enlightened: In the plejades is placed the strengths
of influence, that of inferior things it might be received. The end of Gods
donation to rationals, is, that to others it might be revealed. Every element
moves to its proper place; the earth and water downward; and air and fire
upward: every good Christian moves to his proper end, to wit, to the glory of
his Maker, and the good of his brethren. If a man plants a vineyard, it yields
its fruits in time convenient; If we have spent our labors in studies, shall
it not be declared in time expedient? What is hotter then fire? Love, Love as a
fire within my breast, has burned a long season: Therefore I could not choose
but set my pen to paper in the course of indictment: these have I not indicted
because they are not known, but because they are known; or that the yongnes of
days could equal the gravest sentences of the ancient, or that my ambition is
to answer the meanest of Rhetoricians: but because my candle is lighted, and
two talents must not be interred, since that for the benefit of others it is
convenient they should be used: (these presented) passing thy meditation,
expect not the strongnesse of the aged, or the boughs of a Cedar, from a twig,
but let thy wisdom and discretion (Christian Reader) pass by the weakness of
the writer; More must not be expected then is communicated; therefore it is not
meet that acceptance should be further requested, yet requesting that the
benefit of these may be to thy conscience sealed, that thou may live, and not
die; that thou may die, and live no more to the creature, but to God blessed
for ever. To whom be ascribed all blessedness through Christ Jesus for
evermore.

Thine in the Lord Christ, beloved of the Father, and respected of the Saints,
Timothy Batt.

The Table of the several Heads contained in this Book.
1. Of Grace. 2. Of Election. 3. Of the Covenant of Grace. 4. Of Union. 5. Of
Vocation. 6. Of Adoption. 7. Of Redemption. 8. Of Christ's Mediation. 9. Of
Reconciliation. 10. Of Justification. 11. Of Sanctification. 12. Of
Glorification.
CHAP. I. Concerning Grace.
Definition.
1. THe Hebrew word Chen, from Chanan, does signify to pity: The Greek ward
(...) from charistomaj, signifies to show kindness to a man immeriting, or
undeserving.

Definition.
2. Grace is the free benevolence, or gracious favor of God the Father in
Christ, through which he loves his chosen and peculiar people, remitting their
transgressions; imputing them just and righteous, and bestowing on them the
spirit of Adoption, and eternal hope and benediction: Jer. 31.33, 34. I will
be their God, and they shall be my people; I will forgive their sin, and their
iniquity I will remember no more. Ephesians. 1.3. Blessed be God the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in
heavenly things in Christ.

3. The prevenient grace of God is, that through which God loves his, in the
beloved, without any respect to any merits or deservings in his own peculiar,
1. Joh. 4.19. We love him, because he loved us first.

4. The concomitant grace of God is that whereby he does continually supply his
own with sweet communion with himself in the day of grace, and perfect
fruition, and communion with his Christ in the eternal weight of glory. 1.
Joh. 1.3. That which we have seen and heard, that declare we unto you, that ye
may have communion with us, and our communion is with the Father, and with his
Son Jesus Christ.

5. The subsequent and prevenient grace of God are all one, and the same, only
they differ in respect of dispensation.

6. Operating grace is that, which changes the mind, will, and affection.
Cooperating grace is that which makes the Saints move to Godward, when the will
is changed 1. Cor. 6.11. Such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are
sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God. Phil. 4.13. I am able to do all things through Christ which
strengthens me.

7. The grace of Christ is that whereby he dispenses abundantly to the Saints
from the overflowing and abundance of grace enwrapt within himself; and
procures for his eternal favor, through which they are ever beloved of his
Father, Joh. 1.16. And of his fullness all we receive, grace for grace. Jude
21. Keep your selves in the love of God, waiting for the mercy of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

8. The supereminencie of divine grace and bounty is declared, in the
redemption, union, and salvation of the unworthie, and immeriting. Ephesians. 2.7.
That he might show, in the ages to come, the supereminent riches of his grace,
according to his bounty toward us in Christ.

9. Grace is proposed unto all, in the Gospel of life, and reconciliation, but
made effectual to none but the Saints, believing; Hebr. 4.2. The Word profited
them not, because it was not mixed with faith in them which heard it.

10. The fruits of holiness and righteousness mediately are produced, by the
Saints communion with Christ; and immediately by grace, the cause of
everlasting hope and reconciliation. 1. Joh. 1.6. If we say we have communion
with him, and walk in darkness, we make him a liar, and there is no truth in
us. Tit. 2.11. The grace of God which brings salvation to all men, has
appeared, verse. 12. Teaching us to deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and to
live chastely, godly, and righteously, in this present world.

11. The collocation of inestimable and unspeakable graces abounded in Christ,
since he was anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows, and the
Spirit was not given to him by measure, Hebr. 1.9. Joh. 3.34. For he whom God
has sent speaks the words of God, for God gives him not the Spirit by
measure.

12. There is an inseparable conjunction between the grace of God and the
satisfaction of the Lord Christ, since the Lord Christ has no otherwise merited
life and salvation by his merit or satisfaction, save by the favor or divine
pleasure of his Father. Luke 22.42. Father if thou will take this cup from me,
nevertheless, not my will, but thy will be done. Joh 3.16. For God so loved
the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believed on
him might not perish, but have eternal life.

13. There is an inseparable bond betwixt the satisfaction of Christ, and the
pleasure of God the Father. Hence whatsoever the Lord Christ has procured, it
is his Fathers pleasure to bestow it. Matthew. 25.34 Come ye blessed of my
Father, possess the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world.

14. The inestimable grace of God, which is collocated in the Lord Jesus, and
from him effectually bestowed on the Saints redeemed, cannot utterly be
abolished or extinguished. Romans 8.39. Neither height, nor depth, nor any other
creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord.

15. The Lord Christ by the grace of supplyment, does supply the travelers of
his hope, in the estate of love and mercy, and by the grace of complement does
crown his peculiar with the fruition of glorious and full communion in the
estate of glory, 1. Cor. 1.30. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who is made
unto us wisdom of God, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption;
Which is his body, the complement of him who fills all in all. Ephesians. 1.23.

16. Answerable to the act of faith pitching upon God the Father in his beloved
Christ, so is the gracious enjoyment of the sense of Gods free mercy, and
benevolence in Christ. Ephesians. 3.17, 18, 19. That Christ may dwell in your
hearts by faith. 18. That being rooted, and grounded in love, ye may be able to
comprehend what is the breadth, and the length, and the depth, and the height.
19. And to know the love of Christ which passes all knowledge, that ye may be
filled with all the fullness of God.

17. Pacification of spirit, and peace of conscience arises, whilst the
faithful rest on Gods fatherly indulgencie, being certainly persuaded that
whatsoever they do according to his pleasure, is accepted in the hands of
Christ Mediator, Ephesians. 1. Unto the praise and glory of his grace, whereby he
has freely accepted us in his beloved.

18. The effects of divine grace and favor, are the remission of sins, the
imputation of righteousness, the donation of the Spirit of peace and
consolation, and everlasting blessedness in the kingdom of hope and fruition.
2 Thessalonians. 2.13. God has chosen us from the beginning unto salvation by
sanctification of the Spirit, and the faith of truth. 14. Now the same Lord
Jesus Christ and God; even our Father which has loved us, and given us
everlasting consolation, and good hope through grace.

19. Christ died for the sins of his Saints, and is risen again for their
righteousness and justification; so that he is not only become our salvation,
but his Father is gracious, and propitious to us for his sake. Romans 4.25. He
was delivered for our offenses, and raised again for our justification. Matthew.
17.5. This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear him.

20. As by the sin of Adam we were estranged from God, and destinated to
destruction: so by the obedience of Christ we are received into favor, and
imputed righteous to justification. Romans 5.19. As by the disobedience of one
man many were made sinners; so by the obedience of one man many were made
righteous.

21. God began to embrace through free favor whom he loved freely before the
foundation of the world: then it appeared apparently when he reconciled us to
himself through the precious blood of his beloved Son. Ephesians. 2.4.13. Through
his great love wherewith he loved us, now in Christ Jesus, ye who were sometime
afar off, has he made nigh by the blood of his Son.

22. God through his benevolence has not only given the body of Christ, but
the soul of Christ, to feel the sense of his wrath for the redemption of
mankind; that although we were lost, we might be found; and although through
the law we could hear nothing but condemnation; yet now through Christ we may
hear the sentence of salvation. Gal. 3.10 For as many as are of the works of
the Law are under the curse: for it is written, Cursed is every one that
abides not in all things which are written in the Law to do them. 2. Tim.
1.10. But now is made manifest by the glorious coming of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, who has abolished death, and brought in life, and immortality
into light by the Gospel.

23. In this has appeared the immense love of God toward men; whilst he was
sent into the world for their deliverie; whilst he was made a sacrifice to
pacify the wrath of his Father, which was so hot against them. 1. Joh. 4.10 In
this is love, not that we have loved God; but that he has loved us, and has
sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins.

24. God was most clementious, and propitious in the beloved Christ, making him
the Redeemer of humane generation; whilst the beloved Christ was willing to
redeem them. Heb. 10.6, 7. Burnt-offerings and sacrifice thou would not for
sin: then said I, behold I come. In the volume of thy book it is w itten of me,
that I should do thy will, O God.

25. The free grace of God is the stay of the mind, the prop of the soul, and
the hope of the conscience, in the midst of all sorrow and tribulations.
Lament. 3.21, 22. This call I to mind therefore have I hope: It is the Lords
mercy we are not consumed: but his compassions fail not.

26. If any man shall set himself before the tribunal seat of an angry God, he
shall not stand; being there is nothing in him that may merit favor, or
deserve love at the hands of God. Psalm. 130.3. If Jah shall observe iniquities,
O Lord who shall stand!

27. Christ through his obedience has obtained favor, he has satisfied for
our sins; he has born the punishment for us; and through his obedience God is
well pleased. 2. Cor. 2.21. For he has made him to be sin for us, who knew no
sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.

Contemplation.
O Christian, look to the Rock from whence thou art hewn; and to the hole of
the pit from whence thou art dug: all that thou receivest is from free
favor and grace of a loving Father; had he not favored thee, where had thou
remained? or where had thou been? assuredly in the bottomless pit, under the
heat of everlasting burnings, bound by the black swadle bands of the devil;
locked up under the blackness of darkness to the judgment of the great day;
arraigned by the power of justice, and condemned by the moral Law, never to
have heard the sweet sound of reconciliation; or the heavenly harmony of the
gracious doctrine of redemption, except the bowels of overflowing mercy had
yearned, and the gracious countenance of thy loving Father had been manifested:
The clouds open, and distill their drops, to the refreshing and replenishing of
the sublunarie creature. Thy gracious Father has yearned by the bowels of his
compassion, and has replenished and refreshed thy soul with his abundant
kindness. Thy days might have been days of sorrow, and thy nights nights of
terror: The terrors of death, the horrors of hell; and the afrightment of a
woeful conscience might have sadded thee, had not free love and superabundant
grace prevented: Is not his grace better to thee then kingdoms? then
Consulships? then riches? then Honors? then dignities? or dominions? The
Disciples wondered at the rare and famous buildings of the Temple, and may
not thou wonder at the excellency and incomparablenesse of the free grace of
God thy celestial Father? O how sweet is his grace unto me! is it not as an
ointment poured out? as the sweetest drops distilling from the fullest clouds?
and as the sweetest dewes upon the tender herb? Did the babe spring in the
womb of Elizabeth, at Mary's salutation? and does not joy spring in my
conscience, because of free grace in everlasting redemption? Here is grace
incomparable, here is mercy ineffable, and here is bounty unalterable; is not
this the River from whence my soul has water? is not this the Sun from
whence my mind has light? is not this the heart from whence my will receives
vital motion? I am adopted to be a son elected to salvation, redeemed from
bonds, united to the Lord Jesus Christ; But from whence flows all these? but
from the rivers of free love, and the fountain of gracious love and bounty? My
life, my hope, my peace, my rest, my faith, my all, is from Christ, all in all,
as the Apostle says, Romans 11. last verse, For of him, and through him, and to
him, are all things; to whom be praise and glory for ever. Amen.

CHAP. II. Concerning Election.
1. ELection is the selecting or choosing of some certain men, that the glorious
and supereminent grace of God may be manifested upon them. Romans 9.23. That he
might declare the riches of his glory upon the vessels of mercy, which he has
prepared unto glory.

2. God in the election of free grace wills the glory of the riches of his
grace, and the everlasting benediction of his people. Hence he has disposed a
way for them, that they may come to everlasting life and benediction. Ephesians.
1.5, 6. Who has predestined us unto the adoption of sons by Jesus Christ in
himself, according to the good pleasure of his will. verse. 6. Unto the praise
of the glory of his grace, whereby he has made us freely accepted in his
beloved.

3. Christ is not the meritorious or impulsive cause of election, nothing in
election must be considered, but the mere and free goodness of God our
heavenly Father. Ephesians. 1.11. In him, I say, in whom we have obtained lot,
whilst we were predestined according to the purpose of him who works all
things after the counsel of his own will.

4. The fruition of glorious salvation is founded on the free mercy and
bounty of a loving God; the matter upon the obedience or satisfaction of
Christ the instrument is faith, and the end is the glory or illustration of
divine mercy. Ephesians. 1.4. As he has chosen us in him before the foundation of
the world, that we may be holy, and unblameable before him in love.

5. The elect can never fall finally or totally from grace received, since in
Christ their grace is founded, and that Gods love to them in Christ cannot be
altered. Isa. 54.10. For the mountains shall remove, and the hills shall fall
down, but my mercy shall not depart from thee; neither shall the covenant of my
peace fall away, says the Lord, that has compassion on thee. Romans 8. last
verse, Neither height, nor depth, nor any other (...), shall be able to
separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

6. To the Elect is given the sound and solid knowledge of God and Jesus Christ
whom he has sent; since that to them is not only given the knowledge of the
letter, but also the revelation of the mystery of God and Christ, through the
Spirit. Colos. 1.27. To whom God would make known what is the riches of the
glory of this mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you the hope of
glory.

Contemplation.
BEfore man had a being, God moved to man through love the being and well-being
of every creature; He singled Angels to stand in the estate of purity, and man
to stand in the estate of innocence and integrity; Love chose us before we
were chosen; Love embraced us before we loved. Much was given to Mary, she
loved much; much is given to the Saints before they loved; before we were the
children of wrath, we were the children of mercy, and whilst we were the
children of mercy, we became the children of wrath; we were that we are not;
through love we are that we were not; not for beauty, amiablenesse, or
comeliness, not for works, doings, and performances; not for riches, honors,
or dignities, are we chosen to salvation. Our silver became dross, our
excellency became a dunghill of iniquity; and our glory was turned to
impuritie. The Father of mercy moved in mercy, showed mercy, and yearning in
the bowels of compassion, encompassed poor souls with dear compassions: when
they were in their blood he said unto them, Live; when they lay wallowing in
their blood, he made them live for ever; they were received when the righteous
were refused; the poor prodigals are received in their fathers house, when the
self-conceited are despised. The loveliest stars and the choicest cedars were
chosen for the building of the Temple; the poorest spirits, and the captives of
hope, are chosen to be temples of the holy Ghost: Oh my soul, thou art become a
child of bounty, through bounty; and a vessel of glory through the riches
of eternal glory: thy Father delighted in thee when thou had no delight in
him; he loved thee when thou had no love to him, and gave thee the right hand
of fellowship and communion, when thou stoodest not related to Godward, by
relation or union. Fear nothing, O my soul, what though thou art not famous,
nor glorious in the world? what though thou possessest not the riches and
pleasures thereof? what though no eye under heaven show pity or compassion
toward thee? yet thy God will extend the bowels of that his tender bounty
toward thee. Art thou not chosen of mercy, to express mercy? and a vessel
of glory, to express the riches of his glory? thou art chosen to be that
thou would be, and denied to be that thou would not be; denied to be a
child of wrath, and death, and chosen to be an heir of mercy, and life. What
will thou give to God for so great a kindness? what will thou render to God for
so great a favor? though thou can not answer mercy; yet declare of mercy:
and though thou want in the expression of favor, yet declare and express
the favor of thy loving God and Father. Psalm. 136.23. Who remembered us in our
base estate, for his mercy endures for ever.

CHAP. III. Concerning the Covenant of grace.
Definition.
THe Covenant of grace, is the free promise of God in Christ Jesus, through
which he strongly assures his chosen people, that he will be their God, and
they shall be his people. Jer. 31.31, 32, 33. The 31. verse, Behold, the days
come, says the Lord, that I will make a new Covenant with the house of Israel,
and with the house of Judah. The 32. Not according to the Covenant that I made
with their fathers, in the day that I took them by the hand to bring them out
of the land of Egypt, which my Covenant they break, although I was an husband
unto them, says the Lord. The 33. But this shall be the Covenant that I will
make with the house of Israel, after those days, says the Lord, I will put my
Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts: and will be their God,
and they shall be my people.

The difference betwixt the old and the new Covenant.
1. Under the old they had the promise of Christ to come; we the testification
that Christ is come. 1. Joh. 5.6. This is he that came by water and blood, even
Jesus Christ; not by water only, but by water and blood: and it is the Spirit
that bears witness, because the Spirit is truth.

2. They had the time of infancy and bondage; we the time of freedom, and the
spirit of adoption. Galat. 4 5, 6. The 5. To redeem them that were under the
Law, that we might receive the adoption of sons. The 6. And because ye are
sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying,
Abba, Father.

3. In old time it was made known only to one people; in our time, to all
Nations under heaven Isa. 54.1. Sing O barren, thou that did not bear:
break forth into singing, and cry aloud, thou that did not travel with
child; for more are the children of the desolate, then the children of the
married wife, says the Lord. Romans 10.6, 7, 8. But the righteousness which is
of faith speaks on this wise; Say not in thine heart, who shall ascend into
heaven? that is to bring Christ down from above. 7. Or who shall descend into
the deep? that is to bring Christ again from the dead. 8. But what says it,
the word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that is the word of
faith which we preach.

4. They had the grace of God darkly, and obscurely; we plainly, and
apparently. 2. Cor. 3.18. But we all with open face beholding, as in a glass,
the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image from glory to glory,
even as by the Spirit of the Lord.

5. The communication or gifts of the Spirit under the Gospel of
reconciliation, are more excellent then those which have been communicated
under the Law. Act. 2.17, 18. the 17. And it shall come to pass in the last
days (says God) I will pour out of my Spirit upon all lesh, and your sons
and your daughters shall prophecy, and your young men shall see visions, and
your old men shall dream dreams. The 18. And on my servants, and on my
handmaids, I will pour out in those days of my Spirit, and they shall
prophecy.

6. The old Covenant was given by Moses, this by Jesus Christ. Joh. 1.17. For
the Law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ.

7. The old Covenant binds us over to absolute righteousness; the new commands
us to seek it in Christ the Lord our righteousness. Joh. 6.40. And this is the
will of him that sent me, that every one which sees the Son, and believes on
him, may have everlasting life; and I will raise him up at the last day. Romans
3.26. To declare I say at this time his righteousness: that he might be just,
and the justifier of him which believes in Jesus.

8. The old Covenant was given to impell men to Christ; the new to hold forth
and exhibit Christ. Joh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye
have eternal life; and they are they which testify of me.

9. The proper object of the old was to consternate and humble; the new to
comfort them who are consternated, and humbled. Matthew. 11.28, 29. Come unto me
all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. 29. Take my
yoke upon you, and learn of me for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall
find rest unto your souls.

10. They differ by accident, and through our infirmity, for the Law without
the Gospel is insufficient to salvation. Romans 8.3. For what the Law could not
do, in as much as it was weak through the flesh; God sending his own Son in the
likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh.

11. The Lord Christ is the Mediator of the new Covenant, not only because
the Covenant is made with his for his sake; but because through the virtue of
his mediation, this Covenant cannot be disanulled. Hebr. 8.6.9. But now has he
obtained a more excellent ministry, by how much also he is the Mediator of a
better Covenant, which was established upon better promises. 9 Not according to
the Covenant that I made with their fathers, in the day when I took them by the
hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt, because they continued not in my
Covenant, and I regarded them not, says the Lord.

12. The supereminent, superabundant, and superexcellent grace of God, our dear
and propitious Father, is manifested to his poor servants, in that he has
established the everlasting Covenant of free grace and mercy in the hand of
Christ Mediator. 2. Cor. 1.20. For all the promises of God in him are yea, and
in him Amen, unto the glory of God by us. Hebr. 9.15. And for this cause he is
the Mediator of the new Testament, that by means of death, for the redemption
of the transgressions that were under the first Testament, they which are
called might receive the promise of eternal inheritance.

13. The Covenant of grace is an everlasting and perpetual Covenant, since the
foundation of that Covenant is the free grace of God; and the ratification and
confirmation of the same is the blood of our Lord Jesus Christ. Hebr. 12.24.
And to Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling
that speaks better things then that of Abel.

14. The supereminence of divine grace and favor has not only appeared in
this, that he has established this Covenant in the hand of a Mediator; but
also in this, that he has smitten a Covenant with the immeriting and
undeserving. Hos. 2. the last; And I will sow her unto me in the earth, and I
will have mercy upon her, that had not obtained mercy: and I will say to them
which were not my people, Thou art my people: and they shall say, thou art my
God.

15. The grace of God is the ground; the blood of Christ the matter; the end,
eternal life and beatitude, made over to the faithful in all ages, that they
might be certainly and fully assured that God will be their God and Father
everlasting. Hos. 2.19. And I will betroth thee unto me for ever: yea I will
betroth thee unto me in righteousness, and in judgment, and in loving
kindness, and in mercy.

16. The true and solid knowledge of this free Covenant of grace and bounty,
causes the beloved Saints and believers to hate all Pharisaicall performances,
or the righteousness of Justiciaries. Phil. 3.9. That I may be found in him,
not having mine own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is by
the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God through faith.

17. The benefits of the free Covenant of pity and clemency, are the
remission of sins and condonation of transgression; the donation of the
Spirit, everlasting and continual communion with the Lord Christ in the
kingdom of felicity; perseverance in the state of grace, by the
all-sufficient hand of God, our clementious and heavenly Father. Jer. 31.34.
And they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and every man his
brother, saying, Know the Lord: For they shall all know me, from the least of
them to the greatest of them, says the Lord. For I will forgive their
iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more. 1. Joh. 3 24. And he that
keeps his Commandments, dwells in him, and he in him; and hereby we know
that he abides in us, by the Spirit which he has given us. 1. Pet. 1.5. Who
are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, to be revealed in
the last time.

18. The intrinsicall seal of the Covenant of grace and salvation, is the
Spirit of glory and obsignation; the extrinsicall, is the Lords Supper, and
Baptism. 1. John. 5.8. And there are three that bear witness in earth; the
Spirit, and the water, and blood: and these three agree in one. 1. Cor. 10.16.
The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of
Christ? The bread which we break is it not the communion of the body of Christ?

19. Whosoever are under the Covenant of grace, are not under the Law, but
under grace; not under the jurisdiction of the devil, but under the rule and
command of Christ; not under the dominion of sin and transgression, but under
the Regiment of the Spirit of life and adoption. Romans 8.2. For the law of the
Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the law of sin and
death. Romans 8.14. For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the
sons of God.

20. The faithful after the time they are assured that God is their God
through the Covenant of free grace and mercy; are wholly removed from the
bar of justice, to hear what tidings of peace, mercy, and salvation, shall
come from the throne of grace and mercy. Hebr. 12.18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.

21. The Covenant of grace is smitten with the faithful in Christ the only
and absolute Mediator, before they come to the true and effectual assurance
thereof in their hearts and consciences.

22. The joy of the holy Ghost does then fill the hearts of the faithful, when
in the receiving the seals of the Covenant, they through the act of faith, do
firmly and strongly behold the mavelous and exceeding freeness of that, to
them undeserving. 1. Tim. 1.14, 15. the 14. And the grace of our Lord was
exceeding abundant with faith, and love, which is in Christ Jesus. 15. This is
a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into
the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief.

23. If any man would have assured confidence that he shall live immortally,
and that grace communicated to him shall never be removed, or extinguished; let
him turn his eye upon the freeness and newness of the new Covenant,
established and confirmed to him in the hand of a Mediator. Hebr. 8.6.

24. The Moral Law is no part of the new Covenant, in equality and substance,
it is the same which was made with Adam in his innocence and integrity. Gal.
3.12. And the law is not of faith; but the man that does them, shall live in
them.

25. As the Father of admirable love and kindness makes his covenant with his
in Christ; so does every Christian make his covenant with God in Christ, since
that in himself there is nothing but indigencie, want, and deficiencie; and
that through Christ the fountain and wellspring of fullness and excellency,
he may receive sufficient to perform what he has promised to Godward for his
own particular. Joh. 15.5. I am the Vine, ye are the branches; he that abides
in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit: for without me ye can
do nothing.

26. Our covenant is an holy resignation of soul and body, to serve, obey,
fear and love God, our dear and loving Father, and Jesus Christ whom he has
sent, in answer to that free Covenant which he has made to us in Christ, when
he chose us to be a peculiar people zealous of good works. Romans 12.1. I beseech
you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a
living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service.
Tit. 2.14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works.

Contemplation.
THe eye that sees, the ear that hears, the mind that conceives the
immense and incomprence love of God to his, may admire that God through grace
should make a new covenant of grace to his people, undeserving grace; he saw
them in their blood, defiled, stained, spotted, and impure; yet he chose, and
did not refuse them in that woeful state and condition. Though they were
unfaithful to God in the first covenant, he is faithful to them in the
second: through the breach of the first they lost all; through the help of
Christ in the second they recover all, in that they stood not in the first,
they shut the gates of heaven upon themselves; through, or by virtue of the
second, heaven is open for them to have free entrance: though the Law of works
speak bitter, heavy, and terrible things to the conscience, yet the second
speaks not of bitterness, dreadfulnesse, or terriblenesse; but of favor,
bounty, and benignity to the soul or spirit. The first was in the hand of
man, the second in the hand of Christ. Hence it is so fast strong, and
permanent, that neither heights, nor depths, principalities, nor powers,
neither dominions, nor the prince of darkness with all his rabble, can
anihilate, disanull, or bring to nothing. O Christian, whilst thou art
comprehended, behold that which is incomprehensible; whilst thou art measured,
behold that which is immeasurable; whilst thou ponderest of something, ponder
of that which is unutterable. Romans 11.33. O the depth of the riches, both of
the wisdom and knowledge of God; how unsearchable are his judgments, and his
ways past finding out!

CHAP. IIII. Concerning Union.
Definition.
1. Union is the work of the Spirit of Christ through faith, whereby the Saints
are united unto Christ, and to the Father in Christ, to the end they may enjoy
communion in the promises and benefits of Christ in the state of grace, and in
the estate of glory, everlasting beatitude and perfection. 1. Cor. 6.17. But he
that is joined unto the Lord, is one spirit. 1. Cor. 3.22. Whether Paul, or
Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or
things to come, all are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods.

2. The faithful are not only united to Christ, by faith as the isntrumental
cause, by the Spirit, the cause principalliter operans; but also by the blood
of Christ as the cause material. Ephesians. 2.13. But now in Christ Jesus, ye who
sometimes were far off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ.

3. It has not only been the divine pleasure or benevolence of our heavenly
Father, that we should be united to his dearly beloved Son by nature, but that
we should be united to him by a secret and mystical union. Joh. 17.23. I in
them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one: and that the world
may know that thou have sent me, and have loved them as thou have loved me.

4. The Son of God took upon him the humane nature of mankind, through which he
is joined to all men; but that is infirm, and weak, and not able to bring us
to eternal glory without the union mystical. I in them, and they in me, etc.
Joh. 17.24. Father I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me
where I am; that they may behold my glory which thou have given me: for thou
lovedst me before the foundation of the world.

5. This union is produced through effectual vocation, through which the
Saints are brought from the worlds delectation to love the Lord Christ, with a
dear, entire, and tender affection. 1. Cor. 1.9. God is faithful, by whom ye
were called unto the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Cant. 1.2.
Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth; for thy love is better then wine.

6. By how much the Saints feel the sense of Gods dear and sweet bounty, and
enjoy sweet communion with their Lord that bought them; by so much the more
they rejoice in the love and fellowship one of another. 1. Joh. 1.7. But if we
walk in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus
Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin.

7. There is so strong an union betwixt Christ and his Saints, that there is no
need of his corporal presence in this veil of misery; since more excellent
benefits redounds to the Saints by his presence in heaven, then if he should
remain on earth. Hence he is said to have consummated the work of our
redemption, to sit at the right hand of God, to make intercession for us, and
to go to his Father to provide for us an habitation. Joh. 14.3. And if I go and
prepare a place for you, I will come again and receive you unto my self; that
Where I am, there ye might be also.

8. The greatest dignity under heaven is to be a member of Jesus Christ; a
branch of the vine Christ, and one of the spouses to Christ our royal and
loving Bridegroom. Hence the Church glories in her privilege. Cant. 2.16. My
beloved is mine, and I am his: he feeds among the Lillies. Revel. 19.7, 8, 9.
Let us be glad, and rejoice, and give honor unto him, for the marriage of the
Lamb is come, and his wife has made her self ready. 8. And to her was
granted, that she should be arrayed in fine linen, clean and white: for the
fine linen is the righteousness of Saints. 9. And he says unto me, Write,
blessed are they which are called to the marriage of the Lamb.

9. All the strength, power, and might of all the enemies of salvation, cannot
separate the branches from the vine; the members from the head, or the spouses
of the Lord Christ, from Christ her dear and loving Bridegroom, Because they
are made perfect in one through union with Christ, and with the Father in
Christ. Joh. 17.23.

10. Christ by the grace of complement, will crown all his absolutely with full
fruition in the kingdom of beatitude; and with the grace of supplement in the
kingdom of grace, and primary communion, that they might not want in the day
of fiery trials a supply by his gracious hand of dispensation. Revel. 22.5. And
there shall be no light there, and they need no candle, neither light of the
Sun, for the Lord God gives them light; and they shall reign for ever and
ever. Joh. 1.16. And of his fullness have all we received, and grace for grace.

11. There is an inseparable link betwixt union with Christ, the peace and
obsignation of the Spirit of glory, and the fruits of holiness and
righteousness to the glory of the Father. Joh. 15.5.8. the 5. I am the vine,
ye are the branches; He that abides in me, and I in him, the same brings
forth much fruit: for without me ye can do nothing. The 8. Herein is my Father
glorified, that ye bear much fruit, so shall ye be my disciples.

12. The united have interest in God through Christ, from whom they receive the
spirit of Adoption, which works in them effectually, that they might be
delivered from sin, and regenerated to the hope of eternal life. 1. Cor. 3.22.
Whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things
present, or things to come, all are yours. 1. Pet. 1.3. Blessed be the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which acaccording to his abundant mercy has
begotten us again unto a lively hope by the resurrection of Josus Christ from
the dead.

13. The members of Christ are moved by the same Spirit, known by the same
badge of love, fruit and charity, and have the same end, which is life
eternal and salvation. Joh. 15.16. Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen
you; and ordained you, that ye should go and bring forth fruit, and that your
fruit should remain: that whatsoever ye shall ask of the Father in my Name,
he may give it you. 1. Pet. 1.9. Receiving the end of your faith, even the
salvation of your souls.

14. Though the Saints, who are united unto Christ, may appear to be dead in
themselves, yet the life which they received in their first communion and union
with Christ, cannot be utterly abolished or extinguished; The ground is this,
since there is an inseparable conjunction betwixt the perpetual communion and
everlasting union of the Saints with and in Christ their Lord that loved them,
and bought them with an eternal worth or price impervestigable.

Contemplation.
Who could search the depth of the waters of the Sanctuary? or who can search
the depth of this glorious and heavenly mystery? It is a mystery of mysteries,
a depth of depths, and a riddle past finding out. If I had the tongue of a
thousand Angels, the rationality of a thousand men, yet could I not relate the
excellency of this union betwixt Christ and the soul, and the soul and
Christ; Rare is the influence of celestial bodies in sublunary creatures; Rare
is the vital motion in rational creatures; but more is the working of Christ
in them, who are his redeemed and united people. O my soul, when thou wast as
far from Christ, as heaven is from hell, as the East is from the West, the
North from the South, thy Lord came by his ointments powered out, by his drops
of liquid myrrh, by his precious and incomparable blood, and made thee one
with him, who was so distant from him; thou wast a dead branch, fit for the
everlasting burnings; thou wast a dead member, fit for hells interring; thou
wast a divorced Spouse, not worthy of enjoying; yet his eye of love was dear
over thee, and thy Lord has made thee, a branch, not of hell, but of the Vine
of Consolation; a member, not of death, but of himself the head of his Church,
and sweet dilection; a Spouse, not of an earthly Prince, and Monarch, but to
himself the beloved, his Fathers delectation: Oh! what love is this, that my
Lord should go to the gates of death, the bars of hell, to the tribunal
seat of Justice, to the chained under the black swadle bands of the devil,
and fetch my soul from thence, and make me one of his: Oh! what mercy is this
to my soul, that my Lord is become my Bridegroom, to satisfy me with
pleasurable and delectable delights; my head, to fill me with wisdom
sufficient to salvation, and my Vine, to make me abundantly fruitful through
fruition; am I not bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh? Should I not enjoy
the benefit of his mediation, the fruit of his glorification, and the
privilege of glorious and sweet Communion? who shall separate me from the love
of my sweet Savior? shall Satan? No; shall imperfections and infirmities? No;
shall the Law, or the Jailer of hell? No; they are of no force to disjoyne them
whom God has joined by a bond inseparable. Now I am assured, he will fill me
with love, confirm with his promise, love me with his beloved ones; watch over
my soul, and deliver me from the roarings of the devil, though the Charets
and horsemen of hell pursue me, I shall possess his glory of inheritance;
Though I fall, I shall rise again, though I was in the veil of death, I would
not be afraid, for his sweet streams would comfort me. Hence will I take up
the resolution of the Psalmist, Psalm. 46.2.3. Therefore will we not fear,
though the earth be moved; and though the hills be carried into the midst of
the Sea. Though the waters thereof rage and swell; and though the mountains
shake at the tempest thereof.

CHAP. V. Concerning Vocation.
Definition.
1. VOcation is a gathering of men unto Christ, by the Gospel of life and
everlasting salvation, that they may be united unto him, by a happy and
perpetual union. 1 Cor. 1.9. God is faithful, by whom we are called unto the
Communion of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord.

2. Vocation, is efficatious, or inefficatious.

3. Efficatious vocation is that through which the faithful are called from
Satan's Kingdom, to the Kingdom of grace and glory, by the sanctifying Word of
truth, and the effectual work of the Spirit, that they may not want in the
appointed time, that glorious salvation which Christ their Lord has purchased.
Act. 26.18. That thou may open the eyes of the blind, and convert them from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive
the remission of sins, and an inheritance amongst them who are sanctified by
faith, which is in me.

4. Inefficatious vocation, is when the sons of men are under the sentence of
the Gospel of atonement and reconciliation, yet never find the effectual
operation of the holy Spirit, unto an absolute Conversion; Hence many are
called, and few are chosen.

5. Vocation is Universal or Special.

6. Vocation universal, is that whereby God invites all men, through the
ministry of peace and propitiation, that they would come to the knowledge of
himself, and Jesus Christ, the appointed Redeemer of his elect and peculiar.
Col. 1.23. For which cause I Paul am made Minister, to preach the Gospel to
every creature under heaven.

7. Special vocation is that whereby God does dignifie his own peculiar,
whilst he does illuminate their minds, working in their hearts effectually by
his Spirit. Romans 5.5 Moreover, hope makes not ashamed, because the love of God
is shed abroad in our hearts by his holy Spirit.

8. Universal Vocation, has been shadowed out by Types, or divine Oracles.

9. By Types, Melchesidecke, although he was a Gentile, and without the
promises of Abraham, nevertheles, he was the Priest of the most high GOD, Heb.
7.1.

10. By Oracles, he shall be the expectation of the Gentiles; Mat. 12.21. And
in his Name shall the Gentiles trust.

11. In vocation, there is Christ's oblation, and the Christians reception
considerable.

12. Christ's offer is, that he will be a sufficient Redemption, Reconciliation,
and Salvation to every one who believes, and rests on him, as his assured
refuge and eternal Sanctury. 1 John 4.14. Whosoever shall drink of the water
which I shall give unto him, shall not thirst again: but the water which I
shall give unto him, shall be in him a fountain of springing water unto
eternal life.

13. Christ's proffer is internal and external.

14. Christ's external proffer is, when by the Ministers of the Word of truth,
and salvation, he proposes himself the only and absolute salvation in heaven
and earth. Act. 4.12. Neither is there salvation in any other, neither is there
any other name given under heaven, by which we must be saved.

15. Christ's internal proffer is, when Christ proposes himself effectually
to the hearts of the faithful, through which they have assured confidence,
that Christ has redeemed and saved them from sin, Satan, the Law, hell, and
destruction, and that the Lord Christ will communicate to them eternal life,
peace, joy, and everlasting reconciliation. Col. 2.2. That their hearts might
be comforted, and they knit together in love, and in all riches of the full
assurance of understanding, to know the mystery of God, even the Father, and of
Christ.

16. Reception is through which the faithful do not refuse the proffer of
grace, but receives it through the help of the Spirit of glory. Act. 10.43,
44. To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his Name whosoever
believes in him, shall receive remission of sins. While Peter spoke these
words, the holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the Word.

17 Sometimes there is a reception of the Word of mercy and propitiation, which
is not operative, or effectual to salvation. Mat. 13.20, 21. And he that
receives seed into stony places, the same is he that hears the Word, and
anon with joy receives it. Yet has not root in himself, but dureth for a
while; for when tribulation or persecution arises, because of the word; by and
by he is offended.

18. Reception is either taken actively or passively.

19. Actively, when the heart rests on Christ the blessed Redeemer of his;
redeemed and reconciled, passively when there is a spiritual being of grace in
the hearts of actual Believers. 1 Pet. 2.2. As newborn babes desire the
sincere milk of the Word, that ye may grow thereby.

20. Sometimes the Saints are called alone by the efficacy of the Spirit of
obsignation: Sometimes by the Word, and efficacy of the Word of Life and
Redemption. The Word and the Spirit are not separated in the vocation of the
Saints. Ephesians. 1.13. In whom also ye have trusted after that ye heard the
Word of truth, even the Gospel of your salvation, wherein also after ye
believed, ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of promise.

21. All the faithful have been effectually called from eternal, by virtue of
Gods decree, notwithstanding the Declaration thereof, is, as it may make for
their good, and the glory of God their heavenly and gracious Father. Ephesians.
1.11, 12. In him, I say, in whom ye have obtained an inheritance, being
predestined, according to the purpose of him who works all things, after
the council of his own will. That we may be to the praise of his glory, who
first trusted in Christ.

22. God calls not all his Elect and Adopted in the same moment, to the
knowledge of his sanctifying truth, and the sense of free and benignous favor
and experience, Mat. 20.5, 6.

23. This has not been without the divine pleasure of our gracious and
heavenly Father, that Election which has been before the world was, he makes
known to his by operative and effectual Vocation. Romans 8.30. Whom he has
predestined, them also has he called, and whom he has called, them also
has he justified; and whom he has justified, them also has he glorified.

24. Election and Vocation proceeds from the free benevolence of a loving God,
and are confirmed to the consciences of true believers, through the true and
faithful testimony of the Spirit of Adoption. Romans 8.17. And the Spirit
witnesses together with our spirit, that we are the Sons of God.

25. If we desire to see and know the propitious mind of God, let us turn our
faces toward Christ, in whom the Father is well pleased, if we would seek
eternal life, and the immortality of the celestial Kingdom. Not to any
other but to Christ must we fly, for he is the fountain of our life, the
Author of our salvation, and the ground of our Adoption, and effectual
calling. 1 These. 5.9. For God has not appointed us unto wrath, but to
salvation by the means of our Lord Jesus Christ. 2 Timothy 1.9. Who has saved
us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to our work, but
according to his own purpose and grace, which was given to us through Jesus
Christ before the world was.

26. Now whitherward does our Election tend? but that through the bounty of
him, who is propitious toward us, we may enjoy the filiation of sons,
immortality and salvation; and although our minds are troubled, and our
consciences perplexed, yet no otherwise can we know the certainty thereof, but
by vocation, and absolute regeneration, for absolute regeneration and vocation,
are assured pledges of our salvation, immortality, and filiation. 1 Pet. 1.3
4. Blessed be God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his
abundant bounty, has begetten us to a lively hope, by the resurrection of
Jesus Christ from the dead. To an inheritance immortal, and undefiled, and
that withers not, reserved in heaven for us.

27. Although our heavenly and gracious Father, love all his people, as he
loved his beloved Christ; yet it is his divine grace and pleasure, in
effectual vocation, to try some of his in the fiery furnace of sorrows, and
great tribulation. Act. 2.37. Who when they heard it, they were pricked in
their hearts, and said to Peter, and other Apostles, Men and Brethren, What
shall we do? Isa. 6.5. Then said I, I am a man undone, I am a man of polluted
lips, and I dwell amongst a people of polluted lips; mine eyes have seen the
King the Lord of Hoasts.

28. Our life is hid with God in Christ, and we are called efficaciously from
the world, unto celestial grace, and from woeful darkness, unto his glorious
light, that we may live godly in this present world, expecting the coming of
our Lord and Savior. Ephesians. 4.1. I therefore being prisoner in the Lord, pray
you that ye walk worthy of the vocation whereunto ye are called. Titus 2.13.
Expecting that blessed hope, and that glorious coming of that great God, and
our Savior Jesus Christ.

Contemplation.
THis was the saying of Moses, Who is a Rock, like our Rock, or who is a God
like the God of our salvation? We may say, Who has a Father like our Father?
or who has found any so sweet and delectable, as he has been to us? As the
sweet influence of the Plejades, and the sweet distilling drops from the
Clouds, so has he been in our vocation; his words are rarer then the words of
Moses; the one is Law, the other grace and peace. Joh. 1.17. The Law was given
by Moses, but grace and truth, cams by Jesus Christ. The one a killing Letter,
the other a quickening Spirit. 2 Cor. 3.6. Who also has made us able Ministers
of the new Testament, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit; for the Letter
kills, but the Spirit gives life: The one the ministry of condemnation, the
other the ministry of life and salvation. 2 Cor. 3.9. For if the ministry of
condemnation has been glorious, much more the ministry of righteousness does
abound with glory: The one written in Tables of stone; the other in the fleshly
Tables of our heart. 2 Cor. 3 3. In that ye are manifest, to be the Epistle of
Christ, ministered by us, and written, not with ink, but with the Spirit of the
living God, not in Tables of stone, but in the fleshly Tables of the heart: The
one accuses us before the Bar of Justice, the other acquitteth us before the
Mercy Seat. Joh. 5.4, 5. Think not that I am come to accuse you before the
Father, there is one who accuses you, to wit, Moses, in whom ye trust. Has
Moses fetched home the lost sheep? sought the lost groat; or embraced the poor,
returned Prodigalls; No; it was our Christ, the great and blessed Shepherd of
Israel. What are the drops or dewes, without the Sun? or what can the body
effect without the soul? or what can the Law do in the act of vocation,
without the effectual operation of the Spirit of Jesus: from whence art thou
called, O my soul? Not only from the receipt of custom, but from the custom
of hell; Not only from profaneness to civilitie, from civilitie to
morality; but from all to heavenly and celestial grace and glory; What have
thou found in Christ, fince he called thee? I have found my life in him. my
name in the heavenly places; a hope amongst his peculiar; a rest in his love; a
communion in his promises; a fellowship amongst the Saints; and the glorious,
gracious, and loving face of a sweet Father. And have thou not also found rare
effects in thee since the time of his overpowring of his precious graces; yea
now his love is more to me then Kingdoms, then Consullships, then riches, then
honors, then dignities, then Dominions; yea then all things. If I were possessed
with the wealth of Arabia; the riches of India; the treasure of Africa; and the
glory of Europe; what would those be to me without a Christ? I would rather
choose one dram of his grace, then mountains of gold, then a sea of silver,
then an earth of pleasures, and Kingdoms, and Provinces of delights, and
delectations. Rachel said, Give me children, or else I dye; I say, give me
Christ, or I shall dye. Abraham said, What availes all these, if I go
childlesse? I say, what avails all, if I go Christlesse? Was Jacob
comforted, when he wanted Joseph? or can I be comforted, when I want my
Beloved? And did not Rachel mourn, and would not be comforted when her
children were not? And do I not mourn, and cannot be comforted, because my
Christ is not? From henceforth will I triumph, with the triumphers, and take my
place amongst the Conquerours; for I am not called from the sheepfold, but from
the gates of hell, and made a King and Priest to God the Father; I am not
called from Pharaohs dungeon, but from the dungeon of darkness to be a son
of God the Father, and a brother to the Prince of grace and glory; therefore I
shall see my Fathers face, and behold his glory. Rev. 22.4. And they shall see
his face, and his Name shall be in their foreheads. Verse the fifth; And they
shall reign for evermore.

CHAP. VI. Concerning Adoption.
Definition.
ADoption is the gracious sentence of God, through which he does accept of the
faithful for sons and daughters in Jesus Christ. 1. Joh. 3.1. Behold what
manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the
sons of God: therefore the world knows us not, because it knew him not.

In Adoption there is a gracious manifestation of the good will and pleasure of
God, that he would adopt us in Christ for his peculiar, who by sin were the
children of wrath and of the devil, and were by nature the children of wrath
as well as other. Ephesians. 2.3, 4. But God who is rich in mercy, for his great
love wherewith he loved us. Ephesians. 1.5. Having predestined us unto the
adoption of children by Jesus Christ unto himself, according to the good
pleasure of his will.

Adoption proceeds from Gods decree, it is collocated in Christ, and sealed to
the Saints through the Spirit of adoption. Romans 8 15. For ye have not received
the spirit of bondage again to fear: but ye have received the Spirit of
Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father.

Adoption is not only for Christ's sake, who has merited the same for us; but
it flows also from Gods benignity and bounty toward his elect and chosen.
Galat. 4.6. And because ye are sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his
Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father.

The faithful do not only look for eternal life through the title they have
by redemption; but also through the title they have by adoption. Romans 8.23. And
not only they but our selves also, which have the first fruits of the Spirit;
even we our selves groan within our selves, waiting for the adoption, to wit,
the redemption of our body.

The sweetness and consolation of the faithful arises when instead of the
sons of the devil they through faith apprehend themselves to be the sons of
God. Joh. 1.12. But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become
the sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name.

7 As the Lord Christ in justification is applied as a garment to cover sins;
so in Adoption he is applied as the Prince of our life and salvation. Hebr.
2.10. For it became him for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in
bringing many sons unto glory, to make the Captain of their salvation perfect
through sufferings.

8. This conjunction is so strong, that although Christ is properly the Son of
God by nature; hence termed the first begotten of God, notwithstanding by this
grace of adoption and communion with God in Christ, all the faithful are
called the sons of God. 2. Cor. 6.18. And I will be a Father unto you, and ye
shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty.

9. Although Adam was the son of God by creation, yet not by the mystical
conjunction and union with Christ as we are by adoption. Joh. 17.21. That they
all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be
one in us; that the world may know that thou have sent me.

10. The dignity which we have through adoption does not only superabound
that common relation which every creature has to Godward, but also that which
Adam possessed before he relinquisht his purity and integrity.

11. God has taken the adopted into the number of his own flock or family, and
given to them his name, and has undertaken to be their eternal protector in
the time of danger. Revel. 3.12. Him that overcomes will I make a pillar in
the Temple of my God, and he shall go no more out; and I will write upon him
the Name of my God, and the name of the City of my God, which is the new
Jerusalem, which comes down out of heaven from my God; and I will write upon
him my new Name. Isa. 4.4 5. the 4. When the Lord shall have washed away the
filth of the daughters of Sion, and shall have purged the blood of Jerusalem
from the midst thereof by the spirit of judgment, and by the spirit of
burning. The 5. And the Lord will create upon every dwelling place of mount
Sion, and upon her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a
flaming fire by night; for upon all the glory shall be a defense.

12. The inheritance to which the faithful are adopted is eternal life,
glorious communion, and everlasting blessedness. Joh. 17.2. As thou have given
him power over all flesh; that he should give eternal life to as many as thou
have given him.

13. That blessedness which belongs to the Saints redeemed and beloved, is
not communicated to them for their merits or deservings, but through free
grace, through which they have obtained the dignity of sons, through adoption
or filiation. Isa. 56.3.5. Neither let the son of the stranger that has
joined himself to the Lord speak, saying, The Lord has utterly separated me
from his people; neither let the Eunuch say, Behold, I am a dry tree. The 5.
Even unto them will I give in mine house, and within my walls, a place, and a
name better then of sons and daughters: I will give them an everlasting name
that shall not be cut off.

14. Divine Adoption is not ordained to succession, but to the participation of
an inheritance assigned. Ephesians. 1.18. The eyes of your understanding being
enlightened, that ye may know what is the hope of his calling; and what the
riches of the glory of his inheritance in the Saints.

15. The proper adjunct of adoption is the testification of the holy Spirit
which is given to the faithful. Hence they are said to be sealed by the
Spirit. 2. Cor. 1.21. Now he which stablisheth us with you in Christ, and has
anointed us is God. The 22. Who has also sealed us, and given the earnest of
his Spirit in our hearts.

16. God has adopted his elect unto himself; not that he had no other Son, for
Christ was termed his beloved and only begotten Son: but amongst the sons
of men he had no other, until they were adopted to be beloved in Christ. Gal.
3 26. For ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus.

17. Through the Spirit of Christ we have faith, through which we lay hold on
the death of Christ Mediator; and the promise of God our benevolous and
gracious Father, by which we are adopted to be sons and daughters. Galat. 3.26.
vide.

18. By Adam we were alienated from God, wherefore God has sent his only
begotten and beloved Son, that through him he might choose many sons out of
humane generation. Hence we are said to be chosen out of the world, through his
divine love and free benevolence. Joh. 15.16. Ye have not chosen me but I have
chosen you, and ordained you, that you should go and bring forth fruit, and
that your fruit should remain: that whatsoever ye shall ask of the Father in
my Name, he may give it you. Joh. 17.14. I have given them thy word, and the
world has hated them; because they are not of the world, even as I am not of
the world.

19. The royal robe of Christ's righteousness is their covering in the day of
judgment; the blood of Christ is their peace in the day of evil; and the name
of God is their glory in the midst of afflictions. Isa. 26.8. Yea in the way of
thy judgments, O Lord, have we waited for thee: the desire of our soul is to
thy name, and to the remembrance of thee.

20. The adopted are made kings and priests to God the Father, through the
blood of the Son of God Christ Jesus. Revel. 1.5, 6. the 5. And from Jesus
Christ who is the faithful witness, and the first begotten of the dead, and
the Prince of the kings of the earth: unto him that has loved us, and washed
us from our sins in his own blood. Verse the 6. And has made us kings and
priests unto God and his Father. To him be glory and deminion for ever and
ever. Amen.

21. The sons of God by adoption may feel the sense of Gods anger; yet God
is not angry with them, but exceeding loving, bountiful, and full of clemency
toward them. Micah 7.18. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons
iniquity, and passes by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage? He
retains not his anger for ever, because he delights in mercy. Malachi 3.17.
And they shall be mine, says the Lord of hosts, in that day when I make up my
jewels: and I will spare them as a man spares his own son that serves him.

22. Though the Father of dear love do crown his dear people with dear love,
grace, and mercy, yet he does not always endow them with outward blessings
and prosperity. 2. Cor. 6.4, 5, 6. the 4. But in all things approving our
selves as the Ministers of God, in much patience, in afflictions, in
necessities, in distresses. The 5. In stripes, in imprisonments, in tumults, in
labors, in watching, in fastings: the 6. By pureness, by knowledge, by
long-suffering, by kindness, by the holy Ghost, by love unfeigned.

23. The cries, groans, and sighs of the sons of God, whether in the day
they want the sense of Gods dear love and rarest bounty toward them, or in
the time of great and strong temptation over tops the roarings of Satan, the
cries of vengeance, and the arraigning sentence of the Law so terrible. Romans
8.26. Likewise the Spirit also helps our infirmities: for we know not what we
should pray for as we ought. But the Spirit it self makes intercession for us
with groanings, which cannot be uttered.

24. Though the sons of God may loose the sense of their first communion, yet
they shall for ever enjoy everlasting and perpetual union, so that God for
evermore stands in relation unto them as a Father; and they to him as loving
and dear children. Isa. 63.16. Doubtless thou art our Father, though Abraham
be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledges us not: O Lord, thou art our
Father, our redeemer; thy name is from everlasting. Isa. 64.9. Be not wroth
very sore, O Lord, neither remember iniquity for ever; behold, see us we
beseech thee, we beseech thee, we are all thy people.

25. Though we were the sons of God by creation, yet we became through sin
the sons of the devil, of wrath, of incredulity, of diffidence, of this
world, and of darkness; notwithstanding by adoption we are made sons,
partakers of the divine nature, brethren of Christ, and children of light; that
we might not sin, but that we might be one with Christ through union; and that
we might love the brethren with entire love and affection. 2. Pet. 1.4. Whereby
are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises, that by these you
might be partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the corruption that is
in the world through lust. Hebr. 2.11. For both he who sanctifies, and they
who are sanctified, are all one: For which cause he is not ashamed to call them
brethren. Joh. 15.12. This is my commandment, that ye love one another, as I
have loved you.

26. The kingdom of our God, the glory of which is unutterable, unspeakable,
and unmentionable; has been prepared of old for those who have a being in
Christ; interest in the free promises, and have been beloved of the Father
before the world was. Matthew. 25.34. Then shall the King say unto them on his
right hand, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you
from the foundation of the world.

Contemplation.
OH the deepnesse of immense and admirable love, that of the children of
diffidence and destruction, through Christ are made Saints and sons of
salvation; that of vessels of wrath, hell, the devil, and damnation, we are
made the vessels of rich mercy, peace, love, and happic consolation. When I
was a poor distressed captive taken by the devil, did I think to be made an
heir with Christ, and freed from the accusing law, and woeful evil? not thy
wisdom, but the wisdom of thy dear and benignous Father, has found a way in
the time of misery, to bring thee to glorious and blessed felicity. That was
not found in the land of the living. Ask the depths, and they will say that
wisdom was not found there? Ask the Sea, and it will say; it had no habitation
there; in thy dear Father has been the place of singular wisdom and rarest
intelligence. Pharaoh knew his dream, but was ignorant of the interpretation;
thou know thou wast a slave, but wast ignorant of thy redemption and
adoption. O admirable privilege, and excellent prerogative! O wonderful
dignity given to the Saints, by filiation! What is it to be the son of a King?
or an Emperor? of a Monarch? of a Potentate? What is it to be an heir to
Kingdoms, to Provinces, or to Empires? What is it to enjoy pleasures, joy, or
delectations in this orb terrestrial, if we enjoy not the privilege of the
daughters, and the sons of the living God? It cannot avail thee to be an heir,
and not an heir of Christ's kingdom. It cannot advantage thee to be a son of
an Emperor, and not to be the son of God by adoption; it cannot help thee to
be nephew to a Potentate, and not to be an inheritour with the Lords
inheritance. Thou art Gods by creation, but art thou Gods by a special
relation? Thou have treasures abundant, but art thou his chief treasure? thou
have inheritance amongst the sons of men, but have thou an inheritance amongst
the sons of royal possession? O my soul! what will thy sweet Father do for
thee? great things, he will give thee a name better then of the sons and
daughters; He will protect thee by an invincible protection, and crown thee
with everlasting and glorious salvation. The best of the land of Egypt was
given to Joseph's brethren; the best of the treasures of mercy and
righteousness is given to thee. Gifts were given to the sons of Keturah, but
the possession was Isaacs; gifts are given to the sons of men, but the
possession amongst the Lords inheritance is given to thee. O my soul! thou
have obtained a lot above all lots, and a mercy above all mercies. Therefore
exalt his name with the Church, saying, His mercy endures for ever, his mercy
endures for ever. And make mention of his love with the Apostle, Behold how
great a love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the
sons of God. 1. Joh. 3.

CHAP. VII. Concerning Redemption.
Definition.
1. CHiefly our knowledge consists in this, that having lost what was given in
the creation is again restored to us by the hand of Christ in the act of
Redemption, who shed his blood to redeem us from evils. Phil. 3.8. Yea
doubtless I count all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of
Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all things: and do
count them but dung that I may win Christ.

2. The knowledge of Christ our redeemer is known by the fall of Adam, and by
the material cause of our Redemption.

3. Redemption is the bringing of man to the state of liberty from the slavery
of sin and Satan by the exhibition of a inst price. Matthew. 20.28. Even as the
Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his
life a ransom for many.

4. The end of Redemption is application, and the fast measure, rule, and
reason of application, is the fame gracious will of God which has been the
cause of man's Redemption. Galat. 2.20. I am crucified with Christ,
nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me: and the life which I
now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me,
and gave himself for me.

5. Man being lost, he must seek for the Redemption of his soul through the
hand of Christ: Christ is the adoption of the elect, the conservation of the
Church, the instauration after dissipation, and the redemption of his from
Satan, sin, and all miseries. Tit. 2.14. Who gave himself for us, that he might
redeem us from all iniquity; and purify unto himself a peculiar people,
zealous of good works.

6. We receive the virtue of that redemption by Christ through the power of the
Spirit of Christ, who joyneth us with Christ. Hence is he called the Spirit of
sanctification and adoption, and the seal of our redemption and salvation. 2.
Cor. 1.22. Who has also sealed us, and given the earnest of his Spirit in our
hearts. Ephesians. ^.14.

7. When as in the loins of Adam whole humane kind was lose, so that the
nobleness and excellency of our estate of integrity cannot profit us when we
think upon it; but rather turn to our greater shame, until God the Father
appear in the person of his only begotten Son to the saving or freeing of our
souls from all calamities. 1. Cor. 1.30. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who
of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and
redemption.

8. After the fall of the first Adam, whole mankind was inthralled, his
knowledge of God unto salvation sure would profit him nothing without a
Savior. Hence says our Savior, Joh. 17.3. This is life eternal, to know
thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

9. Whilst we are condemned by the Law, dead in sin; naked, wanting
righteousness; poor, wanting riches; and bondmen, wanting liberty: we must
seek for these at the hands of our Redeemer, in whom, and at whose hands we may
receive these in the time of necessity. Hebr. 4.14, 15, 16. Seeing then that
we have a great high Priest that is passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of
God, let us hold fast our profession. For we have not an high Priest which
cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities: but was in all points
tempted like us, yet without sin, Let us therefore come boldly unto the
throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy; and find grace to help in time of
need.

10. Not rashly, nor by hap, or chance, or by the will of man, that Christ
should have this name (Jesus) but from the will of God, delivered by the Angels;
that he should save his people from their sins. Mat. 1.21. And she shall
bring forth a son, and thou shall call his name Jesus; for he shall save his
people from their sins.

11. God was an enemy to man, till by the death of Christ, he was restored into
favor. Man was accursed, till by the sacrifice of Christ, his iniquity was
expiated: he was separated, until by the body of Christ, he into Conjunction
has been received, Ephesians. 2.16. And that he might reconcile both unto God in
one body by the Cross, having slain the enemy thereof.

12. God loves us first, after by Christ he redeemeth us unto himself, and
until Christ by death redeem us from him that has the power of death,
iniquity does remain, which may deserve the indignation of God; so that
through it we may stand accursed, and condemned in his sight. Romans 3.19. Now
we know that what things soever the Law says, it says to them who are under
the Law: that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty
before God. Gal. 4.4, 5. Verse the 4. But when the fullness of time was come,
God sent forth his son, made of a woman, made under the Law. Verse the 5. To
redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive the Adoption of
sons.

13. When as we are redeemed by the death of Christ, it is not so understood,
as though now he should begin to love us, whom before he hated: but that now
loving us, he does redeem us to be his people. Gal. 1.4. Who gave himself for
our sins, that he may deliver us from this present evil world, according to
the will of God and our Father.

14. It was not sufficient for the taking away of condemnation, that Christ
should undergo death, but also that he might feel the sense of his Fathers
wrath upon him for us, that so our Redemption from wrath might be fully
accomplished. 1 Pet. 2.24. Who his own self bare our sins in his own body
on the tree, that we being dead to sin, should live unto righteousness, by
whose stripes ye were healed.

15. The Father has abolished the power of sin, when the curse of God rested
on the flesh of Christ, then Christ was a satisfactory sacrifice to his Father
for sin, that the strife being ended, through his sacrifice, we may cease to
fear the anger of God any more. Heb. 2.14, 15 Verse the 14. For as much then
as the Children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise
took part of the same, that through death, he might destroy him that had the
power of death, that is the Devil. Verse the 15. And deliver them, who through
fear of death, were all their life time subject to bondage.

16. God has commended his love to us, who gave Christ the price of Redemption
for us; commanding us to flee for succor to his blood, that through that we
might stand secure in the day of Judgment. Romans 5.8. God has commended his
love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us.

17. Christ has been subject to the righteousness of God, that he might
perform what was required of us, fully performing what was necessary, to the
delivery of those who are true believers. Romans 10.4. For Christ is the end of
the Law for righteousness, to every one that believes.

18. The great grace and righteousness of God, is manifested in the freedom
of his from evil, to enjoy the chiefest good. Psalm. 136.23. Which remembered us
in our low estate; for his mercy eadureth for ever. Verse the 24. And has
delivered us from our enemies; for his mercy endures for ever.

19. The application of delivery, is the singular work of the Spirit of life
and Adoption. Hence the Spirit is said to be the earnest of the Saints
Redemption, and the seal of their everlasting delivery and liberation.

20 Redemption flows from the divine Decree and Donation of GOD, whereby he
does give certain men unto Christ, that he might redeem and save them from
sin and iniquity. Luke 1.68, 69. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel; for he
has visited and redeemed his people. And has raised up an horn of salvation
for us in the house of his servant David.

21 Redemption is not without the mind of Christ, being Christ determined,
that his satisfaction should be for the good of them whom he would redeem by
his blood unto God. Rev. 5.9. And they sung a new song, saying, Thou art worthy
to take the book, and to open the seals thereof; for thou wast slain and
have redeemed us to God, by thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and
people, and Nation.

22. The shedding of the blood of Christ, is not without the acceptance of his
Father; being his Father accepts his satisfaction through his blood, as
sufficient to salvation, redemption, and reconciliation. Col. 1.20. And (having
made peace through the blood of his Cross) by him to reconcile all things to
himself: by him, I say, whether they be things in earth, or things in heaven.

23. Liberation or Redemption from sin, and death, not only has been
established in Gods Decree, but also in Christ, and granted to us, in him,
before it be received of us. 1 John 2.2. And he is the propitiation for our
sins; and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world.

24. Christ did satisfy for them only, who by him are saved; although in
respect of his sufficiency, he has satisfied for all, and every one. 1 Timothy
2.6. Who gave himself a ransom for all, to be a testimony in due time.

25. The death of Christ frees from sin; the blood of Christ from the anger
of God, and iniquity: The power of Christ from the jaws of Satan; and Christ's
active and passive obedience from the force of the moral Law. Gal. 3.13.
Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us;
For it is written, cursed is every one that hangs on a tree.

26. Through the delivery or freedom from these, we have not only assurance,
that we shall inherit the Kingdom of glory; but also in the state of grace we
have assurance, that we shall continually have supplies, of that abundant and
overflowing grace, which is in Christ Jesus. 1 John 1.16. And of his fulness,
have all we received, and grace for grace.

27. Peace of Conscience, joy in the holy Ghost, holiness of conversation, are
adjuncts of this freedom, or Redemption. Luke 1.74, 75. That he would grant
unto us, that we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might serve
him without fear. 75. In holiness and righteousness before him all the days
of our life.

28. Redemption has been once performed, twice manifested in the day of grace,
and the hour of Judgment. Romans 8.23. And not only they but our selves also,
which have the first fruits of the Spirit, even we our selves, groane-within
our selves, waiting for the Adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body.

29. Redemption does so far free the Christian, that he is wholly taken from
the bar of Justice, and placed always at the throne of grace and mercy. Heb.
12.18.22, 23, 24. Verse the 18. For ye are not come unto the Mount, that might
be touched, and that burns with fire, nor unto blackness and darkness and
tempest. Verse the 22. But ye are come unto Mount Sien, and unto the City of
the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of
Angels. Verse the 23. To the general Assembly, and the Church of the first
borne, which are written in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the
spirits of just men made perfect. Verse the 24. And to Jesus the Mediator of
the Covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling, that speaks better things then
that of Abel.

30. The comfort and consolation of the Redemption by the hand of Christ
Redeemer, is according to the act of faith in Christ, by whom this redemption
is wrought. Psalm. 116.8. Thou have delivered my soul from death: mine eyes
from tears, and my feet from falling. Isaiah 51.11. Therefore the Redeemed of
the Lord shall return; and come with singing unto Sion; and everlasting joy
shall be upon their head; they shall obtain gladness, and joy, and sorrow shall
flee away.

31. There is an inseparable conjunction between Election and Redemption, since
that before the foundation of the world, Christ was chosen to be the Redeemer
of his chosen and peculiar. Ephesians. 9.7. Having made known unto us the mystery
of his will, according to his good pleasure, which he had purposed in himself.
Verse the 7. In whom we have reaemption through his blood, the forgiveness of
sins, according to the riches of his grace.

Contemplation.
SUch was the kindness of God to Israel, that once in fifty year, they had a
year of Jubilee; in which he who was in bondage, and thraldom, was set at
liberty, and freedom: Such has been the bounty of God to us, that he has
appointed a year of deliverance, by the hand of Christ, that we being Captives
might be set free, and being also bondslaves, we might be set at liberty.
Christ was anointed for that end, not with the oil of Olives, or other
material substance, but with the abundant and overflowing grace of God, that
he might bring poor Captives from Captivity, and we who were poor bondmen,
from everlasting slavery. What is the bondage to man, in respect of the bondage
to Satan? or what is the liberty amongst men in respect of the liberty of
Christ Jesus? From what are we freed? yea from what are we not freed? from the
dominion of sin, the slavery of the Law, the tyranny of Satan, and the gates
of the pit of hell and destruction. By what art thou freed? yea by what art
thou not freed? From sin by the precious, incomparable, inestimable blood of
Christ, out of the jaws of Satan: by the potent, invincible, and unconquerable
strength of Christ, from the force of death: by the vertuall, and efficatious
death of Christ, and from the cursing, condemning, and arraigning power of the
Moral Law, by the full and satisfactory obedience of Christ. It has not been
in the power of man, nor the will of man to work out the work of satisfaction,
or the work of Redemption; the Wine Press of Gods wrath, would have been too
hot, and too heavy for him: It has not been in the mind of Angels, it
would have crushed them to the earth, yea to hell, to have born that weighty
wrath, and fierce indignation of God against sin, when neither spear nor
shield was found among any in the world, for the delivery of mankind; strength
and power has been found in the arms of Christ, fully to perform the work
of deliverance: if a world had been given for the Redemption of one soul, it
would have been refused; an infinite would admit of nothing finite. O! what
worth? what value? what price is the blood of Christ, which is of sufficiency
to redeem all men? all the power of the Creature, could not bring one soul
out of the slavery of the Devil. Oh! what power? what strength? what worth of
excellency is there in Christ? who by his power, strength, and might, has
brought thousands out of the bondage and slavery of hell, and the Devil? All
the Angels in heaven could not by their skill remove one poor soul from the
bar of Justice, and bring it to the mercy-seate, to hear one word of mercy.
What a Sea of wisdom is in Christ? who by his wisdom can bring all the poor
and distressed Consciences to the throne of mercies, to receive whole Rivers of
mercy from thence unto their souls. Sampson overthrew more at his death, then
he did all his life: Christ did more in the Redemption of his in death, then he
did in the time of his life. Let us therefore lift up our eyes to heaven, and
behold the bountiful and benignous mind of God unto us, that whilst our cases
were desperable, and we saw no way for delivery, God has found out a way, and
has sent from heaven the Son of his love, to be our deliverer. A Ram was not
provided, but a Lamb, that through his blood took away the sins of the
world, satisfied Gods Justice, and procured for his people, a joyful and
glorious freedom. God manifested his power from the Cloud, and overthrew
Pharaoh, his Charets, and horsemen in the red Sea. God manifested his mighty
strength in the subverting of Satan and sin, through the blood of Christ.
When Peter was in bonds, the Angel set Peter free; when we were bound by
chains, in the dungeon of darkness and death, Christ has set us free; So
that now the consciences and spirits of the faithful, and ours also, are free
to grace, and to the enjoyment of the Kingdom of felicity; let the Christian
therefore think on these things, and triumph with the Apostle; Oh death, where
is thy sting; oh hell, where is thy victory; let him not fear, neither Law,
nor hell, nor death, nor the Devil, since he is redeemed from the world, though
he live in the world, to God above, who is all in all; to whom be ascribed the
praise of all for evermore. 1 Timothy 1.17. Now unto the King eternal, immortal,
invisible, and the only wise God, be honor and glory, for ever and ever, Amen.

CHAP. VIII. Concerning Christ's Mediation.
Definition.
1. THe Mediation of Christ is the presentation of himself, that external and
infinite oblation once offered to God his Father to that end, that the riches
of heavenly grace might be infused, his redeemed might have free access to his
Fathers Majesty; and his Father everlastingly reconciled to his peculiar and
selected. Hebr. 7.25, 26, 27. Wherefore he is able also to save them to the
uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession
for them. For such an high Priest became us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled;
separate from sinners, and made higher then the heavens. Who needs not daily
as those high Priests, to offer up sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then
for the peoples: for this he did once, when he offered up himself.

2. It is convenient that Christ who is the Mediator betwixt God and man,
should be God-man; unless he had been man, he had not been a fit sacrifice:
unless he had been God, he had not been of sufficient virtue. 1. Tim. 2 5. For
there is one God, and one Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus.

3. Through the personal union of both natures, Christ Mediator is become
King of his Church, and head of the same kind with his body. Ephesians. 1.22, 23.
And has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be the head over all
things to the Church, Which is his body, the fullness of him that fills all
in all.

4. The humiliation of Christ through which he submitted himself to answer the
righteousness of God, and his exaltation which was manifested when he rose
again from the dead, ascending on high, leading captivity captive, has
obtained a perfect redemption for the faithful. Ephesians. 4.8. Wherefore he
says, when he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts
unto men. Hebr 9.12. Neither by the blood of goats, and calves, but by his own
blood he entered in once into the holy place, having obtained eternal
redemption for us.

5. The satisfaction and merit of Christ Mediator, has taken away
condemnation, and has brought eternal life and salvation. Colos. 1.13. Who
has delivered us from the power of darkness, and has translated us into the
kingdom of his dear Son.

6. The merit and satisfaction of Christ differ in diverse operations.

7. The exaltation of Christ is no part of the merits or satisfaction of
Christ, through which he mediates for his with his Father. The ground is this,
since the exaltation of Christ Mediator, follows his cross or satisfaction.

8. Christ is said to be Mediator betwixt God and the faithful, not that it
wholly agrees to the human nature of Christ, but also to his divine nature.
Act. 20.28. Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the flock over
which the holy Ghost has made you overseers, to feed the Church of God, which
he has purchased with his own blood.

9. The satisfaction of Christ according to the substance of it presupposes
grace: through grace Christ has been called to the work of satisfaction. Isa.
53.10. Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him, he has put him to grief: when
thou shall make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, he shall
prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hands.

10. When we speak of the Mediator Christ Jesus, we must have reference to the
divine pleasure of God; for through that he has ordained Christ to be
Mediator, that he might obtain eternal peace for his redeemed. Isa. 53.6. And
we like sheep have gone astray: we have turned every one to his own way; and
the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all.

11. The price of our redemption could not be paid by man; therefore it has
been the work of a Mediator to pay the ransom, to intercede betwixt God and
man; not only by payment, procuring redemption, but also by intercession,
making a perfect peace and reconciliation. Isa. 53. the last verse: Therefore
will I divide him a portion with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with
the strong: because he has powered out his soul unto death; and he was numbered
with the transgressors, and he bare the sins of many, and made intercession
for the transgressors. Ephesians. 2.14. For he is our peace, who has made both
one, and has broken down the middle wall of partition between us.

12. When as our sins were as a cloud betwixt God and us, we being banished and
shut out from his presence, so that we could not behold his favor: neither
could we ascend to him, unless he had descended down to us by the hand of a
Mediator. Ephesians. 2.17, 18. And came and preached peace to you which were
afar off, and to them that were nigh. For through him we both have an access
by one Spirit unto the Father.

13. Although man had stood perfect and entire without spot or wrinkle, yet was
he of so mean a condition that he could never come to God without the hand of
the Mediator Christ Jesus. The ground is this, since it would have been a
dishonor to the Lord Christ, if man should have access to God blessed for
ever, except by himself who was the appointed Mediator.

14. The mission of Christ that he might be Mediator, and that he might be
reconciler betwixt God and man, flows from the divine decree of God, upon
which depends the beatitude or felicity of man. Ephesians. 1.9, 10. Having made
known unto us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure which he
had purposed in himself. That in the dispensation of the fullness of times he
might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven,
and which are on earth even in him. Luke 2.14. Glory to God in the highest, and
on earth peace, good will toward men.

15. In the person of Christ the Mediator there are two things considerable;
the distinction of natures, and the personal union of both together divine, so
far as he is the second person of the Trinity: human, so far as he took
upon him the seed of Abraham. Hebr. 2.14. Forasmuch then as the children are
partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same,
that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is
the devil.

16. The intercession of Christ is twofold; verbal, or meritorious. Verbal in
his prayers for his whom he would redeem and justify; meritorious being an
oblation of infinite value accepted of his Father; that through that, the
prayers, persons, and services of believers may be accepted in all ages. Joh.
17.9. I pray for them, I pray not for the world; but for them which thou have
given me, for they are thine. Hebr. 10.5, 6. Wherefore when he comes into the
world he says, Sacrifice and offering thou would not, but a body have thou
prepared me. In burnt offerings and sacrifices for sin thou have had no
pleasure.

17. The office of Christ Mediator, is not only to pray for his, but to offer
up his life for the redemption or deliverie of the life of his people. Matthew.
20.28. Even as the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister;
and to give his life a ransom for many.

18. The intercession of Christ Mediator, is the cause of the intercession of
the Spirit in us. Romans 8.27. And he that searches the hearts knows what is
the mind of the spirit, because he makes intercession for the Saints according
to the will of God.

19. Christ Mediator intercedes for his with his Father: he is ever present
with his Father. The Father ever remembers that sacrifice once offered by him
for his peculiar. Hebr. 7 25. Wherefore he is able also to save them to the
uttermost, that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make
intercession for them.

20. The intercession of Christ Mediator, has been sufficient and efficatious
from the beginning, by virtue of the decree, promise, and acceptance. Hence he
was termed a Lamb slain from the beginning of the world.

21. The adoption of believers, depends on the grace of Christ Mediator.

22. Christ Mediator was never promised without the shedding of his blood;
being it has been the eternal counsel of God that none should be cleansed
from sin without that blood so precious. 1. Pet. 1.18, 19, 20. Forasmuch as ye
know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold,
from your vain conversation, received by tradition from your fathers: But with
the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish, and without spot.
Who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world, but was
manifest in these last times for you. Revel. 1.5. And from Jesus Christ who is
the faithful witness, and the first begotten of the dead, and the Prince of
the kings of the earth, unto him that has loved us, and washed us from our
sins in his own blood.

23. The prayers of all the faithful from the beginning of the world has had
acceptance alone for the Mediators sake Christ Jesus. Dan. 9.17.23. Now
therefore, O our God, hear the prayer of thy servant, and his supplications,
and cause thy face to shine upon thy sanctuary that is desolate for the Lords
sake. At the beginning of thy supplications the commandment came forth, and I
am come to show thee for thou art greatly beloved; therefore understand the
matter, and understand the vision.

24. The anger of God rests on them who leave Christ the only Mediator, by
the appointment of God the Father. Joh. 3.36. He that believes on the Son;
has everlasting life: and he that believes not the Son, shall not see life;
but the wrath of God abides on him.

25. God never shows himself propitious to any without the mediation of
Christ the absolute Mediator. Matthew. 3. ult. And lo a voice from heaven,
saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.

26. The sacrifices in the time of the Law taught plainly, that God would not
be merciful to any, but through Christ; and that salvation could not be found
elsewhere save in the expiation of Christ, who should pour out his blood for
his peoples ransom. Luke 22.2. Likewise also he took the Cup after supper,
saying, this Cup is the new Testament in my blood, which is shed for you.

27. When as man has not been able to stand in Gods sight, through the fear
and terror of transgression, that we might appear without fear and terror, he
has given Jesus Christ our Lord, that he might be Mediator and Advocate with
himself for us. 1. Joh. 2.12. I write unto you little children, because your
sins are forgiven you, for his Names sake.

28. Christ is Mediator to day, yesterday, and for ever. Hence Gods people
never fail of acceptance in Gods sight that loves them. Heb. 13 8. Jesus
Christ the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever. Ephesians. 1.6. He has made
us accepted in the beloved.

29. Who of the sons of men could make themselves the sons of God; of
captives, heirs of the celestial kingdom? except Christ, Mediator, who
assumed the human nature of man, that he might give to them that plenitude of
his grace which was given unto him, and that he might take to him that which
belonged unto them. 2. Cor. 5. last. For he has made him to be sin for us, who
knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.

30. The prayers which the faithful offer up to God are freely accepted,
through the mediation of Christ. Ephesians. 5.2. And walk in love, as Christ also
loved us, and has given himself for us an offering and a sacrifice unto God
for a sweet smelling savor.

31. Christ for ever appearing Mediator and Advocate in the presence of God;
God does turn away his face from our sins, and turn his face toward his
righteousness. Dan. 9.24. Seve^ty weeks are determined upon thy people, and upon
thy holy City, to finish the transgression, and to make an end of sins, and to
make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness,
and to seal up the vision, and prophecy, and to anoint the most holy.

32. Through the mediation of Christ, true believers have free access to the
throne of grace, from which they are filled with divine grace, and heavenly
blessings, being freed from the terrors and horrors of their spiritual
enemies. Luke 1.74. That he would grant unto us, that we being delivered out of
the hands of our enemies, may serve him without fear. Hebr. 2.15. And deliver
them who through fear of death were all their life time subject to bondage.

33. Damned preparatories will fail in the hour of death and judgment, when
the mediation of Christ will be a city of refuge against sin, and an arc of
covert against the rigor of the Law, and all evils. Romans 8.34. Who is he that
condemns? it is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again: who is even
at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us.

Contemplation.
SUch was thy separation, O Christian, from God, that thou nor I could approach
nigh to God without the hand of our Mediator Christ Jesus; through sin the
handwriting is written against us; we are laid in the balance and found too
light: the mighty wall of separation does so prevent us from approaching, that
unless God did descend down to us by Christ, we could not ascend to him. If we
did but think of ascending to God without Christ, our quakings would be like
the quakings of Beltashazar, and our tremblings as the tremblings of Israel,
before Mount Sinai: or we should hide our faces from him as did Adam our
Father. How terrible? how dreadful? how angry is God with those who look
toward him for mercy without Christ's Mediation? Assuredly if God should but
enter into judgment for one sin, should but ponder or weigh one iniquity,
none could stand before him. If the Angels are impure, in respect of the
purity of his nature; how much more sinful or ungodly men? Man may offend or
trespass against man, and man may plead for him: But if man sin against God,
who shall plead for him but Christ? By him alone we have recourse to the throne
of grace for grace, and to the throne of mercy for mercy. Without him the
heaven should be as brass, and iron, so that our prayers could not enter into
the celestial Sanctuary, nor find acceptance in the presence or sight of God.
Where now is the hand of mercy? the scepter of bounty? and the comfortable
answer of God to the conscience? but in Christ who sits at the right hand of
the Father, making intercession for us. Wherefore if we want wisdom, peace,
and righteousness, remission of sins, and joy of the holy Ghost, let us look
toward heaven, and remember that Christ's oblation once offered is so
prevalent, that through that we shall have an answer of what our souls desire.
Though we may hide our faces as did the Cherubims, in respect of our own
vileness, yet may we look up to God for spiritual blessings, through the
mediation of Christ with confidence. No child may go freer to his father, no
wife to her husband, then we may have recourse to God through Jesus Christ.
Whilst our prayers are weak, Christ's mediation is strong; and whilst our
performances deserve to be denied, through Christ's oblatio^ they are accepted.
Hester found acceptance, although the golden Scepter of Ahashucrus was not
stretched forth: much more shall we find accepration, since that in Christ the
Scepter of bounty is stretched forth; not faithless requests, lowdnes of
voice, repetitions of hell, and death, cause an answer of desires; for had not
Christ merited an answer, we could not be answered. Hence before our requests
touch the heavens, we have an answer on the earth. Dan. 9.23. At the beginning
of thy supplications, the Commandment came forth, and I am come to show thee;
for thou art greatly Beloved, therefore understand the matter, and consider the
Vision.

CHAP. IX. Concerning Reconciliation.
Definition.
1. REconciliation is an Act of the free and dear love of God, our heavenly,
gracious, and clementious Father, whereby through the death, and blood of the
Lord Jesus Christ, he has reconciled us unto himself; to the end, that we
might enjoy everlasting peace and communion with himself, through his beloved.
2 Cor. 5.19 2 Cor. 5.18. Romans 5.10. Coll. 1.20.

2. As the blood of Christ is the cause of Redemption from sin; so it is the
cause of Reconciliation to God. Coll. 1.20. And (having made peace, through the
blood of his Cross) by him to reconcile all things unto himself, by him, I
say; whether they be things in earth, or things in heaven.

3. The only subject in whom we are reconciled to God our Father, is Christ
Jesus our Lord; since that in him alone God does not impute our sins to us. 2
Cor. 5.19. To wit, that God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself,
not imputing their trespasses unto them, and has committed unto us the word of
Reconciliation.

4. The ends of Reconciliation, are the peace of Conscience, the dignity of
Christ our Mediator, and the faithfulls fruition of Gods presence, which was
obscured or hidden from them by reason of iniquity. Ephesians. 2.14. For he is our
peace, who has made both one, and broken down the middle wall of partition
between us.

5. Whilst the soul apprehends not this reconciliation with God in Christ,
there is nothing but disturbance; but when the Spirit of God does assure us of
our Reconciliation with him, we then enjoy the peace of Conscience. Isa. 26.3.
Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee, because he
trusts in thee.

6. The sense of Reconciliation, through the hand of Christ Mediator, is the
beginning of tranquillity of mind, and the upholder of the Spirit against the
fear of the hour of death and Judgment. Isa. 26.12. Lord thou will ordain
peace for us; for thou also bast wrought all our works in us. Isa. 25.8. He
will swallow up death in victory, and the Lord God will wipe away tears from
off all faces, and the rebuke of his people shall he take away from off all the
carth; for the Lord has spoken it.

7. The more a Christian has the sense of this estate and condition, he is
more heavenly in his meditation, more comfortable in declaration, and holy in
conversation. The ground is this, since the dear love of God in the act of
Reconciliation, is the ground of our affection to Christ in the heavenly
places, and of obedience to Gods blessed and sacred Majesty.

8. It is impossible he should loose Gods favor any more, who through the
death of Christ, is to God reconciled, since that sins handwriting is wholly
removed, and that this precious death is a sufficient ransom from all
iniquity. Col. 2.14. Blotting out the handwriting of ordinances that was
against us, which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nayling it to
his Cross. Romans 4.25. Who was delivered for our offenses, and was raised
again for our justification.

9. The faithful under the Law, did not only look for salvation, but also
for reconciliatio^ by the hand of Christ. Isaiah 26.12. Lord thou will ordain
peace for us; for thou also have wrought all our works in us.

10. God was reconciled to man before it was vertually manifested, and after
vertuall manifestation, he is reconciled before of his it be received. The
ground is this, Since it is the wisdom of the Faether, that in himself there
should be the primary ordination, afterward answered by Christ in the act of
Reconciliation, and conferred to the Saints by way of Reception.

11. For as much as it has been impossible, that any creature could reconcile
himself to God infinite in nature, it has been the free grace of God to send
his beloved Son, that being infinite, he might answer, what infinite Justice
did require. Isaiah 63.3. I have trodden the Wine Press alone, and of the
people there was none with me.

12. He that supposes that by answer to the moral Law, he either pacifieth
Gods Justice, procures Gods favor, or makes peace with God, is deceived, for
there is no other means under heaven, to give us rest in the day of great
necessity, or peace in the depths, or gulfes of misery, save by the death and
sufferings of the Lord Jesus. Isaiah 53.5. But he was wounded for our
transgressions; he was bruised for our iniquities; the chastisement of our
peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed.

13. To attribute Reconciliation to any Creature save unto Christ Mediator, is
blasphemy, and a point of high Arminianisme.

14. Although we have been estranged from God through sin, heirs of anger,
of eternal death, subject to destruction, shut out from all the hope of
salvation, and alienated from the blessings of God, and under the yoke and
bondage of the Moral Law, notwithstanding, such has been the love of God unto
us in Christ, that he would remove all these, and not only reconcile us unto
himself, by the blood of Christ, but also by his death. Romans 5.10. For if when
we were enemies, we were reconciled to God, by the death of his Son; much
more being reconciled we shall be saved by his life.

15. By the knowledge of Gods anger against us, we come to the knowledge of our
misery, and of his mercy; and unless we know, how great a sepation or distance
there is betwixt GOD and us, we can never value or prize, the exceeding or
excellent virtue of our Reconciliation by Christ.

16. As God first loves us before he does redeem us, so does he love us,
before he reconcile us unto himself; albeit, we have no assurance of his love,
until we through faith apprehend him to be reconciled unto us through Jesus
Christ. 2 Cor. 5.18. And all things are of God, who has reconciled us unto
himself by Jesus Christ, and has given us the ministry of Reconciliation.

17. Incomprehensible and immutable is the love of God, that although we were
not reconciled actually through the blood and death of his Son, yet he loved
us before the foundation of the world. Ephesians. 1.4 According as he has chosen
us in him, before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy, and
without blame before him in love.

18. As Redemption, Adoption, Union, and Communion, can never be disannulled,
since they are obtained by Christ, and in him established: so reconciliation
being the work of God in Christ, and procured, both by the precious blood, and
vertuall death of Christ, can never be annihilated.

19. Not only the presentation of the chosen of God, but also the glory of
God, and the honor of Christ Mediator, hangs upon the everlasting
reconciliation of the faithful to God. Col. 1.22. In the body of his flesh
through death, to present you holy and unblamable, and unreprovable in his
sight. Heb. 9.24. For Christ is not entered into the holy places, made with
hands, which are the figures of the true, but into heaven it self, now to
appear in the presence of God for us.

20. The infinite worth and power of Christ, in matter of Reconciliation, is so
sufficient to answer Gods infinite purity, that Gods pure nature desires no
more in matter of Reconciliation. 2 Pet. 17. For he received from God the
Father, honor and glory, when there came such a voice to him from the
excellent glory; This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.

21. Though there is a participation of the virtue of Christ's Reconciliation in
this veil of misery, yet the full fruition is not enjoyed of the faithful,
until they come to the Heaven of felicity. 1 Cor. 2.9. For it is written, eye
has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has entered into the heart of man, the
things which God has prepared for them that love him.

22. The assurance that the faithful have of the answer of mercy, and of the
treasures, riches, and wisdom of Christ, is, because that through the infinite
worth of Christ's death and blood, they are absolutely reconciled to GOD the
Father. Col. 2.2. That their hearts might be comforted, being knit together in
love, and unto all riches of full assurance of understanding, to the
acknowledgement of the mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ. Col.
1.21, 22. Yet now has he reconciled in the body of his flesh through death, to
present you holy and unblameable, and unreproveable in his sight.

Contemplation.
THe saying of Ahaziah, King of Israel, to Jehu was; Is there peace? His answer
was, What peace? The reply of the wounded Conscience is; Is there not peace?
The answer is given, there is peace: God who was an enemy, is now become a
friend; his hatred against sin was so great, that it could not be pacified or
assuaged by any humane creature. The bars of Hell, the gates of death, the
iron bands of sin, the fierceness of the Moral Law, is removed by a person
infinite; the same virtue and worth, which has procured Redemption, has
procured Reconciliation. The strength of Sampson, was more then the gates of
Azzah; the virtue and worth in Christ, has been above the enmity betwixt God
and man. What is like to this great and wonderful work of Reconcilement? As
nothing can parallel the work of Redemption and Union with GOD through Christ,
so nothing can equal the work of Reconciliation to God by the hand of Christ.
When we see the Rainbow, we admire, yet we cease to admire, when we consider
the hand that made it. When we behold the famous work of Reconciliation, we may
wonder, yet cease to wonder when we consider the hand that did it. How
comfortable is the calmness of weather, after stormy times? How passing
comfortable is the peace of Conscience from Reconcilement to God, after the
stormy times of temptation? Out of the sweet comes Corroboration; and out of
this comes the greatest consolation. When Balacke saw the standing of Israel in
the Wilderness, he said; How comely are thy tents, O Israel; and thy
habitations O Jacob? When the faithful through the eye of faith, behold the
fruits of reconciliation to God, they say, how great delight, and
comfortablenesse, arises from that peace which is made betwixt God and their
souls? Hence from the work of Reconciliation, comes the work of a Christians
moving to Godward with freeness of spirit. Hence comes the Gospel of
Reconciliation, which speaks better things then the Law: the Law speaks evil;
as Micah against Ahab; as Do^g against the Priests of the Lord; as the Jews
against our Savior, but now the Gospel speaks graciously and sweetly of
peace, of grace, of mercy, being that man to God is reconciled through the hand
of the Mediator Jesus Christ: turn therefore thine ear from the Law to the
Gospel, and walk thou in the comfort thereof, till thou come to see thy
Redeemers face in Sion, and the brightness of the countenance of thy loving
God and Father, blessed for evermore. Then shall thou be satisfied with his
favor, filled with joys, and his sight and Image shall be thy great
contentment. Then shall thou say with the Psalmist, Psalm. 16 11. Thou will show
me the path of life; in thy presence is fullness of joy; at thy right hand are
pleasures for evermore.

CHAP. X Concerning Justification.
Definition.
1. ZAdick Just, in hiphill, signifies righteousness: in hisdi^k justificare,
that is, to account some man just or righteous. Romans 3.26. To declare; I say,
at this time his righteousness: that he might be just, and the justifier of
him which believes in Jesus.

2. Justification is the gracious sentence of God, through Christ apprehended
by faith, whereby he does free the sinner from sins, death, and condemnation;
and repute them just to life, glory, and salvation. Romans 3.24. Being justified
freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ. Romans 5.
ult. That as sin has reigned unto death; even so might grace reign through
righteousness unto eternal life, by Jesus Christ our Lord.

3. This gracious sentence in Justification proceeds from Gods decree, that it
might be pronounced in Christ our Savior to his people, and virtually sealed
to the soul by the holy Spirit, that the Saints might be assured of the
condonation of iniquity, and the imputation of divine and heavenly
righteousness. Micah 7.18. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons
iniquity, and passes by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage? he
retains not his anger for ever, because he delights in mercy. Romans 5.18.
Therefore as by the offense of one, judgment came upon all men to
condemnation: even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all
men unto justification of life.

4. By the same grace whereby Christ was called unto the office of a Mediator,
the elect are called to union and communion with Christ, and by that accounted
just in the sight and presence of God. Hebr. 3.1, 2. Wherefore, holy brethren,
partakers of the heavenly calling, consider the Apostle and high Priest of our
profession Christ Jesus. Who was faithful to him that appointed him; as also
Moses was faithful in all his house. 1. Cor. 1.9. God is faithful by whom ye
were called unto the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord.

5. The efficient cause of our justification is the rich and free grace of God;
the mereitorious cause is themerit of Christ; the isntrumental cause is faith,
apprehending and resting on the promises of God; the end is the glory of God
the salvation of believers, and the illustration of divine mercy. Romans 5.17.
For if by one man's offense death reigned by one, much more they which receive
abundance of grace, and of the gifts of righteousness, shall reign in life by
one Jesus Christ.

6. Christ is dead, and all are dead, that the righteousness of one might be
imputed to all. 2. Cor. 5.15. And that he died for all, that they which live
should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them,
and rose again. Romans 4.24. But for us also, to whom it shall be imputed, if we
believe on him that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead.

7. Christ willingly died, and was willingly crucified, and willingly bare the
sense of his Fathers wrath for our sakes, that he might break the bonds and
chains of death, that he might satisfy the justice of his Father, and bring in
everlasting peace, atonement, and reconciliation. Isa. 53.6, 7. All we like
sheep have gone astray: we have turned every one to his own way, and the Lord
has laid on him the iniquity of us all. He was oppressed, and he was
afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth; he is brought as a Lamb to the
slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb: so he opened not his
mouth.

8. Christ changes our estate and condition, and clotheth us with his pure,
divine, and spotless righteousness, that in his Fathers sight and presence we
might find acceptance. Ephesians. 1.6. vide.

9. This is the stream of sweetest consolation, that the Lord Christ was
accounted unjust, that we might be counted just, and that he stood in the place
of the unrighteous, that we might stand in the place of righteous. 1. Pet.
3.18. For Christ also has once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust,
that he might bring us to God: being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by
the Spirit.

10. Christ the Son and Lord of righteousness, who is our life, and
everlasting righteousness, overcoming death, shines by the Gospel, makes us
now to sit with himself in the heavenly places; that there might be nothing
wanting to our felicity, and to the praise and riches of his grace and
bounty. Ephesians. 2.6, 7. And has raised us up together, and made us sit
together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus. That in the ages to come he might
show the exceeding riches of his grace in his kindness toward us through
Christ Jesus.

11. Now the Son and Lord of righteousness does shine, and we have the
perfect beauty of his divine and pure righteousness revealed in the Gospel of
life and reconciliation: such as is the clearness of noonday, although in
former ages it has been hidden and obscured. Ephesians. 3 8, 9. Unto me who am
less then the least of all Saints, is this grace given, that I should preach
among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ. And to make all men see
what is the fellowship of the mystery which from the beginning of the world
has been hid in God, who created all things by Jesus Christ.

12. Adam whilst he stood in his integrity, innocence, and purity, was not
so pure in the sight of God, as the Saints who are presented spotless in the
flesh of Christ, and imputed righteous through the righteousness of Christ the
Lord, and Prince of righteousness. The ground is this, since the righteousness
which is given to the Saints through union with Christ, surmounteth that which
was given to Adam when he was created.

13. The righteousness of God is not sufficiently manifested and declared,
unless by that the Saints and redeemed may be accounted sufficiently just in
his sight; and that God should communicate righteousness to the undeserving.

14. This is our trust and glory, that Christ the Son of God, the only
author of our salvation, is become our righteousness; and that we in him are
the sons and heirs of the celestial kingdom, made partakers of the divine
nature, and called to the hope and expectation of everlasting beatitude. 1.
Pet. 1.3, 4. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
according to his abundant mercy has begotten us again unto a lively hope by
the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. Romans 8.17. And if children,
then heirs, heirs with God, and joint heirs with Christ: If so be that we
suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together. 2. Pet. 1.4. Whereby
are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises, that by these you
might be partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the corruption, that is
in the world through lust.

15. The sinner is received into communion with Christ, whilst by the grace of
God he is reconciled, and by the blood of Christ he is purged from
transgression; and not otherwise does he stand before the tribunal seat of God,
save by the righteousness of God his Savior, and of Jesus Christ his blessed
and sweet Redeemer. The ground is this, since no righteousness can answer the
righteousness of God, but the pure and infinite righteousness of Christ.

16. There is an inseparable conjunction between the pardon and remission of
sins, and the imputation of divine and absolute righteousness, which is
conveyed to the Saints through communion with the Lord Jesus: so that their
imperfections are covered, the spots and filthiness thereof are deleted, lest
they may come into question by eternal and absolute judgment.

17. If we seek by what means the heart is fixed, and the conscience
satisfied, by no other way or means shall we find it, save by the power of the
cross of Christ, interest in his death, the efficacy of his resurrection, and
the imputation in pure and everlasting righteousness.

18. Whosoever does desire to be just before God, he must seek to be freed
from sin, by the precious and incomparable blood of Christ, and from the
riged force of the Moral Law, by his active and passive obedience. Romans 10.4.
For Christ is the end of the Law, for righteousness to every one that
believes.

19. By his purity all our spots are covered, and the uncleanness of our
imperfections to us is not imputed; and our transgressions in Christ's grave
buried, that they might never plead against us before the bar of Justice.

20. When we are inserted and ingrafted into Christ, then does he dignifie us,
making us one in himself, that we may glory that we are admitted into
fellowship and communion with the Father, with himself, and with his people who
are sanctified by the Spirit, and accounted a glorious people through his
glorious and perfect righteousness. 1. Joh. 1.3. vide.

21. Although justification is for and in Christ the beloved Mediator;
notwithstanding the Saints are not justified in the sight of God until faith
is given to the Saints, by which the Lord Christ is apprehended Romans 5.1.
Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God, through our Lord
Jesus Christ.

22. Christ is the adaequate object of faith, so far forth as faith does
justify. Galat. 2.16. Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the
Law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ; even we have believed in Jesus Christ,
that we might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the
Law: for by the works of the Law shall no flesh be justified.

23. Faith upon no other consideration is said to justify, save, because it
apprehends the superabundant grace of God in reconciliation, applies Christ's
death, blood, and resurrection to the Saints, and rests upon the promises of
God, which are yea, and Amen, to the glory of the Father. 2. Cor. 1.20. vide.

24. This is the life of says, through which a sinner does come to the
possession of his own salvation, whilst by the doctrine of the Gospel he does
acknowledge himself reconciled to God, redeemed and ransomed by the inenarrable
blood of Christ, sealed by the Spirit of life and obsignation, and filled with
joys unspeakable and glorious. 1. Pet. 1.8. Whom having not seen ye love, in
whom though now ye see him not, yet believing ye rejoice with joy unspeakable
and glorious.

25. We are justified before men by holiness and uprightness of conversation,
but before God by the imputation of righteousness in justification. Jam. 2.18.
Yea a man may say, thou have faith, and I have works: show me thy faith without
thy works, and I will show thee my faith by my works.

26. In the justification of the Saints through faith, we must consider the
remission of sin and transgression. The imputation of divine and celestial
righteousness, the gracious acceptance of the Saints prayers and praises; and
that free and gracious reconciliation with God our bounteous and celestial
Father.

27. True justifying faith has always joined with it a certain persuasion of
the bounty and exceeding mercy of God the Father in Christ Jesus. Hebr. 6.18,
19. That by two immutable things in which it was impossible for God to lie, we
might have a strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the
hope set before us. Which hope we have as an ancre of the soul, both sure and
steadfast, and which enters into that within the veil.

28. Though the Saints after their justified estate and condition, may ask the
pardon of sin, and the forgiveness of iniquity, notwithstanding the end
thereof must be the further assurance thereof; the exaltation of the riches of
grace, and the praise of the blood of Christ, which is the cause of condonation
or remission. The grounds are these, that diffidence and unbeleef may be
removed, and the exaltation of the love of God in Christ may be exalted.

29. The new creature presented in Christ unblameable and unreproveable in the
sight of God through reconciliation, made perfect and pure in the presence of
God through justification, endewed with the heavenly and pure grace of
sanctification, is so freed from sin, iniquity and transgression, that God
beholds no more sin in it then in the Lord Jesus Christ. Joh. 17.23. I in them,
and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one; and that the world may
know that thou have sent me, and have loved them as thou have loved me.

30. O admirable change! O garment most sumptuous! O royal and beautiful robe
of Christ's purity, and divine righteousness, wherewith the Saints are
adorned, his chosen invested, and his beloved friends and brethren enrobed,
that they may be for ever and evermore presented glorious in the sight of God,
who is most righteous and holy. Revel. 3.4. Thou have a sew names even in
Sardis, which have not defiled their garments, and they shall walk with me in
white, for they are worthy. Revel. 7.13, 14. And one of the elders answered,
saying unto me, What are these which are arrayed in white robes? and whence came
they? And I said unto him, Sir, thou know. And he said to me, These are they
which came out of great tribulation, and they have washed their robes, and made
them white in the blood of the Lamb.

Contemplation.
THe Church of Christ is all glorious within, through the rare induements of
the Spirit of grace; she is all glorious without, through the righteousness of
Christ imputed to her; God her Father beholds her complete in the garment of
her elder brother: if she sin, she is washed; if she is washed, she is
purified: if she is purified, she is spotless, being she is purged by the
blood of the Lamb Christ Jesus. The robe of righteousness wherewith she is
attired, is not beggarly but rich; not impure, but pure: not finite, but
infinite. Though the world judge her poor, naked, and miserable, yet she is
holy, pure, and clean; she is, as she is made to be complete in Christ, who is
her head and bridegroom, we believe there is an holy Catholic Church, we see
it not, for it is invisible, notwithstanding Gods imputation is not to be
gainsaid by the rabble of unlearned Doctors. If God speak the thing it is so;
if God impute her just, shall it not be so? If the Son make her free, she is
free indeed; if God account her just, she is just indeed. If a King forgive a
rebel, who shall impute that fault to him? If God acquit his Church, who shall
lay any thing to her charge? When Jacob was clothed with the garment of Esau,
his nakedness appeared not to the sight of his old father Isaac. The Church
being clothed with the righteousness of Christ, her nakedness appears not in
the sight of God her heavenly Father through this garment wherewith she is so
strongly invested, she is worthy to follow the Lord Christ from earth to
heaven; not only by the ascent of heavenly meditation, but by ascent of soul
after her pilgrimage is ended. For what ends? to participate of all the rich
and celestial treasures which have been prepared for her before the foundation
of the world; and to see the face of her loving Father in celestial glory.
What now shall fear her? shall wrath? shall anger? divine justice? or
indignation? No, for she is beloved, through her well beloved Christ, the very
Angels rejoice, because she is rich and full of treasures; beautiful and
exceeding amiable through the beauty and amiablenesse of Christ which is given
to her. Had Benjamin a suit passing the suites of his brethren, and has not
the Church a righteousness passing the righteousness of Pharisees? Hence she
loves, knows, nor acknowledges any other righteousness save the
righteousness of Christ; she detesteth even her own works in matter of
justification: she will wear no linsie-wolsie garments, for her pride is
great, and her ambition much in that particular: All her glory is in the Lord,
her righteousness, all her thoughts is now to love and praise her Savior, and
cease from working any more in the way of justification; confessing that of,
and from, and in him she injoyeth it, ascribing continually to him the praise
of righteousness. She gives the glory of glory to the Prince of glory; she
renders the praise of life to the Lord of life; she ascribes the honor of
peace to the Mediator of peace, and she attributes the dignity of
righteousness to her Lord of righteousness. She is in Christ, as a branch in
the Vine through union. She is in Christ as a man in the Sun, by
glorification; she is in Christ as a man in his garment through Justification.
She desires none to rest in her, but Christ the hope of glory: she requesteth
to be in none but Christ her everlasting righteousness; for his righteousness
is the righteousness of God, and it is his Fathers pleasure, that he should
become the Lord her righteousness. Upon which consideration, he is termed the
God of her righteousness. Psalm. 4.1. Hear me when I call, O God of
righteousness; for thou have set me at liberty when I was in trouble, have
mercy upon me, and hearken unto my prayer.

CHAP. XI. Concerning Sanctification.
Definition.
1. SAnctification is a real transmutation from the filthiness of sin, unto
the purity of the Image of God. Ephesians. 4.22, 23, 24. That ye put off,
concerning the former conversation, the old man, which is corrupt, according to
the deceitful lusts. And be renewed in the spirit of your mind. And that ye
put on that new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true
holiness.

2. There are two degrees of Sanctification, infancy, and strong age; the one
is in the estate of grace, the other in the estate of felicity and glory. 2
Cor. 3.18. But we all, with open face, beholding, as in a glass, the glory of
the Lord, are changed into the same Image, from glory to glory, even as by the
Spirit of the Lord.

3. In Sanctification, there are two parts considerable.

1. Mortification. 2. Vivification.
4. Mortification is the first part of Sanctification, through which sin is
mortified, and the force thereof weakened and abated. Romans 6.6. Knowing this
that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be
destroyed, that henceforth we might not serve sin.

5. Vivification is the second part of Sanctification, through which the Image
of God is restored and renewed. 1 Cor. 15.49. And as we have borne the Image of
the earthly, we shall also bear the Image of the heavenly.

6. The efficient and absolute cause, is the Father of eternal grace and
mercies. 1 These. 5.23. And the very God of peace sanctify you wholly: and I
pray God, your whole spirit, and soul, and body, be preserved blameless, unto
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

7. The meritorious, or formal cause, the precious and dear blood of the Lord
Christ, that bought us, Heb. 10.10. By the which will we are sanctified,
through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all. Heb. 10.29. Oh
how much sorer punishment suppose ye shall he be thought worthy, who has
trodden under-foote the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the
Covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and has done despite
unto the spirit of grace?

8. The isntrumental cause of our Sanctification, is the precious and
sanctifying Word of the Lord Jesus. Joh. 17.17. Sanctify them through thy
truth, thy Word is truth.

9. The spirit of life and glory, is the cause principally working and
perfecting of our Sanctification. Hence the Spirit of Christ is termed the
Spirit of Sanctification, Romans 1.4.

10. There is an inseparable lincke and conjunction betwixt the act of
Justification, by or through the righteousness of the Lord our righteousness;
and the act of Sanctification, through the Spirit of life and Adoption. The
ground is this, Since the end of Justification through the love of God, and
righteousness of Christ, is the holiness of our lives and conversations.

11. Whilst the inabilitie of man, is insufficient to mortify sin,
transgression and iniquity, the Spirit of life and consolation, works faith
in the hearts of the faithful, which lays hold on the dear blood and
precious death of the Lord Christ, which draws strength from thence, to the
utter subduing and mortifying of corruption. Heb. 9.14. How much more shall the
blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit, offered himself without spot
to God, purge your conscience from dead works to serve the living God? Romans
6.8, 9, 10. Now if we be dead with Christ, we believe that we shall also live
with him. Knowing that Christ, being raised from the dead, dies no more, death
has no more dominion over him. For in that he dyed, he dyed unto sin once,
but in that he lives, he lives unto God.

12. Whilst man is insufficient to restore again the Image of God, which he
lost in Paradise, to him is given the Spirit of life, through which he is freed
from the Law of sin and death, and raised again to live by the life and
resurrection of Christ. Romans 8.2. For the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ
Jesus, has made me free from the Law of sin and death. Romans 8.11. But if the
Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell in you, he that raised
up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his Spirit
that dwells in you.

13. The New Creature, reconciled through blood, justified through
righteousness, and sanctified by the Spirit, is really and absolutely freed
from blame, reproof, and sin in the sight of, God the Father. 2 Cor. 5.17.
Coll. 1.22. Vide.

14. As God has glory by faith in his promise, love to his Name, and hope in
his salvation; so he has glory by holiness and sanctity in our lives and
conversations. Romans 4.20. He staggered not at the promise of God, through
unbelief: But was strong in faith, giving glory to God. Joh. 17 10. And all
mine are thine, and thine are mine, and I am glorified in them. Mat. 5.16. Let
your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in Heaven.

15. Though the Father of glory, and God of all consolation, give us life
eternal without the desert of holiness and sanctification, yet he does not
give the joy of the Spirit, and supply of grace, without the means of
sanctimony or sanctification. Act. 10.43, 44. Vide.

16. Answerable to the sense of Gods divine favor, the apprehension of the
divine love of Christ, and the over-fillings and over-flowings of the joy of
the Spirit; so is the faithfulls progress to the high calling of God in
Christ. Phil. 3.14. I press toward the mark, for the price of the high
calling of God in Christ Jesus.

17. So far as our sanctification or holiness, is an assurance of our glory
and blessedness hereafter, that it shall receive the crown of hope and
approbation in the day of Judgment, and that through it we glorify our
heavenly Father, before the sons of men, we may rejoice before God, with an
assured confidence. Act. 24.14, 15, 16. But this I confess unto thee, that
after the way which they call Heresy, so worship I the God of my Fathers,
believing all things which are written in the Law and the Prephets. And have
hope toward God, which they themselves also allow, that there shall be a
resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust. And herein do I
exercise my self, to have always a conscience void of offense toward God
and men.

18. Not the terrors of the Law, the fear of hell, the dread of Justice, nor
the affrightment through condemnation, ought to move the Saints to the
obedience of the Gospel of life and salvation, since they are bound to the
obedience thereof, by the love of God, a reconciled Father, and Jesus Christ
whom he has sent. Joh. 15.12. This is my Commandment, that ye love one
another, as I have loved you. Joh. 14.15. If ye love me, keep my
Commandments.

19. Though the Saints for their sanctity and holiness, are not assured of
life and immortality, yet without sanctity and holiness, they are not
assured of beatitude and glory. Heb. 12.14. Follow peace with all men, and
holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord.

20. When the faithful do not consider their justified estate and condition,
and their glorious presentation, through the act of reconciliation, but
opposes and compares their works, with the Commands and Precepts of the
Moral Law. It does possess them with dreadful grief, and woeful sorrow.
Heb. 12.18, 19, 20, 21.

21. The works of Sanctification, makes us not the more beloved of God the
Father, or purer in his sight or presence. The ground is this, Since the
absolute, free and eternal love of God the Father, and the righteousness of
Christ, praeceeds the work of Sanctification.

22. The imperfection of sanctification, is not imputed to the Saints and
Redeemed, since they are absolutely done away in the blood of the Lord Jesus:
The ground is this, since the end of the effusion of the blood of Jesus, is the
pardon or remission of iniquity and impiety.

23. Whilst the faithful present themselves in the sight and presence of God
the Father, they must not look to their own weaknesses, infirmities and
imperfections, but to Gods sweet and loving acceptance in Christ, in whom God
alone is well pleased. Ephesians. 1.6. The ground is this; Since the end of Gods
acceptance is, that through which the Saints may have or enjoy the remission
or condonation of iniquity, weakness, and infirmity.

Contemplation.
THe Lord Christ the Author and finisher of our says, the fountain and well
spring of our refreshment, the ground of all our hope and dependence, is the
cause and finisher of our sanctification. The lower Spheres are moved by the
first Motion; our affections are moved by the power and might of the Lord
Jesus. Does the mighty waters move, without the motion of the Moon? or the
body move, without the Intellectualls? or the soul move to Christ, without the
exceeding and operative power of Christ? O my soul! thou have to deal with
that roaring Lion the Devil, the bonds and cords of iniquity, the strong gates
and bars of death and all evils, and with the flesh, which is an enemy
against the Spirit of life and glory. But thy knees are feeble, thy hands are
weak, and thy spirit fails thee in the day of battle: Therefore thou can
not ride the wild Asses colt, or tame the wild Hindes of the Wilderness, or
bring the untamed Unicorne to thy beck and command. The day is Christ's, not
thine: Thou art a triumpher, but by his power; thou art a victorer, but by his
might; thou art an overcomer, but by his strength; Thy righteousness, thy
life, thy peace, thy joy, thy love, thy hope and communion is from Christ all.
Thy mortification, thy vivification, thy sanctification, is from Christ all in
all: Is his blood the cause of remission? his righteousness the cause of
Justification? his Spirit the cause of thy Adoption? and not his life and death
the cause of thy sanctification? To thee is given the life of faith; the life
of love and obedience, to live unto God, blessed for ever. To thee is given
power from the death of Christ, (who could not be retained by the bonds of
death) blessed for evermore. Where then are the fiery darts of Satan? the
presumption of the flesh? the high looks of Principalities and Powers? Since
thou art made a Victorer, through the Lord of Victory; and have obtained a
Triumph, through our Lord Triumpher. As the weak falls before the mighty and
valiant, and light gives way to darkness: so does hell, the flesh, the Devil,
and evils give way to the Spirit of glory and sanctification. In the day of
the Cross, that roaring Lion, the Devil, could not stand before the Lion of
the Tribe of Judah: In the day of the Resurrection, the black King of
darkness and terrors, could not stand before the Lord of life, light, and
salvation. In the day of thy fight or combats, the powers of hell, or the
bars of death cannot stand through thy Lord that loves thee. O my soul!
Where now is thy thought? lower then the throne of grace? No. Where is thy
contemplation? lower then the Mercy-Seate? No. Where is thy affection? below
the heavenly places? no. Thy Lord has drawn thee, and thou art drawn; thy
Lord has allured thee, and thou art allured. In the time of his love, he
brought thee from earth to heavenly places; from hell and death, to possess a
Being of heaven and life. Where thy Lord is, there will thou be; if he was upon
the Cross, there would thou behold him; if he were in the grave, there thou
would lodge with him; if he be at the right hand of his Father, there will thou dwell with him. All thy Songs are, Praise and Glory; all thy phrase,
power, and wisdom, all thy meditations, wisdom and strength be ascribed to
thy Lord of life and light. So that thou say with the Angels. Amen,
Benediction and Glory, and Wisdom, and Thankesgiving, and Honor, and Power,
and Strength to our God, for ever and ever, Amen. Rev. 7.12.

CHAP. XII. Concerning Glorification.
Definition.
1. GLorification is a real transmutation from the misery, punishment, guilt,
and impuritie of sin, into eternal felicity, and everlasting beatitude and
glory. Apoc. 21.4. And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there
shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any
more pain: for the former things are passed away. Psalm. 16. last. Thou shall
show me the path of life: in thy presence is the fullness of joy, and at thy
right hand there is pleasure for evermore.

2. Respectu termini a quo: It is called a freedom from sin, and a
conservation from anger, death, and the kingdom of darkness 1. These. 1.10.
And to wait for his Son from heaven, whom he raised from the dead, even Jesus
which delivered us from the wrath to come. Matthew 4.16. The people which sat in
darkness saw great light: And to them which sat in the region and shadow of
death, light is sprung up.

3. Respectu termini ad quem: It is called beatification, benediction, life
eternal, glory, the kingdom of our God, and of our Lord Jesus Christ. 1. Joh
5.11. And this is the record that God has given to us, eternal life, and this
life is in his Son. Ephesians. 1.3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly
places in Christ. Apoc. 12.10. And I heard a loud voice, saying, In heaven now
is come salvation, and strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the power of
his Christ: for the accuser of our brethren is cast down, which accused them
before our God, day and night.

4. Such shall be the glory of the faithful in the kingdom of their God and
Father, that no ear has heard, no mind conceived, nor any tongue can speak
of, that glory so inenarrable, and incomparable. 1. Cor. 2.9. But as it is
written, eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has it entered into the
heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them which love him. 2.
Cor. 4.17, 18. vide.

5. Though the glory of the Saints has been intended before the world was,
nevertheless it has been in time by the Lord Christ procured and purchased,
and after time of the glorious Saints shall be possessed and enjoyed. Ephesians.
1.14. Which is the earnest of our inheritance, unto the redemption of the
purchased possession, unto the praise of his glory. 2 Cor. 5.1. For we know,
if our earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of
God, an house not made with hand, eternal in the heavens.

6. The glory and dignity of the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior, consists
not in temporal joys, terrene pleasures, or earthly jucundities, but in the
divine manifestation of the blessed presence of a God most loving. Psalm. 4.7,
8. Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us. Thou have put
gladness in mine heart, more then in the time that their corn, and wine, and
oil increased. Psalm. 17.15. They have children at their desire, and leave the
rest of their substance for their babes. Verse the 16. But as for me I will
behold thy presence in righteousness: I shall be satisfied when I wake with
thy likeness.

7. Not only the whole Church, espoused, redeemed, and reconciled, shall have
possession in the Kingdom of hope and consolation, but also they shall be
possessed of it for ever and evermore. Hence she is said to reign for ever
and evermore. Apoc. 22.4, 5. And they shall see his face, and his name shall be
in their foreheads. And there shall be no night there, and they need no candle,
neither light of the Sun; for the Lord God gives them light, and they shall
reign for ever and ever.

8. That privilege from bonds by redemption, the righteousness of Communion
with Christ, and of the bright shining and glorious countenance of God in
Christ, shall be more fully comprehended in the Kingdom of felicity, then
has been comprehended or apprehended in this veil of misery. 1. Joh. 3.2.
Behold now are we the sons of God; and it does not yet appear what we shall
be: but we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall
see him as he is.

9. The sense of the dear and tender love of God through union and communion
with the Lord Christ, is that happiness, felicity, glory, and beatitude which
shall be enjoyed of the Saints for ever and ever.

10. The abundant, fluent, and supereminent grace of God powered upon the
faithful and beloved Saints in the estate of grace, is their glory, hope, and
bliss in that estate and condition. Romans 5.2. By whom also we have access by
faith, into this grace, wherein we stand and rejoice under hope of the glory of
God.

11. The heavenly Canaan has been designed out by the promised Land of Canaan;
and our heavenly Jerusalem has been figured out by the earthly Jerusalem. Gal.
3.25, 26. For this is Agar in Mount Sinai in Arabia, and answers to Jerusalem
which now is, and is in bondage with her children. But Jerusalem which is above
is free, which is the mother of us all.

12. Predestination from eternal, vocation by the Word of truth, and the
Spirit of glory; Justification through the admirable and pure righteousness of
Christ; Sanctification by the death and resurrection of Christ, are insepably
conjoined to the glorified estate and condition of the Saints in glory. Romans
8.30. Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he also called; and whom he
called, them he also justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified.

13. Joys supereminent, comforts superexcellent, consolations superabundant
are annexed to the faithful and dear children of glory, when they think and
consider they shall have an end of all their hopes; a fullness of all their
wants, an answer of all their desires; in that heavenly, glorious and famous
City, where their loving Redeemer and dear Father dwells and inhabits for
evermore. Isa. 15.8. He will swallow up death in victory, and the Lord God will
wipe away tears from off all faces, and the rebuke of his people shall he take
away from off all the earth: for the Lord has spoken it. Psalm. 36.9. For with
thee is the well of life, and in thy light shall we see light. Apoc. 7.15, 16,
17. Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in
his Temple: and he that sits on the Throne, shall dwell among them. They
shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, neither shall the Sun light on
them, nor any heat. For the Lamb which is in the midst of the Throne, shall
feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of waters; and God shall
wipe away all tears from their eyes.

Contemplation.
SWeet were the streams which were in Paradise, precious are the streams which
flow from this fountain of grace and glory: it is a free glory which is
bestowed upon the Saints beloved. Freeness of grace is the cause of
justification, the freeness of love the cause of sanctification; the freeness
of bounty the cause of glorification. What worth, what value, what dignity
has there been in thee, O my soul? For in thy conscience has been impuritie,
in thy will contradicencie; in thy affection indignity; and in thy flesh,
impugnancie. Thou that wast purer then the purest Nazarene, becamest more
leprous then Naaman the Syrian. Thou that wast more polished then the polished
Saphir, becamest most vile by thy wicked nature, thou may confess that thou
art nothing: thy Christ is all, yea a thousand nothings, for he is all for
evermore. This glory was destinated for thee before the world was, promised to
thee in the covenant of free grace and bounty, treasured up in Christ the
Mediator of free grace and mercy; and sealed by the Spirit of Adoption life
and glory. What said I, is it laid up in Christ? Yea, for in him is thy power,
wisdom, strength, and felicity, in him is thy peace, rest, life, and glory;
in him is thy redemption, wisdom, righteousness, and excellency. Have thou
not heard that in him the Father is well pleased, in him dwells the fullness of
the Godhead bodily; and that the light of the glory of God shines in his face
and favor? Not only mediate communion is granted to thee in the day of thy
grace, but immediate communion shall be granted to thee in the day of thy glory
and felicity. It is meet that Christ who is the Redeemer of poor souls, the
justifier of the ungodly, the Reconciler of them who were at enmity, the
selector or chuser of a people undeserving, that he should be the fountain of
their blessedness and beatitude. It is an honor too great to be given to
principalities, to powers, to dignities, to Mights, or to Dominions; this only
befits Isreal's eternal Shepherd, the Author of their peace, and Prince of
their consolation. This has been the Fathers pleasure, that as all their
joys, love, peace, righteousness and promises should be communicated to the
Saints by Christ in the vale of misery: This has been the Fathers bounty,
that the communion of the Saints, the perfection of his people, the coronation
of his Martyrs, should be given to his in him, in that state so happy. The end
of predestination is vocation: the end of vocation, union; the end of union,
communion; the end of communion, hope and righteousness; and the end of hope
and righteousness is everlasting bliss and blessedness: Therefore I may say,
Christus meus and omnia. Millies hoc dicam, millies hoc cogitabo, millies hoc;
and usque, and usque, and usque millies repetam. Neque enim vel dicere vel
cogitare majus possum aut melius, quam hoc ipsum, Christus meus, and omnia.
Alii alia quaerant, alia desiderent; unum ego Christum meum quaero, Christum
desidero: O Christus meus, and omnia. Opes aliis and honores, voluptates aliis
universas relinquo: Christum ego habea^, and omnia habeo. Totos aliis ego
mundos concedo: Aureos and gemmeos montes non invideo; summas delitias
permitto; mihi Christus meus est omnia. Nihil ita bonum, nihil ita pulchrum aut
jucundum, quin summum illud and primum^^num, and melius sit, and pulchrius sit
ac jucundius. Christus meus, and omnia! quam me varia saepe accedunt desideria,
quam diversis subinde aestuo cupiditatibus! ita ut cum lunatico illo
adolescente, modo in ignem, modo in aquam rapiar. Sed quaenam illa tanta bona
sunt, quae ego tam anxie appeto? Number hoc vel illud genus edulii aut potionis?
Christus meus, cibus meus, potus meus, and omnia. Number hoc vel illud genus
relaxationis aut voluptatis? Christus meus, gaudium meum, voluptas mea, and
omnia. Number hoc vel illud genus honoris aut dignitatis? Christus meus, honor
meus, dignitas mea, and mea omnia. Quid est tandem quod appetere possim, and
cujus loco mihi non Christus sit, and sit omnia? Mihi epulatio, mihi
oblectatio, mihi quies, mihi thesaurus Christus est, mihi Christus omnia, and
plus quam omnia. Nam etsi cibis, quibus inhio, vesci: potu quem sitio, refici:
voluptate, quam ardeo, frui: honores, quos ambio, assequi liceat: quid
istudvesci, quid istud refici, and frui, and affequi? Christus meus, and omnia,
te frui, a te refici, est perfectissime refici, est frui omnibus bonis Christus
meus, and omnia. At vero labor premit, dolor affligit, curae distrahunt, homo
turbat, and exagitat. Nihil horum metueodum; neque enim haec omnia, etiamsi
simul ingrua^t mala sunt, si summum illud bonum opituletur Christus. Christus
meus, and omnia. Tu mihi, O bone Christ, O bonitas, tu in labor quies, in
dolor voluptas, in curis securitas, tu mihi ab omni hominum insultu
propugnaculum tutissimum; tu mihi ab omni malo refugium: tu mihi es omnia,
quaecunque tandem desiderare p^ssum. Ergo quandecunque in posterum, and
quodcunque bonum appetiero, hoc ipse mihi semper occinam: Christus meus, and
omnia. Desine O homo, impuros rivulos sectari, cum fonte^ purissimum habeas:
Christum habes, omnia habes, quaecunque habere concupiscis. O ye sons and
daughters of me^, O ye Watchmen of Israel, marvel not though I exalt the glory
of the Lord of glory. For I have none to mediate my cause in heaven but him;
nor none to comfort my distressed soul on earth besides him. Do the thirsty
long for water, the hungry desire bread, and the Heart bray after the rivers
and springs of water; and do not I long, desire, and bray after my Lord that
bought me?

I cry how long Lord, how long shall it be ere I see thy glorious face and
lovely countenance. O my soul, what though thy tears trickle down thy
cheeks? what though thy face is bedewed with tears? what though thy heart is
full of heaviness? Because the battle is strong betwixt thee and the black
prince of death and darkness, the world hates and contemnes thee, and Angels
of light have made thee worse then the filth of the earth, yet shall thou not
be dismayed; for there is a City provided for thee, whose maker and builder is
God: in which, there is the crown of righteousness, the crown of life, and
the crown of glory; in which there is fellowship with the Angels, with the
Saints, with the Father, and with Christ the beloved Mediator and Reconciler:
in which is everlasting praise, eternal comforts, and infinite fruition.
Therefore I will walk with the travelers, run with the runners, and fight
with the fighters, laying hold of eternal praise and glory, saying, with the
lovers of free grace, the waiters for mercy, and the poor captives of hope,
praise be given to God our celestial, gracious, and bountiful Father; honor
be ascribed to Jesus Christ, our propitious and benignous Mediator, now and
for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
HEAVENLY Contemplations.
REvel. 22.4. And they shall see his face, and his Name shall be in their
foreheads.


And they shall see his face.
THey which go down to the Sea, and occupy in the great waters, they see the
works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep: So they that go into the Church
of Christ, and view what Christ has done for his Church and chosen, they see
the works of Christ, and the wonders he has wrought; has he showed his
admirable work in the act of Redemption, his famous work in the act of
Justification; and has he not showed his famous and admirable work in the act
of donation? What has Christ given? yea, what has he not given? He has given
his redeemed Saints to see his loving face, and lovely countenance. And they
shall see his face, and his Name shall be in their foreheads.

They.
What they? yea; they shall see his face, they whose names are written in the
book of the living, whose lives are hid with God in Christ, who are presented
spotless, blameless, reprovelesse in the sight of God their loving and
beneficial Father. What they? yea they who are cleansed from sin by the blood
of the Lamb incontaminate, and immaculate, who are blessed with spiritual and
celestial blessings; who are collocated in the heavenly places in Christ, and
have undervalued their lives to the death for Jesus cause. What they? Yea they,
who are brethren to Jesus Christ, sons of God the Father, redeemed from all
evils, and beloved before the world was, according to the Text. And they shall
see his face, and his Name shall be in their foreheads.

They shall.
NOt now, yet now in part, not in full perfection or fruition; now they stand
and rejoice, under the hope of glory, now Christ is in them the hope of glory;
now by the Spirit of life, and adoption they pass from glory to glory; now
environed with great tribulations, now they are under great temptations, now
they mourn with the sadest lamentations: are not their mournings as the
mournings of Rachel? their tears are superfluent, as the tears of Jeremiah;
and their sadness as the sadness of Hagar: they see in grace, not in glory,
yet not without glory; they see in glory without the perfection of grace, yet
not without grace; though grace and glory is no cause of heavines, yet
sometimes the Saints are in heaviness; But their Lord will see them again,
their hearts shall rejoice, and their joy shall no man take from them.

They shall see.
CAn mortal man behold the face of God in glory? No. Can mortality behold him
who is invisible? No, or can the frail creature eye him who is immortal? No*
No man has seen God at any time, but the Son out of his bosom, he has
declared him; but when corruption shall put on incorruption; when weakness and
frailty shall be clothed with strength, and glory; and mortality shall put on
immortality, then shall they see his face.

His.
What the face of an earthly Potentate? No: what the sight of an earthly
Prince? No. What, the countenance of a mighty Monarch? No. What then? the face
of him who is the God of sweetest consolation, the Father of divine and shining
glory; the Creator of the heavenly wights, and the orb terrestrial, the Lord
of hosts, our Isreal's King, and the God only wise, blessed for evermore. Amen.

His face.
Where are the fountains of pleasures? where are the springs of delectation?
where are the rivers of supercelestiall joys and consolation? save in his
sweet and gracious presence. Is not that the river that makes glad the City of
our God? Is not that the stream which makes glad the Tabernacles of the most
high? Is not that the sweetest spring that refreshes all the Saints beloved?
Are Abanah and Pharper, rivers of Damascus comparable? the waters of Jordan
answerable; or the waters of Bethlehem in parralell to this? No, the captives
say by this they are delivered; the wounded affirm, by this that they are
healed; the dead relate, by this they are revived; this makes the thirsty land
a poole of pleasant waters; the driest land a spring of sweetest solace: and
the desert place a place of hopeful situation. If we might enjoy heaven, and
not this, what sweetness? If we might enjoy the company of celestial weights,
what delightfulness? If we might enjoy all things, and not this all, what
cheerfulness? The thought thereof makes the travelers to heavenly glory
comfortable and triumphous in their walking; the fighters for the heavenly
crown of righteousness, valiant and victorious in battle: and the prisoners
in bonds and chains for Christ's sake, pleasant, and joyous in praises. O what
thought like this thought? O what cogitation like this cogitation? or what
consideration like this ponderous and serious consideration? To consider that
through the light of this countenance, and the cheerfulness of this blessed
face, and favor, the Saints shall be delivered from all evil, to enjoy the
highest and supremest good. For they shall see his face, and his Name shall be
in their foreheads.

What delivered from all evils? Yea, by this the Law has no power to accuse
before the bar of Justice; arraigne before the tribunal throne of God;
condemn through the infinite and eternal justice of God, or to command us to
stand righteous or holy in the sight and presence of God. By this the fears of
death are removed, the terrors of death abolished, the sting of death
extinguished, and the delivery of death unto the second death prevented: by
this the roarings of that roaring Lion the devil are stopped.

The cunning of that old crafty Serpent subverted; the fireballs of the black
prince of darkness repulsed; and the power of the prince of the air utterly
annihilated. By this the spot of sin, the impuritie of iniquity, the wrath and
indignation for transgression cannot take hold upon the Saints redeemed. By
this they are delivered from the outcries and blasphemies of the damned, the
chains of miserable and woeful darkness, the judgment of the great and notable
day of the Lord, from the woes and miseries of hell for evermore; for they are
a people blessed, beloved of the Father. For they shall see his face, and his
Name shall be in their foreheads.

To enjoy the chiefest good, what said I, the chiefest good? Yea, for in the
enjoyment of this hopeful and blessed countenance, they shall enjoy the
promises. Shall not the dead enjoy the promises of life? Shall not the weary
and heavy laden enjoy the promise of rest? shall not the fighters for glory
enjoy the crown of righteousness? shall not the Saints and Martyrs enjoy the
crown of glory? Yea, for his word is as fast as heaven and earth; his Decree as
absolute as the Decree of the Medes and Persians; and the foundation of his
truth more stable then the center of the earth; Has he not engaged himself by
oath, affirmed by his Word, and established by his promise? His promises are in
Christ, yea, and Amen, unto his glory.

Shall they not understand the infinite and eternal price of Redemption, the
sweet and the delightsome peace of Reconciliation, the glorious beauty of the
righteousness of Christ in Justification; the blessed communion and union with
Christ, annexed to vocation, and that eternal and blessed weight of glory in
glorification? What benefit has been procured by the cross of Christ, what
conquest by the death of Christ, what life and righteousness through the
resurrection of Christ? or what privilege through the mediation or
intercession of Christ, that is not communicated to the Saints through this
blessed face and favor? For they shall see his face, and his Name shall be in
their foreheads.

As they may glory, so will I glory and triumph; though the Sea roar, though
the mountains be cast into the midst of the waters, though the earth should
quake, and the heavens should be shaken, yet would I not fear. O my soul,
what if thou wast cast into a den of Lions with beloved Daniel, what though
thou wast cast into the fiery furnace with Shadrach, Meshech, and Abednego!
what though thou wast in prison with Peter bound in chains amongst the four
quaternions? yet this would refresh thee. What though thou wast with David shut
out from the Lords inheritance, suffered the want of light in a dungeon of
darkness; and sustained the loss of goods, friends, and acquaintance? yet
this would replenish thee: this will make thee more joyful then others, with
all their corn, and wine in abundance. This will make thee more cheerful then
others, having treasures with superfluance; this shall make thee more
delightful then others that possess all things with excrescence. When thou
awakest with this Image, thou may be satisfied with the sweetness of his
face and blessed vision: thou may be ravished, for in his face is fullness
of joy, and pleasures for evermore. Shall others see, and not I? shall others
behold, and not I? I shall behold him, and now near, I shall see him, and not
far off. Therefore will I glory with them that glory, since my lot with theirs
is fallen in goodly places: For we shall see his face, and his Name shall be in
our foreheads.

And his Name shall be in their foreheads.
O Admirable privilege, the Churches admiration, because of the savor of thy
sweet ointme^ts, thy name is an ointment poured out, the Virgins love thee: Is
this a small matter to be called Branches, Members, and Spouse to Christ thy
worthy and loving Bridegroom to his redeemed and chosen? Is this a thing of no
worth to be called heirs, coheires with Christ, and sons and daughters of
the living God? Is this thing of no consequence, that we should be called the
redeemed of the Lord, the friends of Christ, and the Lords inheritance? O my
soul, shall thou not rejoice, and rejoice again to consider that thou bear
the name of God, the new name of the City of our God, even of the new
Jerusalem. Now thy name is altered and changed, thou wast called, a child of
wrath; now a child of favor: a servant of the devil, now a servant of Jesus
Christ: an alienate from the commonwealth of Israel, now a citizen of the
Kingdom of heaven: A limb of the house of hell and death, now one of the
family of God thy dear and tender Father: A stranger from the Covenant of
promise, now one of the familiars and acquaintance of Christ. Was that a
privilege that Abram should be called Abraham, and not this a privilege to
thee, that wast a slave to the black king of darkness, should be called a
servant of life and light. Was that a dignity that Jacob should be called
Israel? and is not this a dignity to thee, that thou who wast a vessel of
hell and wrath, should be called a vessel of bliss and glory? O my soul,
triumph that thou have a name better then the sons and daughters, better then
of kings and Princes, better then Adam in the day of purity and integrity;
for thy name is written in the book of life, it is known in the land of the
living, and engraven on the breast of Isreal's Redeemer. Thou therefore with
boldness shall bear his Name in thy forehead; neither principalities, nor
powers, nor dominions shall affright thee; neither prison, chains, nor bonds
shall amaze thee; neither sword, famine, nor pestilence shall discourage thee;
neither shipwreck, whips, nor reproaches shall daunt thee: thou shall with
boldness confess his Name before men and Angels, for thou shall behold his
face in glory with them that behold it. Revel. 22.4. And they shall see his
face, and his Name shall be in their foreheads.

REvel. 22.5. And there shall be no night there, and they need no candle,
neither the light of the Sun: for the Lord God does give them light, and they
shall reign for evermore.
And there shall be no night there.
It was said of Asher, that his bread should be fat, and he should yield
pleasures for a King. It may be said of this, that the fruits thereof will be
sweetness, it yields sweetness to Kings washed and beloved. It was spoken of
Naphtalie, that he should be as a Hind let go, speaking goodly words; It may be
spoken of Christ, that he came out from the Father, uttering gracious speeches:
And of Joseph, that his bow abode in strength, his hands were strengthened by
the hands of the mighty God of Jacob, the stone and Pastor of Israel. It may
be related of the Saints that they abide invincible, and their faith
inconquerable by the hands of the Lord of life and salvation, and by the words
of the great Shepherd, the Redeemer and seeker of Israel. By what words? by
the words of death, of darkness, of sin, hell and condemnation? No, but by the
words of life, light, remission, heaven, and salvation, according to the text:
And there shall be no night there, and they need no candle, neither the light
of the Sun: for the Lord God does give them light, and they shall reign for
evermore.

No night there.
What no night there? What no darkness there? what no promiscuousnesse nor
dimnesse there? No, time was they sat in the region and shadow of death; but
to them the light of Christ the Sun of righteousness both appeared. Time was
they sat in darkness, being bound with affliction and iron; but to them the
brightness of glory in the face of Jesus Christ has been manifested. Time was
the god of this world had blinded their eyes, that they could not behold the
glory of the Lord in the land of the living: but now Christ the Light of the
world, the Son beloved of the Father, to them has been declared: shall they
sit in solitary places? No. Shall their bonds be everlasting bonds under
darkness? No: or shall their feet stumble upon promiscuous mountains? No. For
the Gospel of life and light is their claritie; the Sun of glorious
righteousness their glory; and the shining countenance of their heavenly
Father their beauty. For there shall be no night there, and they need no
candle, neither the light of the Sun: for the Lord God does give them light,
and they shall reign for evermore.

And they need no candle.
What not of the candle that yields light in the hidden and secret places,
that is a pleasure unto sublunarie creatures; that directs the paths of them
that walk in obscurity? No. What not of the word of Reconciliation, that is a
lantern to our feet, and a light to our paths; not of that which sought out
man upon the mountains of sin, and the craggie rocks of iniquity, of that
which brings in life, peace and immortality? There is no need of the terrene
and earthly, but of the spiritual and heavenly; that alone is needful in the
day of grace, not in glory, the day star appearing, the lesser lights are
extinguished: The Sun of light and glory appearing, the inferior lights are
deleted. Though we need a candle in the day of grace, yet we need no candle in
the estate of glory: for the Lord God who gives grace and glory, immediately
enlightneth by his glory: For there shall be no night there, neither need of
the candle, neither of the Sun: for the Lord God does enlighten them, and they
shall reign for evermore.

Neither of the light of the Sun.
What not of the light of the Sun? which is as supreme amongst the Planets,
the rarest of lights, the delight of sublunaries, the beauty of the world, the
illumination of hidden and secret places, and the rejoicing of the lower orbs
or inferior Regions? No. What not of Christ the effulgencie and character of
his Fathers person, the Son of the bosom full of grace and truth; the
Mediator of the new Covenant, the Prince of peace, the Lord of life and
salvation, the great Shepherd of his sheep, the Son of light, righteousness,
and immortality. Yea, for as our life is deadness without his life, our
righteousness unrighteousness without his righteousness; our glory
deformity without his beauty; our riches poverty without his treasure: so our
light is darkness without his shining beams of glory. Though there is no need
of the light of the Sun, yet there is need of the light of the Son of
righteousness. For there shall be no night there, for the Lord God does
enlighten them, and they shall reign for evermore.

For the Lord God does enlighten them.
What said he, for the Lord God, that is, he who was, who is and is to come,
who is the Alpha and Omega, who has been from everlasting to everlasting, and
from eternity to eternity, who is the Lord of hosts, the holy One of Israel,
the King of Kings, the God only wise, blessed for evermore; who is the Father
of glory, the God all-sufficient, the fountain of consolation, the wellspring
of living waters; the ancre of hope, and the Lord God of Israel to Israel his
redeemed; who is strong, gracious, and merciful, slow to anger, and abundant
in kindness and truth. He will give grace and glory enlightening them, with
his light and glory, according to the text. For the Lord God does enlighten
them, and they shall reign for evermore.

Does enlighten them.
O Admiration of admirations! O wonder of wonders! O gift of gifts, that the
high and holy One of Israel, the Father of eternal mercies, of
incomprehensible and infinite kindness, who dwells in light in accessible, should
communicate his light and glory to poor distressed captives, who walked upon
the dark mountains, who were bound by Law and justice to everlasting chains
under darkness, who were blinded by the fearful king of terrors, that roaring
Lion, whose dwelling and habitation is in eternal woe and misery! O my soul,
was not thy darkness worse then the darkness of Egypt? was it not more
terrible then the darkness of the night season? wast thou not as blind as the
Sodomites, yea thy blindness worse then the blindness of the Aramites? In
that day of darkness and obscurity, thou saw nothing but sin,
transgression, and iniquity; but hell, death, and calamity; but justice,
wrath, and fury; but destruction, woe and misery: though the glory of God
shown in the land of the living, though the beauty of Christ shown amongst
the believing, yet thou beheldest not his glory; but now he has enlightened
thee: when he became the day star in thy heart, a Sun of brightness in thy
understanding, and his glory shown in the face of Jesus Christ upon thy
conscience? What light is like this light wherewith thy Father has enlightened
thee? not the light of the stars; Christ the day star is thy illumination;
not the light of the candle, the Spirit of Christ is to thee the Spirit of
revelation: nor the light of the Sun, though it shine in the Meridian. That
enlightneth the air, this thy soul that contents thy eye, this thy conscience,
that sets and rises; this rises and never sets; that draws vapors
from below, this draws thy soul as high as the heavenly places: that
enlightneth Towns, Cities and Countries, this enlightneth thee to the heavenly
City, whose maker and builder is God. O my soul, is light sown for the
righteous, and not for thee? Has light appeared in a dungeon of darkness, and
not to thee? Or has Christ the Light of the world appeared, and not to thee?
Yea, for though thou wast born blind, yet now thou see: and though thou wast
encompassed with obscurity, yet now thou beholdest: what do thou behold,
yea what do thou not behold? For his grace is thy glory, his face thy
comfort, his promise thy rest, his Christ thy hope, his kingdom thy end, and
the fruition of his face thy great felicity. Thou saw the Sun, whilst
the Son of righteousness was obscured: and whilst the Son of righteousness
appeared, the Sun in the midst of the Planets was ecclipsed; so that whilst
thou wast deprived of the one, thou did enjoy the other: as the text
relates. For thy God enlightneth his, and they shall reign for evermore.

And they shall reign for evermore.
What they who received the holy unction, who have been made Kings and Priests
to God our Father, through the blood of Jesus, who have washed their long white
robes through that blood most precious. They, yea they, who have been cast out
to the open shame and contempt of their faces, who have been unsavourie salt,
whom no eye pitied, neither toward them has the bowels of mercy yearned; yea
they who have not been ashamed of chains, fetters and bonds for Christ's sake;
who have endured reproaches, slanders, shipwracks, whippings, and rebukes, for
Christ their Master, who have not been ashamed to confess the Name of Christ
before Kings, Princes and Monarchs of the earth. They, yea they who have been
strangers from the Commonwealth of Israel, alienates from the Covenant of
promise, without Christ, and without God in the world. They shall reign with
Christ for evermore.

They shall.
WHat not now, who are more then conquerours through Christ that loved them,
who have encountered with sin, fought with Satan, overcome death, and by the
power of their blessed and loving Mediator have suppressed all evils, and
removed all the force of powers and principalities? Not now, who are already
anointed with the holy unction, filled with the fullness of grace and mercy,
made Kings through Christ the beloved King, and Lord of life and
reconciliation. Yea now, for Christ lives in them, they in Christ; Christ dwells
in them, they in Christ, Christ reigns in them, and they by Christ; And they
shall reign for evermore.

Reign.
What they? yea they who have wandered in sheepskins, and goat skins, they who
have been counted as sheep to the slaughter, and have been slain all the day
long for his names sake. They, yea they, who have not had the oil of unction,
who have not had a foot of inheritance amongst the sons of men, who are the
mock of the world, the derision of the people, adjudged unworthie, though most
worthy, whom the world is not worthy of: they shall enjoy a kingdom not
earthly, but heavenly; not mortal, but immortal; not momentarie, but
eternal; not made of stone, of lime, of gold, of silver, or established upon
any earthly foundation, not senced with walls of brass, and posts and gates of
wood and iron; but encompassed about with an eternal protection: not filled
with terrene fruits and pleasures delectable, but with heavenly pleasures, and
joys inenarrable: not with terrene or terrestrial profits, accounted
valeable, but with heavenly treasures and thing unvaleable. O the Himnes, the
Songs and Psalms that are in that City! O the praisings, laudings, and
honors that are in that Jerusalem! O the dignifyings, laudings, and
magnifyings that is in that kingdom! There is nothing but peace, love and
amity; there is nothing but blessedness, life and felicity; there is nothing
but heavenly fruition; glorious communion, and the excellent and eternal
weight of glory. For the Lord Jehovah dwells there: Therefore they shall need
no light, and they shall reign for evermore.

For evermore.
NOt for days, times, years, months and hours, not for tens, hundreds,
thousands, and millions, but for aeternitie. What day like that day wherein the
Son of righteousness shall never set? what time like that time, wherein the
splendorous, glorious and gracious countenance of God shall shine upon the
Saints for ever and ever? What season like that season wherein the Saints shall
enjoy the fruit of inestimable redemption, the benefit of undeclarable
reconciliation, the effect of that inutterable union, and the blessing of that
gracious presentations in the act of justification? O my soul, that shall be to
thee a lot of lots, a portion of portions, and a blessing of blessings; that
shall be to thee a mercy of mercies, a dignity of dignities, and a fruition
of all fruitions. Was Jacob satisfied when he saw the face of Joseph? and shall
not I be satisfied when I shall behold that day of light and beauty? Was
Elkanah better to Hannah then ten sons, and is not this better to thee then ten
thousands? Therefore rest in this rest, hope in this beatitude, wait for this
communion and glory. Since tears shall be no more, death shall be no more,
sorrows shall be no more. For thou with them shall reign for evermore, and
there shall be no night there, neither need of the candle, neither of the Sun:
For the Lord God does give them light, and they shall reign for evermore.

FINIS.
HEAVENLY Contemplations.
PHIL. 9. And now also a prisoner of Jesus Christ.


WHy did not Paul glory that he was an inheritor of an inheritance immortal
and immarcessible? why did he not glory that he was admitted to sweetness of
communion and neernesse of union with his Lord and Mediator? why did he not
glory that he had the gift of healing, the excellency of Ministry, and the
power in casting out of evil spirits; but in bonds and chains for Jesus sake?
(there has been great cause wherefore) for this is a great and exceeding
dignity, greater then either Kingdom or Consulship. For nothing is so
glorious as chains about those hands, as fetters about those feet, as iron
bonds about those necks which are born for Jesus cause. To be a prisoner for
Jesus, is better then to be an Apostle, then to be a Teacher, then to be an
Evangelist. If any man love Christ, he knows what I say; if any man be
ravished and inflamed with the love of his Master, he knows the force of
those bonds: he would rather be a prisoner for Christ, then to dwell in heaven;
he shows to them those hands more bright then any gold, then any Kings
Crown; for a Crown set with precious stones does not so gorgeously set out
the head whereon it stands, as an iron chain wherewith one is bound for
Christ's sake. Perhaps this is more honorable then to set him upon the twelve
thrones: perhaps this is more glorious then to set him at his right hand:
perhaps this is more glorious then to enjoy all terrene and earthly blessings.
But what speak I of human things? I am ashamed to compare riches and
ornaments of gold to those bonds; I am ashamed to compare mountains of pearls
to those chains; I am ashamed to equal Seas of riches to those fetters. If any
man would give me heaven or such sufferings, I would choose those sufferings. If
one would place me with the Angels above, or with Paul in prison, I would
rather choose to be with Paul in prison: if any one would make me one of those
powers that be about heaven; I would rather choose to be such a prisoner: I
would gladly see those chains which the devils fear and tremble, and the
Angels reverence: I would gladly rest in those places where those bonds remain.
Do I count Paul so blessed for that he was taken into Paradise, as I do for
that he was cast into prison? No Or do I count him so blessed for that he was
ravished with the joys of heaven, as I count him blessed in imprisonments? No.
O my soul, if thou art brought to the Cross with thieves, if thou art carried
to answer in chains before Princes and Monarchs; if thou art adjudged worthy
of death with the condemned, spet upon, buffeted and reviled; yea although by
trans-formed. Angels of light: Notwithstanding those shall be thy glory; the
gift of suffering is greater then the staying of the Sun and Moon, greater
then the moving of the world, then to conquer Satan, or drive away devils. The
devils are not so grieved when they are driven away by faith; as when they see
thee valiant and stout in bonds and fetters. How great rejoicing, how great
honor, how great glory, how great pleasure is it to be in bonds for such a
Savior? O blessed hands, which are so adorned with those unvaluable chains.
Does our Lord say that they are blessed who raise the dead, or they are blessed
who open the eyes of the blind? No: But they are blessed who suffer for
righteousness sake. They are now in heaviness, but their Lord will see them
again; their hearts shall rejoice, and their joy shall no man take from them.
They are now despised, yet beloved: now abhorred. yet embraced: now
undervalued, yet esteemed. What shall I say, O that I might have seen the cave
where David was! O that I had seen the prison where Peter was: or that I had
seen the fiery furnace of those worthy sufferers, or the den of Lions where
Daniel was: then should I have admired at the gracious hand and admirable
providence of Christ to his poor sufferers. The Lions did honor Daniels
suffering, the fiery flame did abate at the three Childrens enduring: the
vipers did reverence Paul's chain it was so glorious. Have the sufferers for
Christ lost their names? they have a name written in the book of life. Have
they lost their liberty? they have the liberty of grace and glory. Have they
lost their lives? they have a life laid up with God in Christ. Have they lost
their treasures? they have hidden and glorious treasures. And have they lost
all? they shall possess and enjoy Christ Lord of all. O my soul, whilst
others glories in riches, in honors, in pleasures, in vanities of the world,
thou shall glory in bonds, in fetters, in chains, in scourges, in reproaches,
in stonings, in shipwracks, and in all imposements: for thy Lord has said in
the world thou shall have trouble; but with him thou shall have peace, he will
see thee again, thy heart shall rejoice, and thy joy shall no man take from
thee. Thou shall therefore glory as much in those chains, as in the robe of
righteousness, as in his precious blood, as in his rich inheritance, and in
his faithful promises: for though thou have been a prisoner in Christ, yet not
bound in Christ: though a prisoner to Christ, yet not bound by chains of iron,
but by bonds of love a prisoner of Christ: Since thou have suffered reproaches,
imprisonment, stoning and flight for his Names sake. No marvel though the
Apostles were more then conquerers; no marvel though they went rejoicing from
the Council: no marvel though Paul and Silas sung in bonds and fetters. Since
the presence of Christ is as delectable in prison as in heaven, the love of God
as precious in prison as in the heavenly places; and the chain of Christ in
prison more rich then a chain of pearls and jewels: therefore the Apostle
gloried in this chain. Phil. 9. Yet for loves sake I rather beseech thee, being
such a one as Paul the aged, and now also a prisoner of Jesus Christ.

Of CHRIST.
1.
CHrist is our glory, and our strength for ever,
A help at need, a hold that fails never.
2.
When darkness is, the Sun appears bright,
The darkness past, the Sun we have in sight.
3.
And though the darkness for a time remain,
It passes over, light springs again.
4.
And light appearing, Christ came from on high,
Passing his word, to be our Surety.
5.
To answer, what of man the Law required,
Or Justice plea, of right the truth desired.
6.
By worth of death, and blood, to satisfy
His Fathers wrath, and sins most heinous cry.
7.
So heaven did its drops to earth distill,
And with its springs, the vast places did fill.
8.
When heaven high adjoined it self so low,
All fluent favors on it to bestow.
9.
Distance of place, prevents not influence,
The eye may see, a love incomprehence.
10.
The height, the depth, the faithful do admire,
With serious thoughts within themselves retire.
11.
To think such favor, kindness, and free grace,
Laid up for them in the celestial place.
12.
Obtained by Christ, the Lord of peace and life
Shedding his blood, that he might end the strife.
13.
Hence then Christ pleads, and says, that al is mine
My blood, and death, it has redeemed thine.
14.
For to enjoy the fullness of my store,
For them laid up of old for evermore.
15.
With Angels, Saints, songs of celestial praise,
Mention thy bounty, favor eke always.
Of Faith.
1.
THy suit pursuit after the place celestial,
Thy highest thoughts do leave the place terrestrial.
2.
Thy sweet repose, and steadfast acquiest,
In God through Christ, for everlasting rest.
3.
This faith of thine, is placed in intellect,
Ever on Christ thy object does reflect.
4.
Which changes nature, and old age renews
Altring the will, and will obeyes the truth.
5.
To truth consenting, and does not gainsay,
What divine truth will have it to obey.
6.
God ours in Christ, through faith we do assent,
By it from Christ, our joy, and complement.
7.
Our hope through faith, looks unto God future,
To be persuaded of a kingdom sure.
8.
Since promise faithful is our faiths foundation,
Assuring us in Christ, our great salvation.
9.
Faith saves it is true, yet not without Christ's blood,
Though it conduct us to eternal good.
10.
And though we are the sons of God most high
Yet that is through faith, the truth does not deny.
11.
Whilst we are just through royal righteousness,
From Christ, not man, our faith does that confess.
12.
Whilst we are holy, by Christ's Spirit free,
Our faith applies Christ to thee, and me.
13.
Whilst we adorn, and reverence his Name,
Faith gives the virtue, power to the same.
14.
Whilst we do mourn, faith causes to repent,
Moving the vitals, yet not to relent.
15.
And whilst we have a glorious rich reward.
Faith says that God our works does not regard.
16.
But looks to Christ, who has obtained the Crown,
Obtained honor, conquest and renown.
17.
It never leaves to bring the gray and heary
Unto the place of their celestial glory.
18.
Where sing they shall, and evermore remain,
Halelujahs song, and nevermore refrain.
19.
Since lot is good, a portion them befall,
To be with Christ, who is theirs all, in all.
T. BATT. FINIS.

