THE MERCHANTS REMONSTRANCE: PUBLISHED In the time of the late War, Revived
and enlarged.

Wherein is set forth the inevitable miseries which may suddenly befall this
Kingdom by want of Trade and decay of Manufactures.

With Copy of A Letter to the Kings Majesty presented unto Him at Hampton
Court, October 30. 1647.

SHOWING

1. The want of such a due regard as was fit for the preservation of Trade in
the time of the late War. 2. Some of the bad effects it has since produced.
3. The offer of the Authors opinion what may best be done for Remedy.
ALSO A Letter to the Right Honorable the two Houses of Parliament: To the Army
under the command of His Excellency Sir Tho. Fairfax: And to the rest of His
Majesty's Subjects in general.

Whereunto is annexed, A Discourse of the Excellency of Wool, manifested by
the Improvement in its Manufactures, and the great good thence arising before
the late War.

By JOHN BATTIE of London Merchant.

Published by Authority.

London Printed by Ric. Cotes, for William Hope, at the Unicorn in Co^rnehill,
near the Royal Exchange, 1648.

To the Reader.
READER,
MY Profession being that of a Merchant, thou must expect the Language and
style in this REMONSTRANCE, answerable thereunto: Let thy thoughts be upon the
matter it self, weigh it well, for it is of such concernment to the welfare of
the whole Kingdom, that it must stand and fall with it.

Farewell. John Battie.

To my much esteemed Friend Mr. Battie.
SIR,
I Perused with no less profit then pleasure your manuscript, wherein you
discourse with so much judgment of Trade; discovering the causes of the
present impairment thereof, and how it may be improved hereafter: Whereby I
find that a public soul, and the affections of a good Patriot dwell in you;
things, God-wot, which are rarely found now in England, such is the hard fate
of the times, wherein men scrue up their brains, and stretch all their sinews
to draw water to their own Mills only, though to the prejudice of the
Common-good: But they are much out of their account, who think, that private
fortunes can long subsist, if the public begin to languish; unless a care be
had of Ware River, Middletons pipes will run but poorly, and every one will
find it in his private Cisterns.

This Tract of yours may serve for a true prospective to the Euglish Merchant
to see the visible calamities that are already upon him; as also for a Larum
bell to awake his slumbring spirits to a timely prevention of far greater;
And well fare your heart for it: So I rest*

Your faithful friend to dispose of James Howell.

To the Reader.
OUr worthy Merchant showed has the pare
Of a good Subject, and his Countries friend:
And as a knowing man, a man of Art,
He has prescribed a way Trade to amend:
Let us the counsel then of Battie take,
It may revive us All, and happy make.
A dangerous wound admits not long delay,
Lest it prove mortal, so may't be with Trade,
Whilst time is offered, and when we may,
Let us apply the Known Laws.
Mea'cine he has made,
Or rather us advised, Trades wounds to cure,
Nothing in reason so certain, so sure.
However let us unto our Merchant give
Due thanks and praise for this his good respect
Unto our Trade, he shows how it may live,
Whilst many careless are, and it neglect,
Of such wish we had less, of Batties store;
And so farewell, good friend, I Will say no more.
T. D.

To the Reader.
PHysitian-like, Battie shows the cause
Of a disease that is great, it is Trades defect,

Then he prescribes a medicine, the known Laws,
Which might it help, then let us not it neglect,
The like unto't is not under Heaven,
Let Us pray and pray, that it may be given.
And having thus prescribed a medicine right
On his discourse on Englands Gemme does fall,
Whose splendor is so fulgent and so bright,
That dazzle well it may the eyes of All,
Excelling all Gemmes else without dispute,
Let Us do our best to keep it in repute*
And to good Battie we are All much bound
For the discov'ry he has for us made,
Till then it seemed hidden in the ground,
Now let us look to it, the way he having laid
In his small book, which great in worth does show,
All which distressed England ought to know.
F. N.

To Mr. Battie the Author.
Judicious Friend, thy Book I viewed have,
The lines are few, the matter much I find,
And of such consequence, that it does crave
The ears of All, and All oblige and bind
Their best assistance to afford and give
It to observe, All may the better live.
And live in peace, abhorring thoughts of wars,
The spoil of Trade.
That, thou seek to maintain,
And free the Kingdom from unhappy jars,
Producing pounds of loss, no penny gain;
Profit and loss account does tell us so,
But thou advisest a gaining way to go.
Thanks we thee give, thou showest still thy care
Of this poor kingdoms welfare and it is good,
And as before, so now thou do declare
Thy self for peace, an enemy to blood.
At first thou sayd'st it would be Traffickes bane,
Together with this Kingdoms long won gain.
And now, good friend, take this for a farewell,
That when pale death thy life has taken away,
This thy small Book shall after Ages tell
Thou did'it thy part to help our Trades decay:
Good men will join with thee, they will not sit still,
But ready be to stop so great an ill.
R. P.

To all the Merchants of England.
IN this small book our friend does open lay
The cause, the bad effects, and only cure
Of a Disease that is bad, it is Trades decay,
Me thinks you should it feel, and not endure
So great an ill, but presently extend
Your utmost help and force, it to amend.
For, you (my noble friends) may well discern,
Nothing is better for this Kingdoms good,
But you in special it does concern,
It Is your chiefest welfare, your livelihood*
If you be forced from Traffic to desist,
How then will you be able to subsist?
And of our Merchant have a good esteem,
He it deserves, for he his part has done,
This Kingdoms Trade and Commerce to redeem
From loss, and keep the gain it has long won:
And so (my Merchants) I bid you all Adieu,
Wishing good may of this Advice ensue.
G. T.

To the Reader.
THis I Will post over, and you shall surely see
That which our Nation wants, it is excellency
Commerce, its welfare is the kingdoms gain.
See Battie cares for All from King to Swain,
He shall admired be in after times,
He proves our Fleece above great Philips Mines.
And when our Nation shall with Peace be blessed,
The King and People live with joy and rest,
A due remembrance let of him be made,
He did his utmost to preserve our Trade.
He loves His King, the Laws, Concord* and Peace,
Knowing they are the means of Trades Increase.
When from these principles you start aside;
Let Plunder, Famine and Sickness you beside.
Let Battie sleep secure, and take his rest,
This his Ships Freight will make our Nation blessed*
If we accept thereof, and his advice
Then Batties Golden Fleece shall be our rise.
A: K

To Mr. BATTIE the Author.
MY Worthy Friend, if that our eyes had been
As thine so clear, ours had as thine foreseen
The bad and sad products of civil wars,
On all sides ruin, and ungodly jarres;
Which moved thee much to dislike the same,
When others, not foreseeing, did thee blame.
And if for thy dislike, they will blame thee still,
Amongst the worst of men I them hold will.
And for thy care of Trade, we thee thanks give,
Thou have by this small book showed how't may live:
If of thy counsel now no use we make,
It may hereafter fruitless prove to take.
A Medicine timely used may take effect,
But perish may the body through neglect.
Good friend, however, thou have done thy part,
And therein showed a true English heart.
W. G.

To the READER.
ALl over ask, and you may quickly hear
Of sad complaints, and men possessed with fear,
If these distempers hold, that Trade must cease
Which more and more they find much to decrease:
And know if Trade from them be taken away,
Goods of Fortune must perish and decay,
As Honor, Wealth and Strength by Sea and Land,
By Trade they are kept up, by Trade they stand:
Battie a way has laid All to maintain,
Knowing by loss they will die, and live by gain.
O look upon his medicine, the known Laws,
The Effect it cure will, and remove the cause
Of Englands discords, and it is Trades defect,
And what not else? then let us not it neglect,
And to our worthy Friend give thanks and praise,
He does his best our dying Trade to raise.
M. F.

The Merchants Remonstrance.
TRade is the life of a State, Manufactures are the sinews of Trade, and Money
is the soul of both. There is such a necessary connection and dependency
betweens them, that the one cannot subsist without the other; The last does
animate the second, and the second supports the first, and the first gives
motion and quickening to the other two. Now of all sorts of Trade, Traffic
has been always esteemed the most noble, because the most hazardous; And
Traffic is most proper and useful to Islands, whose security and power
depends principally upon shipping, and navall strength. Amongst Islands, this
of great Britain has been from all times held the most rich, and renowned, as
well for the fertility of the soil, and temperature of the air; as for the
substantial and necessary native commodities it affords in such plenty to
advance Trade, and oblige all other Nations. Now there is no greater enemy to
Trade than War, be it in what Country it will; our Neighbors the Hollanders
excepted, who by so long a habit of War seems to make a Trade of it; They are
the only men who by the advantage of their situation can fish best in
troubled waters; witness the tumults of Germany, and these of England and
Ireland. Yet foreign war is not so great a disturber of Trade, nor half so
destructive, as intestine; For as the fire that is kindled within doors, and in
the bed-straw, as it were, rages more violently: so civil War ruins Trade
faster then any other, and makes poverty and desolation post in one after the
other, wheresoever it is kindled. Now the drift of this small Remonstrance is,
to show the great misery that may suddenly befall this Kingdom through want of
Trade, and the evil effects it may produce.

First, for that the chiefest way of enriching a Kingdom, is the expense of
its native or home commodities (that can well be spared) in foreign parts; if
it fail, the Manufacture must cease, by which means many thousands of poor
Families, which have no other maintenance but by their daily labor, or by what
each days work will afford them, will be suddenly exposed to beggary.

Secondly, diverse Workmen or Artificers, through want of employment here, will
doubtless go into other Countries, and exercise their Trade, whereby it may
come to the knowledge and practice of strangers, as I fear is already: being
at the penning hereof informed, that in Zeland there are Loomes set up for
Perpetuano's, and other Stuffes: And that in other places they are not idle
setting up daily Loomes for Cloth, etc.

It will perhaps be objected, that if our Wool (which is the chief material)
be wanting, they will fail of the exercise of their Trade in foreign parts:
I answer, that such Wools may be had elsewhere, as will serve their turn, by
the due mixture of such sorts as will fit and agree best together.

Witness, The store of course Cloth made in High Germany, where about 20000.
English Clothes, narrow Lists (commonly called by the Merchant Adventurers,
Franckfort sorts) each Cloth containing 28. yards in length, were yearly
spent, and since not above 2000. vented of the said sorts; the cause whereof,
was that unhappy Project of dying and dressing of Cloth by Sir William Cockaine
and others: which so much incensed the Germans (for if it had taken effect,
many Families of Clothworkers and Dyers would have been destroyed) that they
used their utmost endeavors to practice the making of the said sorts of
Clothes; which had such success, that in a very short time the expense of
those sorts of English Clothes, was brought down from so great, to so small a
number. That Project found the like or worse entertainment in Holland, and
other parts of the Low Countries, where, before that time, many thousands of
finer sorts of English Clothes were more vented then now are; so that it was
observed, that whereas before the said Project was put in practice, there were
about eighty thousand English Clothes of all sorts per annum, exported by the
old Company of Merchant adventurers, that in the new Companies time and since,
not much above thirty thousand: whence this Inference may be easily drawn,
That Innovations in a State or Commonwealth are always dangerous, and
sometimes destructive.

Before the late war between us and Spain, there were sent hence thither great
store of knit Stockings; but the Importation of all English commodities into
that Kings dominions being prohibited, his Subjects put in practice the making
of Stockings, and in those quantities, and at such easy rates, that since we
have had peace with that King, it has been free for English Merchants to
import those of the Manufacture of our Country; yet very few are sent, for
that they cannot be afforded at such low rates as those made there. That
people did then also practice the making of Bays, which it is probable, had
taken such effect, that if the war had continued between the two Kings
somewhat longer, the vent of English had been there quite lost. As it was with
the vent of our broad Cloth in the time of Queen Elizabeth of famous memory,
with the which Manufacture, our Merchants drove a great Trade in the Dominions
of Spain, not any in those times, nor before, being there made. And among the
Merchants in Her Majesty's time, were Sir Thomas Gresham, Her Majesty's Cape or
chief Merchant, and Sir John Spencer an Alderman of London, both of no little
note: the former, famous for the building of the Royal Exchange (so named by
Her Majesty) at his own charge, which cost with the purchase of the ground,
as I have heard, 36000. l. or thereabout, a great deal of money, specially in
those times. The latter much taken notice of in regard of his great estate,
which was thought to be 300000 l. or rather more, both which got a great part
of their respective Estates, especially the former, by their Trade in English
Cloth in the parts of Spain before said: But upon the breaking out into a
war with that King (some great reason of State doubtless urging) he not
only prohibits all Commerce or Trade with England, but likewise the importing
of all English Commodities by all others in amity with Him, by which means His
Subjects coming to want their usual supplies of our Cloth fell into making of
Cloth themselves procuring some Workefolke from abroad, and is since so much
increased, that store has been and is still sent into the parts of Italy and
elsewhere, so that we came wholly to lose the vent of that Manufacture not
only in those parts, but also in others, which make use of the Cloth of
Spain, otherwise ours, it is like, might have found vent in the said parts.
Hence it follows, that war with foreign States is destructive to our
Manufactures. The total loss then of our broad Cloth in Spaines Dominions,
and the great decay of the said Manufacture caused by the aforesaid project of
Sir William Cockaine, gave it such an incurable wound, asit could never since
be healed, nor like, having contracted such a Malignant humor in the body of
the Manufacture of our old Drapery, that it corrodeth daily more and more like
unto an exulcerated Cancer, or Canker, never ceasing until it has pierced the
vital parts. And so is it like to be with the Manufacture of our new Drapery,
viz. Bays, Kersies* Perpetuano's, Says, Stockings, etc. which came to a great
height in the time of King James and of our Gracious King Charles till of late,
giving such a life to trade, that it seemed not to be very sensible of the
decayed condition of our old Drapery, but likewise it, viz. our said new
Drapery is already fallen into a very consumptive disease, causing it to
languish and waste much, and unless some good means be forthwith used to
restore both old and new to some measure of strength again, they will daily
grow more and more infirm, till at last for recovery leave or forsake this our
English Air and go into foreign, specially where they first received
breath, which was chiefly Flanders; for till King Edward the thirds time we
had little or no broad Cloth made here in England, but shipped out our Wool for
the parts of Flanders before said, which in those times was to be had very
cheap. And the King foreseeing the great good the making of Cloth would be
unto this Kingdom, attempted to put it in practice, and to that end he
procured sundry Workmen from abroad, endowed them with sundry privileges and
immunities, and put them upon making of Cloth, which in process of time took
such effect, that partly by reason of the want of our Wool, and partly in
regard of the goodness and cheapnesse of the said Cloth, Flanders came almost
to lose that Manufacture, but upon this Innovation or change, Flanders
prohibited the Importation of all English Cloth, so that our Clothiers (who had
store on their hands) could not vent them: The King buys the Cloth and burns
it, lest the Clothiers should have been enforced for want of employment to give
over the making, supposing it seems that the people of Flanders would be
enforced at last in some measure to make use of those made here. The premises
considered the preservation of our Manufactury, me thinks should be as Thorns
or Goads unto out sides, to put us in mind that in all respects we ought to
have such an especial care thereof as not to attempt any thing which may in
the least expose our Manufactures to the hazard of loss, no loss almost that
can befall this Kingdom being comparable unto it.

But admit that foreign Nations, notwithstanding what has been said, will in
some measure have need of some of our Woollen Manufactures* we shall not be
able to furnish them therewith, the chief material Wool being wanting; which
want must follow when our Sheep are destoyed; and with them, all other kind of
Cattle, if this most unnatural war continue but a short time.

The Hollanders are an industrious and diligent people, and watch all
opportunities to ingrosse all the Trade they can into their own hands, they
have certainly a vigilant eye over our Actions, that Lethargy which has
seized on us, will make them the more watchful; they will make no little use
of our distractions; they will be ready to take hold of what we let loose, and
with great eagerness pursue what we let go; we shall not so soon be out,
as they will be in.

Lastly, if the Traffic of this Kingdom be once lost, what will then become
of it? what will then be preserved?

Our Ships, the walls of this Land will rot, and moulder away.

Our wealth and Estates will be consumed, and no means left for recovery.

Tenants will be disabled from paying their Landlords, and they, viz. the
Landlords, for want of supplies of moneys by their usual Rents, will not be
able to furnish themselves, and Families with commodities needful, vented by
men of sundry Trades, viz.

Woollen and Linen Drapers. Mercers. Grocers. Silkmen. Habberdashers.
Vintners, etc.
Together with most sorts of Handicraftsmen, or Artificers.

Part of the commodities wherein they deal, being native, or of our own
Conntrey, both for the materials and Manufacture, and part brought into this
Kingdom from foreign Countries. Now those sorts of Tradesmen failing of the
vent of their commodities, the Trade of Merchants into other Kingdoms must
cease, there will be no need of them, thence will follow the decay of Ships,
Mariners, and sundry sorts of Artificers, Laborers, and many others that have
their dependency upon them. This mischief will not be altogether confined and
bounded within our own Land, it will extend it self (like an Epidemicall
disease) into all or most other Kingdoms where we have Trade: For, if we take
not off the commodities of those Countries in exchange of ours* they must
suffer, and that not a little by it, and for remedy partly, for want of their
accustomed employment, and vent of their said commodities; and partly, by
reason of the want of ours, be enforced to seek out, and learn others
Trades, and very likely pitch or fall upon the making of such as are here made:
For, as in the Body natural, there is such a sympathy and connection of the
parts, that if any of them be distempered, the rest b^th a sense thereof: so
it may be said of the Body of Trade, one Part bath such a dependency upon
another, that if any one fail in any remarkable manner, the rest will in time
suffer thereby.

The Merchants Strangers, both here and abroad, in regard of these troubles,
have withdrawn most part of their Estates hence, and will have shortly little
in this Kingdom: We shall have no little want and miss of their moneys, which
we receive of them here, partly by Exchange from foreign parts, made over,
or remitted by our Factors, in return of such commodities as we usually send
hence to our said Factors; and partly, by the taking up of their moneys here by
Exchange, to be repayed by our Factors abroad; which moneys are commonly
employed in the commodities of this Kingdom, which has been no little
furtherance to the more abundant vent of our Manufactures, and has been
otherwise a great help to our Merchants, specially to some of the younger
sort, who had small stocks wherewith to begin their Trade; the want whereof, I
mean of the Strangers Money, must cause a great decay of Trade; and if once
gone, as is almost, though a present Peace should follow, it will not be so
easily brought back; They will in the Interim find or use other ways and
mean for employment of the same.

By loss of Trade all sorts of people will fail of employment in all parts,
and so wanting means to maintain themselves and Families, be driven into such
straights (for Necessitas turpia coget) that they will lay hold on of what is
next for their support; neither Laws Divine, norhumane, will be able to
restrain them, a general confusion of, and in all things will follow. This
Nation will become contemptible, and a scorn to all others, and be subject to
be invaded and made a prey of by foreign people.

Having thus briefly given a touch of the miserable effects the want of Trade
may produce, which want (as beforesaid) must follow, if these sad distempers
continue: I humbly leave the prevention to the Trustees of the Kingdom, whose
hearts I beseech God may be forthwith moved to take a matter of so great
concernment into their serious consideration, not forgetting how easy a thing
it is, Principiis obstare. And that as War in general, so intestine War is one
of the greatest scourges of God Almighty, and a visible Argument of his
displeasure, and vengeance upon a People.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
AS men's minds for the most part are chiefly busied or fixed on those things
which concern their vocations, so mine. And as mine is that of a Merchant, so
had many thoughts of the great decay of Trade, (which a civil War would
undoubtedly produce) and the irrecoverable loss would thereupon ensue, which
moved me near upon three years past to commit to writing what was offered
unto me touching the same, wherewith acquainting some friends, they importuned
me not a little to publish it in print, which was accordingly done, intituling
it, The Merchants Remonstrance; one of the Copies whereof I make bold with this
to present unto your Majesty, with my humble desires you would be pleased,
when you shall think fit (your other great affairs permitting) to afford it
the perusal, or there of to cause a view to be taken, hoping it may prove of
good use unto your Majesty, and what I more say touching that subject, viz.
matter of Commerce or Trade, which is of no little concernment unto your
Majesty, and the whole Kingdom; yea, it is such, that no earthly good almost
is or can be for or in a kingdom greater then a flourishing Trade; All sorts
of people from the greatest to the meanest are bettered by it, where it is
wanting or in a sparing manner, the people become beggarly and contemptible
both at home and abroad, it ought therefore to be all men's endeavors to
advance, cherish and preserve it. But not long to detain your Majesty, it
will not be amiss to acquiant you with the motives inducing me to take the
boldness to trouble you with these lines. And that is,

First, to show there was not that due regard had as was fit to the
preservation of Trade in the time of this late War, other great affairs of the
Kingdom (it seems) not permitting.

Secondly, to give a touch of some of the bad effects it has since produced.

Thirdly, to offer my opinion, what may best be done for remedy.

That a due regard was wanting, the destruction of Sheep, and the exportation
of Wool (the chief material of this Kingdoms Manufacture) make it plainly
appear.

The bad effects. Diverse Artificers or Workmen for want of employment in this
Kingdom embarked themselves for Holland, where setting up Loomes for Broad
Clothes, Perpetuano's and other stuffes, wanted not Masters to set them on
work, and are made in such quantities, specially Perpetuano's, that store is
sent thence into sundry parts; besides store made, it seems, elsewhere: here
being letters lately from Legorne, which tell us, that our Perpetuano's in
respect of their dearness and badnesse of making find bad vent, the Italian
Merchants preferring those before them that are made in Narbon in France, and
Allicant and Majork in the King of Spaines Dominions. And for our Broad Cloth,
our Merchants, Traders to Hamburg and Rotterdam have not found such bad vent as
of late; and to make it the worse, the dearness here of Wool may be a cause,
for that they cannot be afforded at such low rates as usually have been, that
sort of Wool, which before the War might have been bought at or after the
rate of 9 d. and 10 d. is now worth 16 and 17 d. per pound.

That Commodities may have the better vent or expense, two things are chiefly
necessary: First, the goodness, secondly, the cheapnesse: both which
properties having been heretofore found in English Cloth caused it to be so
much desired in foreign parts, that the people of those parts minded little
the making of any other in any considerable quantity, until that unhappy
Project of Sir William Cockain and others, (as is in the Remonstrance set forth
fol. 3.) and in the time of this late War (for the reason before said) much
increased, and that not a little, by what I hear, viz. that some Broad Clothes
made in Holland have been imported, and passed as returned Clothes for faults,
as oftentimes it happens Clothes are for defects not discovered before the
sale there, which found, the buyer returns them back to the Seller, and the
Seller or Factor sends them over again, to the end that satisfaction may be
had from the Clothier, of whom they were here bought. I cannot blame the
Officer (whose charge it was or is to take notice of such Return) in not
making a better search, for how could it enter into his breast that Clothes
made in a foreign part should be brought over as Merchandise into this
Kingdom? he might think it according to our English proverb, like the
sending of Coals to New Castle: I give the more credit unto it, being informed
that the dearness of Wool here, and consequently of Cloth, gave
encouragement to some Merchant or Merchants to buy in Holland some English
Wool formerly shipped thither, and reship it for these parts, making entery or
passing it in the Customebouse, before the landing, for Spanish or some other
sort of Wool.

Another of the bad effects, and that no small one, is the great decay or
consumption of the Coin of the Kingdom, and that may be made appear sundry
ways, I Will only mention two, viz. the exportation or carrying of it out, and
want of Importation for supply.

And first for exportation. The Scots have not drawn a little from us by
several ways, and some has been sent into Ireland: And then some Merchants,
chiefly in respect of the falling or lowness of the Exchange caused by the
decay of Trade (the like not known in many years) have exported, it seems,
great store of Gold, much having been exchanged for Silver from 2 d. to 8 d.
per pound, and more (as have been told) by the which they have raised good
profit, which I could make to appear, if it were not to give encouragement to
some men (that are too greedy after their own private gain, not caring in the
least how much the Kingdom in general may suffer by it) to practice the like.
And as our Gold Coin, so our Silver it seems, has by such like men been in
no little measure transported into the parts beyond Sea, being informed there
have been several sums from 100 l. and under to 500 l. sterling of late
known paid in Holland at a payment. And so much briefly for exportation.

Secondly, the defect or want of supply by Importation, and they are chiefly
likewise two. The first is want of the frequent Return in foreign Coin, and
sometime in Bullion by diverse Merchants; for part proceed of our Manufactures
exported in regard of the then highness of the Exchange, which highness was
principally caused by the amplenesse or largeness of Trade. Secondly, the want
of the King of Spain or his Contractors, Coin and Bullion, which was sent
from Spain by our Ships into the Downs, and after, a good part was brought up
hither to London, and coined, and the product partly remitted hence by bills of
Exchange for Antwerp, and partly charged thence upon their Factors here, so
that the said Coin and Bullion becoming English, remained among us: Whence,
first did arise an Improvement of our Kings Revenew by the Minting or coynage:
Secondly, a great addition to the Coin of the kingdom; Thirdly, a benefit to
Merchants in matter of Exchange; Fourthly, a profit to Owners of Ships; and
fifthly and lastly, a great help or furtherance to the general Trade of the
Kingdom: But the case being now altered, the Mint, as at present, so is like
for the future to have little to do; our household plate is melted, coined, and
the money wasted: the Merchants bring in none, for the reason before mentioned;
Spaines Contractors dare not send any, for fear of a bad issue of these
divisions, and the Armies Soldiers guarding of the Tower, add unto theirs and
other men's fears. And to manifest the fear of the said Contractors sending
any hither, I am certainly informed that the value of sixty thousand pounds was
lately sent by an English Ship, named the Angel, from Spain for Amsterdam,
whence it may be easily conveyed in specie, or kind, or made over by Exchange
for Flanders. Spain we hear, and the Estates of the united Provinces are
agreed, it is confidently believed they are, not any hostile Act having of late
been offered between them shows it to be so: the agreement for some reason of
Estate not yet published: the Hollanders, etc. forbear therefore yet openly to
trade into the Dominions of that King, but so soon as they safely may, it is
very probable their Ships will be the Conveyers of Spaines Coin for the parts
of Flanders; and if once a conveyance be practiced that way, though these
unhappy differences be amongst us reconciled, not any use to that purpose will
be made of our Ships, and that is likely so to be, for I hear from a friend at
the penning of this (who came lately out of Zeland) that some of Spaines money
was landed at Middleburg brought from Spain by a ship as he supposed, of that
place. And now again as this was ready for the press, we have certain notice
of great store of Bullion and Coin come from Spain to Amsterdam sent thither
by a Ship or Ships of Hamburg, whence it may easily be, as before said, sent to
Flanders, etc.

And now having done with another of the bad effects, partly caused by the
decay of Trade, not holding it fit to trouble your Majesty with more, I come to
the Remedy or Medicine, wherein I Will be very brief, consisting of no more then
only one Ingredient, but is so sovereign and of such efficacy and virtue,
that it will give some present ease to the Malady, which done, some other good
helps may be afterward made use of to give it more, to the restoring it to
some measure of strength, but not the least expectation of bringing it to its
former vigor, in regard the evil has not only taken deep root, but is
already grown to a great height. And in this the Physician may be a good
pattern for us, who meeting with an incurable disease (as some diseases are in
their own nature) is able by art to make it the more easy to be borne, or
when he finds his Patient by reason of much pain to take no rest, and that
much danger threatens, seems to neglect the cause of the disease, and insists
on that which more urges (which is the giving of him ease) lest the disease
grow on stronger, or other symptoms forthwith follow more grievous then the
disease: Even so it might be best for us to do that which most urges, that is
the speedy endeavoring to save the remnant of our Trade, lest worse Symptoms
by our remissness and delays, then have yet, befall. We have letters lately
from foreign parts, that say, there is a peace concluded or great hopes
thereof in Germany, it must, however, at last so be, it behooves us therefore in
the interim to be the more careful of preserving our Manufactures, for the
people in diverse places in the Empire having made a notable progress in making
the like, it may be much teared, they may so proceed after a peace is settled,
that we may come totally to lose the vent of all the Species or kinds of our
said Manufactures, as we did the vent of our Broad Cloth in Spain in the time
of Queen Elizabeth of famous memory, never to be recovered.

But to the Sovereign remedy or medicine before mentioned; It is the speedy
settlement (as I humbly conceive) of the so much
unsettled Estate of this Kingdom according to the known Laws: It is not the
abatement of Tunnage and Poundage, as the case now stands with us, will much
conduce to the saving or enlarging of Trade, or to the better vent of our
Manufactures, it may rather prove of bad consequence, for if we make an
abatement, foreign Princes and States, which now make little account or
esteem of us: witness the Emperor of Muscovia, who has taken all our
Merchants privileges from them, which may prove the undoing of all our Trade
in his Territories. As also the Gran Signior by his so much adhering to the
strange suggestions of Sir Sackvile Crow against our Levant Merchants, which
had like to have been the loss of all the Estates they had in his Dominions,
which to save, cost no small sum of money, and yet not known what the issue
may be, notwithstanding what your Majesty has since done in their behalf,
viz. by sending or dispatching hence of another Ambassador, and your effectual
writing unto the Gran Signior touching that business, it shows however, how
sensible your Majesty is and was of their great and unjust sufferings: but as
have said, if we make an abatement of duties upon goods, they in foreign
States may make an Inhaunsment, now that they are fallen into the making of
such Manufactures as are here made, the better to advance and put forward the
make ing of their own, and for other advantages they may make unto themselves
thereby. This Remedy o^ Medicine may make the disease worse, but timely
application of the other will doubt esse make it better and more easy, (as
have said) to be borne, for then will your Majesty's Subjects of all degrees,
and in all parts be encouraged to go on with confidence in the usual ways of
their several professions and callings, improving that little which they have
yet left, which otherwise will inevitably at last be consumed, and the Trade of
the Kingdom almost lost, specially in foreign parts, which being chiefly in
Woollen Manufactures, must cease, if the material be wanting, which want must
follow, if that small remainer of Sheep be consumed, and such a consumption
will ensue, together with the Workmasters of the said Manufactures, some of
them through want of means to subsist with by their usual labor, here in
their native Country, will doubtless as diverse already, as before said, go
and seeks it in foreign parts, and others staying at home take other bad
courses for their support, as is in the Remonstrance set forth, if these
distractions still continue. Thus have I as briefly as I could made bold to
make known unto your Majesty (according to my weak ability) the most
material of what has been offered unto me touching this subject, humbly
desiring your Majesty would be pleased to make such a favorable constable uction
thereof, as he undoubtedly does of your earnest and longing desire of a speedy
composure of these unhappy differences and the welfare of your Majesty's
subjects. That is

Your Majesty's most humble and loyal Subject John Battie.

TO THE Right Honorable the two Houses of Parliament. To the Army under the
Command of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax: AND To the rest of his Majesty's
Subjects in general.
IT is the part of every true lover of his Country, specially in a time of
public sufferings, to employ his utmost endeavor for the general good, and
not to have the least thought on particular or private ends; then will he have
his thoughts much busied about the state and condition of it, which, if finds
good, will be ready, in as much as in him lies, so to keep it; if bad, seek
an amendment, and if danger threaten, endeavor the prevention. Now we being
still in a way of losing our Golden Fleece, the only life, as it were, of our
Manufactures, and consequently of all the considerable part of the Trade of the
Kingdom: it behooves us all to recollect and call up all the wisdom and
knowledge we have, and employ the same to the prevention of so great, so
irreparable a loss. To which end or purpose I have taken the boldness to
address my self unto His Majesty the head of our Body politic, as in the
first place I was and am in duty bound; showing the cause, some of the bad
effects, and remedy of the melady, of the which find His Majesty very sensible
(O that we his Subjects were the like) as also very ready to do whatsoever in
reason may be expected from a Gracious King.

And now I address my self unto you all, being members of the same Body
politic, and the matter of equal concernment to both King and People, humbly
desiring, that as His Majesty on His part, so you would on yours be sensible of
the sufferings of Trade, and as He, so you would also be ready to join
together in a way of timely prevention of such further mischiefs, as by decay
of our Manufactures, may befall it, that your Children and all future Ages
which shall succeed, may not have the least cause of complaint against you for
any remissness or neglect of or in a work of such high concernment to the
Commonwealth. Which if, they will be ready to say, what a kind of men were our
Forefathers? The King was willing and ready, but they not, and so blame them
for the non-discharging of their duty to their Country, condemn them for
their great ingratitude both to King and Kingdom, and lastly cry out, O that
we never had had our being from such Ancestors!

I need not in this place trouble you with repetition of any particulars
mentioned in the Letter to His Majesty, but refer you to the same, of the
which it is my earnest desire you will (...) take a view, as likewise of the
ensuing discourse of the excellency of our Wool in the improvement by or in
our Manufactures. Of all which, and of what is here said, that a benign
construction may be made, it is the humble desire of Him that is a true lover
of all good men, and a hearty welwisher of the welfare of this poor distressed
Kingdom; and to that end he heartily prays for the removal of all fears
and jealousies, a total forgetfulness of all errors and mis-understandings
on all sides, an unfeigned reconciliation of all differences between King and
People, as also between Subject and Subject, and a speedy settling of a firm
and lasting peace; which ought, or rather is and still will be the prayer of
all good men, as it is again and again of Him, that is His Majesty's humble
and loyal Subject, and the Kingdoms cordial Servant,

JOHN BATTIE.

I crave leave to make this Addition occasioned by the Kings late Message to
the two Honorable Houses of Parliament.
HAving this lying by me ready for the Press came His Majesty's Gracious
Message from the Isle of Wight, dated Novembr. 16. of the which all impartial
and unbiased men take special notice, still declaring His earnest and longing
desire of a speedy settlement of these unhappy differences, well knowing that
the continuance will on all sides be destructive to the well being of this
Kingdom, especially unto Trade. It Is not very improbable, notwithstanding His
deep insight in ma^ters of Estate, which are so obscure and intricate, that
it is impossible for the wisest Statesman on earth of himself, yea I may say
hundreds of Statesmen joined together, to foresee and know all the mischiefs
which occur and happen in an Estate or may befall it, without the help and
information of others, but more especially of or from such men, that have
either a present sense thereof in their own particular, or in regard of their
Negotiations at home or abroad in foreign parts: besides His Majesty neither
has been, nor is in such a capacity or condition as formerly, to receive such
intelligence as was or is fit for the prevention of such evils as may befall
an Estate. It Is not (I say) improbable but that small information, which His
Majesty had from me by my weak^ pen (without vaineglory be it said) showing
not only the great sufferings of this Kingdoms Trade by the present decay of
our Woollen Manufactures, but also the danger of losing hereafter the total
vent of all or most of them in foreign parts, might be some motive unto Him
so speedily to send unto the two Houses of Parliament so gracious a Message,
though His Majesty, indeed needs not the least quickening to the effecting of
any thing which He conceives may conduce to the welfare of His subjects; but
whether or no that which was made known unto Him by me was any motive unto
Him; His Majesty being, as have said, very ready to afford His assistance to
the good of Trade, and to the rectifying of what else is amiss, me thinks
you should (the sad condition not only of Trade, but all things else
considered) forthwith join with Him. And I believe that you of the two
Honorable Houses of Parliament, as also diverse of you of the Army, with many
more of His Majesty's Subjects, are very inclinable so to do, but that some
fear of future safety (as I conceive) of the which is near and dear unto
you, possesses you in regard of the bad effects, far beyond your expectation
or the least of your thoughts, which the ways you have taken to rectify, what
before this Parliament was amiss, have produced. But admit you should run some
hazard of loss, the ancient-Romans may be a good president for you to follow,
Their Histories tell us, they wa^^ed all private interest for the public
good, not any thing was so near and dear unto them, so great was their
respect and love unto their Country, having stillin their thoughts, non nobis
na^i sumus. But be assured you have no just cause of any such fear, as you may
fancy unto your selves, it is true indeed the disaffections of many men one unto
another are very great, in regard of their manifold sufferings by adhering to
this or that side, but not the least doubt, but that His Majesty would first
on His part be unfaignedly reconciled with you, He has often declared it, and
then would be so forward and careful as could be desired to reunite the so
much disunited affections of His subjects, and no doubt but would take effect:
All men (except such as have their subsistence by divisions) greedily thirsting
after a quiet settlement of these unhappy differences, and that an inviolable
peace may follow, so hateful now unto them are differences and dissentions,
whence their sufferings have been so great; and right well know, that the
continuance would make them at last so insufferable, that they should be
enforced into a desperate condition, and not care in the end how or in what
manner they might free themselves.

But I have done, only desire I may first have leave to add that which
follows, though perhaps it may at first sight be thought by some impertinent
to Trade, yet if well weighed, it may be judged otherwise, hope however it will
not give offense. And that is in point of this Kingdoms Honor in the person
of the King, which by the Laws of God and man we are all bound to maintain.
If the King (the life as it were or fountain of Honor) lose His due respect,
disrespect on all sides will follow, viz. to the Nobility, Gentry,
Magistrates, and to all men in authority, and command, even to masters of
private families, and Commanders or masters of Ships, it is already too too
apparent, we have the sad experience of it not only at home but also abroad
in foreign parts. Secondly, if Honor be taken from the King, it is taken from
His hopeful Progeny, the like Kingly Issue not known at this day on earth, so
that the Blood Royal of England in times past so famous and so highly esteemed
both at home and abroad, will come to lose its respect, and at last become so
contemptible, that not any Prince of worth will match with us, but if by us
kept up and maintained in its ancient repute and esteem, the greatest Prince
or Princes in Christendom will be ready to match with us, which may prove
many ways very advantageous to the Crown of England.

Hereunto is annexed a Discourse of the improvement of Wool in our
Manufactures, which may well deserve the notice of all His Majesty's Subjects
in general.

A brief Discourse of the Excellency of Wool manifested by the Improvement in
its Manufactures, and the great good unto the Kingdom thence arising before
the late War.
THat if I should say our Wool was so rich a Jewel before the late War, being
as it were the Basis or foundation upon which the Frame of Englands Trade did
stand: and that it exceeds in worth the Spanish Silver Mines in West India, and
that Spain might far better want those Mines, then England could Wool, I
should not say amiss; for that Spain without the Silver issuing from the said
Mines would be able to draw Trade unto it from foreign Parts, in respect of
the native fruits or commodities it affords, which England, if Wool be wanting,
could not in any considerable measure do. It is not its Lead, Tin, and Coals
would do it: these three would beget very little Trade, and consequently
little employment. And that it is such a Jewel, as I say, or of so much worth
unto this Kingdom, may be demonstrated, partly by the employment of people in
and about the Manufactures: And partly by the Improvement by or in its
Manufactures.

And first for Employment. The Spanish West India Mines were not in a manner
comparable unto i^ by many degrees, it may be rather said, there could be no
reasonable comparison between them, for admit that in the Mines are or were
fifty thousand men employed: they are of the meanest sort of mankind, most of
them Negro's brought as Merchandise out of the parts of Africa into India,
Heathens, unless since their coming thither converted to Christianity: poor
contemptible Slaves, subject to the Arbitrary power and will of a harsh master,
enforced and kept out of their native Country, and no hope of return, bereaved
of all the comforts of life, unless such as are in a manner common with brute
beasts. Thus much for the number and condition of most of the people in that
employment.

And now for the Employment in or about our Manufactures; And first to make an
estimate of the number of our people that were employed about our said
Manufactures, as some in preparing or fitting the Wool for the Kembers or
carding of it, others in Kembing, others in spinning, and some in Knitting,
Weaving, Tucking, Carrying, etc. me thinks the number could not be so few or
so little as a Million throughout the whole kingdom and Dominion of Wales: the
which to make more probable, there were many Clothiers, each one giving
employment to 500. persons, and others gave more: As for or to the condition of
the people I need not say much, it is sufficiently known unto us, they live
amongst us: they were of both Sexes, men and women, and of all ages, from
Childhood to decrepit Old age capable of work, the greatest part of the poorer
sort, yet lived comfortably by their labor.

I might add unto this Employment of the poorer sort, another arising or
proceeding from our Manufactures, and that was by sundry materials imported in
return of the proceed of the said Manufactures exported, by means whereof
many thousands of other sorts of poor people in this Kingdom were daily
likewise set on work, and got thereby their livelihood, but what has been
already said may sufficice to show the Excellency of our Golden Fleece touching
matter of Employment and that about our Manufactures, as more properly and more
directly arising from Wool it self in its own nature.

Secondly, for the improvement of Wool, it may briefly be made to appear by
four of our Manufactures; for what may be said of them, may of the rest; and
these transported white, as they are bought of the Clothier, not meddling with
Dying and Dressing, though both these add unto the Improvement, viz.

A Say sent to Naples. A Perpetuano Ell broad to Dantzigk. A Colchester double
Bay, commonly called a hundred Bay, sent to Spain. A Broad long Cloth sent to
Hamburg.
But before I come to show the Improvement of it in or by the said particulars,
I think not amiss first to go on with what I have more to say touching our
Manufactures thence arising, and concerning the aforesaid mines, as in relation
the one to the other in regard of their Excellency in matter of Trade and
otherwise, and hope to show so much worth in our Woollen Manufactures, that
with the Employment it affords as aforesaid, may be very fitly compared not
only to the Silver proceeding from the said Mines, but also unto Spaines whole
West India Trade, or rather to exceed it: And the better to make good what I
say, it will not be much impertinent to this discourse, to show what Silver
is, though known to most men. It is no other thing then a Mineral dug out
of the bowels of the earth, as Lead and Tin, exceeding all other metalls
(except Gold) in pureness and finenesse; and thus much briefly of the nature
of it. Now in regard of its pureness or finenesse (as before said) it gained
such credit at first in most parts of the world, where Trade was, that the
people were then willing to receive it, as since, and still men are, in
exchange of any or all other Commodities: so that it cannot be accounted any
thing else then a Species or kind of Merchandise, but the chiefest indeed and
most general of all, Gold excepted, drawing all things necessary for man's use
unto it, where it was known, and was and is fit it should so be, partly in
respect of its portablenesse or carriage when divided by the coynage into small
parts or parcells, that men might have it ready, as well for small as great
disbursments or payments for such things as they should have need of to
exchange it for, and partly when in a time of scarsitie or want of a Commodity
in one Country, and that that Country had not any other to exchange for what
was wanting but Silver or money made thereof. As for other uses of Silver, as
Plate for the Table, etc. needless to say any thing: And thus much for the use
of Silver or money made of it.

And now I come to the other most general Species of Merchandise, viz. our late
Woollen Manufactures, and that in this place as b^iefly as may be, for that I
shall enlarge my self when I come to the Improvement. It might well indeed
have been accounted and termed the second general and chief Species of
Merchandise in the whole Universe in the time of King James and of this our
most Gracious Sovereign King Charles till of late years. Our Woollen
Manufactures, having those times gained such credit, and so desired in all
foreign parts, where we traded, that we could not want any thing in exchange
of them, returning home all other sorts of Merchandise of the growth and
Manufactures of foreign parts here in use, and was the cause of the
Employment of more Ships here in one year, then Spaines whole Trade to and in
India in ten. A considerable quantity of our said Manufactures were yearly
sent from Spain by the Spaniards to India, which being there sold or exchanged
for Silver and other India commodities, the said Silver and commodities were
sent in return of or for them: The truth is that our Manufactures gave such a
quickening and life to that Trade, that without them it was very dull and
languished not a little And notwithstanding the great quantities of our said
Manufactures, which were exported into foreign parts, yet we were always
well furnished with the like at home for our own use, so that those exported
were superfluous and could well be spared: Spain could not say, it was so with
the Silver it has or had yearly home out of India, for before the year came
about, little was left even in their best and richest Cities. As for the
Country, a man might travel to many Villages and meet not with a piece of 8
ryalls, which is the value of 4 s. 4 d. Sterling, or our money, but of Copper
coin, indeed, there is good store, and that must serve in stead of Silver and
Gold. Now to make any reasonable estimate of the value or what sum of money
the Manufactures of this Kingdom might or did yearly amount unto, not only
of those sent abroad, but also of those spent at home, is not possible, but
that it was to a very great value not the least doubt, the great Trade driven
therewith within this Kingdom and Dominion of Wales for their own use, and the
great quantities exported into foreign parts, giving hundreds of Ships
employment to and again, bore sufficient testimony: so that it may be thought,
they equalled the value, if not exceeded all the Silver, Gold, and all other
Commodities imported out of India into Spain in one year, which might be
estimated to import the value of 4 or 5 Millions of pounds of our English
money, by the which may be gathered in how great measure His Majesty's Subjects
in general in one kind or other were benefitted by the Trade arising from the
said Manufactures. To the which may be added the great benefit other Kingdoms
and States had thereby* partly in matter of duties paid unto them upon or by
the same, as also upon such commodities as we had from them in return of the
Proceed, amongst which, chiefly Spain, for the great duties paid there, a very
great increase of that Kings Revenue. And partly in matter of Trade not only
at home among themselves, and their neighboring countries, but also into
others far more remote: as for example: The Gran Signior or Great Turks
Subjects in Constantinople and Aleppo send a good part of the Clothes they buy
there of our Levant or Turkey Merchants into diverse parts of this Dominions
many hundreds of miles distant thence. The Spaniards carry great store, (as
have said) into West India. The Portuguezes or Portugal Merchants into East
India, some, but more to Brazil, and other parts belonging to the Crown of
Portugal. The Hollanders and Hamburgers into Russia, as also into parts within
the Baltic Sea and sundry other Countries, notwithstanding the Trade we have
our selves in most of those parts with the like Manufactures. I could enlarge
my self much in showing the great benefit they further have by our said
Manufactures, but this may suffice. And now I come to the Improvement of Wool
in our Manufactures by the four particulars before mentioned.

And first for the Say (a sort commonly called a Hundscot Say) containing in
length 24. yards or thereabout, and might weigh 13. pound, to the making
whereof might so much Wool be spent as stood in or cost the Clothier 17 s.
and was sold to the Merchant in those times, I mean, before the war, for 52
s. which shipped for Naples and the proceed returned in Naples thrown Silk, (a
good return for the setting of the poor on work,) came to be sold here by
the Merchant for a matter of 4 l. 7 s. 6 d.

Secondly, the Perpetuano Cont. in length 23. yards and might weigh 16. pound,
the Wool for its making might stand the Clothier in 21 s. and was sold by the
Merchant for 62 s. which sent to Dantzigk, and the proceed returned in the best
Flax (a good return likewise to set the poor on work) came to be sold by
the Merchant for a matter of 5 l.

Thirdly, the Baye cont. Flemish Elis 52. each Ell being ^ of a yard English
measure (for by the Flemish Ell Bays are sold by the Clothier) and might weigh
38. pound; the Wool for its making might cost the Clothier 35 s. and was sold
to the Merchant at 2 s. per Ell, is 5 l. 4 s. which sent for the parts of
Spain, and the proceed returned in Oil, Leakage deducted, came to be sold by
the Merchant for 9 l. 6 s. 8 d.

Fourthly, the Cloth cont. in length 32. yards, and might weigh 76. pound, so
much Wool for its making might be spent as cost the Clothier 4 l. and was sold
to the Merchant for 12 l. which sent to Hamburg, and the proceed returned in
Steel came to be so^^^ for 15 l.

A further proof of the Improvement might be made in another of our
Manufactures, viz. a pair of white Worstead knit Stockings for a man, to the
making whereof might be spent so much Wool as cost 6 d. and sold by the maker
or knitter for 4 s. But what have said of the other 4 particulars may suffice to
show the Excellency of it, viz. Wool by the improvement in our Manufactures.

Now here being a great Advance or Improvement raised from Wool the material
of our said Manufactures, beside what was gained by the first owner of the
Wool, or Wool Grower, viz.

From 17 s. Which the Wool of the Say cost to 52 s. the Clothiers price, and
after to 4 l. 7 s. 6 d. the Merchants price of the return for proceed. From ^
21 Which the Wool of the Perpetuane cost to 62 s. the Clothiers price, and
after to 5 l. the Merchants price of the proceed. From 35 s. Which the Wool of
the Baye cost to 5 l. 4 s. the Clothiers price, and then to 9 l. 6 s. 8 d. the
Merchants price of the return of the Proceed. From 4 l. Which the Wool of the
Broad Cloth cost to 12 l. the Clothiers price, and then to 15 l. the Merchants
price of the Proceed.
It will be thought, the Clothiers and Merchants Gains were not a littie,
specially the Merchants, to which answer. And first for that of the Clothier,
who, if he gained clearly a matter of 2 s. by a Say of the price of 52 s.
thought it well, the rest of the money went among the Workefolk, which were
many, some of their payment being no more then from 2 d. to 6 d. for a days
work: A small gain for the Clothier it may be thought indeed to be no more
then 2 s. in 50. And so the gain unto other Clothiers may be judged to be
thereabout arising unto them from other Manufactures in such a proportion as
was answerable to the value or price of their Manufactures: as if a long Cloth
of 32. yards might be sold to the Merchant for 10 l. which being 4 times the
value of the Say this Gain might be 4 times so much, as that of the Say,
viz. 8 s. and sometime less according as the market ruled.

Secondly, the Merchants Gain, it was then so little, and is now less then it
may be made appear for some years past, most of them have not gained by their
Trade one time with another 10 per Centum per Annum: and for the most part
raise their Gain by their Commodities exported, and lose by what is imported,
but this indeed more particularly by that Company or Fellowship, commonly
called by the name of Merchant Adventurers. That Trade is certainly best for
the Kingdom, by which the Gain arises from what is exported, and loss by
what is imported. So that this great advance of or from the material Wool
comes to arise; first from the Manufacture or making: and secondly, from
sundry sorts of charges or duties, whence that duty of Tunnage and Poundage,
commonly called Custom, was much improved, Trade increased, Ships employed,
and all His Majesty's Subjects of all professions in one kind or other were
bettered or profited by it.

And now having done with this discourse, leave it unto rational and knowing
men to judge of what excellency our Wool was in its Manufactures before the
late War, and well weighing what have said thereof, suppose it will be
concluded that it far exceeded all Spaines Silver mines in West India, as
also all other commodities usually imported into Spain out of that vast part
of the world; well may I term it so, being judged to be the fourth part of the
whole, though a very great part not inhabited, at least not by Christians. O
that we had been so provident before this Kingdom was so unhappily engaged in
a War, as to have looked back to the times of King James of famous memory, and
before the said War to these of our most pious and prudent King Charles, we
should have seen what a flourishing Estate the Trade of this Kingdom, to the
enriching of many thousands was brought unto, to what it was in former times,
when hardly a Merchants Ship of the burden of 150. Tuns was to be had, and
since are many from the said burden of 150 to 600 Tuns, and some greater: an
undoubted sign of the great increase of Trade, and no little addition to the
strength of the Kingdom, for the which, we have no little cause, not only to
remember but also highly to commend the great wisdom and care of these two
most worthy Princes: but in stead thereof, there want not some malignant and
most unworthy spirits among us, that are ready to cast foul aspersions upon
them, traduce their government, blast their best actions, and desire rather a
perpetual oblivion, then a thankful remembrance of their majesty. O most
transcendent and monstrous ingratitude both to God and man! To God, in not
acknowledging his goodness in bestowing on us such great blessings. To man,
for remunerating or returning so much evil forto much good. Surely, me
thinks, if we as Tradesmen, before we were engaged, as I say, in a War, had
had the least thought of decay only of Trade, and had not look further into
the many more dismal calamities (of the which we have already more then a
bitter taste) that would certainly befall this kingdom by a civil War, it would
or might have been motive sufficient unto us to have employed our utmost
endeavors for its preservation, but (alas) most of us, like men demented, or
bereaved of their wits, run a quite contrary course, weedid what in us lay to
further and hasten its destruction, and to that end we could not be at quiet or
at rest, till we were quit of our moneys, and redouble our diligence in and
about the speedy advancing of that which would undoubtedly be its bane, and
expose the kingdom to the hazard of utter ruin.

The Author having done with this discourse assumes the boldness to adventure
on a few lines of Poetry, which though it be out of a Merchants Road, and may
perhaps be thought by some not to become this subject, hope, never the less,
it will admit a candid construction, the intention being good, though in the
manner or way of expression there may be failing.

To the Clothiers.
MY worthy Friends, by what is said, you feel
At present more then many others do,
Witness your want of work with loom and wheel:
Join hand in hand, and altogether go,
Trade to uphold and Commerce to maintain;
By loss you will perish All, you will live by Gain.
Thousands of you from youth to youths defect
By daily labor live and well subsist,
But who will you maintain? who will you protect,
When you are forced from labor to desist?
Then Clothiers poor, what will of you become?
Some beg, steal others will, and worse will some.
As some already, out of the land they will fly,
And elsewhere seek employment as have said,
Their Art they will others teach, which will the eye
Or eyes put out of Englands Clothing Trade:
Then out will be the Wool of England spunne,
And this our Kingdoms Trade almost undone.
But my good Friends, let not your minds be bent,
Or have a thought to leave your native soil,
In foreign parts to go with full intent
Others to teach which hazard may the spoil
Of our Manufactures, O that is an Act
Would be against Nature, it would sure extract
The vital blood out of your mothers heart,
Which let be never on their Clothiers part.
To all English Merchants Trading in foreign parts.
YOu that are Instruments of foreign Trade,
Worthy English Merchants of much Renown,
Forthwith bestirre your selves, let not be said,
That you sat still, and suffered to fall down
Your Countries Commerce: it is of that esteem
That nothing almost greater can you deem.
As partly by this small book is made appear;
To which refer you, needless to say it again,
But more I Will add to make it the more clear:
Trade boldness gave to pass the Ocean maine,
Discoveries new in foreign parts to make,
An Enterprise not small to undertake.
For men were often to struggle and to strive
With the elements, Fire, Water, Earth and Air,
Which if be Conquerers, of life deprive,
But they did boldly face them, and out dare:
It shows a noble mind and spirit brave,
Death to contemn for Honor, life to wave.
But on they went, such dangers were not all,
From North to South, from East to West they run,
From rising of the Sun unto the fall,
Passing the Equator, and when it was done,
By labor much they came unto the shore
Where yet they met with dangers more and more.
Danger by hidden Rocks, by Shelves of Sand,
Danger by want of knowledge of the Tide,
Danger by an Enemy on the Land,
So that danger they found on every side,
Yet they went on, they dangers did disdain
In hope they should, what they desired, gain.
Profit and Honor, and our Trades increase
Were the chief things where at those men did aim,
Will you by your remissness let them cease?
And not endeavor up to keep their fame,
With so much danger won and so much cost?
No, no, by your neglect let not be lost.
But as before, so now I say again,
Bestirre your selves, let nothing be in you
Deficient our Commerce to maintain,
Which will your Predecessors fame renew:
It will this Lands reputation keep,
And carry't still beyond the Ocean deep.
So will you Honor get, so will you praise,
So will you profit get by foreign Trade,
So you your selves and families may raise:
What more to stir and move you can be said
To you my noble Friends, then only this,
Youl'l get Earths happiness, and Heavens bless?
If what you do, be in an honest way,
For God abhorres Actions foul and base,
And on the actors does heavy curses lay,
A curse of shame at home, abroad disgrace;
A curse of poverty, and all things scant,
But more then these, of Heavens joy the want.
Adieu my friends, I bid you All farewell,
By what have said, it may be well foretold
That Traders all must cease to buy and sell,
If these distempers still among us hold,
And hold they will, without our royal King*
Whom God let us pray in safety home to bring.
To the Seamen.
ANd now brave English Seamen one and All,
I come to you likewise to crave your Aid;
You Are the Managers of this Kingdoms wall,
Which cannot stand without our Clothings Trade*
If Englands Manufactures find no sale
Its strength by Sea and Land must surely fail.
The Wall broke down, employment you will have none,
The lack of which expose you will to the want
Of worldly comforts, none will you bemoane,
All needful things for you becoming scant
May put you on such things as are most base:
Think not on them, let vices have no place
Within your breast, but think you on the Name
And deeds of worth, which may beget you praise.
Acts virtuous revive an honest fame,
And Credit that is decayed again does raise;
All what you do, do in a gentle way,
You Will then be Conquerers, and gain the day.
First humbly pray, and then gently persuade
Both high and low, and men of all degrees,
That they would do their best to keep up Trade,
Nothing with Englands Climate more agroes:
If lost, be then assured one and All,
Down must the welfare of this kingdom fall.
To the City of London.
LOndon the Magazine of Englands Trade,
All men do thee admire for thy neglect
In suffering Commerce thus away to fade,
Me thinks, that thou in chief should it protect,
And do thy best thy dying Trade ro'mend,
For thy well being does on it depend.
Me thinks thou should far more knowing be
In point of Trade, then many others are,
And therefore better should, then they, foresee,
That Trade by discord daily will impair,
Until that wasted is thy long won Gain,
And nothing will be left thee to maintain.
Thy Honor Credit Fame, far spread renown,
With Trade will fall, and none will thee regard.
All earthly goods will fail thee and fall down;
Relieved thou shall not be, Complaints not heard:
What will thou do? what will of thee betide*
Neglected shall thou be on every side.
These things well weighed, and else what more have said,
Should thee out of thy Lethargy awake,
And forthwith think how to preserve thy Trade,
Which first let be by Prayer; it may way make
For other things, that may the better tend
To that which is most fit Trade to amend.
But as I others, so I thee advise,
That what thou do be in a quiet way,
Think not on lawless ways in any wise,
Lest that they cause of Trade greater decay.
And so adieu (good City) fare thee well,
Wishing that Peace may still within thee dwell.
To the Army.
ARmy look to it, seek now Trade to amend,
Delay't not longer; let no by-respect
Away you lead, nor any private end,
Nor that in you be found the least neglect,
Lest be in this and future Ages said,
You were the greatest cause of loss of Trade.
In this small book I have prescribed a way,
How that our Trade may sooner helped be;
As you respect this land, and whilst you may,
In practice it to put do all agree;
And' cause it cannot be without our King,
Endeavor speedily Him home to bring
With Honor and with safety: then provide,
That He with confidence may so remain,
Nothing in reason then will be denied,
Which may our loss repair by a new Gain:
It is the safest way Arreares to pay,
Which never can well be by Trades decay.
On other way I would not have you think
Arreares to g^^, lest more distempers grow,
But well consider, we are at the brinke
Of utter ruin; your wild (...) before show
It to prevent, or else you' hazard run
With this poor Kingdom quite to be undone.
So fare you well brave Army, leave I take,
And pray God bless all those that peace do make.
To the Kingdom.
A Skillful Pilot plying for the shore,
And finding wind increasing more and more,
Bids tack about; again ply for the deep,
That so the Ship we may in safety keep:
If we so wise and provident had been;
We should not now such dismal times have seen,
But now we'are in them, let us all endeavor
Out to get, else we are lost for ever.
Borne for our selves we are not, but the good
Of that wherein we breath and have our food,
Our Country dear I mean, and wasted land,
That grown so feeble is, it cannot stand,
Unless forthwith supported, which must be
In such a way that we may all agree:
Then Trade will bettered be with the whole State,
Delay't not longer lest it be too late.
The King His helping hand offers to lay
To take away the cause of Trades decay,
And what amiss is else; why sit we still,
To join with Him? it is His desire and will.
Deep are the Kingdoms wounds and dangerous sure,
And knowing it, let us hasten to the cure.
And having much in roughest Seas been tossed,
Let Us harbor take, lest that our Ship be lost,
And we perish with it, O that is not all,
Our souls endangered, and our Issues fall.
Concordia parvae res crescunt Discordia, etc.
Small things to great by blessed Concord grow,
By Discord great decay, and kept are low.

Concord maintains love, makes two hearts one:
Discord does them divide, and makes them none.
Concord the hardest knot of strife dissolves,
Discord in Seas of troubles men involves.
Concord amongst the humors peace does make,
Discord the soundest humors in pieces shake.
Concord causes health, health sweet life maintains,
Discord much sickness, sickness kills with pains.
Concord makes friendship twixt body and mind,
Discord their tie of friendship does unbind.
Concord makes Music sweet, pleasing the ear,
Discord does Hearings Organ smite and tear.
Concord makes hearts merry and full of joy
Discord makes sadness, and does mirth destroy.
Concord preserves people, King and Crown,
Discord first enervates, and then pulls down.
Concord Gods true worship does well preserve,
Discord makes people from true worship swerve.
Concord keeps men's manners entire and sound,
Discord with vices foul makes men abound.
Concord makes learning flourish and Arts all,
Discord neglect does cause* then Arts down fall.
Concord upholds Trade, makes it increase,
Discord Trade first weakens, and then makes cease.
Concord of perfect order is the cause,
Discord, disorder breeds, destroys all Laws.
And what not else? let us concord then embrace,
And discord from us put, and have no place.
The Authors Apology.
NOw (Reader) I have done, I Will say no more
Save only this, desiring that before
Thou passest censure on what I have said,
Consider whence it came, whereof it is made.
First it is of matter, that is within my Sphere,
As by the whole discourse is made appear:
Then from a man of Trade, a Merchants brain,
What could thou more expect then matter plain,
Rough hewed, unpolished, harsh and tart,
Void of all form, all shape and Scholars Art?
Both style and language wave, look on the maine,
It is both King and Peoples loss and gain:
The Land with Trade must stand, with Trade must fall;
If lost, adieu the welfare of us all:
Which loss to shun, I heartily thee pray,
That thou would take to heart our Trades decay.
I have prescribed Known Laws*
a Medicine, is it would take,
It might both King and Kingdom happy make.
And so adieu (good Reader) I have done,
Give me thy hand, and thou my heart have won:
So shall we join in one as faithful friends,
Seeking the public good, no private ends.
Postscript.
HEre are now Letters out of the parts of Italy advising the non-sending of any
more of our Woollen Manufactures, for that those of the like kind made in other
Countries and sent thither, are not only better but cheaper. But some perhaps
will object, that though for present we lose the vent of our Manufactures, we
may hereafter regaine it, and that when Wool comes to be had at such low rates
as formerly, which when that will be God knows: Let not such men flatteringly
satisfi themselves with so vain a hope, but remember what has been said of
the loss of the total vent of our broad Cloth in Spain in the time of Queen
Elizabeth, and what has been further mentioned of the late great increase of
Woollen Manufactures elsewhere, to the great decay of the vent of Ours, and the
no little impoverishing of the stook of the Kingdom. Some things, indeed, if
not totally lost, are recoverable; but would be a peer of the greatest
indiseretion to expose a thing of such high concernment (as have said) to the
Commonwealth to the hazard of loss, when there may be ways of prevention.
And withal consider that when one State has got a thing from another to it
self, which is or may be advantageous unto it, it will use all the means
possible to keep and advance it: I need not send you further off then our own
home for a president, you may please to turn back to Folio 5. in the
Remonstrance, and you shall find what this State did in King Edward the thirds
time to get the Manufacture of Broad Cloth from Flanders, and what was
afterward done to keep it here in this kingdom. Besides People in these times
are more knowing in matters concerning Trade, and have better means to improve
them to more advantage then in former times: many things which in former ages
lay hidden and not thought upon, have been discovered in these latter, and
more will be in the future; man's brain is still a working.

PAge 9 line 20. read may say, p. 11. l. 20. r. entry, p. 19. l. 9. r. that, l.
15. waved, p. 24. l. 3. r. in those, p. 26. l. 32. r. 21 s. p. 27. l. 25. r.
less, that, p. 30. l. 12. r. the.

FINIS.

