A DECLARATION OF Sir WILLIAM BATTEN Late VICE ADMIRAL for the PARLIAMENT,
CONCERNING His Departure from London, to His Highness the PRINCE of WALES.

For satisfaction of all Honest SEAMEN, and Others whom it may concern.

At LONDON, Printed in the year, 1648.

A DECLARATION OF Sir WILLIAM BATTEN late Vice Admiral for the Parliament:
Concerning his Departure from London, to His Highness the Prince of Wales.
I Suppose it is not unknown to the greater part of this Kingdom, how for 7
years I have served the Parliament; with what zeal and fidelity I obeyed
their Commands (while I was their Vice Admiral, and held their Commission) God
the searcher of all hearts and themselves can best testify. What benefit they
received by my endeavors becomes not me to mention, and (to do them right)
themselves were still prompt enough to send their voted Thanks for my reducing
the Fleet in the Downs, fetching in the Swallow and Bonaventure, for regaining
Weymouth, for securing Lyme and Plymouth, for taking Hartford-west, Portland,
Pendennis, and Silly, for assisting Major General Laughorne to rout the Forces
in Pembroke-shire, for relieving the Ld Inchiquin when Youghall was besieged,
for repairing Deale-Castle with 600 l. of my own money, for building a Fort at
Plymouth with lime and stone, which cost me 500 l. whereof I never received but
200 l. and that (as the custom was) not without a sufficient Bribe; with many
other services, all which they cannot be more willing to forget then now I
would have them.

But why after all this (when their work was done and without any cause showed)
I was displaced by a Committee at the Headquarters at Putney with the advice
of their Adjutators, I could never understand; nor why I was sent for up by
land, as not to be honored to come in with the Ship, threatened (by that false
man Mr. Smith) to have a Charge drawn up against me unless I would instantly
lay down my Commission, though nothing was objected, but my suffering some of
the 11 Members to go beyond the Seas, when all of them had the Speakers Pass;
this, and because I was not of the temper of the Army, were judged sufficient
to have me dismissed, and another (such another) thrust in to be my Successor
as till then I never imagined would be Vice Admiral of a Navy.

My Commission thus surrendered, I was presently turned out of Deale-Castle, and
could not obtain leave for two nights longer, though my Wife was then sick, and
forced from her Bed to lie at an Alehouse. But how this wrought upon my
Brethren the Seamen, I hope all my life I shall thankfully remember; they best
knew what service I had done, and now beheld mine and their own reward; whereof
they expressed so just resentment when all those injuries offered to me were
repayed to my new Successor, whom they refused to come on Board, sent him back
to the Shore, and bid him return-to the place from whence he came; it being
most reasonable that that man should hold no command who openly professed
himself to be a Leveller.

This new Vice Admiral was no sooner rejected, but Letters came to me from
several friends, that I would return to the Ships; and the City of London (I
heartily thank them) petitioned the Parliament to restore me to my place; so
that some who had been most keen against me, did now make fresh Overtures of a
Commission (if I would embrace it) but I had resolved no longer to serve those
persons, who (as HIS MAJESTY Himself told them) Do change their Principles
with their Successes; and (to deal clearly with the world) I had engaged my
self to His Highness the Prince of WALES, to accept no Commission but such as
His HIGHNESS should please to allow me, though this I presume was then
unknown, both to Derby-house and the Headquarters.

Now (according to their custom) they began to make me a Delinquent; and that
most unworthy man, Sr Henry Mildmay, accused me for assisting the Earl of
NORWICH at Stratford-bridge, and (as the Ld Say told me) for sending Horses to
Sir CHARLES LUCAS at Chelmesford, which whether true or false, was to them
indifferent; since now they resolved to find me a Malignant, whereof they have
given their usual Testimony by violent breaking into my House. Plundring my
Goods, and Sequestring my Estate, with no small incivilities to my Wife and
Family, whereat I nothing wonder since I hear Sir Henry Mildmay's hand was to
the Warrant.

But why should I complain when I see how they required persons of the greatest
eminency, that had done them best service, as the Ld WILLOUGHBY of Parham, the
Ld INCHIQUIN, Sir WILLIAM WALLER, Major General LAUGHORNE, Maj. Gen: MASSEY,
Major General BROWN, Maj. Gen: POYNES, Colonel GRAVES, Col. WEST, Col. BLAKE,
Col. FORTESCUE, and many others yet living, besides those already dead; but
especially the City of LONDON, whose lives and purse were so frankly exposed,
that above fourscore times they had solemn Thanks for their great affection to
the Parliament; yet as a Reward for all their blood and coin) an Army was
brought in upon them, the Tower, Forts, and Magazines seized, their Militia and
Officers taken from them, their Lord Major and Aldermen imprisoned, with all
other marks of slavery from this ungrateful Faction, who take no consideration
but of their advantage, the world not having so ill Subjects, nor worse Masters.

I had not said this, if these injuries concerned only me in particular; but
such injustice has been exercised on my profession, as if the Seamen were
none of the KING'S Subjects, and were to expect no benefit by the Laws of
England: insomuch, that lately when we expressed our desires for Peace, the
Lord Say told us (in too much scorn) he would have us know, the Parliament
should not be Governed by a company of Saylors. To say nothing of that
malicious design of bringing Land-Soldiers on board, to awe and enslave the
Seamen, which to all sober men is the most ridiculous Tyranny ever yet
imagined; and which they I find will not hastily be forgotten.

I must confess, after the Vacating my Commission; I began more seriously to
examine whom I had served, for till then, I was so diligent in performing their
Commands that I took small leisure to examine their Actions, but when I
remember we fought all this while to fetch the KING to His Parliament, and yet
now it is made Treason to offer to bring Him thither; that some Members were
Voted Malignants for deserting the House, and others made Delinquents for
staying in it, that we took Oaths to defend the Kings Person and Authority;
and now must have a Government settled without Him, and no Addresses made to
Him, but Plots and Designs to poison and destroy Him: These and many other
such horrible contradictions cause me to abandon these enemies of Peace, and to
make my humble addresses to his Highness the Prince of Wales, whom (God is my
witness) I come to serve faithfully as becomes an honest man and a Loyal
Subject; not drawn by hopes either of honor or profit, as my friends and
acquaitance (especially Capt. Jordan, a person of known integrity, and great
skill in his profession, who also comes along with me upon the same
resolutions) can sufficiently testify. And I humbly conceive (were nothing of
Conscience in it, yet in common prudence) others are obliged to run the same
course, it being impossible (considering His Majesty's personal Virtues now
evident to all the world; the large possession He has in the hearts of His
people, of all His 3 Kingdoms, His numorous Progeny and Allies) that ever
Peace should be obtained till our KING be restored.

But I would not be mistaken, as if I were now turned an enemy to Parliaments;
for I profess, I shall with the hazard of my life and fortunes, endeavor the
welfare and being of free Parliaments; provided it be with the just Rights of
the KING and His Subjects, that by a Personal Treaty, or what other way it
shall please God; the good known Laws of England may be revived, by a firm
and lasting Peace.

Will: Batten,

FINIS.

