An Account of all the PROCEEDINGS Of the COMMISSIONERS of both PERSUASIONS*
Appointed by his Sacred MAJESTY, ACCORDING To Letters Patents, for the Review
of The BOOK of COMMON PRAYER, etc.

London, Printed in the year 1661.

(...) Majesty's feet, beseeching you to prosper such a blessed Resolution,
till it attain success: We must needs believe, that when your Majesty took our
Consent to a Lyturgy to be a foundation that would infer our Concord, you meant
not that we should have no Concord, but by consenting to this Lyturgy, without
any considerable Alterations.

And when you comforted us with your Resolutions to draw us together, by
yielding on both sides in what we could, you meant not that we should be the
boat to lay the banks that should not stir; and when your Majesty commanded us
by Letters Patents to meet about such Alterations as are needful or expedient
for giving satisfaction to tender Consciences, and the restoring and continuing
of Peace and Unity, we rest assured, that it was not your sense that those
tender consciences were to be forced to practice all which they judged
unlawful, and not so much as a Ceremony abated them; or that our Treaty was
only to convert either party to the Opinion of another; and that all our hopes
of Concord and Liberty consisted only in disputing the Bishops into
Nonconformity, or coming in every Ceremony to their minds.

Finally (for your Majesty, under God, is the protection whereto your people
fly, and as the same necessity still remains which drew forth your Gracious
Declaration) we most Humbly and Earnestly beseech your Majesty, that the
benefit of the said Declaration may be continued to your people, and in
particular, that none be punished or troubled for not using the Common Prayer,
till it be effectually reformed, and the Addition made, as there expressed. We
crave your Majesty's Pardon for the tediousness of this Address, and shall wait
in hope, that so great a Calamity of your people as will follow the loss of so
many able, faithful Ministers, as the rigorous Imposition would cast out, shall
never be recorded in the History of your Reign, but that these impediments of
Concord being forborne, your Kingdom may flourish in Piety and Peace, that this
may be the signal honor of your happy^Reign, and your joy in the day of your
account, which is the Prayer of

Your Majesty's Faithful and Obedient Subjects.

A Copy of his Majesty's Commission.
CHARLES the second by the Grace of God King of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
To our Trusty and well beloved the most Reverend Father in God Accepted
Archbishop of York, The right reverend Fathers in God Gilbert Bishop of
London, John Bishop of Durham, John Bishop of Rochester, Humphrey Bishop of
Sarum, George Bishop of Worcester, Robert Bishop of Lincoln, Benjamin Bishop
of Peterborough, Brian Bishop of Chester, Richard Bishop of Carlisle, John
Bishop of Exeter, Edward Bishop of Norwich; and to our Trusty and well beloved,
The Reverend Anthony Tuckney D D. John Conant D. D. William Spurstow D. D. John
Walis D. D. Tho Manton D. D. Edmund Calamy D. D. Richard Baxter Clerk, Arthur
Jackson, Tho. Case, Samuel Clarke, Matthew Newcomen Clerks; and to our trusty
and well beloved Dr. Earls Dean of Westminster, Peter Heylin D. D. John Hacket
D. D. John Berwick D. D. Peter Gunning D. D. John Pearson D. D. Tho. Pierce D.
D. Anthony Sparrow, Herbert Thorndike D. D. Thomas Horton D. D. Thomas Jacomb
D. D. William Bate, John Rawlinson Clerks, William Cooper Clerk, D. John
Lightfoot, D. John Collings, D. Benjamin Woodbridg, and William Drake Clerk,
Greeting.
Whereas by our Declaration of the 25 of October last concerning Ecclesiastical
affairs, we did (amongst other things) express our esteem of the Liturgy of the
Church of England contained in the Book of Common Prayer; and yet since we find
exceptions made against several things therein, we did by our said Declaration
declare we would appoint an equal number of Learned Divines, of both
persuasions, to review the same: we therefore in accomplishment of our said
will and intent, and of our continued and constant care and study for the peace
and unity of the Churches within our Dominions, and for the removal of all
exceptions and difference, and the occasions of such differences and exceptions
from among our good subjects, for or concerning the said Book of Common Prayer,
or any thing therein contained, do by these our letters patents require,
authorize, constitute and appoint you the said, etc. to advise upon and review
the said Book of Common Prayer, comparing the same with the most ancient
Liturgies which have been used in the Church in the primitive and purest times.
And to that end, to assemble and meet together, from time to time, and at such
time within the space of four Kalendar-months now next ensuing, in the Masters
lodging in the Savoy in the Strand in the County of Middlesex, or in such other
place or places as to you shall be thought fit and convenient, to take into
your serious and grave consideration the several directions and rules, forms of
prayer, and things in the said Book of Common Prayer contained, and to advise,
consult upon and about the same, and the several objections and exceptions
which shall now be raised against the same, and (if occasion be) to make such
reasonable and necessary alterations, corrections, and amendments therein, as
by and between you the said Archbishop, Bishops, Doctors, and Persons hereby
required and authorized to meet and advise as aforesaid, shall be agreed upon
to be needful and expedient, for the giving satisfaction to tender consciences,
and the restoring and continuance of peace and unity in the Churches under our
protection and Government; but avoiding (as much as may be) all unnecessary
abbreviations of the forms and Liturgy wherewith the people are altogether
acquainted, and have so long received in the Church of England. And our will
and pleasure is, that when you the said Archbishop, Bishops, Doctors and
Persons authorized and appointed by these our letters patents to meet, advise
and consult upon and about the premises as aforesaid, shall have drawn your
consultations to any resolution and determination which you shall agree upon as
needful or expedient to be done for the altering, diminishing or enlarging the
said Book of Common Prayer, or any part thereof, That then forthwith you
certify and present to us in writing under your several hands the matters and
things whereupon you shall so determine, for our approbation; and to the end
the same or so much thereof as shall be approved by us, may be established, and
forasmuch as the said Archbishop and Bishops have several great charges to
attend, which we would not dispense with, or that the same should be neglected
upon any great occasion whatsoever, and some of them being of great Age and
infirmities, may not be able constantly to attend the execution of the service
and authority hereby given and required by us, in the meeting and consultation
aforesaid; We will therefore, and hereby require you the said Dr. Earls, etc.
to supply the place and places of such of the Archbishop and Bishops (other
then the said Edward Bishop of Norwich) as shall by age, sickness, infirmity or
other occasions be hindered from attending the said meeting or consultation
(that is to say) that one of you the said Dr. Earls, etc. shall from time to
time supply the place of each one of them the said Archbishop and Bishops
(other then the said Edward Bishop of Norwich) which shall happen to be hindered
or to be absent from the said meetings or consutations; and shall and may
advise, consult and determine, and also certify and execute all and singular
the powers and authorities before mentioned in and about the premises, as fully
and absolutely as such Archbishop and Bishops which shall so happen to be
absent should or might do by virtue of these our letters patents, or any thing
herein contained, in case he or they were personally present. And whereas in
regard of the distance of some, the infirmity of others, the multitude of
constant employment and other incidental impediments, some of you the said
Edward Bishop of Norwich, etc. may be hindered from the constant attendance in
the execution of the service aforesaid, we therefore will and do hereby require
and authorize you the said Thomas Horton, etc. to supply the place or ^laces of
such the Commissioners last above mentioned, as shall by the means aforesaid or
any other occasion be hindered from the said meeting and consultations, that one
of you the said Thomas Horton, etc. shall from time to time supply the places
of each one of the said Commissioners last mentioned, which shall happen to be
hindered or absent from the said meeting and consultations; and shall and may
advise, consult and determine, and also certify and execute all and singular
the powers and authorities before mentioned in and about the premises, as fully
and absolutely as such of the said last mentioned Commissioners, which shall so
happen to be absent, should or might do by virtue of these our Letters patents,
or any thing therein contained, in case he or they were personally present. In
witness whereof we have caused these our Letters to be made patents:

witness our self at Westminster the 25 day of March, in the thirteenth year of
our Reign. Per ipsum Regem.
Barker.

THE EXCEPTIONS Against the BOOK OF Common Prayer.
ACknowledging with all humility and thankfulness, His Majesty's most Princely
Condiscention and Indulgence, to very many of his Loyal Subjects, as well in
His Majesty's most gracious Declaration, as particularly in this present
Commission, issued forth in pursuance thereof; We doubt not but the Right
Reverend Bishops, and all the rest of His Majesty's Commissioners entrusted in
this work, will, in imitation of His Majesty's most prudent and Christian
Moderation and Clemency, judge it their duty (what we find to be the
Apostles own practice) in a special manner to be tender of the Churches peace,
to bear with the infirmities of the weak, and not to please themselves, nor to
measure the consciences of other men by the light and latitude of their own,
but seriously and readily to consider and advise of such expedients, as may
most conduce to the healing of our breaches, and uniting those that differ.

And albeit we have an high and honorable esteem of those godly and learned
Bishops, and others, who were the first Compilers of the Public Liturgy, and
do look upon it as an excellent and worthy work, for that time, when the Church
of England made her first step out of such a mist of Popish Ignorance and
Superstition, wherein it formerly was involved; Yet considering that all humane
works do gradually arrive at their maturity, and perfection; and this in
particular being a work of that nature, has already admitted several
Emendations since the first compiling thereof.

It cannot be thought any disparagement or derogation either to the work it
self, or to the Compilers of it, or to those who have hitherto used it, if
after more than an hundred years, since its first composure, such further
^emendations be now made therein, as may be judged* necessary for satisfying
the scruples of a multitude of sober persons, who cannot at all (or very
hardly) comply with the use of it, as now it is, and may best suit with the
present times after so long an enjoyment of the glorious light of the Gospel,
and so happy a Reformation. Especially considering that many godly and learned
men* have from the beginning all along earnestly desired the alteration of many
things therein, and very many of His Majesty's pious, peaceable, and loyal
Subjects, after so long a discontinuance of it, are more averse from it than
heretofore. The satisfying of whom (as far as may be) will very much conduce
to that peace and unity which is so much desired by all good men, and so much
endeavored by His Most Excellent Majesty.

And therefore in pursuance of this His Majesty's most gracious Commission, for
the satisfaction of tender consciences, and the procuring of peace and unity
amongst our selves, we judge meet to propose,

First, That all the Prayers, and other materials of the Liturgy may consist of
nothing doubtful or questioned amongst pious, learned, and Orthodox persons
inasmuch as the professed end of composing them is for the declaring of the
unity and consent of all who join in the public worship; it being too evident
that the limiting of Church Communion to things of doubtful disputation, has
been in all ages the ground of Schism and Separation according to the saying of
a learned person.

To load our public forms, Mr. Hales.
with the private fancies upon which we differ, is the most Sovereign way to
perpetuate Schism to the worlds end. Prayer, Confession, Thanksgiving, Reading
of the Scriptures, and administration of the Sacraments in the plainest, and
simplest manner, were matter enough to furnish out a sufficient Liturgy, though
nothing either of private Opinion, or of Church-pomp, of Garments, or
prescribed gestures, of Imagery, of Music, of matter concerning the dead, of
many superfluities which creep into the Church under the name of Order, and
Decency, did interpose it self. To charge Churches and Liturgies with things
unnecessary, was the first beginning of all Superstition, and when scruple of
conscience began to be made or pretended, then Schism began to break in. If the
special Guides and Fathers of the Church would be a little sparing of
incumbring Churches with superfluities, or not over-rigid, either in reviving
Obsolete Customs, or imposing new, there would be far less cause of Schism, or
Superstition; and all the inconvenience were likely to ensue, would be but
this, they should in so doing yield a little to the imbecility of their
inferiors; a thing which St. Paul would never have refused to do: Mean while,
wheresoever false or suspected Opinions are made a piece of Church-Liturgy; he
that separates is not the Schismatic: for it is alike unlawful to make
Profession of known, or suspected falsehood; as to put in practice unlawful or
suspected actions.]

2. Further, we humbly desire that it may be seriously considered, that as our
first Reformers out of their great wisdom, did at that time so compose the
Liturgy, as to win upon the Papists, and to draw them into their
Church Communion, by varying as little as they well could, from the Romish
forms before in use; so whether in the present constitution, and state of
things amongst us, we should not according to the same Rule of Prudence and
Charity, have our Liturgy so composed, as to gain upon the judgments and
affection of all those who in the substantials of the Protestant Religion are
of the same persuasions with our selves: Inasmuch as a more firm union and
consent of all such, as well in Worship, as in Doctrine, would greatly
strengthen the Protestant interest against all those dangers and temptations
which our intestine Divisions and Animosities do expose us unto, from the
common Adversary.

3. That the Repetitions, and Responsals of the Clerk and People, and the
alternate reading of the Psalms and Hymns which cause a confused murmr in the
Congregation, whereby what is read is less intelligible, and therefore
unedifying, may be omitted: The Minister being appointed for the people in all
public services appertaining unto God, and the Holy Scriptures, both of the
Old and New Testament, intimating the peoples part in public prayer to be only
with silence and reverence to attend thereunto, and to declare their consent in
the cloze, by saying Amen,

4. That in regard the Letany (though otherwise containing in it many holy
petitions) is so framed, that the petitions for a great part are uttered only
by the people, which we think not to be so consonant to Scripture, which makes
the Minister the mouth of the people to God in prayer, the particulars thereof
may be composed into one solemn prayer to be offered by the Minister unto God
for the people.

5. That there be nothing in the Liturgy which may seem to countenance the
Observation of Lent, as a Religious Fast; the example of Christ's fasting forty
days and nights, being no more imitable, nor intended for the imitation of a
Christian, than any other of his miraculous works were, or than Moses his forty
days fast was for the Jews: And the Act of Parliament 5. Eliz. forbidding
abstinence from flesh to be observed upon any other than a politic
consideration* and punishing all those who by preaching, teaching, writing, or
open speeches, shall notify that the forbearing of flesh, is of any necessity
for the saving of the soul, or that it is the service of God, otherwise, than
as other politic Laws are.

6. That the Religious Observation of Saints-daies appointed to be kept as
Holy Days, and the Vigils thereof without any foundation (as we conceive) in
Scripture, may be omitted. That if any be retained, they may be called
Festivals, and not Holy Days, nor made equal with the Lord's Day, nor have any
peculiar service appointed for them, nor the people be upon such days forced
wholly to abstain from work; And that the names of all others now inserted in
the Calender which are not in the first and second books of Edward the sixth,
may be left out.

7. That the gift of Prayer, being one special Qualification for the work of
the Ministry bestowed by Christ in order to the Edification of his Church, and
to be exercised for the profit and benefit thereof, according to its various
and emergent necessity; It is desired, that there may be no such imposition of
the Liturgy, as that the exercise of that gift be thereby totally excluded in
any part of public worship. And further, considering the great age of some
Ministers, and infirmities of others, and the variety of several services
oft-times concurring upon the same day, whereby it may be inexpedient to
require every Minister, at all times to read the whole; It may be left to the
discretion of the Minister, to omit part of it, as occasion shall require:
which liberty we find to be allowed even in the first Common Prayer Book of
Edward. 6.

8. That in regard of the many defects which have been observed in that version
of the Scriptures, which is used throughout the Liturgy (manifold instances
whereof may be produ^ed, as in the Epistle for the first Sunday after
Epiphany, taken out of Romans 12. 1. Be ye changed in your shape; And the
Epistle for the Sunday next before Easter, taken out of Philippians 2. 5. Found
in his Apparel as a man, as also the Epistle for the fourth Sunday in Lent,
taken out of the fourth of the Galathians, Mount Sinai is Agar in Arabia, and
bordereth upon the City which is now called Jerusalem. The Epistle for St.
Matthews day taken out of the second Epistle of Corinth, and the 4th. We go
not out of kind. The Gospel for the second Sunday after Epiphany, taken out of
the second of John, When men be drunk. The Gospel for the third Sunday in
Lent, taken out of the 11th. of Luke, One house does fall upon another. The
Gospel for the Annunciation, taken out of the first of Luke, This is the sixth
month which was called barren] and many other places) we therefore desire
instead thereof the New Translation allowed by Authority may alone be used.

9. That inasmuch as the holy Scriptures are able to make us wise unto
salvation, to furnish us thorougly unto all good works, and contain in them all
things necessary, either in Doctrine to be believed, or in Duty to be
practiced; whereas diverse chapters of the Apocryphal Books appointed to be
read, are charged to be, in both respects, of dubious and uncertain credit: It
is therefore desired, that nothing be read in the Church for Lessons, but the
holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament.

10. That the Minister be not required to rehearse any part of the Liturgy at
the Communion Table, save only those parts which properly belong to the Lords
Supper; and that at such times only when the said holy Supper is administered.

11. That as the word (Minister) and not Priest, or Curate, is used in the
absolution, and in diverse other places; it may throughout the whole Book be so
used instead of those two words: and that instead of the word Sunday, the word
Lord's Day, may be every where used.

12. Because singing of Psalms is a considerable part of public worship, we
desire that the Version set forth and allowed to be sung in Churches, may be
amended, or that we may have leave to make use of a purer Version.

13. That all obsolete words in the Common Prayer, and such whose use is
changed from their first significancy (as Aread) used in the Gospel for the
Monday, and Wednesday before Easter [Then opened he their wits] used in the
Gospel for Easter Tuesday, etc. may be altered unto other words generally
received, and better understood.

14. That no portions of the Old Testament, or of the Acts of the Apostles, be
called Epistles, and read as such.

15. That whereas throughout the several offices, the phrase is such as
presumes all persons (within the Communion of the Church) to be regenerated,
converted, and in an actual state of Grace (which had Ecclesiastical Discipline
been truly and vigorously executed, in the exclusion of scandalous and
obstinate sinners, might be better supposed: But there having been, and still
being a confessed want of that (as in the Liturgy is acknowledged) it cannot
be rationally admitted in the utmost latitude of Charity.) We desire that
this may be reformed.

16. That whereas orderly connection of Prayers, and of particular Petitions
and Expressions, together with a competent length of the forms used, are
tending much to Edification, and to gain the reverence of people to them. There
appears to us too great a neglect of both, of this order, and of other just
Laws, of Method.

Particularly.
1. The Collects are generally short, many of them consisting but of one, or at
most two sentences of Petition; and these generally ushered in with a repeated
mention of the Name and Attributes of God, and presently concluding with the
Name and Merits of Christ; whence are caused many unnecessary intercisions and
abruptions, which when many Petitions are to be offered at the same time, are
neither agreeable to Scriptural Examples, nor suited to the gravity and
seriousness of that holy duty.

2. The Prefaces of many Collects have not any clear and special respect to the
following Petitions; and particular Petitions are put together, which have not
any due order, nor evident connection one with another, nor suitableness with
the occasions upon which they are used, but seem to have fallen in rather
casually, than from an orderly contrivance.

It is desired, that instead of those various Collects, there may be one
Methodical and entire form of Prayer composed out of many of them.

17. That whereas the Public Liturgy of a Church should in reason comprehend
the sum of all such sins as are ordinarily to be confessed in prayer by the
Church, and of such petitions and thanksgivings as are ordinarily by the Church
to be put up to God, and the Public Catechisms, or Systems of Doctrine,
should summarily comprehend all such Doctrines as are necessary to be believed,
and these explicitly set down: The present Liturgy as to all these seems very
defective.

Particularly.
1. There is no preparatory Prayer in our address to God for Assistance or
Acceptance; yet many Collects in the midst of the Worship have little or
nothing else.

2. The Confession is very defective, not clearly expressing original sin, nor
sufficiently enumerating actual sins, with their aggravations; but consisting
only of generals: Whereas Confession being the exercise of Repentance, ought to
be more particular.

3 There is also a great defect as to such forms of public praise and
Thanksgiving, as are suitable to Gospel Worship.

4 The whole body of the Common Prayer also consists very much of mere
generals: as, (To have our prayers heard,) To be kept from all evil, and from
all enemies, and all adversity, that we may do Gods will; without any mention
of the particulars in which these generals exist.

5 The Catechism is defective as to many necessary Doctrines of our Religion:
some even of the essentials of Christianity not mentioned except in the Creed,
and there not so explicit as ought to be in a Catechism.

18 Because this Liturgy contains the imposition of diverse Ceremonies which
from the first Reformation have by sundry Learned and Pious men been judged
unwarrantable, as

1 That Public Worship may not be celebrated by any Minister that dare not
wear a Surpless.

2 That none may Baptize, nor be Baptized, without the transient image of the
Cross, which has at least the semblance of a Sacrament of Humane Institution,
being used as an ingageing sign in our first and solemn Covenanting with
Christ, and the duties whereunto we are really obliged by Baptism, being more
expressly fixed to that airy sign than to this holy Sacrament.

3 That none may receive the Lords Supper that dare not kneel in the act of
receiving; but the Minister must exclude all such from the Communion: although
such kneeling not only differs from the practice of Christ and of his Apostles,
but (at least on the Lords day) is contrary to the practice of the Catholic
Church, for many hundred years after, and forbidden by the most Venerable
Councils that ever were in the Christian world. All which Impositions, are made
yet more grievous, by that subscription to their lawfulness, which the Canon
exacts, and by the heavy punishment upon the non-observance of them which the
Act of Uniformity inflicts.

And it being doubtful whether God has given power unto men, to institute in
his Worship such mystical Teaching signs, which not being necessary in genere,
fall not under the Rule of doing all things decently, orderly, and to
edification, and which once granted will upon the same reason, open a door to
the Arbitrary Imposition of Numerous Ceremonies of which St. Augustine
complained in his days; and the things in controversy being in the judgment
of the Imposers confessedly indifferent, who do not so much as pretend any real
goodness in them of themselves, otherwise than what is derived from their being
imposed, and consequently the Imposition ceasing, that will cease also, and the
Worship of God not become indecent without them.

Whereas on the other hand in the judgment of the Opposers they are by some
held sinful, and unlawful in themselves, by others very inconvenient and
unsuitable to the simplicity of Gospel Worship, and by all of them very
grievous and burdensome, and therefore not at all fit to be put in balance
with the Peace of the Church, which is more likely to be promoted by their
removal, than continuance: Considering also how tender our Lord and Savior
himself is of weak Brethren, declaring it much better for a man to have a
millstone hanged about his neck, and be cast into the depth of the Sea, than
to offend one of his little ones: And how the Apostle Paul (who had as great a
Legislative Power in the Church, as any under Christ) held himself obliged by
that Common Rule of Charity, not to lay a stumbling block, or an occasion of
offense before a weak Brother, choosing rather not to eat flesh whiles the world
stands (though in it self a thing lawful) then offend his Brother for whom
Christ died: We cannot but desire that these Ceremonies may not be imposed on
them, who judge such Impositions a Violation of the Royalty of Christ, and an
impeachment of his Laws as in insufficient, and are under the holy awe of that
which is written, Deuteronomy. 12. 32. (What thing soever I command you, observe to do
it) Thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish from it) but that there may be
either a total abolition of them, or at least such a liberty, that those who
are unsatisfied concerning their lawfulness or expediency, may not be
compelled to the practice of them, or subscription to them. But may be
permitted to enjoy their Ministerial Function, and Communion with the Church
without them.

The rather because these Ceremonies have for above an hundred years been the
fountain of manifold evils in this Church and Nation, occasioning fad divisions
between Ministers and Ministers, as also between Ministers and People, exposing
many Orthodox, Pious, and Peaceable Ministers, to the displeasure of their
Rulers, casting them on the edge of the penal Statutes, to the loss not only of
their Livings and Liberties, but also of their opportunities for the service of
Christ, and his Church; and forcing people, either to worship God in such a
manner as their own consciences condemn, or doubt of, or else to forsake our
Assemblies, as thousands have done: And no better fruits than these can be
looked for from the retaining and imposing of these Ceremonies, unless we
could presume, that all His Majesty's Subjects should have the same subtilty of
judgment to discern even to a Ceremony, how far the power of man extends in
the things of God, which is not to be expected, or should yield Obedience to
all the Impositions of men concerning them, without inquiring into the will of
God, which is not to be desired.

We do therefore, most earnestly entreat the Right Reverend Fathers and
Brethren, to whom these Papers are delivered, as they tender the glory of God,
the honor of Religion, the Peace of the Church, the service of His Majesty in
the accomplishment of that happy Union, which His Majesty has so abundantly
testified his desires of, to join with us in importuning his most excellent
Majesty, that his most gracious indulgence, as to these Ceremonies granted in
his Royal Declaration may be confirmed and continued to us and our
posterities, and extended to such as do not yet enjoy the benefit thereof.

19. As to that Passage in His Majesty's Commission, where we are authorized,
and required to compare the present Liturgy, with the most ancient Liturgies
which have been used in the Church, in the purest and most primitive times: We
have in obedience to His Majesty's Commission, made enquiry, but cannot find
any Records of known credit, concerning any entire forms of Liturgy, within the
first three hundred years which are confessed to be, as the most Primitive, so
the purest ages of the Church: Nor any Imposition of Liturgies upon any
National Church for some hundreds of years after: We find indeed some
Liturgical forms Fathered upon St. Basil, St. Chrysostom, and St. Ambrose, but
we have not seen any Copies of them, but such as give us sufficient evidence
to conclude them either wholly spurious, or so interpolated, that we cannot
make a judgment which in them has any Primitive Authority.

Having thus in general expressed our desires, we come now to particulars,
which we find numerous, and of a various nature; some we grant are of
inferior Consideration, verbal rather that material (which were they not in
the Public Liturgy of so famous a Church, we should not have mentioned)
others dubious and disputable, as not having a clear foundation in Scripture
for their warrant: but some there be that seem to be corrupt, and to carry in
them a repugnancy to the Rule of the Gospel; and therefore have administered
just matter of Exception and offense to many, truly religious, and peaceable;
not of a private station only, but learned and judicious Divines, as well of
other Reformed Churches, as of the Church of England, ever since the
Reformation.

We know much has been spoken and written by way of Apology, in answer to
many things that have been objected; but yet the doubts and scruples of tender
consciences still continue, or rather are increased. We do humbly conceive it
therefore a work worthy of those wonders of Salvation, which God has wrought
for His Majesty now on the Throne, and for the whole Kingdom, and exceedingly
becoming the Ministers of the Gospel of Peace, with all holy moderation and
tenderness, to endeavor the removal of every thing out of the Worship of God,
which may justly offend or grieve the spirits of sober and godly people. The
things themselves that are desired to be removed, not being of the foundation
of Religion, nor the essentials of Public Worship, nor the removal of them any
way tending to the prejudice of the Church or State; Therefore their
continuance, and rigorous Imposition, can no ways be able to countervail the
laying aside of so many pious and able Ministers, and the unconceivable grief
that will arise to multitudes of His Majesty's most loyal and peaceable
Subjects, who upon all occasions are ready to serve him with their prayers,
estates, and lives. For the preventing of which evils, we humbly desire that
these particulars following, may be taken into serious and tender
Consideration.

Concerning Morning and Evening Prayer.
Rubric.
THat morning and evening Prayer shall be used in the accustomed place of
Church, Chancel, or Chapel; except it be otherwise determined by the Ordinary
of the place, and the Chaucel shall remain as in times past.

Exception.
WE desire that the words of the first Rubric may be expressed as in the Book
established by Authority of Parliament 5to. and 6to. Edw. 6ti. Thus [the
Morning and Evening Prayer shall be used in such place of the Church, Chapel,
or Chancel, and the Minister shall so turn him, as the people may best hear,
and if there be any controversy therein, the matter shall be referred to the
Ordinary.]

Rubric.
And here is to be noted, that the Minister, at the time of the Communion, and
at other times, in his ministeration shall use such Ornaments in the Church, as
were in use by Authority of Parliament, in the second year of the Reign of
Edward the sixth, according to the Act of Parliament.

Exception.
Forasmuch as this Rubric seems to bring back the Cope, Albe, etc. and other
Vestments forbidden by the Common Prayer Book, 5. and 6. Edw. 6. and so our
reasons alleged against Ceremonies under our eighteenth general Exception, we
desire it may be wholly left out,

Rubric.
The Lords-Prayer after the Absolution ends thus; Deliver us from evil.

Exception.
We desire that these words, For thine is the Kingdom, the power and the
glory for ever and ever. Amen. May be always added unto the Lords-Prayer; and
that this Prayer may not be enjoined to be so often used in morning and
evening Service.

Rubric.
And at the end of every Psalm, throughout the year, and likewise in the end
of Benedictus, Benedicite, Magnificat, and Nunc Dimittis, shall be repeated,
Glory to the Father, etc.

Exception.
By this Rubric, and other places in the Common-Prayer-Books, the Gloria
Patri, is appointed to be said six times ordinarily in every Morning and
Evening Service, frequently eight times in a Morning; sometimes ten, which we
think carries with it at least an appearance of that vain repetition which
Christ forbids; for the avoiding of which appearance of evil, we desire it may
be used but once in the Morning, and once in the Evening.

Rubric.
In such places where they do sing, there shall the Lessons be sung, in a
plain Tune, and likewise, the Epistle and Gospel,

Exception.
The Lessons, and the Epistles, and Gospels being for the most part neither
Psalms nor Hymns, we know no warrant why they should be sung in any place,
and conceive that the distinct Reading of them with an Audible voice, tends
more to the Edification of the Church.

Rubric.
Or this Canticle, Ben'dicite omnia opera.

Exception.
We desire that some Psalm or Scripture Hymn may be appointed instead of that
Apocryphal.

In the Letany.
Rubric.
From all Fornication, and all other deadly sin.

Exception.
IN regard that the wages of sin is death; we desire that this clause may be
thus altered, From Fornication, and all other heinous, or grievous sins.

Rubric.
From Battle, and Murder, and sudden death.

Exception.
Because this expression of sudden death has been so often excepted against,
we desire, if it be thought fit, it may be thus read, From battle and
murder, and from dying suddenly, and unprepared.

Rubric.
That it may please thee to preserve all that travel, by land, or by water, all
women laboring with child, all sick persons, and young children, and to show
thy pity upon all prisouers and captives.

Exception.
We desire the term (All) may be advised upon, as seeming liable to just
Exceptions, and that it may be considered, whether it may not better be put
indefinitely; those that travel, etc. rather than universally.

The Collect on Christmas Day.
Rubric.
ALmighty God, which have given us thy only begotten Son, to take our nature
upon him, and this day to be born of a pure Uirgin, etc.

Exception.
WE desire that in both Collects the word (This day) may be left out, it
being according to vulgar Acceptance a contradiction.

Rubric.
Then shall follow the Collect of the Nativity, which shall be said continually
unto New-years-day.

The Collect for Whitsonday.
Rubric.
God which upon this day, etc.

Rubric.
The same Collect to be read on Monday and Tuesday, in Whitson-week.

Rubric.
The two Collects for St. John's day, and Innocents, the Collects for the first
day in Lent, for the fourth Sunday after Easter, for Trinity-Sunday, for the
sixth and twelfth Sunday after Trinity, for St. Lukes day, and Michaelmas day.

Exception.
We desire that these Collects may be further considered and debated, as
having in them, diverse things that we judge fit to be altered.

The Order for the Administration of the Lord's Supper.
Rubric.
SO many as intend to be partakers of the Holy Communion shall signify their
names to the Curate overnight, or else in the morning before the beginning of
morning-prayer, or immediately after.

Exception.
THe time here assigned for notice to be given to the Minister, is not
sufficient.

Rubric.
And if any of these be a notorious evil liver, the Curate having knowledge
thereof, shall call him, and advertize him in any wise not to presume to the
Lords Table.

Exception.
We desire the Ministers sters power both to admit and keep from the Lords
Table, may be according to His Majesty's Declaration, 25. October. 1660. In
these words, The Minister shall admit none to the Lords Supper, till they have
made a credible Profession of their Faith, and promised Obedience to the Will
of God, according as is expressed in the Considerations of the Rubric, before
the Catechism, and that all possible diligence be used for the Instruction and
Reformation of scandalous Offenders, whom the Minister shall not suffer to
partake of the Lords Table, until they have openly declared themselves to have
truly repented and amended their former naughty lives, as is partly expressed
in the Rubric, and more fully in the Canons,

Rubric.
Then shall the Priest rehearse distinctly all the ten Commandments, and the
people kneeling, shall after every Commandment ask Gods mercy for
transgressing the same.

Exception.
We desire,

1. That the preface, prefixed by God himself to the ten Commandments, may be
restored.

2 That the fourth Commandment may be read, as in Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5. He
blessed the Sabbath day.

3. That neither Minister nor People may be enjoined to kneel more at the
reading of this, than of other parts of Scripptures, the rather because many
ignorant persons are thereby induced to use the Ten Commandments as a Prayer.

4. That instead of those short Prayers of the People, intermixed with the
several Commandments, the Minister after the reading of all may conclude with
a suitable prayer.

Rubric.
After the Creed, if there be no Sermon, shall follow one of the Hoinilies
already set forth, or hereafter to be set forth by common Authority.

Exception.
We desire, that the Preaching of the Word may be strictly enjoined, and not
left so indifferent at the Administration of the Sacraments, as also that
Ministers may not be bound to those things which are as yet but future and not
in being.

After such Sermon, Homily, or Exhortation, the Curate shall declare, etc. and
earnestly exhort them to remember the Poor, saying one or more of these
sentences following.

Then it all the Churchwardens, or some other by them appointed, gather the
Devotion of the People.

Two of the sentences here cited are Apocryphal, and four of them more proper
to draw out the peoples Bounty to their Ministers, than their Charity to the
poor.

Collection for the poor may be better made at or a little before the departing
of the Communicants.

Exhortation.
We be come together at this time to feed at the Lords Supper, unto the which
in Gods behalf I bid you all that be here present, and beseech you for the Lord
Jesus Christ sake that ye will not refuse to come, etc.

The way and means thereto is first to examine your Lives and Conversations,
and if ye shall p^rceive your offenses to be such as be not only against God,
but also against your Neighbors, then ye shall reconcile your selves unto
them, and be ready to make restitution and satisfaction.

And because it is requisite that no man should come to the holy Communnion,
but with a full trust in Gods mercy and with a quiet conscience.

If it be intended that these Exhortations should be read at the Communion,
they seem to us to be unseasonable.

We fear this may discourage many from coming to the Sacrament, who lie under a
doubting and troubled Conscience.

Before the Confession.
Then shall this general Confession be made in the name of all those that are
minded to receive the holy Communion either by one of them, or else by one of
the (...) Priest himself.

We desire it may be made by the Minister only.

Before the Confession.
Then shall the Priest or the Bishop (being present) stand up, and turning
himself to the people say thus.

Exception.
The Minister turning himself to the people is most convenient throughout the
whole Ministration.

Before the Prefaces on Christmas day, and 7 days after.
Because thou did give Jesus Christ thine only Son to be born as this Day
for us, etc.

First, We cannot peremptorily fix the Nativitie of our Savior to this or that
day particularly: Secondly, it seems incongruous to affirm the Birth of Christ
and the descending of the Holy Ghost to be on this day for seven or eight days
together.

Upon Whitsunday, and fix days after.
According to whose most true promise the Holy Ghost came down this day from
heaven.

Prayer before that which is at the Consecration.
Grant us that our sinful bodies may be made clean by his Body, and our souls
washed through his most precious blood.

We desire, that whereas these words seem to give a greater efficacy to the
Blood than to the Body of Christ, they may be altered thus, That our sinful
souls and bodies may be cleansed through his precious Body and Blood.

Prayer at the Consecration.
Hear us O merciful Father, etc. who in the same night that he was betrayed
took bread, and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and gave to his
Disciples, saying, Take, eat, etc.

We conceive that the manner of the consecrating of the Elements is not here
explicit and distinct enough, and the Ministers breaking of the Bread is not
so much as mentioned.

Rubric.
Then shall the Minister first receive the Communion in both kinds, etc. and
after deliver it to the people in their hands kneeling; and when he delivers
the bread, he shall say, The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ which was given f^r
thee, preserve thy body and soul unto everlasting life, and take and eat this
in Remembrance, etc.

We desire, that at the distribution of the Bread and Wine to the Communicants,
we may use the words of our Savior as near as may be, and that the Minister be
not required to deliver the Bread and Wine into every particular Communicants
hand, and to repeat the words to each one in the singular number, but that it
may suffice to speak them to diverse jointly, according to our Saviors Example.

We also desire, that the Kneeling at the Sacrament (it being not tha^ gesture
which the Apostles used, though Christ was personally present amongst them, nor
that which was used in the purest and primitive times of the Church) may be
left free, as it was 1. and 2. EDW. As touching Kneeling, etc. they may be used
or left as every man's Devotion serves, without blame.

Rubric.
And note, that every Parishioner shall Communicate at the least three times in
the year, of which Easter is be one, and shall also receive the Sacraments and
other Rites, according to the Orders in this Book appointed.

Exception.
Forasmuch as every Parishioner is not duly qualified for the Lords Supper, and
those habitually prepared are not at all times actually disposed, but many may
be hindered by the providence of God, and some by the distemper of their own
spirits; We desire this Rubric may be either wholly omitted, or thus altered:

Every Minister shall be bound to administer the Sacrament of the Lords Supper
at least thrice a year, provided there be a due number of Communicants
manifesting their desires to receive.

And we desire that the following Rubric in the Common Prayer Book in 5. and
8. EDW. established by Law as much as any other part of the Common Prayer Book,
may be restored for the Vindicating of our Church in the matter of Kneeling at
the Sacrament (although the Gesture be left indifferent) [ Although no Order
can be so perfectly devised, but it may be of some, either for their Ignorance
and Infirmity, or else of Malice and Obstinacy, misconstrued, depraved, and
interpreted in a wrong part; and yet, because brotherly Charity wills that so
much as conveniently may be Offenses should be taken away, therefore are we
willing to do the same. Whereas it is Ordained in the Book of Common Prayer, in
the Administration of the Lords Supper, that the Communicant kneeling should
receive the holy Communion, which thing being well meant for a signification of
the humble and grateful acknowledging of the Benefits of Christ given unto the
worthy Receivers, and to avoid the profanation and disorder which about the
holy Communion might else ensue, left yet the same Kneeling might be thought or
taken otherwise, We do declare, that it is not meant thereby that any
adoration is done or ought to be done either unto the Sacramental Bread or
Wine, there bodily received, or unto any real or essential presence there being
of Christ's natural Flesh and Blood: For as concerning the Sacramental Bread and
Wine, they remain still in their very natural substances, and therefore may not
be adored; for that were Idolatry to be abhorred of all faithful Christians:
and as concerning the natural Body and Blood of our Savior Christ, they are in
heaven, and not here, for it is against the truth of Christ's natural body to
be in more places than in one at one time.

Of Public Baptism.
THere being diverse Learned, Pious, and Peaceable Ministers, who not only judge
it unlawful to Baptize Children, whose Parents both of them are Atheists,
Infidels, Heretics, or Unbaptized, but also such whose Parents are
Excommunicate Persons, Fornicators, or otherwise notorious and scandalous
Sinners; We desire they may not be enforced to Baptize the Children of such,
until they have made due profession of their Repentance.

Before Baptism.
Rubric.
Parents shall give notice over night, or in the morning.

Exception.
We desire that more timely notice may be given.

Rubric.
And then the Godfathers, and the Godmothers, and the people with the Children,
etc.

Exception.
Here is no mention of the parents, in whose right the Child is Baptized, and
who are fittest both to dedicate it unto God, and to Covenant for it: We do not
know that any persons, except the Parents, or some others appointed by them,
have any power to consent for the Children, or to enter them into Covenant. We
desire it may be left free to Parents whether they will have Sureties to
undertake for their Children in Baptism or no.

Rubric.
Ready at the Font:

Exception.
We desire it may so be placed as all the Congregation may best see and hear
the whole Administration.

In the first Prayer.
By the Baptism of the Welbeloved Son, etc. did sanctify the flood Jordan,
and all other waters to the Mystical washing away of sin, etc.

It being doubtful whether either the Flood Jordan or any other waters were
sanctified to a Sacramental Use, by Christ's being baptized, and not necessary
to be asserted, We desire this may be otherwise expressed.

The third Exhortation.
Do promise by you that be their Sureties.

The Questions.
Do thou forsake, etc.

Do thou believe, etc.

Will thou be Baptized, etc.

We know not by what right the Sureties do promise and answer in the name of
the Infant: It seems to us also to countenance the Anabaptistical Opinion of
the necessity of an actual profession of Faith and Repentance in Order to
Baptism. That such a profession may be required of Parents in their own name,
and now solemnly renewed when they present their Children to Baptism, We
willingly grant: but the asking of one for another is a practice whose warrant
we doubt of; and therefore We desire that the two first Interrogatories may be
put to the Parents to be answered in their own names, and the last propounded
to the Parents or pro-Parents thus, Will you have this Child Baptized into
this Faith?

The second Prayer before Baptism.
May receive remission of sins by spiritual Regeneration.

This Expression seeming inconvenient, We desire it may be changed into this;
May be regenerated and receive the Remission of sins.

In the Prayer after Baptism.
That it has pleased thee to regenerate this Infant by thy Holy Spirit.

We cannot in faith say, that every Child that is Baptized is regenerated by
Gods Holy Spirit; at least it is a disputable point, and therefore We desire
it may be otherwise expressed.

After Baptism.
Then shall the Priest make a Cross, etc.

Concerning the Cross in Baptism we referr to our 18th General.

Of Private BAPTISM.
We desire that Baptism may not be administered in a private place at any
time, unless by a lawful Minister, and in the presence of a competent number:
That where it is evident that any Child has been so Baptized, no part of the
Administration may be reiterated in public, under any Limitations: And
therefore we see no need of any Liturgy in that case.

Of the CATECHISM.
1. Quest. WHat is your Name, etc.

2. Quest. Who gave you that Name?

Ans. My Godfathers and my Godmothers in my Baptism.

3. Quest. What did your Godfathers and Godmothers do for you in Baptism?

Exception.
We desire these three first Questions may be altered; considering that the far
greater number of persons Baptized within these twenty years last past, had no
Godfathers nor Godmothers at their Baptism: The like to be done in the seventh
Question.

2. Ans. In my Baptism, wherein I was made a Child of God, a Member of Christ,
and an Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven.

We conceive it might be more safely expressed thus: Wherein I was visibly
admitted into the number of the members of Christ, the children of God, and the
Heirs (rather then Inheritors) of the Kingdom of Heaven.

Of the Rehearsal of the Ten Commandments.

We desire that the Commandments be inserted according to the New Translation
of the Bible.

10. Ans. My duty toward God is to believe in him, etc.

In this Answer there seemt to be particular respect to the several
Commandments of the first Table, as in the following Answer to those of the
Second. And therefore we desire it may be advised upon, whether to the last
word of this Answer may not be added [particularly on the Lords day] otherwise
there being nothing in all this Answer that refers to the fourth Commandment.

14. Quest. How many Sacraments has Christ ordained, etc?

Ans. Two only, as generally necessary to salvation.

That these words may be omitted, and answer thus given: Two only, Baptism and
the Lords Supper.

19. Quest. What is required of persons to be Baptized?

Ans. Repentance, whereby they forsake sin; and Faith, whereby they steadfastly
believe the promises of God, etc.

20. Quest. Why then are Infants baptized, when by reason of their tender age
they cannot perform them?

Ans. Yes: they do perform by their Sureties, who promise and vow them both in
their names.

We desire that the entering Infants into Gods Covenant may be more warily
expressed, and that the words may not seem to found their Baptism upon a really
actual Faith and Repentance of their own; and we desire that a promise may not
be taken for a performance of such Faith and Repentance: and especially, that
it be not asserted, that they perform these by the promise of their Sureties,
it being to the seed of Believers that the Covenant of God is made; and not
(that we can find) to all that have such believing Sureties, who are neither
Parents, nor Pro-parents of the Child.

In the General We observe, that the Doctrine of the Sacraments which was
added upon the Conference at Hampton Court is much more fully and particularly
delivered then the other parts of the Catechism, in short Answers fitted to the
memories of Children, and thereupon we offer it to be considered:

First, Whether there should not be a more distinct and full Explication of the
Creed, the Commandments, and the Lords Prayer.

Secondly, Whether it were not convenient to add (what seems to be wanting)
somewhat particularly concerning the nature of Faith, of Repentance, the two
Covenants, of Justification, Sanctification, Adoption, and Regeneration.

Of CONFIRMATION.
The last Rubric before the CATECHISM.
ANd that no man shall think that any detriment shall come to Children by
deferring of their Confirmation, he shall know for truth, that it is certain by
Gods Word, that Children being baptized, have all things necessary for their
salvation, and be undoubtedly saved.

Although we charitably suppose the meaning of these words was only to exclude
the necessity af any other Sacraments to Baptized Infants; yet these words are
dangerous as to the mis-leading of the Vulgar, and therefore we desire they may
be expunged.

Rubric after the Catechism.
So soon as the Children can say in their Mother Tongue the Articles of the
Faith, the Lords Prayer, and the ten Commandments and can answer such other
questions of this short Catechism, etc. then shall they be brought to the
Bishop, etc. and the Bishop shall confirm them.

We conceive that it is not a sufficient qualification for Confirmation, that
Children be able memoriter to repeat the Articles of the Faith, commonly
called, the Apostles Creed, the Lords Prayer, and the ten Commandments, and to
answer to some questions of this short Catechism; for it is often found that
children are able to do all this at four or five years old. 2dly, It crosses
what is said in the third Reason of the 1. Rubric before Confirmation,
concerning the usage of the Church in times past, ordaining that Confirmation
should be ministered unto them that were of perfect age, that they being
Instructed in the Christian Religion, should openly profess their own Faith,
and promise to be obedient to the will of God. And therefore (3dly,) we desire
that none may be confirmed but according to his Majesty's Declaration. viz.
That Confirmation be rightly and solemnly performed by the information, and
with the consent of the Minister of the place.

Rubric after the Catechism.
Then shall they be brought to the Bishop by one that shall be his Godfather,
or Godmother.

This seems to bring in another sort of Godfathers and Godmothers, besides
those made use of in Baptism; and we see no need either of the one, or the
other.

The Prayer before the Imposition of hands.
Who have vouchsafed to regenerate these thy servants by Water and the Holy
Ghost, and have given unto them the forgiveness of all their sins.

This supposes that all the Children who are brought to be Confirmed, have the
Spirit of Christ, and the forgiveness of all their sins: Whereas a great number
of Children at that age, having committed many sins since their Baptism, do
show no evidence of serious Repentance, or of any special saving grace: And
therefore this Confirmation (if administered to such) would be a perilous and
gross abuse.

Rubric before the Imposition of hands
Then the Bishop shall lay his hand on every Child severally.

This seems to put a higher value upon Confirmation, then upon Baptism or the
Lords Supper; for according to the Rubric and order in the Common Prayer Book,
every Deacon may baptize, and every Minister may consecrate and administer the
Lords Supper, but the Bishop only may confirm.

The prayer after Imposition of hands.
We make our humble supplications unto thee for these Children; upon whom,
after the example of thy holy Apostles, we have laid our hands, to certify
them by this sign of thy favor and gracious goodness toward them.

We desire that the practice of the Apostles may not be alleged as a ground of
this Imposition of hands for the confirmation of children, both because the
Apostles did never use it in that case, as also because the Articles of the
Church of England declare it to be a corrupt imitation of the Apostles
practice, Act. 25.

We desire that imposition of hands may not be made as here it is, a sign to
certify children of Gods Grace and favor toward them, because this seems to
speak it a Sacrament, and is contrary to that forementioned 25th. Article,
which says, that Confirmation has no visible sign appointed by God.

The last Rubric after Confirmation.
None shall be admitted to the holy Communion, until such time as he can say
the Catechism, and be confirmed.

We desire that Confirmation may not be made so necessary to the holy
Communion, as that none should be admitted to it unless they be confirmed.

Of the Form of Solemnization of Matrimony.
THe man shall give the Woman a Ring, etc. -- shall surely perform and keep
the Now and Covenant betwixt them made, whereof this King given and received is
a token and pledge, etc.

Seeing this Ceremony of the Ring in Marriage is made necessary to it, and a
significant sign of the Vow and Covenant betwixt the parties; and Romish
Ritualists give such reasons for the Use and Institution of the Ring as are
either frivolous or superstitious. It is desired that this Ceremony of the Ring
in Marriage may be left indifferent to be used or forborne.

The man shall say, With my body I thee worship.

This word [worship] being much altered in the Use of it since this Form was
first drawn up; We desire some other word may be used instead of it.

In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

These words being only used in Baptism, and herein the solemnization of
Matrimony, and in the absolution of the Sick; We defire it may be considered
whether they should not be here omitted, least they should seem to favor those
who count Matrimony a Sacrament.

Till death us depart.

This word [depart] is here improperly used.

Rubric.
Then the Minister or Clerk going to the Lords Table shall say or sing this
Psalm.

Exception.
We conceive this change of place and posture mentioned in these two Rubricks
is needless, and therefore desire it may be omitted.

Next Rubr.
The Psalm ended, and the Man and the Woman kneeling before the Lords Table,
the Priest standing at the Table, and turning his face, etc.

Collect.
Consecrated the state of Matrimony to such an excellent Mystery.

Exception.
Seeing the Institution of Marriage was before the Fall, and so before the
Promise of Christ, as also for that the said passage in this Collect seems to
countenance the Opinion of making Matrimony a Sacrament, we desire that clause
may be altered or omitted.

Rubric.
Then shall begin the Communion, and after the Gospel shall be said a Sermon,
etc.

Exception.
This Rubric does either enforce all such as are unfit for the Sacrament to
forbear Marriage, contrary to Scripture, which approves the Marriage of all
men; or else compels all that marry to come to the Lords Table, though never so
unprepared: And therefore we desire it may be omitted, the rather because that
Marriage Festivals are too often accompanied with such divertisements as are
unsuitable to those Christian Duties which ought to be before and follow after
the receiving of that Holy Sacrament.

Last Rubric.
The new Married persons the same day of their Marriage must receive the holy
Communion.

Of the Order for the Visitation of the Sick.
Rubr. Before Absolution.
HEre shall the sick person make a special Confession, etc. after which
Confession the Priest shall absolve him after this sort: Our Lord Jesus Christ,
etc. and by his Authority committed to me I absolve thee.

Exception.
Forasmuch as the Conditions of sick persons be very various and different, the
Minister may not only in the Exhortation but in the Prayer also be directed to
apply himself to the particular condition of the person* as he shall find most
suitable to the present occasion, with due regard had both to his spiritual
condition and bodily weakness, and that the absolution may only be recommended
to the Minister to be used or omitted as he shall see occasion.

That the form of Absolution be Declarative and Conditional, as [I pronounce
thee absolved] instead of [I absolve thee] if thou do truly repent and
believe.

Of the Communion of the sick.
Rubric.
But if the sick person be not able to come in Church, yet is desirous to
receive the Communion in his house; then he must give knowledge overnight, or
else early in the morning, to the Curate, and having a convenient place in the
sick man's house, he shall there administer the holy Communion.

Consider, that many sick persons either by their ignorance or vicious life,
without any evident manifestation of repentance, or by the nature of the
Disease disturbing their Intellectuals, be unfit for receiving the Sacrament.
It is proposed, that the Minister be not enjoined to administer the Sacrament
to every sick person that shall desire it, but only as he shall judge expedient.

Of the Order for the Burial of the Dead.
We desire it may be expressed in a Rubric, that the Prayers ^^d Exhortations
here used are not for the benefit of the De^d, (...) for the instruction and
comfort of the of the Living.

First Rubr.
The Priest meeting the Corpse at the Church Style shall say, or else the Priest
and Clark shall sing, etc.

We desire that Ministers may be left to use their discretion in these
circumstances, and to perform the whole service in the Church, if they think
fit, for the preventing of these inconveniences which many times both Minister
and people are exposed unto by standing in the open Air.

The second Rubric.
When they come to the Grave, the Priest shall say, etc.

Forasmuch as it has pleased Almighty God, of his great mercy to take unto
himself the soul of our dear Brother here departed: We therefore commit his
body to the ground in sure and certain hope of resurrection to eternal life.

These words cannot in truth be said of persons living and dying in open and
notorious sins.

The first Prayer.
We give thee hearty thanks for that it has pleased ^^ee to deliver this our
Brother out of the miseries of this (...) world, etc.

That we with this our Brother, and all other departed in the true Faith of the
holy Name, may have our perfect Confirmation and Eliss.

These words may harden the wicked, and are inconsistent with the largest
rational charity.

The last Prayer.
That when we depart this life, we may rest in him, as our hope is this our
Brother death.

These words cannot be used with respect to those persons who have not by their
actual repentance given any ground for the hope of their blessed estate.

Of the thanksgiving of women after Childbirth, commonly called, Churching of
Women.
The woman shall come unto the Church, and there shall kneel down in some
convenient place nigh unto the place where the Table stands, and the Priest
standing by her, shall say, etc.

In regard that the woman's kn^eling near the Table is in many Churches
inconvenient, we desire that these words may be left out, and that the Minister
may perform that service either in the De^k or Pulpit.

Rubric.
Then the Priest shall say this Psalm 121.

O Lord save this woman thy servant.

Ans. which puttteth her trust in thee.

Exception*
This Psalm seems not to be so pertinent as some other, viz as Psalm. 113. and
Psalm. 128.

It may fall out that a woman may come to give thanks for a child born in
Adultery or Fornication, and therefore we desire that something may be required
of her by way of profession of her humiliation, as well as of her Thanksgiving.

Last Rubr.
The woman that comes to give Thanks, must offer the accustomed offerings.

This may seem too like a Jewish purification, rather then a Christian
Thanksgiving.

The same Rubric.
And if there be a Communion, it is convenient that she receive the holy
Communion.

We desire this may be interpreted of the duly qualified; for a scandalous
sinner may come to make this Thanksgiving.

Thus have we in all humble pursuance of his Majesty's most gracious endeavors
for the public weal of this Church, drawn up our Thoughts and Desires in this
weighty Affair, which we humbly offer to His Majesty's Commissioners for their
serious and grave Consideration, wherein we have not the least thought of
depraving or reproaching the Book of Common Prayer, but a sincere desire to
contribute our endeavors toward the healing the distempers, and (as soon as
may be) reconciling the minds of Brethren. And inasmuch as his Majesty has in
his gracious Declaration and Commission mentioned new forms to be made and
suited to the several parts of Worship; We have made a considerable Progress
therein, and shall (by Gods assistance) offer them to the Reverend
Commissioners with all convenient speed, And if the Lord shall graciously
please to give a blessing to these our endeavors, We doubt not but the peace
of the Church will be thereby settled; the hearts of Ministers and people
comforted and composed, and the great Mercy of Unity and Stability (to the
immortal Honor of our most dear Sovereign) bestowed upon us and our posterity
after us.

To the most Reverend Archbishop and Bishops, And the Reverend their
ASSISTANTS, Commissioned by his Majesty to treat about the Alteration of the
Book of COMMON PRAYER.
Most Reverend Fathers, and Reverend Brethren,
WHen we received your Papers, and were told that they contained not only an
Answer to our Exceptions against the present Liturgy; but also several
Concessions, wherein you seem willing to join with us in the Alteration and
Reformation of it: Our Expectations were so far raised, as that we promised our
selves to find your Concessions so considerable, as would have greatly conduced
to the ^ealing of our much-to-be-lamented Divisions, the settling of the Nation
in Peace, and the satisfaction of tender Consciences, according to his
Majesty's most gracious Declaration, and his Royal Commission in pursuance
thereof: But having taken a survey of them, we find our selves exceedingly
disappointed, and that they will fall far short of attaining those happy Ends,
for which this Meeting was first designed; as may appear both by the pa^city of
the Concessions, and the inconsiderableness of them, they being for the most
part Verbal and Literal, rather then Real and Substantial; for in them you
allow not the laying aside of the reading of the Apocrypha for Lessons, though
it shut out some hundreds of Chapters of Holy Scripture; and sometimes the
Scripture it self is made to give way to the Apocryphal Chapters. You plead
against the addition of the Doxologie unto the Lords Prayer. You give no
liberty to omit the too frequent repetition of Gloria Patri, nor of the Lords
Prayer in the same public Service: nor do you yield that the Psalms be read in
the new Translation, nor the word [Priest] to be changed for [Minister or
Presbyter,] though both have been yielded unto in the Scottish Liturgy. You
grant not the omission of the Responsals, no not in the Letany it self, though
the Petitions be so framed, as the People make the Prayer, and not the
Minister; nor to read the Communion-Service in the Desk, when there is no
Communion; but in the late Form instead thereof, it is enjoined to be done at
the Table, though there be no Rubric in the Common Prayer Book requiring it.
You plead for the Holiness of Lent, contrary to the Statute. You indulge not
the omission of any one Ceremony. You will force men to kneel at the Sacrament,
and yet not put in that excellent Rubric in the v. and vi. of Edw. 6. which
would much conduce to the satisfaction of many that scruple it. And whereas
diverse Reverend Bishops and Doctors, in a Paper in print before these unhappy
Wars began, yielded to the laying aside of the Cross, and the making many
material alterations; you, after twenty years sad calamities and Divisions,
seem unwilling to grant what they of their own accord then offered. You seem
not to grant that the clause of the fourth Commandment in the
Common Prayer Book, (The Lord blessed the seventh day) should be altered
according to the Hebr. Exodus 20. The Lord blessed the Sabbath day. You will not
change the word Sunday into the Lords Day, nor add any thing to make a
difference between Holy Days that are of Humane Institution, and the Lords Day,
that is questionless of Apostolical practice. You will not alter Deadly Sin in
the Letany into Heinous Sin, though it hints to us that some sins are in their
own nature Venial; nor that Answer in the Catech. of Two Sacraments only
generally necessary to salvation, although it intimates that there are other
New Testaments Sacraments, though Two only necessary to Salvation. You speak
of singing David's Psalms, allowed by Authority, by way of contempt, calling
them Hopkins Psalms: And though singing of Psalms be an Ordinance of God, yet
you call it one of our principal parts of Worship, as if it were disclaimed by
you. And are so far from countenancing the use of conceived Prayer in the
public Worship of God, (though we never intended thereby the excluding of set
Forms) as that you seem to dislike the use of it even in the Pulpit, and
heartily desire a total restraint of it in the Church. You will not allow the
omission of the Benedicite, nor a Psalm to be read instead of it; nor so much
as abate the reading of the Chapters out of the Old Testament and the Acts, for
the Epistles: But rather then you will gratify us therein, you have found out
a new Device, that the Minister shall say (for the Epistle) you will not so
much as leave out in the Collect for Christmas Day these words (this day)
though at least, it must be a great uncertainty, and cannot be true stylo
veteri, and novo. In public Baptism you are so far from giving a Liberty to
the Parent to answer for his own Child, (which seems most reasonable) as that
you force him to the use of Sureties, and cause them to answer in the name of
the Infant, that he does believe, and repent, and forsake the Devil and all his
works; which does much f^vour the Anabaptistical Opinion for the necessity of
an actual profession of Faith and Repentance in order to Baptism. You will not
leave the Minister in the Visitation of the Sick, to use his judgment or
discretion in absolving the sick person, or giving the Sacrament to him, but
enjoin both of them, though the person to his own judgment seem never so
unfit: neither do you allow the Minister to pronounce the Absolution in a
Declarative and Conditional way, but absolutely, and inconditionately. And even
in one of your Concessions, in which we suppose you intend to accommodate with
us, you rather widen then heal the breach; for in your last Rubr. before the
Catech. you would have the words thus altered, That children being baptized,
have all things necessary for salvation; and dying before they commit any
actual sin, be undoubtedly saved, though they be not confirmed: Which
Assertion, if understood of all Infants, even of Heathen, is certainly false;
and if only of the Infants of Christians, is doubtful, and contrary to the
judgment of many learned Protestants, and will give little satisfaction to us
or others: some more we might name, which for brevities sake we omit. All which
considered, we altogether despair of that happy success which Thousands hope
and wait for from this his Majesty's Commission; unless God shall incline your
hearts for the Peace and Union of the Nation, to a more considerable and
satisfactory alteration of the Liturgy. In which that we may the better
prevail, we here tender a Reply to your Answer, both against our general and
particular Exceptions; of which we desire a serious perusal, and candid
interpretation. We have divided both your Preface and Answer into several
Sections, that so you might more easily understand to which of the particulars
both in the one and in the other our Reply does refer.

THE PAPERS That passed between the COMMISSIONERS Appointed by his Majesty for
the Alteration of the Common Prayer, etc.
THe strain of these Papers we fear is like to persuade many that your design
is not the same with ours. Reply.
Being assured, that it is our Duty to do what we can to the peace and concord
of Believers, especially when we had the past and present Calamities of these
Nations to urge us, and his Majesty's Commands and gracious Promises to
encourage us, we judged the fittest means to be by making known the hindrances
of our Concord, and without reviving the remembrance of those things that tend
to exasperate, to apply our selves with due submission to those that may
contribute much to our recovery; and without personal reflections, to propose
the Remedies which we knew would be most effectual, and humbly and earnestly to
petition you for your consent. But in stead of consent, or amicable Debates in
order to the removal of our differences, we have received from you a Paper
abounding with sharp Accusations, as if your work were to prove us bad, and
make us odious; which as it is attempted upon mistake, by unrighteous means, so
were it accomplished, we know not how it will conduce to the Concord which
ought to be our common end. If we understand Christ's Commission, or the Kings,
and our duty as Christians, or as Ministers, our work now assigned us, was not
to search after, and aggravate the faults of one another, (though of our own in
season we are willing to hear) but to review the Liturgy, and agree upon such
alterations, diminutions and enlargements as are needful to our common unity
and peace. What is amiss in us, we shall thankfully accept your charitable
assistance to discover; but we take not that for the Question which his Majesty
called us to debate, nor do our judgments or dispositions lead us to
Recriminations, nor to cast such impediments in the way of our desired accord:
And were it not that our Calling, and our Masters work are concerned somewhat
in our just Vindication, we should not trouble you with so low, so private and
unnecessary a work, but leave such Causes to the righteous Judge, who will
quickly, impartially, infallibly and finally decide them.

PREFACE.
BEfore we come to the Proposals, Answer.
it will be perhaps necessary to say a word or two to the Preface, Sect. 1.
wherein they begin with a thankful acknowledgement of his Majesty's most
Princely condescension; to which we shall only say, That we conceive the most
real Expression of their thankfulness had been an hearty compliance with his
Majesty's earnest and passionate request for the use of the present Liturgy,
at least so much of it as they acknowledge by these Papers to be lawful: how
far they have in this expressed their thankfulness, the world sees, we need not
say.]

1. AS we hope it is no matter of offense to acknowledge his Majesty's gracious
condescension; Reply.
so when his Majesty by his Declaration has granted us some liberty as to the
use of the Liturgy before the alteration, and has by his Commission engaged
us in a Consultation for the alteration of it; we conceive our Brethren (nor
the world, to whose observation they appeal) had no warrant to censure us as
unthankful to his Majesty, because of our present forbearance to use it, or
part of it, before the intended alteration; at least till they had heard us
speak for our selves, and render an account of the reasons of our forbearance,
and they had gone before us more exemplarily in their own obedience to his
Majesty's Declaration. As to our own Consciences, if we thought not the
Common Prayer Book to be guilty of the general and particular faults which we
have laid open to you, we durst not have found fault with it: and while we took
it to be a defective, disorderly and inconvenient mode of Worship, it would be
our sin to use it of choice, while we may prefer a more convenient way, what
ever we ought to do in case of necessity, when we must worship God
inconveniently, or not at all. And as to our people, for whose edification and
not destruction we have our power or offices, we have taken that course, as far
as we are able to understand, which most probably tended to their good, and to
prevent their hurt and separation from the Church: and consequently, that
course which did most conduce to his Majesty's ends, and to his real service,
and the Churches peace: none of which would be promoted by our obtruding that
upon our people, which we know them unable to digest, or by our hasty offending
them with the use of that, which we are forced to blame, and are endeavoring
to correct and alter. And we see not how it can be justly intimated that we use
no part of it, when we use the Lords Prayer, the Creed, the Commandments, the
Psalms, the Chapters, and some other parts; and how much more you expect we
should have used, that we might have escaped this brand of Ingratitude, we know
not. But we know that Charity suffers long, and thinks no evil, (1 Cor. 13
4, 5.) and that we have not attempted to obtrude any mode of Worship on our
Brethren, but desired the liberty to use things of that nature as may conduce
to the benefit of our Flocks: And as we leave them to judge what is most
beneficial to their own Flocks, who know them, and are upon the place; so it is
but the like freedom which we desire: We are loath to hurt our people
knowingly. The time is short; if you will answer our reasonable Proposals, it
will not be too late at the expiration of our Commission, or the date of the
reformed Liturgy, to use it: greater liberty has been used about Liturgies in
purer times of the Church, with less offense and accusation.

[It can be no just cause of offense to mind them of their duty, Answer.
as they do us of ours; Sect. 2.
telling us, It is our duty to imitate the Apostles practice in a special
manner; to be tender of the Churches peace, and to advise of such Expedients,
as may conduce to the healing of breaches, and uniting those that differ: for
preserving of the Churches peace we know no bettter nor more efficatious way
then our set Liturgy, there being no such way to keep us from Schism, as to
speak all the same thing, according to the Apostle.]

If you look to the time past, Reply.
by our Duties we suppose you mean our Faults; for it is not Duty when it is
past: If you in these words respect only the time present and to come, we
reply, 1. The Liturgy we are assured will not be a less, but a more probable
means of Concord after the desired Reformation then before; the defects and
inconveniences make it less fit to attain the end. 2. Whether the Apostle by
[speaking the same thing,] did mean either [all using this Liturgy of ours,]
or [all using any one form of Liturgy as to the words] may easily be
determined. This is of much later date, unless you will denominate the whole
form of the Lords Prayer, and some little parts. And those that affirm, that
the Apostles then had any other, must undertake the task of proving it, and
excusing the Churches for loosing and dis-using so precious a Relict; which if
preserved, would have prevented all our strifes about these things. And in the
mean time they must satisfy our Arguments for the Negative: as, 1. If a
Liturgy had been indicted by the Apostles for the Churches, being by universal
Officers inspired by the Holy Ghost, and so of universal use, it would have
been used and preserved by the Church as the Holy Scriptures were. But so it
was not. Ergo, no such Liturgy was indicted by them for the Churches. 2. If a
prescript form of words had been delivered them, there would have been no such
need of exhorting them to speak the same thing, for the Liturgy would have
held them close enough to that. And if the meaning had been [see that you use
the same Liturgy,] some word or other to some of the Churches would have
acquainted us with the existence of such a thing; and some reproofs we should
have found of those that used various Liturgies, or formed Liturgies of their
own, or used extemporary Prayers; and some express Exhortations to use the same
Liturgy or Forms: but the holy Scripture is silent in all those matters. It is
apparent therefore that the Churches then had no Liturgy, but took liberty of
extemporate Expressions, and spoke in the things of God, as men do in other
matters, with a natural plainness and seriousness, suiting their Expressions to
the subjects and occasions. And though Divisions began to disturb their Peace
and holy Orders, the Apostle in stead of prescribing them a form of Di^ine
Services for their unity and concord, do exhort them to use their gifts and
liberties aright, and speak the same thing for matter, avoiding Disagreements,
though they used not the same words. 3. Just. Martyr, Tertull. and others
sufficiently intimate to us, that the Churches quickly after the Apostles, did
use the personal Abilities of their Pastors in Prayer, and give us no hint of
any such Liturgy of Apostolical fabrication and imposition, and therefore
doubtless there was nothing, for it could not have been so soon lost or
neglected. 4. It is ordinary with those of the contrary Judgment, to tell us
that the extraordinary Gifts of the Primitive Christians, were the reason why
there were no prescribed forms in those times, and that such Liturgies came in
upon the ceasing of those Gifts: and 1 Cor. 14. describes a way of public
worshipping, unlike to prescript forms of Liturgy: so that the matter of Fact
is proved and confessed. And then how fairly the words of the Apostle,
exhorting them [to speak the same thing,] are used to prove that he would have
them use the same Forms or Liturgy, we shall not tell you by any provoking
Aggravations of such abuse of Scripture. And indeed for all the miraculous
Gifts of those times, if prescript Forms had been judged by the Apostles to be
the fittest means for the concord of the Churches, it is most probable they
would have prescribed such: considering, 1. That the said miraculous Gifts were
extraordinary, and belonged not to all, nor to any at all times; and therefore
could not suffice for the ordinary public Worship. 2. And those Gifts began
even betimes to be abused, and need the Apostles Canons for their regulation,
which he gives them in that 1 Cor. 14. without a prescript Liturgy. 3.
Because even then divisions had made not only an entrance, but an unhappy
progress in the Churches; to cure which, the Apostle exhorts them often to
Unanimity and Concord, without exhorting them to read the same, or any
Common Prayer Book. 4. Because that the Apostles knew that perilous times would
come, in which men would have itching ears, and would have heaps of Teachers,
and would be self-willed, and unruly, and divisions, and offenses, and heresies
would increase: and ergo, as upon such foresight they indicted the holy
Scriptures to keep the Church in all Generatio^s from error and divisions in
points of Doctrine; so the same reason and care would have moved them to do the
same to keep the Churches in unity in point of Worship, if indeed they had
taken prescribed Forms to be needful to such an Unity: They knew that after
their departure the Church would never have the like advantage, infallible,
authorized and enabled for delivering the universal Law of Christ: And seeing
in those parts of Worship, which are of stated use, and still the same, Forms
might have suited all Ages as this Age, and all Countries as this Country (in
the substance) there can no reason be given, why the Apostles should leave this
undone, and not have performed it themselves, if they had judged such Forms to
be necessary, or the most desirable means of unity. If they had prescribed
them, 1. The Church had been secured from error in them. 2. Believers had been
preserved from divisions about the lawfulness and fitness of them, as receiving
them from God. 3. All Churches and Countries might had one Liturgy, as they
have one Scripture, and so have all spoke the same things. 4. All Ages would
have had the same without innovation, (in all the parts that require not
alteration) whereas now on the contrary; 1. Our Liturgies being the Writings of
fallible men, are liable to error, and we have cause to fear subscribing to
them, as having nothing contrary to the Word of God. 2. And matters of Humane
Institution have become the matter of scruple and contention. 3. And the
Churches have had great diversity of Liturgies. 4. And one Age has been
mending what they supposed they received from the former faulty, and imperfect:
So that our own which you are so loath to change, has not continued yet three
Generations. And it is most evident, that the Apostles being entrusted with the
delivery of the entire rule of Faith and Worship, and having such great
advantages for our unity and peace, would never have omitted the forming of a
Liturgy of universal usefulness, to avoid all the foresaid inconveniences, if
they had taken this course of unity to be so needful or desirable as you seem
to do. Whereas therefore you say you know no better or more efficatio^s way
then our Liturgy, etc. We reply, 1. The Apostles knew the best way of unity,
and of speaking the same thing in the matters of God: But the Apostles knew not
our Liturgy, (nor any Common Prayer Book, for ought has yet been proved.)
Ergo, the said Liturgy is not the best way of unity, or speaking the same
thing, etc. 2. The Primitive Church in the next Ages after the Apostles, knew
the best way of unity, etc. But they knew not our Liturgy. Ergo, our Liturgy
(not known till lately) is not the best way of unity. If it be said that our
Liturgy is ancient, because the Sursum Corda, the Gloria Patri, etc. are
ancient: We answer, If indeed it be those ancient sentences that denominate our
Liturgy, we erave the Justice to be esteemed Users of the Liturgy, and not to
suffer as Refusers of it, as long as we use all that is found in it of such
true antiquity.

[This experience of former and latter times has taught us, Answer.
when the Liturgy was duly observed, Sect. 3.
we lived in peace; since that was laid aside, there has been as many modes
and fashions of public Worship, as fancies: we have had continual dissension,
which variety of Services must needs produce, whilst every one naturally
desires and endeavors not only to maintain, but to prefer his own way before
all others: whence we conceive there is no such way to the preservation of
peace, as for all to return to the strict use and practice of the Form.]

Pardon us while we desire you to examine whether you speak as members that
suffer with those that suffer, Reply.
or rather as insensible of the calamities of your Brethren, that is as
uncharitable: you say you lived in peace, but so did not the many thousands
that were fain to seek them peaceable habitations in Holland, and in the
deserts of America; nor the many thousands that lived in danger of the
High Commission, or Bishops Courts at home, and so in danger of every malicious
Neighbor that would accuse them of hearing Sermons abroad, when they had none
at home; or of meeting in a Neighbors house to pray, or of not kneeling in the
receiving of the Sacrament, etc. We would not have remembered you of these
things, but that you necessitate us by pleading your peace in those days as an
Argument for the imposing of the Liturgy. 2. Might not Scotland as strongly
argue from this Medium against the Liturgy and say, [Before the Liturgy was
imposed on us, we had peace, but since then we have had no peace?] 3. When the
strict imposing of the strict use and practice of these Forms was the very
thing that disquieted this Nation, (taking in the concomitant Ceremonies and
Subscription) when this was it that bred the divisions which you complain of,
and caused the separations from the Churches, and the troubles in the Churches:
it is no better arguing to say, We must return to the strict use of that Form
if we will have peace, then it was in the Israelites to say, [We will worship
the Queen of Heaven, because then we had peace and plenty,] when that was it
that deprived them of peace and plenty; (we compare not the Causes, but the
Arguments:) nor is it any better Argument then if a man in a Dropsy or Ague,
that caught it with voracity or intemperance, should say, [While I did eat and
drink liberally, I had no Dropsy or Ague, but since my appetite is gone, and I
have lived temperately, I have had no health; Ergo, I must return to my
intemperance, as the only way to health.] Alas! Is this the use that is made
of all our experiences of the causes and progress of our Calamities? What have
you and we, and all smarted as we have done, and are you so speedily ready to
return to the way that will engage you in violence against them that should be
suffered to live in peace? If the furnace that should have refined us, and
purified us all to a greater height of love, have but enflamed us to greater
wrath, woe to us, and to the Land that bears us. What doleful things does this
prognosticate you, that Prisons, or other penalties, will not change men's
Judgments: And if it drive some to comply against their Consciences, and
destroy their Souls, and drive the more conscientious out of the Land, or
destroy their bodies, and breed in men's minds a rooted opinion, that Bishops
that are still hurting and afflicting them, (even for the things in which they
exercise the best of their understanding, and cautelously to avoid sin against
God) are no Fathers, Friends or Edifiers, but Destroyers; alas! who will have
the gain of this? O let us no more bite and devour one another, lest we be
devoured one of another, Gal. 5. 15. or Christ be provoked to decide the
Controversy more sharply then we desire or expect. 4. But really, has liberty
to forbear the Liturgy produced such divisions as you mention? The license or
connivance that was granted to Heretics, Apostates, and foul-mouthed raylers
against the Scripture, Ministry, and all Gods Ordinances, indeed bred
confusions in the Land; but it is to us matter of admiration to observe (clean
contrary to your intimation) how little discord there was in Prayer, and other
parts of Worship among all the Churches throughout the three Nations, that
agreed in Doctrine, and that forbore the Liturgy. It is wonderful to us in the
review to consider, with what love, and peace, and concord, they all spoke the
same things that were tied to no Form of words, even those that differed in
some points of Discipline, even to a withdrawing from local Communion with us,
yet strangely agreed with us in Worship. And where have there been less
Heresies, Schisms, then in Scotland, where there was no such Liturgy to unite
them? If you tell us of those that differ from us in Doctrine, and are not of
us, it is as impertinent to the point of our own agreement in Worship, as to
tell us of the Papists.

[And the best expedients to unite us all to that again, Answer.
and so to peace, are, Sect. 4.
besides our Prayers to the God of peace, to make us all of one mind in an
house, to labor to get true humility, which would make us think our Guides
wiser, and fitter to order us then we our selves; and Christian charity, which
would teach us to think no evil of our Superiors, but to judge them rather
careful Guides and Fathers to us: which being obtained, nothing can be imagined
justly to hinder us from a ready compliance to this method of service appointed
by them, and so live in unity]

Prayer and Humility are indeed the necessary means of peace: Reply.
But if you will let us pray for peace in no words but what are in the
Common Prayer Book, their brevity and unaptness, and the customariness, that
will take off the edge of fervor with humane nature, will not give leave (or
help sufficient) to our souls to work toward God, upon this subject, with that
enlargedness, copiousness and freedom as is necessary to due fervor. A brief
transient touch, and away, is not enough to warm the heart aright; and cold
Prayers, are like to have a cold return; and therefore even for peace sake, let
us pray more copiously and heartily then the Common Prayer Book will help us to
do. And whether this be that cause, or whether it be that the
Common Prayer Book has never a Prayer for it self, we find that its Prayers
prevail not to reconcile many sober, serious persons to it, that live in
faithful fervent Prayer. 2. And for Humility, we humbly conceive it would most
effectually heal us, and by causing the Pastors of the Church to know that they
are not to rule the flocks as Lords, but as ensamples; not by constraint, but
willingly, 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3. and it would cause them not to think so lightly of
themselves, and so meanly of their Brethren, as to judge no words fit to be
used to God in the public Worship, but what they prescribe, and put into our
mouths; and that other men are generally unable to speak sensibly or suitably,
unless they tell us what to say; or that all others are unfit to be trusted
with the expressing of their own desires: Humility would persuade the Pastors
of the Church at least to undertake no more then the Apostles did, and no more
to obtrude or impose their own words upon all others in the public Worship: if
they found any unfit to be trusted with the expression of their minds in
public Prayer, they would do what they could to get meeter men in their
places; and till then, they would restrain, and help such as need it; and not
upon that pretense, as much restrain all the ablest Ministers, as if the whole
Church were to be nominated, measured, or used according to the quality of the
most unworthy. And it is also true, that humility in private persons and
inferiors, would do much to our peace, by keeping them in due submission and
obedience, and keeping them from all contentions and divisions, which proceed
from self-conceitedness and pride. But yet, 1. The humblest, surest Subjects
may stumble upon the scruple, whether Bishops differ not from Presbyters only
in degree, and not in order or office, (it being a Controversy, and no
resolved point of Faith even among the Papists, whose Faith is too extensive,
and favor too Ecclesiastical, ambition too great) and consequently they may
doubt whether men in the same order, do by Divine appointment owe obedience
unto those that gradually go before them. 2. And they may scruple whether such
making themselves the Governors of their Brethren, make not themselves in^eed
of a different order of office, and so encroach not on the authority of Christ,
who only makes Officers purely Ecclesiastical; and whether it be no
disloyalty to Christ to own such Officers. 3. And among those Divines that are
for a threefold Episcopacy, (besides that of Presbyters, who are Episcopi
Gre^is) viz. general unfixed Bishops, like the Evangelists or Apostles, (in
their measure) and the fixed Bishops of Parochial Churches, that have
Presbyters to assist them, to whom they do preside, and also the Presidents of
larger Synods; yet is it a matter of very great doubt, whether a fixed Diocesan
being the Pastor of many hundred Churches, having none under him, that has the
power of Jurisdiction or Ordination, be indeed a Governor of Christ's
appointment or approbation; and whether Christ will give us any more thanks for
owning them as such, then the King will give us for owning a^ Usurper. Humility
alone will not seem to subject these men to such a Government. 4. And though
their coercive Magistra^ical power be easily submitted to, as from the King,
(how unfit Subjects soever Churchmen are of such a power) yet he that knows
his superiors best, does honor God more, and supposes God more infallible
then man, and will feel himself most indispensibly bound by Gods commands, and
bound not to obey man against the Lord. And whereas there is much said against
the peoples taking on them to judge of the lawfulness of things commanded them
by superiors, we add, 5. That humble men may believe that their superiors are
fallible; that it is no impossibility to command things that God forbids; that
in such cases, if we have sufficient means to discern the sinfulness of such
commands, we must make use of them, and must obey God rather then men; that
when the Apostles acted according to such a resolution, Act. 4. 19. and Daniel
and the three VVitnesses, Dan. 6. and 3. they all exercised a judgment of
discerning upon the matter of their superiors commands; that not to do so at
all, is to make Subjects Brutes, and so no Subjects, because not rational free
Agents, or to make all Governors to be Gods: and lastly, that it will not save
us from Hell, nor justify us at Judgment for sinning against God, to say that
superiors commanded us; nor will it prove all the Martyrs to be sinners and
condemned, because they judged of their superiors commands, and disobeyed
them. All which we say, to show the insufficiency of the Remedy here by you
propounded, (the humility of Inferiors) unless you will also add your help;
without obedience there is no order or lasting concord to be expected: And by
abasing the eternal God, so far as to set him and his Laws below a creature,
under pretense of obedience to the creature, no good can be expected, because
no peace with heaven; without which, peace with men is but a confederacy,
hastening each party to destruction: and therefore absolute obedience must be
given only to God the absolute Sovereign. In all this we suppose that we are
all agreed: and therefore, 6. and lastly, we must say that the way to make us
think the Bishops to be so wise, and careful Guides and Fathers to us, is nor
for them to seem wiser then the Apostles, and make those things of standing
necessity to the Churches unity, which the Apostles never made so; nor to
forbid all to preach the Gospel, or to hold Communion with the Church, that
dare not conform to things unnecessary. Love and tenderness are not used to
express themselves by hurting and destroying men for nothing; and to silence
and reject from Church Communion for a ^eremony, and in the mean time to
persuade men that they love them, is but to stab or famish all the sick persons
in the Hospital or Family, whose stomachs cannot take down the d^sh we offer
them, or whose throats are too narrow to swallow so big a morsel as we send
them; and when we have done, to tell them, the only remedy is for them to
believe we love them, and are tender of them. And who knows not that a man may
think well of his Superiors, that yet may question whether all that he
teaches or commands him, be lawful?

[If it be objected, Answer.
That the Liturgy is in any way sinful and unlawful for us to join with, Sect.
5.
it is but reason that this be first proved evidently, before any thing be
altered: it is no Argument to say, That multitudes of sober pious persons
scruple the use of it, unless it be made to appear by evident reasons, that the
Liturgy gave the just grounds to make such scruples. For if the bare pretense
of scruples be suff^cient to exempt us from Obedience, all Law and Order is
gone.]

To this passage we humbly crave your consideration of these Answers: Reply.
1. We have not only said, that sober pious Persons scruple the Liturgy, but
we have opened to you those defects and disorders, and corruptions, which must
needs make the imposing of it unlawful, when God might be more fitly served. 2.
It is strange that you must see it first evidently proved unlawful for men to
join with the Liturgy, (you mean, we suppose, to join with you in the using of
it, or when you ^^e it) before you will see reason to alter any thing in it:
What if it be only proved unlawful for you to impose it, though not for others
to join with you when you do impose it, is this no reason to alter it? Should
you not have some care to avoid sin your selves, as well as to preserve others
from it? An inconvenient mode of Worship is a sin in the Imposer, and in the
Chuser, and voluntary User, that might offer God better, and will not, Mal. 1.
13, 14. And yet it may not be only lawful, but a duty to him that by violence
is necessitated to offer up that or none. And yet we suppose the Imposers
should see cause to make an Alteration. If you lived where you must receive the
Lords Supper sitting, or not at all, it is like you would be of this mind your
selves. 3. Why should it be called [A bare pretense of Scruples?] as if you
searched the hearts, and knew (not only that they are upon mistake, but) that
they are not real, when the persons not only profess them real, but are
willing to use all just means that tend to their satisfaction: they study,
read, pray, and will be glad of Conference with you, at any time, upon equal
terms, if they may be themselves believed. 4. Even groundless scruples about
the matter of an unnecessary Law, which has that which to the weak both is and
will be an appearance of evil, may be sufficient to make it the Duty of Rulers
to reverse their impositions, though they be not sufficient to justify the
Scrupulous. 5. If a man should think that he ought not to obey man even when he
thinks it is against the Commands of God, though he be uncertain, (as in case
of going on an unquestioned Warfare, or doing Doegs execution, etc.) yet it
follows not, that [all Law and Order is gone,] as long as all Laws and Orders
stand that are visibly subservient to the Laws of God, and to his Sovereignty,
or consistent with them, and when the Subject submits to suffering where he
dare not obey.

[On the contrary we judge, Answer.
that if the Liturgy should be altered as is there required, Sect. 6.
not only a multitude, but the generality of the soberest and most loyal
Children of the Church of England would justly be offended, since such an
alteration would be a virtual Concession that this Liturgy were an intolerable
burden to tender consciences, a direct cause of Schism, a superstitious usage,
(upon which pretenses it is here desired to be altered) which would at once
both justify all those which have so obstinately separated from it, as the
only pious, tender-conscienced men, and condemn all those that have adhered to
that, in conscience of their duty and loyalty, with their loss or hazard of
estates, lives and fortunes, as men superstitious, schismatical, and void of
Religion and Conscience. For this reason, and th^se that follow, we cannot
consent to such an alteration as is desired, till these pretenses be proved,
which we conceive in no wise to be done in these Papers; and shall give Reasons
for this our Judgment.]

If the Liturgy should be altered, Reply.
as is here required, and desired by us, that it could be no just offense to
the generality (or any) of the soberest and most loyal Children of the Church,
(as you speak) is easy to be proved, by laying together the considerations
following: 1. Because it is by themselves confessed to be alterable, as not
having it self its formal Constitution, till less then two hundred years ago.
2. And themselves affirm it to be not necessary to salvation, but a thing
indifferent, while they exclude all higher institutions from the power of the
Church. 3. They confess it lawful to serve God without this Liturgy, without
which he was served by other Churches above 1460 years, and without which he is
now served by other Churches, when the contrary minded doubt whether with it he
be lawfully served. 4. Those that desire the alteration, desire no more then to
serve God as the Churches did in the days of the Apostles, that had their most
infallible conduct. 5. And they offer also such Forms as are more
unquestionable as to their congruency to the Word of God, and to the nature of
the several parts of Worship. 6. And yet though they desire the surest concord,
and an universal Reformation, they desire not to impose on others what they
offer, but can thankfully accept a Liberty to use what is to their own
Consciences most unquestionably safe, while other men use that which they like
better. So that set all this together, with the consideration of the necessity
of the preaching the Word, and Communion that is hereupon denied, and you may
see it proved, That to have such a Liturgy so altered, that is confessed
alterable, for so desirable an end, for the use only of those that cannot well
use it, without urging others to any thing that they do themselves account
unlawful, cannot be a matter of just offense to the generality of sober
Children of the Church, nor to any one. And as to the reason given, it is
apparently none: For, 1. Of those that scruple the unlawfulness of it, there
are many that will not peremptorily affirm it unlawful, and condemn all that
use it, but they dare not use it doubtingly themselves. 2. When our Papers were
before you, we think it not just that you should say that it is here desired to
be altered, on the pretense that it is a direct cause of Schism, and a
superstitious usage: Have we any such expressions? If we have, let them be
recited; if not, it is hard that this should even by you be thus affirmed as is
said by us, which we have not said. We have said, [That the Ceremonies have
been the Fountain of much evil, occasioning divisions, but not what you charge
us to have said in words or sense. 3. And may not you alter them without
approving, or seeming to approve the reason upon which the alteration is
desired, when you have so great store of other reasons? The King in his
Declaration is far enough from seeming to own the Charge against the things
which he was pleased graciously to alter so far as is there expressed. If a
Patient have a conceit that some one thing would kill him, if he took it, the
Physician may well forbear him in that one thing, when it is not necessary to
his health, without owning his reasons against it. If his Majesty have Subjects
so weak as to contend about things indifferent, and if both sides err, one
thinking them necessary, and the other sinful; may he not gratify either of
them without seeming to approve their error? By this reason of yours he is by
other men in such a case necessitated to sin; for if he settle those things
which some count necessary, he seems to approve of their opinion, that they are
necessary; if he take them down when others call them sinful, he seems to own
their charge of the sinfulness. But indeed he needs not to do either; he may
take them down, or leave them indifferent; professedly for unity and peace, and
professedly disown the Errors on both sides. We are sorry if any did esteem
these Forms and Ceremonies any better then mutable indifferent Modes and
Circumstances of Worship; and did hazard estate or life for them as any
otherwise esteemed: And we are sorry, that by our Divisions the Adversary of
Peace has gotten so great an advantage against us, as that the Argument
against necessary charitable forbearance is fetched from the interest of the
reputation of the contending Parties, that things may not be abated to others
which you confess are indifferent and alterable, and which many of them durst
not use, though to save their lives. And this because it will make them thought
the pious, tender conscienc'd men, and make others thought worse of. But with
whom will it have these effects? Those that you call the generality of the
sober loyal children of the Church, will think never the worse of themselves,
because others have liberty to live by them, without these things: and the
rest, whose liberties you deny, will think rather the worse of you, then the
better, for denying them their liberty in the worshipping of God. You
undoubtedly argue here against the interest of Reputation, which you stand for:
Your Prefaces to your Indulgencies, and your open Professions; and (if you will
needs have it so) your own Practices, will tell the world loud enough, that the
things which you adhered to with so great hazards are still lawful in your
Judgment, and it will be you honor, and add to your reputation, to abate
them to others, when it is in your power to be more severe. And if you refuse
it, their sufferings will tell the world loud enough, that for their parts they
still take them to be things unlawful. As for the Reasons by them produced to
prove them sinful, they have been publicly made known in the Writings of many
of them; in Ames his fresh suit against the Ceremonies, and in the Abridgement,
etc. and in Bradshaws, Nicolls, and other men's Writings.

[To the first general Proposal, Answer. Prop. a. 1.
we answer: That as to that part of it which requires that the matter of the
Liturgy may not be private opinion or fancy, Sect. 1.
that being the way to perpetuate Schism; the Church has been careful to put
nothing into the Liturgy, but that which is either evidently the Word of God,
or what has been generally received in the Catholic Church; neither of which
can be called private opinion: and if the contrary can be proved, we wish it
out of the Liturgy.]

We call those Opinions which are not determined Certainties; Reply.
and though the greater number should hold them as Opinions, they are not
therefore the Doctrines of the Church, and therefore might be called private
Opinions: but indeed we used not the word, (that we can find:) the thing that
we desired, was, that the materials of the Liturgy may consist of nothing
doubtful, or questioned among pious, learned and Orthodox persons.] We said
also, That the limiting Church Communion to things of doubtful disputation,
has been in all Ages the ground of Schism and Separation, (which is not to
say, that the Liturgy it self is a superstitious usage, or a direct cause of
Schism.) And we cited the words of a learned man, (Mr. Hales) not as making
every word our own, but as a Testimony ad hominem, because he was so highly
valued by your selves, (as we suppose) and therefore we thought his words might
be more regarded by you then our own. 2. Where you say, [That the Church has
been careful to put nothing in the Liturgy, but that which is either evidently
the Word of God, or that which had been generally received in the Catholic
Church:] We reply, 1. We suppose there is little or nothing now controverted
between us, which you will say is evidently the Word of God, either the Forms
or Ceremonies, or any of the rest. 2. If by [in the Church,] you mean [not by
the Church,] but by any part in the Church; how shall we know that they did
well? And if by [the generality] you mean not All, but the Greater part, you
undertake the proof of that which is not easy to be proved; it being so hard
to judge of the majority of Persons in the Catholic Church, in any notable
differences. We do take it for granted that you limit not the Catholic
Church, as the Papists do, to the Confines of the Roman Empire; but indeed we
can only wish, that your Assertion were true, while we must show it to be
untrue, if you speak of the Primitive Church, or of an universality of time, as
well as place; (if not, it is more against you, that the Primitive Catholic
Church was against you.) The very thing in question that contains the rest,
[That it is needful to the peace of the Church, that all the Churches under one
Prince should use one Form of Liturgy,] was not received by the Catholic
Church, nor by the generality in it; when it is so well known that they used
diversity of Liturgies and Customs in the Roman Empire. The generality in the
Catholic Church received not the Lords Supper kneeling, at least on any Lords
days, when it was forbidden by diverse general Councils, and when this
prohibition was generally received as an Apostolical tradition: We have not
heard it proved, that the Surplis or Cross, as used with us, were received by
the universal Church: it is a private Opinion not received by the Catholic
Church, that [It is requisite that no man should come to the holy Communion,
but with a full trust in Gods mercy, and with a quiet conscience,] though it be
every man's duty to be perfect pro statu viatoris, yet it is not requisite that
no man come till he be perfect. He that has but a weak Faith, (though not a
full trust) must come to have it strenghtened: and he that has an unquit
conscience, must come to receive that mercy which may quiet it. It is a private
Opinion, and not generally received in the Catholic Church, [That one of the
people] may make the public Confession at the Sacrament in the name of all
those that are minded to receive the holy Communion. It is a private, and not
generally received distinction, that the Body of Christ makes clean our bodies,
and his Blood washes our souls. It is a doubtful Opinion, to speak easily,
that when the Lords Supper is delivered with a Prayer not made in the Receivers
name, but thus directed to him by the Minister, [The Body of our Lord Jesus
Christ, etc. preseve thy body and soul,] it is so intolerable a thing for the
Receiver not to kneel in hearing the prayer, that he must else be thrust from
the Communion of the Church, and yet that no Minister shall kneel that indeed
does pray: But he may pray standing, and the Hearers be cast out for standing
at the same words. It is not a generally received, but a private Opinion, [That
every Parishioner (though impenitent, and conscious of his utter unfitness, and
though he ^e in despair, and think he shall take his own damnation) must be
forced to receive thrice a year; when yet even those that have not [A full
trust in Gods mercy,] or have not [a quiet conscience,] were before pronounced
so incapable, as that none such should come to the Communion.] Abundance more
such Instances may be given, to show how far from truth the Assertion is, that
[The Church has been careful to put nothing into the Liturgy, but that which
is either evidently the Word of God, or which has been generally received in
the Catholic Church,] unless you speak of some unhappy unsuccessful
Carefulness. But we thankfully accept of your following words, [And if the
contrary can be proved, we wish it out of the Liturgy,] which we entreat you
to pefso^m, and impartially receive our proofs. But then we must also entreat
you, 1. That the Primitive Churches Judgment and Practice may be preferred
before the present declined, much corrupted State. And 2. If Gods Law rather
then the sinful practices of men breaking that Law, may be the Churches Rule
for Worship: For you call us to subscribe to Art. 19. that [As the Church of
Jerusalem, Alexandria and Antioch has erred, so also the Church of Rome has
erred, not only in their living, and manner of Ceremonies, but also in matters
of Faith: and says Rogers, in Art. 20. They are out of the way, which think
that either one man, as the Pope, or any certain Calling of men, as the
Clergy, has power to decree and appoint Rites or Ceremonies, though of
themselves good, unto the whole Church of God, dispersed over the universal
world.] And indeed, if you would have all that corruption brought into our
Liturgy, and Discipline, and Doctrine, which the Papists, Greeks, and others
that undoubtedly make up the far greater number of the now universal Church do
use; you would deserve no more thanks of God or man, then he that would have
all Kings, and Nobles, and Gentry levelled with the poor Commons, because the
latter are the greater number; or then he that would have the healthful
conformed to the sick, when an Epidemical Disease has made them the Majority;
or then he that would teach us to follow a multitude to do evil, and to break
more then the least Commands, because the greater number break them. We pray
you therefore to take it for no justification of any uncertain or faulty
passage in our Liturgis, though the greater number now are guilty of it. 3. And
we must beseech you, if the Churches Judgment or Practice must be urged, that
you would do us the justice as to imitate the ancient Churches in you sense of
the quality, and the mode and measure of using and imposing things, as well as
in the materials used and imposed. Consider not only [whether you find such
things received by the ancient Churches,] but also consider how they were
received, esteemed and used; whether as necessary or indifferent; as points of
Faith, or doubtful Opinion; whether forced on others, or left to their free
choice. If you find, that the generality of the Ancient Churches received the
White Garment after Baptism, and the tasting of Milk and Honey, as Ceremonies
freely, though generally used; you should not therefore force men to use them.
If you find, that the Doctrine of the Mil^ennium, or of Angels corporeity was
generally received as an Opinion, it will not warrant you to receive either of
them as a certain necessary truth. If you find, that the general Councils
forbad Kneeling in any Adoration on the Lords days, but without force against
Dissenters; you may not go deny the Sacrament to all that kneel, nor yet forbid
them to keel in praying. So if you find some little parcels of our Liturgy,
or some of our Ceremonies used as things indifferent, left to choice, forced
upon none, but one Church differing from another in such usages or observances,
this will not warrant you to use the same things as necessary to order, unity
or peace, and to be forced upon all: use them no otherwise then the Churches
used them.

[We heartily desire, Answer.
that according to this Proposal, great care may be taken to suppress those
private Conceptions of Prayers before and after Sermon, Sect. 2.
lest private Opinions be made the matter of Prayer in Public, as has and
will be, if private persons take liberty to make Public Prayers.]

The desire of your hearts is the grief of our hearts; Reply.
the Conceptions of Prayer by a public person, according to a public rule,
for a public use, are not to be rejected as private Conceptions: We had hoped
you had designed no such innovation as this in the Church: When we have heard
any say that it would come to this, and that you designed the suppression of
the free Prayers of Ministers in the Pulpit, suited to the variety of the
subjects and occasions, we have rebuked them as uncharitable in passing so
heavy a censure on you: And what would have been said of us a year ago, if we
should have said that this was in your hearts? Nothing will more alienate the
hearts of many holy prudent persons from the Common Prayer, then to perceive
that it is framed and used as an Instrument to shut out all other Prayers, as
the Ministers private Conceptions. Such an end and design, will make it, under
the notion of a means, another thing then else it would be, and afford men such
an Argument against it, as we desire them not to have: but we hope you speak
not the public sense. As the Apostles desired (as aforesaid) that all would
speak the same things, without giving them (that ever was proved) a Form of
words to speak them in; so might we propose to you, that uncertain opinions be
made no part of our Liturgy, without putting all their words into their
mouths, in which their desires must be altered. Your hearty desire, and the
reason of it, makes not only against extemporary Prayer, but all prepared or
written Forms or Liturgies that were indicted only by one man, and have not the
consent antecedently of others. And do you think this was the course of the
Primitive times? Basil thus used his private Conceptions at C^sarea, and Greg.
Thaumaturgus before him at Neocesarea, and all Pastors in Justin Martyrs and
Tertullians days. And how injurious is it to the Public Officers of Christ,
the Bishops and Pastors of the Churches, to be called private men? who are
public persons in the Church, if they be not? Every single person is not a
private person, else Kings and Judges would be so. And have you not better
means to shut out private opinions, then the forbidding Ministers praying in
the Pulpit, according to the variety of subjects and occasions? You have first
the Examination of persons to be ordained, and may see that they be able to
speak sense, and fit to manage their proper works with judgment and
discretion, before you ordain them; And some confidence may be put in a man in
his proper calling and work, to which he is admitted with so great care, as we
hope (or desire) you will admit them. If you are necessitated to admit some few
that are injudicious, or unmeet, we beseech you (not only to restore the many
hundred worthy men laid by, to a capacity, but that you will not so dishonor
the whole Church, as to suppose all such, and to use all as such, but restrain
those that deserve restraint, and not all others for their sakes: And next, you
have a Public Rule (the holy Scripture) for these men to pray by. And if any
of them be intolerably guilty of weaknesses or rashness, or other miscarriages,
the words being spoken in public, you have witnesses enough, and sure there is
power enough in Magistrates and Bishops to punish them; and if they prove
incorrigible, to cast them out. In all other Professions these means are
thought sufficient to regulate the Professors. His Majesty thinks it enough to
regulate his Judges, that he may choose able men, and fit to be trusted in their
proper work; and that they are respo^sible for all their male-administrations,
without prescribing them Forms, beyond which they may not speak any thing in
their Charge. Physicians being first tried, and responsible for their doings,
are constantly trusted with the lives of high and low, without tying them to
give no counsel or medicine but by the prescript of a Book, or determination of
a College. And it is so undeniable, that your reason makes more against
Preaching, and for only reading Homilies, as that we must like it the worse,
if not fear what will become of Preaching also. For, 1. It is known that in
Preaching a man has far greater opportunity and liberty to vent a false or
private opinion, then in Prayer. 2. It is known de eventu, that it is much more
ordinary. And if you say, [That he speaks not the words of the Church, but his
own, nor unto God, but man, and therefore it is less matter:] We answer, It is
as considerable, if not much more, from whom he speaks, then to whom he speaks
as the M^nister of Christ, in his stead and name, 2 Cor. 3. 19, 20. And it is
as a higher, so a more reverend thing to speak in Gods Name to the people, then
in the peoples name to God; and to speak that which we call Gods Word, or
Truth, or Message, then that which we call but our own desire: we make a God a
liar, or corrupt in his words, if we speak a falsehood in his Name; we make but
our selves liars, if we speak a falsehood to him in our names: the former
therefore is the more heinous and dreadful abuse, and more to be avoided: or if
but equally, it shows the tende^cy of your reason, (for we will not say of your
design, as hoping you intend not to make us Ruff^ans.) We do therefore for the
sake of the poor threatened Church, beseech you that you will be pleased to
repent of these desires, and not to prosecute them, considering that to avoid a
lesser evil (avoidable by safer means) you will bring a far greater evil on the
Churches, and such as is like to strip these Nations of the glory in which they
have excelled the rest of the world* even a learned, able, holy Ministry, and a
people sincere, and serious, and understanding in the matters of their
salvation. For, 1. As it is well known that an ignorant man may read a Prayer
and Homily as distinctly and laudably as a learned Divine, and so may do the
work of a Minister, if this be it; so it is known that man's nature is so
addicted to ease and sensual diversions, as that multitudes will make no better
preparations, when they find that no more is necessary, when they are as
capable of their places and maintenance if they can but read, and are forced
upon no exercise of their parts, which may detect and shame their ignorance,
but the same words are to be read by the ablest and ignorantest man: it is
certain that this will make multitudes idle in their Academical Studies, and
multitudes to spend their time idly all the year, in the course of their
Ministry: and when they have no necessity that they are sensible of, of
diligent studies, it will let loose their f^eshly voluptuous inclinations, and
they will spend their time in sports, and drinking, and prating, and idleness;
and this will be a Seminary of Lust: or they will follow the world, and drown
themselves in Covetousness and Ambition, and their hearts will be like their
studies. As it is the way to have a holy able Ministry, to engage them to holy
studies, to meditate on Gods Law day and night; so it is the way to have an
ignorant, profane and scandalous Ministry, (and consequently Enemies to
serious Godliness in others) to impose upon them but such a work, as in
ignorance and idleness they may perform as well as the judicious and the
diligent. If it be said, [That their parts may be tried and exercised some
other way:] We answer, Where should a Ministers parts be exercised, if not in
the Pulpit or the Church, and in Catechizing, in private Baptism and Communion,
and in the visitation of the sick? their work also is such as a Schoolboy may
do as well as they, their ignorance having the same Cloak, as in public. If it
be said, [That a Ministers work is not to show his parts:] We answer, But his
Ministerial work is to show men their sins, and to preach the wonderful
mysteries of the Gospel, to help men to search, and understand the Scriptures,
and to search, and to know their hearts, and to know God in Christ, and to hope
for the glory that is to be revealed; and fervently to pray for the success of
his endeavors, and the blessings of the Gospel on the people, and cheerfully
to praise God for his ^arious benefits; which cannot be done without Abilities.
A ^hysitians work is not to show his parts ultimately, but it is to do that for
the cure of diseases which without parts he cannot do; and in the exercise of
his parts, (on which the issue much depends) to save men's lives. The
ostentation of his good works, is not the work of a good Christian; and yet he
must so let his light shine before men, that they may see his good works, and
glorify God. And undeniable experience tells us, That God ordinarily
proportioneth the success and blessing to the skill, and holiness, and
diligence of the Instruments; and blesses not the labors of ignorant, ungodly
Drones, as he does the labors of able faithful Ministers. And also that the
readiest way to bring the Gospel into contempt with the world, and c^use all
Religion to dwindle away into Formality first, and then to Barbarism and
Brutishness, is to let in an ignorant, idle, vicious Ministry, that will become
the peoples scorn: Yea, this is the way to extirpate Christianity out of any
Country in the world, which is decaying apace, when men grow ignorant of the
nature and reasons of it, and unexperienced in its power and delightful fruits,
and when the Teachers themselves grow unable to defend it. And we must add,
That whatsoever can be expected duly to affect the heart, must keep the
intellect, and all the faculties awake in diligent attention and exercise: And
in the use of a Form, which we have frequently heard and read, the faculties
are not so necessitated and urged to attention, and serious exercise, as they
be when from our own understanding we are set about the natural work of
representing to others what we discern and feel. Man's mind is naturally
sloathful, and will take its ease, and remit its seriousness longer then it is
urged by necessity, or drawn out by delight: When we know beforehand, that we
have no more to do, but read a Prayer or Homily, we shall ordinarily be in
danger of letting our minds go another way, and think of other matters, and be
senceless of the work in hand. Though he is but an Hypocrite that is carried on
by no greater motive then man's observation and approbation; yet is it a help
not to be despised, when even a necessity of avoiding just shame with men,
shall necessarily awake our invention, and all our faculties to the work, and
be a concurrent help with spiritual motives. And common experience tells us,
That the best are apt to loose a great deal of their affection by the constant
use of the same words or forms. Let the same Sermon be preached an hundred
times over, and try whether an hundred for one will not be much less moved by
it, then they were at first. It is not only the common corruption of our
nature, but somewhat of innocent infirmity that is the cause of this. And man
must cease to be man, or to be mortal, before it will be otherwise. So that the
nature of the thing, and the common experience of our own dispositions, and of
the effect on others, assures us, that understanding serious Godliness, is
like to be extinguished, if only Forms be allowed in the Church, on pretense
of extinguishing errors and divisions: And though we have concurred to offer
you our more corrected Nepent^es, yet must we before God and me^, protest
against the dose of Opium which you here prescribe or wish for, as that which
plainly tends to cure the di^ease by the extinguishing of life, and to unite
us all in a dead Religion. And when the Prayers that avail must be effectual
and ferve ^t, Jam 5. 16. and God will be worshipped in spirit and truth, and
more regards the f^ame of the heart, then the comeliness of expression; we
have no reason to be taken with any thing that pretends to help the tongue,
while we are sure it ordinarily hurts the heart: And it is not the affirmations
of any men in the world, persuading us of the harmlessness of such a course,
that can so far un-man us, as to make us dis-believe both our own experience,
and common observation of the effects on others. Yet we confess that some Forms
have their laudable use, to cure that error and vice that lies on the other
extreme. And might we but sometimes have the liberty to interpose such words as
are needful to call home and quicken attention and affection, we should think
that a convenient conjunction of both might be a well-tempered means to the
common constitutions of most. But still we see the world will run into
extremes, whatever be said or done to hinder it. It is but lately that we were
put to it, against one extreme, to defend the lawfulness of a Form of Liturgy;
now the other extreme it troubles us, that we are forced against you, even
such as you, to defend the use of such Prayers of the Pastors of the Churches,
as are necessarily varied according to subjects and occasions, while you would
have no Prayer at all in the Church, but such prescribed Forms. And why may we
not add, That whoever makes the Forms imposed on us, if he use them, is
guilty as well as we of praying according to his private Conceptions? And that
we never said it proved from Scripture, that Christ appointed any to such an
Office, as to make Prayers for other Pastors and Churches to offer up to God:
and that this being none of the work of the Apostolical, or common Ministerial
Office in the Primitive Church, is no work of any Office of Divine Institution.

[To that part of the Proposal, Answer. Sect 3.
That the Prayers may cons^st of nothing doubtful, or questioned by pious,
learned and Orthodox persons; they not determining who be those Orthodox
persons, we must either take all them for Orthodox persons, who shall
confidently affirm themselves to be such; and then we say, First, the Demand is
unreasonable; for some such as call themselves Orthodox, have qu^stioned the
prime Article of our Creed, even the Divinity of the S^n of God; and yet there
is no reason we should part with our Creed for that. Besides the Proposal
requires impossibility; for there never was, nor is, ^or can be such Prayers
made, as have not been, nor will be questioned by some wh^ call themselves
pious, learned and Orthodox: if by Orthodox be meant those who adhere to
Scripture, and the Catholic Consent of Antiquity, we do not yet know that any
part of our Liturgy has been questioned by such.]

And may we not thus mention Orthodox persons to men that profess they agree
with us in Doctrinals* unless we digress to tell you who they be? Reply.
What if we were pleading for civil concord among all that a^e loyal to the
King, must we needs digress to tell you who are loyal? We are agreed in one
Rule of Faith, in one holy Scripture, and one Creed, and differ not (you say)
about the Doctrinal part of the 39 Art. And will not all this seem to tell you
who are Orthodox? If you are resolved to make all that a matter of Contention
which we desire to make a means of Peace, there is no remedy while you have the
Ball before you, and have the Wind and Sun, and the power of contending without
control. But we perceive, [That the Catholic consent of Antiquity,] must go
into your definition of the Orthodox; but how hard it is to get a reconciling
determination, what Ages shall go with you, and us, for the true Antiquity, and
what is necessary to that consent that must be called Catholic, is unknown to
none but the unexperienced. And indeed we think a man that searches the holy
Scripture, and sincerely and unreservedly gives up his Soul to understand, love
and obey it, may be Orthodox, without the knowledge of Church History: we know
no universal Lawgiver, nor Law to the Church, but one, and that Law is the
sufficient Rule of Faith, and consequently the test of the truly Orthodox,
though we refuse not Church History, or other means that may help us to
understand it. And to acquaint you with what you do not know, we our selves
(after many Pastors of the Reformed Churches) do question your Liturgy, as far
as is expressed in our Papers: And we profess, [to adhere to Scripture, and the
Catholic consent of Antiquity,] (as described by Vincentius Liniensis) If you
will say, that our pretense and claim is unjust, we call for your Authority to
judge our hearts, or dispose us from the number of the Orthodox, or else for
your proofs to make good your accusation. But however you judge, we rejoice in
the expectation of the righteous Judgment that shall finally decide the
Controversy; to which, from this Aspersion, we appeal.

[To th^se Generals, Answer. Sect. 4.
loading public Form with Chapter pomp garm. Imagery, and many Superfluities that
creep into the Church under the name of Order and Dec^ncy, i^cumbring Churches
with Superfluities, over-rigid reviving of obsolete Customs, etc. We say, that
if these Generals be intended as appliable to our Liturgy in particular, they
are gross and foul Slanders, contrary to their profession, page ult. and so
either that or this contrary to their Conscience; if not, they signify nothing
to the present business, and so might with more prudence and ^andor have been
omitted.]

You needed not go a fishing for our Charge; Reply.
what we had to say against the Liturgy, which we now desired you to observe,
was here plainly laid before you: Answer to this, and suppose us not to say
what we do not, to make your selves matter of reproaching us with gross and
foul slanders. Only we pray you answer Mr. Hales, as Mr. Hales, (whom we took
to be a person of much esteem with you) especially that passage of his which
you take no notice of, as not being so easy to be answered, for the weight and
strength which it carries with it, viz. that the limiting of the
Church Communion to things of doubtful disputation, has been in all Ages the
ground of Schism and Separation; and that he that separates from suspected
Opinions, is not the Separatist. And may we not cite such words of one that we
thought you honored, and would hear, without contradicting our Profession, of
not intending depravation or reproach against the Book without going against
our Consciences? If we cite the words of an Author for a particular use, (as to
persuade you of the evil of laying the hurches unity upon unnecessary things)
must we be responsible therefore for all that you can say against his words in
other respects? We suppose you would be loath your words should have such
interpretation, and that you should be under such a Law for all your Citations:
Do as you would be done by.

[It was the wisdom of our Reformers to draw up such a Liturgy as Answer. N. 2.
neither Romanist nor Protestant could justly except against; and therefore as
the first never charged it with any positive Errors, but only the want of
something they conceived necessary: so it was never found fault with by th^se
to whom the name of Protestants most properly belongs, those that profess the
Augustine Confession; and for those who unlawfully and sinfully brought it into
dislike with some people, to urge the present State of Affairs, as an Argument
why the Book should be altered, to give them satisfaction, and so that they
should take advantage by their own unwarrantable Acts, is not reasonable.]

If it be blameless, Reply.
no man can justly except against it: but that de facto the Romanists never
charged it with any positive Errors, is an Assertion that makes them
reformed, and reconcilable to us, beyond all belief: Is not the very using it
in our own Tongue a positive Error in their account? Is it no positive Error
in the Papists account, that we profess [To receive these Creatures of Bread
and Wine?] Do they think we have no positive Error in our Catechism about the
Sacrament, that affirms it to be Bread and Wine a ter the Consecration, and
makes but two Sacraments necessary? etc. 2. And unless we were nearlier agreed
then we are, it seems to us no Commendation of a Liturgy, that the Papists
charge it with no positive Error. 3. That no Divines or private men at home,
or of foreign Churches, [that ever found fault with the Liturgy, are such to
whom the name of Protestant properly belongs,] is an Assertion that proves
not what authority of Judging your Brethren you have, but what you assume; and
commends your Charity no more, then it commends the Papists, that they deny
us to be Catholics. Calvin and Bucer subscribed the Augustine Consession, and
so have others that have found fault with our Liturgy. 4. If any of us have
blamed it to the people, it is but with such a sort of blame as we have here
expressed against it to your selves; and whether it be [unlawful and sinful] the
impartial comparing of your words with ours, will help the willing Reader to
discern. But if we prove indeed that it is [defective and faulty that you bring
for an Offering to God,] when you or your Neighbors have a better, which you
will not bring, nor suffer them that would, (Mal. 1. 13.) and that you call
evil good in justifying its blemishes, which in humble modesty we besought you
to amend, or excuse us from offering, then God will better judge of the
unlawful act, then you have done. But you have not proved that all or most of
us have caused the people at all to dislike it; if any of us have, yet weigh
our Argument, though from the present state of Affairs: or if you will not hear
us, we beseech you hear the many Ministers in England, that never meddled
against the Liturgy, and the many moderate Episcopal Divines, that have used
it, and can do still, and yet would earnestly entreat you to alter it, partly
because of what in it needs alteration, and partly in respect to the Commodity
of others; Or at least we beseech you recant, and obliterate such passages as
would hinder all your selves from any Act of Reformation hereabout, that if any
man among you would find fault with some of the grosser things, which we laid
open to you, (tenderly and sparingly) and would ^eform them, he may not
presently forfeit the reputation of being a Protestant. And astly, we beseech
you deny not again the name of Protestants to the Pri^ate of Ireland, the
Archbishop of York, and the many others that had diverse meetings for the
Reformation of the Liturgy, and who drew up that Catalogue of faults, or
points that needed mending, which is yet to beseen in print; they took not
advantage of their own unwarrantable Acts for the attempting of that alteration.

[The third and fourth Proposals may go together, Answer. N. 3, 4.
the demand in both being against Respensals, and alternate Readings, in
Hymns, and Psams, and L^t^^y, etc. And that upon such reason as does in truth
enforce the necessity of continuing them as they are, namely for edification.
They would take these away, because they do not edify, and upon that very
reason they should continue, because they do edify: if not by informing of our
reasons and understandin^s, (the Prayers and Hymns were never made for a
Catechism) yet by quic^ning, continuing and uniting our devotion, which is apt
to f^eeze* or sleep, ^r ^^at in a l^ng continued Prayer, or F^rm; it is
necessary therefore for the edifying of us therein, to be often called upon and
awa^^ned by frecuent Amens, to be excited and stirred up by mutu^l exultations,
pr^vocations, petitions, holy c^ntentions and strivin^s, which shall m^st show
his ^wn, Socrat. lib 6. ca^ 8. Th^^dor lib. cap. (...) 7. 1, 2. Ezra^. 11
and stir up others zeal to the Glory of God. For this purpose alternate
Reading, Repetitions and Responsals, are far better than a long tedious Pr^yer:
Nor is this ^^r opini^^ only, but the Judgment of former ages, as appears by
the practice of ancient Christian Churches, and of the Jews also. But it seems
they say to be against the Scripture, wherein the Minister is appointed for the
people in public Prayers, the peoples part being to attend with s^lence, and
to declare their assent in the close, by saying Amen: if they mean that the
people in public Services must only say this word Amen, as they can no where
prove it in the Scriptures, so it does certainly seem to them, that it cannot
be proved; for they directly practice the contrary in one of their principal
parts of Worship, singing of Psalms, where the people bear as great a part as
the Minister. If this may be done in Hopkins, why not in David's Psalms? If in
Meter, why not in Prose? if in a Psalm, why not in a Letany?]

What is most for edification, Reply.
is best known by experience, and by the reason of the thing: for the former,
you are not the Masters of all men's experience, but of your own, and others
that have acquainted you with the same, as theirs: We also may warrantably
profess in the name of our selves, and many thousands of sober pious persons,
that we experience that these things are against our edification; and we
beseech you do not by us, what you would not do by the the poor laboring
servants of your family, to measure them all their diet for quality or
quantity, according to your own appetites, which they think are diseased, and
would be better, if you worked us as hard as they: and we gave you some of the
Reasons of our Judgment: 1. Though we have not said that the people may not in
Psalms to God concur in voice, (we speak of Prayer which you should have
observed) and though we only concluded it agreeable to the Scripture-practise,
for the people in prayer to say but their Amen; yet knowing not from whom to
understand the will of God, and what is pleasing to him, better then from
himself, we considered what the Scripture says of the ordinary way of public
Worship; and finding ordinarily that the people spoke no more in prayer (as
distinct from Psalms and Praise) then their Amen, or mere consent, we desired
to imitate the surest pattern. 2. As we find that the Minister is the mouth of
the people to God in public, (which Scripture, and the necessity of order do
require;) so we were loath to countenance the peoples invading of that sacred
Office, so far as they seem to us to do: 1. By reading half the Psalms and
Hymns: 2. By saying half the Prayers, as the Minister does the other half: 2.
By being one of them the mouth of all the rest in the Confession at the Lords
Supper. 4. By being the only Petitioners, in the far greatest part of all the
Letanie, by their [Good Lord deliver us,] and [We beseech thee to hear us, good
Lord;] while the Minister only recites the matter of the matter of the
prayer, and makes none of the Request at all; we fear lest by parity of reason
the people will claim the work of preaching, and other parts of the Ministerial
Office: 3. And we mentioned that which all our ears are witnesses of, that
while half the Psalms and Hymns, etc. are said by such of the people as can say
them, the murmur of their voices in most Congregations is so unintelligible and
confused, as must hinder the edification of all the rest; for who is edified by
that which he cannot understand? We know not what you mean by citing 2 Chronicles.
7. 1, 4. Ezra 3. 11. where there is not a word of public prayer, but in one
place of an Acclamation, upon an extraordinary sight of the glory of the Lord,
which made them praise the Lord, and say, [He is good, for his mercy is for
ever;] when the prayer that went before was such as you call [A long tedious
prayer,] uttered by Solomon alone, without such breaks and discants. And in the
other places is no mention of prayer at all, but of singing praise; and that
not by the people, but by the Priests and Levites, saying the same words, [For
he is good, for his mercy endures for ever toward Israel:] The people are said
to do no more then shout with a great shout, because the foundation of the
House was laid; and if shouting be it that you would prove, it is not the thing
in Question. Let the ordinary mode of praying in Scripture be observed, in the
prayers of David, Solomon, Ezra, Daniel, or any other; and if they were by
breaks, and frequent beginnings and endings, and alternate Interlocutions of
the people, as yours are, then we will conform to your mode, which now offends
us; but if they were not, we beseech you reduce yours to the examples in
Scripture: we desire no other rule to decide the Controversy by. As to your
Citation, 1 Socrat. there tells us of the alternate singing of the Arrians in
the reproach of the Orthodox, and that Chrysostom (not a Synod) compiled Hymns
to be sung in opposition to them in the streets, which came in the end to a
Tumult and Bloodshed. And hereupon he tells us of the original of alternate
singing, viz. a pretended Vi^ion of Ignatius, that heard Angels sing in that
order. And what is all this to alternate Reading, and praying, or to a Divine
Institution, when here is no mention of reading or praying, but of singing
Hymns; and that not upon pretense of Apostolical Tradition, but a Vision of
uncertain credit? Theodore also speaks only of singing Psalms alternately,
and not a word of reading or praying so; and he fetches that way of singing
also as Socrat. does, but from the Church at Antioch, and not from any
pretended Doctrine or Practice of the Apostles: and neither of them speaks a
word of the necessity of it, or of forcing any to it: so that all these your
Citations, speaking not a word so much as of the very Subject in question, are
marvellously impertinent. The words [Their Worship,] seem to intimate that
singing of Psalms is part [of our Worship,] and not of yours: we hope you
disown it not; for our parts we are ashamed of it. Your distinction between
Hopkins and David's Psalms, as if the meter allowed by Authority to be sung in
Churches, made them to be no more David's Psalms, seems to us a very hard
saying. If it be because it is a Translation, then the prose should be none of
David's Psalms neither, nor any Translation be the S^ripture. If it be because
it is in meter, then the exactest Translation in meter should be none of the
Scripture. If because it is done imperfectly, then the old Translation of the
Bible, used by Common Prayer Book, should not be Scripture. As to your reason
for the supposed priority, 1. Scripture-examples telling us, that the people
had more part in the Psalms, then in the Prayers or Reading, satisfy us, that
God and his Church then saw a disparity of Reason. 2. Common Observation tells
us, That there is more order, and less hinderance of Edification in the peoples
singing, then in their reading and praying together vocally.

[It is desired that nothing should be in the Liturgy, Answer. N. Sect. 1.
which so much as seems to countenance the observation of Lent as a Religious
Fast; and this as an expedient to peace: which is in effect to desire, that
this our Church may be contentious for peace sake, and to divide from the
Church-Catholick, that we may live at unity among our selves: For St. Paul
reckons them amongst the lovers of contention, who shall oppose themselves
against the custom of the Churches of God. That the religious observation of
Lent was a custom of the Churches of God, appears by the testimonies
following, Chrysostom. Ser. 11. in Heb. 10. Cyrill. Catec. mist. 5. St. Aug. Ep.
119, ut 40 dies ante Pascha observetur, Ecclesiae consuetudo roboravit: and St.
Hierom ad Marcell, says, it was secundum traditionem Apostolorum: This Demand
then tends not to peace, but Dissension. The fasting forty days may be in
imitation of our Savior, for all that is here said to the contrary; for though
we cannot arrive to his perfection, abstaining wholly from meat so long; yet we
may fast forty days together, either Cornelius his fast, till three of the
Clock after noon, or Saint Peter's fast, till noon; or at least Daniels fast,
abstaining from meats and drinks of delight; and thus far imitate our Lord.]

If we had said that the Church is contentious if it adore God in kneeling on
the Lords Days, Reply.
or use not the White Garment, Milk and Honey after Baptism, which had more
pretense of Apostolical tradition, and were generally used more anciently then
Lent, would you not have thought we wronged the Church? If the purer times of
the Church have one custom, and latter times a contrary, which must we follow?
or must we necessarily be contentious for not following both? or rather, may we
not by the example of the Church that changes them, be allowed to take such
things to be matters of Liberty, and not Necessity? If we must needs conform to
the custom of other Churches in such things, or be contentious, it is either
because God has so commanded, or because he has given those Churches
authority to command it: If the former, then what Churches or what Ages must we
conform to? If all must concur to be our pattern, it will be hard for us to be
acquainted with them so far as to know of such concurrences: And in our Case we
know that many do it not. If it must be the most, we would know where God
commands us to imitate the greater number, though the worse; or has secured
us that they shall not be the worst? or why we are not tied rather to imitate
the purer Ages then the more corrupt? If it be said, that the Church has
authority to command us; we desire to know what Church that is, and where to be
sound and heard, that may command England, and all the Churches of his
Majesty's Dominions. If it be said to be a General Council, 1. No General
Council can pretend to more Authority then that of Nice, whose 20th Canon,
backed with tradition and common practice, now binds not us, and was laid by
without any Repeal by following Councils. 2. We know of no such things as
General Councils, at least that have bound us to the religious observation of
Lent. The Bishops of one Empire could not make a General Council. 3. Nor do we
know of any such power that they have over the universal Church, there being no
visible Head of it, or Governors to make universal Laws, but Christ, (as
Rogers on the 20th Article forecited shows) our 21th Article says, That
[General Councils may not be gathered together without the Commandment and Will
of Princes:] And doubtless all the Heathens and Mahometans, and all the
contending Christian Princes, will never agree together (nor never did) to let
all their Christian Subjects concur to hold a General Council. It says also,
[And when they be gathered together, (for as much as they be an Assembly of
men, whereof all be not governed with the Spirit and Word of God) they may
err, and sometimes have erred, even in things pertaining unto God: therefore
things ordained by them, as necessary to salvation, have neither strength nor
authority, unless it may be declared that they be taken out of the Holy
Scriptures.] And if they may err in things pertaining unto God, and ordained
by them as necessary to salvation, much more in lesser things. And are we
contentious if we err not with them? Our 39 Article determines this
Controversy, saying, [It is not necessary that Traditions and Ceremonies be in
all places one, or utterly like; for at all times they have been diverse, and
changed according to the diversity of Countries, times, and men's manners, so
that nothing be ordained against Gods Word.] And after, [Every particular, or
National Church, has Authority to ordain, change, or abolish Ceremonies, or
Rites of the Church, ordained only by Man's Authority, so that all things be
done to edifying:] They that believe not this, should not subscribe it, nor
require it of others. As for the Testimonies cited by you, they are to little
purpose: We deny not not that the custom of observing Lent, either fewer days
or more, was as Ancient as those Authors. But first, That Lent was not known or
kept in the second or third Ages, you may see as follows, Tertul. de jejun.
l. 2. cap. 14. pleading for the Montanists, [Si omnem in totum devotionem
temporum, and dierum, and mensium, and annorum erasit Apostolus, cur Pascha
celebramus anno circulo in mense primo? cur quadraginta inde diebus in omni
exulcatione deturrimus? Cur stationibus quartam and sextam, sabbati dicamus?
and jejuniis Parasceven? quanquam vos etiam sabbatum si quando continutatis;
nunquam nisi in Pascha jejunandum, etc. And cap. 15. excusing that rigor of
their Fasts, [quantula est apud nos interdictio ciborum, duus in anno.
Hebdomadas xerophagiarum nec totas, exceptis scilicet sabbatis, and dominicius
offerimus Deo: The old general Fast at that time was only the voluntary
unconstrained fasting on Good Friday, and after that on one or two days more,
and then on six. Irenaeus in a Fragment of an Epistle in Eusebius. Hist. Lib. 5.
Cap. 26. Gr. Lat. 23. says, (the Controversy is not only of the day of
Easter, but of the kind of Fast it self: for some think they should fast one
day, some two, others more: some measure their day by forty hours of day and
night; and this variety of those that observe these Fasts, began not now in our
Age, but long before us with our Ancestors; who, as is most like, propagated to
posterity the custom which they retain, as brought in by a certain simplicity,
and private will; and yet all these lived peaceably among themselves, and we
keep peace among our selves; and the difference of Fasting is so far from
violating the consonancy of Faith, as that it even commends it.] Thus
Irenaeus, (read the rest of the Chapter) thus is the true reading confessed by
Bellarmine, Rigaltius, etc. and Dionys. Alexand. Ep. Can. ad Basil. page 881.
Balsam says, [Nor do all equally and alike sustain those six days of fasting;
but some pass them all fasting, some two, some three, some four, some more.]
And the Catholics in Tert de jejun. cap. 2. says, Itaque de caetero
differentur jejunandum, ex arbitrio, non ex imperio novae disciplinae, pro
temporibus and causis uniuscujusque sic and Apostolos observasse, nul^um aliud
imponentes jugum certorum, and in commune omnibus obeundorum jejuniorum: And
Socrat. admireth at many Countries, that all differed about the number of days,
and yet all called i^ Quadrages^ma, lib. 5 c. 22. Lat. Gr. 21. So Sozomen lib.
7. c. 19. Gr. and Niceph. lib. 12. cap. 34. which may help you to expound
Hierom, and the rest cited by you, as Rigaltius does ad Tertul. de jujun. 118.
as showing that they did it with respect to Christ's forty days fast, but not as
intending any such thing themselves as any fast of forty days. It is against
the Montanists, that the Quadrag. was but once a year, that Hierom uses the
title of Apostolical tradition. And how to expound him, see Epist. ad Lucin,
[unaqueque provincia abundet in suo sensu, and praecepta Majorum leges
Apostolicus arbitretur;] But says August. ad Casulan Ep. 86. [In Evangelicis
and Apostolicis literis, totoque Instrumento quod appellatur Testamentum Novum,
animo id revolvens video preceptum esse jejunium: quibus, autem die^us non
oportet jejunare, and quibus oport^at, precepto Domini vel Apostolorum non
invenio definitum.] And that Christians abstinence in Lent was voluntary
[quanto magis quisque vel minus voluerit, vel potuerit,] August. affirms,
cont. Faustum Manich. lib. 30. cap. 5. And Socrat. ubi supr. says, [ac quoniam
nemo de care praeceptum literarum monumentis proditum potest ostendere,
perspicuum est Apostolos liberam potestatem in eadem cujusque men^i, ac
arbitrio permisisse: ut quisque nec metu, nec necessitate inductus quod bonum
sit ageret.] And Prosper de vit. Contempl. li. 2. C. 24. veruntamen sic
jejunare, vel abstinere debemus, ut nos non jejunandi, vel destinendi
necessitate subdamus, ne jam devoti, sed inviti, rem voluntariam faciamus.] And
Cassianus, lib. 2. col. 21. cap. 30. says, [In primitiva Ecclesia equale
fuisse jejunium per totum annum: Ac frigescente devotione, cum negligerentur
jei^nia inductum Quadrag. a Sacerdotibus. But when you come to describe your
Fast, you make amends for the length, by making it indeed no Fast; [To abstain
from meats and drinks of delight:] where neither the thing nor the delight is
profitable to further us in our duty to God, is that which we take to be the
duty of every Christian all the year, as being a part of our mortication, and
self-denial, who are commanded to crucify the flesh, and to make no provision
to satisfy the lusts of it, and to subdue our bodies: but when those meats and
drinks do more help then hinder us in the service of God, we take it to be our
duty to use them, unless when some other accident forbids it, that would make
it otherwise more hurtful. And for fasting till Noon, we suppose it is the
ordinary way of diet to multitudes of Sedentary persons, both Students, and
Tradesmen, that find one meal a day sufficient for nature: If you call this
fasting, your poor Brethren fast all their life time, and never knew that it
was fasting; But to command hard Laborers to do so, is but to make it a fault
to have health, or to do their necessary work. We beseech you bring not the
Clergy under the suspicion of Gluttony, by calling our ordinary wholesome
temperance by the name of fasting. Sure Princes may feed as fully and
delightfully as we; yet Solomon says, Woe to thee, O Land, when thy King is a
Child, and thy Princes eat in the morning. Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy
King is the Son of Nobles, and thy Princes eat in due season, for strength, and
not for drunkenness;] For mere sensual delight it is never lawful; And when it
is for strength, it is not to be forbidden, unless when by accident it will
i^fer a greater good to abstain, Eccl. 20. 16, 17. so Prove. 31. 4, 6. It is not
for Kings to drink wine, nor Princes strong drink: Give strong drink to him
that is ready to perish, and wine to those that be of heavy hearts.

[Nor does the Act of Parliament, Answer. Sect. 2.
5 of Eliz. forbid it: We dare not think a Parliament did intend to forbid that
which Christ his Church has commanded. Nor does the Act determine any thing
about Lent Fast, but only provide for the maintenance of the Navy, and of
Fishing in order thereunto, as is plain by the Act. Besides, we conceive that
we must not so interpret one Act, as to contradict another, being still in
force and unrepealed. Now the Act of 1 Eliz. confirms the whole Liturgy, and
in that the religious keeping of Lent, with a severe penalty upon all those,
who shall by open words speak any thing in derogation of any part thereof; and
therefore that other Act of 5 Elizab. must not be interpreted to forbid the
religious keeping of Lent.]

If when the express words of a Statute are cited, Reply.
you can so easily put it off, by saying (it does not forbid it) and you dare
not think that a Parliament did intend to forbid that which Christ his Church
has commanded,) and (you must not interpret it as contradicting that Act which
confirms the Liturgy,) we must think that indeed we are no less regardful of
the Laws of the Governors than you. But first, we understand not what
authority this is that you set against the King and Parliament, as supposing
they will not forbid what it commands. You call it Christ's Church, we suppose
you mean not Christ himself, by his Apostles infallibly directed and inspired.
If it be the National Church of England, they are the Kings Subjects; and why
may he not forbid a Ceremony which they command? or why should they command it
if he forbid it? If it be any Foreign Church, there is none has power over us.
If it be any pretended head of the Church universal, whether Pope or general
Council, having power to make Laws that bind the whole Church, it is a thing so
copiously disproved by Protestants against both the Italian and French Papists,
that we think it needless to confute it, nor indeed dare imagine that you
intend it. We know not therefore what you mean; But whatever you mean, you seem
to contradict the forecited Article of the Church of England, that makes all
humane Laws about Rites and Ceremonies of the Church to be unchangeable, by
each particular National Church; And that it is not necessary that Ceremonies
or Traditions be in all places one, or utterly like.) We most earnestly beseech
you be cautious how you obtrude upon us a Foreign Power, under the name of
Christ's Church, that may command Ceremonies which King and Parliament may not
forbid; whether it be one man or a thousand, we fear it is against our Oaths
of Allegiance and Supremacy, for us to own any such Power. And (not presuming
upon any immodest challenge) we are ready in the defense of those Oaths, and
the Protestant Religion to prove against any in an equal conference, that there
is no such power; and for the Statutes let the words themselves decide the
Controversy, which are these:

[Be it enacted, That whosoever shall by Preaching, Teaching, Writing, or open
Speech notify that any eating of Fish, or forbearing of Flesh, mentioued in
this Statute, is of a^y necessity for the saving of the Soul of man, or that it
is the Service of God, otherwise than as other politic Laws are and be, that
then such persons shall be punished as the spreaders of false News are, and
ought to be] And whereas you say the Act determines not any thing about Lent
Fast, it speaks against [eating Flesh on any days now usually observed as
Fish-dayes] and Lent is such. And the sense of the Act for the Lyturgy may
better be tried by this, which is plain, than this reduced to that which is
more obscure.

[The Observation of Saints days is not as of Divine, N. 6. Ans.
but of Ecclesiastical Institution, and therefore it is not necessary that they
should have any other ground in Scripture, than all other Institutions of the
same nature; so that they be agreeable to the Scripture in the general end, for
the promoting ^i^ty; and the observation of them was ancient, as appears by the
Rituals and Lyturgies, and by the joint consent of Antiquity, and by the
ancient Translations of the Bible, as the Syriack and Ethiopick, where the
Lessons appointed for Holy days are noted and set down, the former of which
was made near the Apostles times: Besides, our Savior himself kept a Feast of
the Churches Institution, viz. the Feast of the Dedication, St. John 10. 22.
The chief end of these days being not Feasting, but exercise of Holy Duties,
they are fitter called Holy Days than Feastivals; and though they be all of
like nature, it does not follow that they are equal; the People may be
dispensed with for their work, after the Service, as Authority pleases. The
other names are left in the Calender, not that they should be so kept as
Holy Days, but they are useful for the preservation of their memories, and for
other reasons, as for Leases, Law-dayes, etc.]

Repl. The antiquity of the Translations mentioned, Rep.
is far from being of determinate certainty; we rather wish than hope, that the
Syriack could be proved to be made near the Apostles times. But however the
things being confessed of humane Institution, and no foreign Power having any
authority to command his Majesty's Subjects, and so the imposition being only
by our own Governors, we humbly crave that they may be left indifferent, and
the Unity or Peace of the Church, or Liberty of the Ministers not laid upon
them.

Sect. 1.
[This makes all the Lyturgy void, N. 7. Ans.
if every Minister may put in, and leave out at his discretion.]

Repl. You mistake us; Rep.
we speak not of putting in, and leaving out of the Liturgy; but of having
leave to intermix some Exhortations or Prayers besides, to take off the
deadness which will follow, if there be nothing but the stinted Forms; we would
avoid both the extreme that would have no Forms, and the contrary extreme that
would have nothing but Forms; but if we can have nothing but extremes, there is
no remedy; it is not our fault: And this moderation and mixture which we move
for, is so far from making all the Lyturgy void, that it would do very much to
make it attain its end, and would heal much of the distemper which it
occasioneth, and consequently would do much to preserve the reputation of it.
As for instance, if besides the Forms in the Lyturgy, the Minister might, at
Baptism, the Lords Supper, Marriage, etc. interpose some suitable Exhortation
or Prayer, upon special occasion, when he finds it needful: should you deny
this at the visitation of the sick, it would seem strange; and why may it not
be granted at other times? It is a matter of far greater trouble to us, that
you would deny us and all Ministers the Liberty of using any other Prayers
besides the Lyturgy, than that you impose these.

Sect. 2.
[The Gift, Ans.
or rather Spirit of Prayer, consists in the inward Graces of the Spirit, not
in extempore expressions, which any man of natural parts, having a voluble
tongue, and audacity, may attain to, without any special Gift.]

Repl. All inward Graces of the Spirit, Rep.
are not properly called the Spirit of Pray^r; nor is the Spirit of Prayer,
that Gift of Prayer which we speak of; nor did we call it by the name of a
special Gift; nor did we deny that ordinary men of natural parts, and voluble
tongues may attain it: But yet we humbly conceive, that as there is a Gift of
Preaching, so also of Prayer, which God bestows in the use of means,
diversified much according to men's natural parts, and their diligence, as other
acquired abilities are; but also much depending on that Grace that is indeed
special, which makes men love and relish the holy Subjects of such Spiritual
studies, and the holy exercise of those Graces that are the soul of Prayer, and
consequently making men follow on such exercises with delight and diligence,
and therefore with success; and also God is free in giving or denying his
Blessing to man's endeavors: If you think there be no Gift of Preaching, you
will too dishonourably level the Ministry. If reading be all the Gift of Prayer
or Preaching, there needs no great understanding or learning to it; nor should
Cobblers and Tinkers be so unfit men for the Ministry as they are thought, nor
would the reason be very apparent why a Woman mightnot speak by Preaching or
Praying in the Church.

Sect. 3.
[But if there be any such Gift as is pretended, Ans. Cor. 14.
it is to be subject to the Prophets, and to the Order of the Church.]

Repl. The Text speaks, Rep.
(as Dr. Hammond well shows) of a subjection to that Prophet himself who was
the Speaker: Inspiration excluded not the prudent exercise of Reason; but it is
a strange ordering, that totally excludes the thing ordered. The Gift of
Preaching (as distinct from Reading) is to be orderly, and with due subjection
exercised; but not to be on that pretense extinguished and cast out of the
Church: And indeed if you should command it, you are not to be obeyed, whatever
we suffer. And why then should the Gift of Prayer (distinct from Reading) be
cast out?

Sect. 4.
[The mischiefs that come by idle, Ans.
impertinent, ridiculous, sometimes seditious, impious, and blasphemous
expressions, under pretense of the Gift, to the dishonor of God, and scorn of
Religion, being far greater than the pretended good of exercising the Gift; it
is fit that they who desire such liberty in public devotions, should first
give the Church security, that no private opinions should be put into their
Prayers, as is desired in the first proposal, and that nothing contrary to the
Faith, should be uttered before God, or offered up to him in the Church.]

Repl. The mischiefs which you pretend, Rep.
are inconveniences attending humane imperfeotion, which you would cure with a
mischief. Your Argument from the Abuse, against the Use, is a palpable fallacy,
which cast out Physicians in some Countries, and rooted up Vines in others, and
condemns the reading of the Scriptures in a known tongue among the Papists.
If the Apostles (that complained then so much of divisions, and Preaching false
doctrine, and in envy, and strife) had thought the way of cure had been in
sending Ministers about the world with a Prayer Book or Sermon book, and to
have tied them only to read, either one or both of these, no doubt but they
would have been so regardful of the Church, as to have composed such a
Prayer Book or Sermon book themselves, and not left us to the uncertainties of
an Authority not infallible, nor to the divisions that follow the impositions
of a questionable Power, or that which unquestionably is not universal, and
therefore can procure no universal Concord. If one man among you draw up a Form
of Prayer, it is his single conception; and why a man as learned and able, may
not be trusted to conceive a Prayer for the use of a single Congregation,
without the dangers mentioned by you, as one man to conceive a Prayer for all
the Churches in a Diocese, or a Nation, we know not. These words [that the
mischief is greater than the pretended good] seem to express an unjust
accusation of ordinary conceived Prayer, and a great undervaluing of the
benefits: If you would intimate that the Crimes expressed by you are ordinarily
found in Ministers Prayers, we that hear such much more frequently than you,
must profess we have not found it so (allowing men their different measures of
exactness, as you have even in writing.) Nay, to the praise of God we must say,
that multitudes of private men can ordinarily pray, without any such
imperfection as should nauseate a sober person; and with such seriousness and
aptness of expression, as is greatly to the benefit and comfort of our selves
when we join with them. And if such general accusations may serve in a matter
of public and common fact, there is no way for the justification of the
Innocent: And that it is no such common Guilt, will seem more propable to them
that consider, that such conceived Prayers, both prepared, and extemporate,
have been ordinarily used in the Pulpits in England and Scotland, before our
days till now, and there has been power enough (in the Bishops and others
before the Wars) to punish those that speak ridiculously, seditiously,
impiously, or blasphemously: And yet so few are the instances (even where
jealousy was most busy) of Ministers punished, or once accused of any such
fault in Prayer, as that we find it not easy to remember any considerable
number of them; there being great numbers punished for not reading the Book for
playing on the Lord's days, or for Preaching too often, and such like, for one
that was ever questioned for such kind of praying. And the former showed that
it was not for want of will to be severe, that they spared them as to the
later. And if it be but few that are guilty of any intolerable faults of that
nature in their Prayers, we hope you will not go on to believe that the
mischiefs that come by the failings of those few, are far greater than the
benefit of conceived Prayer by all others: We presume not to make our
experiences the measure of yours, or other men's; you may tell us what does most
good or hurt to your selves, and those that have so communicated their
experiences to you: But we also may speak our own, and others that have
discovered them to us; and we must seriously profess, that we have found far
more benefit to our selves, and to our Congregations (as far as our Conference
and Converse with them, and our observation of the effects allows us to
discern) by conceived Prayers, than by the Book of Common Prayer: we find that
the benefit of conceived Prayers is to keep the mind in serious employment, and
to awaken the affections, and make us fervent and importunate. And the
inconvenience, is, that some weak men are apt, as in Preaching and Conference,
so in Prayer, to show their weakness, by some unapt expressions or disorder;
which is an evil no way to be compared with the forementioned good,
considering that it is but in the weak, and that if that weakness be so great
as to require it, Forms might be imposed on those few, without imposing them on
all for there sakes, (as we force not all to use spectacles or Crutches, because
some are pur-blind or lame,) and considering that God hears not Prayers for
the Rhetoric, and handsome Cadencies and neatness of expressions, but will
bear more with some incuriosity of words (which yet we plead not for) than with
an hypocritical, formal, heartless, lip-service; for he knows the meaning of
the Spirit, even in the groans, which are not uttered in words. And for the
Common Prayer, our observation tells us, that though some can use it
judiciously, seriously, and we doubt not profitably, yet as to the most of the
vulgar, it causes a relaxing of their attention and intention, and a lazy
taking up with a Corpse or image of devotion, even the service of the lips,
while the heart is little sensible of what is said: And had we not known it, we
should have thought it incredible, how utterly ignorant abundance are of the
sense of the words which they hear and repeat themselves from day to day, even
about Christ himself, and the essentials of Christianity: It is wonderful to us
to observe that rational Creatures, can so commonly separate the words from all
the sense and Life. So great a help or hinderance even to the understanding, is
the awakening, or not awakening of the affections, about the things of God: And
we have already showed you many unfit expressions in the Common Prayer Book,
especially in the Epistles and Gospels, through the faultiness of your
Translation, as Ephesians. 3. 15. [Father of all that is called [Father in Heaven and
Earth] and that Christ was found in his apparel as a man] [that Mount Sinai, is
Agar in Arabia, and bordereth upon the City now called Jerusalem] Gal. 4. 25.
[This is the sixth Month which is barren] Luke 1. [And when men be drunk] Joh.
2. with many such like; which are parts of your public Worship: and would you
have us hence conclude, that the mischiefs of such expressions are greater than
all the benefits of that Worship? And yet there is this difference in the
Cases, that weak and rash Ministers were but here and there one, but the Common
Prayer is the Service of every Church and every day: Had we heard any in
extemporary Prayers use such unmeet expressions, we should have thought him
worthy of sharp reprehension, yea, though he had been of the younger or weaker
sort. Diverse other unfit expressions are mentioned, in the exceptions of the
late Archbishop of York, and Primate of Ireland, and others (before spoken of)
and there is much in the prejudice, or diseased curiosity of some Hearers, to
make words seem idle, impertinent, or ridiculous, which are not so (and which
perhaps they understand not): some thought so of the inserting in the late
Prayer Book, the private opinion of the souls of the departed, praying for us,
and our praying for the benefit of their Prayers. As for the Security which you
call for, (though, as is showed, you have given us none at all against such
errors in your Forms, yet) we have before showed you, that you have as much, as
among imperfect men can be expected: The same that you have, that Physicians
shall not murder men, and that Lawyers and Judges shall not undo men, and that
your Pilot shall not cast away the Ship: you have the power in your hands, of
taking or refusing, as they please or displease you; and of judging them by a
known Law, for their proved miscarriages, according to the quality of them; and
what would you have more?

Sect. 5.
[To prevent which mischiefs, Ans.
the former Ages knew no better way, than to forbid any Prayers in public, but
such as were prescribed by public Authority. Con. Carthag. Can. 106. Milen.
Can. 12.]

Repl. To what you allege out of two Councils, Rep.
we answer, 1. The acts of more venerable Councils are not now at all observed,
(as Nice 1. Can. ult. etc.) nor many of these same which you Cite. 2. The
Scripture, and the constant practice of the more ancient Church allowed what
they forbid. 3. Even these Canons show that then the Churches thought not our
Lyturgy to be necessary to their Concord; nor indeed had then any such form
imposed on all, or many Churches to that end; for the Can. of Coun. Carthag.
(we suppose you meant Coun. 3. Can. 23.) mentions Prayers even at the Altar,
and allows any man to describe and use his own Prayers, so he but first cum
instructioribus Fratribus eas confer, take advice about them with the abler
Brethren. If there had been a stated Form before imposed on the Churches, what
room could there be for this course? And even this much seems but a caution
made newly upon some late abuse of Prayer. The same we say, de Council. Malevit.
Can. 12. if they were but a prudentioribus tractatae, vel comprobatae in
Synodo, new Prayers might by any man at any time be brought in; which shows
they had no such stated public Lyturgy, as is now pleaded for; and even this
seems occasioned by Pelagianism, which by this caution they would keep out.

We hope your omission of our eighth Desire (for the use of the new
Translation) intimates your Grant, N. 8.
that it shall be so: But we marvel then that we find among your Concessions
the alteration of no part but the Epistles and Gospels.

[As they would have no Saints days observed by the Church, N. 9. Ans.
so no Apocriphal Chapter read in the Church; but upon such a reason as would
exclude all Sermons, as well as Apocripha, viz. because the holy Scriptures
contain in them all things necessary, either in Doctrine to be believed, or in
duty to be practiced: If so, why so many unnecessary Sermons? why any more but
reading of Scriptures? if notwithstanding their sufficiency, Sermons be
necessary, there is no reason why these Apocriphal Chapters should not be as
useful, most of them containing excellent Discourses, and Rules of morality; it
is heartily to be wished that Sermons were as good: if their fear be, that by
this means those Books may come to be of equal esteem with the Canon, they may
be secured against that by the title which the Church has put upon them,
calling them Apocriphal; and it is the Churches Testimony which teaches us
this difference; and to leave them out, were to cross the Practice of the
Church in former Ages.]

Repl. We hoped when our desires were delivered in writing, Rep.
they would have been better observed and understood; we asked not [that no
Apocriphal Chapter may be read in the Church] but that none may be read [as
Lessons:] For so the Chapters of holy Scripture there read are called in the
Boo^; and to read them in the same place, under the same Title, without any
sufficient note of distinction, or notice given to the People, that they are
not Canonical Scripture (they being also bound with our Bibles) is such a
temptation to the vulgar to take them for Gods Word, as does much prevail, and
is like to do so still: And when Papists second it with their confident
affirmations, that the Apocriphal Books are Canonical, (well refelled by one of
you, the R. Reverend Bishop of Durham,) we should not needlessly help on their
success. If you cite the Apocripha as you do other human Writings, or read them
as Homilies, (when and where there is reason to read such) we spoke not against
it. To say that the People are secured by the Churches calling them Apocripha,
is of no force till experience be proved to be disregardable, and till you have
proved that the Minister is to tell the People at the reading of ever such
Chapter, that it is but Apocriphal, and that the People all understand Greek,
so well as to know what Apocriphal signifies. The more sacred and honorable
are these Dictates of the holy Ghost recorded in Scripture, the greater is the
sin by reading the Apocripha, without sufficient distinction to make the People
believe, that the Writings of man are the Revelation and Laws of God: And also
we speak against the reading of the Apocripha, as it excludes much of the
Canonical Scriptures, and takes in such Books in their steads, as are commonly
reputed fabulous. By thus much you may see how you lost your Answer by
mistaking us, and how much you will sin against God by denying our desires.

[That the Minister should not read the Communion Service at the Communion
Table, N. 10. Ans.
is not reasonable to demand, since all the Primitive Church used it; and if we
do not observe that Golden Rule of the venerable Council of Nice [let ancient
Customs prevail] till reason plainly requires the contrary, we shall give
offense to sober Christians, by a causless departure from Catholic usage, and
a greater advantage to enemies of our Church, then our Brethren I hope would
willingly grant. The Priest standing at the Communion Table, seems to give us
an invitation to the holy Sacrament, and minds us of our duty, viz. to receive
the holy Communion, some at least every Sunday; and though we neglect our duty,
it is fit the Church should keep her standing.

Repl. We doubt not but one place in it self, Rep.
is as lawful as another; but when you make such differences as have misleading
intimations, we desire it may be forborne. That all the Primitive Church used
when there was no Communion in the Sacrament, to say Service at the Communion
Table, is a crude Assertion, that must have better proof before we take it for
convincing; And it is not probable, because they had a Communion every Lords
day; And if this be not your meaning, you say nothing to the purpose: To prove
they used it when there was a Communion, is no proof that they used it when
there was none: And you your selves disuse many things more Universally
practiced then this can at all be fairly pretended to have bin: The Council of
Nice gives no such golden Rule as you mention; A Rule is a general, applyable
to particular Cases; The Council only speaks of one particular. [Let the
ancient Custom continue in Egypt, Lybia, and Pentapolis, that the Bishop of
Alexandria have the Power of them all.] The Council here confirms this
particular Custom, but does not determine in general of the Authority of
Custom. That this should be called a Catholic usage, shows us how partially
the word (Catholic) is sometime taken: And that this much cannot be granted
us, lest we advantage the Enemies of the Church, does make us wonder whom you
take for its Enemies, and what is that advantage which this will give them; But
we thank you that here we find our selves called Brethren, when before we are
not so much as spoken to, but your speech is directed to some other (we know
not whom) concerning us. Your reason is that which is our reason to the
contrary; you say [the Priest standing at the Communion Table, seems to give us
an invitation to the Holy Communion, etc.] What! when there is no Sacrament by
himself or us intended? no warning of any given? no Bread and Wine prepared? Be
not deceived, God is not mocked. Therefore we desire that there may be no such
Service at the Table, when no Communion is intended, because we would not have
such gross dissimulation used in so Holy things, as thereby to seem (as you
say) to invite Guests when the Feast is not prepared, and if they came we would
turn them empty away. Indeed, if it were to be a private Mass, and the Priest
were to receive alone for want of Company, and it were really desired that the
People should come, it were another matter. Moreover there is no Rubric
requiring this Service at the Table when there is no Communion.

[It is not reasonable that the Word Minister should be only used in the
Liturgy: N. 11. Ans.
for since some parts of the Liturgy may be performed by a Deacon, others by
none under the order of a Priest, viz. Absolution, Consecration; it is fit that
some such word as Priest should be used for those Offices, and not Minister,
which signifies at large every one that ministers in that holy Office, of what
order soever he be. The word Curate signifying properly all those, who are
trusted by the Bishops with Cure of Souls, as anciently it signified, is a very
fit word to be used, and can offend no sober Person. The word [Sunday] is
ancient, Just. Martyr Ap. 2. and therefore not to be left off.]

Repl. The word [Minister] may well be used instead of Priest, Repl.
and Curate, though the word [Deacon] for necessary distinction, stand: yet we
doubt not but [Priest] as it is but the English of Presbyter, is lawful: but it
is from the common danger of mistake, and abuse that we argue. That all Pastors
else are but the Bishops Curates, is a Doctrine that declares the heavy charge,
and account of the Bishops, and tends much to the ease of the Presbyters minds,
if it could be proved: If by [Curates] you mean such as have not directly by
Divine obligation the Cure of Souls, but only by the Bishops Deligation: But
if the Office of a Presbyter be not of Divine Right; and so, if they be not the
Curates of Christ, and Pastors of the Church, none are. And for the ancient use
of it, we find not that it was so from the beginning: And as there is difference
between the ancient Bishops of one single Church, and a Diocesan that has many
hundreds; so is there between their Curates. But why will ye not yield so much
as to change the word [Sunday] into [the Lords Day] when you know that the
later is the name used by the holy Ghost in Scripture, and commonly by the
Ancient Writers of the Church, and more becoming Christians. Just. Martyr,
speaking to Infidels, tells how they called the day, and not how Christians
called it: All he says is that on Sunday (that is, so called by the Heathens)
the Christians hold their Meetings: see the usage of the Church in this point
in August. Cont. Faustum Manich. lib. 18. cap. 5.

[Singing of Psalms in Meeter is no part of the Lyturgy, N. 12. Ans.
and so no part of our Commission.]

Repl. If the word Lyturgy signify the public worship, Rep.
God forbid you should exclude the singing of Psalms: And sure you have no
fitter way of singing then in Meeter: When these, and all Prayers conceived by
private men (as you call the Pastors) whether prepared or extemporary, (and by
purity of reason Preaching) are cast out, what will your Lyturgy be? We hope
you make no question whether singing Psalms, and Hymns, were part of the
Primitive Lyturgy: And seeing they are set forth and allowed to be sung in all
Churches, of all the People together, why should they be denied to be part of
the Lyturgy: we understand not the reason of this. N. 13. 14. we suppose you
grant by passing them by.

[The Phrase is such, N. 15. Ans.
etc.] The Church in her Prayers uses no more offensive Phrase, then Saint Paul
uses, when he writes to the Corinthians, Galatians and others, calling them in
general, the Churches of God, sanctified in Christ Jesus, by vocation Saints;
amongst whom notwithstanding there were many, who by their known sins (which
the Apostle endeavored to amend in them) were not properly such, yet he gives
the denomiation to the whole, from the greater part, to whom in Charity it was
due, and puts the rest in mind, what they have by their Baptism undertaken to
be, and what they profess themselves to be; and our Prayers, and the Phrase of
them surely, supposes no more then that they are Saints by calling, sanctified
in Christ Jesus, by their Baptism admitted into Christ's Congregation, and so
to be reckoned Members of that Society, till either they shall separate
themselves by wilful Schism, or be separated by Legal Excommunication, which
they seem earnestly to desire, and so do we.]

Repl. But is there not a very great difference between the Titles given to the
whole Church (as you say, from the greater part, as the truth is from the
better part, though it were the less) and the Titles given to individual
members, where there is no such reason? We will call the Field a Corn-field,
though their be much Tares in it, because of the better part which
denominateth: But we will not call every one of these Tares by the name of
Corn. When we speak of the Church, we will call it holy, as Paul does; but when
we speak to Simon Magus, we will not call him holy, but say [Thou art in the
Gall of bitterness, and the bond of Iniquity, and have no part, or lot in this
matter, etc.] we will not persuade the People that every notorious Drunkard,
Fornicator, Worldling, etc. that is buried, is a Brother, of whose Resurrection
to Life Eternal we have sure and certain hope; and all because you will not
Excommunicate them; We are glad to hear of your desire of such Discipline: But
when shall we see more then desire? and the Edge of it be turned from those
that fear sinning, to those that fear it not?

Sect. 1.
[The Connection of the parts of our Lyturgy, N. 16.
is conformable to the example of the Churches of God before us, and have as
much dependence as is usually to be seen, in many Petitions of the same Psalm;
And we conceive the Order and Method to be excellent, and must do so, till they
tell us what that Order is which Prayers ought to have, which is not done here.]

Repl. There are two Rules of Prayer; Rep.
one is the Nature of the things compared (in matter and order) with nature and
necessity: The other is the revealed Will of God in his Word, in General the
holy Scripture, more Especially the Lords Prayer: The Lyturgy (for the greatest
part of the Prayers for daily use) is confused, by which soever of these you
measure it. You seem much to honor the Lords Prayer by your frequent use of
it, (or part of it) we beseech you dishonor it not Practically, by denying it
for matter and order, to be the only ordinary and perfect Rule; we know about
particular Administrations, where it is but certain Select Requests that we are
to put up, suited to the particular subject and occasion, we cannot follow the
whole Method of the Lords Prayer which contains the heads of all the parts,
where we are not to take in all the parts; we cannot take them in that order:
But that none of all your Prayers should be formed to that perfect Rule; that
your Letany which is the comprehensive Prayer, and that the body of your daily
Prayers (broken into severy Collects) should not (as set together) have any
considerable respect unto that order, nor yet to the order which reason, and
the nature of the thing requires, (which is observed in all things else) and
yet that you should so admire this, and be so tenatious of that, which in
conceived Prayer you would call by worse names then Confusions, this shows us
the power of prejudice: We were thus brief in this Exception, lest we should
offend by instances: But seeing you conceive the Order and Method to be
excellent, and to be willing to hear more as to this, and the following
Exception, we shall, when you desire it, give you a Catalogue of Defects, and
Disorders, which we before forbore to give you. The Psalms have ordinarily an
observable Method: If you find any whole parts you cannot so well set together,
as to see the Beauty of Method, will you turn your eye from the rest, and from
the Lords Prayer, and choose that one for your President? or excuse disorder on
that pretense?

Sect. 2.
[The Collects are made short, Ans.
as being best for Devotion, as we observed before, and cannot be accounted
faulty, for being like those short, but prevalent Prayers in Scripture; Lord be
merciful to me a Sinner. Son of David, have mercy on us. Lord increase our
Faith.]

Repl. We do in common speech call that a Prayer, Rep.
which contains all the substance of what in that business, and address we
have to say unto God: And that a Petition, which contains one single request:
usually a Prayer, has many Petitions. Now if you intend in your address unto
God, to do no more then speak a transient request, or Ejaculation (which we may
do in the midst of other business) then indeed your instances are pertinent;
but why then do you not give over when you seem to have done, but come again,
and again, and offer as many Prayers almost as Petitions. This is to make the
Prayer short, (as a Sermon is, that is cut into single sentences, every
Sentence having an Exordium, and Epilogue as a Sermon) but it is to make the
Prayers much longer, then is needful or suitable to the matter. Do you find this
the way of the Saints in Scripture? indeed Abraham did so, when Gods
Interlocution answering the first Prayer, called him to vary his request, Genesis
18. but that is not our Case. The P^alms, and Prayers of David, Solomon,
Hezekiah, Asa, Ezra, Nehemiah, Daniel, and the other Prophets; of Christ, John
17. are usually one continued Speech, and not like yours (as we said before.)

Sect. 3.
[Why the repeated mention of the Name and Attributes of God, Ans.
should not be most pleasing to any godly Person we cannot imagine; or what
burden it should seem, when David magnified one Attribute of Gods mercy 26.
times together; Psalm 36. Nor can we conceive, why the Name and Merits of
Jesus, with which all our Prayers should end, should not be as sweet to us as
to former Saints, and Martyrs, with which here they complain our Prayers, do so
frequently end; since the Attributes of God, are the ground of our hope of
obtaining all our Petitions, such Prefaces of Prayers as are taken from them,
though they have no special respect to the Petitions as following, are not to
be termed unsuitable, or said to have fallen rather casually then orderly.]

Repl. As we took it to be no controversy between us, Rep.
whether the mention of Gods Name is deservedly sweet to all his servants, so
we thought it was none, that this reverent Name is reverently to be used, and
not too lightly; and therefore not with a causeless frequency tossed in men's
mouths, even in Prayer it self: and that Tautologies and vain repetitions, are
not the better, but the worse, because Gods Name is made the matter of them: Is
it not you that have expressed your offense (as well as we) against those weak
Ministers that repeat too frequently the Name and Attributes of God, in their
extemporary Prayers? and is it ill in them? and is the same, and much more,
well in the Common Prayer? Oh, have not the Faith of Worship of our Glorious
God, in respect of Persons. Let not that be called rediculous, idle,
impertinent, or worse in one, which is accounted commendable in others. Do you
think it were not a faulty crossing of the mind, and Method of Jesus Christ, if
you should make six Prayers of the six Petitions of the Lords Prayer, and set
the Preface and Conclusion unto each. As, [Our Father which art in Heaven,
hallowed be thy Name, for thine is the Kingdom, etc.] and so on all the rest.
Yet we know that the same words may be often repeated (as David does Gods
enduring mercy) without such Tautological vanity, when it is not from
emptiness, or neglect of order, or affectation; But in Psalms, or Hymns, where
affections are to be elevated by such Figurative Elegancies, and strains, as
are best beseeming Poetry or rapture, we are not against such Repetitions. But
if we may (according to the Common Prayer Book) begin, and end, and begin, and
seem to withdraw again, and make a Prayer of every Petition or two, and begin
and end every such Petition, with Gods Name, and Christ's Merits, as making up
half the Form, or near; nothing is an affected, empty tossing of Gods Name in
Prayer, if this be not? We are persuaded if you should hear a man in a known
extemporary Prayer do thus, it would seem strange and harsh, even to your
selves.

Sect. 1. N. 17. Exc. 1. Ans.

[There are besides a preparative exhortation, several preparatory Prayers.
Despise not, O Lord, humble and contrite hearts, which is one of the Sentences
in the Preface; And this, That those things may please him, which we do at this
present; at the end of the Absolution: and again immediately after the Lords
Prayer before the Psalmody, Oh Lord open thou our Lips, etc.]

Repl. [Despise not O Lord humble, Rep.
and contrite hearts] is no Prayer for assistance, and acceptance in that
worship, suited to the duty of a People addressing themselves to God: But it is
recited, as a Scripture invitation to Repentance. And [that those things may
please him which we do at this present] are no words of Prayer, but part of an
exhortation to the People: And [O Lord open thou our lips] comes after the
Exhortation, Confession, Absolution and Lords Prayer, and (ergo) is not in the
place of such an address as we are speaking of. What will not serve to justify
that which we have a mind to justify, and to condemn that which we have a mind
to condemn?

Sect. 2.
[This which they call a defect, Ans.
others think they have reason to account the perfection of the Lyturgie, the
Offices of which being intended for common, and general Services would cease to
be such, by descending to particulars; as in Confession of Sins, while it is
general, all persons may and must join in it, since in many things we offend
all; but if there be a particular enumeration of Sins, it cannot be so general
a Confession, because it may happen that some or other, may by Gods Grace have
been preserved from some of those sins enumerated, and therefore should, by
confessing themselves guilty, tell God a lie, which needs a new Confession.]

Repl. If General words be its Perfection, Rep.
it is very culpable in tediousness and vain repetitions: For, what need you
more than [Lord be merciful to us sinners?] There Is together a general
Confession of Sin, and a general Prayer for Mercy, which comprehend all the
particulars of the Peoples Sins and wants. We gave you our Reason, which you
answer not. Confession is the exercise of Repentance, and also the helper of
it; and it is no true Repentance which is not particular, but only general. If
you say, you repent that you have sinned, and know not wherein, or do not
repent of any particular sin, you do not indeed repent; for sin is not
existent, but in the individuals: And if you ask for Grace, and know no what
Grace, or desire no particular Grace, indeed you desire no Grace at all. We
know there is time and use for general Confessions and Requests; but still, as
implying particulars, as having gone before or following; or at least it must
be supposed that the People understand the particulars included, and have
inward Confessions and desires of them; which cannot here be supposed, when
they are not at all mentioned, nor can the People generally be supposed to have
such quick and comprehensive minds; nor is there leisure to exercise such
particular Repentance or desire, while a general is named. And we beseech you,
let the Scripture be judge, whether the Confessions and Prayers of the Servants
of God have not been particular? As to your Objection or Reason, we answer. 1.
There are general Prayers, with the particular or without them. 2. There are
particular Confessions and Prayers, proper to some few Christians, and there
are others common to all: It is these that we expect, and not the former. 3.
The Churches Prayers must be suited to the Body of the Assembly, though perhaps
some one or few, may be in a state not fit for such expressions. What a
lamentable Lyturgy will you have, if you have nothing in it, but what every one
in the Congregation may say as true of, and suitable to themselves? Then you
must leave out all thanksgiving, for our Justification and forgiveness of Sins,
and Adoption, and title to Glory, etc. because many in the Assembly are
Hypocrites, and have no such mercies; and many more that are sincere, are
mistaken in their own Condition, and know not that they have the mercies which
they have, and therefore dare not give thanks for them, lest they speak an
untruth. Then the Lyturgy that now speaks, as in the persons of the sanctified,
must be changed, that the two forementioned sorts (or the later at least) may
consent; and when you have done, it will be unsuitable to those that are in a
better state, and have the knowledge of their Justification. This is the
Argument which the Sectaries used against singing of David's Psalms in the
Congregations, because there is much in them that many cannot truly say of
themselves: But the Church must not go out of that way of Worship prescribed by
God, and suited to the state of the ordinary sort of spiritual worshippers,
because of the distempers, or super-eminent excellencies of some few. It were
easy to go over David's Psalms, and your own Lyturgy, and show you very much,
that by this Argument, must be cast out. He that finds any passage unsuitable
to himself, is not to speak it of himself.

Sect. 3.
[As for Original Sin, Ans.
though we think it an evil Custom, springing from false Doctrine, to use any
such expressions as may lead people to think, that to the persons baptized (in
whose persons only our Prayers are offered up) Original Sin is not forgiven in
their holy Baptism; yet for that there remains in the Regenerate, some relics
of that, which are to be bewailed; the Church in her Confession acknowledges
such desires of our own hearts, as render us miserable by following them; That
there is no health in us; That without Gods help our frailty cannot but fall;
That our mortal nature can do no good thing without him, which is a clear
acknowledgement of original sin.]

Repl. 1. He that has his Original Sin forgiven him, Rep.
may well confess, that he was born in Iniquity, and conceived in Sin, and was
by nature a Child of Wrath, and that by one man sin entered into the World; and
that Judgment came on all men to condemnation, etc. The pardoned may confess
what once they were, and from what Rock they were hewn; even actual sins must
be confessed after they are forgiven (unless the Antinomians hold the truth
against us in such points) 2. All is not false Doctrine that crosses men's
private opinions, which you seem here to obtrude upon us. We know that the
Papists (and perhaps some others) hold that all the baptized are delivered from
the guilt of Original Sin: But (as they are in the dark, and disagreed in the
application of it, so) we have more reason to incline to either of the ordinary
opinions of the Protestants, than to this of theirs. 1. Some learned
Protestants hold, that visibly all the baptized are Church Members pardoned and
justified; which is, but that they are probably justified indeed, and are to be
used by the Church (upon a judgment of Charity) as those that are really
justified; but that we have indeed no certainty that they are so, God keeping
that as a secret to himself concerning individuals, till by actual Faith and
Repentance, it be manifest to themselves. Another opinion of many Protestants
is, that all persons that are Children of the Promise, or that have the
conditions of pardon and justification in the Covenant mentioned, are to
receive that pardon by Baptism: And all such are pardoned, and certainly in a
state of justification and salvation thereupon. And that the Promise of pardon
is made to the faithful and their Seed, and therefore that all the faithful and
their Seed in infancy, have this pardon given them by the promise, and solemnly
delivered them, and sealed to them by Baptism, which investeth them in the
benefits of the Covenant: but withal, that 1. The professed Infidel and his
Seed, as such, are not the Children of the Promise, and therefore if the Parent
ludicrously or forcedly, or the Child by error be baptized, they have not
thereby the pardon of their sins before God. 2. That the Hypocrite, that is not
a true Believer at the heart, though he profess it, has no pardon by Baptism
before God, as being not an Heir of the Promise, nor yet any Infant of his as
such: But though such are not pardoned, the Church that judges by profession,
taking Professors for Believers, must accordingly use them and their Seed. 3.
But though the Church judge thus charitably, of each Professor in particular,
till his Hypocrisy be detected, yet does it understand that Hypocrites there
are, and still will be in the Church, though we know them not by name; and that
therefore there are many externally baptized, and in Communion, that never had
the pardon of sin indeed before God, as not having the condition of the Promise
of pardon; such as Simon Magus was: We have less reason to take this Doctrine
for false, than that which pronounces certain pardon and salvation to all
baptized Infants whatsoever. And were we of their Judgment, we should think it
the most charitable act in the world, to take the Infants of Heathens and
baptize them; and if any should then dispatch them all to prevent their lapse,
they were all certainly saved. We hope by [some Reliques] you mean that which
is truly and properly Sin: for our parts, we believe according to the 9th.
Article [That Original Sin stands in the corruption of the nature of every
man, whereby man is far gone from original Righteousness, and inclined to evil:
And that this infection of nature does remain in the Regenerate. And though
there is no Condemnation against them that believe and are baptized, yet
Concupiscense and Lust has of it self the nature of sin] You say [the Church
acknowledges such desires, etc.] Devices and desires are Actual sins, and not
Original, which consists in privation, and corrupt inclination. The next
words [There is no Health in us] it seems the Translators that put it into the
Lyturgy misunderstood; but however you seem here plainly, by your
misinterpretation, to misunderstand it. Nulla salus in nobis, is spoken
actively, and not possessively, or passively. The plain sense is, there is no
Help, Deliverance, or Salvation in our selves; we cannot help our selves out of
this misery, but must have a better Savior. As Christ is often called our
Salvation, so we are denied to be our own: So that yet here is no Confession at
all of Original Sin, but of the effects. The two next Sentences, confess a
debility and privation, but not that it was ab Origin; but may for any thing
that is there said be taken to be since contracted. Nor are the words in this
Confession, but in some other Collects elsewhere, which proves not that this
Confession says any thing of Original Sin.

Sect. 4.
[We know not what public Prayers are wanting, Ans.
nor do they tell us: the usual Complaint has been, that there were too many;
neither do we conceive any want of public thanksgivings, there being in the
Lyturgy, Te Deum, Benedictus, Magnificat, Benedicite, Glory be to God on high;
therefore with Angels, and Archangels, the Doxology, Glory be to the Father,
etc. all peculiar, as they require to Gospel Worship, and fit to express our
thanks and honor to God, upon every particular occasion, and occasional
Thanksgivings after the Letany, of the frequency whereof themselves elsewhere
complain, who here complain of defect, if there be any Forms wanting, the
Church will provide.]

Repl. Rep.
We have showed you in the Forms we offered you, what we judge wanting. The R.
Reverend Bishop of Exeter, has taken notice of the same want, and proposed a
supply. Those you name, are either but general Sentences, or extend but to some
few particulars, as being suited to the persons, and particular occasions of
them, and none save the Te Deum designed to be the distinct Praise of the
Church, for the benefits of Redemption, as the suitable and sufficient
performance of this great part of the Lyturgy: However it will do you no harm,
that your Brethren be gratified with fuller expressions, and variety. They that
have complained of too many (because you shred your Petitions into almost as
many Prayers, and so the Thanksgivings into such briefs) yet complained not of
too much; but that too many, by the multitude of Prefaces and Epilogues, was
the cause of too little.

Sect. 5.
[They complain that the Lyturgy contains too many generals, Ans.
without mention of the particulars, and the instances are such Petitions as
these, [That we may do Gods Will] [To be kept from all Evil] almost the very
terms of the Petitions of the Lords Prayer; so that they must reform that,
before they can pretend to mend our Lyturgy in these Petitions.]

Repl. Rep.
We complain not that there are Generals, but that there is nothing but
Generals in so great a part of your Prayers; and therefore they are very
defective. And if really these Generals suffice you, a few lines may serve
instead of your whole Book: Instead of all your Confessions, it may serve to
say, that [we have greatly sinned] and no more; instead of all your Letany or
deprecations, it is enough to say [Deliver us from all Evil] instead of all
your Petitions for Grace, Peace, Rain, fair Weather, Health, etc. it is enough
to say [Give us the Good we want] Indeed the Lords Prayer has general
Requests, because it is the design of it to be the Rule of Prayer, and so
contain but the Heads to which all Prayers are to be reduced. But if therefore
you will have no more particulars, why do you use any Prayer but the Lords
Prayer? We hope you do not think to supply any defects pretended to be found in
its Generals, nor to correct the order of it: If it be but because you would
not on every particular occasion be so large, as to say the whole, you may take
that Head, which suiteth that occasion; and so [give us this day our daily
Bread] may serve instead of all the Collects for temporal Supplies: And all
your O^fices may be blotted out, and one of the Petitions of the Lords Prayer
placed in the stead of each of them.

Sect. 6.
[We have deferred this to the proper place, Ans.
as you might have done.]

Repl. Rep.
It was the proper place under the Head of defectiveness, to instance in this
as well as other defects.

Sect. 1.
[We are now come to the main and principal demand, Ans. N. 18.
as is pretended, viz. the abolishing the Laws, which impose any Ceremonies,
especially three, the Surplice, the sign of the Cross, and kneeling; these are
the yoke, which if removed, there might be peace. It is to be suspected, and
there is reason for it, from their own words, that somewhat else pinches, and
that if these Ceremonies were laid aside, and these or any other Prayers,
strictly enjoined without them, it would be deemed a burden intolerable; it
seems so by N. 7. where they desire, that when the Lyturgy is altered,
according to the rest of their Proposals, the Minister may have liberty to add,
and leave out, what he pleases; yet because the imposition of these Ceremonies,
is pretended to be the insupportable grievance, we must of necessity, either
yield that demand, or show them reason why we do not; and that we may proceed
the better in this undertaking, we shall reduce the sum of their Complaint, to
these several Heads, as we find them in their Papers. The Law for imposing
these Ceremonies, they would have abrogated for these Reasons.

Repl. Rep.
To what you object (to intimate your suspicion of us) from N. 7. we have
before answered: We must profess the abatement of Ceremonies, with the
exclusion of all Prayers and Exhortations, besides what is read, will not
satisfy us. The Liberty which we desired in all the parts of Worship (not to
add to the Lyturgy, or take from it, but to interpose upon just occasion, such
words of Prayer or Exhortation as are requisite, and not to be tied at every
time to read the whole) we are assured will do much to preserve the Lyturgy,
and bring it into more profitable use, and take off much of men's offense: And
pardon us while we tell you this certain truth, that if once it be known, that
you have a design to work out all Prayers (even those of the Pulpit) except
such as you prescribe, it will make many thousand people fearing God, to be
averse to that which else they would have submitted to, and to distaste both
your endeavors and ours, as if we were about drawing them into so great a
snare: And as the Proverb is, you may as well think to make a Coat for the
Moon, as to make a Lyturgy that shall be sufficiently suited to the variety of
places, times, subjects, accidents, without the liberty of intermixing such
Prayers or Exhortations, as alterations and diversities require.

Sect. 2.
[First, It is doubtful, whether God has given power to men to impose such
siguificant signs, Ans.
which though they call them significant, yet have in them no real goodness in
the judgment of the imposers themselves, being called by them things
indifferent, and therefore fall not under St. Paul's Rule of omnia decenter,
Cor. 14.
nor are suitable to the simplicity of Gospel Worship.

Secondly, Because it is a violation of the Royalty of Christ, and an
impeachment of his Laws, as unsufficient; and so those that are under the Law
of, See Hooker l. 3. sect. 4.
Deuteronomy. 12. Whatsoever I command you, observe to do, you shall take nothing from
it, nor add any thing to it. You do not observe these.

Thirdly, Because sundry Learned, Pious, and Orthodox men, have ever since the
Reformation, judged them unwarrantable, and we ought to be as our Lord was,
tender of weak Brethren, not to offend his little ones, nor to lay a
stumbling block before a weak Brother.

Fourthly, See Hooker l. 4. sect, 1.
Because these Ceremonies have been the Fountain of many evils in this Church
and Nation, occasioning sad divisions betwixt Minister and Minister, betwixt
Minister and People, exposing many Orthodox Preachers to the displeasure of
Rulers, and no other fruits than these can be looked for, from the retaining of
these Ceremonies.]

Repl. Rep.
We had rather you had taken our reasons, as we laid them down, than to have so
altered them; E. G. having told you, that some hold them unlawful, and others
inconvenient, etc. and desired that they may not be imposed on such who judge
such impositions, a violation of the Royalty of Christ, etc. you seem to take
this as our own sense, and that of all the Ceremonies, of which we there made
no mention; You refer us to Hooker, since whose Writings, Ames in his fresh
Suit, and Bradshaw, and Parker, and many others have written that against the
Ceremonies, that never was answered that we know of, but deserve your
Consideration.

Sect. 3. Ans.

[Before we give particular Answers to these several Reasons, it will be not
unnecessary to lay down, some certain general Premises, or Rules, which will be
useful in our whole discourse. First, That God has not given a Power only,
but a Command also of imposing whatsoever shall be truly decent, and becoming
his Public Service, 1 Cor. 14. After St. Paul had ordered some particular
Rules for Praying, praising, prophesying, etc. he concludes with this general
Canon, let all things be done (...) in a fit Scheme, Habit, or Fashion,
Decently; and that there may be Uniformity in those Decent performances, let
there be a (...), Rule or Canon for that purpose.]

Rep. Repl.
As to your first Rule, we answer. 1. It is one thing to impose in general that
all be done Decently, and in Order; This Cod himself has imposed by his
Apostle: And its another thing to impose in particular, that this or that be
used as Decent and Orderly. Concerning this we add, It is in the Text said [let
it be done:] but not [let it be imposed,] yet from other Scriptures we doubt
not but more Circumstances of Decency and Order, as derermined time, place,
Utensils, etc. which are common to things Civil, and Sacred, (though not the
Symbolical Ceremonies which afterward we confute) may be imposed, with the
necessary cautions, and Limitations afterward laid down. But 1. That if any
Usurpers will pretend a Power from Christ to impose such things on the Church,
though the things be lawful, we must take heed how we acknowledge an Usurped
Power by formal obedience. 2. A just Power may impose them, but to just ends:
as the preservarion, and success of the Modified worship, or Ordinances: And if
they really conduce not to those ends they sin in imposing them. 3. Yet the
Subjects are bound to obey a true Authority in such impositions, where the
matter belongs to the Cognizance and Office of the Ruler; and where the mistake
is not so great as to bring greater mischiefs to the Church, then the
suspending of our Active obedience would do. 4. But if these things be
determined under pretense of Order, and Decency, to the plain destruction of
the Ordinances Modified, and of the intended end, they cease to be means, and
we must not use them. 5. Or if under the names of things Decent, and of Order,
men will meddle with things that belong not to their Office, as to institute a
new worship for God, new Sacraments, or any thing forbidden in the General
Prohibition of adding, or diminishing; this is an usurpation, and not an Act of
Authority, and we are bound in obedience to God, to disobey them. 6. Where
Governors may command at set times, and by proportionable penalties enforce,
if they command when it will destroy the end, or enforce by such penalties as
dest^oy, or cross it, they greatly sin by such Commands. Thus we have more
distinctly given you our sense, about the matter of your first Rule.

Sect. 4.
[Not Inferiors but Superiors must judge what is convenient and decent; Answ.
Rule 2.
They who must order that all be done decently, must of necessity, first judge
what is convenient, and decent to be ordered.]

Repl. Repl.
Your second Rule also is too crudely delivered, and therefore we must add: 1.
A Judgment is a Sentence, in order to some Execution; and Judgments are
specified from the ends, to which they are such means; When the question is
either, [what Law shall be made, or what penalty shall be exercised?] the
Magistrate is the only judge, and not the Bishop or other Subject. In the first
he exercises his judicium discretionis, in order to a public Act. In the
second he exercises a public Judgment: When the question is, [what order pro
tempore is fittest in Circumstantials for this present Congregation?] the
proper Presbyters or Pastors of that Congregation, are the Directive Judges, by
Gods appointment. 3. The Magistrate is Ruler of these Pastors, as he is of the
Physicians, Philosophers, and other Subjects. He may make them such general
Rules, especially for restraint, to go by, as may not destroy the exercise of
their own Pastoral power: As he may forbid a Physician to use some dangerous
Medicine on his Subjects, and may punish him when he wilfully kills any of
them: But may not on that pretense appoint him what, and how, and when, and to
whom he shall administer, and so become Physician himself alone. 4. When the
question is, [Who shall be excluded from the Communion of a particular Church?]
The Pastors of that Church (or Congregation) are the first proper Judges. 5.
When the question is, [Who shall be excluded from, (or received into) the
Communion of all the associated Churches, of which we are naturally capable of
Communion?] The associated Pastors or Bishops of these Churches in Synods, are
Judges; Beyond this there are no Judges.

6. When the question is, [Whether the Laws of Magistrates, or Canons of
Bishops, are agreeable or not to the Word of God, and so the obedience is
lawful or unlawful?] the Consciences of each individual Subject is the Judge,
per judicium discretionis, as to his own practice; And if men had not this
judgment of discerning, but must act upon absolute implicit obedience; then
first, man were ruled as unreasonable; Secondly the Magistrate were made a God,
or such a Leviathan, as Hobbs describes him; Thirdly, And then all sin might
lawfully be committed, if commanded: But we are assured none of this is your
sense.

Sect. 5.
[These Rules and Canons for decency made and urged by Superiors; Answ. Rule
3. Heb. 13. 17. Romans 13
are to be obeyed by Inferiors, till it be made as clear, that now they are
not bound to obey, as it is evident in general, that they ought to obey
Superiors; for if the exemption from obedience be not as evident as the
Command to obey, it must needs be sin not to obey.]

Repl. Repl.
To your third Rule we add; It is first considerable, what the thing is? and
then, how it is apprehended? if it be really lawful, and well commanded, and to
be obeyed, it is no ignorance, doubt or error of the Subject, that can exempt
him from the duty of obeying; But it may ensnare him in a certainty of sinning,
whether he obey, or disobey: For as God commands him to obey, and also not to
do that which man commands, when God forbids it; So he obliges the
erroneous, first to lay down his errors, and so to obey. But if a thing be
forbidden of God, and commanded of man, and one man erroniously thinks it
lawful, and that he should obey, and another is in doubt between both, it is
neither a duty, nor lawful for either of them here to obey: For man's error
changes not Gods Laws, nor disobligeth himself from obedience; But this man's
duty is both, to lay by that error, and to refuse obedience: But if the
question be only of the order of such a persons duty: We answer; If the thing
be really lawful, and obedience a duty, then he that doubts or erreth, should
if possible suddenly lay by his errors or doubt, and so obey: But if that
cannot be, he should first go about the fittest means, for his better
information till he be resolved, and so obey. And so on the contrary, if really
the thing commanded be unlawful, if he be sure of it, he must resolve against
it; if he hesitate, he is not therefore allowed to do a thing forbidden,
because he is ignorant: For his ignorance is supposed culpable it self; but he
is first to consult and use the best means, for his Instruction, till he know
the truth, and in the mean time to suspend his Act. But yet because of humane
frailty, between several faults, we must consider when we cannot avoid all as
we would, in what order most safely to watch and to avoid them. And so when I
have done my best, and cannot discern whether a Command be just, and the thing
lawful or not; If it has the face of Idolatry, Blasphemy, or some h^inous Sin,
that is commanded; and our disobedience have the appearance, but of an effect
of involuntary Ignorance, it is more excusable in us to fear the greater sin,
and so to suspend till we are better satisfied, than to do that which we
suspect, to be so heinous a Sin, though indeed it prove no sin; So on the
contrary, if our obedience be like to bring Infamy or Calamity on the Church,
and our Obedience appear to be but about a very small sin, if we doubt of it,
it is more excuseable to obey, than to disobey, though both be faulty,
supposing the thing to be indeed unlawful, and we discern it not. So that your
Rule of obeying, where you are not as sure, etc. Is an unsure Rule, unless as
we have fullier cautioned it.

Sect. 6.
[Pretence of Conscience is no exemption from obedience, A^sw. Rule 4.
for the Law as long as it is a Law, certainly binds to obedience; Romans 13. Ye
must needs be subject; and this pretense of a tender or gainsaying Conscience
cannot abrogate the Law, since it can neither take away the Authority of the
Lawmakers, nor make the matter of the Law in it self unlawful; Besides if
pretense of Conscience did exempt from obedience, Laws were useless, whosoever
had not list to obey might pretend tenderness of Conscience, and be thereby set
at liberty, which if once granted, Anarchy and Confusion must needs follow.]

Repl. Repl.
To Rule 4. Neither pretense of Conscience, nor real Error of Conscience
exempteth from the Obligation to obey: though sometime it may so ensnare, as
that obeying shall become of the two, the greater sin; so also real Error, or
pretense of Conscience will justify no man for obeying, when it is by God
forbidden.

Sect. 7.
[Though Charity will move to pity, Answ. Rule 5.
and relieve those that are truly perplexed or Scrupulous: yet we must not
break Gods Command, in Charity to them, and therefore we must not perform
public Services undecently or disorderly for the case of tender consciences.]

Repl. Repl.
O that you would but do all that God allows you, yea that he has commanded
you, for these ends! how happy would you make your selves, and these poor
afflicted Churches. But as to the instance of your Rule, we answer. 1. When
the indecency and disorder is so small, as that it will not cross the ends, so
much as our disobedience would, we are here so far more comfortable, and
peaceable than you, as that we would even in Gods worship, do some things
indecent and disorderly, rather than disobey. And so should you do rather than
destroy your Brethren, or hinder that peace, and healing of the Church. For
Order is for the thing ordered, and not contrarily. For example, there is much
disorder lies in the Common Prayer Book, yet we would obey it, as far as the
ends of our calling do require. It wouldbe undecent to come without a Band, or
other handsome Raiment into the Assembly; yet would we obey, if it were
commanded us, rather than not worship God at all.

We are as confident that Surplices, and Copes are undecent, and kneeling at
the Lords Table is disorderly, as you are of the contrary: And yet if the
Magistrate would be advised by us (supposing himself addicted against you) we
would advise him to be more charitable to you, than you here advise him to be
to us: We would have him, if your Conscience require it, to forbear you in this
undecent and disorderly way; But to speak more distinctly. 1. There are some
things decent and orderly, when the opposite species is not undecent or
disorderly. 2. There are some things undecent, and disorderly, in a small and
tolerable degree: And some things in a degree intolerable. 1. When things
decent are commanded, whose opposites would not be at all undecent, their
Charity and Peace, and Edification, may command a Relaxation, or rather should
at first restrain from too severe Impositions: As it is decent to wear either a
Cloak or a Gown, a Cassock buttoned, or unbuttoned, with a Girdle or without;
to sit, stand, or kneel in singing of a Psalm; to sit or stand in hearing the
Word read or preached, etc. 2. When a Circumstance is undecent or disorderly,
but in a tolerable degree, to an Inconvenience; Obedience, or Charity, or
Edification, may commaud us to do it, and make it not only lawful, but a duty
pro hic and nunc, while the preponderating Accident prevails. Christ's
instances go at least as far as this, about the Priests in the Temple breaking
the Sabbath blamelesly, and David's eating the Shewbread, which was lawful for
none to eat ordinarily, but the Priests: And the Disciples rubbing the ears of
Corn: [I will have mercy and not Sacrifice] is a lesson that he sets us to
learn, when two duties comes together, to preserve the greater, if we would
escape sin; And sure to keep an able Preacher in the Church, or a private
Christian in Communion, is a greater duty, caeteris paribus, than to use a
Ceremony, which we conceive to be decent; It is more orderly to use the better
translation of the Scripture, than the worse, as the Common Prayer Book does;
and yet we would have no man cast out for using the worse: It is more orderly,
decent, and edifying for the Minister to read all the Psalms, than for the
people to read each second verse; And yet we would not cast out men from the
Church or Ministry merely for that disorder, It is more orderly, and decent to
be uncovered in divine worship, than covered: And yet rather than a man should
take cold, we could allow him to hear a Chapter or Sermon covered: why not much
more, rather than he should be cast out. But let us come to the Application, It
is no undecent disorderly worshipping of God, to worship him without our Cross,
Surplice, and kneeling in the reception of the Sacrament. 1. If it were, then
Christ and his Apostles had worshipped undecently and disorderly; And the
Primitive Church that used not the Surplice, nor the transient Image of the
Cross in Baptism (but in an unguent) yea the Church for many hundred years,
that received the Sacrament without kneeling. 2. Then if the King, Parliament,
and Convocation should change their Ceremonies, it seems you would take your
selves bound to retain them; for you say you must not worship God undecently:
But that they may be changed by Authority, our Articles determine, and
therefore Charity may well require the Magistrate to change them without any
wrong to the worship of God. 3. We appeal to the common judgment of the
Impartial, whether in the nature of the thing, there by any thing that tells
them, that it is undecent to pray without Surplice in the reading place, and
not undecent to pray without in the Pulpit? And that it is undecent to Baptize
without Crossing, and not to receive the Lords Supper without: And that it is
undecent for the Receiver to take the Lords Supper without kneeling, and not
for the Minister to give it him standing, that prays in the delivery.

Sect. 8.
[These promised we Answer to your first Reason, Answ. 1
that those things which we call Indifferent, Answ. ^
because neither expressly commanded or forbiden by God, have in them a real
goodness, a fitness, and decency, and for the cause are imposed, and may be so
by the Rule of St. Paul, by which Rule, and many others in Scripture, 1 Co. 14.
a power is given to men to impose Signs, which are never the worse surely,
because they signify something that is decent and comely, and so it is not
doubtful, whether such power be given; It would rather be doubtful, whether the
Church could impose such ildle Signs, if any such there be, as signify
nothing.]

Repl. Rep.
To your first Answer we reply. 1. We suppose you speak of a moral Goodness;
and if they are such indeed, as are within their power and really good, that
is, of their own nature, fitter than their opposites, they may be imposed by
just Authority, by equal means, though not by usurpers, nor by penalties that
will do more harm than the things will do good. 2. Signs that signify nothing,
we understand not: It is one thing to be decent, and another [to signify
something that is decent; what you mean by that, we know not. The Cross
signifies our not being ashamed to profess the Faith of Christ crucified,
etc.] do you call that something [that is decent?] It is something necessary to
Salvation. 3. Signs are exceeding various: At present we use but two
distinctions. 1. Some are Signs ex primaria intention iustitnentis, purposed,
and primarily instituted to signify (as an Escucheon, or a Sign at an Inn
door in common matters; and as the Sacrament and Cross in sacred matters) and
some are Signs but consequently secondarily, and not essentially, as intended
by the Institutors (so Hills and Trees may show us what a Clock it is, and so
every Creature signifies some good of Mercy or Duty, and may be an Object of
holy Meditation; so the color and shape of our Clothes may mind us of some
good, which yet was none of the primary or proper end of the Maker or Wearer.)
2. Signs are either arbitrary expressions of a man's own mind, in a matter
where he is left free; or they are Covenanting Signs between us and God in the
Covenant of Grace, to work Grace on us, as moral Causes, and to engage us
Sacramentally to him. Such we conceive the Cross in Baptism to be. The Preface
to the Common Prayer Book says [They are apt to teach and excite, etc.] which
is a moral operation of Grace; and the Canon says [It is an honorable badge,
whereby the Infant is dedicated to him that dyed on the Cross] we are signified
with it [in token, that hereafter we shall not be ashamed to confess the Faith
of Christ crucified, and manfully to fight, etc.] now if a thing may be
commanded merely as a decent Circumstance of Worship, yet it is unproved that a
thing in its nature as instituted, and in the primary intention, is thus
Sacramentally to dedicate and engage us in Covenant to God, by signifying the
Grace and Duty of the Covenant be lawfully cammanded by man. 1. Decent
Circumstances are necessary in genere. There must be some fit time, place,
gesture, vesture (as such) utensils, etc. But that there be some such
dedicating engaging Signs, in our Covenanting with God, signifying the Grace of
the Covenant, and our state and duty as Soldiers under Christ (besides Gods
Sacraments) this is not necessary in genere, and therefore it is not left to
man to determine de specie. 2. If there be any reason for this use of the
Cross, it must be such as was in the Apostles days, and concerns the
universal Church in all ages and places, and then the Apostles would have taken
care of it. Thus much here in brief of Signs; and more anon, when you again
call us to it.

Sect. 9.
[To the second, Ans. 2. Ans.
That it is not a violation of Christ's Royalty, to make such Laws for decency,
but an exercise of his Power and Authority which he has given to the Church,
and the disobedience to such Commands of Superiors, is plainly a violation of
his Royalty; As it is no violation of the Kings Authority, when his Magistrates
command things according to his Laws, but disobedience to the Command of those
injunctions of his Deputies, is violation of his Authority. Again, it can be no
impeachment of Christ's Laws, as insufficient, to make such Laws for decency,
since our Savior, as is evident by the Precepts themselves, did not intend by
them to determine every minute and circumstance of time, place, manner of
performance, and the like; but only to command in general the substance of
those Duties, and the right ends that should be aimed at in the performance,
and then left every man in particular (whom for that purpose he made
reasonable) to guide himself by Rules of reason for private Services; and
appointed Governors of the Church, to determine such particularities for the
public. Thus our Lord commanded Prayers, Fasting, etc. But for the times and
places of performance, he did not determine every of them, but left them to be
guided as we have said. So that it is no impeachment of his Laws, as
insufficient, to make Laws for determining those particulars of decency, which
himself did not, as is plain by his Precepts, intend to determine, but left us
Governors for that purpose, to whom he said [As my Father sent me, even so
send I you, and let all things be done decently, and in order] of whom he has
said to us, [Obey those that have the oversight over you] and told us, that if
we will not hear his Church, we must not be accounted as Christians, but
Heathens and Publicans; And yet nevertheless they will not hear it, and obey it
in so small a matter, as a Circumstance of time, place, habit, or the like,
which she thinks decent and fit, and yet will be accounted the best Christians,
and tell us that it is the very awe of Gods Law, Deuteronomy. 12. 32. that keeps them
from obedience to the Church in these Commands; not well considering that it
cannot be any adding to the Word of God, to command things for order and
decency, which the Word of God-commands to be done, so as they be not commanded
as Gods immediate Word, but as the Laws of men; but that is undeniable adding
to the Word of God, to say, that Superiors may not command such things which
God has no where forbidden, and taking from the Word of God, to deny that
Power to men, which Gods Word has given them.]

Repl. Rep.
To make Laws (to determine of undetermined Circumstances, necessary in genere,
to be some way determined, and left to Magistrates or Ministers de specie, and
to do this according to the general Rule of Scripture, and in order to the main
end, and not against it) is not against the Royalty or Will or Christ; but to
make new dedicating Covenanting Symbols, to signify the Doctrine of the
Covenant of Grace, and solemnly engage us unto God, and place these in the
public Worship, which are not mere Circumstances, but substantial
Institutions, not necessary in genere (that there should be any such at all,
besides Gods Sacraments) we fear this is a violation of the Royalty of Christ,
and a reflection on his Laws, as insufficient. For, 1. If it belong to the
Power proper to Christ, then it is a violation of his Royalty, for any man to
exercise it; but it belongs to the Power proper to Christ, Ergo, etc. The
Minor is proved thus: If it belong to the universal Head, or Ruler of the
Church, as such; then it belongs to the Power proper to Christ; (for we are
ready to prove there is now under him, no universal Head or Ruler, personally,
or collectively and civilly one) But, etc. If in the Reason of it, it should be
the matter of an universal Law, if any, then it should be the work of the
universal Lawgiver, if any: But, etc. If in the Reason of it, it be equally
useful to the Church, universal as to any particular Church, or Age, then it
should according to the reason of it, be the matter of an universal Law, if of
any: But, etc. It has the same aptitude, to engage us to a duty of universal
necessity, and has no reason proper to this Age, or Place for it; but common
to all. Moreover, it is no where committed to the power or care of man; Ergo,
it is proper to the Care and Power of Christ; no Text is showed that gives man
power in such things: To do all things decently and orderly, and to
edification, is no giving of power on that pretense, to make new Covenanting
dedicating Signs: To do Gods work decently, etc. is not to make more such of
our own heads; it is but the right modifying of the work already set us. And to
do all decently, orderly, and to edification, was a duty in Moses time, when
yet such things as these in question might not be added by any but God: (when
we say by God, we mean by his inspired Instruments; and when we say by Christ,
we mean by his inspired Instruments) If we should make Laws, that every one is
publicly to taste Vinegar and Gall, as a Sign that we are not ashamed of, but
resolved through all fresh-displeasing di^ficulties to follow Christ, that did
so, and thus to engage and dedicate our selves to him; this were to do more
than to [do all things decently and orderly] which he appointed. If milk were
to be publicly sucked or drank by all in profession, that we will feed on the
sincere Milk of his Word, and so to dedicate us to him by Covenant: Or, if we
were to put on an Helmet, and other Armor, in token that we will be his
Soldiers to the death, and manfully fight under, etc. These Engagements, by
such public signs, are Sacraments in the sense, as the word was used of old,
when it signified a Soldiers solemn listing, or covenanting with his Commander.
Thus by distinguishing decent and orderly modes, and Circumstances necessary in
genere, from new Ordinances, even solemn dedicating, covenanting, or such like
mystical Signs; we have showed you what we grant, and where you fail, and what
is indeed a wrong to Christ, and an accusation of his Laws, and what not? and
how unjust your following accusation of us is (who never yet told you, we would
be accounted the best Christians; but to desire to please Christ as near as we
can, is not blame worthy.) Abundance of things of lesser moment than these, are
commanded by God in the Law, to which he adds, that Sanction, Deuteronomy. 12. 12.
Whatever things I command thee, etc. And we conceive, that the words [As my
Father sent me, so, etc.] had somewhat proper to the extraordinary Mission:
[And if he hear not the Church, etc.] is neither spoken of a Church universal,
nor of Magistrates making Laws for such Ceremonies or Signs: But if he hear not
that Church, with which he was in Communion, and which admonishes him for his
sin, let that Church reject him from their Communion.

Sect. 10.
[The Command for decent Ceremonies, Ans. 3. Ans.
may still continue in the Church, notwithstanding the 12. of Deuteronomy. and so it
may too, for all the exceptions taken against them, by sundry Learned, Pious,
and Orthodox persons, who have judged them they say unwarrantable; and if Laws
may be abrogated as soon as those that list not to obey, will except against
them, the world must needs run into confusion; but those that except are weak
Brethren, whom by Christ's Precept and Example we must not offend. If by weak we
understand ignorant, they would take it ill to be so accounted, and it is their
own fault if they be, there having been so very much written, as may satisfy
any that have a mind to be satisfied. And as King James of blessed memory, said
at Hampton Court (if after so many years Preaching the Gospel, there be any yet
unsatisfied, I doubt it proceeds rather out of stubborness of opinion, than out
of tenderness of Conscience; if by tenderness of Conscience, they mean a
fearfulness to sin, this would make them most easy to be satisfied, because
most fearful to disobey Superiors.) But suppose there be any so scrupulous, as
not satisfied with what has been written, the Church may still without sin,
urge her Command for these decent Ceremonies, and not be guilty of offending
her weak Brother; for since the scandal is taken by him, not given by her, it
is he that by vain scrupulosity offends himself, and lays the stumbling block
in his own way.]

Repl. Rep.
But the Command for man's Institution of a new Worship of God, or Rites
Sacramental, are so like to Sacraments as the Cross is; or for the unnecessary
imposition of unnecessary things, which should be left to every prudent
Ministers discretion, and this upon pain of being cast out of the Church or
Ministry; and the Law for subscribing that all these are lawful, and for
swearing obedience to the Bishops; all these Laws are not to be found in
Scripture. If you should but command your Servant, to do what you bid him,
decently and orderly, you would think he mistook you, if upon that pretense he
would do any other work, which he could but say tended to the decency of yours.
And we would gladly hear, what you can think your selves, is forbidden in Deuteronomy.
12. 32. if not such humane Ordinances? And why you forbear giving the truer
sense of the Text? It is a sad Case with the poor Church, when Gods Wisdom that
made a few and necessary things, the matter of his Churches Concord, is no more
valued, but we will be wiser; and when the experience of the Church, that has
been torn into pieces 1400. years, by men's inventions, and needless usages and
impositions, is yet of no more force with us that come after them; but whatever
can be said, or done, or seen, we will still make Laws, that all men shall be
tantum non, unchristned, and damned (that is, cast out of the Ministry or
Church Communion) that will not wear this or that, or bow thus or thus, or look
this way or that way, or say this word or that word; and when we have laid such
a needless snare, we will uncharitably cry out [that the world will be brought
into Confusion, because men that list not to obey, would have the Laws
abrogated] where has Christ set you to make such Laws? Is it not work enough
for us and you, to obey the Laws that he has made? why made he none for
Postures, and Vestures, and Words, and Teaching Signs of this nature, if he
would have had them? If he had not told us, that there is one Lawgiver, one
Lord; and that his Word is able to make us wise unto Salvation; and that he
would lay no greater burden on us, than necessary things, and would not have us
despise or judge each other on such occasions: If he had but told us, that he
left any Officers after his inspired Apostles, for the making of Ceremonies, or
new Laws of Worship, or Teaching engaging Signs for the Church, we would as
gladly understand and obey his Will in these things, as you. What hurt is it to
us, to use a Cross or other Ceremony, if it were not for fear of disobeying
God? Enforce Gods Law upon us, as zealously as you will, and see if we will
disobey it: But that the world shall run into confusion, rather than we shall
leave to serve God, as Peter and Paul did, without Crossing, Surplices, and
kneeling at the Sacrament, and then that we shall be reproached as the Cause of
all, by our disobedience: God has told the world by his Word, and will tell
them by his Judgments, that this is not his way to Unity and Peace. As to your
Argument, from your Brethrens weakness, we say, 1. It is not your strength to
slight it, or them; nor is it their weakness, that they are willing to be
esteemed weak. The Apostle called those weak, that placed a necessity in
indifferent things, Romans 14. and not those that understood their indifferency.
But the truth is, the nature of things indifferent, is not well unstood by all
on either side; some may think evil of some things that deserve it not, and in
this they are weak, though in other matters they may be strong. And for the
rest, we speak according to the worst, that you your selves can charitably
suppose: you can say no more of them, but that they are weaker, that is, in
this know less then you: though perhaps we may take them to be stronger, that
is to be more in the right; yet are we not so confident, as to censure you or
others; but speak of things difficult, and doubtful, as they are. But how prove
you that we would take it ill, to be our selves, or have those we speak of
accounted ignorant in such things as these? use us no worse then the ignorant
should be used. And till you would turn a man out of the Ministry, or Church,
for being ignorant of the nature of a Ceremony (which never was in his Creed,
the Decalogue or Scripture) deal not so by us, that would be wiser if we knew
how; That all our ignorance is our own fault we deny not; But it is an excess
of confidence, and uncharitableness, to tell us that there is so very much
written as may satisfy any man [that has a mind to be satisfied] when we
profess in his sight that knows the hearts, that we have a mind to be
satisfied, and would know the truth, at what rate soever if we knew how: what
would you have us to do that we do not, to be satisfied? Do we not read as much
for Ceremonies, as the dissenters use to do against them? many Books against
them are yet uuanswered: as we never shuned any Public or private conference
with any of you, and such reasonings are not like to convince us. If you will
be the Judges of your Brethrens hearts, and say it is not tenderness of
Conscience, but stubbornness, we shall refer that to the day, when your hearts,
and ours shall all be opened. Must none be tender Conscienced, that dare not
venture to obey you in such things? when you may with undoubted safety forbear
the imposing of your Ceremonies, and so forbear the casting out of your
Brethren, if you will not, who shows less tenderness of Conscience? That the
scandal is taken, and not given, is still the thing in question, as to many
things: And if it were no just occasion of offense, yet you ought not to lay
that which others weakness will turn into a stumbling block, unnecessarily
before them. If the Apostles Argument be good, Romans 14. The Church may not urge
unlawful things, nor things merely lawful, upon such penalties, as will exclude
things necessary. If an idle word be to be accounted for, an idle Law is not
laudable, much less when all men must be excluded the Ministry o^ Communion
that scruple it; when yet a man may be a profane Swearer, for 12. pence an
Oath, and may swear an 100. times, before he pays that 12. pence. A Papist
shall pay 12. pence for not coming to Church, and a Protestant be thrust out of
your Communion, for not kneeling at the Sacrament, and a Minister suspended,
imprisoned, undone, for not crossing a Child, or wearing a Surplice. May
Magistrates, or the Church rhus urge their commands? can any thing be spoken
plainer then the Scripture speaks against this course? And would you make the
world believe, that the Brethren that do not all that you bid them, are so
unreasonably, and obstinately scrupulous, as to have no matter of offense but
what they lay before themselves, when they have the Practice of the Apostles,
and the Custom of the Primitive Church, for many hundred years against you, and
this called by them an Apostolical Tradition, and decreed by the most venerable
Councils that ever were? If you had but one of these, (the decree of a General
Council, or Practice of all the purest Church alone) for one of your
Ceremonies, you would think him uncharitable, that so reproached you for
pretending Conscience.

Sect. 11.
[The Case of St. Paul not eating flesh, Ans.
if it offended his Brother, is nothing to the purpose; who there speaks of
things, not Commanded either by God, or by his Church, neither having in them
any thing of Decency, or Significancy to serve in the Church; St. Paul would
deny himself his own Liberty, rather than offend his Brother. Bnt if any man
breaks a just Law or Custom of the Church, he brands him for a Lover of
Schism and Sedition, 1 Cor. 11. 16.]

Repl. Repl.
But because at our last Meeting, it was said with so much confidence by one,
that the Case in Romans 14. and 15. was nothing to ours, we shall here say the
more to what you say, that Paul's not eating flesh is nothing to the purpose:
your reasons are, 1. Because he speaks of nothing commanded by God, or his
Church. 2. Nor of any thing of Decency, or significancy to serve in the Church.
To the first we have often told you, that which is undeniable, 1. That Paul was
a Governor of that Church himself, that had no Superior to con trole him: If
you say then, that he wrote not as a Governor; we Answer, yes: for he wrote as
an Apostle, and wrote that Epistle that was to be a standing Law, or Canon to
them; If this be no act of his Office, and Authority, there was none such; And
then you must say the like of all the rest of the Epistles. 2. Moreover as Paul
the Apostle excludes all such impositions, so he wrote to all the Resident
Pastors that were at Rome, for he wrote to the whole Church: and therefore
these commands extend to the Governors, that they make not such things the
matter of Contempt or Censures, or any uncharitable course, but bear with one
another in them. Will you call men obstinate self-offenders, that differ from
you, when you have no better Answers then these to the plain decisions of the
holy Ghost? what we speak of Romans 14. 15. we speak also of 1 Cor. 8. And 3. It
is to the Rulers of the Church that we are speaking, and it is they that answer
us: And shall the Rulers say [if it were not a thing commanded we might bear
with you] when it is themselves that command them Ecclesiastically; and we
entreat them but to forbear that, and to concur with us in Petitioning the King
to forbear commanding them coercively; who no doubt will easily forbear it, if
they do their part. 4. Yea a fortiore it lays a heavier charge on such
Governors then others. If it be so heinous a Sin as Paul makes it to censure,
or despise one another, for meats and days, and such like things, how much
more to Excommuuicate, silence, and undo one another? and deprive thousands of
Souls of the Preaching of the Gospel, that consented not to their Pastor's
nonconformity? 5. Paul lets you know, that those things are not the Center
or matter of our necessary Concord, but of mutual forbearance, and therefore
condemns all that will make them necessary to our Unity, Ministry, or
Communion. 6. And the difference is wholly to the advantage of our Cause; for
those that Paul spoke to, were not come so high as to go about to force others
to do as they did, but only to despise them for not doing it. 2. And therefore
to the second Reason we answer. 1. If the things had been different, yet so was
Paul's Injunction different from our request; for Paul goes so high as to
command them to deny their own Liberty, in not eating lawful meats themselves,
least they offend, and hurt their Breth^en; whereas we are now but desiring
you, that you would not force others to do that which they take to be a sin,
and that with penalties that fall heavier on the Church, then on them; They had
on both sides fairer pretenses then you have: The Cases before us to be
compared are four; the Case of the refusers of meats and observers of days
then: The Case of the users of those meats, and not observers of those days:
The Case of our imposers: And the Case of non-conformists: The pretense that
their refusers of meats had, in 1 Cor. 8. was, that being offered to Idols,
they thought it made them partakers of the Idolatry; and so they sinned through
weakness in being offended at others, and censuring them that used their
Liberty: And had they not here a fairer pretense for their offense and
censures, then you for your impositions? You cannot show half so great an
appearance of good in the things commanded, as they could do of Evil in the
things for which they were offended. And the offended censurer in Romans 14. had
this pretense, that the thing was forbidden in Gods own Law, even the meats
which he refused; and the days co^mmanded which he observed: And he knew not
that the Law in these matters of Order and Ceremony was abrogated (which Peter
himself was ignorant of, when he refufed to eat things common and unclean:) But
you have no pretense of Gods own command for the matter of your impositions, as
these men had for the matter of their offense, and censure: so that here you
are on the worser side. And for the other party, that in 1 Cor. 8. abused their
Liberty: and Romans 14. despised their Brethren, they had a double pretense: one
was, that it was their Liberty; and if every scrupulous party should drive them
from their lawful meat, and drink, they knew not whither they might drive them:
Another was, that the Law was abrogated by Christ; and therefore if they
complied in practice with the scrupulous, or did not show their difference,
they might seem to be guilty of the restoring of the Law, and complying with
the Jews and the Heretics, that both then were enemies to the Church, and
agreed in this; had not these men now a fairer pretense for eating, 1 Cor. 8.
and for the dissent showed, Romans 14. then you ever yet produced for forcing
others from Ministry, and Church, (or into sin, and Hell, if they will obey you
against their Consciences) and all for that which you never pretended to show a
command of God for? And others show you (as they think) Scripture, and
Councils, and Custom against: To tell us then that Paul spoke of things [not
Decent and Significant] is (pardon our plainness) to say much less then
nothing: For it was not against imposing that Paul spoke, but using, and not
using, censuring and despising; and their Arguments were (suitable to their
Cause) of another kind of moment, than Decency or Indecency, Significancy or
Insignificancy, even from supposed Idolatry rejecting Gods Law, and complying
with Jews, and Heretics, in restoring the Law, and casting away the Liberties
purchased by Christ, even in their private eating, and drinking. To be no more
tedious now, we humbly offer in any way convenient to try it out, with the
Reverend Brother that so confidently asserted the disparity of the cases; and
to prove, that these Scriptures most plainly condemn your impositions now in
qnestion; though we should have thought, that one impartial reading of them
might end the controversy, and save the Church and you from the sad effects.
As to that, 1 Cor. 11. 16. we answer, 1. It is uncertain whether the word
[Custom] refer to the matter of Hair, or to contention: so many Expositors
judge, q. d. [the Churches of God are not contentious] 2. Here is no
Institution (muchless by fallible men) of new Covenanting, Dedicating, or
Teaching Symbols, or Ceremonies; nor is here any unnecessary thing enjoined,
but that which nature, and the Custom of the Country had made so decent, as
that the opposite would have been abusively indecent: This is not your Case. A
Cross or Surplice is not decent by nature, or common reputation, but by
Institution (that is, not at all; for if it be not instituted, because decent,
it will not be decent, because instituted) nor are these so decent, as the
opposite to be indecent. The Apostles worshipped God as decently without them,
as you do with them: The Minister prays in the Pulpit, as decently without
the Surplice, as in the Reading place with it. 3. Paul does but exhort them to
this undoubted Comeliness (as you may well do, if men will do any thing, which
nature or common reputation makes to be slovenly, unmannerly or indecent, as
being covered in Prayer, or singing Psalms, or any such like; about which we
will never differ with you:) But even here, he talks not of force, or such
penalties as tend to the greater hurt of the Church, and the ruin of the person.

Sect. 12. Ans. 4. Ans.

[That these Ceremonies have occasioned many Divisions, is no more fault of
theirs, than it was of the Gospel, that the Preaching of it, occasioned strife
betwixt Father and Son, etc. the true Cause of those Divisions, is the Cause of
ours, which St. James tells us is Lust, and inordinate desires of Honor,
Wealth, or Licentiousness, or the like: were these Ceremonies laid aside, there
would be the same Divisions. If some, who think Moses and Aaron take too much
upon them, may be suffered to deceive the People, and to raise in them vain
fears and jealousies of their Governors; but if all men would, as they ought,
study peace and quietness, they would find other, and better fruits of those
Laws of Rites, and Ceremonies, as Edification, Decency, Order, and Beauty, in
the Service and Worship of God.]

Repl. Whether the Ceremonies be as innocent, as to Divisions, as the Gospel (a
strange Assertion) will better appear, when what we have said, and what is more
fully said by Dr. Ames, Bradshaw, and others, is well answered. If the true
Cause of our Divisions be as you say [Lust, and inordinate desires of Honor,
or Wealth, or Licentiousness] then the party that is most lustful, ambitious,
covetous, and licentious, are likest to be most the Cause. And for Lust and
Licentiousness, we should take it for a great attainment of our ends, if you
will be entreated to turn the edge of your severity against the Lustful and
Licentious. O that you would keep them out of the Pulpits, and out of the
Communion of the Church, till they reform! And for our selves, we shall take
your Admonitions or Severities thankfully, when ever we are convicted by you,
of any such sins. We are loath to enter upon such Comparisons, between the
Ministers ejected, for the most part, and those that are in their rooms, as
tends to show by this Rule, who are likest to be the Dividers. And for
inordinate desires of Honor and Wealth, between your Lordships and Us, we are
contented that this Cause be decided by all England, even by our enemies, at
the first hearing, without any further vindication of our selves; and so let it
be judged who are the Dividers. Only we must say, that your intimation of this
Charge on us, that seek not for Bishoprics, Deaneries, and Archdeaconries, or
any of your preferments; that desire not, nor would accept pluralities of
Benefices, with Cure of Souls; that never sought for more than Food and
Raiment, with the liberty of our Ministry, even one place, with a tolerable
Maintenance, whose provoking Cause, has been our constant opposition to the
Honors, Wealth, Lordships, and pluralities of the Clergy; yea, who would be
glad on the behalf of the poor Congregations, if many of our Brethren might
have leave to Preach to their Flocks for nothing. We say your intimation makes
us lift up our hands and hearts to Heaven, and think, O what is man! what may
not by some History be told the World! O how desirable is the blessed day of
the righteous universal Judgment of the Lord! How small a matter till then
should it be to us, to be judged of man! We hope upon pretense of not suffering
us to deceive the People, you will not deny liberty to Preach the necessary
saving Truths of the Gospel, considering how terrible a Symptom and
Prognostic, this was in the Jews, 1 These. 2. 15, 16. Who both killed the Lord
Jesus, and their own Prophets, and persecuted the Apostles, and God they
pleased not, and were contrary to all men, forbidding to Preach to the
Gentiles, that they might be saved; to fill up their sins always: for wrath
was come upon them to the utmost. We can as easily bear whatever you can
inflict upon us, as the hinderers of the Gospel, and Silencers of faithful
Ministers, and troublers of the Churches, can bear what God will inflict on
them; and so the Will of the Lord be done.

Sect. 13.
[There has been so much said, Ans.
not only of the lawfulness, but also of the convenience of these Ceremonies
mentioned, that nothing can be added. This in brief may here suffice for the
Surplice, that reason and experience teaches, that decent Ornaments and Habits,
preserve Reverence and awe; held therefore necessary to the solemnity of Royal
Acts, and Acts of Justice; and why not as well to the solemnity of Religious
Worship? and in particular, no Habit more suitable than white Linen, which
resembles Purity and Beauty, wherein Angels have appeared, Rev. 15. fit for
those whom the Scripture calls Angels. And this Habit was ancient, Chrysostom.
Hom. 60. ad pop. Antioch.]

Repl. 1. If nothing can be added, Repl.
then we doubt the answered Writings extant against these Impositions, will
never be well answered. 2. We are desirous that no undecent Vestures or Habits,
be used in Gods Service. Those that scruple the Surplice, do it not as it is a
Habit determined of as decent; but as they think it is made an holy Vestment,
and so a part of external Worship, as Aaron's Vestments were; (as may be seen
in the Arguments of Cotton and Nichols, lately Printed together.)

Sect. 14.
[The Cross was always used in the Church, Ans.
in immortali lavacro, Tertul. And therefore to testify our Communion with
them, as we are taught to do in our Creed; as also in token that we shall not
be ashamed of the Cross of Christ. It is fit to be used still, and we conceive
cannot trouble the Conscience of any that have a mind to be satisfied.]

Repl. That the Cross was always used in the Church in Baptism, Rep.
is an Assertion certainly untrue; and such as we never heard nor read till
now. Do you believe it was used in the Baptism of the Eunuch, Lydia, the Jalor,
Cornelius, the 3000. Acts 3. or in those times? And when it did come up, it was
with Chrysm, and not our airy transient Image; and therefore you so far differ
from the users. 2. The Condemnation of Genuflection on the Lords days in
adoration, was at least as ancient and universal, and commanded by Councils,
when the Cross was not; and yet you can dispense with that, and many such
usages. And if you will your selves fall in with Custom, yet every ancient
common Custom, was never intended to be a matter of necessity to Union or
Tolleration of our Brethren; use no other force about the Cross than the Church
then did. Your saying, that you [conceive it cannot trouble the Conscience of
any that have a mind to be satisfied] does but express your uncharitable
censeriousness, while your Brethren have studied, and prayed, and conferred for
satisfaction, it is like, as much as you, and profess their earnest desires of
it, and their readiness to hear or read any thing that you have to say, in
order to their satisfaction.

Sect. 15.
[The posture of kneeling, Ans.
best suites at the Communion, as the most convenient, and so most decent for
us, when we are to receive as it were from Gods hand, the greatest of seals of
the Kingdom of Heaven; he that thinks he may do this sitting, let him remember
the Prophet Mal. Offer this to the Prince, to receive his Seal, from his own
hand sitting, see if he will accept of it; when the Church did stand at her
Prayers, the manner of receiving was, more Adorantium, St. Aug. Psalm. 98.
Cyril. Catech. Mystag. 5. rather more than at Prayers, since standing at Prayer
has been left, and kneeling used instead of that, (as the Church may vary in
such indifferent things) now to stand at Communion, when we kneel at Prayers,
were not decent, much less to sit, which was never the use of the best times.]

Repl. To all this about kneeling, Rep.
we say, 1. We have considered the Text in Mal. and what you say; and yet, 1.
We find that our Betters, even Christ's Apostles, and the universal Church, for
many hundred years, thought not kneeling most decent; nor did the Church, in
the first Age, think sitting unmeet in that Service, to the King of the Church:
And we hope you reprehend them not. 2. You require not the Adult, that are
baptized, to receive that Seal or Sacrament kneeling. 3. When kneeling at
Prayers was in use, in the Apostles times, yet kneeling in the reception of the
Sacrament was not. 4. Why can you so lightly put off, both the Practice and
Canons of the Church in this, more than in other such things? However you
cannot here deny de facto, but that kneeling on the Lords days in the
receiving the Sacrament, was for many hundred years, of the purer times of the
Church, disused and condemned: And why do you not tell us, what other General
Council repealed this, that we may see whether it be such, as we are any way
bound by? When you say [the Church may vary in such indifferent things] 1. If
kneeling or standing at Prayer, be an indifferent thing, then so are they at
this Sacrament. 2. Then you follow the Changers, and we the old Pattern. 3.
Then the Canons of general Councils and Customs, pretended to be from
Apostolical Tradition, may be changed. 4. What is it, that you call the Church
that changes, or may change these? A Council, or a popular Custom? Bring us
not under a foreign Power. 5. The thing then being so indifferent and
changeable, you may change it if you please, for ends that are not indifferent.
6. And if now the Ministers may Pray standing, why may not the People receive
standing? 7. When you say, that [to sit, was never the use of the best times]
you deny the Apostles, and primitive times to be the best; as to the extent of
the Church, they were not the best, but as to the purity of administrations
they were.

Sect. 16.
[That there were ancient Lyturgies in the Church, Ans.
is evident, St. Chrysostom's, St. Basil's, and others: And the Greeks tell us
of St. James, much elder than they; and though we find not in all Ages whole
Lyturgies, yet it is certain that there were such in the eldest times, by those
parts which are extant, as Sursum Corda, etc. Gloria Patri, Benedicite, Hymnus
Cherubinus, etc. Vere dignum and justum, etc. Dominus vobiscum, and cum Spiritu
tuo, with diverse others. Though those that are extant may be interpolated, yet
such things as are found in them, all consentient to Catholic primitive
Doctrine, may well be presumed to have been from the first, especially since we
find no Original of these Lyturgies from General Councils.]

Repl. We know there wants not a Lyndanus, Repl.
a Coccius, to tell the world of St. Peter's Lyturgy, which yet prays, that by
the Intercession of Peter and Paul, we may be defended, etc. and mentions
Lynus, Cletus, Clemens, Cornelius, Cyprian, Lucia, Barbara, and abundance such;
shall we therefore conclude that there were Lyturgies from the first, and that
what is here consentient to Antiquity wa^ in it? There wants not a Marg. de la
Bigne, a Greg. de Valent. a Coccius to commend to us the Lyturgy of Mark, that
praye^h (protege Civitatem istam propter Martyrem tuum, and Evangelistam
Marcum, etc. and tells us, that the King, where the Author lived, was an
Orthodox Christian, and prays for the Pope, Subdeacons, Lectors, Cantors,
Monks, etc. must we therefore believe, that all that is Orthodox in it, is
ancient? So there wants not a Bigne, Bellarm. etc. to tell us of St. James his
Lyturgy, that mentions the Confessors, the Deiparam, the Ancherets, etc. which
made Bellarm. himself say, (de Lyturgia Jacobi sic sentio, eam non esse ejus,
aut multa a posterioribus eidem addita sunt) and must we prove the Antiquity of
Lyturgies by this, or try ours by it? There wants not a Sainctsius, a Berllarm*
a Valentia, a Paresius, to predicate the Lyturgy of St. Basil, as bearing
witness to Transubstantiation, for the Sacrifice of the Mass, for Praying to
Saints, etc. when yet the exceeding disagreement of Copies, the difference of
some Forms from Basil's ordinary Forms, the Prayers for the most Pious and
faithful Emperors, show it unlikely to have been Basils: Many predicate
Chrysostom's Mass or Lyturgy; as making for praying to the dead, and for them,
the propitiatory Sacrifice of the Mass, etc. when in one Edition Crysost. is
prayed to in it, says Cook; in another, Nicolaus and Alexius, that lived about
1080. is mentioned; in another, Doctrines are contained (as de Contaminata
Maria, etc.) clean contrary to Chrysostom's Doctrine; must we now conclude,
that all is Ancient, that is Orthodox, when one Copy is scarce like another? or
can we try our Lyturgy by such as this? The shreds cited by you prove a Lyturgy
indeed, such as we have used while the Common Prayer Book was not used, where
the Psalms, the words of Baptism, of Consecration, Commemoration, and delivery
of the Lord's Supper, and many other, were used in a constant Form, when other
parts were used as the Minister found most meet; so Sursum Corda was but a
warning before, or in the midst of Devotion, such as our [Let us Pray] and will
no more prove, that the substance of Prayer was not left to the Ministers
present or prepared Conception, than Ite Missa est, will prove it. The Gloria
Patri, Bellarm. himself says, according to the common opinion, was formed in
the Conncil of Nice, which was in the 4th. Century. And even then such a
particular testimony against the Arrians, might well stand with a body of
unimposed Prayers; and rather shows, that in other things they were left at
liberty. If the Benedicite, the Hymns, or other passages here mentioned, will
prove such a Lyturgy as pleases you, we pray you bear with our way of Worship,
which has more of Hymns and other Forms, than the^e come to. That these
Lyturgies had no Original from General Councils, adds nothing with us to their
Authority, but shows that they had an arbitary Original; and all set together
shows, that then they had many Lyturgies in one Princes Dominion, and those
alterable, and not forced; and that they took not one Liturgy to be any
necessary means to the Churches Uni^^ or Peace, but bore with those that used
various at discretion. We well remember that Tertul. tells the Heathens, that
Christians showed by their conceived Hymns, that they were sober at their
Religious Feasts; it being their Custom [ut quisque de Scripturis sanctis, vel
de proprio ingenio potest, provocetur in medium Deo canere] Apol. cap. 39. Note
here, 1. That though there be more need of Forms for Singing, than for Praying;
yet even in this, the Christians in public had then a liberty of doing it de
proprio ingenio, by their own wit or parts. 2. That those that did not de
proprio ingenio, did it de Scripturis sanctis, and that there is no mention of
any other Lyturgy, from which they fetched so much as their Hymns. And the same
Tertul. Apol. c. 30. describing the Christians public Prayers, says [sine
monitore, quia de pectore oramus] [we pray without a Monitor or promptor,
because we do it from the heart, or from our own breast,] And before him Just.
Mar. Ap. 2. p. 77. says; (...). But if all these words seem not plain enough
to some, it is no wonder when they rest not in the greater plainness of the
holy Scriptures, where Prayer is so frequently mentioned, as much of the
employment of believers, and so many directions, encouragments and exhortations
given about it, and yet no Liturgy or stinted form; except he Lords Prayer is
prescribed to them, or once made mention of, no man directed here to use such,
no man exhorted to get him a Prayer Book, or to read or learn it, or to beware
that he add or diminish not: whereas the holy Scriptures that were then given
to the Church, men are exhorted to read, and study, and mediate in, and
discourse of, and make it their continual delight: and its a wonder that David
that mentions it so often, in Psalm. 119. does never mention the Lyturgy, or
Common Prayer Book, if they had any: And that Solomon when he dedicated the
house of Prayer without a Prayer Book, would only beg of God, to hear [what
Prayers, or what Supplication soever shall be made of any man, or of all the
People of Israel, when every one shall know his own sore, and his own grief,
and shall spread forth his hands in that house] 2 Chro. 6. 29. and that he
gives no hint of any Lyturgy or Form, so much as in those common Calamities,
and talks of no other Book then the knowledge of their own sores, and their own
griefs: And in the Case of Psalms, or singing unto God where it is certain,
that they had a Lyturgy, or Form, (as we have,) they are carefully collected,
preserved, and delivered to us, as a choice part of the holy Scripture. And
would it not have been so with the Prayers, or would they have been altogether
numentioned, if they also had been there prescribed to, and used by the Church,
as the Psalms were? would Christ and his Apostles even where they were
purposely giving Rules for Prayer, and correcting its abuse, (as Mat. 6. 1 Cor.
14, etc.) have never-mentioned any Forms but the Lords Prayer, if they had
appointed such, or desired such to be imposed, and observed? These things are
incredible to us when we most impartially consider them; for our own parts as
we think it uncharitable to forbid the use of Spectacles to them that have weak
eyes, or of Crutches to them that have weak Limbs, and as uncharitable to undo
all that will not use them, whether they need them or not; so we can think no
better of them, that will suffer none to use such Forms, that need them, or
that will suffer none to pray but in the words of other men's prescribing,
though they are at least, as able as the prescribers. And to conclude, we
humbly crave that ancient customs may not be used against themselves, and us,
and that you will not innovate, under the shelter of the name of Antiquity. Let
those things be freely used among us that were so used in the purest Primitive
times. Let Unity and Peace be laid on nothing, on which they laid them not; let
diversity of Lyturgy, and Ceremonies be allowed where they allowed it. May we
but have Love and Peace on the Terms as the Ancient Church enjoyed them, we
shall then hope we may yet escape the hands of uncharitable destroying zeal: we
therefore humbly recommend to your observation the Concurrent testimony of the
best Histories of the Church, concerning the diversity of Lyturgy, Ceremonies,
and modal observances; in the several Churches under one and the same civil
Government: and how they then took it to be their duty to forbear each other in
these matters, and how they made them not the test of their Communion, or
Center of their peace concerning the Observation of Easter it self, when other
Holy Days, and Ceremonies were urged, were less stood upon, you have the
judgment of Irenaeus, and the French Bishops in whose name he wrote in Eusob.
Hist. Eccl. l. 5. 6. 23. Where they reprehend Victor for breaking peace with
the Churches that differed about the day, and the antecedent time of Fasting,
and tell him that the variety began, before their times, when yet they
nevertheless retained Peace, and yet retain it, and the discord in their
Fasting declared, or commended the concord of their Faith, that no man was
rejected from Communion by Victors Predecessors on that account, but they gave
them the Sacrament, and maintained Peace with them, and particularly Policarp,
and Anicetus held Communion in the Eucharist, notwithstanding this difference.
Basil Epist. 63. does plead his cause with the Presbyters, and whole Clergy of
Neocesarea, that were offended at his new Psalmodi^, and his new order of
Monasticks, but he only defends himself, and urges none of them to imitate
him, but tells him also of the novelty of their own Lyturgy, that it was not
known in the time of their own late renowned Bishop Greg. Thaumaturgus, telling
them that they had kept nothing unchanged to that day of all that he was used
to, (so great alte^ations in 40. years were made in the same Congregation) and
he professes to pardon all such things, so be it the principal things be kept
safe. Socr. Hist. Ec. l. 51. c. 21. about the Easter difference, says [that
neither the Apostles, nor the Gospel, do impose a yoke of bondage on those that
betake themselves to the Doctrine of Christ, but left the Feast of Easter, and
other Festivals, to the observation of the free and equal Judgment of them
that had received the benefits. And therefore because men use to keep some
Festivals, for the relaxing themselves from labors, several Persons in several
places, do celebrate of custom, the memorial of Christ's Passion Arbitrarily, or
at their own choice. For neither our Savior, nor the Apostles commanded the
keeping of them by any Law, nor threaten any mulct, or penalty, etc. It was the
purpose of the Apostles not to make Laws for the keeping of Festivals, but to
be Authors to us of the reason of right living, and of Piety. And having showed
that it came up by private custom, and not by Law, and having cited Irenaeus,
as before he adds, [that those that agree in the same Faith, do differ in
point of Rites, and Ceremonies] and instancing in diverse, he concludes [that
because no man can show in the monuments of writings, any command concerning
this, it is plain that the Apostles herein permitted free Power to every ones
mind and will; that every man might do that which was good without being
induced by fear or by necessity. And having spoken of the diversity of customs,
about the Assemblies, Marriage, Baptism, etc. He tells us [that even among the
Novatians themselves there is a diversity in their manner of their praying, and
that among all the Forms of Religions and parties, you can no where find two,
that consent among themselves in the manner of their praying.] And repeating
the decree of the Holy Ghost, Act. 15. [To impose no other burden but things
necessary] he reprehendeth them [that neglecting this, will take fornication as
a thing indifferent, but strive about Festivals, as it were a matter of life,
overturning Gods Laws, and making Laws to themselves.] And Sozomen Hist. Eccl.
l. c. 18. and 19. speaks to the same purpose, and tells us that the Novatians
themselves determined in a Synod at Sangar in Bythinia, that the differenoe
about Easter being not a sufficient cause for breach of Communion, all should
abide in the same concord, and in the same Assembly, and every one should
celebrate this Feast as pleased himself: and this Canon they called (...) and
c. 19. He says of Victor, and Policarp, that [they deservedly judged it
frivolous, or absurd, that those should be separated on the account of a
custom, that consented in the principal heads of Religion: For you cannot find
the same Traditions in all things alike, in all Churches though they agree
among themselves] and instancing in some Countries, where there is but one
Bishop in many Cities, and in others, Bishops are ordained in the Villages.
After many other instances, he adds [That they use not the same Prayers,
Singings or Readings, nor observe the same time of using them.] And what
Lyturgy was imposed upon Constantine the Emperor? or what Bishops or Synods,
were then the makers of Lyturgies, when he himself made public Prayers for
himself and Auditory, and for his Soldiers? Eusebius. de vit. Constantini, l. 4.
c. 18, 20. etc. But the diversity, liberty, and change of Lyturgies in the
Churches under the same Prince, are things so well known, as that we may
suppose any further proof of it to be needless: In the conclusion therefore we
humbly beseech you, that as Antiquity, and the Customs of the Churches in the
first Ages, is that which is most commonly and confidently pleaded against us,
that your mistake of Antiquity may not be to our Cost, or paid so dear for as
the loss of our Freedom, for the serving of God in the work of the Ministry, to
which we are called; we beseech you let us not be silenced, or cast out of the
Ministry or Church, for not using the Lyturgy, Cross, Surplice, kneeling at the
Sacrament, till you have either showed the world that the practice or Canons of
the Catholic Church have led you the way as doing it, or requiring it to be
done. And make not that so necessary, as to force men to i^ on such dreadful
terms, which the ancient Churches used with diversity, and indifferency, and
liberty. We beseech you, show the world some proof, that the ancient Churches
did ever use to force, or require Ministers to subscribe to their Lyturgies, as
having nothing in them contrary to the Word of God, or to swear obedience to
their Bishops, before you impose ^uch things on Us, while yet you pretend to
imitate Antiquity. And have but the moderation toward your Brethren, as in
suffering, or at death, or Judgment, you would most approve. Remember how
unpleasing the remembrance of such differences about Ceremonies, was to Bishop
Ridley, as toward Bishop Hooper, when they were in Prison; and how the Arrians
fury made the Orthodox gladly to go to the Churches of the Novatians, and meet
with them, and join with them in Prayer, and had almost been united with them,
in the bond of Concord, if the Novatians in a stiff maintaining of their old
Customs, had not utterly refused it: But yet in other matters, they embraced
each other with so singular a Benevolence and Love, that they would willingly
have dyed for each other, (as Socrates tells us, Hist. lib. 2. cap. 30.) And
may we not all here see our duty? When Atticus was urged to deny to the
Novatians the liberty of their Meetings within the City, he refused it, because
they had suffered for the Faith in the Arrians persecution, and changed nothing
in the Faith, though they separated from the Church; and was so far from
violence against dissenters, as that he gave large relief to them that differed
from him in Religion, Socrat. Hist. lib. 7. cap. 25. It was the much praised
saying of Theodosius to him, that asked him, why he put none to death that
wronged him; [I would I could rather make them that are dead, alive] Socrat. l.
7. c. 22. Much more should Christian Bishops be enemies to cruelty, who know
that Charity is more essential to Christianity, than this or that Form of
Lyturgy or Ceremonies is. If you think it unsufferable, that we should have
differences about such things, remember that there will be no perfect Unity,
till there is perfect Charity and Sanctity; and that destroying one another,
and consequently destroying Charity, is an unhappy way to Unity. And that Unity
is to be held in things necessary, and liberty in things unnecessary, and
Charity in both. Remember that it was in a far greater difference, where
Constantine persuades the Christians to mutual forbearance, by the example of
the Philosophers, that suffer difference in abundance of their opinions. Eusebius.
de vita Constant. lib. 2. cap. 67. And that Valens the Arrian was made more
moderate, and abated his persecution of the Orthodox, by the Oration of
Themistius, who bid him not [wonder at the dissentions of the Christians, for
they were small, if compared unto the multitude and crowd of Opinions that are
among the Heathen Philosophers, as being more than 300. and that God will by
this diversity of Opinions manifest hi^ glory, and make men the more reverence
him, who is so hardly known S^crat. Hist. ^ib. 4. cap. 27. Those that dissent
from you in these tolerable Cases, cannot c^ange their own Opinions; but you
can, if you will, forbear hurting of your Brethren: Do that which you can do,
rather than urge them by usuitable means, to that which they cannot do. These
are not matters sufficient to justify Contention and uncharitable usage of
your Brethren. When many of the Macedonian Faction ^etitioned the good Emperor
Jovianus, to depose those that affirmed the Son to be unlike the Father, and to
put their party in their places; he gave them no answer but this, [I hate
Contention, and I love and honor them that are addicted to Concord] Socrat.
lib. 4. cap. 21. Then (says Eusebius. Hist. lib. 8. cap. 1.) did the Lord obscure
the Daughter of Zion, and cast down the glory of Israel, etc. when those that
seemed our Pastors rejecting the Rule of Godliness were inflamed among
themselves with mutual Contentions, and drove on only these Contentions,
Threatenings, Emulation, mutual Hatred and Enmity, and, like Tyrants, prosecuted
their ambitions.] We thought it no impertinent digression, here to take this
occasion, again to crave your exercise of the ancient Charity, and our
enjoyment of the ancient Liberty, instead of a forcing the anciently-free
Lyturgie and Ceremonies, and that by unproportionable penalties; and if yet we
cannot prevail with you, we shall still beg for Peace of the God of Peace,
where we have better hopes to be heard, and shall hold on in seeking it, how
ill soever our endeavors may be interpreted or succeed: And as the good man
wept, (Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 18.) when he saw a Woman pompously adorned, because
He was not so careful to please God, as She was to allure men: So we shall
confess we ought to weep that we cannot be more charitable and laborious in
building up the Church in Holiness and Peace, than others are by uncharitable
courses to afflict it: And it shall be our, hope that whether by their Labors,
or their Sufferings, God will serve and honor himself, by those many faithful
Servants of his, whom he has called into his Work, and whose Cause we plead;
and that however they are used, they shall not be unuseful to the ends of their
Vocation: As Theodoret observes, Hist. lib. 4. cap. 30. that in a calamitous
time [the Moderator of the Universe raised up such Guides, as were sufficient
in so great affluctuation, and opposed the valor of the Leaders to the
greatness of the Enemies Incursion, and gave the best Remedies in the hardest
times of Pestilence] So that the punished Pastors did from the utmost parts of
the Earth corroberate their own, and refu^^ the Adversaries by their Writings.]
And for our selves, as we were truly desirous to do our part for to preserve
your reputation with the Flocks, in order to the success of your Government for
their good, and never envyed you that worldly Honor or Revenue, which yet some
have thought unsuitable to the simplicity and employment of Christ's Ministers:
So if you will neither suffer us quietly to serve God, or conscionably to serve
you, we shall be the less sollicitous for that part of our Task from which you
have power to discharge us: And as Basil said to Valens the Emperor, that
would have him pray for the Life of his Son [If thou will receive the true
Faith, and restore the Churches to Concord, thy Son shall live] which when he
refused he said [The will of God then be done with thy Son] So we say to you,
If you will put on Charity, and promote your Brethrens and the Churches peace;
God will honor you, and good men will honor you, and your Calling will have
advantage by it: But if you will do contrarily, the will of the Lord be done
with your Honors; but know, that them that honor Him, He will honor; and
they that despise Him, shall be lightly esteemed* and that by the course of
uncharitable violence, which we deprecate, you will most deeply wound the Cause
of your pre-eminence, even more than its adversaries could have done: And, if
it be the will of the Lord that suffering at home, where we have served Him,
must be our Lot, we doubt not but that he will furnish us with strength and
patience, and we shall remember such Ensamples as Ruffin records, Hist. Lib.
2. Cap. 3. when a Millitary Bishop sent his Soldiers to assault 3000 scattered
Christians, where appeared a strange kind of Warfare, when the assaulted
offered their necks, saying only, Amici, ad quid venisti? Friend, why came
thou hither? Or if we must be removed from the Land of our Nativity, as Maris
told Julian, That he thanked God, that had deprived him of his sight, that he
might not see the face of such a man, Socrat. Hist. Lib. 3. Cap. 10. So we
shall take it as a little abatement of our Affliction, that we see not the Sins
and Calamities of the People, whose Peace and Welfare we so much desire. Having
taken this opportunity here to conclude this part with these Requests and
Warnings, we now proceed to the second Part, containing the particulars of our
Exceptions, and your Answers.

Concerning Morning and Evening Prayer.
1. Rubr. Sect. 1.
WE think it fit that the Rubric stand as it is, Answ.
and all to be left to the discretion of the Ordinary.

Repl. We thought the End and Use, more considerable than Custom; and that the
Ordinary himself should be under the Rule of doing all to Edification.

2. Rubr. Sect. 2.
Answ. [For the Reasons given in our Answer to the 18. General, whither you
refer us, we think it fit that the Rubric continue as it is.]

Repl. We have given you Reason enough against the Imposition of the usual
Ceremonies; and would you draw forth those absolute ones to increase the burden?

Sect. 3. Lords Prayer.
Answ. [Deliver us from evil] These words [for thine is the Kingdom, etc.] are
not in St. Luke, nor in the ancient Copies of St. Matthew; never mentioned in
the ancient Comments, nor used in the Latin Church, and therefore questioned
whether they be part of the Gospel; there is no reason that they should be
always used.]

Repl. We shall not be so over-credulous as to believe you, that these words
are not in the ancient Copies: It is enough that we believe that some few
ancient Copies have them not; but that the most (even the Generality, except
those few) have them: The judgment of our English Translators, and almost all
other Translators of Matthew, and of the R. R. B.^. of Chester among your
selves, putting the Copy that has it in his Bible (as that which is most
received and approved by the Church) do show on which side is the chief
Authority. If the few Copies that want it; had been thought more authentic and
credible, the Church of England, and most other Churches, would not have
preferred the Copies that have this Doxologie: And why will you in this
contradict the later Judgment of the Church, expressed in the Translation
allowed and imposed? The Syriack, Ethiopick, and Persian Translations also have
it; and if the Syriack be as ancient as you your selves even now asserted, then
the Antiquity of the Doxologie is there evident: And it is not altogether to be
neglected, which by Chemnitius, and others, is conjectured, That Paul's words,
2 Timothy 4. 18. were spoken as in reference to this Doxologie; and as Pareus, and
other Protestants conclude, it is more probable the Latins neglected, than
that the Greek inserted, of their own heads, this sentence. The Socinians and
Arrians have as fair a pretense for their Exception against 1 John 5. 6, 7.
Musculus says, non cogitant vero similius esse, ut Graecorum Ecclesiae, majis
quam Latina, quod ab Evangelistis Graece Scriptum est, integrum servavit,
nihilque de suo adjecerit, quid de Graeca Ecclesia dico? vidi ipse
vetustissimum Evangelium secundum Matthaeum, Codicem, Chalaaeis, and Elementis,
and verbis conscriptum, in quo Coronis ista perinde atque in Graecis legebatur.
Nec Chaldei solum sed and Arabes Christiani pariformiter cum Grecis orant, Et
exemplar Hebraeum a docto and celebri D. Sebast. Munstero vulgatum, hanc ipsum
Coronidem habet: Cum ergo consentiant hac in re, Hebraeorum, Chaldaeorum,
Arabum, and Graecorum Ecclesiae, valde inconsideratum videtur, quod uni
Latinorum Ecclesiae contra omnes reliquas tautum tribuitur authoritatis, ut
quod sola diversum legit, ab Evangelistis traditem esse credatur: quod vero
reliquae omnes, concorditer habem, and orant, pro a^dititio and peregrino
habeatur. And that Luke has it not, will no more prove that it was not a part
of the Lords Prayer, than all other omissions of one Evangelist will prove,
that such words are Corruptions in the other that have them. All set together
give us the Gospel fully; and from all we must gather it.

Sect. 4. Lords Prayer, often used.
Answ. [It is used but twice in the Morning, and twice in the Evening Service,
and twice cannot be called often, much less so often.] For the Letany,
Communion, Baptism, etc. they are Offices distinct from Morning and Evening
Prayer, and it is not fit that any of them should want the Lords Prayer.]

Repl. We may better say we are required to use it six times every morning,
than but twice: for it is twice in the Common Morning Prayer, and once in the
Letany, and once in the Communion Service, and once at Baptism, (which in great
Parishes is usually every day) and once to be used by the Preacher in the
Pulpit: and if you call these distinct Offices, that makes not the Lords
Prayer the seldomer used: Sure we are the Apostles thought it fit, that many of
their Prayers should be without the Lords Prayer.

Sect. 5. Gloria Patri.
Answ. [This Doxology being a solemn Confession of the blessed Trinity, should
not be thought a burden to any Christian Lyturgy, especially being so short as
it is: neither is the repetition of it, to be thought a vain repetition, more
than [his mercy endures for ever] so often repeated, Psalm. 136. we cannot give
God too much Glory, that being the end of our Creation, and should be the end
of all our Services.]

Repl. Though we cannot give God too much Glory, we may too often repeat a form
of words, wherein his Name and Glory is mentioned: There is great difference
between a Psalm of Praise, and the praise in our ordinary prayers; more liberty
of repetition may be taken in Psalms, and be an Ornament: And there is
difference between that which is unusual (in one Psalm of 150) and that which
is our daily course of Worship: When you have well proved that Christ's
prohibition of battologie extends not to this (Matthew. 6.) we shall acquiesce.

Sect. 6. Page 15. Rubr. 2.
Answ. [In such places where they do sing, etc.] The Rubr. directs only such
singing, as is after the manner of distinct reading, and we never heard of any
inconvenience thereby, and therefore conceive this demand to be needless.]

Repl. It tempts men to think they should read in a singing tone, and to turn
reading Scripture into singing, has the inconveniences of turning the edifying
simplicity and plainness of God's Service, into such affected unnatural strains
and tones, as is used by the Mimical and Ludicrous; or such as feign themselves
in Raptures: And the highest things (such as words and modes that signify
Raptures) are most loathsome, when forced, feigned and hypocritically affected;
and therefore not fit for Congregations, that cannot be supposed to be in such
Raptures. This we apply also to the sententious mode of Prayers.

Sect. 7. Benedicite.
Ans. [This Hymn was used all the Church over, Conc. Tolet. Can. 13. and
therefore should be continued still, as well as Te Deum, (Ruffin. Apol. cont.
Hieron.) or, Veni Creator, which they do not object against us as Apocriphal.]

Repl. You much discourage us in these great straits of time, to give us such
loose and troublesome Citations; you turn us to Ruffin. Apol. in gross; and tell
us not which of the Councils of Tollet, among at least 13. you mean. But we
find the words in Council 4. but that Provincial Spanish Council, was no meet
judge of the Affairs of the universal Church, unto the universal Church: nor is
it certain by their words, whether [quem] refer not to [Deum] rather than to
[Hymnum] but if you so regard that Council, remember that Can. 9. it is but
once a day that the Lord's Prayer is enjoined, against them that used it, but
on the Lord's day only; and that Can. 17. it is employed, that it was said but
once on that day. The Benedicite is somewhat more cautelously to be used, than
humane Compositions, that profess to be but humane: when the Apocriphal
Writings, are by the Papists pretended to be Canonical, and used so like the
Canon in our Church, we have the more cause to desire, that a sufficient
distinction be still made.

In the Letany.
Sect 1.
Ans. [The alterations here desired, are so nice, as if they that made them,
were given to change.]

Repl. We bear the Censure; but profess, that if you will desert the products
of Changers, and stick to the unchanged Rule, delivered by the Holy Ghost, we
shall joyfully agree with you. Let them that prove most given to change, from
the unchangeable Rule and Example, be taken for the hinderers of our Unity and
Peace.

Sect. 2.
Ans. [From all other deadly sin] is better than [from all other heinous sin]
upon the reason here given, because the wages ^f sin is death.]

Repl. There is so much mortal poison in the Popish distinction of mortal and
venial sin (by which abundance of sins are denied to be sins at all properly,
but only analogically) that the stomach that fears it, is not to be charged
with niceness: The words here seem to be used by way of distinction; and [all
deadly sin] seems not to be spoken of [all sin;] and if so, your reason from
Romans 6. 23. is vain, and ours firm.

Sect. 3.
Ans. [From sudden death] as good as from [dying suddenly] which therefore we
pray against, that we may not be unprepared.]

Repl. We added [unprepared] as expository, or hinting, to show the reason why
sudden death is prayed against; and so to hint our Prayers to that sudden
death, which we are unprepared for; there being some ways of sudden death, no
more to be prayed against than death it self, simply considered may. When you
say [from sudden death] is as good as from [dying suddenly] we confess it is,
but not so good as from dying suddenly and unpreparedly.] We hope you intend
not to make any believe, that our turning the Adjective into an Adverb, was our
Reformation? And yet we wondered to hear this made a common jest upon us, as
from those that had seen our Prayers. Would you have had us said [from sudden
and unprepared death?] you would then have had more matter of just exception
against the words [unprepared death] than now you have against [dying
suddenly:] A man may be well prepared to dye suddenly, by Martyrdom for Christ,
or by War for his Prince, and many other ways.

Sect. 4.
Ans. [All that travel] as little liable to exception as [those that travel]
and more agreeable to the phrase of Scripture, 1 Timothy 1. 2. I will that Prayers
be made for all men.]

Repl. All universal is to be understood properly, as comprehending all the
individuals, and so it is not an indefinite: And we know not that we are bound
to pray for Thieves, and Pirates, and Traitors, that travel by Land or Water,
on such Errands as Faux, or the other powder Plotters, or the Spanish Armado,
in 88. or as Parry, or any that should travel on the Errand as Clement or
Raviliack did to the two King Heneries of France: Are these niceties with you.

Sect. 5. P. 16.
Ans. [The second Collect. etc.] We do not find, nor do they say, what is to be
amended in these Collects; therefore to say any thing particularly, were to
answer to we know not what.]

Repl. We are glad that one word in the proper Collects has appeared such to
you, as needs a Reformation; especially when you told us before, [That the
Lyturgy was never found fault with, by those to whom the name of Protestants
most properly belongs.] which looked upon our hop^s of reformation, almost as
destructively as the Papists Doctrine of infallibility does, when we deal with
them. As for the Collects mentioned by us, you should not wonder that we
brought not in a particular Charge against them: For first, we had a conceit
that it was best for us to deal as gently and tenderly as we could, with the
faults of the Lyturgy: And therefore we have under our Generals hid abundance
of particulars, which you may find in the Abridgement of the Lincolnshire
Ministers, and in many other Books. And secondly, we had a conceit, that you
would have vouchsafed to have treated with us personally in persence, according
to the sense of his Majesty's Commission, and then we thought to have told you
particularly of such matters; but you have forced us to confess that we find
our selves deceived.

Communion Service.
Sect. 1. P. 17. Kyries.
Ans. [To say [Lord have mercy upon us] after every Commandment, is more quick
and active, than to say it once at the close; and why Christian People should
not upon their knees ask their pardon for their Life, forfeited by the breach
of each Commandment, and pray for Grace to keep them for the time to come;
they must be more than ignorant that can scruple.]

Repl. We thank you for saying nothing against our four first Requests. Though
we be thought more than ignorant for our scruple, we can truly say, we are
willing to learn; but your bare opinion is not enough to cure ignorance and
more. By your reason, you may make kneeling the gesture for hearing the
Scriptures read, and hearing Sermons and all: If you will but interweave
Prayers, he must be more than ignorant that will not kneel. The universal
Church of Christ was more than ignorant, for many hundred years, that not only
neglected, but prohibited Genuflexion in all adoration each Lords day: when now
the 20. of Exodus or 5. Deuteronomy. may not be heard or read, without kneeling (save
only by the Clergy.)

Sect. 2. P. 18. Homilies.
Ans. [Some Livings are so small, that they are not able to maintain a Licensed
Preacher, and in such and the like Cases, this provision is necessary; nor can
any reason be given, why the Ministers reading a [Homily] set forth by common
Authority, should not be accounted Preaching of the Word, as well as his
reading or pronouncing by heart, a Homily or Sermon of his own, or any other
man's?]

Repl. 1. When the Usurpers would quickly have brought Livings to that
competency, as would have maintained able Preachers, we may not question
whether just Authority will do it. 2. When abundance of able Ministers cast
out, would be glad of liberty to Preach for nothing, this pretense has no
taste or sense in it. 3. When we may not without the imputation of
uncharitableness, once imagine that your Lordships, with your Deans, and other
Officers, do not value the saving of Souls above Money, we may conclude, that
you will voluntarily allow so much out of your ample Revenues, as will supply
such places, or many of them: the rather, because we find you charging them, as
[inordinately desiring the Honor and Wealth of the World] that would have had
all Ministers to have had 100 l. or 80 l. per annum a piece; and therefore may
conclude, that you will take no more, if you hate that sin, more than they do,
that are accused of it: But the next part of your An^wer firghteth us more; to
which we say, That we will not differ with you for the name, whether reading
Homilies, may be called Preaching; but we take the boldness to say, that it is
another manner of Preaching that Christ and his Apostles sent men to perform;
and which the Church has gloried in, and been edified by to this day; and
which thousands of Souls have been brought to Heaven by; and which we again
desire may be enjoined, and not left so indifferent.

Sect. 3. Sentences.
Ans. [The Sentences tend all to exhort the People to pious liberality, whether
the Object be the Minister, or the Poor; and though some of the Sentences be
Apocriphal, they may be useful for that purpose.] Why Collection for the Poor
should be made at another time, there is no reason given, only change desired.]

Repl. We have often told you, why the Apocripha should be cautelously used in
the Church; that Usurper that should pretend to the Crown, and have a more
numerous party than the King (that has the undoubted Right) will be looked on
more suspitiously than ordinary Subjects. 2. It is a sordid thing for Ministers
to love Money, and it is sordid, unless in extraordinary necessities, to have
them beg, and beg for themselves, and beg under a pretense of serving God; even
in times when the Clergy seems advanced. 3. We confessed our selves deceived, in
thinking we should have free personal debates with you, which made us reserve
many of our Reasons. Our Reasons are, 1. For less disturbance. 2. Because the
Peoples affections are much more raised usually, and so fitter for returns,
when they have received. 3. Especially, because it is most seasonable to do the
Acts of Gratitude, when we had received the obliging benefits, and so say,
[What shall I give the Lord for all his Benefits?] when we have partaked of
them; and to offer our selves first, and with our selves, what he gives us,
unto him, when we have received him, and his Graces offered to us. These are
the Reasons that brought us under your Censure of desiring a Change.

Sect. 4. P. 19. 3. Exhortation.
A^sw. [The 1. and 3. Exhortations, are very seasonable before the Communion,
to put men in mind how they ought to be prepared, and in what danger they are
to come unprepared: that if they be not duly qualified, they may depart, and
be better prepared at another time.]

Repl. But is it not more seasonable that in so great business such warning go
a considerable time before? Is there then leisure of self-examination, and
making restitution and satisfaction, and going to the Minister for Counsel to
quiet his Conscience, etc. in Order to the present Sacrament? We yet desire
these things way be sooner told them.

Sect. 5. Exc. 1.
Answ. [We fear this may discourage many, certainly themselves cannot desire
that men should come to the holy Communion with a troubled Conscience, and
therefore have no reason to blame the Church, for saying [it is requisite that
men come with a quiet Conscience, and prescribing means for quieting thereof]
if this be to discourage men, it is fit they should be discouraged and
deterred, and kept from the Communion till they have done all that is here
directed by the Church, which they may well do considering, that this
Exhortation shall be read in the Church, the Sunday or Holy Day before.]

Rep. But we can and do desire, that many that have a troubled Conscience, and
cannot otherwise quiet it, should come to the Communion for remedy, and not be
discouraged or kept away.

Sect. 6. Ministers Turning.
Answ. [The Ministers turning to the People is not most convenient, throughout
the whole Ministration, when he speaks to them: as in Lessons, Absolution, and
Benedictions, it is convenient that he turn to them, when he speaks for them to
God, it is fit that they should all turn another way as the ancient Church ever
did; the reasons of which you may see, Aug. lib. 2. De Ser. Dom. in monte.

Repl. It is not yet understood by us, why the Ministers or People (for which
you meant by [they all] we know not) should turn another way in Prayer; for we
think the People should hear the Prayers of the Ministers: if not, Latin
Prayers may serve, and then you need not except against extemporary Prayers,
because the People cannot own them, for how can most of them own what they hear
not, whatever it be. As for Augustins reason for looking toward the East when
we Pray, [ut ad moneatur animus ad naturam excellentiorem se convertere, id est
ad Dominum, cum ipsum corpus e^us quod est terrenum ad corpus excellentius, id
est ad corpus caeleste convert^ur:] we suppose you will not expect that we
should be much moved by it. If we should, why should we not worship toward any
of the Creatures visible when we can pretend such reasons for it, as minding us
of Superior things? and why should we not look Southward when the Sun is in the
South? And we fear the worshipping toward the Sun, as representing, or minding
us of Christ's Heavenly Body, is too like to the prohibited worshipping before
an Image, and too like to that worshipping before the Host of Heaven, in which
the old Idolatry consisted, or at least which was the Introduction of it; of
which our Protestant writers Treat at large against the Papists, on the point
of Image worship; See also Vessius de Idolat. lib. 2. cap. 2, 3. etc.

Sect. 7. Exc. 3.
Ans. [It appears by the greatest evidences of Antiquity, that it was upon the
25. day of December. S. Aug. Psalm. 132.]

Repl. It is not August. alone in Psalm. 132. that must tell us which way [the
greatest evidences of Antiquity] go: And his reasoning that John must decrease,
and Christ must increase, as proved by John's being born, when the days
decrease, and Christ's being born when the days increase, does not much invite
us to receive his testimony. We conceive the ancient opinion of Jerusalem, and
other Eastern Churches, that were nearest to the place, is a greater Argument
for the contrary, then you have here given us for what you thus affirm: we
might set Epiphan. against Aug^st. and call the Greek Churches, till the midst
of Chrysostoms time, when they changed their opinion, and in our time the
Judgment of the Famous Chronologers, Scaliger, Berraldus, Broughton,
Calvisius, Cappellus, Clopenburgius, with many others, are not contemptible, as
set against such an unproved Assertion as this.

Sect. 8.
Ans. [That our sinful bodies, etc.] It can no more be said, those words do
give greater efficacy to the Blood then to the Body of Christ, then when our
Lord says, [This is my Blood which is shed for you, and for many for the
remission of sins, etc.] and says not so explicitly of the Body.

Repl. Sure Christ their intimates no such distinction, as is here intimated:
There his Body is said to [be broken for us] and not only [for our bodies.]

Sect. 9. To every Communicant kneeling.
Ans. [It is most requisite that the Minister deliver the bread and wine into
every particular Communicants hand, and ropeat the words in the singular
number; for so much as it is the propriety of Sacraments, to make particular
ob^ignation to each Believer, and it is our visible Profession, that by the
Grace of God, Christ tasted death for everyman.]

Reply 1. Did not Christ know the propriety of Sacraments better than we? and
yet he delivered it in the plural number to all at once, with a [Take ye, eat
ye, drink ye all of it] We had rather study to be obedient to our Master, than
to be wiser than He. 2. As God makes the general offer, which gives to no man
a personal in^erest, till his own acceptance first appropriate it; So it is fit
that the Minister, that is God's Agent, imitate Him, when his Example, and the
Reason of it, so concur to engage us to it; Clemens, Alexandr. Stromat. lib. 1.
Prope. gives a Reason (as we understand him) for the contrary, That Man being
a free Agent, must be the Chooser, or Refuser, for himself: (...). Quemadmodum
Eucharistiam cum quidem, ut mos est, diviserint, permittunt unicuique ex populo
ejus partim sumere: and after renders this reason, (...): ad accurate enim
perfecteque eligendum ac fugiendum optima est Conscientia.

And the thing is so agreeable to your own doctrinal Principles, that we fear
you disrelish it because it comes from us.

Sect. 10. Kneeling, etc.
Answ. [Concerning Kneeling at the Sacrament we have given account already;
only thus much we add, That we conceive it an Error to say, that the Scripture
affirms the Apostles to have received not kneeling: The posture at the Paschal
Supper we know, but the Institution of the holy Sacrament was after Supper, and
what Posture was then used, the Scripture is silent. The Rubric at the end of
the 1. Edw. c. 6. that leaves kneeling, crossing, etc. indifferent, is meant
only at such times as they are not prescribed and required: But at the
Eucharist kneeling is expressly required in the Rubric following.]

Repl. Doubtless when Matthew and Mark say it was [as they did eat] to which
before it is said [That they sat down] and when Interpreters generally agree
upon it, this would easily have satisfied you, if you had been as willing to
believe it, as to believe the contrary: Matthew. 26, 20, 21, 26. the same phrase
is used, v. 26. (...), as in v. 21. where it shows they were still sitting.
For the sense of the Rubric, if you prove that the Makers so interpret it, we
shall not deny it; but the Reason of both seems the same.

Sect. 11. Communion three times a year.
Answ. [This desire to have the Parishioners at liberty, whether they will ever
receive the Communion or not, savours of too much neglect, and coldness of
affection toward the holy Sacrament: it is more sitting that order should be
taken to bring it into more frequent use, as it was in the first and best
times: Our Rubr. is directly according to the ancient Counc. of Eliberis, cap.
81. Great. de Consecrat. no man is to be accounted a good Catholic Christian
that does not receive three times in the year: The distempers which indispose
men to it, must be corrected, and not the receiving of the Sacrament therefore
omitted: It is a pitiful pretense to say they are not fit, and make their sin
their excuse: formerly our Church was quarrelled at for not compelling men to
the Communion; now for urging men: How shall she please?] Hooker, l. 5. s. 8.

Repl. We con^ess it is desirable that all our distempers and unfitness should
be healed; and we desire with you that Sacraments may be oftener; but that every
person in the Parish that is ^^fit, be forced to receive, is that which we
cannot concur with you to be guilty of: Two sorts we think unfit to be so
forced (at least:) First, abundance of people grossly ignorant and scandalous,
that will eat and drink Judgment to themselves, not discerning the Lord's Body:
Secondly, many mela^^ holy and otherwise troubled doubting souls; that if they
should receive the Sacrament before they find themselves more fit, would be in
danger to go out of their wits with fear, left it would seal them to
destruction, and, as the Lyturgy says, left the Devil enter into them, as into
Judas; or at least it would grievously deject them: As formerly, so now, there
is great reason (...) that the unprepared be not forced to the Sacrament: and
ye^ (...) to great a part of the Body of the Church may not be let alon^ in
your Communion, without due admonition and discipline, that ordinarily neglect
or refuse the Churches Communion in this Sacrament; Those that are so profane
should be kept away; but withal they should be proceeded with by discipline,
till they repent, or are cast out of the Church.

Sect. 12.
Answ. [This Rubric is not in the Lyturgy of Queen Elizabeth, nor confirmed by
Law; nor is there any great need of restoring it, the world being now in more
danger of Profanation than of Idolatry; besides the sense of it is
sufficiently declared in the 28 Article of the Church of England. The time
appointed we conceive sufficient.]

Repl. Can there be any hurt or danger in the peoples being taught, to
understand the Church aright? Has not Bishop Hall told you in his Life, of a
Romanist beyond Sea that would have forced him down, that the Church of England
is for Transubstantiation, because of our Kneeling, page 20. And the same
Bishop, greatly differing from you, says in the same Book, page 294. [But to
put all scruples out of the mind of any Reader concerning this Point, let that
serve for the upshot of all, which is expressly set down in the fifth Rubr. in
the end of the Communion, set forth as the Judgment of the Church of England,
both in King Edward and Queen Elizabeth's time (note that) though lately upon
negligence, (note, upon negligence) omitted in the Impression.] and so recites
the words. Where you say, [There is no great need, etc.] We reply: 1.
Profaneness may be opposed nevertheless for our instructing the People against
Idolatry. 2. The abounding of Papists, who in this point seem to us Idolatrous,
shows that there is danger of it. 3. The commonness of Idolatry throughout
the world, and the case of the Israelites of old, show that man's nature is
prone to it. 4. Profaneness and Idolatry befriend each other. As God is jealous
against Idolatry, so should all faithful Pastors of the Church be; and not
refuse to give such a Caution to the People, and say, There is no great need of
it.

Public Baptism.
Sect. 1. Ex.
Ans. [Until they have made due profession of Repentance, etc.] We think this
desire to be very hard and uncharitable, punishing the poor Infants for the
Parents sakes, and giving also too great and arbitrary a Power to the Minister
to judge which of his Parishioners he pleases, Atheists, Infidels, Heretics,
etc. and then in that name to reject their Children from being baptized. Our
Church concludes more Charitably, that Christ will favorably accept every
Infant to Baptism, that is presented by the Church, according to our present
order; and this she concludes out of holy Scripture (as you may see in the
Office of Baptism) according to the Practice and Doctrine of the Catholic
Church, Cyp. Ep. 59. August. cap. 28. and de verb. Apost. Ser. 14.

Repl. We perceive you will stick with us in more then Ceremonies. To your
Reasons we reply, 1. By that Reason, all the Children of all Heathens, or
Infidels in the world, should be admitted to Baptism, because they, should not
be punished for the Parents sakes. 2. But we deny that it is (among Christians
that believe Original Sin) any absurdity, to say that Children are punished for
their Parents sakes. 3. But yet we deny this to be any such punishment at all,
unless you will call their non-deliverance a punishment. They are the Children
of Wrath by nature, and have Original sin. The Covenant of Grace, that gives
the saving Benefits of Christ, is made to none but the faithful and their Seed.
Will you call this a punishing them for their Fathers sakes, that God has
extended his Covenant to no more? Their Parents infidelity does but leave them
in their Original sin and misery, and is not further it self imputed to them;
If you know of any Covenant or Promise of Salvation, made to all without
Condition, or to Infants on any other Condition or qualification, but that they
be the Seed of the faithful dedicated to God, you should do well to show it us,
and not so slightly pass over things of so great moment, in which you might
much help the world out of darkness, if you can make good what you intimate: If
indeed you mean as you seem to speak, that its uncharitableness to punish any
Infants for the Parents faults, and that a non-liberation is such a punishment,
then you must suppose, that all the Infants of Heathens, Jews, and Turks are
saved (that dye in Infancy) or else Christ is uncharitable: And if they are all
saved without Baptism, then baptizing is of no use or necessity, as you seem to
think. What then is the privilege of the Seed of the Faithful, that they are
Holy, and that the Covenant is made with them, and God will be their God? We
fear you will again revive the opinion of the Anabaptists, among the People,
when they observe that you have no more to say for the baptizing of the
Children of the Faithful, than of Infidels, Heathens and Athiests. To your
second Objection, we Answer: You will drive many a faithful Labourer from the
work of Christ, if he may not be in the Ministry, unless he will baptize the
Children of Infidels, Heathens, and Excommunicate ones, before their Parents do
repent. And the first question is not, who shall be judge? but whether we must
be all thus forced? Is not the question as great, who shall be judge of the
unfitness of persons for the Lord's Supper? and yet there you think it not a
taking too much upon us, to keep away the scandalous, if they have their
Appeals to you? And is it indeed (a power too great and arbitrary) to have a
judicium discretionis about our own Acts? and not to be forced to baptize the
Children of Heathens against our Consciences? who judged for the Baptizers in
the primitive Church, what persons they should baptize? We act but as Engines
under you, and not as men, if we must not use our reason; and we are more
miserable than brutes or men, if we must be forced to go against our
Consciences, unless you will save us harmless before God: O that in a fair
debate you would prove to us, that such Children as are described are to be
baptized, and that the Ministers that baptize them, must not have power to
discern who to baptize. But who mean you by the Churches that must present
every Infant that Christ may accept them? Is every Infant first in the Promise
of pardon? (If so, show us that Promise) and then sure God will make good that
Promise, though Heathen Parents present not their Children to him, as (your
grounds suppose) if not, then will the sign save those that are not in the
Promise: But is it the Godfathers that are the Church, whoever called them so?
And if by the Church you mean the Minister, and by presenting, you meant
baptizing them, then any Heathens Child that a Minister can catch up and
baptize, shall be saved; which if it could be proved, would persuade us to go
hunt for Children in Turkey, Tartary, or America, and secretly baptize them in
a habit that should not make us known; but there is more of fancy than charity
in this; and Christ never invited any to him, but the Children of the Promise,
to be thus presented and baptized.

Sect. 2.
[The time appointed we conceive sufficient.] Repl. We conjecture the words
that conclude your former Subject being misplaced, are intended as your Answer
to this; and if all the Children of any sort in the world, that are brought to
us, must by us be baptized without distinction, indeed it is no great matter
what time we have notice of it.

Sect. 3. P. 23.
Ans. [And then the Godfathers, etc.] It is an erroneous doctrine, and the
ground of many others, and of many of your Exc^ptions, that Children have no
other right to Baptism, than in their Parents right; the Churches primitive
practice forbids it to be left to the pleasure of the Parents, whether there
shall be other Sureties or no? (St. Aug. Ep. 23.) It is fit we should observe
carefully the practice of venerable Antiquity, as they desire, Prop. 18.]

Repl. It seems we differ in Doctrine, though we subscribe the same Articles;
we earnestly desire you distinctly to tell us, what is the Infants title to
Baptism, if it be not to be found in the Parent? Assign it, and prove it when
you have done, as well as we prove their right, as they are (the Seed of
Believers, dedicated to them by God) and then we promise to consent. It Is
strange to us to hear so much of the Churches primitive practice, where so
little evidence of it is produced, Aug. Ep. 23. talks not (of primitive
practice) ab initio non fuit sic; was it so in the Apostles days? And
afterward you prove not that it was the judgment of the Catholic Church,
that bare Sponsers instead of Parents, Pro-parents or Owners of the Children,
might procure to the Children of all Infidels, a title to Baptism and its
benefits. Such Suscepters as became the Owners or Adopters of the Children, are
to be distinguished from those that proforma, stand by for an hour, during the
baptizing of Children, and ever after, leave them to their Parents: who as they
have the natural interest in them, and power of their disposal, and the
Education of them, so are fittest to covenant in their names.

Sect. 4.
Ans. [The Font usually stands as it did in primitive times, at or near the
Church door, to signify that Baptism was the entrance into the Church
mystical; We are all bap^ized into one Body, 1 Cor. 12. 13. and the People may
hear well enough. If Jordan and all other waters, be not so far sanctified by
Christ, as to be the matter of Baptism, what Authority have we to baptize? and
sure his Baptism was dedicatio Baptismi.]

Repl. Our lesser difference about the Font, and the flood Jordan, is almost
drowned in the greater before going: But to the first we say, that we conceive
the usual situation for the Peoples hearing, is to be preferred before your
Ceremonious position of it. And to the second we say, that dedicatio Baptismi
is an unfiting phrase, and yet if it were not, what is that to the
sanctification of Jordan, and all other waters? Did Christ sanctify all Corn,
or Bread, or Grapes, or Wine to an holy use, when he administered the Lords
Supper? Sanctifying is separating to an holy use; but the flood Jordan, and all
other water, is not separted to this holy use, in any proper sense; no more
than all mankind is sanctified to the Priestly Office, because men were made
Priests.

Sect. 5. Sureties, etc. P. 24.
Ans. [It has been accounted reasonable, and allowed by the best Laws, that
Guardians should Covenant and contract for their Minors to their benefit; by
the same right the Church has appointed Sureties to undertake for Children,
when they enter into Covenant with God by Baptism, (St. Aug. Ep. 23.) And this
general practice of the Church is enough to satisfy those that doubt.]

Rep. 1. Who made those Sureties Guardians of the Infants that are neither
Parents, nor Pro-parents, not Owners of them? we are not now speaking against
Sponsors: But you know that the very Original of those Sponsors is a great
Controversy: And whether they were not at first most properly Sponsors for the
Parents, that they should perform that part they undertook (because many
Parents were Deserrors, and many proved negligent) Sponsors then excluded not
Parents from their proper undertaking, but joined with them; Godfathers are not
the Infants Guardians with us, and therefore have not power thus to Covenant
and Vow in their names: We entreat you to take heed of leaving any Children
indeed out of the mutual Covenant that are baptized: How are those in the
Covenant that cannot consent themselves, and do it not by any that truly
represent them, nor have any Authority to act as in their names? The Authority
of Parents being most unquestionable (who by nature, and the Word of God, have
the power of disposing of their Children; and consequently of choosing and
covenanting for them) Why should it not be preferred? at least, you may give
leave to those Parents that desire it, to be the Dedicators of, and Covenanters
for their own Children, and not force others on them whether they will or no.
2. But the question is not of Covenanting, but professing present Actual
believing, forsaking, etc. In which though we believe the Churches sense was
sound, yet we desire that all things, that may render it liable to
misunderstanding, may be avoided,

Sect. 6. Page 24.
[Receive remission of sins by spiritual Regeneration, most proper for Baptism
is our spiritual Regeneration, St. John 3. unless a man be born again of water
and the spirit, etc. And by this is received remission of Sins, Acts 2. 3.
Repent and be Baptized every one of you, for the remission of sins; So the
Creed; one Baptism for the remission of sins.]

Repl. Baptism as an outward Administration, is our visible Sacramental
Regeneration: Baptism as containing with the Sign, the thing signified, is our
spiritual real Regeneration. As we are Regenerated before Baptism, (as you know
adult Believers are) so we cannot pray to receive remission of sins by that
same Regeneration renewed. As we are regenerated really in Baptism, that
Regeneration and Remission are conjunct benefits: But if Baptism at once give
Regeneration and Remission, it follows not that it gives Remission by
Regeneration: But as Regeneration comprehends the whole change (real or
Physical, and (...)) so we acknowledge, that as the part is given by the whole,
you may say that remission is given by regeneration, but more s^^ly in it than
by it; but we are not willing to make more ado about words than needs.

[We cannot in faith say, that every Child that is baptized, is regenerate,
etc. seeing that God's Sacraments have their effects, Ex^. Sect. ^. Page 24.
Answ.
where the Receiver does not ponere obicem, put any bar against them (which
Children cannot do) we may say in faith of every Child that is baptized, that
it is regenerated by Gods Holy Spirit, and the denial of it tends to
Anabaptism, and the contempt of this holy Sacrament, as nothing worthy, nor
material, whether it be adminis^red to children or no: Concerning the Cross, we
refer to our Answer to the same in general.]

Rep. All God's Sacraments attain their proper end: But whether the Infants of
Infidels be the due subjects, and whether their end be to seal up Grace and
Salvation to them that have no promise of it, Ti^ 3. 5.
or whether it be only to seal the Covenant to Believers and their seed, are
Questions yet undecided^, wherein we must entreat you not to expect that we
should implicitly believe you; and it is as easy for us to tell you, that you
are promoting Anabaptism, and much more easy to prove it: We take those but
for words of course.

PRIVATE BAPTISM.
[We desire that Baptism may not be administered in a private piace) and so do
we, Ex^. etc. Sect. 8. Answ.
where it may be brought into the public Congregation. But since our Lord has
said, St. John 3. Unless one be born of Water and the Holy Ghost, he cannot
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. We think it fit that they should be Baptized
in private, rather then not at all. It is appointed now to be done by the
lawful Minister.

Repl. We must needs suppose you are disputing with Protestants, who ordinarily
show the Papists that that Text, Joh. 3. asserteth no absolute necessity of
Baptism to salvation. But we believe as well as you, that it is the regular way
of solemn Initiation into the Covenant and Church of Christ, which none that
indeed are the Children of the Promise should neglect. As Coronation
solemnizeth his entrance upon the Kingdom, that had before the title; and as
Marriage solemnizeth that which before was done by consent; so Baptism
solemnizeth the mutual Covenant which before had a mutual consent: And none is
authorized to consent for Infants, but those that by nature, and God's Law,
have the power of disposing of them, and whose will is, in sens^ forensi the
Children^ will: It solemnly investeth us in what we had an Antecedent right to,
and therefore belongs to none but those that have that right: And this we are
ready to make good by any fair debate that you will allow us.

Nor is any thing done in private, Sect* 9.
reiterated in public, but the solemn reception into the Congregation, with
the Prayers for him, and the public declaration before the Congregation, of
the Infants, now made by the Godfathers, that the whole Congregation may
testify against him if he does not perform it, which the Ancients made great
use of.

Rep. Do you not say in the Rub. (And let them not doubt but the Child so
baptized, is lawfully and sufficiently baptized, and ought not to be baptized
again. And after (I certify you, that in this case all is well done, etc.) And
yet you do not renew all the Baptismal Covenant, renouncing the flesh etc. And
engaging into the Christian belief: And that you may see that the Church of
England takes not all Infants infallibly to be regenerated by Baptism (unless
you grant that they repent to the substance of Baptism; the baptismal Prayer is
here used for the fore-baptized, that God will give his holy Spirit to this
Infant, that he being born again, and made heir of everlasting salvation, etc.)
which shows that he is now supposed to be Regenerandus, non regeneratus. Do
they pray for his Regeneration, whom they account regenerate already? You must
either confess that there they repeat much of the substance of Baptism, and
take the Child as not baptized, or else, that they take the baptized Child to
be not regenerate. And then we may well take them for unregenerate, that show
no signs of it, at years of discretion, but live a carnal and ungodly life,
though they can say the Cat^chim, and seek Confirmation.

Of the CATECHISM.
[Though diverse have of late been baptized without Godfathers, 31 p. 56. An. 3.
yet many have been baptized with them, and those may answer the Question, as
they are, the rest must answer according to truth: But there is no reason to
alter the rule of the Catechism for some men's irregularities.

Rep. If you will have a Catechism proper to those that had Godfathers, give
leave to others to use one that will teach them (as you say) to answer
according to truth: And let us in the same have that liberty of leaving out the
doubtful opinion of Godfathers and Godmothers, and that which we think too
childish a beginning, What is your Name? and let us use one that speaks more of
the necessary Doctrines of Salvation, and nothing but necessaries.

[We conceive this expression as safe as that which they desire, and more fully
exrressing the efficacy of the Sacrament, 22* p. 2.
according to St. Paul, the 26. and 27. Gal. 3. where St. Paul proves them all
to be Children of God, because they were baptized, and in their Baptism had put
on Christ; If children, then heirs, or which is all one, Inheritors, Romans 8. 17.

Rep. By Baptism Paul means not the carkase of Baptism, but the baptismal
dedication and covenanting with God: They that do this by themselves, if at
age, or by Parents or Pro-parents authorized (if Infants) sincerely, are truly
members of Christ, and children of God, and Heirs of Heaven: They that do this
but hypocritically and verbally, as Simon Magus did, are visibly such as the
others ate really; But really are still in the gall of bitterness, and bond of
iniquity, and have no part or lot in this business, their hearts being not
right in the sight of God. This is that truth which we are ready to make good.

[We conceive the present Translation to be agreeable to many ancient Copies, 3
p* 26. 10 Com.
therefore the change to be needless*]

Rep. What ancient copy has (the seventh day) in the end of the 4th.
Commandment, instead of the Sabbath Day? Did King James cause the Bible to be
new translated to so little purpose: We must bear you witness, that in some
cases you are not given to change.

[My duty toward God, etc.] It is not true that there is nothing in that
Answer which refers to the 4th. Commandment, Excep. 4.
for the last words of the answer do orderly relate to the last Commandment of
the first Table, which is the fourth.

Rep. And think you indeed, that the fourth commandment obliges you no more to
one day in seven, than equally (to all the days of your life) this Exposition
may make us think that some are more serious then else we could have imagined,
in praying after that commandment, Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our
hearts to keep this Law.

[Two only as generally necessary to salvation, Excep. 5.
etc.) These words are a Reason of the Answer that there are two only, and
therefore not to be left out.

Rep. The words seem to imply by distinction, that there may be others not so
necessary, and the Lords Supper was not by the Ancients taken to be necessary
to the salvation of all.

[We desire that the entering of Infants, etc.] The effect of childrens Baptism
depends neither upon their own present actual Faith and Repentance, which the
Catechism says expressly they cannot perform; nor upon the Faith and Repentance
of their natural Parents, or Pro-parents, or of their Godfathers or Godmothers,
but upon the Ordinance and Institution of Christ; but it is requisite that when
they come to age they should perform these conditions of faith and repentance,
for which also their Godfathers and Godmothers charitably undertook on their
behalf. And what they do for the Infant in this case, the Infant himself is
truly said to do, as in the Courts of this Kingdom daily the Infant does answer
by his Guardian; and it is usual to do homage by proxy, and for Princes to
marry by proxy; for the further justification of this answer, see St. Aug. Ep.
^1. ad Bonif. Nihil aliud credere quam fidem habere ac per hoc cum respondetur
parvulum credere qui fidei nondum habet effectum, respondetur fidem habere
propter fidei Sacramentum and convertere se ad Deum, propter Conversionis
Sacramentum quia and ipsa responsio, ad celebrationem pertinet Sacramenti
itaque parvulum, and si nondum fides illa, que in credentium voluntate
consister, tamen ipsius fidei Sacramentum

Repl. 1. You remove not at all the inconvenience of the words that seems to
import what you your selves disclaim. 2. We know that the effects of Baptism,
do depend on all the necess^ry con-causes on Gods mercy, or Christ's merits, on
the Institution, and on Baptism it self according to its use, as a delivering
investing Sign and Seal, and they depend upon the promise sealed by Baptism,
and the promise supposes the qualified subject, or requisite Condition in him
that shall have the benefit of it; to tell us therefore of a common Cause on
which the ef^ect depends, v^z. the Institution or Baptism it self, when we are
inquiring after the special condition that proves the person to be the due
subject, to whom both promise and Baptism does belong: This is but to seem to
make an Answer; Either all baptized absolutely are ^ustified and saved, or not:
If yea, then Christianity is another kind of thing than Peter or Paul
understood, that thought it was not the washing of water, but the answer of a
good Conscience to God: Then let us catch Heathens, and dip them, and save them
in dispite of them: But if any condition be requisite (as we are sure there is)
our question is, what it is, and you tell us of Baptism it self; did ever
Augu^t. jure vel (...), was to be esteemed a believer; we grant with Austin,
that Infants of believers, propter Sacramentum fid^i, are visibly and
professedly to be numbered with believers; but neither Austin nor we will ever
grant you that this is true, of all that you can catch; and use this form of
Bapt^sm ever, the seal will no^ save them that have no part in the promise.

[The Catechism is not intended as a whole body of Divinity, Sect. 7. Page 28.
but as a Comprehension of the Articles of Faith, and other Doctrines most
necessary to salvation; and being short, is fittest for Children and common
people; and as it was thought sufficient upon mature deliberation, and so is by
us*]

Rep. The Creed, the Decalogue, and the Lords Prayer, contain all that is
absolutely necessary to salvation at least: If you intended no more, what need
you make a Catechism? If you intend more, why have you no more. But except in
the very words of the Creed, the essentials of Christianity are left out; if no
explication be necessary, trouble them with no more then the Text of the Creed,
etc. If explication be necessary, let them have it; at least in a larger
Catechism, fitter for the riper.

CONFIRMATION.
[It is evident that the meaning of these words is, Sect. 1. Rub. 1.
that Children baptized, and dying before they commit actual sin, are
undoubtedly saved, though they be not confirmed; wherein we see not what danger
there can be of misleading the vulgar, by teaching them truth; but there may be
danger in this desire of having these words wronged, as if they were false; for
St. Austin says he is an Infidel that defies them to be true, Ep. 23. ad Bonif.

Rep. What, all Children saved, whether they be Children of the Promise or no?
Or can you show us a Text that says (Whoever is baptized, shall be saved,) the
Common Prayer Book plainly speaks of the non-necessity of Unction,
Confirmation, and other Popish Ceremonies and Sacraments, and means that ex
part Ecclesiae, they have all things necessary to salvation, and are
undoubtedly saved, supposing them the due subjects, and that nothing be wanting
ex part sui, which certainly is not the case of such as are not Children of
the Promise, and Covenant; the Child of an Heathen does not ponere obicem,
actually, quo minus baptizetur, and yet being baptized, is not saved on your
own reckoning, (as we understand you) therefore the Parent can penere obicem,
and either hinder the Baptism or effect, to his Infant; Austin speaks not there
of all Children whatever, but those that are offered per aliorum spiritualem
voluntatem, by the Parents usually, or by those that own them after the Parents
be dead, or they exposed, or become theirs: He speaks also of what may be done,
and de eo qui fieri non posse arbitratur: But our question is, what is done,
and not what God can do: Our great question is, what Children they be that
Baptism belongs to?

[After the Catechism we conceive that it is not a sufficient qualification,
Sect. 2. Rub.
etc.^ we conceive that this qualification is required rather as necessary,
then as sufficient, and therefore it is the duty of the Minister of the place,
Can. 61. to prepare Children in the best manner to be presented to the Bishop
for confirmation, and to inform the Bishop of their fitness, but submitting the
judgment to the Bishop both of this, and other qualifications, and not that
the Bishop should be tied to the Ministers consent; compare this Rubric to the
se^ond Rubric before the Catechism, and there is required what is further
necessary and sufficient.

Repl. 1. If we have all necessary ordinarily, we have that which is sufficient
ad esse, there is more ordinarily necessary, then to say those words. 2. Do you
owe the King no more obedience? Already do you contradict his Declaration,
which says, Confirmation shall be performed (by the information, and with the
consent of the Minister of the place.) But if the Ministers consent shall not
be necessary, take all the charge upon your own souls, and let your souls be
answerable for all.

They see no need of Godf.) Here the Compilers of the Liturgy did, Sect. 3.
Exc. 1. 24*
and so does the Church, that there may be a witness of the Confirmation.]

Repl. It is like to be your own Work as you will use it, and we cannot hinder
you from doing it in your own way. But are Godfathers no more than Witnesses?
etc.

[This supposes that all children, etc.) Sect* 4. Ex* 2.
It supposes, and that truly, that all Children were, at their Baptism by
water, and the Holy Ghost, and had given unto them the forgiveness of all their
sins, and it is uncharitably presumed, that notwithstanding the frailties and
slips of their Childhood, they have not totally lost what was in Baptism
conferred upon them, and therefore adds, Strengthen them, we beseech thee O
Lord, with the Holy Ghost, the Comfortes, and daily increase in them their
manifold gifts of grace, etc. None that lives in open sin ought to be
confirmed.]

Repl. 1. Children baptized without right, cannot be presumed to be really
regenerate and pardoned. 2. We speak only of those that by living in open sin,
do show themselves to be unjustified; and these you confess should not be
confirmed. O that you would but practice that! If not, this Confession will
witness against you.

[Before the Imposition of hands, Sect* 5. p. ^0 Rubr.
etc.) Confirmation is reserved to the Bishop, in honorem ordinis to bless,
being an act of Authority, so was it of old. St. Hierome Dialog. adv. Lucifer,
says it was, Totius-Orbis-consentio in hanc partem; and St. Cyprian to the same
purpose, Ep. 73. and our Church does every where profess, as she ought to
conform to the Catholic usages of the Primitive times, from which causlesly to
depart, argues rather love of contention, than of peace. The reserving of
Confirmation to the Bishop, does argue the Dignity of the Bishop above
Presbyters, who are not allowed to Confirm, but does not argue any excellency
in Confirmation above the Sacraments: St. Hierome argues the quite contrary, ad
Lucif. Cap. 4. That because Baptism was allowed to be performed by a Deacon,
but Confirmation only by a Bishop; therefore Baptism was most necessary, and
of greatest value; the mercy of God allowing the most necessary means of
Salvation to be administered by inferior orders, and restraining the less
necessary to the higher, for the honor of their order.]

Repl. O that we had the Primitive Episcopacy! and that Bishops had no more
Churches to over-see than in the Primitive times they had, and then we would
never speak against this reservation of Confirmation to the honor of the
Bishop; but when that Bishop of one Church is turned into that Bishop of many
hundred Churches, and when he is now a Bishop of the lowest rank, that was an
Archbishop, when Archbishops first came up, and so we have not really existent
any mere Bishops (such as the Ancients knew) at all, but only Archbishops and
their Curates; marvel not if we would not have Confirmation proper to
Archbishops, no one man undertake more than an hundred can perform; but if they
will do it, there is no remedy, we have acquit our selves.

Prayer after the Imposition of hands is grounded upon the practice of the
Apostles, Sect. 6. Ex^. 1.
Heb* 62. and Acts 8. 17: nor does 25 Article say, that Confirmation is a
corrupt imitation of the Apostles practice, but that the 5 commonly called
Sacraments, have ground partly of the corrupt following the Apostles, etc.
which may be applied to some other of these 5. but cannot be applied to
Confirmation, unless we make the Church speak Contradictions.

Rep. But the question is not of imposition of hands in general; but this
imposition in particular: And you have never proved, that this sort of
imposition, called Confirmation, is mentioned in those Texts: And the 25
Article cannot more probably be thought to speak of any one of the 5. as
proceeding from the corrupt imitation of the Apostles, then of Confirmation as
a supposed Sacrament.

We know no harm in speaking the language of holy Scriptures, 7. Ex. 2.
Acts 8. 15. they laid their hands upon them, and they received the holy Ghost;
and though imposition of hands be not a Sacrament, yet it is a very fit sign,
to certify the persons what is then done for them, as the Prayer speaks.

Rep. It is fit to speak the Scriptures Language in Scripture-sense; but if
those that have no such power to give the holy Ghost, will say, receive the Holy
Ghost, it were better for them to abuse other Language, than Scripture Language.

After Confirmation.
THere is no inconvenience that Confirmation should be required before the
Communion, Sect. 8. Ex*
when it may be ordinarily obtained; that which you here fault, you elsewhere
desire.

Rep. We desire that the credible approved profession of Faith, and Repentance,
be made necessaries: But not that all the thousands in England that never came
under the Bishops hands (as not one of many ever did, even when they were at
the highest) may be kept from the Lords Supper; for some cannot have that
imposition, and others will not, that yet are fit for communion with the Church.

The Ring is a significant sign, Marriage the Ring. Sect. 1. p. 3^*
only of humane institution, and was always given as a pledge of fidelity and
constant love; and here is no reason given why it should be taken away* nor are
the reasons mentioned in the Roman Ritualits, given in our Common Prayer Book.

Rep. We crave not your own forbearance of the Ring, but the indifferency in
our use of a thing so mis-used, and unnecessary.

These words, Sect. 2. Answ.
In the Name of the Father, Son and holy Ghost, if they seem te make Matrimony
a Sacrament, may as well make all sacred, yea civil actions of weight to be
Sacraments, they being usual at the beginning and ending of all such. It was
never heard before now, that these words make a Sacrament.

Rep. Is there no force in an argument drawn from the appearance of evil, the
offense and the danger of abuses, when other words enough may serve turn.

They go to the Lords Table, Sect. 3. Col.
because the Communion is to follow.

Rep. They must go to the Table whether there be a Communion or not Consecrated
the estate of Matrimony to such an excellent mystery, Sect. 4.
etc.) Though the institution of Marriage was before the fall, yet it may be
now, and is consecrated by God to such an excellent Mystery as the
representation of the spiritual Marriage between Christ and his Church, Ephesians. 5.
23. we are sorry that the words of Scripture will not please. The Church in the
25. Article has taken away the fear of making it a Sacrament.]

Reply. When was Marriage thus consecrated? If all things used to set forth
Christ's offices or benefits, by way of similitude, be consecrated, then a
Judge, a Father, a Friend, a Vine, a Door, a Way, etc. are all consecrated
things: Scripture phrase pleases us in Scripture-sense.

The new-married persons the same day of their marriage must receive the holy
Communion. Sect. 5. p. 33* Rub.
This enforces none to forbear Marriage, but presumes, as well it may) that all
persons marriageable, ought to be also fit to receive the holy Sacrament: And
marriage being so solemn a Covenant of God, they that undertake it in the fear
of God, will not stick to seal it by receiving the holy Communion, and
accordingly prepare themselves for it; it were more Christian to desire that
these licentious festivities might be suppressed, and the Communion more
generally used by those that marry, the happiness would be greater than can
easily be expressed, Unde sufficium ad enarrandum faelicitatem e^us Matrimonij,
quod Ecclesia conciliar, and confirmat oblatio. Tertul. lib. 2. ad Uxorem.

Rep. Indeed! Will you phrase and modifie your administrations upon such a
supposition, that all men are such as they ought to be, and do what they ought
to do? Then take all the world for Saints, and use them accordingly, and blot
out the Doctrine of Reproof, Excommunication and Damnation, from your Bibles:
Is it not most certain, that very many married persons are unfit for the Lords
Supper, and will be when you and we have done our best? And is it fit then to
compel them to it? But the more unexpected, the more welcome is your motion; of
that more Christian course, suppressing of licentious festivities, when shall
we see such Reformations undertaken?

Visitation of the Sick.
FOrasmuch as the condition, Sect. 1. p. 7*
etc.) All which is here desired, is already presumed, namely, That the
Minister shall apply himself to the particular condition of the person; but
this must be done according to the rule of prudence and justice, and not
according to his pleasure; therefore if the sick person show himself truly
penitent, it ought not to be left to the Ministers pleasure to deny him
Absolution, if he desire it. Our Churches direction is acc^rding to the 13.
Can. of the venerable Council of Nice, both here, and in the next that follows.

Rep. But the question is, whether he show himself truly penitent or not; if we
have not here neither a judgment of discretion, for the conduct of our own
actions, what do we with reason? Why are we trusted in the Office? And whose
judgment must we follow? The Bishop cannot have leisure to become the Judge,
whether this man be penitent. It must then be the Minister, or the man himself.
And must we absolve every man that says he repents? Then we must believe an
incredible profession, which is against reason: Some are known Infidels, and in
their health profess that they believe not the Scripture to be true, and make a
mock at Jesus Christ, and perhaps in a sickness that they apprehend no danger
in, will send for the Minister in scorn, to say, [I repent] and force him to
absolve him, that they may deride him and the Gospel. Some of us have known too
many of those that have for twenty or thirty years been common drunkards,
seldom sober and week together, and still say when they came to themselves,
that they were sorry for it, and did un^eignedly repent, and as they said in
health, so they said in sickness, dying within a few days or weeks after they
were last drunk: Must we absolve all these? Some dye with a manifest hatred of
an holy like, reviling at those that are careful to please God; yet saying,
they hate them not as holy, but because they are all Hypocrites, or the like;
and yet will say, they repent of their sins. Some forbear not their accustomed
swearing and cursing, while they profess repentance. Some make no restitution
for the wrong which they say they repent of: And must we take all those for
truly penitent? If not, the Minister must judge. What you mean by your saying,
[Our Church's direction is according to the 13th Canon of the venerable Council
of Nice both here and in the next that follows] we know not; The second Council
of Nice you cannot mean (its Canon being uncertain) and the 13th of no such
sense. And the 13th. Canon of the first Council of Nice, is only, that lapsed
Catecheumens shall be three years inter and ientes, before they pray again with
the Catecheumens. This shows they then took not up with every word of seeming
penitence, as true repentance; but what it is to your purpose, we know not, nor
is there any other Canon in that Council for you: The eleventh Canon is
sufficiently against you: The lapsed that truly repented, were to remain among
the penitent for three years, and seven years more, if they were fideles, etc.
ab omnibus vero illud precipue observetur ut animus eorum, and fructus
poenitentiae attendatur, quicunque enim cum omni timore, and lacrimis
perseverantibus, and operibus bonis Conversationem suam, non verbis solis sed
opere, and veritate demonstrant, cum tempus statutum etiam ab his fuerit
impletum, and orati^nibus jam coeperint communica^e, licebit etiam Episcopo
humanius circa res aliquod cogitare:) We know this rigor as to time, was
unjust, and to the dying it was abated; but you see here that bare words that
were not by seriousness, and by deeds made credible, were not to be taken as
sufficient marks of penitence, of which it was not the person himself that was
to be the Judge.

The form of absolving in the Liturgy, Sect. 7. Answ.
is more agreeable in the Scriptures then that which they desire, it being said
in St. John 20 Whose sins you remit, they are remitted; not, Whose sins you
pronounce remitted; and the condition needs not to be expressed, being always
necessarily understood.

Rep. It is a controversy amongst the learned Expositers, how much that of
John 20. was proper to the Apostles, and such others as were then to have the
Spirit in an extraordinary manner, who did remit sins effectually by remitting
the punishment of it, by casting out Devils, healing the sick, etc. according
to that of Jam. 5. 14, 15. Is any sick among you, let him call for the Elders
of the Church, and let them pray for him, and anoint him with Oil in the Name
of the Lord; and the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall
raise him up, and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him. If
besides this remitting them effectually, the rest be no other then a
Ministerial pronouncing them so given by God according to his Covenant in the
Gospel, then you cannot plead the phrase of a Text, which respects another
way of remission then we pretend to but must phrase it according to the nature
of the thing, and the sense of other Scriptures also that fullier open it:
There are three ways of pardoning; 1. By grant or gift (whether by a general
act of pardon, or a particular.) 2 By sentence. 3. By execution, that is,
preventing, or taking off the penalty. The first of these is done already by
God in the Gospel. The second God does principally, and his Ministers
instrumentally, as his Messengers. The third, (the taking off the penalty) they
can do no otherwise in the case before us, then by praying that God will take
it off, and using his ordinary means. So that it is most evidens, that this
Absolution that Ministers are to perform, can be no other then to pronounce the
penitent Believer to be absolved by God according to his Covenants: And if
there be no other should we not speak as intelligibly as we can? Indeed there
is more in absolving the Excommunicate, for then the Church both judiciously*
and executively remitteth the penalty of Excommunication, (to which also the
Text, John 20. may have much respect) but the penalty of damnation can be no
otherwise remitted by us, than as is expressed; and indeed, the thing is of
such exceeding weight, that it behooves us to deal as intelligibly and openly
in it, as we can. And therefore we admire that you should say, The condition
needs not be expressed, being always necessarily understood; Necessarily! do
you mean, Necessitate n^turali, and irresistibili? So that all the wicked men
in the world cannot choose but understand us to speak conditionally? Surely this
is none of your meaning; if it were, it were far from truth: Or do you mean
not, de necessitate vel certitudine eventus, but de debito ex obligatio^e? no
doubt but it is necessary as a duty, and also ad finem, as a means: And
therefore it is, that we desire it may be expressed. And doubtless you think
not that all men do their duties, and understand all that they ought to
understand, no not in this particular. If you mean that all sick men may be
rationally supposed to understand it, this can never be believed by us that are
^acquainted personally (and have been) with so many, of whom it is not true.
How many think the Ministers absolution, and the Sacrament, will serve turn,
with their unsound hypocritical repentance? How easily is that understood
absolutely, or as bad, while they take you to take it for granted* that they
have the condition which is absolutely expressed.

Is it not fit the Minister should have power to deny this viation, Sect. 3. p.
34. Exc. ^.
or holy Communion, to any that humbly desire it, according to the Rubric,
which no man disturbed in his wits can do; and whosoever does, must in charity
be presumed to be penitent, and fit to receive.

Rep: There is no condition mentioned in the Rubric, but that he be desirous
to receive the Communion in his house humbly is not there* And why may not a
man disturbed in his wits, desire the Communion? You deny things that
ordinarily fall out, and yet lay the weight of your Cause on that denial. But
why must we give the Sacrament to those that have lived in gross ignorance,
infidelity and profaneness and never manifested credibly, that they repent?
You say, that whosoever desires the Sacrament, according to the Rubric, must
in charity be presumed to be penitent: But where has God commanded or approved
so blind and dangerous an act as this, under the Name of Charity? The ordinary
observations of out lives is not to be confuted by men's assertions: We know by
sad experience, that there is abundance of the worst of men among us, that are
desirous to receive this Sacrament when they are sick, that give no credible
evidence of true repentance; but some in the ignorance and deceit of their
hearts, and some as conscious of their impiety, for which they seek any
shifting remedy to quiet their Consciences for the time, are much more eager
for this Sacrament in their sickness, then many better and more penitent
persons. And must we judge all these penitent, and give them the Sacrament as
such? We must needs profess, that we think this course would not be the least
effectual service unto Satan, to deceive poor sinners, and keep them from
knowing their misery, and seeking aright after the true remedy in time; pardon
us while we lay together the parts of your Doctrine as we understand it here
delivered, and leave it to your consideration, what a Church, and what a
Ministry it would make. 1. All Infants of any Parents in the World that we can
baptize are undoubtedly regenerate, and in a state of life, and shall be saved
if they so dye. 2. The Holy Ghost and forgiveness of sin being then given them,
it is charitably presumed that they have not totally lost this, notwithstanding
the frailties and slips of their childhood; and so when they can say the
Catechism, they are to be confirmed. 3. Being confirmed, they are to be
admitted to the Lords Supper. 4. All that marry, and others, thrice a year must
receive the Lords Supper, (though unfit.) 5. The Minister must absolve all the
sick, that say they repent; (if we understand you, for we suppose you allow not
the Minister to be judge.) 6. This Absolution must be absolutely expressly, I
absolve thee from all thy sins, without the condition, If thou repent and
believe. 7. Whosoever desires the Communion in his sickness, must in charity
be presumed to be penitent and fit to receive. 8. The Minister must not have
power to forbear such baptizing, absolving, or delivering the Communion as
foresaid. (We now omit what is said of the dead at burial.) And if this be not
the ready way to hinder thousands from the necessary knowledge of their
unrenewed hearts and lives, and from true repentance, and from valuing Christ
as the Remedy, and from making a necessary preparation for death, and also the
way to lay by abundance of faithful and conscion^ble Ministers, that dare not
take such a deceiving dangerous course; we must confess our selves much
mistaken in the nature of man's corrnpeion and misery, and the use of Gods
Ordinances for his recovery.

The Burial of the Dead.
It is not fit so much should be left to the d^scretion of every Minister,
Sect. 2.
and the desire that all may be said (...) the Church, Rub. ^.
being not preten^ed to be for the ease of tender Consciences, but of tender
heads, may be helped by a Cap better then a Rubric.

Rep. We marvel that you say nothing at all to our desire, that it be expressed
in a Rubric, that Prayers and Exhortations there used are not for the benefit
of the dead, but only for the comfort and instruction of the living: You
intend to have a very indiscreet Ministry, if such a needless circumstance may
not be left to their discretion. The contrivance of a Cap instead of a Rubric,
shows that you are all unacquainted with the subject of which you speak; and if
you speak for want of experience in the case of souls, as you now do about the
case of men's bodies, we could wish you some of our experience of one sort (by
more converse with all the members of the Flock) though not of the other. But
we would here put these three or four questions to you.

1. Whether such of our selves as cannot stand still in the cold Winter at the
Grave half so long as the Office of Burial requires, without the certain
hazard of our lives, (though while we are in motion we can stay out longer) are
bound to believe your Lordships, that a Cap will cure this better then a
Rubric, though we have proved the contrary to our cost, and know it as well as
we know that cold is cold? Do you think no place but that which a cap or
clothes do cover, is capable of letting in the excessively refrigerating air.

2. Whether a man that has the most rational probability, if not a moral
certainty, that it would be his death, or dangerous sickness (though he wore
twenty Caps) is bound to obey you in this case.

3. Whether usually the most studious laborious Ministers, be not the most
invaletudinary and infirm? And 4thly, Whether the health of such should be made
a jest of by the more healthful, and be made so light of as to be cast away,
rather then a Ceremony sometime be left to their discretion? And whether it be
a sign of the right and ingenuine spirit of Religion, to subject to such a
ceremony? Both the life of godliness, and the lives of Ministers, and the
peoples^souls; much of this concerns the people as well as the Ministers.

We see not why these words may not be said of any person, Sect. 3. page 35.
whom we dare not say is damned; and it were a breach of charity to say so even
of those whose repentance we do not see: For whether they do not inwardly and
heartily repent even at the last act, who knows? And that God will not even
then pardon them upon such repentance, who dares say? It is better to be
charitable and hope the best, then rashly to condemn.

Rep. We spoke of persons living and dying in notorious sins, suppose they were
Whoredom, Perjury, Oppression, yea Infidelity or Atheism, etc. But suppose we
cannot be infallibly certain that the man is damned, because it is possible
that he may repent, though he never did express it: Will you therefore take him
for a brother, whose soul is taken to God in mercy? You are not sure that an
excommunicate person, or an Heathen does not truly repent after he is
speechless: But will you therefore say, that all such dye thus happily? This is
a most delusory principle! The Church judges not of things undiscovered: Non
esse and non apparere, are all one as to our judgment: We conclude not
peremptorily, because we pretend not here to infallibility. As we are not sure
that any man is truly penitent that we give the Sacrament to, so we are not
sure that any man dies impenitently. But yet we must use those as penitent,
that seem so to reason, judging by ordinary means, and so must we judge those
as impenitent that have declared their sin, and never declared their
repentance. It seems by you, that you will form your Liturgy, so as to say,
that every man is saved that you are not sure is damned, though he show you no
repentance, and so the Church shall say that all things are, that are but
possible, if they conceit that charity requires it. But if the living by this
be kept from connversion, and flattered into Hell, will they there call it
charity that brought them thither? O lamentable charity, that smoothers men's
way to Hell, and keeps them ignorant of their danger till they are past
remedy! Millions are now suffering for such a sort of charity. Lay this to the
forementioned Propositions, and the World will see that indeed we differ in
greater things then ceremonies, and forms of prayer.

Churching Women.
IT is fit that the Woman performing especial service of Thanksgiving, 1 p. 36.
Exc 1.
should have a special place for it, where she may be perspicuous to the whole
Congregation, and near the holy Table, in regard of the Offering she is there
to make: They need not fear Popery in this, since in the Church of Rome she is
to kneel at the Church-door.]

Reply. Those that are delivered from impenitency, from sickness, etc. perform
a special service of Thanksgiving* etc. yet need not stand in a special place;
but if you will have all your Ceremonies, why must all others be forced to
imitate you? we mentioned not the Church of Rome. 2. Ex. 2.


The Psalm 121 is more fit and pertinent, then those others named, as 113, 128.
and therefore not to be changed.]

Reply. We have proposed to you what we think meetest in our last pages; if you
like your own better, we pray you give us leave to think otherwise, and to use
what we propounded.

If the woman be such as is here mentioned, 3. Exc. 3.
she is to do her penance before she be Churched.]

Reply. That is, if she be accused, prosecuted, and judged by the Bishops Court
to do penance first, which happens not to one of a multitude, and what shall
the Minister do with all the rest? all tends to take away the difference
between the precious and the vile, between those that fear God, and that fear
him not.

Offerings are required as well under the Gospel as the Law, 4. Ex. 4
and amongst other times most fit it is, that oblations should be when we come
to give thanks for some special blessing, Psalm. 76. 10, 11. such is the
deliverance in Childbearing.]

Reply. Oblations should be free, and not forced: to some special use, and not
to Ostentation.

This is needless, 4 Ex 5
since the Rubr. and Common-Pr. require that no notorious person be admitted.]

Reply. We gladly accept so fair an interpretation, as freeth the Book from
self-contradiction, and us from trouble; but we think it would do no ^urt, but
good, to be more express.

The Concessions.
We are willing that all the Epistles and Gospels be used according to the last
Translation.

Reply. We still beseech you, that all the Psalms and other Scriptures in the
Lyturgie recited, may (for the same reason) be used according to the last
Translation.

That when any thing is read for an Epistle, Sect. 2.
which is not in the Epistles, the Superscription be [For the Epistle.]

Rep. We beseech you speak as the vulgar may understand you, [for the Epistle]
signifies not plain enough to such, that it is indeed none of the Epistles.

That the Psalms be collated with the former Translation, Sect. 3.
mentioned in Rub. and printed according to it.

Rep We understand not what Translation or Rubr. you mean.

That the word^ [this day] both in the Collects and Prefaces, Sect. 4.
be used only upon the day it self, and for the following days it be said [as
about this time.]

Rep. And yet there is no certainty which was the day it self.

That a longer time be required for signification of the Names of the
Communicants, Sect. 5.
and the words of the Rubric, be changed into these [at least some time the day
before.

Rep. [Sometime the day before] may be near, or at night, which will allow any
leisure at all, to take notice of the proofs of peoples scandals, or to help
them in preparation.

That the power of keeping scandalous sinners from the Communion, Sect. 6.
may be expressed in the Rubric, according to the 26 and 27 Cannons, so the
Minister be obliged to give an account of the same immediately after to the
Ordinary.

Reply. We were about returning you our very great thanks, for granting us the
benefit of the 26 Canon, as that which exceeds all the rest of your
Concessions; But we see you will not make us too much beholden to you: and poor
Christians (that will not receive the Sacrament contrary to the example of
Christ and his Apostles, and the custom of the Catholic Primitive Church, and
the Canons of General Councils, must be also used as the notorious impenitent
sinners. But the Canon requires us not to signify the cause, but upon
complaint, or being required by the Ordinary.

That the whole Preface be prefixed to the Commandments. Sect. 7.


Reply. And why not the word [Sabbath-day] be put for the [Seventh-d^] in the
end: Must not ^uch a ^alsification be amended?

That the second Exhortation be read some Sunday, 8.
or Holy Day, before the Celebration of the Communion, at the discretion of the
Minister.

That the general Confession at the Communion be pronounced by one of the
Ministers, Sect. 9.
the people saying after him, all kneeling humbly upon their knees.

That the mannner of consecrating the Elements be made more explicit, and
express; Sect. 10.
and to that purpose those words be put into the Rubr. [then shall he put his
hand upon the Bread, and break it] then shall he put his hand unto the Cup.

That if the Font be so placed as the Congregation cannot hear, Sect. 11.
it may be referred to the Ordinary to place it more conveniently.

That those words [Yes, Sect. 12.
they do perform those, etc.] may be altered thus; [because they promise them
both by their Sureties, etc.]

That the words of the last Rubr. before the Catechism may be thus altered,
[That Children being Baptized have all things necessary for their salvation,
Sect. 13.
and dying before they commit any actual sins, be undoubtedly saved, though
they be not confirmed.

That to the Rubr. Sect. 14.
after Confirmation these words may be added [or be ready and desirous to be
confirmed.

That those words [with my body I thee worship] may be altered thus: Sect. 15.
[with my body I thee honor?]

That those words [till death us depart] be thus altered [till death us do
part. Sect. 16.


That the words [sure and certain] may be left out. Sect. 17.


Reply. For all the rest we thank you, but have given our reasons against your
sense expressed in Sect. 13. before, and for satisfactoriness of the last: And
we must say in the conclusion, that if those be all the abatements and
amendments you will admit, you sell your Innocence, and the Churches peace for
nothing.

FINIS.

