SERMONS UPON DEATH, AND Eternal Judgment.

BY WILLIAM BATES, D. D.

LONDON; Printed by J. D. for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons against the
Royal Exchange in Cornhil. 1683.

To the Right Honorable RACHEL Lady RUSSEL.
MADAM,
OF all Affairs for the compassing whereof Men are so diligent and sollicitous,
there is none of that absolute necessity, and high importance, as the
Preparation for Death and Judgment. This requires the whole Man in his best
vigor, and should be the Work of the Day, but it is usually delayed till the
melancholy Evening of Age, or the twilight of Death. The Trifles of this World
divert them from that main business, to which all other things should be
subordinate. It equally deserves Wonder and Compassion, that Death which is so
constantly in Men's view, should be so seldom the matter of their application,
when all are of the same Glass, made of the same frail natural Principles; and
no Argument is more frequently and pathetically urged upon them.

It Is not strange that deep Truths, that by the strength and exercise of the
mind are drawn like Gold out of the Mines, have no efficacy upon those that are
not capable of understanding them: but the Doctrins of Death, and Judgment
after it, are plain Truths, by Natural, Moral, and Divine Evidence known to
all, yet no more affect Men, than a Paradox of incredible Novelty. If the
Doctrine of Eternal Judgment were but a probable Opinion, controverted with
equal Arguments, yet it is a matter of such vast concernment, that Reason
requires all our possible diligence to avoid an eternal evil that may be, the
loss of celestial Glory, and the Torments of Hell: But since it is an
infallible Truth, as certain as the Word of God, it is a Miracle to astonish
Heaven and Earth, that Men live as carelessly as if they should never die, and
die as securely as if they should not live in the next state, to receive the
just punishment of their Sins. They are fearless whilst Death is far off in
their thoughts: and when Age has snowed upon their heads, that no Marks of
decaying Nature should appear, make their own Winter to flourish with another
Spring. But it is in vain, for Death knows them under their disguise, and will
not stay beyond the appointed time. And in that decisive hour, Infidelity or
Presumption hardens Men to pass as quietly and boldly in appearance into
another world, as unfeigned Faith, and a regular lively Hope in the Promises of
the Gospel. But as deceitful Physic stops the Fit for the present, that will
return more violently and fatally afterward: So a counterfeit short Peace
transmits them to everlasting Sorrows.

The design of the following SERMONS is to awaken Men, that they may be wise
and consider their latter end: to secure an interest in our Redeemer, who has
disarmed Death of its Sting, and made that Enemy our Friend: and to practice
dying every day, by withdrawing their hearts from the vanities of this
transient World, that have such a pernicious influence to excite the carnal
appetites, and stupify the Conscience, which are the true causes of their sin
and misery. And what can be more powerful to render them temperate and sober in
the use of present things, vigilant and serious in their preparations for their
great and final Change, than the remembrance that Death is immediately attended
with Judgment, and Judgment with Blessedness or Misery for ever. I know this
Argument is naturally displeasing, but the usefulness should recommend it to
our most solemn and composed thoughts, before all the vain entertainments of
the Fancy and sensual Affections. As Herbs of Medicinal virtue, that are not
pleasing to the sight or smell, yet are valued by the Skilful as treasures of
Health; and preferred before the fairest Flowers that are perfumed and painted
by Nature, so as to excel the richest luster of Solomon's Glory.

The Body is in a continual Consumption, and no Art can long preserve it: but
whilst the outward Man is irrecoverably declining and wasting, if the Inward
Man be ascending and renewing to perfection, the advantage is incomparable. O
how comfortable is it to a holy Believer in the parting hour to commit his
Spirit into the hands of his Heavenly Father! (for thus he is authorized and
encouraged by our Savior's Example) and lay down the Flesh to rest in Hope:
for Christ is the Guardian of the Grave, has the Keys of Death, and will revive
the Bodies of his Saints incorruptible and immortal, the Copies of his own
glorious Body.

Madam, I shall not attempt the celebrating your Ladyships Virtues, that render
you a bright Ornament of your Sex, and more truly Honorable than your Noble
Descent and Alliance: but direct my best Desires to God, that your Family may
be a singular and eminent Example of the Divine Favor: that the fading Gloss
of this World may not deceive you, but your Heart may be above where your
Treasure is; that you may live to God and your Soul, for Heaven and Eternity. I
am,

Madam, Your Honors very humble and faithful Servant, WILLIAM BATES.

SERMONS UPON DEATH.
HEB. 2. 15. And deliver them, who through fear of Death were all their
lifetime subject to Bondage.
IN the first Chapter of this Epistle, the Proofs of the Eternal Deity of
Christ are produced with that evidence of Scripture Light, that only a veiled
Heart, obstinate Infidelity can resist. The Medium which the inspired Penman
makes use of is, the comparing him with the Angels, the most noble Flower of
the Creation, and showing that he is infinitely dignified above them. This he
does by a strong connection of Arguments: First, By his Title that is divinely
high and peculiar to himself. He is declared by the Testimony of the Eternal
Father to be his Son, Verse. 4, 5.
in the most proper and sublime sense: begotten of him, and therefore having
the same essential Perfections of the Godhead in their uncreated Glory. But
the Angels are not dignified with this Name in any places of Scripture, where
the Excellency of the Angels is in the fullest terms expressed. And that this
Name is taken from his Nature, is clearly proved: because Adoration is due to
him upon this account, even from the Angels of the highest Order. Verse. 6.
When he brings in the first-begotten into the World, he says, And let all
the Angels of God worship him.

Divine Worship is a Prerogative inseparably annexed to the Deity, both upon the
account of the supreme Excellencies of the Nature of God, and his Relation to
Angels and Men as Creator, and Preserver, the Fountain of their Being and
Happiness. This without the most open defiance of his Authority, cannot be
given to a mere Creature; Deuteronomy. 6. 13. and 10. 20.
and by the Command of God himself, is to be performed as a respect due to the
filial Godhead. The Argument proceeds from the Name to the Offices. Verse. 7.
Of the Angels he says, Who makes the Angels Spirits, and his Ministers a
flame of Fire. They are the prime Instruments of his Providence, most zealous
and active to accomplish his pleasure. But the Son is God, not by Analogy and
Deputation as Princes are, nor with a limitation and diminution, as Moses was
made a God to Pharaoh, but absolutely and really as subsisting in the Divine
Nature: And consequently he is the Supreme King, and to him the Ensigns of
Majesty divinely Royal are ascribed. But unto the Son he says, Verse. 8.
Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever, a Scepter of Righteousness is the
Scepter of thy Kingdom: Whereas the Scepters of Earthly Kings are often
unrighteously managed, and their Thrones ruinously fall. There is a further
Confirmation from his Works, that are divinely great and glorious, wherein no
Creature has any share of Efficiency. The making of the World, is ascribed to
him. Verse. 10.
Thou Lord in the beginning have laid the Foundation of the Earth, and the
Heavens are the Works of thy Hands.

The Divine Attributes, the peculiar Character of the Deity belong to him:
Eternity and Immutability. The most solid parts of the visible Creation shall
perish and be changed: but thou remainest, and art the same. His Life is an
entire, uniform, unchangable Perfection. His Glory and Felicity are in the same
invariable Tenor for ever possessed by him. Lastly, The Son sits in that quality
at the right Hand of the Father, Verse. 13.
in the Society of Empire, as equal to him in Power and Honor, commanding all
in the visible and invisible World, most easily and irresistibly, though
gradually subduing his Enemies to a consummate Victory. But the Angels, so
numerous and powerful, Verse. 14.
are ministering Spirits, employed for the defense and benefit of the Church.

From this summary account we may understand how firmly the Divinity of Christ
is established in the Scripture. For those Passages of the Prophets, that speak
of the God of Israel as Creator, and the sole object of Adoration are directly
referred to Jesus Christ. And the Name Jehovah, Psalm. 97. 9.
the Majesty of which consists in its being incommunicable is attributed to
him. This is the Foundation upon which that whole Fabric of the Gospel is
built. The Office of Mediator in the prophetical, priestly, and regal
administration is necessarily joined with the Divinity of his Person. And the
revelation of it from Heaven, is as clear as the Sun is visible in the
Firmament. All the Difficulties in our conceiving this great Mystery of
Godliness, are but like the shadows that attend the Light. And all the heretial
subtilties to pervert the sense of such plain and positive Texts, are as
impertinent as impious.

This being established, the Apople proceeds to give an account of the Son of
God's assuming the Humane Nature, and submitting to Sufferings and Death. This
is a Divine Secret so miraculously strange, that the Contrivance was without
the Compass of the Angelical Minds, and the discovery of it, is only by
supernatural Revelation: but when revealed, the account of it is so open and
consentaneous to reason, as being the most congruous Means for the illustration
of God's Glory in the saving lost Men, that the humane Mind, if not deeply
corrupted with the tincture of Prejudice, must consent to it as worthy of all
acceptance.

The substance of his reasoning is this, That it was the product of the most
wise, merciful, and righteous Counsel of God, that the Savior of Men should
have communion with them in their Nature, that he might have a right to redeem
them by his Alliance and Propinquity: Chap. 2. 11.
for he that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified, are all one: and that he
should undergo sufferings, even to death, for the price of their Redemption,
and the remedy of their Infirmities: Forasmuch as the Children are partakers of
Flesh and Blood, he also likewise took part of the same, that through Death he
might destroy him that had the Power of Death, that is the Devil: And deliver
them who through fear of Death, were all their Lives subject to Bondage.

The Devil is said to have the Power of Death.

1. Because he induces men to commit sin, that meritoriously renders them
liable to Death. He tempted the first Man cum effectu, and was a Murderer from
the beginning.

2. In that he inspires them with furious thoughts, and inflames their
Passions, from whence proceed Strifes and Wars, that efficiently cause Death.
He is supreme in all the Arts of Mischief, and always intent upon Evil. It Is by
his instigation that Men become like raging Beasts, animated and bent on mutual
slaughter.

3. Because he is many times the Executioner of God's Wrath, and inflicts Death
upon rebellious and incorrigible Sinners. It Is recorded by the Psalmist, That
God cast upon the Egyptians the fierceness of his anger, Psalm. 78. 49.
wrath, indignation, and trouble; by sending evil Angels: those Princes of the
Air, the Instruments of the Thunder and fiery storm of Hail that destroyed them.

4. Because he makes Death more formidable to sinners, by heightning their
guilty Fears of God's TribunaI. The false Spirit, in tempting Men to sin, puts
on blandishments, but afterward he is a severe accuser of them to God, and to
themselves.

Lastly, This Title may signify his tormenting sinners with unrelenting cruelty
in Hell, which is the second Death.

Now these Evils being the penal Consequence of sin, our Savior by his Death
appeased the injured Justice of God, and thereby destroyed the cruel tyranny of
the Devil. As the Lamb of God, in the Notion of a Sacrifice, he overcomes our
spiritual Enemies. Sin, Satan, and Death, lie vanquished at the foot of his
Cross. Besides, our Savior having felt such sorrows and infirmities as are
usual to his People, by that correspondence and resemblance between them, is
compassionately inclined to relieve them.

I shall now insist upon the blessed Privilege of Believers set down in the
Text, viz.

That Jesus Christ by his Death, frees his People from the servile tormenting
fear of Death.

In prosecuting the Point, I shall, 1. consider the account the Scripture gives
of Death's entrance into the World. 2. Show what the fear of Death includes,
and the Bondage consequent to it. 3. How the Death of Christ frees us from the
thraldom of that fear. 4. Who are partakers of this blessed Privilege.

And then apply it.

I. The Scripture gives an account of Death's entrance into the World, in a
threefold respect.

1. As the desertt of Sin. 2. As the Effect of the divine Decree. 3. As the
Sentence of the Law.

1. As the Desert of Sin. The first design of the Creator was his own Glory in
conjunction with the happiness of Man. He was made accordingly Holy in
perfection, placed in Paradise, and his state contained all the Ingredients of
Felicity proper to his Nature. He was capable of dying, as sad experience
proves, yet no Accident from without, no Distemper from within had impaired his
vigor, and made him actually subject to Death without sin. Whilst innocent he
was immortal, not from everlasting Principles of Nature, but by Divine
Preservation, of which the Tree of Life was the ordained Means and sacramental
Pledge. For God unchangably loves his own Image: and though by his Sovereignty and
absolute Power he may resume the Being he gives, yet his Goodness and Covenant
were a sacred assurance that Man's happy Life should run parallel with his
perseverance in his Duty. This Immortality was not the singular privilege of
Adam's Person, but had been the Inheritance of all his Progeny. But he soon
revolting from his just Obedience, of Immortal became Mortal, and according to
the original establishment of Propagation, transmitted his Nature with the
guilt and poison of Sin to all his Posterity. Thus by one Man Sin entered into
the World, Romans 5. 12.
and Death by Sin, and so Death passed upon all Men* for that all have sinned.
As his Obedience had been rewarded, so his Rebellion is punished in all that
naturally descend from him. From hence it is, that so numerous a part of
Mankind are cut off before the commission of actual Sin. Death enters into the
Forge of Life, and destroys the Conception that newly began to live. And what
is more righteous than that Man when he disobeyed the Author of Life, should
forfeit his Life and Blessedness. The Soul voluntarily lost the spiritual Life
by forsaking God, Anima volens perdidit vivere, nolens ergo perdat and
vivificare.
therefore unwillingly loses the natural Life by expulsion from the Body. The
Apostle declares, the Wages of Sin is Death, Romans 6. 23.
not only that of the Body, but the Death of the Soul, which is a dreadful
Concomitant of it. And from hence we may discover the false Philosophy of the
wisest Heathens in their Opinion of Death. They judged it to be the primary
necessity and condition of Nature, Hac lege intraverant, ut exirent. Senec.
fixed by irresistible Fate: and not understanding the true and just reason of
its coming into the World, they could not apply a sufficient Remedy against its
Evil.

2. As the Effect of the divine Decree respecting Sin. This is discovered by
revelation in the Word of God, and by the real execution of it. Heb. 9. 27.
It is appointed to Men once to die. Eccles. 1. 4.
This Decree is universal and unrepealable. One Generation passes away, and
another Generation comes: like the ebbing and flowing of the Sea in its stated
Periods. Nothing can interrupt or frustrate this appointment. There are diverse
Conditions of Men, and various ways of living in the World; some are high in
Dignity, others are level with the Earth: some walk in a Carpetway smooth and
easy, others in a thorny and troublesome: some walk on the golden Sands, others
on the Mire: but the same uncontrollable necessity of dying involves all. And
whatever the way be, whether pleasant or doleful, yet every one passes in it
with equal steps, measured by the same invariable spaces of Hours and Days, and
arrive at the same common end of Life. Those who are regarded as visible
Deities amongst Men, that can by their Breath raise the Low, and depress the
Lofty, that have the Lives of millions in their Power, yet when the ordained
time is come, as they cannot bribe the accusing Conscience for a minutes
silence, so neither delay Death. I have said ye are Gods, but ye shall die like
Men.

3. Death is to be considered as the Sentence of the Law. The reasonable
Creature was made under a Law the Rule of his Actions. The moral Law directed
him how to continue in his holy and blessed State: To which was annexed the
Precept of not eating of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, only as a mark
of his Subjection, and for the trial of his Obedience. This Precept had an
infallible sanction by the most high Lawgiver: Genesis 2. 17.
In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall die the death. Man did not keep
this Command of so easy observation, and justly incurred its doom. As Sin is
the violation of the Law, so Death is the violation of the Sinner in his Nature
and Felicity retorted from the Law.

The deaths of Men are very different in their kinds; and are comprised in the
words of David concerning Saul; 1 Samuel 26. 10.
The Lord shall smite him, or his Day shall come to die, or he shall descend
into the Battle, and perish. Sometimes they are cut off by the immediate
flaming hand of God, for the more exemplary revenge of Sin; sometimes by
surprising Accidents; sometimes by bloody Contentions; sometimes consuming
Diseases. But though Death be not uniform, yet it is always the execution of the
Law upon Offenders. As of those who are condemned by Humane Justice, some
suffer a more easy and honorable Death, others a more disgraceful and
torturing, some are Beheaded, others are Crucified, yet all die as Malefactors.
Thus some die a natural Death, others a violent, some by a gentle preparing
sickness without reluctation, others die upon the Rack by sharp pains: some die
attended with their Friends, and all supplies to sweeten their Passage, others
forsaken of all Comforters: yet Death is the same Sentence of the Law upon all
Men. And this if duly considered, makes it terrible in whatever shape it
appears.

II. The next thing to be considered is, What the fear of Death includes, and
the bondage that is consequent to it. This I shall explain and amplify, by
considering four things.

1. The nature of Fear in general, as applicable to the present Subject.

2. The particular Causes that render Death so fearful.

3. The degree of this Fear expressed by Bondage.

4. How it comes to pass that men are not always under the actual fear of
Death, but subject to the Revolutions of it all their lives.

1. I will consider the nature of Fear in general, as applicable to the present
Subject.

Fear is a passion implanted in Nature, that causes a flight from an
approaching Eye. Three things are requisite to qualify the Object and make it
fearful.

(1.) The Evil must be apprehended. Knowledge, or at least suspicion, excites
Fear, by representing an Evil that is likely to seize upon us. Till the mind
discern the danger, the passions are unmoved: and imaginary Evils by the mere
apprehension, are as strongly feared as real.

(2.) The Evil must be future. For the naked theory of the most pernicious Evil
does not wound the Soul, but the apprehension of falling under it. If reason
can open an expedient to prevent an Evil, this Passion is quiet. And Fear
precisely regards its Object as to come. Present Evils induce grief and sorrow:
past Evils by reflection affect with joy, and give a quicker relish to present
felicity. Approaching Evils alarm us with fear.

(3.) The Evil must be apprehended as prevalent to make it fearful. For if by
comparison we find our strength superior, we either neglect the Evil for its
levity, or determine to encounter it; and resistance is the proper effect of
Anger, not of Fear. But when an impendent Evil is too hard for us, the Soul
shrinks and recoils from it.

Now all these Qualifications that make an Object fearful concur in Death.

1. It Is an Evil universally known. The frequent Funerals are a real
demonstration that speaks sensibly to our Eyes, that Death reigns in the World.

2. It Is certainly future. All the wretched Accidents of this Life, such as
concern us in our Persons, Relations, Estates, and Interests; a thousand
Disasters that a jealous Fear and active Fancy will extend and amplify; as they
may, so they may not happen to us. And from this mixture of contrary
possibilities, from the uncertainty of event, Hope that is an insinuating
passion mixes with Fear, and derives Comfort. For as sometimes a sudden Evil
surprises not forethought of, so often the Evil that was sadly expected, never
comes to pass. But what Man is he that lives, Psalm. 89. 4.
and shall not see Death? Who is so vain as to please himself with an
imagination of Immortality here?

3. It Is a prevalent Evil, from hence the proverbial Expression, Strong as
Death that subdues all, Cant. 8. 8.
cruel as the Grave that spares none. It Is in vain to struggle with the pangs
of Death. No Simples in Nature, no Compositions of Art, no Influence of the
Stars, no Power of Angels, can support the dying Body, or retain the flitting
Soul. There is no Man has power over the Spirit to retain the Spirit;
Ecclesiast. 8. 8.
neither has he power in the day of Death: and there is no discharge in that
War. The Body sinks in the Conflict, and Death feeds on its prostrate prey in
the Grave.

2. I shall consider more particularly the Causes that render Death so fearful
to Men. 1. In the apprehension of Nature. 2. In the apprehension of Conscience
1. In the apprehension of Nature, Death has this Name engraven in its
forehead, Ultimum terribilium, the supreme of terrible things, upon several
accounts.

1. Because usually sickness and pains languishing or tormenting, make the
first changes in the Body, and the natural Death is violent. This Hezekiah
complained of with a mournful accent, He will cut me off with pining sickness:
Isa. 38.
from day even to night thou will make an end of me. I reckoned till morning,
that as a Lion, so will he break all my Bones. A Troop of Diseases are the
forerunners of this King of Terrors. There is a preceding encounter, and
sometimes very fierce, that Nature feels the cruel Victory before it yields to
this Enemy. As a Ship that is lost by a mighty tempest, and by the concussion
of the Winds and Waves loses its Rudder and Masts, takes in water in every
part, and gradually sinks into the Ocean: So in the shipwreck of Nature, the
Body is so shaken and weakened by the violence of a Disease, that the senses,
the animal and vital Operations decline, and at last are exstinguish'd in death.

2. Death considered in the strictest propriety, as destructive of the natural
being, that is our first and most valuable good in the order of Nature, is the
just object of Fear. The union between Soul and Body is very intimate and dear,
and like David and Jonathan they part unwillingly. Nature has a share in the
best Men, and works as Nature: St. Paul declares, we would not be uncloathed,
not finally put off the Body, but have it glorified in conjunction with the
Soul. Our blessed Savior, without the least impeachment of the Rectitude and
perfection of his Nature, expressed an aversness from Death, and with submission
to the divine Will desired a freedom from it. His Affections were holy and
humane, and moved according to the quality of their Objects.

3. The natural consequents of Death render it fearful. Life is the foundation
of all natural enjoyments, and the loss of it induces the loss of all for ever.
It Is from hence that such Evils that are consistent with Life, and deprive us
only of some particular content and pleasure, are willingly chosen rather than
Death. The forfeiture of Estate, the degrading from honor, the confinement to
a perpetual Prison, the banishing from our native Country, are less Penalties
than Death.

There is a natural love of Society in Man, and Death removes from all. The
Grave is a frightful solitude. There is no conversation in the territories of
darkness. This also Hezekiah in his apprehensions of death speaks of with
tears. Isa. 38. 11.
I shall see Man no more in the Land of the Living. As in the Night, Dies
moritur in noctem, and tenebris usquequaque sepelitur; funestatur mundi honor,
omnis substantia denigratur, sordent, silent, stupent cuncta: ubique justitium
est. Tertul. de Resurrec. Car.
the World is an universal Grave, all things are in a dead silence; Palaces,
Courts of Justice, Temples, Theaters, Schools, and all places of public
Conversation are shut up: the noise and rumor that keeps Men in continual
observation and action ceases. Thus when the Sun of this present Life is set,
all the Affairs and Business, all the vain joys of Company, Feasting, Dancing,
Music, Gaming, ceases. Every one among the Dead is confined to his sealed
obscure Cell, and is alone an entertainment for the Worms.

The Psalmist says of Princes, Their breath goes forth, they return to the
Earth, in that very day their thoughts, their glorious compassing thoughts,
perish. This the Historian observes was verified in Julius Caesar: After his
assuming the Imperial Dignity, he thought to reduce the numerous Laws of the
Romans into a few Volumes, comprising the substance and reason of all; to
enrich and adorn the City of Rome, as was becoming the Regent of the World: to
epitomize the Works of the most learned Grecians and Romans for the public
Benefit. And whilst he was designing and pursuing these, Talia agentem atque
meditantem mors praevenit. Sueton.
and other vast and noble things, Death surprised him, and broke off all his
Enterprises.

At the terrible Gate that opens into Eternity, Men are stripped of all their
Honors and Treasures, and as naked as they come into the World, Psalm. 49. 16,
17.
go out of it. Be not thou afraid when one is made rich, when the glory of his
House is increased. For when he dies, he shall carry nothing away; his glory
shall not descend after him. Death equally vilifies, makes loathsome and ghastly
the Bodies of Men, and reduces them to sordid Dust. In the Grave the As our
Divine Poet expresses it.
dust is as precious and powerful of one as of another. The brags of Life are
but a nine days wonder; And after Death the fumes that spring, From private
Bodies make as big a thunder, As those that rise from a huge King.
Civil distinctions are limited to the present time. The prodigious Statue in
Nebuchadnezzar's Vision, Dan. 2. 32, 33, 34, 35. Herbert.
While it was upright, the parts were really and visibly distinct: The head was
of fine gold, the breast and arms of silver, the belly and thighs of brass; the
legs of iron, the feet part of iron and part of clay: but when the stone cut
out without hands, smote the Image upon the feet, then was the iron, the clay,
the brass, the silver, and the gold, broken to pieces together, and became like
the Chaff the wind carries away. Who can distinguish between Royal Dust taken
out of magnificent Tombs, and Plebean Dust from common Graves? Who can know who
were Rich, and who were Poor; who had power and command, who were Vassals, who
were remarkable by Fame, who by Infamy? 2 Kings 9. 37.
They shall not say this is Jezebel: not know this was the Daughter and Wife of
King. The King of Babylon, styled Lucifer the bright Star of the Morning, that
possessed the first Empire in the World, was degraded by Death, humbled to the
Grave, and exchanged all his glorious State for Worms and Putrefaction. Isa.
14. 11.
The Worm is spread under thee, and the Worms cover thee. In short, Death
separates Men from all their admired charming Vanities.

2. Death is fearful in the apprehension of Conscience, as it is the most
sensible mark of God's Wrath, that is heavier than Death, and a summons to give
an account of all things done in this Life, to the righteous Judge of the World.
Heb. 9. 27.
It Is appointed to all Men once to die, and afterward the Judgment. The Penal
Fear is more wounding to the Spirit, than the Natural. When the awakened Sinner
quietly expects the Citation to appear before the Tribunal above, where no
excuses, no supplications, no privileges avail, where his cause of Eternal Life
or Death must be decided, and the awards of Justice be immediately executed; O
the Convulsions and Agonies of Conscience in that hour! when the diseased Body
cannot live, and the disconsolate Soul dare not die, what Anxieties surround
it? This redoubles the terrors of Death, that the first transmits to the second
that was figured by it. O the dismal aspect of Death riding on a pale Horse,
with Hell the black Attendant following. This Fear surprised the Sinners in
Sion; Who among us can dwell with devouring Fire? who among us can remain with
everlasting burnings? This made a Heathen, the Governor of a Province, to
tremble before a poor Prisoner. Acts 24. 25.
While Paul discoursed of Righteousness, Temperance, and Judgment to come,
Foelix trembled. Heb. 10. 31.
It Is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, who lives for
ever, and can punish for ever. None is so powerful as God, nothing so fearful
as the guilty Conscience.

3. The degrees of this Fear is expressed by Bondage. This Passion when regular
in its Object and Degree is excellently useful: it is a wise Counselor and
faithful Guardian, that plucks off the Mask from our Enemies, and keeps Reason
vigilant and active to prevent a threatening Evil, or to sustain it in the best
manner. It Is observable in the brute Creatures, that the weak and fearful, are
most subtle and ingenious to secure themselves, and supply the want of
strength with artifice. But when Fear is inordinate, it is a tyrannous Master,
that vexes the weary Soul, and hinders its free and noble Operations. Caesar
chose rather to be exposed to sudden death, Praestat semel mori quam semper
timere.
than to be continually harrast with fears how to avoid it. The Greek word
implies the binding of the Spirit, (...) from (...).
that causes an inward slavery. And in the Apostles Writings, (...). Romans 8.
15. (...).
the Spirit of Fear, and the Spirit of Bondage, are equivalent. Ishbosheth,
when Abner provoked by the Charge about Readiness Concubine, 2 Timothy 1. 7.
imperiously threatened to translate the Kingdom to David, was struck with such
a fear, that he could not answer Abner a word, 2 Samuel 3. 10, 11. The sudden
passion stifled his reply, and reduced him to a defenseless silence. Now the
fear of Death, as it is remiss or vehement, such are the degrees of bondage from
it.

1. It embitters the enjoyments of the present Life, and makes the most
prosperous in the World, even in the fullness of their sufficiency to be in
straits. Though the senses are pleased with the quick sweetness of Change from
one Object to another, yet the Soul cannot have a delightful undisturbed
fruition, foreseeing that the stream of Pleasure will issue into the dead Sea.
Eccles. 11. 7.
Truly Light is sweet, and it is a pleasant thing to behold the Sun. But how
short is this Life with all its pleasures, in comparison of the days of
darkness that follow. Now though it is our best wisdom and truest liberty, to
rejoice in this World, as if we rejoiced not, and frequently to meditate on the
cooling Doctrines of Death and Judgment, to repress the transports of the
voluptuous appetite; yet since the Comforts of this Life are liberally indulged
to us by the Love of God, to be the motives of our grateful and affectionate
Obedience, to sweeten our passage to Heaven, we may with tranquillity of Spirit
make a pure and cheerful use of them in his service; and it is an oppressing
bondage, when the disquieting anxious fears of Death hinders our temperate
enjoyment of his Favors and Blessings.

2. The fear of Death oppresses the Souls of Men under a miserable Bondage to
the Devil; for his Dominion is maintained by the Allurements and Terrors of the
World. Tho Men do not explicitly acknowledge his Sovereignty, yet by voluntary
yielding to his pleasing temptations, they are really his Slaves. And the
apprehension of temporal Evils, especially of Death, dressed up in a frightful
representation, with its bloody pomp, Prove. 29.
is the strongest snare to the Soul. The faint-hearted prove false-hearted in
the time of trial: For the timorous Spirit being wholly intent how to avoid the
incursion of a present Evil, forgets or neglects what is indispensibly to be
done, and thinks to find an excuse in the pretended necessity. How many have
been terrified from their clearest Duty, and resolved Constancy? To escape
Death, they have been guilty of the most insufferable impieties, by renouncing
God their Maker and Savior, and worshipping the Devils for Deities. Every Age
presents sad spectacles of many that choose iniquity rather than affliction, Job
36. 21.
that relinquish their duty, and by wicked compliances save their Lives and
lose their Souls. Carnal Desires, and Carnal Fears, are the Chains of Hell that
retain Men Satan's Captives. But what folly, what madness is it, for the
avoiding the impotent fury of the Creature, to venture on the powerful wrath of
God, that exceeds all the terrors that can be conceived by fear. This renders
them more brutish than the Horse, that starting at his Shadow, springs over a
desperate Precipice. Rev. 21.
The fearful are excluded from Heaven, and cast into the Lake of Fire and
Brimstone for ever.

3. The extreme fear of Death and Judgment, dejects and discourages the Soul
from the use of means to prevent eternal misery, and induces a most woeful
Bondage. Fear anticipates and exasperates future Evils: for as knowledge excites
fear, so fear increases knowledge, by the uncessant working of the thoughts upon
terrible Objects. The fearful mind aggravates the foreseen Evil, and distills
the Poison from all the circumstances and consequences of it. And when the Evil
is apprehended as insuperable and indeclinable, all endeavors to escape are
cut off. Senec. Nullum malum sine eifugio.
What a Philosopher observes of an Earthquake, compared with other destructive
Evils, is true in this case. There may be a safe retreat from Fire, from
Inundations, from Storms, from War, from Pestilence, but an Earthquake
astonishes with so violent a perturbation, Timor fugam perdidit.
that stops our flight from the imminent danger. So the vehement impressions of
fear from the approaches of death, and the severe executions upon the Sinner
after it, distracts the mind, and disables from flying from the Wrath to come.
These Fears are more heavy by the suggestions of Satan, who represents God so
terrible in his Majesty, inexorable in his Justice, and dreadful to Death, that
all hopes of obtaining his favor are lost. As the Egyptian Darkness was not
merely from the absence of the Sun, but from feculent Vapors condensing the
Air, that it might be felt. So these dark and fearful expectations of the
Divine Wrath, are not only from the withdrawing the Light of God's Countenance,
but from the Prince of Darkness that foul Spirit. And as we read of the
Egyptians, that no Man arose from his place for three days, as if they had been
buried in that darkness, and deprived of all active power and motion: so the
despairing Soul sits down mourning at the Gates of Death, totally disabled from
prosecuting the Things that belong to its peace. It Is Hope inspires and warms
us with alacrity, encourages our Endeavors, Despair is without edg and
industry. The Soul suffers the hardest Bondage, and the condition is
inexpressibly sad under the tyranny of this Fear. O how enthralled, how
desolately miserable! for despair does meritoriously and effectually ruin the
Soul. For whereas there is no Attribute more Divine, no clearer Notion of the
Deity than Love and Mercy; this Passion disparages his Mercy, as if Sin were
more omnipotent, than his Power to pardon; and all the Tears that flow from it,
are so far from expiating, that they increase Guilt: and whereas the believing
view of Christ would as completely and presently recover the Soul-wounded
Sinner, as the Israelites were by looking to the ordained visible Sign of their
Salvation; Despair turns away the Eye from our Deliverer, and fixes it upon
misery as remediless and final.

4. How comes it to pass that Men are not always under the actual fear of
Death, but subject to the revolutions of it all their Lives.

The Seeds of this Fear, are hid in the guilty Breasts of Men, and at times,
especially in their Calamities, break forth and kindle upon them. In their
leisure and Retirement, intercurrent thoughts of Death and Judgment sting them
by fits, and make them uneasy. The flashes of Conscience, like moments of
Lightning, startle them, but they relapse into their habitual stupidity. And
the account of it will be clear, by considering the following Particulars.

1. Men are apt to flatter themselves with the hopes of long Life, and look
upon Death at a great distance. Though there be a dying disposition in the
youngest and strongest Persons, though we live in a world of Casualties, and
Death lie in ambush to surprise us every day, yet we are secure: because Evils
affect us according to their apprehended nearness. A Petty Constable that is
troublesome and vexatious, is more feared by his Neighbors, than the Grand
Signior with all his Executioners. As remote Objects, though of vast bigness,
are lessened to our sight, so through the supposed interval of many years,
Death is looked on with a diminution of its Terror. But when Death presents it
self before Men ready to dispatch them, how formidable is its appearance! Saul
tho renouned for his Valor, yet when he understood by Revelation, that to
morrow he and his Sons should be in the state of the dead, 1 Samuel 28.
there was no strength in him, but he fell straightway all along on the Earth;
struck through with fear before he was wounded by the Arrows of the Philistines.
Belshazzar in the midst of his luxury and jolity, Dan. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4.
attended with a thousand Lords, and his herd of Concubines, inflamed with
Wine, and therefore less capable of fear, yet upon the sight of the fatal Hand
writing on the Wall a few unknown Characters, which his guilty Conscience
(before the Prophet Daniel came) interpreted to be the sentence of present
Death, How fearfully was his Countenance changed pale as a Carcass? How
suddenly did his Blood congeal, and his warmest quickest Spirits die in his
Heart? His whole Body was seized by such a vehement trembling, that his joints
were loosed, and his knees smote one against another. This is a representation
of those who bid defiance to Death at a distance; but when the fatal Hour is
come, and they hear the Sentence decreed against them, God has numbered thy
days, and finished them: thou art weighed in the balance (all thy words and
Actions, thy Thoughts and Affections) and art found wanting: and thy Soul shall
be divided from thy Body, the one sent to Hell to suffer the undying Worm of
Conscience, the other to the Grave, to be a prey to the Worms of Corruption;
how are they overcome with horror!

2. The continual succession of the Pleasures and Business of the World divert
the mind from the attentive strong contemplation of Death, and the consequences
of it. Pensive thoughts are unwelcome, and we studiously endeavor to cancel
the memory of such things as afflict us. It Is said of the Wicked, that God is
not in all their thoughts: The consideration of the Holy Inspector and Judge of
their Actions is tormenting, therefore they fill their minds with earthly
Imaginations, to exclude the Divine Presence. We read of those, who to put far
away the evil day, Amos 6. 3, 4.
chaunted to the sound of the Viol, and drank Wine in Bowls. They are rocked
asleep with the motion of fantastic Vanities. And sleep takes away Fear, but
gives no safety. It Is recorded of Marius, Aelian.
that after his overthrow by Scylla, he was always in consternation, as if he
heard the sound of the Trumpets, and the noise of the victorious Army pursuing
him: And his Fears were no longer quiet than whilst charmed with Wine and
Sleep. He therefore was continually drunk, that he might forget Himself, his
Enemy, and his Danger. Thus Men make a pitiful shift to forget their latter
End: and whilst they are following either secular Affairs, or sensual
Pleasures, are unconcerned for what is to be hereafter. But this diversion will
shortly be at an end, for in their languishing hours, when the wasted Body
fails the carnal Mind, and sensual Desires fail the Man, then Conscience that
spoke with a low Voice before, is loud and terrible, and like the rigid Exactor
in the Parable, that took his Debtor by the throat, requires them to pay what
they owe.

3. Some are so hardened in Infidelity, that the Powers of the World to come
make no impression on their hearts. They mind but little, and are less affected
with invisible things. They fortify themselves with gross thoughts, that the
Spirit of Man vanishes with his Breath, that Death is the end of this Life, and
not the beginning of another, and feed without fear. Place one in the midst of
destructive Evils, but unseen or not believed, and he is as fearless as a blind
Person walking on the brink of a deep Pit. Indeed there are none less disturbed
with the terrors of Death, than the eminently good, or the extremely bad: for
the one sort have a blessed hope that Death will be to them an entrance into
Life, and live like the Angels, with a joy unspeakable and glorious. The others
are as sensual and secure as the Beasts that perish, having extinguished the
fear of eternal future Evils, which is the proper passion of reason. The
Apostle declares, That knowing the terror of the Lord, 2 Cor. 5. 11.
we persuade Men to be reconciled to him, before the season of Mercy be
expired. But those who have suppressed the natural Notions of Eternal Judgment,
as they think it beneath their wisdom to be persuaded by the Promises of
Heaven, so beneath their courage to be terrified with the threatenings of Hell,
and triumph over the ruins of Conscience. But though wicked Infidels slite the
Threatenings, they shall not escape the Vengeance of God.

We read of Noah, Heb. 11.
that being warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved with fear, he
prepared an Ark for the saving of his House. His Fear was the native issue of
his Faith. But the profane World, in whom sense was predominant, that despised
the Oracle, and trembled at no Judgments but what were acting on the visible
Stage, they eat and drank, married, and were given in marriage, till swept away
by the unfeared Inundation. We read that Lot being certified by an embassy of
Angels, that a Deluge of Fire would in a few hours pour down from Heaven upon
Sodom, he most earnestly solicited his Sons-in-Law, Arise, depart out of this
place, for the Lord will destroy this City: but they entertained his
compassionate advice with derision, he seemed to them as one that mocked, and
were surprised by those fearful Flames that dispatched them from a temporal
Hell to that which is Eternal. Thus 'twas prophesied, That in the last days
there shall come Scoffers, walking after their own lusts, and saying, Where is
the Promise of his coming? But let them blaspheme and scorn the most sacred and
terrible Truths, let them perpetuate their excess of riot, and wild Mirth while
they live, Death will come, and Judgment as sure as Death.

III. I now come to show how the Death of Christ frees us from the tormenting
fear of Death.

For the clearing this, we are to consider, that Sin, Satan, and Death, are
Enemies in combination against Man in his mortal state; and the destructive
Power of Satan, and Death, is from Sin. When Man renounced his Creator and
natural Lord, he was judicially given up to Satan as the Executioner of
Vengeance, and to the Power of Death. Such is the order, rather the confusion
in the World by Sin. The Empire of Satan and Death is built on the Ruins of our
Innocence.

Now the Son of God came from his Throne in Heaven to deliver us: And whereas
there are two ways of obtaining freedom from captivity, either by Ransom, or by
Power and Rescue, in both respects our deliverance from Bondage, to these
Capital Enemies, is ascribed to the Death of Christ.

It Is called our Ransom, and that in its strict Notion has a respect to
Captivity. 1 Timothy 2. 6.
There is one God, and one Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus:
who gave himself a Ransom for all. His Life was the full price of our Liberty
and Salvation. God does not pardon sin, and release from punishment by a pure
absolute act of his Will and Authority, as a Creditor forgives a Debtor; but in
such a way as to preserve the Rights of Justice inviolate. Therefore when Man
was devoted to Death, our Redeemer exchanged conditions with him, and offered
up his precious Blood, 1 Pet. 1. 18.
as our Ransom to God, in the quality of the King and Judge of all. Such was the
dignity of his Person, that the entire World, the Heavens and the Earth with
all their Inhabitants, are of less value to him, than the basest Dross to
refined Gold. Such was the greatness of his Sufferings, in which the highest
degree of Obedience, Phil. 2. 8.
and the lowest degree of Humility were conspicuous, as to be a valuable
Compensation, to obtain eternal Redemption for us.

Now when God the supreme Judge is satisfied, Satan forfeits the right he had to
torment us, and is divested of his dominion over our Wills; which though justly
permitted, was an usurpation upon God's Right in Man that can never be
extinguished. It Is said by the Apostle, that our Savior blotting out the
handwriting of Ordinances that was against us, Col. 2.
which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his Cross:
He abolished the use of the Ceremonial Law, that was an Evidence and Enditement
of their Guilt who performed it, and the Curse of the Moral Law: it follows,
and having spoiled Principalities and Powers, he made a show of them openly,
triumphing over them in it. Our Savior died victoriously; the Tree of Infamy
on which he suffered, was the Trophy of his Conquest. His Death disarmed Satan
of his Weaponswhere by he subdued us, Sin, the Law, and Death; for though his
actual Triumph was in his Resurrection and Ascension to Glory, yet it is justly
ascribed to his Death: for that meritoriously opened the Grave at his
Resurrection, and Heaven at his Ascension.

And here by the way it is most worthy of observation, that our deliverance from
our spiritual and most deadly Enemies is equally righteous, as admirable and
glorious: for our suffering Savior appeased the Wrath of God, and broke the
Powers of Darkness. The Wisdom and Love of God had their designs in his Death,
as well as the malice and rage of Satan, as Lines, that are opposite in the
circumference, meet in the Center.

And as from the Tyranny of Satan, so the Death of our Redeemer is our
redemption from Death, as to the curse and final dominion of it; nay, has made
it a blessed advantage to us.

1. The Curse is removed. Death considered as the Wages of Sin, is all sting
and poison, the consequent of the spiritual Death, and the introduction to
eternal Death. The sting of Death is Sin, 1 Cor. 15.
and the strength of Sin is the Law. Death has its wounding Power from Sin,
and Sin from the Law, that forbids it, the discovers its Nature, and enhanses
the measure of its Guilt, and denounces condemnation for it. Now our Savior
having in our stead, subjected himself to Death, the penalty of the Law for
Sin, There is no condemnation to those that are in Christ Jesus. Gal. 3.
Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us.
Death inflicted on the Saints, has not that relation to the guilt of Sin, as to
be properly satisfaction to revenging Justice. There are no petty payments to
be made by our Sufferings after his complete satisfaction to God. The Lord laid
on him the Iniquities of us all. Isa. 53.


It Is indeed still a declaration of God's holy displeasure against Sin, for
that originally opened the way of its coming into the World; and sometimes by
the immaturity or manner of it, it is a chastisment upon good Men for sin; that
is, to make them renew their Repentance, and mortify their carnal Affections
that fasten them to the World. For though after the last act of expiration there
is no place for Repentance; yet in the approaches of Death, the Soul is
strongly excited by the Call of God to review its state, and make solemn
preparation to be found of him in Peace. But it is not in a strict sense the
malediction of the Law, and divine Revenge upon them. The Serpent is turned
into a Rod of Heb. 12.
Correction in the hands of our Heavenly Father for their good. As the Apostle,
speaking of some that for their profaning the Lord's Table, were fallen asleep,
1 Cor. 10. 33.
adds, that when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we way not
be condemned with the World. A Believer shall not be hurt of the Rev. 2.
second Death.

From hence it is, that in the Book of Life, the Scriptures, the death of the
Saints is called a sleep. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 14
St. Paul argues, If we believed that Jesus died and rose again; even so them
also that sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him. It Is observable how the
Apostle varies the expression, Jesus died, and the Saints sleep in him: for he
sustained death with all its terrors, Annon long gloriosius fuit, quandoquidem
totum pro nobis agebatur, ut non modo passio corporis, sed etiam cordis
affectio pro nobis faceret? Et quos vivificabat mors, nihilominus and
trepidatio robustos, and maestitia laetos and taedium alacres and turbatio
quietos sacecet, and desolatio consolatos? Bern. Sermon. 1. de St. Andr.
that it might be a calm sleep to his People. They enjoy as perfect a rest in
the Beds of Dust, as ever in the softest Down. Stephen in the midst of a shower
of stones fell asleep. Believers die in peace. The Righteous is taken from the
Evil to come: Isa. 57. 1, 2.
he enters into peace. Being reconciled to God through the Blood of Christ,
they are not terrified at his Call, but with sweet tranquillity resign their
Souls unto him. Luke 2.
Lord, now let thy Servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy
Salvation. There is a vast difference in God's account, between the Death of
Righteous and the Wicked. As the Tabernacle in the Wilderness was taken down
with care upon their change of station, and delivered to the Levites Charge, in
order to the raising of it again with honor; but the House incurably infected,
was plucked down with violence, and thrown into an unclean place with
execration: thus the death of the Saints is precious in the sight of the Lord,
their Bodies are kept in the bosom of the Earth, to be raised in Glory; and the
death of the Wicked is accursed. In short, as the Wood that Moses cast into the
Waters of Mara, by a miraculous virtue sweetened them: so the Cross of Christ
has taken away the malignity and bitterness of Death.

2. Death is a blessed advantage, and enriching Gain to a Believer: it brings
him to the possession of that Good that incomparably exceeds the Evil that
remains in it. For the Death of a Saint is not total; but as in the Ceremony of
Purification from Leprosy, one Bird was killed, and the other let fly in the
open Air, the mysterious shadow of the Lepers being restored to a state of
Liberty: thus when the Body dies and returns to the Earth, the Spirit returns
to God, the Father of Spirits, and Fountain of Life. Our Savior told the Jews,
I am the living Bread that came down from Heaven: John 6. 48.
if any Man eat of this Bread, he shall live for ever; and the Bread that I
will give is my Flesh, that I will give for the Life of the World. The Heavenly
Divine Life, that is communicated by the Spirit of Christ to Believers, remains
entire when the sensitive life is lost. The natural order is, There is a time
to be born, and a time to die: the supernatural is, there is a time to die, and
a time to be born. The death of a Saint is a Dies iste quem tu tanquam supremum
reformidas, aeterni natalis est. Senec.
new Birth; the pains of the dying Body are as Throws, whereby the ripened Soul
is delivered into the Land of the Living. The happiness of a Saint after Death,
more particularly will appear by considering;

1. The place to which he ascends the highest Heaven. This inferior World is
framed with exquisite Order, the Earth is full of the Glory of the Lord; yet
it is but the sediment of the Creation, the habitation of Birds and Beasts, nay
of rebellious Sinners; and by this we may raise our thoughts to conceive
something of the seat of Life and Blessedness Above.

It Is for its amplitude and excellency called the Heaven of Heavens, which is
the highest comparison to instruct and astonish us with the Glory of the place.
The shining Firmament, with all the Luminaries that adorn it, are but the
Frontice-piece to it. All the luster of Diamonds, the fire of Carbuncles and
Rubies, the brightness of Pearls are dead in comparison of its Glory. It Is
called by our Savior his Fathers House, and he is the God of Glory; it is his
Temple, wherein his sacred Presence is fully exhibited: His Throne, wherein his
Majesty is revealed in the most illustrious manner.

For pleasantness; it is called Paradise, in allusion to the delicious Garden
planted by the hands of God himself for Adam, his Favorite, whilst innocent.
There is the Tree of Life indeed, and Rivers of Pleasure ever springing from
the Divine Presence. Col 9
It Is the Inheritance of the Saints in Light; to signify literally and
allegorically the glory and joy of the Place. For Light gives splendour to
things; and conciliates cheerfulness, and is a fit Emblem of both. As on the
contrary, Hell is described by the blackness of darkness for ever; to signify
the sadness and despair of the Damned, and because in that center of misery, a
perpetual night and invincible darkness increases the horror of lost Souls.

Heaven for stability is called, a City that has Foundations, whose Builder and
Maker is God. The present World is like a Tent or Tabernacle set up for a time,
and with all its perishing Idols shall shortly fall; all this beautiful Scene
shall be dissolved: But the supreme Heaven is a Kingdom that cannot be shaken.
Our Savior tells us, In my Father's House are many Mansions, to signify the
amplitude and durableness of it.

2. In that blessed Place there is a freedom from all afflicting Evils, that
are numberless here. The present World is a labyrinth of Thorns, in every state
we meet with something to vex us. You may as well count the Waves of the Sea
when enraged by a Tempest, as the troubles to which in this mortal open state
we are exposed. Job 14. 1.
Man that is born of a Woman, is of few days, and full of trouble. A short
life, and many miseries. Tempus angustatur ad vitam, dilatatur ad miseriam.
O our unhappy capacity! the Body is liable to as many Diseases as there are
Members; and the Soul to as many perplexities as passions. How often are the
scenes and habits changed in the time of one Man? He that lives in pleasures,
must act the Mourner's part. Our sweetest comforts have hidden stings: and
whatever is most pleasing may occasion bitter grief. And usually holy Men have
a greater portion of afflictions here: sometimes by the malignity and violence
of the wicked; as under the Law, the Lamb and the Dove were Sacrifices, the
Emblems of Innocence, and Purity, and Meekness, whilst the Vulture and the Lion
the greedy devourers escaped. This the Apostle declares of the Elect, They are
predestined to be conformed to the Image of God's Son, who traced out the way
to Heaven in his own Blood, and by the Cross ascended to the Throne. Sometimes
more immediately Divine Providence afflicts them, to preserve their Spirits
from the tainted pleasures of the World, and other Holy Ends: but there is a
rest for the People of God in Heaven. Besides, there are Relics of Sin in the
best of the Saints here. Indeed Sin is deposed from sovereignty and rule; the
imperious Lusts are crucified, but not quite expired. As those that were nailed
to the Cross in their hands and feet, the parts least vital and most sensible,
died a painful lingering death. Still the flesh lusts against the spirit, and
the spirit against the flesh. As there is a complexion of Humors in humane
Bodies, always jarring when they are in the soundest health; and where there is
not this active contrariety, either the Body is without a Soul, a mere Carcass,
or a glorified Body in Heaven. So where there is not this internal Combat
between Grace and Sin, either the Man is wholly Omnes homines aut sunt penitus
caro, and nihil habent spiritus, ii sunt insidele; sine regeneratione. Aut sunt
tantum spiritus sine carne. li sunt sancti; qui jam in Coelo aeterna fruuntur
pace sine pugna. Aut sunt partim spiritus, partim caro. li sunt omnes renati
per spiritum sanctum in Christo. Aug. cont. Jul.
Carnal, dead in sins and trespases; or wholly spiritual reigning in Heaven.
And there is nothing more works on the tender affections of a Saint, than to
find in himself what is displeasing to God; that still he is under a sad
necessity of sinning. What is said concerning an old Man wasted and decayed in
his drooping Years, that the Grasshopper is a burden to him; is true, of the new
Man in a Christian, the sins that are counted light in the valuation of the
World, are a heavy weight to him. Vain Thoughts, idle Words, irregular
Passions, unprofitable Actions, are motives of heartbreaking sorrow. Now Death
is to a Believer a universal Remedy against all the Evils of this Life: it
frees him from all Injuries and Sufferings, and from Sin in all its degrees,
from all inclinations and temptations to it. He that is dead, cease from Sin.
Death is the passage from this Wilderness to the true Canaan the rest Above,
that flows with better Milk and Honey, with Innocence and Happiness for ever.
There nothing can disturb the Peace, or corrupt the purity of the blessed.

3. Besides the privative advantage, the freedom from all the effects of God's
displeasure, and the resentments of it, there is the highest positive Good
obtained by Death; The Spirits of just Men are made perfect in Heaven. The Soul
is the Glory of Man, and Grace is the Glory of the Soul, and both are then in
their exaltation. All the Faculties of the Soul are raised to the highest
degrees of Natural and Divine Perfection. In this Life Grace renews the
Faculties, but does not elevate them to their highest pitch: it does not make a
mean Understanding pregnant, nor a frail Memory strong, nor a slow Tongue
eloquent, but sanctifies them as they are. But when the Soul is released from
this dark Body of Earth, the Understanding is clear and quick, the Memory firm,
the Will and Affections ardent and vigorous. And they are enriched with divine
Light, and Love, and Power, that makes them fit for the most noble and heavenly
Operations. The lineaments of God's Image on the Soul are first drawn here, but
then it receives his last hand. All the Celestial Colors are added, to give
the utmost life and luster to it. Here we are advancing, but by Death we arrive
at Perfection.

We shall in Heaven be joined to the Assembly of Saints and Angels, our best
Friends. Love is the Law of that Kingdom, and Perfectly obeyed there. Now how
charming is the Conversation of one that is wise and holy, especially if the
sweetness of affability be in his temper? How pleasantly does time slide away
in the company of our beloved Friends? We are not sensible of its flight. But
what dear satisfaction is it to be united to that chosen consecrated Society
Above, who love one another as themselves. Though the Angels and Saints have
different degrees of Glory, yet every one is perfectly happy and pleased. As
the strings of an Instrument differ in the size and sound, some are sharp and
high, some grave and deep, others a mean, and from that variety results the
Harmony and Music, so that if every string had Judgment and Election, it would
choose to be what it is: so from the different degrees of Glory in Heaven, the
most amiable and equal Order of the Divine Wisdom appears, that satisfies every
one.

We shall be in the glorious presence of God and Christ, where is fullness of
joy, and infinite pleasures for ever. It Is said of Abraham, He rejoiced to see
the day of Christ, two thousand Years before his coming. When by Faith he saw
the incarnation of the Son of God, in order to the redemption of Men, it put
him into an ecstasy. Yet then our Savior was born to Sorrows and Miseries. But
how ravishing is the sight of our Redeemer, set down on the right hand of the
Majesty on high, having purged our Sins by himself, and accomplished our
Salvation. Now we are absent from God, yet in believing his infallible
Promises, we rejoice with a Joy unspeakable and glorious; But how much more
joyful is the fruition of them? Here the Divine Goodness is derived to us
through secondary means, that weaken its efficacy, but in Heaven the
consolations of the Creator are most purely dispensed, and his immediate
Excellencies are made known.

This Blessedness exceeds all our thoughts and explicit desires, and requires
the eloquence and experience of an Angel to set it forth. The bright sum of it
is this, We shall see God in his Glory, face to face, 1 Cor. 13.
in the most perfect manner: the sight of his Glory shall transform us into his
Likeness; 1 John 3.
we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is: This shall produce in us
the most pure and ardent Love; and Love shall be attended with inexpressible
joy, and that with the highest praises of the blessed God, whose influxive
presence is the Heaven of Heaven.

And that which crowns all is, that the Life above is Eternal. This satisfies
all our Desires, and excludes all our Fears: for unchangeableness is an
inseparable Attribute of perfect felicity. The Blessed are in full communion
with God, the Fountain of Life, and Christ the Prince of Life. Because I live,
says our Savior, ye shall live also. What can interrupt, much less put an end
to the happiness of the Saints? The Love of God is immutably fixed upon them,
and their Love upon him. Here their love is subject to decays, and gradual
alienations; as the Needle in the Compass, though it always has a tendency to the
North Pole, yet sometimes it declines and has its variations. But in Heaven the
love of the Saints is directly and constantly set upon God. The light of his
Countenance governs all their Affections. It Is as impossible to divert their
desires from him, as to cause one that is inflamed with thirst, to leave a
clear flowing Spring for a noisome Puddle. In short, Heaven is filled with
eternal Halelujahs: for there is no appearance of Sin, no shadow of Death
there: all miseries are vanished, and all that is desirable is possessed by
the Saints: the Circle of their Employment is to enjoy and praise the Divine
Goodness for ever.

Now is not the blessed exchange a Christian makes of the present Life, for
that which is infinitely better, sufficient to make Death not fearful, nay
desirable to him? And this Happiness was purchased for us by the everlasting
Treasure of our Savior's Blood. The satisfaction of his Sufferings was
meritorious, as the Merits of his active Obedience was satisfying.

Before I proceed to the third Head, I shall resolve a Question, How it comes
to pass, since Believers are freed from the sting of Death, that they die, and
remain in the state of Death for a time.

For this there are several Reasons.

1. By this means all the sinful Frailties that cleave to the Saints in this
Life, are abolished. Romans 8.
The Body is dead because of Sin: And what is more becoming the wise and holy
Providence of God, than that as by Sin Man was at first made subject to Death,
so by Death Sin dies entirely for ever. Thus as in Sampson's Riddle, Out of the
Devourer comes Meat; and our worst Enemy is conquered by his own Weapons.

2. Death is continued to the Saints, for the more eminent exercise and
illustration of their Graces, for the Glory of God, and in order to their
future reward. Poterat autem Christus etiam hoc donare credentibus, ut nec
istius experirentur corporis mortem: sed si hoc fecisset carni quaedam
faelicitas adderetur, minueretur fidei fortitudo. Quid enim magnum erat vivendo
eos non mori qui crederent credere se non moriturum? Quanto est majus quanto
fortius quanto laudabilius ita credere, ut se speret moriturus sine fine
victurum? Aug. de pecc. Mort. Lib. 2.
Faith, and Love, and Patience, are declared in their most powerful Operations
in our encounter with Death. If every Saint were visibly and entirely
translated to Heaven, after a short course of holy Obedience; if the Wicked did
visibly drop down quick into Hell, Faith would be resigned to sight here. This
would confound the Militant state of the Church with the Triumphant. Therefore
now Death happens to the Good as well as to the Wicked. In the next state they
shall be separated by a vast Gulf, and an amazing Difference. Now Faith,
whatever the kind of Death be that a Christian suffers, sees through the
thickest Clouds of Disgrace and Misery, the glorious Issue. As the illustrious
Confessor who was crucified with our Savior, proclaimed his Eternal Kingdom in
the midst of insulting Infidels. And our love to God then appears in its
radiancy and vigor, when we are ready for the testimony of his Truth, and
advancing his Glory, to suffer a violent Death: or when it comes in a gentler
manner, for it is even then terrible to Nature, we are willingly subject to
dissolution, that we may be united to God in Heaven. And our patience has never
its perfect work, and is truly victorious, till this last Enemy be subdued.
Death is the Seal of our Constancy and Perseverance. Now the Righteous Rewarder
will crown none but those that strive lawfully, Exercitia nobis sunt non
funera, dant animo fortitudinis gloriam: Contemptu mortis praeparant ad
coronam. Cypr. de Mortal.
and are complete Conquerors. And how wise and sweet is the Economy of the
Divine Providence in this, that the frailty of our Nature should afford us a
means of glorifying God, and of entitling our selves by his most gracious
Promises to a blessed Reward.

3. Our Savior by his unvaluable Obedience and Sufferings, has procured for
Believers a Celestial Divine Life, of which the natural Body is not capable.
The Apostle says, Flesh and Blood cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. The
exigencies and decays of the sensitive Nature require a continual relief by
food and sleep, and other material supplies: but the Life above is wholly
spiritual, and equal to that of the Angels. Therefore till this earthly animal
Body be reformed and purified, it is not capable of the Glory reserved in
Heaven. This is so absolutely requisite, that those Believers, who are found
alive at the last Day, shall in the twinkling of an Eye be changed, that they
may be qualified for it. Now herein the Wisdom of God is wonderful, that Death
which by the Covenant of Works was the deserved penalty of Sin, by the Covenant
of Grace should be the Instrument of Immortality. That as Joseph by a
surprising Circuit was brought from the Prison to the Principality; so a
Believer by the Grave ascends to Heaven. This the Apostle in his Divine
Disputation against Infidels, proves in a most convincing manner; Thou Fool,
that which thou sowest, is not quickened except it die. As the rotting of the
Corn in the Earth is necessary to the reviving and springing of it up: so we
must die, and the Image of the Earthly Adam be abolished, that we may be
transformed into the Image of the Heavenly One.

And to the other part of the Question, Why the Saints remain in the state of
Death for a time? there is a clear Answer. The Resurrection of the Saints is
delayed till Christ's coming to Judgment, partly for the Glory of his
Appearance: For what an admirable sight will it be, that the Saints of all Ages
shall at once arise glorified and immortalized to attend upon our Savior in
the last act of his Regal Office, and then to make a triumphant entry with him
into Heaven: And partly, that the established order of Providence may not be
disturbed: for the changing of our Nature into Glory, in a sudden and
inexplicable manner, cannot be without miraculous Power; and if every Believer
presently after Death, were in his glorified Body translated to Heaven, the
World would be always filled with Miracles, which were to cease after the
sufficient Confirmation of the Gospel by them. But how long soever the Interval
be to the Resurrection, it shall be with them that sleep in Jesus, as it is with
those that awake out of a quiet natural sleep, to whom the longest night seems
but as a moment: so when the Saints first awake from Death, in the great
Morning of the World, a thousand Years will seem no more to them than to God
himself, but as one day.

I now come to prove the third Thing, That our Savior will abolish the
Dominion of Death over the Saints.

Whilst the Bodies of the Saints remain in the Grave, they seem to be
absolutely under the power of Death. The World is a Golgotha, filled with the
Monuments of its Victories. And it may be said to this our last Enemy, in the
words of the Prophet to the bloody King, Have thou killed and taken possession?
But we are assured by an infallible Word, that the power of Death shall be
abolished, and the Bodies of the Saints be revived incorruptible and immortal.

The Resurrection is a Terra incognita to the wisest Heathens; a Doctrine
peculiar to the Gospel: some glimmerings they had of the Soul's Immortality,
without which all Virtue had been extinguished in the World, but no conjecture
of the reviving of the Body. But reason assists Faith in this point, both as to
the Will of God, and his power for the performing it. I will glance upon the
natural Reasons that induce the considering Mind to receive this Doctrine, and
more largely show how the Resurrection of the Just is assured by our Redeemer.

1. The Divine Laws are the Rule of Duty to the entire Man, and not to the Soul
only: and they are obeyed or violated by the Soul and Body in conjunction.
Therefore there must be a resurrection of the Body, that the entire Person may
be capable of Recompenses in Judgment. The Soul designs, the Body executes: the
Senses are the open Ports to admit Temptations. Carnal Affections deprave the
Soul, corrupt the Mind, and mislead it. The love of Sin is sounded in bono
jucundo, in sensible pleasures: and the Members are the Servants of Iniquity.
The Heart is the Fountain of Profaneness, and the Tongue expresses it. And the
Body is obsequious to the holy Soul in doing or suffering for God; and denies
its sensual appetites and satisfactions in compliance with Reason and Grace.
The Members are the Instruments of Righteousness. It follows then there will be
an universal Resurrection, that the rewarding goodness of God may appear in
making the Bodies of his Servants gloriously happy with their Souls, and their
Souls completely happy in union with their Bodies, to which they have a natural
inclination, and his revenging Justice be manifest in punishing the Bodies of
the Wicked with eternal torments answerable to their guilt.

And of the possibility of the Resurrection, the circular and continual
production of things in the World, is a clear demonstration of the Power of God
for that effect. There is a pregnant Instance that our Savior and the Apostle
made use of as an Image of the Resurrection: A grain of Corn sowed in the Earth
corrupts and dies, and after springs up entire: its death is a disposition to
life. The essays of God's Power in the Works of returning Nature, Flowers and
Fruits in their season, instruct us how easily he can make those that are in
the dust to awake to life. If the Art of Man, whose power and skill (...)
^^rrow and limited, can refine Gold and Silver to such a luster, as if their
matter were not Nomen terrae in igni reliquit. Tertul.
Earth dug out of the Mines: If from black Cinders it can form Crystal
Glasses so clear and shining, how much more can Omnipotency recompact our dust,
and reanimate it with a glorious life? Death that dissolves our vital frame,
does not abolish the matter of our Bodies: and though it is corrupted and changed
by a thousand accidents, yet it is unperishing; and under whatsoever Colors and
Figures it appears, God perfectly discerns and will separate it for its proper
use.

More particularly, I will show how the Resurrection of Christ is an assurance
of the Resurrection of Believers to Glory. As our Surety he was under the
arrest of Death; it becoming the holy Majesty of God, and conducing to the ends
of his Government, not to derogate from the dignity of his Law, but to lay the
penalty upon his Son, who interposed for us. Now having finished the work of
our Redemption by his sufferings, his Resurrection was the just consequent of
his Passion. And it is observable that his Resurrection, tho one entire act, is
ascribed as to himself, Romans 1. 11.
so to his Father, by whose consent and concurrence he rose again. Therefore
it is said, Whom God raised up, having loosed the pains of Death: Acts. 2. 24.
since it was impossible he should be holden by it. 'Twas naturally impossible
upon the account of the Divine Power inherent in his Person, and legally
impossible, because divine Justice required that he should be raised to Life;
partly to vindicate his innocence, for he was reputed, and suffered as a
Malefactor, and principally because he had fully satisfied God. Accordingly the
Apostle declares, he died for our Sins, Romans 4.
and rose again for our Justification. Having paid our Debt, he was released
from the Grave, and the Discharge was most solemnly published to the World.
It Is therefore said, the God of Peace raised him from the dead: Heb. 13.
the act is most congruously ascribed unto God, invested with that title,
because his Power was exerted in that glorious Work, after he was reconciled by
the Blood of the Covenant. Briefly, Our Savior's Victory over Death was
obtained by dying, his Triumph by rising again. He foiled our common Enemy in
his own territories the Grave. His Death was a Counter poison to Death it self:
as a bruised Scorpion is a Qui sibi ipse pulcherimum medicamentum. Celsus.
noble Antidote against its Venom. Indeed his Death is incomparably a greater
Wonder than his Resurrection. For it is apparently more difficult that the Son
of God, who originally possesses Immortality, should die, than that the humane
Body united to him, should be raised to a glorious Life. It is more conceivable
that God should communicate to the humane Nature some of his Divine
Perfections, Impossibility, and Immortality, than that he should submit to our
lowest Infirmities, Sufferings, and Death.

Now the Resurrection of Christ is the argument and claim of our happy
Resurrection. For God chose and appointed him to be the Example and Principle
from whom all divine Blessings should be derived to us. Accordingly he tells
his Disciples in a forecited Scripture, because I live, ye shall live also.
Our Nature was raised in his Person, and in our Nature all Believers: Therefore
He is called the first fruits of them that sleep; because as the first Fruits
were a pledge and assurance of the following Harvest; and as from the condition
of the first Fruits being offered to God, the whole Harvest was entitled to a
Consecration; so our Savior's Resurrection to the Life of Glory is the earnest
and assurance of ours. He is called the firstborn among the Dead, and owns the
race of departed Believers as his Brethren, who shall be restored to Life
according to his Pattern. He is the head, Believers are his members, and
therefore shall have communion with him in his Life. The effect is so
infallible that now they are said to be raised up together, Ephesians. 2. 6.
and made to sit in heavenly places in Christ Jesus. If his Victory over our
Enemies had been imperfect, and he had saved himself with difficulty and
hazard, [ as it were by Fire,] in the Apostle's expression, our Redemption had
not been accomplished: But his Passion was triumphant, and is it conceivable
that he should leave the Saints, his own by so many dear titles, under the
power of Death? If Moses the Deliverer of Israel from the Tyranny of Pharaoh,
Exodus 10. 26
would not suffer any thing of theirs, not an hoof to remain in the House of
Bondage; will our great Redeemer be less perfect in his Work? Shall our last
Enemy always detain his Spoils, our Bodies, in the Grave? This would reflect
upon his Love and Power. It Is recorded, to confirm our hopes, how early his
Power was displaid in forcing the Grave to release its chained Captives: Matthew.
27. 52, 53.
And many bodies of Saints which slept arose, and came out of the Graves after
his Resurrection, and went into the holy City, and appeared unto many. What
better Earnest can we have that the strength of Death is broken? From what he
has done to what he is able to do, the Consequence is clear. The Apostle tells
us, He will raise our vile bodies, Phil. 3. 1.
and change them like unto his glorious Body, by that Power whereby he is able
to subdue all things to himself. Our Redemption will then be complete, Romans 8.
23.
and all the bitterness of Death past. The Redemption of the Soul is
accomplished from Sin and Misery immediately after Death: but the Redemption of
the Body is the last in order, and reserved to crown our Felicity at the Great
Day. Then Death shall be swallowed up in Victory, 1 Cor. 15.
abolished for ever.

And O the joyful reunion of those dear Relatives after such a Divorce! when
the Body that was so long detained in the loathsome Grave, 1 Cor. 15.
shall be reformed with all glorious Perfections, and be a fit Instrument for
the Soul, and partaker with it in Blessedness and a consummate Immortality.
It Is said that those that wear rich Clothing are in Kings Houses: but what are
all the Robes of costly Folly wherein earthly Courtiers appear, to the
Brightness and Beauty of the Spiritual Body wherewith the Saints shall be
clothed, to qualify them for the Presence of the King of Kings, and to be in
his House for ever? But O the miserable Condition of the Wicked in that day!
Death now breaks their Bodies and Souls into an irreconcilable Enmity, and how
sad will their Conjunction be! the Soul will accuse the Body to have been Sins
Solicitor, continually tempting to sensualities: and the body will upbraid more
than ever it allured the soul, for its wicked Compliance: Then the Sinner shall
be an entire Sacrifice burning but never consumed. Mark 9.
Now from the assurance of a blessed Resurrection by Christ, the foremention^d
fear of Death is conquered in Beleivers. If the Doctrine of the Felices errore
suo quos ille timorum Maximus, haud urget leti metus, inde ruendi In ferrum
men's prona viris, animaeque capaces Mortis, and ignavum rediturae parcere
vitae. Lucan*
Transmigration of Souls into other Bodies (the invention of Pythagoras)
inspired his Disciples with that fiery vigor, as to encounter the most present
and apparent dangers, being fearless to part with the Life that should be
restored; how much more should a Christian with a holy confidence receive
Death, knowing that the life of his Body shall not be finally lost, but renewed
in a blessed Eternity?

The fourth General to be considered is, the Persons that have an interest in
this blessed Privilege.

This inquiry is of infinite moment, both for the awakning of the secure, who
vainly presume upon their interest in the Salvation of the Gospel, and for the
confirming and encouraging the Saints. And we have an infallible rule of trial
declared by St. John: He that has the Son, has Life, and he that has not the
Son, has not Life. 1 John 5. 12.
All the excellent and comfortable Benefits procured by our Savior are
communicated only to those who are united to him. Particularly with respect to
the present subject: Justification, that great blessing of the Gospel, the
complete pardon of Sins, that disarms Death of its sting, is not common to all
that are Christians in title, but is a privilege with a limitation; There is
no Condemnation to those that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 1.
vitally as their Head from whom are derived spiritual influences, and
judicially as their Advocate in Judgment; and such are described by this
infallible Character, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit. The
blessedness after Death that is assured by a Voice from Heaven, is with this
precise restriction, exclusive of all others: Blessed are the Dead that die in
the Lord; Revel.
they rest from their labors, and their works follow them. The glorious
Resurrection at the last Day, when the Bodies of the Saints that now rest in
Hope, shall be incorruptible and immortal, is the consequence of union with
him. Thus the Apostle declares; As in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be
made alive. 1 Cor. 15. 22
As all that were naturally in and from Adam the corupt fountain of Mankind,
are under the sentence of Death; so all that are in Christ the Head of the
Regenerate, shall partake of his blessed Life. Others shall be raised by his
Power, as their Judge, but not as their Head: raised to be more miserable than
Death can make them, not be transformed into his glorious Resemblance; made
capable of suffering an ever-dying Death, not revived to eternal Life.

Now the bond of our union to Christ, is the holy Spirit derived from him, as
the Head of the Church, and is the inward, powerful* and lasting principle of
Holiness, and new obedience in Believers. He that is joined to the Lord, 1 Cor.
6. 17.
is one Spirit: that is, by the Spirit of Holiness has a real participation of
his Life, Joh. 6. 36.
is both quickened and united to him. When the Prophet Elisha by the outward
applying 2 Kin. 4. 34.
the parts of his Body to the dead Child, inspired life into him, there was no
real union between them: but Christ is by his Spirit so intimately united to
Believers, Gal. 2. 20.
that he lives in them, and they in him. The sanctifying Spirit renews the
directing and commanding faculties, the fountains of moral actions; enlightens
the Understanding with saving Knowledge, rectifies the obliquity of the Will,
purifies the Affections, and reforms the Life, so that the same mind is in
Christians as was in Christ; and as his Conversation was, such is theirs in the
World. This divine Change is not wrought by natural Reason, tho assisted by the
most powerful Arguments. The breath of a Man may as easily dispel a Mist, or
thaw a Frost, as humane directions and motives to Virtue can renew the Mind and
Heart, and produce a holy frame of Soul toward God. Renewed Christians are
said to be in the Spirit, illuminated, inclined and enabled by the Spirit to do
God's Will; and the Spirit of God to dwell in them, by his peculiar and eminent
operations. They live in the Spirit, and walk in the Spirit. An Angel may
assume a Body, and act by it: but the humane Soul enlivens it, and performs
sensible operations by it. And such a principle is the holy Spirit to the Soul,
gives it spiritual life, activity and power for good Works. By what application
of the Spirit's power this is produced is mysterious and inexplicable: but as
the Apostle speaks of his rapture into the third Heavens, that he knew it was
real, and heard unutterable things, tho how it was performed, whether in the
body, or out of the body, he could not tell: thus when a natural man, the
current of whose thoughts, and affections, was to the things of this World,
becomes spiritual, when the carnal appetite is subdued, and sanctified Reason
has the Throne, when he feels such strong and sweet impulsives to holiness as
engage the Will, when the stream of his desires ascend to the things above, and
his Life becomes holy and heavenly, he feels and knows this wonderful change,
tho the manner how it was wrought he cannot tell I will show more fully this
sanctifying work of the Spirit, that we may the better understand our state.

The Spirit of God is denominated by various titles, the Spirit of Truth, Joh.
15. 26.
the Spirit of Holiness, the Comforter, Romans 1. 4.
and represented by various types, by an Ointment that clarifies the Eye to see
things aright, by cleansing refreshing Water, by purifying refining Fire,
correspondent to his sacred operations in the Soul.

As the Spirit of Truth, he illuminates the Understanding to see the reality
and excellency of supernatural and heavenly things, of the great Mysteries of
Godliness, of Eternal Glory; so that a Christian in his most deliberate, solemn
and composed thoughts, in his exactest valuation infinitely prefers them before
the gaudy Vanities of this transient World. When the Eyes of the Mind are truly
enlightened, present things appear, or rather disappear, as shadows.

As the Spirit of Holiness he renews the Will and Affections, inspires the Soul
with divine and unutterable desires after the Favor and Grace of God, and
communicates spiritual Power for the prosecution and obtaining those Desires.

The holy Spirit raises such a Love to God, that habitually and strongly
inclines the Soul to obey his Commands.

This is the most clear and essential Character of a Christian, the special and
most excellent Property of a Saint, upon which all other holy Qualifications
depend. As Reason is the first and chief excellence of Man, from whence his
other Perfections are derived, that distinguish him from the Brutes, and give
him a natural and regular pre-eminence and dominion over them, so that a Man is
most properly defined a Reasonable Creature: Thus the Love of God is the most
Divine Grace, the true Form of Holiness, the Root from whence all other Virtues
spring and flourish, and most peculiarly distinguish a Saint from Unregenerate
Men, however adorned and accomplished; so that a Saint is most properly defined
to be a Lover of God.

This is the Principle of true Holiness inherent in the Soul, and shining in
the Conversation, that distinguishes the Sincerity of a Saint from the Art of
Hypocrisy, an affected appearance of Religion for carnal sordid respects: and
from Civil Virtue, that restrains from what is ignominious and disgraceful to
our Reputation, and makes obnoxious to penalties of the Laws, and excites to
praiseworthy Actions, upon worldly motives: and from Philosophical Morality,
that forbids Vice as contrary to Reason, and commends Virtue as the chief
ornament and perfection of humane Nature, without a regard to please and
glorify God.

And Divine Love is the Principle of Universal Holiness. Love is called the
fulfilling of the Law, as it is a comprehensive Grace, and as it draws forth all
the active powers of the Soul to do God's Will in an exact manner. Universal
Obedience is the exercise of Love in various instances. As the Spouse in the
Song of Solomon is transformed in diverse Representations; sometimes as a
Sister, sometimes as a Warrior, sometimes as the Keeper of a Vineyard, but she
always acted as a Lover, and her chief business was to please her Beloved. This
Allegorical description of the Church, signifies that when the Soul is inflamed
with the love of God, that affection will be active and discover its self in
all it does or suffers in the service of God. This will make a Christian very
desirous and diligent to please God in all things, and careful not to displease
him in any thing; for that is the inseparable effect of Love. The felicity of
the natural temper, and the force of Education, may cause a loathing of some
Evils, and dispose to some good Works, but with a reserved delight in other
sins, and a secret exception against other duties. Servile fear is a partial
principle, and causes an unequal respect to the Divine Precepts: it restrains
from sins of greater guilt, at which Conscience takes fire: it urges to some
duties, the neglect of which causes disquiet: but the Love of God causes the
hatred of Sin, and therefore it is against all Sin, not only to prevent the
exercise of it, but to eradicate it out of the soul. All the fearful
consequences of Sin do not render it so odious to a gracious Spirit, as its own
proper idea and intrinsic evil, as it is contrary to the holy Nature and Law of
God. Love unites the soul to God, and turns the thoughts continually to him:
and the lively sense of his Majesty and Presence, who is so pure that he cannot
behold iniquity, causes an aversion from all that is dispjeasing to his Divine
Eyes. And from hence it is that a zeasous Lover of God is frequent and strict
in reviewing his heart and ways, and upon the discovery of sinful failings,
renews his repentance, which is the exercise of grief and Love, and renews his
purposes of more care and circumspection for the future* Love aspires to be
like God in all possible degrees of Purity: for it inflames our desires after
his Favor, as that which is better than Life, and all the sweetest enjoyments
of it, and Hoiiness is the powerful attractive of God's delightful Love to us.

Love is the principle of free, ingenuous, and joyful Obedience. 'Twas our
Savior's Meat and Drink to do the Will of his Father. For Love is the fountain
of Pleasure, it moves the Soul with Election and Liberty, and makes every thing
grateful that proceeds from it. Therefore the Apostle declares, that the Law is
not made for a righteous Man: that is, as it is enforced by terrible penalties,
to constrain rebellious sinners to obedience: for Love is an internal living
Law in the heart, and has an Imperial Power over his Actions. And this also
distinguishes the renovation of one sanctified by the Spirit, from the
imperfect change that is made in the unregenerate. They may stop the eruption
of corrupt Nature, but are like Swine that being washed, have an inclination to
wallow in the Mire: they may by strong impressions of Fear be urged to do many
good things; but in this they are like a Boul that is thrown with such
violence, as controuls the drawing of the Bias, and makes it run contrary to
it. But Love enclines the Soul to obey the holy motions of the Spirit with
facility: as the Wheels in Ezekiel's Vision turned every way with readiness as
the Spirit moved them.

And with holy Love there is a spiritual Power communicated, that both the
natural averseness and impotence to what is good may be healed. By the virtue
of the sanctifying Spirit, the Soul that was dead, absolutely unable to perform
spiritual and supernatural Acts, is revived to a kind of Omnipotence, it can do
all things, required by the Evangelical Covenant, by the new Law that is in the
hands of our merciful Mediator for Salvation. It Is true, there are relics of
sin in the best, and the Flesh and Spirit are repugnant Principles warring
against one another: but the holy Spirit will make no capitulation or
composition with sin, but is so predominant that sin is gradually subdued, and
does not so freely and frequently break forth, as it does from the unrenewed.
By the accession of his strength we are enabled to mortify the deeds of the
Body, to crucify the Flesh with the affections and lust thereof: And to perform
holy Duties, with freedom, alacrity and zeal, in such a manner as is acceptable
to God. In short, saving Grace is distinguished from that which is common to the
unregenerate, by its prevalency and constancy. There may be a declination in
the Saints tending to a downfall; but the Seed of God, that supernatural Grace
that remains in them, will by the power of the holy Spirit recover the
supremacy. Others may be enlightened, and feel some good motions, and transient
touches, as Saul had his rapture among the Prophets; but they are not truly,
entirely, and perseveringly converted to God. They are not proof against the
allurements or terrors of the World. They make a fair profession till they are
tried by temptations. Congealed drops of water appear like solid Crystal, till
the warm beams of the Sun dissolve them, and discover the hypocrisy of the
Crystal. False Jewels may seem to have the luster of Diamonds, till they are
broke by a fall, and discovered to be Glass. Thus the Riches, the Honors and
Pleasures of the Flesh melt some, and temporal Evils break the resolutions of
others, and make it evident they were not sincere Converts. But where the holy
Spirit savingly works, he is said to dwell: he is not like a Passenger, or a
Tenant at will, that neglects the House, and suffers it to fall into ruin, but
as the Proprietary and Owner he keeps perpetual residence in true Christians,
and by his continual influence preserves them from final Apostasy.

Now from hence we may judge whether we have an interest in Christ and his
Benefits. For the Apostle clearly tells us, Romans 8. 9.
that if any Man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. By this
sacred Signature, we are appropriated to Christ, and visibly distinguished from
the World. For tho the secret and pure influences of the Spirit in the soul are
only known to the person that feels them, yet his active inspirations are
declarative of his presence and power in the outward conversation. As the Wind
that is of so thin and subtle a nature that it is invisible in it self, but we
certainly know from what point it blows by the course and way that the Ship
makes: thus the Spirit of God, who is compared to the Wind, is discovered by an
infallible Indication, his fruits and effects in a holy Life. And those who
have communion with Christ by his Spirit, have a share in his Victories, and
may with confidence meet the last enemy Death: For we are assured, If the
Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in us, Romans 8. 11.
he that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken our mortal Bodies,
by the Spirit that dwells in us.

A preparative conformity to Christ in Grace, will be followed with a
consummate in Glory. But those who never felt the sanctifying efficacy of the
Spirit in their hearts and lives, tho they are Christians in profession, yet
they have no other union with Christ, than a dead Branch with a Tree that
receives no sap and virtue from it; or an artificial Member joined to the Body,
that may have the outward clothing and ornaments proper to that part, but
derives no life and sense from it. Whoever is in Christ is a new Creature. 2
Cor. 5. 17.
And only those who partake in the first resurrection from Sin, shall be
exempted from the power of the second Death, and upon just grounds are freed
from the terrors of the first.

To apply this point, let us,

1. Consider our dear Obligations to our blessed Savior, who to free us from
the sting and enslaving fear of Death, submitted to it with all its terrors
from God and wicked Men. He felt a sadness to an Agony in his Soul, and
suffered the equal extreamities of Ignominy and Torment in his Body. The Favor
of God was intercepted from him, that it may shine upon us in that gloomy hour.
And all his terrible Sufferings, tho foreknown by his enlightened mind, could
not weaken his determined Will to undergo them for us: But when Peter regarded
with a more tender eye his Life than our Salvation, he was repelled with
indignation. Unparalleled Love! no less than divine, transcending all the
instances of humane affection. The highest kind and excess of Love amongst Men
is to die for another, and the highest degree in that kind is to die to save an
Enemy; and of this our Savior is the singular Example. Love incomprehensible!
it passes knowledge, and all understanding but his who expressed it. His Love was
equal to the height of his Glory from whence he descended, and the depth of
his sufferings that he sustained in our stead. By washing us from our sins in
his Blood, he makes us Kings, Revel. 1.
dignifies us with spiritual Sovereignty over not only defiling, but disturbing
passions. The freest and most confident Sinner in the World, that rebels
against the Divine Laws without restraint, is a slave not only under the chains
of his imperious Lusts, but in that he is liable to the scourgings of
Conscience when ever awakened, and to the servile fear of Death every day. But
the sincere Christian has a clear and sweet peace, a blessed tranquillity from
the tormenting apprehensions and fears of Death, that are the just consequents
of guilt.

One of the ancient Romans Macti ingenio este Coeli interpretes, rerumque
naturae capaces, Argumenti repertores, quo Deos hominesque vinxistis.
highly celebrates the Astronomers who discovered the true Causes of the
Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, and freed the World from the double darkness of
Ignorance and Fear, which believed the obscuring of those great Lights were the
fainting fits of Nature, Plin. lib. 2.
and mortal symptoms threatening an universal Calamity. But what Praise and
Blessing is due to our Savior, who has given us infallible assurance that the
death of the Righteous is not as the heathen World imagined, an irreparable
loss of Life, but a short eclipsing of this low and mean Light that is common
to sensitive creatures, to be restored more excellent and permanent in Heaven;
where those Stars shine in the Divine Presence for ever. Thanks be to God which
gives us the Victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. This should render him
infinitely precious to us, and inflame our Hearts with desires equal to our
Obligations to serve him.

2. Let us make it the main business of our lives to remove from our Souls the
just fears of Death. It Is one of the solemn follies of the World to fear where
there is no cause* As if a Sentinel should mistake Gloworms in the Night for
lighted Matches, and give a false Alarm: but it is a worse folly, tho pleasing,
not to fear when there is the greatest reason to excite it. And it is so in the
present Case: for the most are without the fear of Death, that should make them
serious in preparing for it: nay to maintain their security, are as unwilling
to hear Conscience declare the wretchedness of their condition with respect to
Eternity, as Ahab was the Prophet Michaiah, who always foretold evil things to
him.

'Twas the chief design of the Philosophers by Principles of Reason to fortify
themselves against all frightful Accidents, and with a masculine Mind, and an
Heart ardent with generous Spirits to Foelix qui potuit rerum cognoscere
causas: Atque metus mortis and inexorabile fatum Subjecit pedibus. Virgil.
encounter this inevitable Evil. When one of them was threatened by the Emperor
Antigonus with present Death, he boldly replied, Threaten this to your
dissolute Courtiers that are softened and melted by sensual pleasures, and
easily receptive of terrible impressions, not to a Philosopher to whom Death is
contemptible in any appearance. This was a piece of affected Bravery, for Pagan
Philosophy could never furnish them with Armor of Proof against the Dart of our
last Enemy. But the Gospel assuring us that Death is an entrance into
Immortality, makes that to be the reality of a Christian, that was a vain boast
of the Philosophers.

Now that we may be established in that blessed Tranquillity that Death cannot
discompose, the following Directions are infinitely useful.

1. We must give all diligence to be in a state of Reconciliation with God. The
things requisite to that are, as the Apostle declares, Repentance toward God,
and Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. Act. 20. 21.
Repentance includes a Godly sorrow for Sins past, with a detestation and
forsaking them sincerely, without hypocrisy, and entirely, without partiality
in the heart and conversation. It Is called Repentence from dead works: Heb. 6.
1.
the proper name of our Sins, that deserve eternal Death* By repentance we
return to Obedience that is due to God our Maker and Lawgiver. Faith respects
the Redeemer, who by his Blood shed on the Cross, and pleaded in Heaven,
reconciles God to penitent Sinners. The belief of his merciful and powerful
Mediation for our acceptance and Pardon, 2 Cor. 5. 14.
works by Love, and constrains us to dedicate our selves in a devoted propriety
to his Glory and Service, and to live according to that Dedication. These two
are absolutely necessary to the vital and salvifical state of a Christian. And
as soon as a person sincerely repents and believes, he is justified before God,
and if he dies will certainly obtain eternal Glory. This should be the early
and most speedy work of our Lives: for the delay of Repentance, and neglect of
securing the Favor of God, arms Death with more stings and terrors.

(1.) It Is direct Rebellion against God, who commands us to hear his Voice to
day, Heb. 2* 7, 8.
obediently and immediately, Quis enim satis explicet verbis quantum mali sit
non obedire tanto potestatis imperio, et tanto terrenti supplicio?
upon no less penalty than being excluded from his blessed Rest for ever. Yet
the self-flattering Sinner preaches another Gospel to himself, and runs in
hazard of Damnation and the eternal Curse every hour.

(2.) It Is the most provoking Abuse of his Mercy and Patience that should lead
Men to Repentance. He can in the twinkling of an Eye, in the beating of a
Pulse, cut off the Sinner: it is as easy to his power as to will it. And there is
no consideration should be so meltting and moving as his Clemency. We read of
David that he had more than once in his power Saul his unjust and implacable
enemy, and spared him: the effect of it was, that Saul became so softened, and
under such compunction of spirit, that he wept, confessed his guilt, and desisted
from persecuting him, overcome by that unexampled Love: 1 Samuel 26. 21.
If a Man find his Enemy, will he let him go? And yet Men take advantage from
the goodness of God securely to despise his Laws.

(3.) How justly will this render divine Mercy inexorable to their Prayers and
Tears in their extremity? When a Roman Gentleman, that had wasted a great
Estate by Luxury, and was wont to revel in the Night and sleep in the Day,
petitioned the Emperor Tiberius to relieve his poverty, he was dismissed with
this upbraiding Answer, Sero experrectus es, You are risen too late. He never
opened his Eyes to see his Condition till it was past remedy. This is the sad
case of many Souls that waste the seasons of Grace, and are careless of their
Duty till they are upon the point of perishing, and then address themselves to
God for his Favor and Pardon, but are justly rejected with the reproaches of
their obstinate neglect of Salvation in the time of their lives.

(4.) Repentance that is indispensibly required to qualify us for Mercy, is far
more difficult and hazardous by Men's deferring of it. The last guilty
disposition that seals up the Damnation of the Sinner, is Impenitence. Now he
that delays the returning to his Duty, shall have more cause to repent
hereafter, but less will and power. For the continuance in Sin hardens the
heart, and that which is indisposition, will become averseness and obstinacy.
The heart with difficulty changes its last end: Actions may be suddenly
changed, when there is a disability to perform them, but the inward inclination
to Sin, without supernatural Grace, remains. And is it reasonable to expect the
least breathings of the Spirit, any divine Assistance, after long resisting his
holy Excitations? God threatens, My Spirit shall not always strive with Man;
And to the forsaken Sinner the seasons of Grace are as irrevocable as his
wasted misspent time. The Delayer does not trust, but tempt divine Mercy.

(5.) The numerous Examples of those who have deferred Repentance and
Reconciliation with God, and at last died in their sins, should terrify Men, if
they are not wrought on in a more excellent way. 1. Some presume upon the
vigor of their Youth or Complexion, and think when they have satiated
themselves with the pleasures of Sin, when they have the freest vacancy, and
are retired from the affairs of the World, there will be a convenient season
for making their peace with God. And how often are they suddenly cut off, the
first symptom of their sickness is Death, and what the Angel with such
solemnity declared, that time should be no more, is verified concerning them,
by an unexpected dissolution. 2. Some that continue a while in sickness and
languishings, do not apply themselves seriously to God, upon the hopes of
recovery. And this hope is cherished by the mortal love, the cruel deceit of
friends, who are unwilling to let them see their danger, lest their spirits
should sink under it. And thus many die in an unprepared state. 3. Others that
are guilty, and graceless, tho distant from Death and Hell but a few hours, are
secure as Jonah, who slept in the midst of a Tempest at Sea. The tenor of
their lives discovers this to be divine Vengeance, they are seized with a
spirit of slumber, and pass without fear into the state of everlasting
desperation. 4. Others who have lived in careless security, as if they had made
a Covenant with Death, yet upon the near approaches of it, when they see Death
before them attended with Judgment, and Judgment Hell; as we read of Sisera,
who from extreme Fear past to extreme Security: so on the contrary, these
self-deceivers from extreme Security have fallen into extreme Fear. Then Truth
and Conscience, that were so long under unrighteous restraints, break the
Fetters, and terribly charge the sinner. Then innumerable Acts which they
thought to be innocent, appear to be sins, and Sin that they made light of, to
be infinitely evil, and in the highest degree hateful to God. And sometimes by
the suggestions of the enemy of Souls, they are overwhelmed with despair, and
their last Error is worse than the first. 5. Others are deceived with things
that are short of true repentance, and mistake a false peace for a true, and
assuage the anguish of Conscience by palliating remedies. Their sorrowful sense
of Sin, their Prayers, their resolutions of Amendments, are the product of
servile Fear, that is ineffectual to Salvation. And as it is with crafty
Tradesmen that take up much upon trust when they are ready to breaking; so they
are very liberal of their promises of Reformation, when in their own
apprehension near dying. But how often does Experience convince us of the
inefficacy of a sickbed Repentance? How many that were very penitent and
devout, with one foot as it were in the Grave, and another in Hell, and were as
a Brand plucked out of the Fire, and the fear of Death being removed, all the
pangs of Conscience, the religious Affections that were felt and expressed by
them vanish as the morning dew? Now converting Grace is distinguished by its
radication and efficacy, not only from the mere pretenses of those who know
their own insincerity, but from the real workings of Conscience, and the
imperfect dispositions to good that are in the Unrenewed. And those persons who
with the return of Health have returned to their Sins again, if they had died
with their religious resolutions, would have presumed that their repentance was
unto Life, and of their interest in the divine Mercy. The Heart is deceitful
above all things, and above all things deceitful to it self.

6. But supposing in the last hours there be an unfeigned closing with Christ
according to the Gospel Covenant, and a cordial change from the love of Sin to
the love of Holiness, this person shall certainly not miss of Heaven, but Death
will be less comfortable, than if he had in the course of his Life declared the
truth and power of Grace in such acts and fruits as are suitable to it.

The sum is this: the vain hope of living long, and being reconciled to God
when they please, is the fatal foundation of Men's Sins and Misery. They apply
the Word of God against the Mind of God, and securely provoke him, as if they
could take Heaven by violence in contradiction to the Gospel. But they usually
dispose of that time they shall never enjoy, or presume upon that pardoning
Mercy and assisting Grace they shall never obtain. We are commanded to seek the
Lord while he may be found, a sad intimation that it is not in our power to find
him to our comfort when we please. He spares long, but abused Patience will
deliver Sinners to revenging Justice. Sampson was three times in the Chamber of
his Lust exposed to Treachery and escaped, but the fourth time he said, I will
arise, but was surpised by his Enemies, and lost his strength and sight and
liberty. I doubt not that some are wonderfully converted and saved at last, but
these special Mercies are like our Savior's passing in the Way, and by his
miraculous Virtue healing the two blind persons, when great numbers remained
uncured. We read a prodigious story in the Book of Kings, 2 King. 1.
that a Captain and his fifty went to Elias to command him to come to the King;
and immediately a tempest of Lightning destroyed them. Now who would think it
possible that another Captain and his fifty should be so desperate, that having
the Ashes and Relics of these miserable Carcases smoking before their Eyes,
as to make the same Citation to the Prophet: yet they did, and provoked the
Justice of Heaven to consume them. And this is verified in thousands every day:
for notwithstanding they see sinners like themselves suddenly cut off in their
evil ways, they persist unreformed as if they were fearless of Hell, nay as if
resolved to secure their own Damnation. I have insisted the longer on this,
because it is so universally useful.

2. The careful preserving our selves from wilful presumptuous Sins, is an
happy means to render Death comfortable to us. The Spirit seals our Pardon and
title to Heaven as the holy Spirit, his Testimony that we are the Children of
God, and Heirs of Glory, is concurrent with the renewed Conscience, and
distinguished from the ignorant presumptions, blind conjectures, and carnal
security of the unholy. As the sanctifying Spirit he distinguishes true
Christians from the lost World, appropriates them to God, confirms their
present interest in the Promises of the Gospel, and their future hopes.
Briefly, Grace is the most sensible effect and sign of God's special Favor,
the fruit of Election, and the earnest of Glory: and the truth of Grace is most
clearly and certainly made evident by the continual efficacy of it in the
Conversation. The observation of our Hearts to suppress unholy affections, and
of our senses to prevent them, a constant course of Holiness in our lives, (tho
many frailties will cleave to the best) is usually rewarded with great peace
here.

God has established a connection between our Obedience and his Comforts. Those
that keep themselves pure from the defilements of the World, have the white
Stone promised, the bright Jewel of Assurance of God's pardoning and rewarding
Mercy. We read of Enoch that the walked with God, was a Star shining in a
corrupt Age, the tenor of his Life was holy, and he was translated to Heaven
without seeing Death. Tho this was an extraordinary Dispensation, yet there is
a peculiar reward analogical to it, for those who walk circumspectly: they
shall not see Death with its terrors, but usually have a holy Cheerfulness, a
peaceful Joy, in their passage through the dark Valley to Heaven. But
presumptuous Sins against external and internal restraints, the convincing Law
of God, and the directions of Conscience, grieve the Holy Spirit, and wound our
Spirits, and, if continued, sequester us from the comfortable privileges of
the Gospel, and render us unfit for the Kingdom of Heaven. And when they are
retracted by Repentance, yet there often remains a bitter remembrance of them:
as deep Wounds, tho cured, yet are felt in change of weather. And sometimes a
springtide of doubts and fears breaks into humble penitent Souls, in the last
hours: tho Death brings them safely, yet not comfortably to Heaven.

3. The zealous discharge of the Duties of our place and calling, the
conjunction of our resolutions and endeavors to glorify God, and do good
according to our abilities and opportunities of service, sweetens the thoughts
of Death to us. For the true end and perfection of Life is the Glory of God,
and when with fidelity it is employed in order to it, Death brings us to the
blessed Rest from our Labors. Our Savior when he was to leave the World,
addressed himself to his Father, I have glorified thee on Earth, I have finished
the work thou gave me to do. Joh. 17.
And now Father glorify me with thy self, with the Glory which I had with thee
before the World was. A Christian that imitates and honors Christ, and with
diligence perseveres in weldoing, may with an humble confidence in the Divine
Mercy expect the promised reward. The reflection upon a wel-spent life is
joined with a joyful prospect of God's Favor and acceptance above. But the
careless and remiss, those who are wilfully negligent of their Duty, how
fearful is Death that summons them to give an account of their Talents to the
Righteous Lord?

4. A holy indifference of affection to present things, makes it easy to part
with them, and Death less fearful to us. David, tho a King, declares he was a
stranger on Earth, not only with respect to his transient condition, but his
inward disposition; and that he was as a weaned Child from the admired Vanities
of the World. Chrysostom in a Letter to Ciriacus who was tenderly sensible of
his Banishment, wrote to him, You now begin to lament my Banishment, but I have
done so for a long time: for since I knew that Heaven was my Country, I have
esteemed the whole Earth a place of exilement. Constantinople, from whence I am
expelled, is as distant from Paradise as the Desert to which they send me. But
when our affections are set upon external things, and we are irregular in our
aims, intemperate in our use, and immoderate in our delights, how sensible and
cutting is the division from them? How bitter is Death that deprives a carnal
Wretch of all the materials of his frail Felicity? What a storm of passions is
raised to lose all his good things at once? for it is a Rule in Nature, What is
possessed with transporting Joy, is lost with excessive Sorrow. As the Ivy that
twines so closely about the Tree, and is intimately fastened by so many roots as
there are branches, cannot be plucked away without rending the Bark with it; so
when the World, that was as it were incarnated with the Heart, is taken away,
the Heart it self is grievously rent by the violent separation. Haec enim est
infaelicitas hominum, propter quae peccant Morientes his dimittunt, et ipsa
pellata secum portant. Aug.
And the infelicity of carnal and worldly persons is heavily aggravated, in
that the guilt in procuring or abusing those treasures and delights that they
leave here with so great sorrow, will cleave to them, and give Testimony
against them before their Judge. But when the Affections are loose to the World,
and set upon Heaven, the separating with the Earth, is no loss but gain, and
with that alacrity, as the putting off a vile garment to be clothed with a
Royal Robe. Stemus expeditae ad omnem vius, nihil habentes quod relinquere
timeamus; Retinacule ista sunt spei nostrae. De cult. Foem.
'Twas the wise Counsel of Tertullian to the Women of the first Ages of the
Church, not to value and love the Jewels and Ornaments of Gold, that they might
be more ready and resolved to obtain by Death Martyrdom, and by Martyrdom
Eternal Glory. And that we may disentangle our Souls from those voluntary bands
that fasten us to present things, we must have a sincere uncorrupted judgment
of their meanness. The Apostle exhorts Christians to moderation in their temper
and conversation with respect to the business and enjoyments here, that they
who have Wives, be as tho they had none; that those that rejoice, be as tho
they rejoiced not; and they that buy, as tho they possessed not; and they that
use the World, as not abusing it: for the fashion of the World passes away. To
a wise and pondering Observer, what comparison is there between Shadows and
Dreams, and substantial everlasting Blessedness? If Men had the same opinion of
this World whilst they live, as they will have when they are to die, they would
not set over it. They who have magnified temporal Honors and Riches, and lived
in Pleasures without remorse, yet in their dying hours, when Men speak with
most feeling and least affectation, how have they vilified those empty
appearances of happiness? with what moving expressions declared the vanity and
brevity of worldly things? As when the Israelites were to go through the River
Jordan, that opened it self to make a free and dry passage for them; the lower
part of its Waters ran into the Dead Sea, Josh. 3. 16.
and utterly failed: Ad instar Montis intumescentis, apparebant procul.
but the Waters that came from above, rose up and appeared like a Mountain;
thus when Men come to the universal passage, from this to the next life,
inferior things absolutely fail, and are lost in the dead Sea, but the things
above, that are eternal, then appear in their true greatness, exceeding all
humane comprehension: from hence is the change of mind and language concerning
the one and other.

5. Solemn, affectionate, and frequent Converse with God in Religious Duties
will render Death not fearful to us. The whole life of a Christian, as such, 1
John 3.
is a continual Communion with the Father, and with Jesus Christ. For he
performs all good works by divine Grace communicated from above, and refers all
to the Divine Honor. As in a pair of Compasses, one foot is fixed in the
Center, whiles the other moves in the Circumference: so the Heart of a
Christian is in Heaven, his aims are for God, whilst he is active here in the
World. His Natural and Civil Actions are heightened to a supernatural end: And
thus his Conversation is in Heaven. But this was spoken of before: and that
which is now specified is the more immediate Service of God in holy Meditation,
Prayer, and the Ordinances of the Gospel, which is the noblest part of the
spiritual Life.

Our blessed Savior who was a Comprehensor upon Earth, always saw the Face of
God, and invariably sought his Glory in all things, yet had his special times
of Prayer and Heavenly-Communion with God, and the most glorious testimonies of
his Favor in those times. Our Communion with God here is as true as in Heaven,
but the influence and fruition is different according to our capacity. When the
Soul feels the vigorous exer^ise of the thoughts and affections upon God, and
the raised operations of Grace in holy Duties, it is as certain a sign of God's
Favor and Acceptance, as when Fire descended from Heaven to consume the
Sacrifice. And often our affe^tionate Duties are rewarded with sensible
Consolations, and holy Souls are dismissed from the Throne of Grace as they shall
be received at the Throne of Glory, with the reviving testimonies of God's
approbation. Now the assurance of God's Love conquers the fear of Death.

This Communion must be frequent. As love and respects between Friends are
maintained by constant Visits and Letters, and mutual Confidence arises from
Acquaintance: so by the interchange of holy Duties and divine favors we
preserve a lively sense of God's Love, and an humble familiarity with his
Majesty, that his Presence is not a terror to us. A Christian that walks with
God here, when he leaves the World, (to use the words of a dying St.) changes
his Room, but not his Company. God was always with him on Earth, and he shall
be ever with God in Heaven.

But cold and seldom converse begets strangeness, and that makes us shy of God.
When Religious Duties are performed as a complemental Visit without zealous
Affections, or used only in times of Affliction and Exigency, as Cordial Waters
in swooning Fits, the Divine Presence is uncomfortable to us. They who prefer
carnal sweets before acquaintance with God, cannot with Peace and Joy think of
appearing before him. O how unwelcome is Death to such, for then the Spirit
returns to God that gave it.

6. Let us strengthen our belief of the blessed state after Death. Divine
Truths lose their influence and efficacy when they are not steadfastly believed.
Heb. 11. 1.
Faith is the substance of things not seen, and the evidence or conviction of
things hoped for. The Spirit confirms our Faith not by a pure Physical Act, but
by convincing Reasons of the truth of the Gospel. The Life of Christ so
glorious in holiness, his Doctrine so becoming the Wisdom and other excellent
Attributes of the Deity, his Miracles so great, numerous, open, and beneficial,
not merely to surprise the Spectators with astonishment, but to touch their
Hearts; his Death foretold by the Prophets, and exactly agreeing in all the
circumstances of the Predictions; his Resurrection the most noble operation of
the Divine Power, are the strong^st Proofs that what he has revealed as the
Counsel of God for our Redemption, and the Preparations of Glory for the Saints
in Heaven, are divine Truths. And the efficacy of the Spirit of Christ in
sanctifying his Disciples in all Ages, is a continual and as satisfying an
Argument that the Gospel is derived from God the fountain of Truth, as
extraordinary Miracles. For Holiness is as ^^^parable a property of the Divine
Natu^ (...) the sancti^ (...) divine an ef^ect (...) of the Body. Now, (...)
God enters into Covenant with obedient Believers, to be their God, a title and
relation, that supposing them the most happy here, all the enjoyments of this
World cannot fulfill. This Covenant is not dissolved by Death, for he uses this
style after the death of his faithful Servants: and from hence it follows they
are partakers of his Glory and Joys in the next Life. For the honor of his
Veracity is most dear to him. The Psalmist declares, that he has magnified his
Word above all his Name. No perfections of his Nature are more sacred and
inviolable than his Truth. The foundations of Nature shall be overturned, and
the most solid parts of the Creation destroyed, but his Promises shall be
completely accomplished. We are assured by his Infallible Authority, that there
remains a Rest for the People of God. And he that receives this Testimony, sets
to his Seal that God is true: honors the Truth of God's Word, and binds
himself more firmly to his Service, and is encouraged to leave this sensible
World, for that which is infinitely better. Our confidence and patience in
well-doing, and in suffering the utmost evil to Nature, is from the pregnant
apprehensions of the reality of eternal things. We know, says the Apostle, if
our earthly tabernacle be dissolved, we have a Building not made with hands, 2
Cor. 5. 1.
eternal in the Heavens. This fortified him against the terrors of Death. When
Stephen saw the Heavens open, and the Son of God ready to receive him, with
what courage and constancy did he encounter the bloody Rage of his Murderers?
Faith supplies the want of Vision, it pierces the Clouds, opens a Window in
Heaven, sees the Crowns of Righteousness prepared for the Saints, and sweetens
the bitterest passage to it. But if our Faith be weak and wavering, our Courage
will decline in the needful hour. It Is with Christians in their last passage
from Earth to Heaven, as with the Apostle walking upon the Waters to Christ:
whilst his Faith was firm in Christ, he went upon the Waves as on the firm
Land: but upon the rising of a Storm his Faith sunk into Fear, and he sunk in
the Waters; till our Savior upon his earnest Prayer, Lord, save me, took hold
of him, and raised him with that compassionate Reproof, O thou of little Faith,
wherefore did thou doubt?

The last Use is, to excite the Saints to die with that courage and
cheerfulness as becomes the Gospel of Christ. The encouragement of Joshua to
the Israelites against the Giants that terrified them from entering into the
Land of Canaan, the type of Heaven, Be not afraid of them, they are Bread for
us, we shall obtain an easy Conquest over them, is applicable to this purpose:
do not fear Death the Enemy that interposes between us and the true Canaan; for
our Conflict shall be the means of our Victory, and triumphant possession of
the holy and blessed Land above. This is very honorable to our Redeemer, and
recommends Godliness to the judgment, affections, and practice of others.
Epist. Jul.
S. Basil tells of a custom to anoint the tops of Doves Wings with some
fragrant liquor, that mixing in company with other Doves, they might by the
scent allure them to follow to the Dove-houses. Thus when holy Persons live and
die with peaceful joy, those that converse with them, are drawn by that
Fragrance of Paradise to apply them to serious Religion.

It Is the Apostle's Consolatory Advice to Believers, 1 Thessalonians. 4.
Not to be sorrowful for those that sleep in JESUS, and those that are without
hope.

When Jacob saw his Beloved Son's Coat rent and stained with Blood, he
abandoned himself to desperate Sorrow, and mourned for his Death, when Joseph
was advanced in Authority and Dignity next to Pharaoh in the Kingdom of Egypt.
Thus when we see the Garment of Mortality rent by Diseases, we mourn for
departed Saints, as if Death had absolutely destroyed them, when their Souls
are reigning in Glory. This immoderate Sorrow is an Heathenish Passion,
suitable to their ignorance of the future happy state, but very unbecoming the
plenary Assurance the Gospel affords us of it. So for the Wicked to die with
fears and palpitations of heart, to be surrounded with impendent horrors, when
such a precipice and depth of misery is before them, is very just and
reasonable; but for the Saints to die uncomfortably under inordinate fears, is
a disparagement to the Blessed Hope established upon the revelation of Life and
Immortality by the Gospel.

Now in three things I shall propound the duty of dying Christians.

1. To submit to the Divine Pleasure with resigned spirits, as to the means,
the manner, and time of Death. God has a Sovereign Right and Dominion over us.
The present Life is his most free Favor, and he may justly resume it when he
pleases. His Will should be the first and last Rule of ours. Whether he gently
untwines the Band of Life, or violently breaks it, we must placidly, without
reluctation, yield up our selves. By what means soever Death comes, all second
causes are moved by an impression from above, in what Age of Life soever, all
our times are appointed by the divine Counsel: And a Saint ought with that
readiness and submission receive it, as if he heard an express Voice from
Heaven calling him to God, and say in his heart with Samuel, Here I am, thou
did call me. This is the last act of our obedience, and very pleasing to God.
We read of the marvelous Ille excrit gladium, ille cervicem, uno voto, una
devotione: sub tanto non dic^m humanitatis, sed potius naturae ipsius ^etu,
laeti sunt.
Consent of Abraham and his son Isaac, the Father to offer up his Son, and the
Son his Life, (that were both the gifts of God) in compliance with the divine
Command, and from Heaven he declared his high approbation of it. This is to
make a virtue of necessity, and turn Nature into Grace. But discontent and
reluctance, as if our Lives were our own, and taken from us unjustly or
unseasonably, is rebellious unthankfulness, unbecoming a Creature, much more a
true Christian, who exchanges a perishing life for that which is eternal.

2. To receive Death not only with Patience, but earnest desires to be with
Christ. I know Death is naturally unwelcome. Our Savior tells St. Peter, When
thou art old, another shall bind thee, John 21. 41.
and lead thee where thou would not: Signifying his Martyrdom. Secutus a
corpore volebat esse cum Christo, sed si sicri posset prater mortis molestiam.
Nolens ad c^m venit, sed volens c^m vicit. Aug. Tract. 123 in Joan.
The circumstance [ when thou art old] is remarkable, and intimates the natural
unwillingness to die, when there was little time to live. But his rational
sanctified Will was superior and prevalent. The universal desire of the Saints
is to be happy in the presence of God. for the Divine Nature communicated to
them is intelligent and inclining toward its chief good: and if the obtaining
it, were not by being uncloathed, but clothed upon by an imediate translation
to Heaven, how willingly would they leave this World? But there is a bitterness
in Death that makes it unpleasant, and many holy Souls that desire the Glorious
Liberty in Heaven, yet are loath to leave their Prison. Now there are so many
Arguments to make the Saints desirous of dying, that methinks since Life is
chiefly valued and dear to them, as it is the way to Heaven, when they are come
to that blessed end, it should not be longer desirable. What is this lower
World that chains us so fast? It Is the Devil's circuit wherein he ranges seeking
whom he may devour: It Is the Theater of contentions: The low aspire to rise;
the exalted fear to fall. The Poor envy the Rich; and the Rich despise the
Poor. It Is a foreign Country to the Saints, and as Pilgrims and Strangers,
they are liable to reproaches, injuries, and hard dealings from the Wicked, the
natives of the Earth. What is the present momentany Life that so enamours us?
it is surrounded with Temptations, oppressed with Fears, ardent with irregular
desires, and continually spent in vanity or vexation. In Adversity it is deprest
and melancholy: in Prosperity foolish and proud. It Is a real infelicity under
the deceitful appearance of felicity. But above all other motives, the evil of
Sin from which we cannot be clearly exempted here, should render Death
desirable. The best suffer internal divisions between the law of the Flesh,
and the law of the Mind; as Rebecca felt the twins, Esau and Jacob, repugnant
in her Womb, How hard is it to be continually watching the Heart that
Corruptions do not break out, and the Senses that temptations do not break in?
How difficult to order the Affections, to raise what is drooping, and suppress
what is rebellious? for they are like the People of whom the Historian speaks,
qui nec totam servitutem pati possunt, nec totam libertatem. How many Enemies
of our Salvation are lodged in our own bosoms? The Falls of the Saints give sad
evidence of this. If the Body were unspotted from the World as in the Creation
of Man, there might be a just Plea of our unwillingness to part with it, but
since it is the insentive and instrument of Sin, we should desire to be
desolved that we might be perfectly holy. Death is the final remedy of all the
temporal and spiritual evils to which we are liable here. And the love of
Christ should make us willing to part with all the endearments of this life,
nay desirous to enter into the Caelestial Paradise, tho we must pass under the
Angels Sword the stroke of Death to come into his Presence. He infinitely
deserves our love, for we owe our Salvation and Eternal Glory, to the merit of
his Humiliation and the power of his Exaltation. With what earnest affections
did St. Paul desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ? Phil. 1.
Love gave Wings of Fire to his Soul, ardent desires mounting to Heaven. How
valiant were the Martyrs in expressing acts of love to Christ? How boldly did
they encounter Death that interposed between them and the sight of his Glory?
their love was hotter than the Flames that consumed them. They as willingly
left their Bodies, as Elias let fall his Mantle, to ascend to Heaven. And how
does it upbraid the coldness of our love, that we are so contented to be here,
absent from our Savior. That the Moles of the Earth who never saw the light of
the Sun, and feed on bitter roots, are pleased in their dark receptacles is no
wonder; but if Birds that are refresht with his cheerful Beams, and feed on
sweet Fruits, should willingly be confined in Caverns of the Earth, it were
unnaturally strange: thus if Pagans, and those who are so in heart, tho
different in profession, that are so short-sighted, and depraved, that only
present and sensible things are perceived and affect them, that they are
unwilling to die is no wonder; for then all that is valuable and delightful to
them is lost for ever: but for those who are enlightened by the Revelation of
God so clearly concerning the state of Glory, and have tasted the goodness of
the Lord, and know the incomparable difference between the mean and frail
felicity here; and the inestimable immutable felicity hereafter, for them to be
unwilling to leave this World for that which is infinitely better is
astonishing. Such was the love of our Savior, that his personal Glory in
Heaven did not fully content him, without the Saints partaking of it with him:
John 17.
Father I will that those whom thou have given me be with me where I am, that
they may behold my Glory: If our Hearts do not answer his, it is a sad
indication that we have not an interest in him: for the application of his
Merits is always joined with the imitation of his Virtues, and the reflection
of his Love. The Lovers of Christ will join with the inflamed Spouse, Cant. 1.
Draw us and we will run after thee: O loosen our affections from this World
that we may readily ascend to thee: they will renew the sighs of holy David in
his Banishment, O when shall we come and appear before God!

Lastly, To die with thanksgiving and joy. It Is usual to compare this Life to a
Voyage; the Scripture is the Chard that describes the Coasts we must pass, and
the Rocks we must avoid; Faith is the Compass that directs the Course we must
steer; Love is the Rudder that governs the Motion of the Ship; Hope fills the
Sails: Now what Passenger does not rejoice at the discovery of his Country
where his Estate and Heart is, and more at the near approach to the Port where
he is to land? Is not Heaven the Country of the Saints? is not their Birth
from above, and their tendency to their Original? and is not the blessed Bosom
of Christ their Port? Oh what joyful thanksgivings are due to God, when by his
Spirit and Providence they have happily finished their Voyage through such
Quamdiu in Salo isto, tamdiu inter naufragia.
dangerous Seas, and are coming into the Land of the Living? How joyful was to
Noah the coming of the Dove with an Olive Branch, to show him the Deluge was
assuaged, and the time was come of his freedom from the troublesome company of
Animals, and from the straitness and darkness of the Ark, to go forth and
possess the World? How joyful should Death be to a Saint, that comes like the
Dove in the evening, to assure him the Deluge of Misery is ceased, and the time
is come of his enlargement from the Body, his deliverance from the wretched
sinful society here, and his possessing the Divine World? Holy Souls are
immediately transported by the Angels to Christ, and by him presented to his
Father, without spot or wrinkle, complete in Holiness, and prepared for
Communion with him in Glory. How joyfully are they received into Heaven by our
Savior and the blessed Spirits? they are the reward of his Sufferings, the
precious and dear purchase of his Blood: The Angels that rejoice at the
Conversion of a Sinner, much more at the Glorification of a Saint: and the
Church of the Firstborn who have before us entered into Glory, have a new
accession of Joy, when their younger Brethren arrive to the undefiled immortal
Inheritance. And is it not very becoming Believers joyfully to ascend to the
Seat of Blessedness, to the happy Society that inspires mutual Joys for ever?
For our encouragement there are numerous instances of Believers that have with
peace and joy, tho in various degrees, past through the dark Valley to the
Inheritance of Light. Some have died with more Joy than they lived, Accitus sum
ad id miraculi, videri exultantem in mor^^ hominem (...) insultan^^^ morti.
Bern. 26 Sermon. in Cant.
and triumphed over the last Enemy with the vocal Praises of God: others with
silent affections have quietly commended their Spirits into his hand. Some have
inward Refreshings and support; others exuberant Joys and Ravishments, as if
the Light of Glory shined into them, or the Veil of Flesh were drawn, and their
Spirits were present with the invisible World. Some of the Martyrs in their
cruellest Sufferings felt such impressions of Confidence and Alacrity, that as
in the House of Lamech there was accorded at the same time two discordant
Callings by the two Brothers; Genesis 4.
Jubal the Inventer of the Harp and Organ, and Tubal-Cain the first Artificer
in Brass and Iron: the one practiced on Instruments of Music, breathing
harmonious sounds and melodies, the other used Hammers and Anvils making noise
and tumult: So in some persons whilst the heaviest strokes fell on their
Bodies, their Souls were ravished with the sweetest Joy and Exultation. Indeed
it is not thus always with the Saints: for tho Sin be pardoned, yet the
apprehensions of Guilt may remain. When a Stream is disturbed it does not truly
represent the Object: When the Affections are disordered, the Mind does not
judge aright of a Christian's state. A Serpent may hiss when it has lost its
sting. Death may terrify when it cannot hurt us. I doubt not but some excellent
Saints have been in anxieties to the last, till their Fears were dispelled by
the actual fruition of Blessedness. As the Sun sometimes sets in dark Clouds,
and rises in a glorious Horizon. We read our Evidences for Heaven by the Light
of God's Countenance: his Image is made visible in our Souls by the
illustration of his Spirit: and he exercises Prerogative in the dispensation of
his Comforts. It Is his pleasure to bestow extraordinary Favors on some, and
deny them to others that are as holy. But every Penitent Believer has just
cause of Joy in Death: for Jesus Christ has reconciled God, destroyed Satan,
and conquered Death: and the last day of his Life is the first of his Glory.

FINIS.
Errata of the Sermons on Death.
PAge 8. line 19. for should, r. might. P. 25. l. 18. f. lost, r. tossed. P. 32.
l. 19. f. quietly, r. guiltily. P. 92. l. 12. f. impassibility, r.
impossibility.

The Sermons on Judgment.
P. 11. l. 21. dele only. -- l. 22. r. not only the Angels. P. 19. l. 23. f.
attaque, r. attach.

SERMONS UPON Eternal Judgment.

BY WILLIAM BATES, D. D.

LONDON; Printed by J. D. for Brabazen Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons against the
Royal Exchange in Cornhil. 1683.

SERMONS UPON Eternal Judgment.
Acts 17. 31. Because he has appointed a Day, in the which he will judge the
World in Righteousness, by that Man whom he has ordained: whereof he has
given assurance unto all Men, in that he raised him from the dead.
SAint Paul had this Title of Honor eminently conferred upon him, the Apostle
of the Gentiles: This Office he performed with persevering diligence, diffusing
the Light of Life to those that sat in darkness, and in the shadow of Death.
In this Chapter we have recorded the substance of his Sermon to the Athenians;
wherein his admirable Zeal and Prudence are remarkable, in the Matter and Order
of his Discourse, to convince and persuade them to receive the saving Truth of
the Gospel. He first lays down the Principles of Natural Religion, to prepare
them for the more easy belief of supernatural revealed Religion. The
depravation of the Minds of Men was in no instance more prodigious than in
their vilifying Conceits of the Deity: They attributed his Name and Honor to
various Idols, and ascribed to him their own Figure, and which was infinitely
more unworthy and dishonorable, their own Passions and Vices. They adored
their own vain Imaginations. The Idols of their Hearts were erected on their
Altars. Venus was a Goddess, because impure Love reigned in their Breasts.
Bacchus had Religious Rites, because sensual Pleasures as sweet as Wine
intoxicated their Spirits. These Errors, as gross as impious, were universal:
the Philosophers themselves were not exempted from the Contagion. The Apostle
therefore makes use of the clearest Arguments, to give Authority to the plain
conspiring Voice of Nature, that had so long in vain recalled them from
Idolatry to the Worship of the only true God. He therefore declares, that the
Divine Maker of all things, Verse. 29.
the Father of Spirits, could not be represented by corporeal and corruptible
things, but was to be acknowledged and adored in a manner becoming his
spiritual and infinite Perfections. That he made all Nations of one Blood,
Verse. 26.
though distinguished in their Habitations and Times, that they might seek and
serve the one universal Creator. And though the Pagan World for many Ages had
lived in an unnatural Oblivion of God, and he seemed unconcerned for their
violation of his Laws, yet it was not from the defect of Justice, but the
direction of his Wisdom, that his Patience was so long extended to them. And
this he proves by the new and most express declaration of his Will: But now he
commands all Men every where to repent; because he has appointed a day, in
which he will judge the World in Righteousness, by the Man whom he has
ordained: whereof he has given assurance to all Men, in that he raised him
from the Dead.

In the words, the Eternal Counsels of God are revealed in two great things.

1. The determining a time wherein he will righteously judge the World: He has
appointed a Day.

2. The designation of the Person by whom he will perform that eminent part of
Sovereignty: by Jesus Christ whom he has raised from the Dead.

In order to the handling of the main Point, it is requisite to premise briefly
some Propositions.

1. That God is the Universal Monarch of the World, and has supreme Authority
to govern reasonable Creatures, antecedent to their Election and Consent. The
Psalmist calls to the Heathens, Psalm. 100.
Know ye that the Lord is God: that is, the most glorious Being, and absolute
Sovereign; for it is he that made us, and not we our selves. He formed all
things by his Almighty Goodness, and is King by Creation.

2. The two principal and necessary parts of his Sovereignty are, to give Laws
for the ruling of his Subjects, and to pass final Judgment upon them for their
Obedience or Disconformity to his Precepts. Mere natural Agents are regulated
by a wise establishment, that is the Law of their Creation. The Sun and Stars
are moved according to the just Points of their Compass. The Angels are under a
Law in Heaven, and obey his Commandments. The Humane Nature of Christ, though
advanced to the highest capacity of a Creature, yet received a Law. And his
whole Work upon Earth for our Salvation, was an Act of Obedience to the Will of
God. If a Prince out of affection to his Friend will leave his own Dominions,
and live privately with him in a Foreign Country, he must be subject to the
Laws of the Place. Indeed it is not conceivable that a Creature should be
without a Law; for this is to make it supreme and independent: Supreme, in not
being liable to a superior Power to confine and order it: Independent, as to
its Being and Operations; for dependence necessarily infers subjection. There
is a visible connection between those Titles; Isa. 33. 22.
The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King. And
sometimes in Scripture his Sovereignty is intimated in the Title of Judge: thus
in that humble Expostulation of Abraham for Sodom; Shall not the Judge of all
the World do right? He addresses his request to God under that Title, to soften
his Power, and incline his Clemency to save the Wicked for their sakes who were
comparatively Righteous, that is, innocent of their crying Sins.

3. As his right to govern and judge the World is natural, so are his
Attributes, his Wisdom, Holiness, Justice, and Power, that qualify and render
him most worthy to exercise this Government. These are finite separable
Qualities in Angels or Men, but essential Perfections to the Deity. It Is more
rational to conceive that things may be congealed by the heat of Fire, or
turned black by whiteness, than that the least act of injustice can be done by
the Righteous Lord. The Apostle rejects with extreme detestation, the
blasphemous Charge of unrighteousness in God's proceedings: Is God unrighteous
that takes Vengeance? Romans 3. 5, 6.
God forbid: For then how shall God judge the World? He may as soon renounce his
Nature, and cease to be God, for as such he is necessarily Judge of the World,
as violate his own Perfections in his judicial proceedings with us.

4. God being invisible in his own Nature, has most wisely ordained the last
Judgment of the World to be transacted by a visible Person: because Men are to
be only judged, and not the Angels, and the whole Process of it with them, will
be for things done in the Body. The Person appointed for this Great Work, is
Jesus Christ the Son of God united to the Humane Nature. The Father judges no
Man: Joh. 5. 22.
Not as if he descended from the Throne, and divested himself of his Supremacy,
but not immediately; but has committed all Judgment to the Son. Verse. 26, 27.
And it follows, As the Father has Life in himself, so has he given to the
Son to have Life in himself: And has given him authority to execute Judgment
also, because he is Son of Man; that is, as Mediator. The quality of this
Office requires no less Person for the discharge of it.

1. Upon the account of its superlative Dignity. No mere Creature is capable of
such a glorious Commission. To pass a Sovereign Sentence upon Angels and Men,
is a Royalty reserved for God himself. We read that no Man in Heaven, or Earth,
Rev. 5.
was able to open the Sealed Book of his Eternal Counsels, as unsearchable as
deep: only Jesus Christ who was in the Bosom of the Father, the Seat of his
Counsels and Compassions, and was acquainted with all his Glorious Secrets,
could unfold the Order of the Divine Decrees about the Church. And if no
Creature was worthy to be admitted into God's Counsel, much less to be taken
into his Throne. The Eternal Son, the express Image of his Person, is alone fit
to be his authorized Representative in Judgment. Our Savior declares, that the
Father invested the Son with this Regal Power, that all Men should honor the
Son, John 5. 23*
with the same religious Reverence, and supreme adoration, as they honor the
Father.

2. Upon the account of the immense Difficulty, no mere Creature is able to
discharge it. To judge the World, includes two things. 1. To pass a righteous
and irrevocable Judgment upon Men for all things done in this Life. 2. The
actual execution of the Sentence. And for this no less than infinite Wisdom,
and infinite Power are necessary. If a select number of Angels of the highest
Order were deputed, yet they could not manage the judicial trial of one Man.
For besides the innumerable acts and omissions in one Life, the secrets of the
Heart, from whence the guilt or goodness of Moral Actions is principally
derived, are not open to them. He alone that discerns all things, can require
an account of all.

2. The Son of Man is invested with this High Office as the Reward of his
Sufferings. We must distinguish between the essential and oeconomical Power of
Christ. The Son of God, considered in his Divine Nature, has an original Power
of Judgment equal with the Father, but considered as Mediator, has a Power by
delegation. In the quality of the Son of Man, he is inferior in dignity to the
Father: The Apostle declares this in that scale of Subordination, of the
Creatures to Believers, and of Believers to Christ, and of Christ to God. All
things are yours, and you are Christ's, and Christ is God's. And observing the
beautiful Order that arises from the superiority and dependence between things,
he says, The Head of every Man is Christ, and the Head of the Woman is the
Man, and the Head of Christ is God. Now this Power by Commission was conferred
upon him as the Reward of his Sufferings. The Apostle expressly declares it,
that Christ being in the Form of God, and without any usurpation truly equal to
him in Divine Perfections and Majesty, humbled himself, and came obedient to
the Death of the Cross. Wherefore God has highly exalted him, and given him a
Name above every Name: that at the Name of Jesus every Knee should bow, of
things in Heaven, and things in Earth, and things under the Earth; and that
every Tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the Glory of God the
Father. His victorious Sufferings are the Titles of his Triumphs, his being so
ignominiously deprest and condemned by Men, is the just reason of his
advancement to judge the World.

5. There is a Day appointed wherein the Son of Man will appear in sensible
Glory, and exercise his judicial Power upon Angels and Men. He is now seated at
the right hand of the Majesty on High, and the Celestial Spheres are under his
Feet: Universal Nature feels the power of his Scepter: He reigns in the Hearts
of the Saints by his Word and Spirit, and restrains the Fury of his Enemies in
what degrees he pleases: but still his Servants are in distress, and his
rebellious Enemies insolently break his Laws* and the Curtains of Heaven
conceal his Glory from us: therefore a Time is prefixed, when in the Face of
the World he will make an eternal difference by Rewards and Punishments between
the Righteous and the Wicked, and his Government shall have its complete and
glorious Issue. This is styled the Judgment of the Great Day.

1. With respect to the appearance of the Judge. When the Law was given from
Mount Sinai, the Mountain was covered with Fire, and the Voice of God as loud
as Thunder proclaimed it from the midst of the Flames, so that the whole Army
of the Israelites was prostrate on the Plain, struck with a sacred Horror, and
almost dead at the amazing sights and sounds. From hence it is said, that in his
right hand was a fiery Law. And if the Lawgiver appeared in such terrible
Majesty at the proclaiming the Law, how much more when he shall come to revenge
the Transgressions of it? It Is set forth in Scripture in the most lofty and
magnificent Expressions. He shall come in his Father's Glory, Luke 9. 26*
and his own Glory, and the Glory of the Angels. A devouring Fire shall go
before him, to consume all the Works of the Universe. He shall descend from the
highest Heavens, glorious in the attendance of innumerable Angels, but more in
his own Majesty, and sit on a radiant Throne high above all.

2. It Is great, with respect to the appearance of those who are to be judged:
All the Apostate Angels, and the universal Progeny of Adam. The bowels of the
Earth, and the bottom of the Sea, and all the Elements shall give up the Dead.
The mighty Angels the winged Ministers of Justice, shall fly to all Parts, and
attaque the Wicked to bring them as miserable Prisoners before that high
Tribunal. And those blessed powerful Spirits shall congregate the Righteous, to
present them at his right hand.

3. It Is great with respect to what shall be then done: He shall perform the
most glorious and consummate act of his Regal Office, after a righteous Trial
pronounce Judgment, upon which the eternal Destiny of the World depends. And
immediately the Saints shall ascend with him to the everlasting Mansions of
Glory, and the Wicked shall be swallowed up in the fiery Gulf for ever.

To define the particular Time when this shall be accomplished, is beyond the
knowledge of the Angels of highest dignity. It Is inter Arcana Imperii, among the
Secrets of the Kingdom of Heaven. It Is observable that God has revealed the
Times precisely wherein some great Events should come to pass: after how many
Years the Israelites should be freed from Egyptian Bondage: after what space of
Time they should be restored from the Captivity of Babylon: when the Messiah
should die for the expiation of Sin: but there is no designation by certain
Characters of the particular Day, nor Year, nor Age, in any Prophecy of our
Savior's coming to Judgment. And of this an Account may be given. The special
End of those Predictions was, that those who lived to see their accomplishment,
notwithstanding the seeming Impossibilities, might believe the Truth and Power
of God to fulfill the Revelation of his Purposes for the time to come. But at
the last Day, all the Promises and Threatenings will be fulfilled, nothing will
remain to be the Object of Faith, and consequently it was superfluous to
declare the certain Time, since the exact accomplishment of it according to the
prediction, will neither be useful to confirm Believers or convert Infidels.

Lastly, The Resurrection of Jesus Christ is the most convincing and commanding
Evidence of this Doctrine, that he shall judge the World. For he was charged
with Blasphemy deserving of Death for this Testimony: Mat. 26. 64, 65.
I say unto you, hereafter shall you see the Son of Man sitting on the right
hand of Power, and coming in the Clouds of Heaven. He dedicated Martyrdom in
his own Sufferings. Now God in raising him from the Dead, confirmed the truth
of his Testimony by that visible Miracle, and the belief of it converted the
World to Christianity.

I will now proceed to illustrate and prove the main Point, which is this:

That God will judge the World in Righteousness by Jesus Christ.

The Mediator, who shall be Judge in the Union of both Natures, considered as
the Son of God, is essentially Holy and Righteous, and considered as the Son of
Man, was holy, harmless, undefiled, and separate from Sinners. In him all
Virtues shined in their absolute Purity: and who is so worthy and qualified to
reward Holiness and punish Wickedness, as the holy one of God? It Is said of
him, Heb. 1.
Thou have loved Righteousness, and hated Iniquity, therefore thy God has
anointed thee with Oil of gladness above thy Fellows: Consecrated him to the
Regal Office, and enriched his humane Nature with Endowments suitable to it.
'Twas prophesied of him, Esa. 11. 2, 3, 4.
The Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the Spirit of Wisdom and
Understanding, the Spirit of Counsel and Might, the Spirit of Knowledge, and of
the Fear of the Lord; and shall make him of quick understanding in the Fear of
the Lord, and He shall not judge after the sight of his Eyes, neither reprove
after the hearing of his Ears. But with Righteousness shall he judge the Poor,
and reprove with Equity. Humane Judgments are often unrighteous from vicious
Respects and Affections that pervert the Will, or fair Appearances that deceive
the Understanding: by Gifts or Guile, Innocence is cast, and Guilt acquitted:
but the Judge of the World is inflexible to partiality, and all things are
entirely open to his sight. In the Act of Judgment he is represented sitting on
a white Throne, Rev. 20. 11.
the emblem of unspotted Holiness.

The Righteousness of God's Judicial Proceedings will appear by considering
three things.

1. The Equity of his Law the Rule of the great and final Judgment.

2. The Evidence of the Facts and Matter, which shall be produced as the Reason
of the Judgment.

3. The impartiality of the Sentence.

1. The Equity of the Law which shall be the Rule of the last Judgment. This
will appear by considering the Law of Nature, and the Law of Faith, in their
Precepts and Penalties, annexed to enforce the observation of them.

1. The Law of Nature, which is the Rule of Man's Duty, will be the Rule of
Judgment: for without the Law there is no Transgression; and consequently a
Person is unaccountable for his Actions. This Law is composed of such Rules as
are most becoming the wise and gracious Creator to give, and the reasonable
Creature to receive and obey: for they entirely agree and concenter in his
Glory and the good of his Subjects. The Apostle adorns the Law with the most
excellent Elogy, Romans 7. 12.
it is Holy, Just, and Good. Holy as it enjoins all Acts of Piety to God: the
adoration of his Majesty resulting from his inexpressible divine Perfections,
the imitation of his Purity, a reliance on his Goodness, a resignation to his
most wise Providence, and a dutiful obedience to his Will. Such a sense of our
dependence and subjection to God, is the proper Character of the reasonable
Creature, as dignified above inanimate and mere sensitive Beings. The Law is
just, as it directs us how to demean our selves in our various Relations.
Justice is the Cement of Societies, without which they disband and fall into
Confusion. And the sum of the Law is virtually comprised in one Rule, to do to
others as we would they should do to us, than which nothing is more equal. It Is
good to Man that keeps it, commanding nothing but what is influential upon his
well-being here and for ever. It does not infringe his true Freedom, but allows
him unstained Delights, and enjoins what is proper to advance and secure his
Dignity, Felicity, and Perfection. It forbids every thing that defiles and
debases him, and causes a degeneration from his native excellency. If we
prescind in our thoughts the sacred authority of the Lawgiver, all the
Precepts of the Law for their moral Goodness, deserve our esteem and choice,
and entire observation. The sanctified Mind approves them universally. I esteem
all thy Precepts concerning all things to be right, Psalm. 119. 128.
says holy David. Nay, in the Wicked there is an intellectual assent to the
goodness of the Law, though the corrupt Will does not embrace it: there are some
inclinations and wishes to obey it, but controlled by vicious desires. It Is
said of the convinced Sinner, Romans 2. 18.
Thou know his Will, and approvest the things that are more excellent.

It may be objected, that the Law being pure, and Man in a frail state,
surrounded with innumerable temptations, to require perfect obedience from him,
and condemn him for his Failings, seems hard. The Law lays a restraint upon all
the Senses, and forbids all fleshly Lusts; this may be easy to separate Souls,
but for Men to live in the Body, as if they were out of it, to be always
vigilant against the insinuations or attaques of Sin, is impossible. Thus the
Carnal Mind is apt with some color, to traduce the Righteousness of God's
Government. But it will be clearly vindicated, by considering,

1. The Law supposes Man in a state of integrity, furnished with sufficient
Power to comply with every Precept, though free to fall from his Duty and
Happiness. To command absolute Impossibilities, is tyrannical, and utterly
inconsistent with the Nature of the Blessed God.

2. The first Man wilfully transgrest the Law, and lost his Holiness: And
Nature being poisoned in the Fountain, is corrupt in all the descendants from
him. Mankind was justly degraded in rebellious Adam, and is destitute of
spiritual strength to perform all that the Law requires.

3. This disability is vicious and culpable, and can be no pretense against the
Rights of the Lawgiver. A natural disability from the want of requisite Faults
is a just excuse. It Is no Fault that a Man cannot stop the Sun as Joshua did,
nor calm a Tempest as our Savior did by his Word. But the disability that
arises from a depraved disposition, renders a Person more guilty. And this is
the present Case. The Will of Man is disobedient and perverse, and as soon as
it can exercise El^ction, chooses Evil: and by custom in Sin becomes more
hardened and obstinate. And from hence the Prophet charges the contumacious
Jews; Behold their Ear is uncircumcised, Jer. 6. 10.
and they cannot hearken. Were they incapable of hearing the Divine Commands?
No, but the Word of the Lord was to them a reproach, they had no delight in it.
And our Savior upbraids the Pharisees, How can ye believe, which receive
Honor one of another, Joh. 5. 44.
and seek not the Honor that comes from God only. They were in high reputation
for their Holiness, which made it impossible for them in an humble penitent
manner to submit to our Savior. In short, the primary end of the Law was the
happiness of Man in the performance of his Duty, and his first Sin, and
consequent impotence to fulfill it, was by his own Fault. As the Obliquity of a
Line cannot be ascribed to the strait Rule, but to the Error of the Hand that
draws it. And from hence it is clear, that if God should with a terrible
exactness require of Men unsinning Obedience upon the pain of Damnation, he
could not be taxt with unrighteousness.

But God has been pleased to mitigate and allay the Severity of the Law by the
Gospel; so that although the least breach of it makes a Person an Offender and
obnoxious to Judgment, yet the Law of Faith propounds such merciful Conditions
to the Guilty, that upon the performance of them, they may plead their Pardon
sealed with the Blood of their Redeemer, and shall be saved and crowned in the
Day of Judgment. We are commanded so to speak and do, James 2. 12.
as they that shall be judged by the Law of Liberty. Thus the Gospel is styled,
in that it frees the Conscience, though not from the obedience, yet from the
terrors and condemnation of the Law; for there was not the least signification
of Mercy by it. But in the Gospel, the Grace of God most illustriously appears.

1. In that when our Innocence was lost, there may be a renovation of the
Sinner by Repentance: to which the plenary pardon of Sin is assured, (...)
Wash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine
Eyes: Cease to do evil, and learn to do well, says the Lord: and though your
Sins be as Scarlet, they shall be white as Snow; though they be red like Crimson,
they shall be white like Wool. God will not pardon those who forgive and
flatter themselves in their Sins; but those who confess and forsake them, shall
find mercy.

2. Sincerity of Obedience is accepted where Perfection is wanting. When a
Person with consent of Heart and serious endeavors strives to obey the Holy
Will of God, without the exception of any known Duty, or the indulgence of any
Sin, God will spare him, Mal* 3. 17.
as a Father spares his Son that serves him. It Is not so much the Matter as the
Allowance that makes Sin deadly. Where there is guile in the heart, it will be
severely imputed. It Is not according to some particular Acts of Sin, but the
Tenor of the Life, that the state of Men will be decided.

3. Unfeigned Faith in the Lord Jesus, that is, such a belief of the Truth and
Goodness of his Promises, as induces us to receive him as our Prince and
Savior, as purifies the Conscience, the Heart, and Life, will free us from
Hell, and entitle us to Heaven, according to the Covenant of Grace. In short,
the final Resolution of a Man's Trial and Case will be this; either he has
performed the gracious Conditions of the Gospel, and he shall be saved; or
rejected them, and he shall be damned.

If it be objected, that the terms of Evangelical Justification, though in
themselves comparatively easy, yet are of impossible performance to Men in
their natural sinful state. The Answer is clear;

1. That although the natural Man be dead in Sin, without spiritual strength to
resolve and perform his Duty, and holy heat of desires to it; and nothing is
alive in him but his corrupt Passions, that are like Worms generated in a
Carcass; yet by the Grace that is offered in the Gospel, he may be enabled to
perform the Conditions of it, for in this the Gospel excels the Law: the Law
discovers Sin, but affords no degrees of supernatural Power to subdue it, and
directs to no means for the expiation of its Guilt. As the Fire in the Bush
discovered the Thorns without consuming them. But the sanctifying Spirit, the
true Spring of Life and Power, 2 Timothy 1. 7.
is the concomitant of the Gospel, as St. Peter declares, 1 Pet. 1. 12.
With the preaching of the Gospel the Holy Ghost was sent down from Heaven. And
the Spirit by illuminating, preventing, and exciting Grace, assists Men to
repent and believe; and is promised in rich and liberal supplies to all that
humbly and ardently pray for it. This our Savior assures to us by a most
tender and endearing Comparison: Luke 11. 13.
If ye that are evil know how to give good things to your Children, how much
more shall your Heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to those that ask it?

2. From hence it follows, that it is from the perverseness of the Will, and the
love of Sin, that Men do not obey the Gospel. For the Holy Spirit never
withdraws his gracious assistance, till resisted, grieved, and quenched by
them. It will be no excuse that Divine Grace is not conferred in the same
eminent degree upon some as upon others that are converted: for the impenitent
shall not be condemned for want of that singular powerful Grace that was the
privilege of the Elect, but for receiving in vain that measure of common Grace
that they had. If he that received one Talent had faithfully improved it, he
had been rewarded with more, but upon the slothful and ungrateful neglect of
his Duty, he was justly deprived of it, and cast into a Dungeon of Horror, the
Emblem of Hell. The Sentence of the Law has its full force upon impenitent
Sinners, with intolerable aggravations for neglecting the Salvation of the
Gospel.

Concerning the Heathens, the Scripture declares,

1. That although the Law published by Moses was not communicated to them, yet
there was a silent, though less perfect Impression of it in their Hearts. The
Law of Nature in the fundamental Precepts of Religion, and Society, and
Temperance, was better known than obeyed by them. Romans 1. 26, 27.
Therefore the Apostle endites them for atrocious Crimes, such as natural
Conscience consenting with the Law of God, severely forbids upon the pain of
damnation. Thus it is said of the Heathens, Romans 1. 32.
who knowing the Judgment of God, That they which commit such things are worthy
of death; not only commit the same, but have pleasure in them that do them. And
at the last Day, As many as have sinned without the Law, Romans 2.
as delivered to the Jews, shall be judged and perish, not according to that
Law of Moses, but the Law of Nature that obliged them to do good, and restrain
themselves from Evil; of which the counterpart was not totally deleted in their
Hearts.

2. Although the Revelation of Christ in his Person, Office, and Benefits, is
not by the preaching of the Gospel (that is necessary for the begetting of
Faith) extended to all Nations; yet the Grace of the Redeemer is so far
universal, that upon his account the indulgent Providence of God invited the
Heathens to Repentance. Romans 2. 4.
His renewed Benefits that sweetened their Lives, and his powerful patience in
forbearing so long to cut them off, when their Impurities and Impieties were so
provoking, Acts 14. 17.
was a testimony of his inclination to clemency upon their reformation. And for
their abusing his Favors, and resisting the methods of his Goodness, they will
be inexcusable to themselves, and their condemnation righteous to their own
Consciences.

We are next to consider the Sanction of the Law that enforces Obedience, and
it will appear that God is not extreme, but wisely and justly ordained Eternal
Death to be the punishment of Sin.

This will appear by considering,

1. The end of the Sanction is to preserve the Authority of the Law in its full
vigor, to render it most solemn and awful; and consequently the punishment
must be so heavy, as to overpoise all Temptations that might otherwise induce
the Subjects to transgress its Precepts.

Therefore to Adam the first and second Death was threatened upon his
Disobedience; and Fear as a Sentinel was planted in his Breast, that no guilty
Thought, no irregular Desire, no deceitful Suggestion should enter to break the
Tables of the Law deposited therein. Now since notwithstanding the threatening,
Man was so easily seduced by the insinuations of the Tempter to break the Law,
and disorder the Government of God in the World, it is evident that such a
restraint was not over-rigorous to secure his Obedience. I shall not insist on
what is sadly visible since the first Apostasy, that there is in Mankind such a
prodigious propensity to sensual things, that without the fear of Hell, no
Arguments are strong enough to prevent the bold violation of the Divine Law.

2. It Is consented to by common Reason, that there ought to be a proportion
between the quality of the Offense, -- Adsit Regula peccatis, quae poenas
irroget aequas. Horat.
and the degrees of the Punishment. Justice takes the Scales into its hand
before it takes the Sword. Now sin against God is of such an immense Guilt,
that an eternal Punishment is but equivalent to it. This will appear by
considering,

1. The Perfections of the Lawgiver who is infinitely above us. One Act of Sin
is rebellion against God, and includes in it the contempt of his Majesty,
before whom the highest Angels cover their Faces with reverence and adoration,
Isa. 6. 2, 3.
as unworthy to behold his Glory, and cover their Feet as unworthy that he
should behold them: the contradiction of his Holiness that is his peculiar
Glory: the denial of his Omniscience and Omnipresence, as if he were confined
to the superior World, Job 22. 14.
and busy in regulating the harmonious order of the Stars, and did not discern
and observe what is done below: the defiance of his Eternal Power, and
provoking him to jealousy, as if we were stronger than he.

2. If we consider the Obligations of the reasonable Creatures to obey his
Commands, the guilt of Sin rises prodigiously. They were made by his Power with
this special character of Excellency, according to his Image: they were happy
in his Love: they were endowed with intellectual Faculties capable to
understand and consider their Obligations to their bountiful Lord. From hence
it appears that Sin is the most unnatural Rebellion against God, and in it
there is a concurrence of Impiety, Ingratitude, Perfidiousness, and whatever
may inhance a Crime to an excess of Wickedness.

3. The meanness of the Motives that induce Men to prefer the pleasing their
depraved Appetites before Obedience to his Sacred Will, extremely aggravates
the Offense. Of this we have a convincing Instance in the first Sin committed
upon Earth. Deceitful Curiosity, flattering Pride, a secret pleasure of acting
according to his own Will, joined with the low attractives of sense, blinded
and transported Adam to eat the Mortal Fruit, against the express Command of
God. And ever since, the vanishing shadows of Honor, or Gain, or Pleasure, are
the only perswasives to Sin. And what can be more provoking, than for a Trifle
to transgress the Law of God, and equally despise his Favor and Displeasure?
Can any punishment less than Eternal expiate such Impieties? The Rules of
Humane Justice may discover to us the Equity of the Divine Justice. It Is
ordained by the wisest States, that many Crimes which may be done in a few
minutes, shall be punished with Death, and the Offender be deprived of his
natural Life for ever: And is it not most just that Treason against the Great
and Immortal King, should be revenged with Everlasting Death?

4. That which farther clears the Divine Justice in punishing Sin with Hell, is
this, That God by his infallible Promise assures us, that all who sincerely and
uniformly obey him, shall be rewarded with Heaven for ever: a Blessedness most
worthy the greatness and love of the Eternal God to bestow upon his Servants: a
Blessedness that surpasses our most comprehensive Thoughts. Now if Everlasting
Glory be despised, what remains but endless Misery to be the Sinner's Portion?
The Consequence is remediless. If Sin with an eternal Hell in its Retinue be
chosen and embraced, is it not equal that the rational Creature should inherit
his own choice? How just is it that those who are the Slaves of the Devil, and
maintain his Party here, should have their recompense with him for ever? That
those who now say to the Almighty, depart from us, we desire not the knowledge
of thy Ways, should hear the Dreadful Depart from me into everlasting Fire? As
there will be no vain-boasting in Heaven, where the Reward is the Gift of pure
Bounty; so there will be no righteous Complaint against God in Hell, where the
Punishment is inflicted by powerful Justice. He that voluntarily sins, by
consequence chooses the Punishment due to it.

5. The estimation of an Offense is taken from the disposition of him that does
it. When it is done with pleasure and obstinacy, there is no place for Favor.
Now final impenitence alone makes Sin actually and eternally damning to the
Sinner. Those that, notwithstanding all gracious Means, live continually in
rebellion against God, those that impenitently die in their Sins, those that
desire to live here for ever, that they might enjoy their sweet Sins; those
that are so hardened and naturalized in their Vices, that if they were revived
and brought again into this World of Temptations, would certainly return to the
pleasures of Sin; is it not righteous that their incorrigible obstinacy should
be punished for ever? Paenae aequalitas non nude spectanda ut in ponderibus and
mensuris, sed expenso proposito, and voto ejus qui deliquit. Grot.
Is it not just that those who would continue under the dominion of Sin, should
forfeit all their claim to the Divine Mercy? For if we consider them as
unrepentant and irreclaimable from their Wickedness, there are in them the just
provocations and true causes of God's final rejection and hatred: and if we
consider God as revealed in his Word and Works, his essential Properties,
Wisdom, Purity, Justice, necessarily work upon such Objects in such a manner.
How zealous an indignation did the Son of God express against the obdurate
Pharisees? You Serpents, you Generation of Vipers, how should you escape the
damnation of Hell? Mat. 23. 33.
They in despite of all his Miracles, the equal Expressions of his Goodness and
Power, resisted his Authority, blasphemed his Person, and slighted his
Salvation. Now though other Sins are of an inferior Nature, and weaker Evidence,
yet Obstinacy added to them, makes a Person unworthy and incapable of Mercy.
From hence the misery of the Damned is without Redemption, without Hope,
without Allay for ever.

2. I shall now proceed to consider the Evidence of the Facts that is produced
as the Reason of that Judgment.

The temper of Divine Justice is very observable in the particular Judgments
recorded in Scripture. In the first process of Justice on Earth, we read, that
God made the enquiry of Adam, Genesis 3. 11.
Have thou eaten of the Tree whereof I commanded thee that thou should not
eat? and by palpable Evidence convinced him before he condemned him. Thus
before the fiery Vengeance upon the wicked Cities, the Memory of which will
never be extinguished; The Lord said to Abraham, Genesis 18. 20, 21.
Because the Cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great, and because their Sin is
grievous, I will go down now, and see whether they have done according to the
Cry of it, that is come up unto me: viz. whether they were so numerously and
excessively wicked: if not, I will know. God is pleased to incarnate himself in
Man's Expression, to declare more sensibly to us, that he never punishes with
precipitation, but after an equal trial of the Cause. Thus we read of that
profane King of Babylon, Belshazzer, Dan. 5. 27.
That he was weighed in the Balance, and found wanting, before he was
sentenced to be deprived of his Kingdom and Life. And the destruction of the
Antichristian State is attended with solemn Halelujahs for the righteousness of
that Judgment. Rev. 19. 2, 3.
And in the last Day the Righteousness of God's Proceedings shall be
universally manifest and magnified. Romans 2. 5.
It Is therefore called the Day of the Revelation of the Righteous Judgment of
God. Now in order to this, the Scripture informs us, that all the Works of Men
shall be brought in to Judgment, Eccl. 12. last.
even every secret thing, whether good or evil. And the Apostle says, 2 Cor.
5. 10.
That we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may
receive the things done in his Body, according to that he has done, whether it
be good or bad.

All Sins, whether secret or openly visible, shall be accounted for. Those Sins
that have been acted in the most secret Retirement, so that no eye of Man could
take cognizance of them; Nay, the Sins of the thoughts and affections, of which
Satan could not accuse Men, when the inward Fire of Lust or Malice is not
discovered by the least smoke or sparkles, by no expressions, all those shall
be brought to Judgment: Romans 2. 16.
God will judge the Secrets of Men by Jesus Christ.

The sins of Omission of our Duty that are so numerous, from carelessness and
diversions, from slothfulness and delays, and that now so little affect us; for
we are more sensible of what we do, than of what we have not done; the guilt of
all these shall then be heavily charged on the Conscience of the Sinner. The
neglect of improving all the Means, Advantages, and Opportunities of doing or
receiving Good, will be a great part of that Judgment. The Lord called his
Servants to an account for the Talent committed to their trust, and required
profit in proportion to their number and worth.

All sins of Commission in Youth and Age, whether gross Sensuality, as
Lasciviousness, Lusts, excess of Wine, 1 Pet. 4. 5.
Revellings, Banquetings, and abominable Idolatries, and all excess of Riot,
shall be accounted for to him who is ready to judge the quick and the dead: or
acts of unrighteous-to others. Col. 3. 25.
He that does wrong, shall receive according to the wrong he has done. And sins
of a lesser guilt, for which the most are not touched with grief or shame,
shall then be produced in Judgment. All the sins of our words, so easily
committed, and not so easily observed, shall then be called to a heavy
remembrance. The Judge himself tells us; Mat. 12. 36.
I say unto you, that every idle word that Men shall speak, they shall give
account thereof in the Day of Judgment. And if vain words, the Signs and
immediate Effects of a vain Mind, shall sadly increase our Accounts, how much
more all the contentious, fierce and revengeful words, the detracting, false,
contumelious and injurious words, the impure, filthy, and contagious words, the
profane, blasphemous, and impious words that flow from the evil Treasure of
the Heart? O their dreadful number, and oppressing weight!

And all the Aggravations and Circumstances of Men's Sins, that raise their
Guilt to such fearful heights, shall be enumerated in order to Judgment. For
thus 'twas foretold; Jud. 14, 15.
Behold, the Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints, to execute Judgment
upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly
Deeds which they have ungodly committed; and all their hard Speeches which
ungodly Sinners have spoken against him. And all the good Works of the Saints
shall then be remembered, even to the least work of Piety, the giving of two
Mites to the Treasury of the Temple; Luke 21. 3, 4.
and the least work of Charity, Mat. 10. 42.
the giving a cup of cold Water to a Disciple, upon the account of his Relation
unto Christ. All their secret Graces and Duties shall then be rewarded.

The manner of this Judicial Evidence is set forth to us in Scripture, by the
opening the Books; congruously to proceedings in humane Judgment, wherein the
Information and Charge is produced from Writings for the conviction of the
Accused. Thus it was represented to St. John in a Vision; Rev. 20. 12.
I saw the Dead, small and great, stand before God; and the Books were opened,
and the Dead were judged out of the things that were written in the Books,
according to their Works.

1. The Books of the Law and Gospel shall then be opened in all the Injunctions
and Prohibitions, and our Lives compared with them. Our Savior told the Jews,
John 5. 45.
Do not think that I will accuse you to my Father, there is one that accuses
you, even Moses, in whom you trust: not the Person, but the Law of Moses. And
he denounced against those that reject the Gospel; John 12. 48.
the Word that I have spoken, the same shall judge them in the last Day. The Law
is the exact Transcript of God's Sacred Will, the natural and immutable Rule of
Righteousness; it is pure, forbids all Sin, and enjoins universal Holiness; it is
Spiritual, requires not only a conformity in Words and Actions, but inward
sanctity in mind and heart: for the Soul is the principal part of Man, entirely
open to God's Eye, the Maker and Judge of it. And the most enlightened Saints
have but an imperfect knowledge of it here. This made Holy David, after his
meditation upon its purity and perfection, to cry out in an Agony, Who can
understand his Errors! cleanse thou me from secret sins. Psalm. 19.
This when opend in its spiritual and comprehensive Nature, by a wise and
zealous Preacher, darts a Light into the Conscience, and discovers many secret
Sins, that like so many Serpents were still and quiet in the dark; but upon the
sudden breaking in of the Light, fly upon the Sinner, and torment him with
their mortal Stings. But when the Lawgiver himself shall expound the Law in
its full extent and perfection, with respect to all the Duties it commands, and
Sins it forbids, how guilty will Men appear? how unable to answer one Article
of a thousand charged upon them?

2. The Omniscience of God will give most convincing Evidence of all our Works.
All things are naked and open to his Eyes, Heb. 4. 13.
with whom we have to do in Judgment. The Psalmist declares the infinite
perspicacity of his sight: The Darkness hides not from thee, Psalm. 139.
but the Night shines as the Day. As his Light and transcendent Brightness is
invisible to us, 1 Timothy 6. 16.
so our thickest darkness is visible to him. We cannot see things in the Night,
because it hinders the reception of the Rays, that insinuate into the Eye and
causes sight: but the Eyes of our Judge are like a flame of Fire, Rev. 1. 14.
dispelling all darkness. From his Throne in Heaven, his piercing Eye sees
through all the concealments of Men's Sins. Thou have set our Iniquities before
thee, Psalm. 90. 8.
and our secret Sins in the Light of thy Countenance. He discovered the
Sacrilege of Achan, the Lie of Gehazi, the Deceit of Ananias. Readiness
disobedience in sparing the Amalekites devoted to destruction, 1 Samuel 15. 21.
had the colorable pretense of Piety, and, as a Sacrifice, was laid on the
Altar. 2 Samuel 11. 25
And David's Murder of Uriah was imputed to the chance of War as a sufficient
excuse. But though they might have deceived others, they could not deceive God.
He is intimately present with the Souls of Men, that are unsearchable to the
most discerning Angels of Light, and knows all their most secret Designs and
Desires. The Pharisees in whom Pride was the first Property, and Hypocrisy a
second Nature, could not, with all their saintly shows, impose upon our
Savior: for he knew what was in Man. Mat. 23. 14.
He discovered their Alms to be not the effect of Charity but Ostentation, Mat.
6. 2.
and their specious Acts of Devotion to be a train to surprise some rich Prey.
Mat. 23. 14.


And this Divine Knowledge of Men and their Actions is in order to Judgment.
Thus the wise King declares, Prove. 24. 12.
Does not he that ponders the Heart consider it? and he that keeps thy Soul,
does not he know it? And shall not he render to every Man according to his
Works? And God himself testifies, Jer. 17. 10.
I the Lord search the Heart, even to give to every Man according to his Works.
For this Reason he is said to keep a Register of Men's Sins. Thus he speaks of
the impure Idolatries of the Jews; Behold, it is written before me, Isa. 65. 6.
to signify his exact and actual knowledge, I will not keep silence, but will
recompense, even recompense into their Bosoms. And at the Day of Judgment he
will declare his Knowledge of their Sins before all, and the most secret shall
be made evident, as if written in their Foreheads in the most plain and legible
Characters.

And all the goodness of the Saints shall then be revealed by the Judge. O si
nobis animam boni viri liceret inspicere, quam pulchram faciem, quam sanctam,
quam ex magnifico, placidoque fulgentem videremus! Senec.
Their greatest Excelcellencies are invisible to the Eyes of Men: the sanctity
of their Aims and Affections, which gives Life and Value to all the Acts of
Obedience, their secret Duties, wherein the sincerity and ardency of their
Souls is most expressed, are only known to God. And such is the excellent
humility of the Saints, that the more they are enriched, and abound with the
gracious influences of the Spirit, the less they discover to the World: as the
Celestial Bodies, when in nearest conjunction with the Sun, and most filled
with his Light, are least in appearance to the Inhabitants of the Earth. Mal.
3. 16, 17.
But there is a Book of Remembrance before him, for them that feared the Lord,
and thought upon his Name. And they shall be mine, says the Lord of Hosts, in
the day when I make up my Jewels: and I will spare them as a Man spares his Son
that serves him.

3. The Conscience of every Man shall then be opened, and give an accusing or
excusing testimony of all things: Romans 2. 15, 16.
for these Acts of Conscience in the present Life, have a final respect to
God's Tribunal. And tho the Accounts are so vast, there shall be an exact
agreement between the Books of God's Omniscience and of Conscience in the Day
of Judgment. Now indeed the Conscience of Man, tho never so inquisitive and
diligent in examining and revising his Ways, is unable to take a just account
of his Sins. As one that would tell the first appearing Stars in the Evening,
before he can reckon them others appear and confound his Memory with their
number: so when Conscience is seriously intent in reflecting upon it self,
before it can reckon up the Sins committed against one Command, innumerable
others appear. This made the Psalmist, upon the survey of his Actions, break
forth in amazement and perplexity; Mine Iniquities are more than the Hairs upon
my Head, Psalm. 40. 12.
therefore my Heart fails me. But it will be one of the Miracles of that Day,
to enlarge the view of Conscience to all their Sins. And O the formidable
spectacle, when Conscience enlightened by a Beam from Heaven, shall present to a
Sinner in one view the sins of his whole Life! Now Conscience is a Notary in
every Man's Bosom; and tho it is not always vocal, yet writes down their
Actions. The Sin of Judah is written with a Pen of Iron, Jer. 17. 1.
and with a point of a Diamond it is graven upon the Tables of the Heart. But
then it shall be compelled to give a full Charge against the Guilty. Of this we
have an infallible presage in this world, when Conscience turns the point
against the Breast of a Sinner, and enforces the Tongue, by a secret instigation
to accuse the Person. And this Information of Conscience at the last will make
the Sinner speechless: for the Book of Accounts with Divine Justice, was always
in his own keeping; and whatever is recorded there, was written with his own
hand. And how will those hardened Sinners that now kick against the Pricks of
Conscience, be able to repel its strong and quick Accusations before that
terrible Tribunal?

4. Other numerous Witnesses will appear to finish the process of that Day. Not
as if God, that knows all things, wants information, but for the public
conviction of the Wicked.

Satan will then bring a bloody Charge against them. Such is his Malignity,
that he is a Complainer of God to Man, and by calumniating the Blessed Creator,
seduced our first Parents; and he is the Accuser of Men to God. He is styled
the Accuser of the Brethren before God day and night. Rev.
Sometimes falsely, as when he taxed Job, that his Piety was mercenary; and
often truly to provoke the Divine Displeasure. But tho his Charge be just
against them as Sinners, yet as Penitent Sinners they are absolved by the Judge
upon the Throne of Grace. This we have represented to the Prophet Zechary,
Zech. 3. 1, 2, 3.
Joshua the High Priest, a Type of the Church, standing before the Angel of the
Lord, and Satan standing at his right hand to accuse him; for that was the
place of Accusers. But Christ the Blessed Reconciler interposed. And the Lord
said to Satan, the Lord rebuke thee, O Satan, even the Lord that has chosen
Jerusalem rebuke thee. But he will principally act the part of an Accuser at
the Last Judgment. This is intimated in that fearful imprecation, Let Satan
stand at his right hand; Ps. 109. 6, 7
When he is judged, let him be condemned. He is now an active watchful Spirit,
whose Diligence is equal to his Malice, and by glittering Snares, or violent
Temptations, draws Men to sin. But then he will be their most bitter Accuser,
not from zeal of Justice, but pure Malignity. Then he will aggravate their
Crimes by the most killing Circumstances; tho in accusing them he endites
himself, their sins being usually done by his solicitations.

And the Wicked themselves will accuse one another. In this World
Fellow-sinners usually conceal one another Wickedness, restrained by their own
obnoxiousness. But then all that have been jointly engaged in the commission of
Sin, will impeach each other. The voluptuous Sinners that have excited one
another to Lust or Luxury; Prove. 7. 18.
Come let us take our fill of Love till the Morning: Come, I will fetch Wine,
Isa. 56. 12.
and we will fill our selves with strong Drink, for to morrow shall be as to
day, and much more abundant: All the Charming Companions and Associates will
with fierceness charge one another. And the malicious cruel Sinners that say,
Prove. ^.
Come let us lay wait for Blood, let us swallow them up quick as the Grave,
will then like enraged Furies fly upon one another. In all Sins of Combination,
the inferior Instruments will accuse their Directors for their pernicious
Counsel, and the Directors will accuse the Instruments for their wicked
Compliance.

And all the Holy Servants of God, who by their Instructions, Counsels,
Admonitions, Examples have endeavored to make the World better; especially
those who by their Place and Relation were more concerned, and more zealously
and compassionately urged and persuaded those under their Care to reform their
Lives, and save their Souls, will give a heavy Testimony against them. Indeed
the very presence of the Saints will upbraid the Wicked, for their resisting
all the warming, melting Entreaties, all the grave and serious Reproofs, all
the tender earnest Expostulations, that were ineffectual by the hardness of
their Hearts.

Briefly, the Scripture attributes to the Signs and Circumstances of Men's sins,
a vocal Evidence against them. Thus the Prophet speaking of the House built by
Rapine and Extortion, The Stones of the Wall cry, Hab. 2. 11.
and the Beams answer them; and with concurrent testimony accuse the
unrighteous Builder. And St. James declares, That the Wages of the Hireling,
kept back by fraud, Jam. 5. 3, 4.
cry against the Oppressor. And the rust of Gold and Silver treasured up, is a
Witness against the Covetous. And this by the recognition of Conscience will be
a Memorial against them hereafter.

To what the Scripture speaks of this kind of Evidence of Men's sins, I shall
add a useful Representation framed by a Heathen, to signify that wickedness,
how secretly soever committed, shall be brought to light in Judgment. He tells
us, that the Soul of a very guilty Wretch, was after Death arraigned before one
of the severe Judges below. And at his Trial, because his atrocious Crimes were
done in secret, he stood upon his defense, denying all. The Judge commanded his
Lamp to be produced, that was an Eye Witness of his Wickedness. The Lamp
appeared, and being demanded what it knew of him, answered with a sigh, Would I
had been conscious of nothing, for even now the remembrance of his Villainies
makes me tremble. I wish my Light had been extinguished, that the Oil that
maintained, had quenched it. But I burnt with disdain, and cast about some
Sparks to fire his impure Bed, and was grieved that my little Flame was so weak
as not to consume it. I said within my self, If the Sun saw these Villainies, it
would be eclipsed, and leave the World in Darkness. But I now perceive why I
was constrained to give Light to him, that being a secret Spy of his
Uncleanness, his Thefts and Cruelties, I might reveal them. But we that are
enlightened by Faith, and know that God is Omnipresent, and that whatever Sin
is done, though in the deepest and darkest recess, is manifest to him, Ipse
timendus est in publico, ipse in secreto. Lucerna ardet? videt te. Lucerna
extincta est? videt te. In cubile intras? videt te. in cord versaris? videt
te. Ipsum time.
have no need of Lucian's Lamp to make our Judge to be feared by us.

3. The impartiality of the Sentence will make the Justice of God conspicuous
before the whole World. This consists in two things.

1. There will be no distinction of Persons.

2. There will be a distinction of Causes in that Judgment; and according to
their Nature, the Sentence will pass upon all.

1. There will be no distinction of Persons. In Humane Courts, the Judges
sometimes extend and amplify, sometimes contract or smother the Evidence, and
are more rigorous or favorable in their Sentence, as they are byast toward
the Persons before them. But the Righteous Judge of the World is incapable of
being inclined to favor or severity upon such base Motives. This is frequently
declared in Scripture, to possess us with his Fear. If ye call upon the Father,
who without respect of Persons judges according to every Man's Work, 1 Pet. 1.
17.
pass the time of your sojourning here in fear. No spiritual Privileges upon
which Men are so apt to presume, viz. that they are Members of the Reformed
Church; that they are enriched with excellent Gifts; that they enjoy the
Ordinances in their purest Administration, will avail them without real
Holiness in their hearts and lives. The being united to Societies of the most
glorious Profession, of strictest Purity, and sublime Devotion, does no more
prove one to be a real Saint, than the being of an eminent Company of Merchants
proves one to be a rich Citizen. Those that bow the Knee and not the Heart in
faithful Reverence, that give the empty title of Lord to Christ, without the
tribute of Obedience, will be rejected by him. Mat. 7. 22.
Many shall say at the Day of Judgment, Lord, Lord, we have prophesied in thy
Name, and done many wondrous works. Then will the Judge say, I know you not:
Depart from me ye workers of Iniquity. No degrees of Civil Greatness will be of
any moment and advantage in that day. St. John testifies, I saw the Dead, small
and great, stand before God, in an equal Line, to receive their Trial. Kings
shall then be divested of their Imperial Titles, of their Crowns and Scepters,
and their Robes of State, and only be accompanied with their Works. Of this we
have an undoubted Proof, in that they are no more exempted from the common Law
of dying than the meanest Slave. Death, that rugged Officer arrests them
without Ceremony, and summons them to appear before that Tribunal. The Royal
Purple could not protect Herod from being devoured by Worms. The Apostle speaks
indefinitely in the forecited place; He that does wrong, shall receive for the
wrong he has done; Col. 3. last.
and there is no respect of Persons. No circumstantial Accidents can derive
true worth, or truly debase Persons, but inherent Qualities, and the Actions
that flow from them: and accordingly, the High and Holy God will accept or
disapprove them. What St. Paul observes of the saving Grace of the Gospel being
indifferently offered to all, is applicable in this case. He tells us, There is
neither Greek nor Jew, Col. 3. 11.
Barbarian nor Scythian, Bond nor Free, that are preferred or excluded upon a
Carnal account, but that all may equally partake of Spiritual Blessings. Thus
the difference of Nations will be no Privilege or Prejudice to any in the Day
of Judgment. The most rude and contemptible shall have as fair and equal a
Trial, as the most polite and civilized. The ignorant Barbarians, as the
Learned Grecians, that so much boasted of their vain Excellencies above them.
The Negroes in Africa, as the People of Europe: for they have the same Relation
to God their Maker, and as truly bear the impression of God stamped upon the
Humane Nature in the Creation, and therefore common to the whole species of
Mankind: An Image may be fashioned in Ebony, as well as in Ivory. Briefly, all
Men are equally subject to his Laws, and shall be equally accountable for their
Actions. The Rich and the Poor shall then meet together, without d^stinction,
before God the Marker and Judge of them all.

2. There shall be a distinction of Causes, and every Man be judged according
to his Works, the tenor of good Works, and the desert of bad. The Apostle
assures us, Gal. 6. 7, 8.
That whatsoever a Man sows, that shall he reap: He that sows to the Flesh,
shall of the Flesh reap Corruption: But he that sows to the Spirit, shall of
the Spirit reap Life everlasting. The Harvest shall be according to the Seed,
both in kind and measure.

1. Romans 2. 7.
Those who by patient continuance in well-doing, seek for Glory, and Honor,
and Imortality, shall obtain eternal Life. Romans 6. last.
Indeed, eternal Life is the Gift of infinite bounty, nay of pure Mercy, Jude
21.
and Mercy excludes Merit. It Is said of the Blessed Martyrs, who contended for
the Truth and Purity of the Gospel to the Death, Rev. 7. 14.
that their Robes were washed white in the Blood of the Lamb, not in their own
Blood? Their right to Heaven was from the application of his Merits to them.
But the Reward is dispensed from God according to the Evangelical Law; not only
as a Magnificent Prince, but as a Righteous Judge. All those whom the Gospel
ordains to Eternal Life, shall infallibly obtain it, and none that the Gospel
excludes. Those who were sensible of their Sins, and cordially forsaking them,
did humbly and entirely depend upon the Grace of God, through the Blessed
Reconciler and Savior, shall be justified and glorified. Then the Judge will
discern between unfeigned Faith and vain Presumption, and will justify the
Faith of the Saints by the genuine Fruits of it, the Godliness, Righteousness,
and Sobriety of their Lives, and a victorious perseverance in their Duty,
notwithstanding all the pleasing Temptations or Tortures to withdraw them from
it. Thus the Apostle expresses his humble confidence; 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8.
I have fought the good Fight, I have finished my Course, henceforth there is
laid up for me the Crown of Righteousness, which God the Righteous Judge will
give me at that day: and not only to me, but to all that love his appearance.
We read in the Description of the Last Judgment, That the Book of Life was
opened: Rev. 20. 12.
the Names of all that were written in Heaven, shall then be declared, that it
may appear they are saved by Grace. For it was his most free pleasure to select
some from the common Mass of Perdition, who were naturally as guilty and
corrupted as others, and to predestinate them to Eternal Glory, and effectual
persevering Grace to prepare them for it. The Saints are created in Christ
Jesus unto good Works which God has before ordained, that they should walk in
them. And the New Creation is as undeserved and entire an Effect of God's Love
as the first was. But it is said, That every Man was judged according to his
Works. For Eternal Election does not entitle a Person immediately to Heaven,
but according to the order established in the Gospel. Thus the King at the last
Day speaks to the Elect; Mat. 15. 34, 35.
Come, ye Blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom, prepared for you before
the foundation of the World: for I was hungry, and ye fed me; naked, and ye
clothed me.

And according as the Saints have excelled in Fidelity and Zeal in God's
Service, they shall be rewarded with a more excellent Glory. The Stars of
Paradise are of a different brightness and greatness, as the Stars of the
Firmament. Indeed all are perfectly happy, without Plus amant illud Regnum in
quo ^on timent habere confortes. Aug. de Civit. Dei.
jealousy, that any is equal or superior to them in that Kingdom. But God will
crown his own Graces as the Saints have improved them. Our Savior valued the
Widows two Mites, as transcending all the magnificent Gifts of others; because
of the degrees of Love in the giver. There was a richer Mine of affection in
her Heart, Gold of a more noble Vein, more pure and precious than all their
Riches. This was of greater price in God's account, who weighs the Spirits in
his Balance. 2 Cor. 8. 12.
God will accept and reward according to what a Man has, and not according to
what he has not. He that improves but two Talents with his best skill and
diligence, shall have a greater Reward than another that had ten Talents, and
was remiss and less careful to employ them for his Masters profit. The Rule
will be exactly observed, He that sows bountifully, shall reap bountifully; and
he that sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly.

And if God will be thus impartial in rewarding the Saints, much more in
punishing the Wicked. For the renumeration of our Duty is the effect of his
most free Favor; but the recompenses of Sin are due, and decreed by Justice,
in Number, Weight, and Measure. The severity of the sense will be in
proportion, as Men's Sins have been more numerous and heinous. Although all the
Damned shall be equally miserable in despair, all broken on an endless Wheel,
yet the degrees of their Torment are different. Sins of Ignorance are
extenuated in comparison of Rebellious Sins against knowledge. The first are
like a Servant's dashing against his Master in the dark; the other like the
insolent striking of him in the light: And as they incur greater Guilt, will
expose to greater Punishment. Accordingly our Savior predicts, Luke 12. 47. 48.
that the Servant which knew his Lord's Will, and prepared not himself, neither
did according to his Will, shall be beaten with many stripes. But he that knew
not, and did commit things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes.
Unactive Knowledge is worse than Ig^orance. For this reason the case of
Heathens will be more tolerable than of the Jews: for though some natural
Principles were strong and quick in their minds, that made them sensible of
their duty and danger, yet they were not so clear and perfect as the Law
delivered by Moses. Those Sins that were infirmities in a Pagan, were
presumptuous in a Jew. And the case of the Jews will be more tolerable than of
disobedient Christians, who enjoy the Gospel less charged with Ceremonies, and
more abundant in Grace than the Mosaical Dispensation. Those that have set
before them the Life of Christ, the Model of all Perfection, that are excited
by such loud Calls to flee from the Wrath to come, and yet are deaf and
regardless to the Commands, nay to the melting Invitations and precious
Promises of the Gospel, shall have a more intolerable Judgment than the most
guilty Sinners, even the Sodomites and Sidonians that were strangers to it. The
precious Blood of the Son of God despised, induces a Crimson Guilt. And as Sins
are committed with pride and pleasure, with eager appetite and obstinacy, the
revenge of Justice will be more heavy upon Persons.

More particularly, Sins of consequence, whereby others are drawn to Sin, will
heighten the Guilt, and the retribution of Justice will be to every Man
according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings. Jer. 17. 10.


This will principally concern Superiors in eminency of place, whose dignity
has always a concomitant proportion of Duty. Their vicious Actions are
Examples, and their Examples more powerful Rules than their Laws, and give
countenance to others to sin licentiously. They sin with an high Hand, and
involve the ruin of innumerable persons that depend upon them. As the Dragon
in the Revelation, whose fall from Heaven drew a train of lesser Stars with
him. And all inferior Magistrates, who by personal commission, or partial
connivance, encourage and harden others in Sin, and by their power
discountenance serious Religion, and obstruct the progress of it, heap up
Damnation to themselves.

And the Ministers of the Word, who are obliged to watch for the Souls of Men;
and should, like the Heavens, by their light, influence, and motion, their
Doctrine and Lives, guide and quicken others in the ways of Holiness, if by
their neglect and wickedness others are lost for ever, their Account will be
most heavy and undoing.

Of this number are those, who by their unholy Conversation weaken the
Authority and Efficacy of the Word, and more successfully persuade Men to do
Evil, than by their Preaching to do well: for we are apt to take deeper
impression through the eye than through the ear, and to follow the Physician's
Practice rather than his Counsel. These perish not alone in their Iniquity. And
such who are unfaithful Dispensers of the Treasures of their Lord, and by loose
Doctrines corrupt the Minds of Men, to fancy a Mercy in God derogatory to his
Holiness, that although they live indulgently in Sin, they may obtain an easy
Pardon and Happiness at last. And such who employ their high Commission for low
and base ends: Those who instead of preaching Jesus Christ, and him crucified,
the pure and saving Truths, derived from the Fountain of the Gospel, entertain
their hearers with flashy Conceits, and studied Vanities, to give a relish to
Curiosity, and to have the applause of Fools, and obscure the native Majesty of
the Word, enervate its force, and render it powerless to Conscience.

And those who spend their zeal in things of no moment to Salvation, and let
fly bitter Invectives against those that dissent from them in unconcerning
Matters, by which they harden Atheistical Scorners in vilifying the Office of
the Ministry as a Carnal invention, set up and used for Secular ends; and
induce ot^^^s to place Religion in Formalities and slight colors of it, as if
Conformity to needless Rites would exclude the defects of substantial Holiness.

It Is observed in the Chaldee-Paraphrase, when God was inquiring of Cain
concerning Abel, that he charges him, The voice of thy Brother's Bloods cries
unto me. As if Cain were a Murderer not of a single Man only, but of a numerous
Race that might have descended from his Brother. Thus a wicked Minister will be
charged not only for murdering himself, but as many precious Souls as might
have been converted and saved, if he had faithfully performed his Duty.

And Parents that should instill the Principles of Godliness into their Children
in their early age, and season their minds with the knowledge of the Divine
Laws, to regulate their Lives, and make them sensible of their Obligations to
obey them, that should recommend Religion to their Affections by an holy and
heavenly Conversation, if by the neglect of their Duty their Children are
exposed as a prey to the Tempter, and ruined for ever, it will enhance their
last Reckoning, and increase the score of their Guilts beyond expression.

And Masters of Families, and all others that have authority and advantage to
preserve or reform from evil those that are committed to their Care, and to
instruct and command them to do what is pleasing to God and profitable to their
Souls, will be sadly accountable for those that perish by their neglect.

In short, we see by common experience, that Company and mutual Consent is a
usual Motive to Sin; and many persons that alone would with abhorrence reject
some Temptations, yet are sociably sinful. Now all those who by excitation or
example, lead others to destruction, as they are first in Sin, will be chief in
the Punishment. We read in the Parable of the rich Voluptuary, that being in
Hell, Luke 16. 28.
he desired a Messenger might be dispatched from the Dead to warn his Brethren,
left they should come to that place of Torment. Is there such Charity in Hell
to the Souls of others? Non orat pro fratrum salute qua non tangitur reprobus,
sed pro se ne ipsius tormenta ex consortio fratrum a^geantur.
No, that Furnace always burns with its proper flames, there is not a spark of
that Divine Fire there. But remembering how guilty he had been of their Sins,
feared that his Torments would be increased by their coming thither. Brugen.
Society in endless Sorrows does not divide but reflect them.

Now if Damnation for Sin be such a Misery as is expressed in the Scripture by
the most violent Figures and words of the heaviest signification; if all the
possible Tortures suffered here are but a Lenitive to the preparations of Wrath
in Hell, how miserable shall those be, who, as if a single Damnation were a
light matter, do not only commit Sin in their own persons, but are in
combination with Satan to corrupt and destroy others, and multiply the
sentences of Damnation against themselves? These treasure up Wrath against the
day of Wrath.

Briefly, the whole Process of that Day, the Arraignment and Sentence are so
ordered, as to clear the Judge, and confound the Guilty. God will be justified
in his Sentence, and overcome when he judges.

I shall now come to apply this great Doctrine.

1. Let us from what has been discoursed of Judgment to come, be excited to
confirm our Faith in this great and useful Doctrine; and by serious and
frequent thoughts to apply it to our selves. Some within the Church have only a
superficial belief of this, as a point of the Religion wherein they were
educated, but carnal Affections, Fear, Hope, Love, and Desire, control their
Assent, as to its operation upon them. They believe in the general that God is
the Judge and Rewarder of our Actions, and in the absence of temptation resolve
to obey him: but when a strong Trial comes from some temporal Good or Evil that
is present, their Faith is negligent, and unactive to keep them from Sin. Now
to make our Faith powerful, we must,

First, confirm it by convincing Arguments, that it may be an undoubted
Assurance, a certain Light, directive and persuasive in the course of our
Lives. Some Doctrines of Religion, that are of an incomprehensible nature, and
should be received with silent adoration for the Authority of the Revealer, are
obstinately contradicted by some, upon a vain pretense that nothing is to be
believed that will not endure the rigorous inquisition of Reason, and be
comprehended by our narrow Minds: but Reason, tho darkened, sees the necessity
of a future Judgment. Nature and Scripture testify there is a God, and that he
has a Right, and Power, and Will to distribute the rewards of Virtue, and the
penalties of Vice to his Subjects. To deny this, is directly against the
implanted Notion of the Deity in the heart. There is a real difference between
Moral Good and Evil, not depending upon Opinion, but arising from the immutable
nature of things, and the eternal Law of God. Otherwise, considered in it self,
it were no more faulty to murder a Parent, than to kill a Fly; nor to rob a
Travellor, than to chase a Deer. But the Conscience of the most profligate
wretch would startle at such an Assertion. The disposition and admirable order
of the World in its various parts, and the vicissitude of Seasons, declare to
the obsering Mind, that a most wise, good, and powerful God governs and
preserves all things by his vigorous Influence. And can it be that the Divine
Providence, so visibly wise and good in regulating the course of Nature, should
be defective toward Man, the most noble part of the World? And can it be
extended to humane affairs, if there be no other than the present state,
wherein the Righteous are afflicted, and the Wicked prosper? where Sins of the
deepest stain and the lowdest cry are unpunished; and the sublime and truly
heroic Virtues are unrewarded? nay, where Vice receives the natural reward of
Virtue, Honor and Felicity, and Virtue the just wages of Vice, Disgrace and
Sufferings. It Is necessary therefore that there be a future state, and a
righteous distribution of rewards, according to the good and evil of Men's
Actions here.

The Heathens disguised this terrible Truth under the Fictions of the Infernal
Judges, Minos, and Rhadamanthus, and Eacus. And the Furies and Vultures, and
fiery Lake, which they thought tormented the Wicked in the next World,
Testimonium animae naturaliter Christiana. Tert.
discover what apprehensions they had of the desert of Sin, and the punishment
that certainly attended it. The Guilty would fain be freed from the terrors of
it, and strangle Conscience, that is bound over to give Testimony in the Day of
Judgment, that they may sin without scruples. But tho Fear be a troublesome and
involuntary Passion, they cannot totally extinguish the internal sense and
presages of future Judgment; but as the motions of Courage came upon Sampson at
times; so Conscience awakened by sharp Afflictions, by sudden Dangers, and the
approaches of Death, makes a sad deduction of past Sins, and sorecasts cruel
things. It cites the Offender before the enlightened Tribunal of Heaven,
scourges with remorse, and makes him feel even here the strokes of Hell. Though
the Sin be secret, and the guilty Person powerful, not within the cognizance or
reach of humane Justice, yet Conscience has a Rack within, and causes pain and
anxiety, by fearful expectations of Judgment to come.

And Divine Revelation is most express in declaring this great Truth. The Light
of Faith is more clear and certain from the infallible Word of God, than the
Light of Reason. Before the Flood, Enoch in the early Age of the World foretold
it; Jude 14, 15.
Behold, the Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints, to execute Judgment
upon all.

Solomon under the Law repeats this Doctrine, Eccles. 12.
that every secret thing shall be brought into Judgment, whether good or evil.
And God himself speaks in the sublimest style of Majesty, and swears by
himself, for our firmer belief, As I live, Isa. 45. 23.
says the Lord, every Knee shall bow to me, and every Tongue confess to God,
the glory of his Justice. From whence the Apostle infers, Romans 14. 10, 11.
so then every one of us shall give an account to God for himself. In the
Gospel we have distinctly described the Person of the Judge, Mat. 13. 42, 43.
and 23. 30, 31.
the glorious Attendants of his Coming, and the manner of his proceedings in
that Day. Now the many Predictions in Scripture so visibly accomplished in the
Person of Jesus Christ, An vere extribuit nobis omnia quae promisit, and de
solo die judicii nos fefellit?
and by him, give infallible assurance, that all his Promises and Threatenings
are equally certain, Aug.
and shall be fulfilled. As sure as our Savior is come in his humble state,
and has accomplished the Prophecies of his Sufferings, he will come in his
Glory to judge the World.

2. That the belief of eternal Judgment may be powerful in our hearts and
lives, it must be actuated by frequent and serious thoughts. Faith gives life
and efficacy to our notions of eternal things, and Consideration makes our
Faith effectual. As the natural Life is preserved by the activity of the vital
Principles, the Circulation of the Blood, the drawing of the Breath, the motion
of the Pulse; so the spiritual Life is maintained by the exercise of Grace. The
carnal Affections dare not appear before Reason and Conscience, when awakened
by the serious believing Consideration of eternal Judgment. The Evangelists
relate, that when our Savior was asleep in the Ship, a sudden Tempest arose
that was likely to over-set it in the Sea: but awakened by the cry of his
Disciples, Lord, save us, we perish; he presently rebuked the Wind, and a Calm
ensued. Thus whilst the habit of Faith is asleep in the Soul, there will be
great danger from the concurrent violence of Temptations and Corruptions; but
when it is awakened by lively and powerful thoughts, it does Miracles in
subduing the strongest Lusts. It Is monstrous and beyond all belief, did not
sensible experience make it evident, that notwithstanding the minds of Men are
convinced of the certainty of the Divine Judgment, and the Recompenses that
immediately follow, yet their Wills remain unconverted, and their Affections
cold and unactive in their preparations for it: That such numbers who have so
much Christianity as to believe that an irrevocable Doom will pass upon the
Wicked, and so little Christianity, that they cannot justly hope to escape from
it, yet are so careless of their Duty, nay joyful in their sinful courses, as
if Judgment were a dreadless thing. What is the cause of this prodigious
security? It Is the neglect of considering, that we must all appear before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, to receive according to the things done in the body,
whether good or evil.

Their senses and faculties are so employed abroad in the World, they have
neither leisure nor desire to think seriously of it. Their hearts are so
ravished with dreams of sensuality, and engaged in terrene affairs, that they
are very averse from exercising their minds upon such displeasing objects.

I have read of an excellent Preacher, that in a Sermon described the last
Judgment in all its Terrors, with such ardent expressions, and those animated
with such an affecting Voice, such an inflamed Countenance and Action, that his
Hearers broke forth into passionate Cries, as if the Judge himself had been
present to pass the final Sentence upon them. In the height of their Commotion
the Preacher bid them stop their tears and passions, for he had one thing more
to add, the most afflicting and astonishing Consideration of all the rest, That
within less than a quarter of an hour, the memory and regard of that which so
transported them would vanish, and their affections return to carnal objects in
their usual manner.

The neglect of Consideration makes even the Doctrine of Judgment to come to be
without efficacy. It Is necessary therefore that the belief of this be so firmly
seated in the Heart as its Throne, that it may coma^nd the thoughts to be very
attentive to it, and may have Regal power over our wills and affections, that
our lives may be ordered according to its Rules.

2. The Consideration of Eternal Judgment will vindicate the Proceedings of
Divine Providence, and the honor of God's governing this World, from the
imputations of Unrighteousness. God is provoked every day, yet spares the
Wicked, and heaps an abundance of Favors on them. His Patience and Goodness
they profanely abuse, and become more obdurate and inflexible. They are apt to
blaspheme the Excellency of his Nature in their Hearts, Psalm. 14. 1.
thinking that he is ignorant or careless, impotent or unjust. They implicitly
deny his Providence and Judgment, that he does not observe their Sins, and will
not require an account for them. Or else they interpret his Permission to be an
Approbation of their Sins. These things have thou done, Psalm. 50.
and I kept silence, thou thoughtest I was such an one as thy self. Thus the
Heathens transplanted the Vices of Earth to Heaven, and represented their Gods
to be sensual, jealous, furious as Men, and accordingly expected an easy
Absolution for their Sins. Or else the distance of Judgment to come so hardens
them, that they hear God's Thunder with less fear, than Boys do their Squibs
and Crackers. Because Sentence against an evil Work is not speedily executed,
Eccl. 8. 2.
therefore the hearts of the Sons of Men are fully set in them to do evil. But
how desperate is the madness of Sinners? God now seems to wink at their Sins,
Acts 17. 30.
but has appointed a day of Accounts. He suffers them to live in prosperity, 2
Pet. 2. 4.
but they are reserved to the day of Judgment to be punished, and possibly
sooner: for sometimes they are cut off by visible vengeance, to convince the
World that the supreme Judge does not bear the Sword in vain. But tho it is
delayed for a time, yet he declares, that their Sins are laid up in store with
him, Deuteronomy. 32. 34
and sealed up among his Treasures. To him belongs Vengeance and Recompense. He
is a mild Judge now, and his Clemency suspends their Punishment; but Amos 8. 7.
Justice will not forget it. He threatens the secure Sinner, Psalm. 50. 21.
I will reprove thee, and set thy Sins in order before thine eyes. How will the
scornful obstinate Sinner change complexion and tremble, when an Army of Sins
more terrible than so many Furies, shall be ranged in Battle, and with fiery
Darts wound his naked Soul? How will the stubborn Atheist, that pleases himself
with vain imaginations of the Eternity of the World, and the Mortality of the
Soul, be confounded when he feels the truth of Scripture-threatnings, to his
eternal sorrow? then all their Ralleries will be turned into Lamentations. It Is
not for Cum habeat in potestate vindictam mavult diu tenere patientiam.
want of power that God spares the Wicked, but because they are always in his
hands, and he can make them as miserable as they are sinful when he pleases.
Cyprian. de bon. Patient.
It Is not through the neglect of Justice, but for most wise and holy Reasons,
as shall appear in the last day, when a decisive irreversible Judgment shall be
propronounc'd, and immediately ininflicted upon them before the World. (...),
etc. Cum hi novissimi versus in Tragoedia Euripidis pronuntiati essent, totus
populus ad ejiciendum and Actorem and Carmen consurrexit uno impetu: donec
Euripides in medium prosiluit petens ut expectarent, viderentque quem admirator
auri exitum faceret. Senec. Epist. 115.
When an Actor at Athens spoke with Admiration of Riches, as the most valuable
Acquisition, and of the Felicity of Rich Men: the People were in an Uproar at
the immorality of the Speech, and were ready to chase him from the Stage. But
the Poet himself appeared, and desired them to stop their Fury till they saw
the Catastrophe, the wretched end of that sordid Miser. Thus we are apt to
accuse the ways of God when the Wicked flourish; but we should stop our
tumultuous thoughts, for their end will absolve Divine Providence from all
undue reflections upon the account of their temporal happiness.

And the sound belief of this will rectify all mistaking apprehensions, and
clear all perplexing appearances about the Sufferings of the Righteous here.

Indeed if we consider the holiest Men as they are Sinners, their Afflictions
are so far from blemishing the Justice of God, that they are the signs of his
Mercy: for all is a Favor on this side Hell to those that deserve it. David an
excellent Saint, acknowledges the righteousness of God's Judgments with respect
to himself. But when the Saints suffer for a righteous Cause, and, as the
Psalmist expresses it, Psalm. 44.
for thy sake are we killed all the day long, and are counted as Sheep for the
slaughter; there is not a visible correspondency between the Providence of God
in his governing the World, and the unchangeable Rules of Justice, that those
who do evil should suffer evil, and those who do well should be happy. As the
Apostle speaks to the persecuted Christians, 2 Thessalonians. 6* 7^
It is a righteous thing with God to recompense Tribulation to them that
trouble you, and to you who are troubled rest with us. Now there is a day
coming, when the Persecutors shall be punished, and the Saints be rewarded for
all their Sufferings, and the distribution of Recompenses shall be in the
presence of the World, for the glory of Divine Justice. For the distinction
that is made between Men at Death is private and particular, and not sufficient
for the honor of God's Government. But at the last Day all Men that have lived
in several successions of Ages shall appear, and Justice have a solemn Process
and Triumph before Angels and Men. As some excellent Piece that is to be
exposed to public view, is covered with a Traverse, to prevent the disturbance
in the working, and the discovery of the Work till brought to such perfection
as will surprise with wonder those that see it: So God is pleased to cover his
proceedings for a time, but in the last day there will be such a Revelation of
the righteous Judgment of God, Romans 2. 7.
that those who now doubt, or complain of his Justice, shall admire and adore
it.

3. The belief of this Doctrine as it vindicates Divine Providence, so it is
powerful to comfort the Saints under Persecutions for Righteousness sake;
especially when Innocence is wounded with slanderous Darts, and Calumnies are
joined with Cruelties, representing them as worthy of public hatred. It was
one of the Subtle Artifices of Julian the Apostate, to mingle the Images of
the Heathen Gods with those of the Emperors, that the doing reverence (as the
Christians were commanded) to all together, might imply a dereliction and
renouncing of their Religion, and their Simplicity seem Impiety: or if, jealous
of slipping from their profession, they refused to do it, they might seem to
deny the expressions of honor due to their Emperors, and be reputed to suffer
not as Christian Martyrs, but as Rebels. But the believing Consideration of
God's righteous Judgment will make them despise the Censures and Reproaches of
malicious Adversaries. With me, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4. 5.
it is a very small thing that I should be judged by Man's Judgment; he that
judges me is the Lord. The severest Censure was of no more weight compared
with the approbation of God, than the lightest Feather that flies in the Air,
put in the Scales against the Globe of the Earth. The assurance of a righteous
Cause, Inter Judicem justum, and conscientiam tuam, noli timere nisi causam
tuam. Aug.
and a righteous Judge, will preserve an inward and joyful tranquillity of Soul
in the midst of all the Storms of Reproach and Scandalous Imputations; like the
calmness of a Haven when the Sea is tempestuous without. And this will fortify
Believers to bear with an invincible courage all the violence that is offered
to them for their fidelity to God. All the wrongs and injuries they endure,
shall be redrest with infinite advantage. The extremest Evils to which they
are exposed for Christ, are like the Chariots of Fire sent from God, not to
consume but conduct Elias in triumph into the highest Heaven. God will give
them present Support, inward Consolations, and a future Crown. There is an
appointed day when oppressed Innocence shall obtain the noblest Victory* and
disgraced Godliness the most public and highest Honor. 1 Pet. 1. 7.
The Faith of sincere Christians shall be found to praise and glory. They may
suffer under the tyranny of Time, but shall reign in the Kingdom of Eternity.
The belief of this, when firmly radicated in the heart, is so powerful as to
make them glory in the sharpest Tribulations, and joyfully triumph over Satan,
with his perverted malignant World. Cantando rumpitur Anguis. But alas, the
Sin, and a great part of the trouble of the Saints, arises from their weakness
of Faith, and not patient waiting for the Day of the Lord. When heavy
Persecutions and great Distresses are continued by the restless Adversaries,
they are apt through impatience and instability of mind, to be full of
sorrowful Complaints that God delays their particular Deliverance. And as
sometimes the Clock out-runs the motion of the Sun, that is the true measure of
Time; so their hasty desires prevent the eternal Counsel of his Will, that has
determined the period of the Miseries of his People, and of the Prosperity of
the Wicked in the fittest time. And that he suspends his glorious Coming to
judge the World in Righteousness, discourageth weaker Christians, and makes them
ready to faint in the day of Adversity. 2 Pet. 3. 9.
But the Lord is not slack in performing his Promise, as Men count slackness.
There is not the least reason to question his Fidelity and Power, or to suspect
his Love and Remembrance of his People. And as the Stars of Heaven enlighten
the Earth, but the Candles on Earth cannot enlighten the Heavens: so the Wisdom
of God's Counsel and Providence should direct us patiently to expect his
appointed time, but our glimmering reason cannot direct him.

4. The serious belief of future Judgment is the most effectual restraint from
secret Sins. Men are apt to encourage themselves in evil upon the account of
secrecy: it is the usual tinder of Temptations. If solitude and silence, if the
darkness of the night, or any disguises may conceal their Wickedness from
humane Eyes, they are bold and secure as to God. The Psalmist declares what is
the inward principle that acts them, what is the language of their hearts:
Psalm. 94. 5. 6.
All the workers of Iniquity boast themselves, they say, The Lord shall not
see, neither shall the God of Jacob regard it. But O the brutish folly of Men,
to think, that because they do not see God, that he does not see them. As if
one should shut his Eyes in the face of the Sun, and do some foul abominable
thing, thinking himself to be unseen, because he sees no person. How vain is
the impure diligence of the Adulterer, the crafty diligence of the Deceiver,
the sollicitous diligence of other Sinners to hide things from the Judge of
all? Shall not God search it out, for he knows the very secrets of the heart?
What a confounding discovery will be made of secret Wickedness at the last day?
Here obscurity is the mask of Shame that conceals it from the World. Or if only
Children and Fools that are not capable to judge of the indecency and turpitude
of Actions, be Spectators, Men are not touched with shame for foul things. But
then their Wickedness shall be displayed before God, the holy Angels and
Saints. The actual belief of this would deprive Satan of one of his greatest
Advantages, and be a blessed Preservative from many Sins that allure the
consent by the temptation of secrecy. A considering Christian will reject them
with indignation, saying with Joseph, How can I do this great Wickedness, and
sin against God? The Sins undiscovered and unpunished by temporal Tribunals,
shall then receive a just recompense.

5. The remembrance of that strict Judgment, is the most natural and powerful
remedy against sensual Temptations that so easily insinuate and engage the
hearts of Men. S. Peter reckoning up the Heathen Sins, 1 Pet. 4. 3, 4.
Lasciviousness, Lusts, excess of Wine, Revellings, and abominable Idolatries,
tells the Christians, that the Gentiles thought it strange that they did not
run with them to the same excess of riot* As the Disciples when our Savior
walked upon the Waters, thought he had been a Spirit, judging that no real Body
could tread on them without sinking: thus Men are apt to think it impossible to
restrain their carnal appetites when allured by pleasing objects. But the
belief of the Terrors of the Lord, will damp the sensual affections when most
strongly inclined to forbidden things, and extinguish delight in Sin: for
delight and fear are inconsistent. Therefore the wise Preacher gives this
Counsel, Rejoice O young Man in thy youth, Eccles. 11.
and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of
thy heart, and sight of thine eyes: but know thou for all these things God will
bring thee to Judgment. This will change the apprehensions of the mind, and
alter the taste of the appetite, and make the most enticing and irresistible
Lusts, the objects of our greatest detestation.

6. The consideration that the Son of God, clothed with our nature, shall judge
the World, affords strong Consolation to his People, and is a motive of great
terror to the Wicked. How comfortable is it to his People that he who loved
them above his Life, and was their Redeemer on the Cross, shall be their Judge on
the Throne? He is the same Jesus Christ, yesterday, to day, and for ever; the
same indulgent Savior, in the exaltation of his Glory, as when under
sufferings, reproach and shame. He is described in that glorious Appearance, by
the conjunct Titles of his Majesty and Power, Tit. 12. 13.
The Great god, and of his Compassion and Mercy, Our Savior, to signify his
Ability and Affection to make them happy. When he comes with a heavenly Train
of Angels to Judgment, he will be as tender of his Servants, as when he
suffered for them in his humble state. He that paid their Debt, and sealed
their Pardon with his own Blood, will certainly publish the Acquittance. How is
it possible he should condemn those for whom he died, and who appear with the
impressions of his reconciling Blood upon them? How reviving is it that Christ,
whose Glory was the end and perfection of their Lives, Phil. 1.
shall dispose their states for ever? that he, who esteems every act of their
Charity and Kindness done to his Servants as done to himself, shall dispense
the blessed Reward? Then the King will say to them placed on his right hand,
Come, Mat. 25.
ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the World. O the transports of joy to hear those words from his
Life-breathing Lips! The Prophet breaks forth in an Extacy, How beautiful are
the feet of the Messengers of Peace, those that bring gladtidings of Salvation?
but how much more beautiful is the face of the Author of our Peace and
Salvation? O how full of Serenity, and Clemency, and Glory! The expectation of
this makes them languish with impatience for his Coming. Tho the Preparations
of that Day are so dreadful, when the Sun shall be darkened, Acts 2.
and the Moon turned into Blood, and the Stars fall like leaves in Autumn, yet
it is styled a Day of Refreshment to the Saints. But how dreadful will his
Coming in Majesty to Judgment be to the Wicked! Videtis vulnera quae
inflixistis, agnoscitis latus quod pupugistis, quoniam and per vos, et propter
vos apertum est, nec intrare voluistis.
They shall see him whom they have pierced, and with bitter lamentation
remember the indignities offered to him. What Excuses can they alledg, why they
did not believe and obey the Gospel? Our Savior revealed high Mysteries, but
confirmed them with great Miracles. Aug.
He required strict Holiness, but offered divine Grace to enable Men to do his
Will. He poured forth his Spirit upon them, but their hearts were as hard as
the Rocks, and as barren as the Sands. Then he will reproach them for their
undervaluing neglect of the great Salvation, so dearly purchased, and so freely
and earnestly offered to them: for their obstinacy, that the Purple streams
that flowed from his Crucified Body, that all the Sorrows and Agonies of his
Soul were not effectual Perswasives to make them forsake their Sins: for their
preferring the Bramble to reign over them, Satan the Destroyer of Souls, and
ungrateful rejecting the true Vine, the blessed Savior, who by so many
miraculous mercies solicited their love and deserved their service; this will
make the sentence as just as terrible, and the more terrible because just. This
will exasperate the anguish, that the Gospel shall be a savor of Death to
them; and the blessed Redeemer pronounce them cursed, and dispatch them to
everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels for ever. The Judgment
of the Redeemer will be more heavy than that of the Creator. For all the riches
of his goodness which they despised, shall be the measure of their guilt and
woes. All the means of Grace used for their conversion, but frustrated by their
perverseness, shall rise up in Judgment against them. Justice will revenge the
abuse of Mercy. Do they hope to soften the Judge by Submissions and
Deprecations? alas, he will be inflexible to all their Prayers and Tears. The
Lamb will be then a Lion armed with terrors for their destruction. Or can they
appeal to an higher Court to mitigate or reverse the Sentence? No, his
Authority is supreme, and confirmed by the immutable Oath of God. Or, Romans 14.
do they think to resist the execution of the sentence? Desperate Folly! The
Angels, notwithstanding their numbers and strength, could not for a moment
escape his revenging hand. The whole World of Sinners is of no more force
against his Wrath, than the light dust against a whirlwind, or dry Stubble
against devouring Fire. Or do they think by a stubborn Spirit to endure it?
Self-deceiving Wretches! If the correction of his Children here, tho allayed,
and for their amendment, make their beauty and strength consume away as a moth,
how insupportable will the Vengeance be on his obstinate Enemies? Who knows the
power of his Anger? who can found the depths of his displeasure?

7. The Consideration of eternal Judgment should be a powerful Incentive to
prepare our selves for it. It Is the Inference the Apostle makes from the
certainty of our appearing before the righteous Judge, 2 Cor. 5. 9.
Wherefore we labor that whether present, or absent, in this or the next life,
we may be accepted of him. 2 Cor. 5. 9.
This was his great Design, his chief Care, his Duty and his Glory: Never did
any person more ardently aspire, and ambitiously endeavor for the obtaining a
Kingdom, than he did to secure his own Acceptance with the Lord. In order to
this I will lay down the Rules of our Acceptance in that Day, and conclude the
Argument.

1. Unfeigned Faith in the Lord Jesus is absolutely necessary, that we may be
accepted. This is such a belief of his all sufficient Merits, and his merciful
inclination to save us, that the guilty and self-condemned Sinner entirely
consents to the terms of the Gospel, as well as to the privileges of it, with
a reliance upon his Merits, and a resolution to obey his Precepts. He is a
Priest on a Throne, a Prince, and a Savior, and so must be acknowledged and
received. Upon this condition his Righteousness is freely imputed to us for our
Justification unto Life, without which we must perish in our Sins. For,

1. The best Saints are guilty and deeply obnoxious to the Law, and the
Judgment of God is invariably according to Truth; so that appearing in their
Sins, they will be cast for ever. God's Tribunal, like that of the severe Roman
Judge, is Reorum Scopulus, a Rock that dashes in pieces all the Guilty that come
to it. Therefore the Psalmist so earnestly deprecates, Enter not into Judgment
with thy Servant, O Lord; for in thy sight shall no Man living be justified.
And the Aposte, though a transcendent Saint, devests himself of his own
righteousness, that he may be entirely covered with the righteousness of
Christ, and renounces all things, that he may be found in him as his Surety in
that Day of Accounts, and obtain Pardon by virtue of his Satisfaction for Sin.
We cannot perfectly obey the Commands, nor appease the Displeasure of God: but
the expiatory Sacrifice of Christ propitiats the Divine Justice. This alone can
make us stand in Judgment before the fiery Law, and the fiery Tribunal, and the
Judge who is a consuming Fire, to all the Guilty that appear in their Sins
before him. The Blood of the Mediator has sprinkled the Throne of God in
Heaven, and our Consciences being sprinkled with it by a purifying Faith, we
may appear before God the Judge of all with an humble confidence, and enter into
the Holy of Holies, the Celestial Sanctuary with joy.

2. Not only the pardon of our Sins, but the acceptance and rewarding of our
services with eternal Glory is upon the account of our Savior's complete
Righteousness. There are defilements in the persons, and defects in the works
of the Saints. Their most holy and fervent Prayers are perfumed by the Incence
of his Intercession, Rev. 8. 3.
and so become grateful to God. Our best Virtues are mixed and shadowed with
imperfections; but in him all Graces were conspicuous in their consummate
degrees. Our Obedience, supposing it perfect, is of no desert: When we have
done all, we are unprofitable Servants: but his Obedience was infinitely
meritorious by the union of the Deity with his humane Nature, and is the
foundation of the excellent Reward. Not that his Merits derive a value to our
Works to make them worthy of eternal Glory: as some noble Mineral infused into
Water, that is in it self without taste or efficacy, gives it a medicinal
tincture and virtue; for this is impossible, since the infinite Dignity of his
Person, and his most perfect habitual and actual Holiness, that are the
fountains and reasons of his Merits, are incommunicable to our persons and
works. For this would render us equal to our Savior, and our works to be
divine as his. But the active and passive Righteousness of Christ is so
satisfactory and meritorious, that God is pleased graciously to reward with the
Crown of Life the mean services of those who are by a lively and purifying
Faith united to him.

2. Sincere Obedience, that is, an uniform and entire respect to all the
Commands of God, will alone be accepted in that day: for his Authority runs
through all, and binds them on the Conscience. David had this Testimony from
God himself, that he was a Man after his own heart, that fulfilled all his
Will. And St. John refers the decision of our state to this, If our hearts
condemn us of any allowed Sin of omission or commission, 1 John 3. 20, 21.
much more God will, who is greater than our hearts, and knows all things. But
if the illuminated tender Conscience condemns us not of insincerity, we have
confidence toward God, that he will spare and accept us notwithstanding our
frailties, and give free and safe access into his presence. The lives of many
are checkered with a stran^ disparity, they are restrain (...) some Sins of
apparent odiousness, but indulgent to others; they are strict in some duties,
but loose and slack in others, as if they hoped by way of commutation to be
accepted of God; to expiate their Delinquencies in one kind by supererrogating
in another. Some are painted Pharisees in the duties of the first Table, very
exact in the formalities of outward Devotions, but gross Publicans in the
duties of the second: careless of Justice and Equity, and Charity to Men:
Others are in appearance strictly moral in the discharge of their duties to
Men, and negligent of their obligations to God. But partial obedience can never
endure the trial of Conscience, much less of God. For what is the weak light of
our minds, to the pure eyes of his Glory? It will make us liable to inward
rebuke now, and to open confusion at the last. St. Paul's rejoicing was from
the Testimony of his Conscience, 2 Cor. 1. 12.
that in simplicity and godly sincerity he had his conversation in the World:
and, as he expresses it in another place, it was his daily exercise to have a
Conscience void of offense toward God, and toward Men. Tho our conquest of
Sin be not complete, yet our resolution and endeavors must be to mortify it in
every kind. Though our obedience has not the perfection of degrees, we must be
equally regarding the Divine Law. If there be any secret-favoured Sin either of
omission or commission, it will render our Petitions unacceptable at the Throne
of Grace, and our Persons at the Throne of Judgment; If I regard Iniquity in my
heart, the Lord will not hear my Prayer. The Law requires the performance of
our Duty without abatement, or denounces the penalty without allay or
mitigation: the Gospel has not relaxed the strictness of the Law as it is the
Rule of Life, but as it was the condition of obtaining Life. Sincere obedience
is accepted by that gracious Covenant, where the Legal Perfection is wanting:
but that is indispensibly required of all. I may illustrate this by a passage
of Alexander the Great, who being desirous to learn Geometry, applied himself
to a skilful Instructor in it. But his warlike disposition made him more
capable to conquer than to measure the Earth, so that tired with the first
Propositions, he desired his Master to make the Scheme more clear and plain,
and easy to him: ^ui praecep^or: ista inquit omnibus eadem sunt, aeque
difficilia. Senec. Epist. 91.
To whom the Master replied, that the Theorems of that Science were equally
difficult to all and required the same attention of mind to understand them.
Thus the Gospel of Mercy requires of all sincere Sanctification, and serious
endeavors to perfect Holiness in the Fear of God, and without this none shall
be exempted from Condemnation.

To the sincerity of Obedience, I shall add a more restrained Notion of it as
respecting Religion. The duties of Piety consist of an outward and inward part;
and the one without the other is but as a Carcass without a quickening Soul. Now
there will be an exquisit Anatomy of the Heart in that Judgment, a discovery of
all the Principles and Motives by which Men were acted, and then he that is a
Saint inwardly, in the Spirit, who with pure aims and holy affections has
served God, shall have praise of him. And those who have used God to enjoy the
World, that have assumed pretenses of Piety for secular ends, shall be
reproved. This will be a cause of wonder in that day, that many who are highly
esteemed by Men as excellent Saints, shall be an abomination to God. That in
the broad way to Hell thousands go thither is sad beyond expression, but not
strange at all: but that in the path of Heaven any should descend to Hell, is
astonishing. That those who live without God in the World, in the profane
neglect of his Worship, in a dissolute disorderly course, should fall under
Condemnation, is believed of all: but that those who have appeared zealous in
Religion shall be at last rejected, is contrary to universal expectation. And
not only the gross Hypocrite that deceives others, but he that deceives himself
by the external practice of holy Duties without correspondent lively
Affections; that prays with that coldness as if he had no desire to be heard,
and hears with that carelessness as if he had no desire to be sanctified by the
Word, and is conversant in other parts of divine service in that slight manner,
as if he had no design to be saved, shall by a convincing upbraiding Light see
his Wickedness in dishonouring that God whom he pretended to worship, and
neglecting his Soul. When the Upright as pure Gold shall be more radiant by the
Fire, the Insincere like reprobate Silver shall not endure that severe trial.

3. The frequent discussion of Conscience, and reviewing our ways, is necessary
in order to our comfortable appearing before our Judge. This is a duty of
constant revolution: for while we are in flesh, the best Saints,
notwithstanding all their vigilance and diligence, are overtaken by surprisal,
and sometimes overborn by strong temptations; and it is more necessary to beg
for daily pardon, than for our daily bread. Under the Law if any one had by
touching a dead Body contracted Uncleanness, he was to wash his Clothes in the
evening, and not to lie down in his Uncleanness. This was typical of our duty,
that we should wash away our sinful defilements every day in the purifying
Fountain of Christ's Blood, that is set open for Sin and for Uncleanness. And
the method of the Gospel to obtain the grant of Pardon, and our comfortable
sense, and the blessed effects of it is this, there must be a mournful sight,
and serious acknowledgment of our daily sins, and a judging our selves by the
domestical tribunal in our breasts as worthy of Condemnation: for tho we cannot
satisfy Divine Justice for the least Sin, we must glorify it: and with
humility and fervency desire that God would graciously forgive our renewed
Sins, with unfeigned Resolutions and Care against them for the future. Thus we
are to sue out our Pardon for Sins committed every day. And whereas many Errors
in regard of our frailty, and their fineness, do slip from us, we should with
contrite Spirits implore the Divine Majesty to cleanse us from our secret Sins,
Psalm. 19. 12.
such as through ignorance or inadvertancy escape from our observation. If we
are obliged to be reconciled to an offended or offending Brother before the
night, and the Sun must not go down upon our wrath, much more to be reconciled
to an offended God, that his displeasure may be atoned. The morning and evening
Sacrifice was a Figure of the constant use of Christ's Merits and Mediation for
us; The secure neglect of renewing our Repentance for our renewed Sins,
deprives us of the comforts of the Covenant, and will make the thoughts of
Judgment as heavy as Mountains upon the Conscience, when it is awakened out of
its slumber. But when the Soul's Accounts are kept clear with Heaven every day,
O what a blessed Rest does the penitent Believer enjoy in the Favor of God! O
the divine calm of Conscience when our Debts are cancelled in the Book of God's
Remembrance! If we should be unexpectedly summoned to appear before the Judge of
all, the sight of our Sins will rather excite thankful affections, and joyful
praises of God for his Mercy, that he has pardoned them; than fearful
despairing thoughts of his Mercy, that he will not pardon them.

And as this considering our ways leads to Repentance, and is a remedy for past
Sins, so it is a powerful Preservative from Sins afterward. For as in War the
greatest care is to fortify the weakest part of a besieged Town, and make it
impregnable; so a Christian by the experience of his infirmity and danger, will
be more wise and wary, more circumspect and resolved against those Sins whereby
he has often been foiled, to prevent the daily incursion, and sudden surreption
by them. And according to the degrees of our Innocence, we have confidence of
Acceptance with God in Judgment.

4. Let us improve with a wise and singular diligence the talents committed to
our trust: for in that day we shall be responsible for all that we have
received. All the Blessings we possess, whether natural, our Life, our
Faculties, our Endowments, our Health and Strength; or Civil, Honor and
Dignity, Riches and Reputation; or Spiritual, the Gospel in its light and
power, the graces and assistance of the Holy Ghost, as they are gifts from
God's Love, so they are talents to be employed for his Glory. We are Stewards,
not Proprietaries: for the Supreme Lord does not relinquish his right in our
Blessings, that we may dispose of them at our own pleasure, but has prescribed
Rules for our using them in order to his Glory, our own Good, and the Benefit
of others. And it is sad to consider that usually those who enjoy the greatest
gifts render the least acknowledgments, and the most abundant in Favors are
most barren in Thankfulness. Time, that unvaluable treasure, that is due to God
and the Soul, the price of which arises from the work of Salvation to be done
in it, how is it squandered away? Conscience would blush at the serious
reflection that every day so much is spent in the business of the World, or
Pleasures, and so little redeemed for Communion with the holy God: that as in
the Prophetic Dream the lean Kine devoured the fat, so unconcerning vanities
take up that time that should be employed for our last and blessed End. While
time is miserably wasted, the Soul lies a bleeding to everlasting Death. More
particularly, we shall be accountable for all the days of the Son of Man that
we have seen, all the special seasons of Grace: these we should improve for our
Eternal Advantage, to prepare us for the Divine Presence above. But alas, the
Lord's Day that is consecrated for the immediate Service of God, and should be
entirely spent in it, and in things that have a necessary subordination to it,
yet neither the enforcement of Duty, nor incitations of Love prevail upon the
most, conscienciously to employ it in spiritual affairs. If they afford their
presence at the Public Worship it is thought enough, and, as if the rest of the
Day was unsanctified time, they waste it in either Complemental Visits, or
Secular Business, in Recreations, or things impertinent to their Salvation.

Riches are an excellent Instrument of doing good: Gold is the most precious
and extensive Metal, and by a mavelous Art an Ounce may be beaten out into
some hundred Leaves: but it is a more happy Art by giving it, to enrich our own
Souls, and supply the Necessities of many others. But great Estates are often
used to foment Men's vicious guilty affections, Pride, and Sensuality; and it is
called Nullis vitiis desunt pretiosa nomina. Plin. lib. 73.
Greatness and Magnificence to waste them in sumptuous Vanities. I instance in
these Talents, because they are usually abused to the dishonor of the Donor.
If the slothful Servant that hid his single Talent in a Napkin, and returned it
without advantage to his Lord, was cast into outer darkness, where there is
weeping and gnashing of teeth, a fearful Image of what will befall all
unprofitable persons, how severe will their Accounts be who lavish out their
numerous Talents to gratify their carnal Appetites, and betray the Blessings of
God to his enemy the Devil? Only the wise and good Servant that with prudent
Contrivance and zealous Endeavors improves his Talents, shall from the
gracious Lord, in whom are all attractives and remuneratives of our service,
receive an excellent Reward.

5. Another Rule of our Acceptance at the last Day is, That we must with
Courage and Zeal maintain in our rank and places the Cause of Christ. For thus
he declares expressly, Matthew. 10. 33, 34.
Whosoever shall confess me before Men, him also will I confess before my
Father which is in Heaven. But whosoever shall deny me before Men, him also
will I deny before my Father which is in Heaven When the truth, purity, and
power of Religion, in Doctrine, Worship and Practice, is discountenanced and
overborn, our Savior commands, and will reward our undiscouraged visible
Constancy in it. He will not only reign in our hearts, Romans 10.
but be honored with our lips, and in our conversations. We usurp the title of
Christians unless we adhere to our Duty in despite of all opposition. The
temptations that usually withdraw Men from confessing and glorifying Christ,
are such as work upon the passions of Fear and Shame. And the consisideration
of the last Judgment will fortify us against both.

1. Sometimes Religion exposes the Professors of it to the loss of all temporal
enjoyments, and of Life it self. And when the Honor of our Savior requires
such a Service of us, when that Confirmation is necessary to recommend Divine
Truth to the belief and affections of others, when our cheerful and courageous
Example in suffering would animate those that are fearful to constancy of
Confession, then from Cowardice to withdraw our Testimony, is to betray him
again. When our Duty is attended with extreme Dangers, then the sincerity and
perfection of our Love to Christ is brought to the strictest trial. As true
Carbuncles are discovered in the night, for the darkness redoubles their
splendour: so the fidelity of Christians is evident in Persecutions that inflame
and excite their Zeal to magnify the Name of Christ unto the Judgment of the
World. There is no Fear in Love, 1 John 4. 18.
but perfect Love casts out Fear. But Fearfulness hinders the expressing acts
of Love to Christ, and betrays to Apostasy. For as every Passion is a
Perturbation, so especially Carnal Fear that blinds and disturbs the mind, and
hinders the serious consideration of the reasons of our Duty, and those motives
to persevere in it, that are the fountains of our strength. From hence the
timorous are often treacherous, and Faith lies buried under the cold pale Ashes
of Fear. Now the irregularity of this Passion is best cured by directing it to
the most powerful Object. As the Rod of Moses swallowed up the Rods of the
Magicians, so a stronger Fear will subdue that which is in a weaker degree. Our
Savior therefore threatens those that for the fear of Men ( who can but kill
the Body) dare not own and defend his Truth and Cause, that he will renounce
them before his Father in the great Day, the immediate consequence of which
will be the destruction of Body and Soul in Hell. Matthew. 10. 31, 32, 33.
If Earthly Potentates had a Jurisdiction over Heaven, if Men were to be tried
by their Laws at the last Day, if their Power extended to Eternity, they might
exact unlimited Obedience to their Wills, but Conscience is a more desirable
Friend and terrible Enemy than Caesar, and all temporal Tribunals are
subordinate and accountable to the Supreme and Eternal: there is one Lawgiver
and Judge, Jam. 2.
who is able to save, and to destroy for ever. It is the worst Perdition to
secure our selves by the neglect of our Duty, when we ought to perish for the
Glory of our Savior. Mark 8. 35.
He that saves his Life shall lose it.

2. Shame wounds deeper the Breasts of some than Violence. Zedekiah would
rather expose his Kingdom and Life to the fury of the Chaldean Armies, Jer. 38.
19.
than be himself exposed as an object of derision by surrendering it. And Satan
who understands the temper of Men's spirits, suits his temptations accordingly.
The Purity and Holiness of Religion, expressed in the actions of the Saints, is
by the scurrilous Reslections and bitter Sarcasms of profane Persons made
contemptible. This is as foolish and malicious, as if a slave should reproach
the Son of a King that he was like his Father in his Countenance and actions;
for by how much the resemblance of God's Holiness appears with more evidence
and eminence in their lives, their divine relation is more certainly and justly
to be acknowledged. Yet how many are ashamed of this Glory? And Zeal to
vindicate the Honor of Religion is traduced and vilified either as the effect
of designing Faction, or of the indiscretion and rashness of a weak Judgment
and strong Passions. In every Age the faithful Servants of God are by scornful
titles despised: 1 Cor. 4. 17.
We are accounted, says the Apostle, the offscouring of the World. But a
generous Christian looks upon disgrace for the sake of Christ as his honor.
The Apostles rejoiced that they were accounted worthy to suffer shame for his
Name. It Is said of the Baptist, he was not that Light, Acts 5. 41.
but came to bear witness to that Light: intimating as if that were the next
degree of dignity to it. And our Savior, speaking of the Proofs of his divine
Mission, reckons up the Witnesses of such dignity, that it is not possible for
sacred Ambition to aspire to higher Honor than to be in Conjunction with them:
they are John the Baptist, John 5. 33, 36, 37, 39.
his Miracles, his Father, and the Scriptures.

Let us appeal then from the light depraved Fancies of carnal Men, to the wise
and faithful Judgment, and Authority of the Son of God. He will at the last Day
in the presence of his Father and all the Court of Heaven, give an incomparable
Crown to all that have despised Shame for his sake. But those vile Spirits,
whose Courage of Straw is quelled by vain opinion, and the reproaches of Fools,
and have deserted the Cause of Christ, shall then be clothed with Confusion;
for this we are assured by our Judge, that whosoever shall be ashamed of me and
my words, Mark 8. 38.
in this adulterous and sinful generation, of him also shall the Son of Man be
ashamed when he comes in the glory of his Father, with the holy Angels. If the
unnatural Brothers were astonished when the Governor of Egypt told them, I am
Joseph whom ye sold, how much more will false Christians, when the Lord of
Glory shall tell them, I am Jesus whom for base shame ye denied? How will it
confound those abject Wretches to be a spectacle of abhorrence and scorn before
that Universal Glorious Confluence? They would choose rather to be covered under
the ruins of the World. If we value and desire the approbation of the King of
Angels, if we fear a final rejection from him, to obtain the one, and avoid the
other, we must entirely adhere to his Interest, without any respect to the eyes
and esteem of the perverse deceived World.

6. A cordial beneficent Love to the Saints, is a requisite qualification of our
Acceptance in the Day of Judgment. Then shall the King say to them on his right
hand, Matthew. 25. 34, 35, 36.
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the World. For I was an hungry, and ye gave me meat; I was
thirsty, and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me in; naked, and
ye clothed me; I was sick, and ye visited me; I was in Prison, and ye came unto
me. The union and endearments betwixt Christ and his People are mutual and
reflexive; as they are extremely tender of his Glory, so he is concerned in all
that is done to them. And tho the perfection of Love consists more in the
affection of the heart than in outward offices, yet our Savior most
congruously produces in Judgment the conspicuous effects of Love to them, the
supplying their wants, allaying their sorrows, owning them when obscured and
deprest by afflictions, and injuriously treated by others. This love of service
that is directed and exercised toward the Saints, for the Image of God shining
in them, because they are the Children of God, and Members of Christ, and
therefore extended to all in whom the reason of that Love appears, shall be
gloriously rewarded: For he interprets what is done upon his Account to those
who are his own by so many dear titles, as done to himself. And what is more
becoming his excellent Goodness than to reward his works of Mercy with saving
Mercy? But those who when Christ presents himself to them in his poor
distressed Members, and solicits their assistance, to protect them from
injuries, to refresh their sorrows, to support them in their exigencies, those
that have ability but want affection to do them good, and incompassionately
neglect the suffering Saints, shall be sentenced to be tormented with the
Apostate Angels for ever. What indignity is it to the Son of God, that those
for whom he shed his Divine Blood, should be in less value and regard with
many, than the Dogs and Horses maintained for their pleasure? And if those on
the left hand shall be condemned to eternal Fire, for the coldness of their
Love, how terrible will the Judgment bet of those that from the heat of their
enmity outragiously persecute the Servants of Christ for his sake, in their
Persons, Estates, Reputations, that with a worse than barbarous inhumanity seek
their ruin? Is there any Sin of a more mortal guilt? The infernal Furnace is
sevenfold heated for the punishing such wickedness.

To conclude this Argument, let us observe the Command of our Savior, To watch
and pray always, that we may be counted worthy to stand before the Son of Man.
These are Duties of universal influence into our Lives, the one prevents
carelessness, the other vain confidence in our selves, and the consideration of
Judgment to come, is the greatest motive to them, and the first principle of
Holiness. This should work more powerfully in us, considering the Day of Death
is equivalent to the Day of Judgment to every person; for then a particular
Sentence decisive and irrevocable passes, that shall be published at the last
Day. Methinks the terrors of the Lord should engage our Souls and Senses to a
continual preparation for his Coming. It Is represented so as to affect the Eye,
and keep it vigilant: Jude 15.
Behold, the Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints, to execute Judgment
upon all. Behold, he comes in the Clouds, Rev. 1. 9.
and every Eye shall see him. And to call the Ear, and make it attentive; The
Lord himself shall descend from Heaven, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16.
with the voice of the Archangel, and with the Trump of God. How circumspect
should we be in all our ways, since every action shall be reviewed by our Judge.
St. Peter strongly infers from the dissolution of the World, as a most cogent
Argument, that we should be exactly and universally holy: seeing then all these
things shall be dissolved, 2 Pet. 3. 11, 12.
what manner of persons ought we to be in all holy Conversation and Godliness?
But the consideration of the eternal Judgment immediately succeeding the
destruction of the World, O how powerful should it be upon Conscience and the
Affections to regulate the whole course of our Lives with a final respect to
God's Tribunal.

In short, That which we read of the success of the Apostle's preaching to the
Athenians upon the present subject, the Immortality of the Soul, comprised in
the Resurrection of the Body and the future Judgment, is the same in all times
and places: And when they heard of the Resurrection of the Dead, Act. 17. 32,
34.
some mocked; and others said, We will hear thee again of this matter; and
others believed. There are three differences of the Hearers of this Doctrine of
so great importance: some deride it as an extravagant fancy: some believe it,
and yield up themselves entirely in obedience to it: others do not absolutely
reject it, as the first, nor accept it, as the second, but have a Conjecture,
or slight superficial Opinion of it, or a speculative Assent as to a history of
things that do not concern them, and defer the serious consideration and
applying of it to themselves. And of this third sort (O Grief!) are the most of
those who are Christians in name. They delay till Death, the solemn reflecting
upon the final Judgment, and the inevitable Consequence of it, a blessed or
miserable estate for ever. And whereas the Apostle, who had infallible
assurance of God's Love, did with an holy severity and self-denial abstain from
all Carnal Complacencies that might hazard the never-fading Crown; 1 Cor. 9. 27.
I keep under my Body, and bring it into subjection, lest by any means when I
have preached to others, I should be a Castaway. Vae miseris nobis qui de
electione nostra nullam aedhuc Dei vocem cognovimus, et jam in otio quasi de
securitate torpemus. Greg. lib. 29. Moral.
Yet the most live and die in a secure state, without preparation to appear
before the Presence of his Glory.

FINIS.
Some Books printed for Brabazon Aylmer in Cornhill.
THe Harmony of the Divine Attributes, in the Contrivance and Accomplishment of
Man's Redemption by the Lord Jesus Christ. Or, Discourses, wherein is showed,
how the Wisdom, Mercy, Justice, Holiness, Power, and Truth of God are glorified
in that Great and Blessed Work. By William Bates, D. D. in Quarto.

Considerations of the Existence of God, And of the Immortality of the Soul,
with the Recompenses of the Future state. To which is now added, The Divinity
of the Christian Religion, proved by the evidence of Reason, and Divine
Revelation: for the Cure of Infidelity the Hectic Evil of the Times. By
William Bates, D. D. in Octavo.

The Sovereign and final Happiness of Man, with the effectual means to obtain
it. Also the Joys of Heaven, and Torments of Hell are discoursed of. By William
Bates, D. D. in Octavo.

Several Sermons upon Death, and Eternal Judgment. By William Bates, D. D. in
Octavo.

A Funeral Sermon, preached upon the Death of the Reverend and Excellent
Divine, Dr. Thomas Manton, who deceased October 18. 1677. By William Bates, D.
D. To which is now added, the last Public Sermon Dr. Manton preached. in
Octavo.

One hundred and ninety Sermons on the whole 119th Psalm, By the late Reverend
and Learned Divine, Thomas Manton, D. D. in Folio.

Twenty select Sermons upon choice Subjects, preached by Thomas Manton, D. D.
in Quarto.

Eighteen Sermons on the 2d Chapter of the 2d Epistle to the Thessalonians,
containing the Description, Rise, Growth, and Fall of Antichrist. With diverse
Cautions and Arguments to establish Christians against the Apostasy of the
Chnrch of Rome. By Tho. Manton, D. D. in Octavo.

The Gospel-Method of God's saving Sinners by Jesus Christ: practically
explained in XII Propositions. Or, a Discourse of the New Covenant. By the late
Learned Dr. Abraham Clifford. To which is prefixed a Preface, by Dr. Manton,
and Mr. Richard Baxter. in Octavo.


