THE POETS Knavery Discovered, in all their lying PAMPHLETS:

Wittily and very Ingeniously Composed, laying open the Names of every lying
Lybel that was Printed last year, and the Authors who made them, being above
three Hundred Lies.

Showing how impudently the Poets have not only presumed to make extreme and
incredible Lies, but dare also feign false Orders and Proceedings from the
Parliament, with many fictitious Speeches.

Well worth the Reading and knowing of every one, that they may learn how to
distinguish betwixt the Lies, and real Books.

Written by J. B.

LONDON, Printed for T. H.

An Order from the House of Commons for the suppressing of Pamphlets.
THe Parliament having maturely considered of the manifold lies, and
ementitious Pamphlets, that have been published to the great ignominy and
dishonor of the State, did appoint a select Committee for the restraint of all
Libells: And ordered, that all lying Pamphlets should be suppressed, and
nothing Printed without License.

The temporizing Poets have broached such impudent scurrility, and ementitious
Pamphlets out of the inexhaust mintage of their roving fancies, that the whole
City is embroydred with nothing but incredible lies; that jars so much in the
wearied ears of the World, that the scarce-breathing mandrake could not digest
the same. These Needy-braines to purchase some commodious vailes from the foamy
vapor of a scurrilous humor, did strive to set their unconcocted wits to the
highest pin, that lying and Nonsense were the two coincedant twins, that always
distilled from the nasty dregs of their Satyricall quills. One of these
Poetical Satyrs, though he was a Night-Walker, and in nocturnall darkness A
Poet.
once escaped the Counter, and another time Newgate yet he was the Arch-conduct
of their harsh-tuned Chorus: another did Bray like an Ass, and became his
Secondary, and although he yielded the precedence to the former (for he Another
Poet.
was the most lying knave) yet he was not so nihilate a Cipher, but that he
challenged the second place in an Arithmeticall Another Poet
order to himself: Another Harberd his froathy Muse in the Rheumaticke
exhalations of muddy taplash, which made his fancy so extremely dull, that when
he writ any thing, every What lack you Sir, or Stationers Apprentice could
conceive it to be Harberts Lie. Thus these three, like Triple-headed Cerberus,
nursed their viperous muses in Acharon, and fomented them in Stygian gall,
greedily biting the fame of every Delinquent, whom they will not permit only
to suffer quietly Parliamentary Justice, but they also will nettle them afresh
with their goosequil censure. Since the Earl of Straffords death, there have
been above three hundred lying Pamphlets printed to my credible enumeration.
First, then the Lord Lievtenants Speech The names of the lying pamphlets
fabulously fathred upon him in the Tower; but protested against by such
eminent Persons as accompanied him some time before his execution: his Vltimum
Vale: his pitiful Elegies fathred upon himself: his amorous Re-greet to
Cloriuda: his Ghost, and suppositions Dialogue betwixt him, and the Lords Grace
of Canterbury: Canterburys Dream: Lambeth Fair, where such rascally stuff is
employed to the consumption of paper, as the perusal of it would make an Horse
break his halter, as is vulgarly said: with his Recantation penned by an
Amsterdamian pedant: and his Potion lately ministered by an Antimonian Empyrick:
with his Tools, composed by a company of fools: and his Last Will and
Testament. To see the Metropolitan of a flourishing State thus opprobiously
abused, is an insufferable thing, and ought not to be tolerated: yet if he be
culpable, and peccant, the Law is sufficient to curb him, and he ought to
suffer according to its censure: but to see his grave made before his eyes with
lying libels: or to encounter with such extremes, as the blasting tongue of
infamy, is an act of higher suffering, then the just censure of Law may permit.
Then many other of the Clergy have been most ignominiously abused: as in the
Articles against D. Beale, and D. Cosins, and M. Squire of Shorditch, they were
all Poetically feigned, and ementitious: wherein they were highly impeached, as
if the Articles had been presented to the Parliament, when they were mere
fictitious: the Dialogue betwixt D. Cousins, and a Fellow of his College: The
Copy of a Letter sent from the Lord Finch to him: News from Sir John Sucklin:
Four Letters sent from the Scottish Commissioners to the Parliament in
England, Mr. Seakers Speech to the King at His Royal Arivall in Scotland: and
His Majesty's Answer to the same, were all most shamefully feigned? Which did
not only Derogate from his Imperial sufficiency, but was also a high
dishonor to his Majesty. The Lord Balberino's Speech, The Marquess of
Hameltons, and General Lashley's Speech in the Scottish Parliament, with the
Dukes of Lenox, were all fictitiou^; and fabulous: And diverse Pamphlets
published concerning some treachery that was there found out, were all lies:
Then Sir William Parkins, and Sir Nathaniell Coppingers Speeches, In this
Parliament, with three other very false. A Gunpowder and a Wildfire Plot in
Ireland were Poetical, Irelands Complaint, and Petition, were both false: Yea
there are so many lies concerning Ireland Printed, that my Paper would be to
little to describe them all, they amount to 37. more lies in Total. Dolesull
News from Edenborough since his Majesty's departure from thence: News from
Newcastle, Durham, and Constantinople were all lies. A Dialogue betwixt the
King of France, and Spain, with the French, and Spanish Fleet arrived at
Ireland were both false. The Scottish Volunteeres Victory, and a glorious
overthrow of the Rebels by the Scots, with Sir Kenelme Digby's Victory, were
all fabulous. Fourteen Orders from the House of Commons were shameful lies,
the Parliaments Care for the Tower were false. A terrible Plot against London,
and Westminster, with the Twelve Bishops conspiracy in the Tower, were not
true: The Papists Plot against the City, The Jesuits Plot against the
Parliament, and their confession before they were carried to Tyburne, were
ementitious. Suffolk, Norfolk, Huntington-shire, S^me^set-shire, and the
first of Hartfordshire Petition were all ^bsurd f(...): the first of the
Apprentices of London, and Women's Petition were false. The Cobblers end, or his
last Sermon and the Leathersellers, and Button-makers Sermons were all
fictitious. The Parliaments Answer to Buckinghamshire Petition: News from
Hell, Rome and the Inns of Court: The Papists Petition to the Pope: Lunsfords
Letters found one at Temple B^rre, and another in St. Paul's Church, were both
feigned. Yea if I should enumerare every particular lie, I should both
trespass too far on (gentle Reader) your patience: and loose my self in the
irremiable Laborinth of those inumerous fictions, neither could this Paper
contain them all: but as I aforesaid, they amount in all to the number of
above three hundred. Now I can accuse none, but these temporizing
Pamphlet-mongers, who for a little mercenary gain, and profit, infused plenty
of Gall, and Wormwood into their lying, and Satyricall lines. What a base
humor is this in you, Poetical Needy-braines, who for a sordid gain, or
desire to have the Style of a witty Raylor, will thus impoyson your pen, and
puzzle your sterile pates inventing such senseless, stigmatick, ballad
Balderdash: as our very Street-Cantors, who would warble pleasantly through thr
nose like an Amsterdam Zelot, at the insurrection of the flesh against the
Spirit, for a Pot of Huffes Ale, and a huge Subsidy toast: shrug to hear it,
and with an honest scorn hout at it? Oh what a lamentable thing it is to
suffer the sentence of such penurious, pennilesse wits, who wholly resolve
their ink to gall, for a little mercenary gain: or to purchase a pair of
decayed Trouzes at the second hand, to cover their nakedness: whose lying
Libels are woven up in braine-sick fancies. Well! Poets draw submissively
nearer: and with an humble attentive ear attend the delivery of my definite
advice unto you: Be Penitential, and give a serious recantation to the world
for all your lying Pamphlets, and confess all your infamous abuses to the
State: ye had better I say confess so, then at the Gall-house: this is my
advice, which if you will embrace, I know it would give more satisfaction to
the Spectacle of the World.

FINIS.

