CHRIST'S Gracious Message from the Throne of GRACE, To all the Prisoners of
HOPE.

ZACH. 9.11. As for thee also, by the blood of thy Covenant, I have sent forth
thy Prisoners out of the pit, where there is no water.

By TIMOTHY BATT, Physician.

Printed in the year, 1644.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE CHARLES, King of Great Britain, France and
Ireland, etc. AND TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDS and COMMONS assembled in the
High Court of PARLIAMENT. Grace and Peace be multiplied from God the Father,
and from Jesus Christ whom he has sent.
SIRS,
THough it might seem Ingravity that the Sprouts in Libanus might attinge or
touch the tops of the Cedars in Libanus. Notwithstanding, it is the most
princely dignity, and the highest honor to the highest Cedars of Libanus; to
overshadow and defend the lowest sprouts. Was it honorable in King Agrippa,
Felix and Festus, to lend audience to Paul a chayned Prisoner? And will it not
be counted an honorable thing to your Highness, and to Your Honorable Lords
to countenance the Contemplation of your Prisoner concerning the Prisoners of
Hope? Were the gleanings of Ephraim better then vintage of Abiezer? and is not
our Contemplation concerning Christ's Prisoners, more fruitful then the Vine
with its fullest clusters? the Stars which are obscured in the presence of
the brightest Sun, are profitable in his absence, giving their light to the
sublunarie travilers: Howsoever the light of these our Contemplations for the
present may seem as darkness, yet if through your Princely favor, and your
Honors protections these may be allowed; they will give a glimmering light to
the poorest soul, and most distressed spirit: It will be to them as the
flowing springs of Solace, and as the pleasant influence from the highest
stars. How will they sing of love because of the Fathers dearest love? how
will they speak of glory in Christ the prince of glory? when they shall
understand that they are set free by the blood of his Covenant out of the pit
where in there is no water. Zach. 9.11. As for thee also, by the blood of my
Covenant, I have sent forth thy Prisoners out of the pit, wherein is no water.
When they shall find that their Lord was anointed to set the^ loose out of the
Dungeon of death and darkness: and that he was the chosen Redeemer to break
the bars of death, throw upon the gates of hell, and knap in sunder the
chains of the Devil. Isa. 61.1, 2, 3. The high and honorable are not
ignorant, that the greatest prince under heaven, and the mightiest Monarch in
the sublunarie world are poor prisoners of hope unto Christ mediator of the
covenant, King of his bought and Redeemed. Is the Earth beholding to the watery
clouds? and the lowest plants to the highest planers? and are not all Terren
and earthly Princes beholding to Christ King of Kings and Lord of Lords for
ever. The Prisoners of hope in this state and Kingdom are almost infinite in
number. How many thousands lie sick at the poole of Bethesda? how many
thousands of mourning and drooping hearts waits for Christ's springs of love
more then David did for the waters of Bethlehem? I might say, how many Millions
wounded in their consciences, bleeding in their bloods; lies waiting at this
hour before the throne of grace for the sweet and clear countenance of God
the Father, therefore they sigh and groan for his assurance through his
Adoption of children, for his liberty through the Redemption from Eternal
bonds, for his righteousness through his presentation glorious, and for his
joys and consolation through the law of the Spirit of life and obsignation: as
they have found under your Highest, Noblest and worthiest favors, a gracious
defense and loving protection, so they doubt not, but that two wings and two
shadows will be one wing and one shadow for their prosperity and protection:
Considering, that there is such a neerenesse of union between the Princely
Head, and the Honorable shoulders of this Royal state and Kingdom. I with the
Prisoners of Hope had neither gold nor silver, riches nor treasures, pearls
nor jewels to present unto His Highness, or to the Honorable Assembly; save
these lines of love for acceptance: Not doubting, but our present will be as
rich as the Queen of Shebaes was in Jerusalem; and as Benjamins and Judahs was
in the sight of Joseph, since the presenter with the Prisoners of Hope, presents
nothing else but a present concerning the Love of God the Father, the rich
treasures and the righteousness of Christ Mediator, of the joys, love and
peace concerning the Spirit of glory our comforter: knowing that is not
convenient for the meanest to be offensive to the highest, and the weakest
troublesome unto the Honorable: We by general petition, desire and request
that His Majesty with your Honors, might honor the poorest with your shadow
and vindication, and we in general shall be bound by an everlasting
obligation, to wish all peace, all unity and concord between His Majesty and
your Honors for ever. Oh that the Lion of the Tribe of Judah would not only
crown the Lion with strength and fortitude; but also honor his poorest
Prisoners with peace and sweet tranquillity. Oh that the King of Kings might
shine gloriously upon the head of His Majesty, and the Prince of Princes might
shine favorably upon the Nobles of this Kingdom. Oh that the gracious favor
of him that was in the Bush, and the dear love of him that was upon the Cross
might compose these differences, put an end to these great distractions, and
make two one in this our Native Country. Whilst we thus desire and wish the
welfare, prosperity and dignity of this State and Kingdom; we shall wait for
His Highest and Princely acceptance, and your noblest and worthiest
approbation of this Treatise concerning the Prisoners of Hope, since it is no
less then the message of the King of Kings unto a King, an Embassage from the
Prince of glory unto Princes: and a Contemplation of the Throne of grace to all
that waits for grace in Israel. Therefore silence shall constrain us, whilst
we wish for the highest glory the richest mercy, for the dearest bounty, and
for the greatest love that flows from the Thron of grace to fall upon you,
that your dewes may be more soft then the dewes upon the tender herbs, that
your light may be more splenderous then the sun in the Meridian, and that the
stability, firmness and glory of this State and Commonwealth may be faster
fixed then the celestial Orb. Amen, Amen, Amen. Then shall the sons of Sion
sing a song of Melodious, the daughters of Jerusalem make a harmony victorious,
and the poorest Prisoners of Hope shall sit under your shadows most joyous,
each giving glory, praise, honor, truth, and thankesgiving to him that sitts
upon the Throne now and for evermore: Recording that sentence memorable
throughout all ages and generations. Apoc. 4. last. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to
receive glory, and honor, and power: for thou have created all things, and for
thy pleasure they are and were created.

Your Majesty's most humble subject, and welwisher to your Royal Crown and
dignity; As also to your Honorable Lords and Commmons, sat in High Court of
PARLIAMENT. TIMOTHY BATT.

An Epistle to the Prisoners of Hope, beloved of the Father, and bought by the
blood of Christ their blessed and dear Redeemer.
IS the knowledge of the unsearchable riches of Christ made known to the
Prisoners of misery? and shall not I direct my speech to them in the rarest
Elegancie? Are rare things spoken concerning the city of God? are excellent
thing spoken concerning the streams that make glad the City of our God? And
are not rare and excellent things spoken concerning the Prisoners of our God? J
had rather my mind should forget its high conceivement, J had rather my
affection should loose it sweet contentment, then J should forget my sentence
concerning their solace and delightment. How should J forget them whom our
dearest Lord has not forgotten? Why should J not set them before mine eyes,
whom he has presented in his gracious presence. For whom was he anointed? if
not for his distressed flock? For whom was he wounded? if not for wounded
conciences and poor distressed catives? For whom was his bloody Cross, his
bitter Agony? if not for his dearest ones and Prisoners of great calamity.
Will our Lord lead his captives into captivity? No, Will he relinquish his
gasping and gronings hearts? No, they are more precious to him then the rarest
gemms, they are more beautiful in his eyes then the beautiful diadems, and
more choice to him then the choysest treasure. Who are written between his
breasts? if not they, who are charactered upon his heart? if not they, or who
are counted or esteemed above all Terrene or Earthly treasures? if not they,
For they are beloved of the Father from Eternity, they are bought by the
Prince of grace and glory, they are seal a by the spirit of life and liberty:
O ye Prisoners of Hope! are you not as dear to your dearest Lord in the day of
tribulation as in the day of salvation, in the day of temptation, as in the day
of reconciliation, in the day of affliction, as in the day of Adoption. J know
you have bin wounded by the darts of Satan, bin accused by the accuser of the
brethren, you have had war with the flesh and corruption, and have been
bruised like the bruised reed, and broken like the Potters vessel. I know
that the sun should be as darkness, if that you should not behold the
Son of righteousness, that the morning star should be obscure, if the
morning star should not appear in purity, and the face of ten thousand
Angels should appear as dimnesse, if that you should not behold the face of
the Angel of the Covenant in gratiousnesse. Hence I am assured the word of
grace, of life, of hope, ^f peace, of salvation, of reconciliation, ^f
justification, and of glorification will be as dear to you as the apple of
your ^yes, as precious as your own lives, and ^s near unto you as your own
souls; therefore as the morning star is to the travelers in the
wilderness, as the oriental sun to them that sit in darkness, as the
rarest jewels to them that have no riches: So will this message be to you his
bleeding Prisoners. Therefore J cease to crave acceptance, since these of you
are lovingly accepted, ever wishing you grace from your loving Father,
blessedness and hope from your blessed Redeemer, to whom be given glory and
honor in the Churches for ever and ever, Amen.

T. B.

When I in blood involved was,
cast out to open shame:
His dearest love did then appear,
to everlasting fame.
Before I saw the Sun of light,
the sun did shine one me;
Before the morning star arose,
all darkness I did see.
But when the Sun and morning star,
appeared in the day:
All darkness vanished from my sight,
I saw a glorious way.
Of love, of peace, of grace, of hope,
of rest and great glory,
Free from all wrath, debate, and jarres,
from malice and envy.
^n love the Saints do praises sing,
unto his glorious name,
The glorious riches of his grace,
in joys they do declaime.
While they were chained in fetters strong
under the power of hell,
His riches bounty did appear,
free mercy did excel.
For he redeemed them from chains,
from fetters set them free;
By dearest love and precious blood,
procuring liberty.
That they might have access by faith,
unto his highest grace:
And live by faith which is in him,
in his most holy place.
Hence are the gemmes of rarest worth,
appearing in his sight:
Beholding his most glorious face,
his everlasting light.
When clouds of darkness did beset,
their souls incompast round:
Overwhelmed were they by hellish fiends,
they woe and sorrow found.
Then shined he forth in the sweet face,
of Christ the Prince of peace:
When he by death did reconcile,
all enmity did cease.
That they might stand complete in robes,
more pure then the gold;
More rich then gemmes and precious stones,
a hundred thousand fould.
When they were naked and unrob'd,
impurest in his sight:
In vestments pure clothed he did,
in them he took delight:
Since he presented them most pure,
complete in Christ to be:
Whilst he gave them to be in Christ.
their great felicity.
When they were sons of wrath and death
shut out of hope most sure:
He gave to them inheritance,
amongst the Saints most pure.
That they might have a lot and hope,
amongst the Saints most dear:
All glorying hearts in praises high,
with Saints that do in fear.
When they were fare from Christ the vine,
of peace and precious love:
His gracious face on them did shine,
his bounty they did prove.
When they were made one with the vine,
to be in him for aye:
In-joying springs of precious joys,
in the eternal day.
When they were prisoners of his hope,
involved in dust below:
His throne of freest grace imbrast,
to hell he did not throw.
Their bleeding hearts and drooping minds,
involu'd and wrapped in blood:
By freest grace and dearest love,
bought to eternal good.
That they in love might praises sing,
unto his glorious name:
Rich glorious praises of his grace,
they might to Saints declaime.
Shall they surcease exalting praise?
singing free grace for ever:
His bounty will they not record?
to Saints that fails never.
Praise, glory, now perpetually,
from his abundant store:
Oh honor that most glorious name,
both now and evermore.
WHilst that my Muses,
upon high object bent,
High thoughts poss'd,
but to what intent;
Let Prisoners view,
and these sweet lines peruse,
Peruse in love,
and faulty lines excuse,
The piercing power,
of my intellect,
My lowest thoughts,
to highest did erect,
Memory Retaind,
thought of a subject rare,
Queen will consenting,
somewhat to declare,
Affection joynd,
with those in combination,
High thoughts conceived,
in my contemplation.
And conscence paralells,
affection strong,
Its rarest plea,
I must my theme prolong,
Since that no object,
to the view or sight,
Gives such sweet solace,
to the souls delight,
And graces power,
grants its free consent,
That all my theme,
of Christ was congruent,
That pen might stay,
and I might cease my verse,
Of Christ in prose,
the more I might rehearse.
Christ's gracious Message from the Throne of Grace, to all the Prisoners of
hope.
ROMANS 8.1, 2. There is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in
Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh; but after the Spirit, For the law
of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the law of sin
and death.


WHen we look upon the Sun, Moon and Stars, and behold the wisdom, mercy,
and power of the Father toward humane generation; it makes us to stand amazed,
and astonished, so when we look and behold the wisdom, mercy, and power of
the Father shining forth in Christ the morning Star, the Son of everlasting
grace and bounty, it makes us to wonder and admire at that which shines forth
to us in the morning star, and glorious Son of righteousness. That which
shines to us by in and by the Creature, is not comparable to that which
shines toward us in and through the Lord Jesus. What is the brightness of the
morning star to Christ the morning star? or what is the beauty and glory of
the sun, to Christ the Sun of glorious righteousness? or what as the beauty
of things terrene and earthly to things sublime or heavenly? hence the Apostle
memorates and records the excellency of the Lord Jesus Christ by the privilege
the Saints received in and by him, according to the Text. Now then there is no
condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh,
but after the Spirit, Romans 8, 1. Beloved, our manner is by way of exposition or
contemplation; Now then there is no condemnation? They have been cast out to
the open shame of their faces, they were not swadled in the day of their
Nativity, but trodden in their blood, and overwhelmed with the deepest misery,
they have been alienated from the throne of grace, estranged from the mercy
seat, and have lived without God in the world, they have been in the black
swadle bands of the Devil, under the claves of the roaring Lion the Devil,
and have been children of wrath as well as others. The truth of the premises
is granted: notwithstanding, there is no condemnation to them, since the being
of the Saints in Christ frees them from all the gulfes of horrid miseries
whatsoever: They have many sins, many infirmities, iniquities and
transgressions, they are an offending and erring people out of the way as well
as others: they have been silenced before the throne of Justice, they have
sinned and shot their arrows below the glory of the Father, the truth of the
premises is granted: Notwithstanding, there is no Condemnation to them which
are in Christ Jesus, since the Father of eternal mercy has given unto them an
absolute Nonimputation of offenses in the Lord Jesus, in whom he has
reconciled his beloved Saints and peculiar: in the act of Justification he
has given to his Saints a general acquittance, freeing them from sin,
iniquity and transgression by the blood of the Lord of life and glory, and by
the death of him who was the only beloved of his bosom; hence comes in those
rare sentences of divine testimonies. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of
Gods chosen? it is God that justifies, who is it that shall condemn? it is
Jesus Christ that is dead, yea, rather that is risen again, who is at the
right hand of God making intercession for us. Romans 8.33, 34. To them is given
the privilege and dignity of union, they are branches to Jesus Christ the
blessed and fruitful Vine of his Church. I am the Vine, ye are the branches,
John 15.5. they are members to Jesus Christ their blessed head and reconciler,
to wit, Members of his flesh and of his bones, Ephesians. 5.30. they are the choice
precious and dearest spouse of the Lord Jesus Christ. My beloved is mine, amd I
am his; he feeds among the Lillies, Cant. 6.3. they are not only dear to
Christ because he has bought them, but they are near to Christ, because they
are made one with him; The glory that thou gave me, I have given to them,
that they may be one as we are one. John 17.22. What Devil therefore shall
accuse? the accuser of the Brethren is cast out of the heavenly places. And I
heard a great voice out of heaven saying, Now is come salvation, and strength
and the Kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ; for the accuser of
the brethren is cast down, which accused them before our God day and night,
what hell shall terrify? since the Lord Christ has triumphed over hell, death,
the devil and all Evils. O death where is thy sting, oh grave where is thy
victory. The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the law. But
thanks be to God, which gives us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ, 1
Cor. 15.55, 56, 57. shall the law adjudge us? noe, since we have a gracious
Mediator who ever presents us glorious in the sight of his gracious and
heavenly Father; hence it is spoken by the holy Ghost, that Christ entered into
heaven to appear in presence of God for us. For Christ is not entered into the
holy places made with hands, which are the figures of the true, but into heaven
it self; now to appear in the presence of God for us. Heb. 9.24. shall death
amaze or trouble us? no, for by the death of Christ we are delivered from the
servitude and slaverie of death. That through death he might destroy him that
had the power of death, that is the Devil, and deliver them who through fear
of death, were all their life time subject to bondage. Heb. 2.14, 15. What
though the venamous Serpent seek to sting thee? yet be not thou dismayed: what
though the Law morrall would accuse, artaigne or condemn thee before the bar
of justice? yet be not discour^ged: what though death with the sting thereof
would amaze thee? yet be thou not amazed, since there is no Condemnation to thy
soul or conscience, since thou art in Christ Jesus, and he pleades thy cause at
the right hand of the Father saying, This my people stands righteous before
thee in my righteousness, holy through my holiness, and pure through my
purity and integrity: am I not their Lord of pure and divine righteousness? am
I not their prince of glory who has presented them pure, spotless and entire
in thy sight? Am not I the Mediator of thy everlasting grace and mercy? who
was made not only unto them wisdom and redemption, but also righteousness
and sanctification? was not I arraigned at the bar of Pontious Pilate, that
they might not be arraigned at the bar of justice, accused of my native
countrymen, that they might be excused in thy presence, condemned by their
injudiciall sentence to free them from condemnation. I stood in the place of
Manasseth, that Idolater, in the room of Paul that Blasphemer, in the stead of
Peter, that denier, when mine could not bear the heat of thy burning wrath
and indignation; I stood and bear their iniquities, when they could not tread
the winepresse of thy fury, I trod the winepresse for them, thou laydst the
sins of mine upon my shoulders, thou did cast thy darts through my sides, I
was wounded, I was chastised, I was broken to pieces for them, being made sin
for them, who being thy son knew no sin, that they might be made the
righteousness of God in me. Now there is no condemnation to them which are in
Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit. Romans 8.1. I
have made death temporal a bed of down, a place of rest, and a sweet passage
to my glory, did Israel pass through the red sea and the waters did not
overwhelme them? did Judah and Rheuben pass through the waters of Jordan and
those did not offend them? and shall not mine pass through the gates of death,
and shall that destroy them? no, I have taken away the death of death
spiritual, I live in mine by hope, I have made them to cast Ankor in the throne
of my grace and dearest mercy, in whom we have an Ankor of the soul, safe and
firm, entering into that which is within the veil. Heb. 6.19. Which hope we
have as an Ankor of the soul both sure and steadfast, and which enters into
that within the veil. I live in them by love, I have made them live in Me by
my love: So that there love to me is above treasures, riches and honors, above
Father, Mother, wife and children, above bonds, chains, and fetters, above
temptations, anguish or tribulation, above the malice of the Devil, the
terrors of the law, the horrors of hell, the darts of the world, and the
wars of the flesh. I have made them to leave all things terrene and earthly,
and to pitch on those things which are high and heavenly; My love to them in
their value and estimation is above Rubies, Saphires, precious gemmes,
carbuncles and precious Jewels, ten thousand mountains of gold in their sight
are undervalued. I am the chiefest of ten thousand, the loves of men and women
are disaccounted, since my love to them is above the loves of Jonathan and
David. The freeness of my love has made them love me entirely and freely, and
the eternity of my love has made them love Me eternally, hence have I spoken
of them. John 17.28. And I have made known to them thy name, and will make it
known, that the love wherewith thou have loved me, may be in them, and I in
them. I have made them live the life of faith, though their faith overcoms the
world, and this is the victory that overcommeth the would, even your faith. 1 John 5.4. though their faith repulseth the fiery darts of Satan, above all
taking the shield of faith, whereby ye shall be able to quench the fiery darts
of Satan, Ephesians. 6.16. Though their faith is more precious then gold that is
tried in the fire; That the trial of your faith being much more precious then
of gold that perishes, though it be tried with fire, might be found unto
praise and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.8. Notwithstanding
it is mine, I make them to believe in my Father, and in my self whom he has
sent. I made them my beloved, injoyers of eternal life, glory and beatitude.
I made them to abide in me by faith, whilst I abode in them by love, the truth
thereof, is witnessed by my Apostle. I am crucified with Christ, nevertheless
I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, and the life that I now live in the
flesh, I live by the faith of the son of God, who loved me, and gave himself
for me. I also have taken away death eternal, for I have reconciled mine to
the Father by an everlasting reconciliation; I have brought with me the
everlasting robes of righteousness, I have taken away all their sins,
iniquities and transgressions by my blood most precious: I have made them one
by union, that they might enjoy a being in Me and in my Father.

Hence the second death shall have no power of them, I my self have spoken it.
Apoc. 20.6. Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first resurrection,
on such the second death has no power, but they shall be Priests to God, and
of Christ's, and shall reign with him a thousand years.

What has the world to say to my people? true it is, they have been
drunkards, persecuters, blasphemes, they have been alienated from my glory,
estranged from my love, and without my presence in the world, but I have washed
them in the purest fountain, I have made their scarlet die whiter then the
snow, their bloody crimson whiter then the wool; are they defiled like the
Menstruous cloth? no, are they leprous as was Naaman the Assirian? no, they
are purer then the purest Nazarene. What has the flesh to plead against mine?
true it is; before I came to live in them, their minds were clouded with
Egyptian darkness, there wills resisted my words of reconciliation, their
affections were involved in things terrene and sublunarie, their hearts harder
then the rocks or millstone; and their consciences were the habitation of the
black fiends of darkness; but since I took up my rest in them, I appeared
the glorious light of the Gospel of life and redemption, I have removed their
darkness, I have made them conformable to my sacred and holy will, I have set
their affections aloft in the heavenly places, I have softened their obstinate
and obdurate hearts, and have cleansed their consciences from sin by my blood
most precious. Now old things are past away, and all things are become new: now
they are my workmanship created in Me to good works, that they should walk in
them. Now my peace, my joy, my love, my grace, and my liberty dwells in them.
Am I not King and Lord commander in the soul? Am I not prince and Lord
defender of the conscience? Am I not Master and governor of the affections?
yea, though sin is in their flesh, yet my grace is in their spirits, for I am
in them both grace and glory; therefore there is no condemnation to them that
are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit.

What can the world say against those that are my redeemed and reconciled? They
will take away their good name, I suffer the Angels of light to bespot their
garments, I permit the legalists to defame and to blemish their conversations,
but the servant is not greater then his Master, nor the Disciple then his Lord.
If they take away their name, I have given them a name which is written in the
book of life, and charectered it upon my breast for ever. If they take away
their liberty, yet have they always liberty to the throne of my hevenly grace
and highest mercy, if they take away their goods, yet are they enriched by my
heavenly grace and treasure of wisdom; if they take away their vestments, yet
stand they clothed with my garments of everlasting righteousness: And if they
take away their lives, yet their lives are hid in me and in my Father.
Therefore there is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, which
walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit, Romans 8.1. There is a threefold
ground why there is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus.

The first ground is this, since the Eternal justice of the Father is
satisfied. I argue thus; if the eternal justice of the Father in and by Christ
is satisfied, then there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ: But the
Eternal justice of the Father is satisfied in and by Christ, therefore there
is no condemnation to them that are in Christ. That the justice of the Father
is satisfied in and by Christ, is evident: first upon denomination. Christ is
called the Son of the Father, in whom the Father is well pleased; so the holy
Ghost has related in the Evangelist. Mat. 3. the last. This is my beloved
Son in whom I am well pleased. As if the Father should speak thus to his
people, Let all my people know that I know of justice no more, of wrath no
more, of indignation and vindication no more, true, it is my pleasure to hide
my face, my joy, my peace, my rest, my glory, and the rareness of my communion
from mine; notwithstanding such has been my divine and rarest pleasure, that
my delight alone is in the Son of my bosom, my glory in the prince of grace
and glory, and my rest is in him whom I have constituted and appointed to be
Mediator of the Covenant of grace and bounty amongst the Saints triumphant,
none are accepted to dwell in my presence but in and through my beloved:
amongst my Saints and warriors Militant, none are welpleasing in my sight but
in and through the Son of my bosom, he is the sweet smelling sacrifice most
gracious and acceptable before Me, I my self have spoken it. Ephesians. 5.2. And
walk in love, as Christ has loved us, and given himself an offering: a
sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor. The Mirhe, the Aloes, and the
Cassia are not sweet in my presence, the sweetest gumes, the frankincense, and
pleasant ointments are not pleasant in my nostrills; nothing is pleasant before
me but the first begotten from the dead, and prince of the Kings of the earth,
I have undervalued al my Angels, respecting none but the Angels of the
everlasting covenant, though my pleasure was to give them a song of praise for
ever, counting them worthy of the light of my countenance, dignifying them with
the honor of messengers and protectors, notwithstanding they could not answer
my purity, nor satisfy my justice I have disesteemed the sons of men, though
I made them Lords over my creatures, the noblest of my worekmanship, and gave
to them both purity and innocence; notwithstanding they cannot answer my
demands, nor appease my wrath nor fury. I have disaccounted of the bodies of
bulls, of beasts, of goats; and I have prepared a body by and for my self, I
my self have spoken it. Wherefore when he comes into the World, he says,
sacrifices and burnt offerings thou would not, but a body have thou
prepared. Heb. 10.5. Hence I have accepted of the body of the Lord of life for
my people, of the blood of the prince of glory for the children of death and
misery, of the death of him that is the Mediator of of the Covenant of life
and promises, for the curse and death of my peculiar. Now then there is no
condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, which walk not after the flesh
but after the Spirit, Romans 8.1.

The second ground why there is no Condemnation to them who are in Christ Jesus.

Because the law is satisfied, the law is satisfied actively and passively, my
beloved was to present my people complete, pure and holy, without spot or
wrinkle, unblameable, unreproveable and righteous, to make of unrighteous
righteous, of unholy holy, of impure and defiled, pure and undefiled, which in
and by him was performed, when he fulfilled all righteousness, when he
answered every jot and title of my law required, when he was made sin for
mine, that they might be made the righteousness of God in him. 2 Cor. 5. the
last. He answered my law passively, for he was wounded, bruised and broken to
pieces, who but your Lord was led as a Lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep
before the shearer as dumb? who but your Lord, cried out upon the Cross, my
God my God, why have thou forsaken me? who but your Lord sweat water and blood
in the day of his passion? beloved, thou cammest short of the glory of God, yet
thy dear Lord bought thee, the prince of glory sought thee, and the shepherd
of the covenant came and performed all for thee, hence, he is the end of the
law for righteousness sake. Romans 10.4. Christ is the end of the law for
righteousness sake, to every one that believes; therefore there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not aftert the flesh
but after the Spirit, Romans 8.1.

The third Ground why there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus.

Because they are united to the Son of my love, had they not been united to
the vine of rarest virtue, the Lord of richest wisdom, the bridegroom of
sweetest love, then might they have bin condemned, but because of their union,
they enjoy communion in him and with him: by their union they enjoy a threefold
voice.

The first is the voice of Reconciliation.

The second the voice of Adoption.

The third, the voice of Justification and Redemption.

Of the first, to wit concerning the voice of Atonement or reconciliation, the
day has been that the wall of separation has been betwixt thee and the
Father, the hand writing of ordinances against the conscience, the blackness
of darkness had overclouded the soul, thy sins, iniquities, and
transgressions had separated between me and thee, and the whole heavens were
overcast with the mists of dimnesse, till I speak of rarest love in the Son
of my love, till I speak of peace in the reconciler of my Redeemed, till I
spoke of Rest to all your restless souls under heaven, because my Son has
reconciled mine through his pure and precious blood, hence I have nothing
against them that are washed in his blood; because I have made an atonement in
and through him who has been my choice and beloved servant: therefore I have
no charge against them who have been children of wrath and enemies against my
Majesty. As my love, my grace, my peace, my glory rests in him; so my peace
abides in him: hence has he left the Legacy of dearest and precious love. My
peace I give unto you, my peace I leave unto you, not as the world gives, give
I unto you; Let not your hearts be troubled nor fear. Therefore there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh
but after the Spirit. Romans 8.1.

The second voice of Christ, is the voice of Adoption; As our Justification,
our Redemption, our Union, our Reconciliation, our vocation and Glorification
are in Christ. So our sonneship or Adoption is in Christ: If the Father of
glorious mercy account thee a branch, it is because thou art in Christ the
vine, if he account thee a member, it is because thou art in Christ the head,
If he account thee one of the espoused, it is because thou art in Christ the
Bridegroomed, If he account thee a son, it is because thou art in his dear and
welbeloved Son; hence I come to draw thy soul to me, I make to thee thy
privilege. According as I have related by my servant John. 1 Ioh. 3.1. Behold
how great love the Father has given to us, that we should be called the
Sons of God.

That though thou wast a slave of hell, a vessel of wrath, a child of
perdition, a bondslave to the law, and under the ridged and severe tyranny of
the devil: notwithstanding, I have chosen thee to be one of mine by the
covenant of my freest grace and bounty, I have redeemed thee for my self, and
called thee by my name, I have adopted thee to be one of my sons and children
by adoption, when I took up my rest in my beloved: I preached peace to the
peacelesse, liberty to the bondmen, grace to the graceless, riches to the
poor, and assurance of sonship to them who are and have not been my sons by
adoption: hence though no creature pity thee, though Angels shut their eyes
against thee, and all the sublunarie Creatures should bid thee adieu and
farewell, notwithstanding I come to embrace thee, and to love and delight in
thee for ever, since the day that I adopted thee, have I not filled the soul
with the joys, comforts and solaces of my spirit? have not I sealed thee to
the day of Eternal redemption by the seal of Adoption? have not I given thee
the spirit of prayer and supplication? have not I given thee the assurance of
life and salvation? Now then there is no condemnation to thy soul which art in
Christ Jesus, for thou walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit.

Thirdly, the voice of God in Justificatio^; how in justificatio^? yea beloved,
this is the Admirable work of the spirit of glory, that we are assured that we
are redeemed by the blood of Christ imcomparable, that we are reconciled by
the death of Christ unspeakable, and that we are assured that we are
justified by the righteousness of Christ undeclarable, I being justified in
Christ, how should I enjoy any thing but salvation? Am I not made complete in
him that is the head of all principalities and powers? Am I not clothed with
the righteousness of the Son of righteousness? more bright then ten
thousand Suns? Am I not washed, purified and cleansed in the purest, rarest
and most precious fountain which is in the Kingdom of the dear Son of God?
hence I shall enjoy the horn of salvation the great, free and eternal
salvation in Christ. Now then there is no condemnation to me that am in Christ
Jesus, who walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit.

Moreover these three things preserves the Saints from death and condemnation.

1. The love of Christ. 2. The power of Christ. 3. The glory of Christ.
What said I the Love of Christ? yea: search the hights above, sound the depths
beneath, extend thy thoughts abroad to all the parts of the sublunarie Orb,
and thou shall find no love like the love of Christ: is the love of a mother
so dear to her child? is the love of a husband so dear to the wife of his
bosom? as Christ's love is to his Church? no: with the same love wherewith the
Father has loved Christ, with the same love he has loved the Church and
chosen: the Father loved Christ from eternity, Christ has loved the Church
from eternity; the Father through his tender love did not leave his beloved in
the day of his Cross, when he cried out My God my God why have thou forsaken
me; Thou will not leave my soul in grave, neither will thou suffer thy holy
one to see corruption. Psalm. 16.10.

Lo the Lord Christ will not leave his poor servants, his dearest jewels and
his precious Saints in the days of greatest misery and calamity. Psalm. 9 10.
The Lord is a refuge to the poor, a refuge in due time, in the day of trouble.

The Fathers love to the Lord Christ was so great, that he set him above
principalities, above might, above power, and above all things; that all things
in heaven and earth might bow and bend before him: Wherefore God has exalted
him, and given him a name, above every name, that at the name of Jesus every
knee should bow, both of things in heaven, of things on earth, and of things
under the earth. Phil. 2.9.10.

The love of the Lord Christ is: so dear to his, that he has exalted them
above all, to him that overcommeth, I will give to sit with me in my throne, as
I have overcome, and sit with my Father in his throne. Revel. 3.21.

The Father loved Christ so entirely, that he filled him with the riches of
righteousness, the treasures of wisdom, and the plenitude of all heavenly
excellencies; Christ loves his Church so affectionately, that he fills her
with heavenly joys, and he enriches her with all spiritual and heavenly
gifts, blessed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us
with spiritual blessings in heavenly things in Christ, Ephesians. 1.3. therefore
through my love there is no condemnation to mine, they not after the flesh but
after the Spirit. Romans 8.1.

Secondly, Because of the power of Christ, there is no condemnation to them
that are in Christ.

His power is not only the cause of our vivification from the dead, of our
Collocation in the heavenly places, of our faith in his name, But also of our
conservation to eternal life and salvation. John 17.2. He defends thee by an
internal and efficatious power, when thy spirit says that thou art overcome,
the spirit says thou art more then a conqueror through him that loved thee,
every day thou art a conqueror through his blood, a victoret through his death,
a tryumpher through his righteousness, neither the darts of hell, the fire bales
of the Devil, the strength of the law, the wars of the flesh, nor the
puissant strength of the world can vanquish thee: for thou art defended by a
strength invincible, thou art protected by a power unconquerable, thou art
invi^oned by a might insuperable and thou art guarded with a force inexpugnable,
Am I not thy Rock, thy shield, thy Buckler, and defender? Am I not thy Sun thy
shadow, thy horn of Salvation and deliverer? Am I not he that carries thee
above one Eagles wings? that breaks the bow, the spear and shield and
vanquisheth, overcommeth and concultateth under my feet all the enemies of thy
salvation? my strength is above powers, my might above dominions, my glory
above principalities, and my Puissancie above all the opposers of thy life and
addoption. Hence there is no condemnation to thee, for thou art kept by my
power to salvation, not walking after the flesh, but after the spirit.

Thirdly, the glory of Christ is the cause why there is no condemnation to them
which are in Christ Jesus, that walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit.

Christ speaks after this manner to his Saints. Beloved, I have written your
name upon my breast, I have in graven them in the book of life, I have
presented your cause in the presence of my Father by my blood most pure, by my
death most victorious, by my righteousness most acceptable, therefore for the
glory of my grace, I will not leave you. I that am the Lord of life, the
welspring of living waters, that eternal and everlasting life given of my
Father: I have laid up your lives in the throne of my grace, I have treasured
them, up in the throne of my mercy and for the glory of my mercy I will not
desert you: have I bestowed so great cost as to adventure my life, blood, my
death, my righteousness and my glory for thee? did I leave my height of glory
to fetch thy Soul from the lowermost hell, from the gates and bars of
eternal death, from the black claws, clutches and swadle bands of Satan?
have I given thee communion with my Father, and with my self in all the
treasures of heavenly righteousness, and made thee one of my members, one of
my branches, one of my espoused and dearest friends? and shall I now forsake
thee? I am that faithful, Yea and Amen, and will keep my promise, I will be
with mine to the end of the world. Mat. 28. verse last. There is therefore no
condemnation to mine, they walk not after the flesh but after the spirit.

We proceed to the second part of the text which walk not after the flesh,
but after the Spirit.

The blessed Apostle argues by evedent arguments; that there is no condemnation
to them which are in Christ Jesus. The first Argument is, If that to the Saints
victory over sin and death is given to them by Jesus Christ, then is there
no condemnation to them that are in Christ. But to the Saints victory over sin
and death is given to them by Jesus Christ, therefore there is no condemnation
to them. Romans 7. the last. I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. So then,
with the mind I my self serve the law of God: but with the flesh the law of
sin.

If the law of the Spirit of life has freed us from the law of sin and death,
then is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus: But the law of the
spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has freed us from the Law of sin and death,
therefore there is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus. Romans 8.2.
For the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has made me free from the
Law of sin and death.

If God has sent his Son to redeem his own from sin, and that sin was
condemned in the flesh of Christ for there sakes, then is their no condemnation
to them; But God sent his own son to Redeem them, and that sin might be
condemned in his flesh, therefore there is no condemnation to them. Romans 8.3.
For what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God
sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin
condemned sin in the flesh.

If they who are in Christ Jesus walk not according to the flesh but according
to the Spirit, then there is no condemnation to them; But they that are in
Christ Jesus, walk not according to the flesh, but according to the Spirit,
therefore there is no condemnation to them. Romans 8 1. There is therefore now no
condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh,
but after the Spirit.

Those that are in Christ Jesus walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.
They live the life of faith, of love, of hope, of peace, of grace, of mercy and
consolation, through their union they live the life of freedom, and liberty in
the state of grace, the life of praise and prayer to the thron of glory through
their Redemption, they live the life of assurance, of Mercy, grace and peace,
through there Adoption, they live the life of purity, boldness and joy through
their justification, they live the life of holiness, of chastity and sobriety
through their Sanctification. My branches walk through the strength of
sweetness, my members walk in the power of my wisdom, my spouses walk in
the joyfulnesse of the light of my Countenance. Since the day that I washed
them in my blood most pure, they will not polute their bodies, since the time
that I gave them assurance that they were the sons of God, they do walk as
dear and loveing Children: since the moment that they have been filled with my
joys, my comforts, my consolations, my influences of divine grace and solace:
they are filled with praises, honorings, and praisings of my holy name: My
Spirit leads them into all truth; when the Spirit, of truth shall come, he
shall teach you all truth. John 14.26. He shall teach you all things, and bring
all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you; My Spirit
leads them into all obedience: For as many as are lead by the Spirit of God,
are the sons of God: Romans 8.14 My spirit leads them not to contentions, to
backbitings, to slanderings, to railings, to whisperings, to lyings to
reproachings, to Envy, Malice, hatred contempt, Disdain and Revenge. But to
mildness, gentleness, curtisie, Meeknes and lenity, to joy, to peace to love,
to gratiousnes of spirit and sobriety. Gal. 5.18, 19.20, 21, 22, 23. But if ye
are led by the spirit, ye are not under the law: Now the works of the flesh are
manifest, which are these; Adultery, Fornication, uncleannes, laciviousnes, etc
But the fruits of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance, against these there is no law. There
is not a prayer from my grace, to the throne of grace, but my spirit has been
the cause thereof, there is not a praise from the praise of my glory, but my
spirit is the instru^ent thereof. If they call my Father their Father, it is by
the spirit of Adoption, Romans 8 15. For ye have not received the Spirit of
bondage again to fear, but ye have received the spirit of Adoption, whereby we
cry Abba Father, If mine groans with sighs and groans with unspeakable and
unutterable, it is by my Spirit of Sanctification. Romans 8.26, 27. Likewise the
Spirit also helps our infirmities, for we know not what we should pray for as
we ought, but the Spirit it self make intercession for us, with groanings which
cannot be uttered, and he that searches the hearts knows what is the mind
of the Spirit: because he makes intercession for the Saints according to the
will of God. If mine are consolated through consolation, it is by Spirit of
consolation. 2 Cor. 1.4, 5. who comfort us in at our tribulation, that we
may be able to comfort them that are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith
we our selves are comforted of God; for as the sufferings of Christ abound in
us, so our consolation also abounds by Christ. Do my people encounter with
hell, sin, the law, death, the Devil and all evils without my presence? no,
do my people Navigate upon the mighty seas of misery, do they sail over the
vast Ocean of calamity without my assistance? no, I am not only their Lord
victorer to triumph over hell by heaven, over death by my life, over sin by my
blood, over the law by the law of the Spirit of life, over the flesh by my
spirit, over the Devil by my death, over the world by my glorious and
triumphous victory, I am not only their Lord acquirer of glory by
relinquishing of my glory, of righteousness by fulfilling all righteousness,
of peace by the peace of my cross, of love by the loss of the sense of love,
but I am there Lord conducter and leader to my heavenly glory. What morning
star conducts them to rest, but I the morning star? what son of beauty
leads them to the light of felicity, but I the son of righteousness? I am
the sun by day, and the cloud by night: I am the only captain of my redeemed
and purchased; I am the day star that alwais appears in the hearts of mine;
Therefore there is no condemnation to them which walk not after the flesh but
after the Spirit. Romans 8.1.

A sweet Contemplation.

Oh the depth of the sweet love and mercy of my Lord that bought Me! what no
condemnation to me? No, I am washed in the blood of the lamb immaculate, I am
presented spotless in spotless robes, I am Redeemed from amongst the
prisoners of no hope, I am united to the son of God, and enjoy communion with
him. My soul who shall condemn thee? shall death, shall hell shall the law,
shall the Devil, shall the world, shall the flesh? no, for they are not in thy
beloved; what though London England and the whole world band themselves against
thee, what though Legallists, the Angels of light, the world and all the rabble
of hell shall beset thee on every side? what though the nearest and them which
should be dearest to thee, raise lies, slanders reproaches, rebukes, ignominies
and all evils against thee? yet be not dismayed; for there is no condemnation
to them who are in Christ; Now thy thoughts shall be continually upon thy free
redemption, thy rich justification, thy sollid sanctification, thy glorious
Adoption, thy wonderful union, and thy eternal glorification; now thy spirit
is full of love, of praise, of glory; saying with the Apostle, Romans 8.1, 2. Now
then there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not
after the flesh but after the spirit. For the law of the spirit of life in
Christ Jesus, has made me free from the law of sin and death.

The Philosopher says, there is a hidden and secret virtue in the stars and
planets; not in consonant to Scripture: can thou restrain the sweet
influences of Pleiades? And that there is a hidden virtue in gemms and precious
jewels that none can understand but those that are skillful lapidaries: So
there is a hidden and enclosed excellency in Christ the Lord of life and Prince
of glory, and who can restrain the influences of his goodness? or who can
understand the richnes of his love, but those who have known him by
experience, who can speak of the glorious robes of righteousness, but those
that are clothed with the glorious robes of righteousness? who can make
mention of the rareness of Adoption, but those who have obtained inheritance
immortal and immarcessable? or who can declare concerning the liberty of grace
and glory, but those that have access to the throne of grace by the spirit of
glory? hence came the rare experience the blessed Apostle found in and through
the hand of the Mediator, who delivered him from the law of sin and death by
the glorious and indissoluble Law of life according to the Text. Romans 8. 2. For
the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the law
of sin and death.

The law in Scripture is taken several ways.

First, Sometimes for the rule of mercy and peace, because from it the Saints
enjoy Mercy from the bowels of mercy in God the Father, and from Jesus Christ
Mediator of the Law or Covenant. Gal. 6.16. As many as walk according to this
rule, peace be unto them and mercy, and upon the Israel of God.

Secondly, sometimes it is taken for the law of faith, since in and by that we
do not only believe the pardon of sins through the blood of Christ, the non
Recordation of iniquity through the mercy of the Father, and the free enjoyment
of God to be our God and heavenly Father in that Covenant of life peace and
Adoption, but also because that we by that Covenant are under the command of
the Father, the mind and will of the Lord Christ the gracious mediator of the
law of life and reconciliation. Romans 3.27. Where is boasting? excluded, by the
law of works, nay, but by the law of faith.

Thirdly, Sometimes it is called the New Testament, not only in opposition to
the old; but because the Father of dearest mercies has been pleased to
reveal and testify a more full fruition and Communion of his love in the
remission or condonation of iniquity in the blood of his dear Son, Luke
22.20. Likewise also he took the Cup after Supper, saying, this Cup is the new
Testament in my blood which is shed for you.

Fourthly, Sometimes it is termed the new Covenant, to denote that high
dignity, great Prerogative and wonderful privilege that is given to them
under this Covenant: since, in this he becomes their God and bountiful Father,
Remembers their iniquities no more, Writes his law in their hearts, And
teaches them the high and deep truths of the Gospel. Jeremiah. 31.31, 32, 33,
34. Behold the days come says the Lord, I will make a new Covenant with the
house of Israel, and with the house of Judah, Not according to the Covenant
that I made with their Fathers, in the day that I took them by the hand to
bring them out of the land of Egypt, which my Covenant they break, although I
was an husband unto them says the Lord. But this shall be the Covenant that I
will make with the house of Israel after those days says the Lord, I will put
my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts: and will be their
God and they shall be my people. And they shall teach no more every man his
neighbor, and every man his Brother, saying, know the Lord. For they shall all
know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them: says the Lord, for
I will forgive their iniquities, and I will remember their sin no more.

Fifthly, Sometimes the everlasting Covenant, since God, does not only become our
God and Father; But our God and Father to eternity. Not only forgiving and
pardoning sin, but forgiving and pardoning sin and iniquity for ever and
evermore: Not only writing the law of life and love in the hearts of his
people, but he Characters it in their hearts by a Character that cannot be
deleted or extinguished. Isay 55.3. Incline your ear and come unto me, hear,
and your soul shall live. And I will make an everlasting Covenant with you,
even the sure mercies of David. Isaiah 54.10. For the Mountains shall depart,
and the Hills shall be removed, But my kindness shall not depart from thee,
neither shall the Covenant of my peace be removed, says the Lord that has
mercy on thee.

Sixthly, And in the text it is called the law of the Spirit of life.

1. Not only because it gives eternal life to the sons of Adoption.

2. Because that it frees the sons by Adoption from the Law of sin and
death: But also because it is established in the hand and breast of the Lord of
life. Romans 8.2. For the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has made me
free from the Law of sin and death.

2 Why is it termed the Law?

1. To answer, The truth of prophecy which has been delivered by the Holy
Ghost. Isaiah 2.3. And the people shall say, come ye, and let us go up to the
Mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob: and he will teach us
of his ways, and we will walk in his paths. For out of Sion shall go forth
the Law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.

2. To distinguish it from the Law of Nature, The Law Ceremonial and the Law
Morrall. Jer. 31.33. But this shall be the Covenant that I will make with the
house of Israel after those days says the Lord, I will put my Law in their
inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and they
shall be my People.

3. Metaphorically or Respectively, as the Laws in France are not the Laws of
Spain, nor the Laws of Spain, the Laws of England: So the Law of the spirit
of life is not the Law of Sin and Death.

4. To denote that although the Saints are not under the Law of accusation,
arraignment, execution, and condemnation: Nevertheless they are un-the Law of
grace, Faith, Peace, Mercy and Reconciliation. Romans 6.14. For sin shall not
have dominion over you, for ye are not under the Law but under grace.

Thirdly, Why the Law of the Spirit.

First, Because the Spirit reveals it. John 15.14. He shall glorify me,
because he shall receive of mine and declare it to you.

Secondly, Because the Spirit of God ingraves it in the hearts of all those
that are in Covenant with the Father and Jesus Christ, whom he has sent.

Thirdly, Because the promise of the Law or Covenant is consonant to the fruits
and workings of the Spirit of life and glory. Gal. 5.22. But the Fruits of the
Spirit is Love, Joy, Peace, Longsuffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith,
Meekness, Temperance, against such there is no Law.

Fourthly, Why in Christ Jesus? Not without grave consideration.

First, If all heavenly divine and excellent blessings are in Christ Jesus,
then the Covenant or Law of life is in Christ Jesus: but all heavenly divine
and excellent blessings are in Christ Jesus, therefore the Covenant or Law of
life is in Christ Jesus. Ephesians. 1.3. Blessed be the God and Fatther of our Lord
Jesus, who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in
Christ Jesus. 1 Cor. 1.^0. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is
made unto us Wisdom, and Right^eousnesse, and Sanctification, and Redemption.
Is wisdom without him that is the treasure of wisdom? No: Is Righteousness
without the Lord of Righteousness? No: Is Redemption without our blessed and
most gracious Redeemer? No: Is Sanctification without him that Sanctifies his
by his blood most dear? No: Or is the Covenant of Grace and life without the
Lord of life? No: In man there is not only the excellency of memory, the
rareness of affection, but also the highness of understanding: in the Sun
there is not only beauty, splendour, but rareness of efficacy: So there is not
only Redemption, Justice, Sanctification, and Wisdom: But also the Covenant
and Law of life and mercy.

Secondly, This Covenant or Law is established by the death of Christ Mediator:
Therefore it is meet and expedient that it should be in Christ Mediator, Heh.
9.15. And for this cause he is Mediator of the New Covenant or Testament,
that by means of death for the Redemption of the transgressions that were
under the first Testament, they which are called might receive the the promise
of eternal inheritance. Heb. 12.24. And to Jesus the Mediator of the new
Covenant, and to the blood of sprinckling: which speaks better things then
that of Abell.

Thirdly, Because that he has performed all that the Morrall Law requires,
the Morrall Law required of thee, absolute complete and entire Righteousness,
it demands of thee exact perfect and strickt obedience, it binds thee over that
thou shall not speak one word before the bar of Justice, that thou shoot no
arrow below the glory of God, and that thou answers eternal infinite and
equal commands of the Father, but thou art come too short of his glory, thy
obedience is not answerable to his requires, and thy arrows are on this side
the throne of grace and mercy: but the Lord Christ became the surety, he has
paid all thy debts; though more in number then the sand upon the Sea shore, he
has borne the sense of anger, of wrath, of heat and justice, when thou
stoodest quivering before the bar of justice then he answered for thee. When
Angels stood wist and silent, since they could not bear the heat of
everlasting burning, nor answer the severity and and purity of infinite and
eternal Justice, when men were whist and silent, since they were involved in
their blood, clothed in old rotten rags of Righteousness: and could not
answer the purity and Righteousness of the God of Righteousness: when all
Creatures might give in their voice we have Gold, Silver, Brass, Tin, Lead
and Iron: We have Pearls, Jewels, and rare Treasures; the beautiful Diamonds,
the costly Rubies, and the richest Saphirs, Yet all these cannot redeem one
from the Pit, Justify one in thy presence, bring one to the riches of
Inheritance, or to answer thy exact demands or requires: but we all confess
the truth of him as it is written of him; and not of us. Psalm. 40.7, 8. Then
said I lo I come, in the volume of thy book it is written of me: I delight to
do thy will O God; yea thy law is within my heart.

Fourthly, It has been expedient that the Law of life should be placed in the
Lord of Life: as the old Covenant or the law of Death was placed in the Loins
of Adam. It was not convenient that the Law of Faith should be in the Children
of Incredulity, that the Law of love and mercy should be in the Children of
Wrath and Fury, that the Testament of life and Reconciliation should be in the
Sons of Death and Condemnation: had this Covenant been made with us; as the
old Covenant was made with Adam, we had broken this Covenant as well as Adam.
Therefore such has been the eternal wisdom of the Father to establish the
Covenant in Christ since he was the son of Mercy, the son of Love, the son
of Grace and Bounty: He was he that was able to make us at once with the
Father, to nail our sins to the Cross, to bury them in his grave, to cast
our sins into the Sea of Oblivion, he was he that was able being the mind of
the Father to reveal the mind of the father: being the son of the bosom, to
make known what has been in his Fathers bosom, being the treasures of
wisdom, to manifest hidden Knowledge and Wisdom. Hence the Law of the
Spirit of life is said to be in Christ, and not in us according to the Text.
Romans 8.2. For the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has made me free
from the Law of sin and death.

Fifthly, Why freed Me? not only because of manifestation to the Churches of
Christ, that he had interest in the Liberty and Redemption by Jesus Christ, but
also that he might have great consolaion in the midst of all sorrows and
tribulations, as if he had said, though the Law has made War against me,
has slain me, has found me polluted, sinful, and defiled: and made me cry
out who shall deliver me from the body of this death, notwithstanding, from
that I am rescued and delivered according to the text. Romans 8.2. For the Law of
the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the Law of sin and
death.

Why says he from the law of sin (...)? some understand this to be law
ceremonial, but I understand this to be the law morrall; that it is not
proper to call the law ceremonial, the law of sin and death, I prove it thus.

First, That which was the only cause of death to the Beasts, and the
figurative imposition upon them to signify eternal life to the redeemed and
reconciled, that is not properly called the law of sin and death to us, but the
law ceremonial was the only cause of death to the beasts, and the figurative
imposition to signify eternal life to them that are reconciled and Redeemed.
Ergo.

Secondly, That which by the Holy Ghost is not called the law of sin and
death, is not the law of sin and death, but the holy Ghost has not called
the law ceremonial the law of sin and death; therefore it is not the law of
sin nor death: The Holy Ghost has attributed this to the morrall law. Romans
7.11. For sin taking occasion by the commandment deceived me, and by it slew
me. Romans 3.20, 21. Therefore by the deeds of the law there shall no flesh be
justified in his sight, for by the law is the knowledge of sin, but not the
righteousness of God without the law is manifest, being witnessed by the law
and the Prophets. 1 Cor. 15.55, 56. O death where is thy sting? O grave where
is thy victory? the sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the
law.

That law which figures out eternal life, Redemption and reconciliation, that
cannot be the law of sin and death, but the law ceremonial figured out
eternal life Redemption and reconciliation, therefore that cannot be the law
of sin and death, the ground is this, because the figure really answers to
the thing figured, the end of Heave offerings, signified the exaltation of our
Lord upon the Cross, the peace offerings, the reconciliation by Christ in the
day of his Cross, the burnt offerings, the satsfying of the justice of the
Father, to wit, the appeasement of wrath in the time of his cross; If I
should speak of the Cherubims, they signify nothing else but mercy, in that
they were covered with gold designs the riches of Christ, in that they spread
their wings one toward another, denotes the faith of the Saints toward the
throne of grace and mercy, in that the mercy seat was placed above the arc of
presence, signifies that Christ the Lord of life and salvation is exalted above
all things, and that his presence extends it self to his poorest and meanest
servants, in that God answered from the mercy seat between the Cherubims m^kes
known to the Saints Adopted, that they are to receive answer of prayers from
the breast of Christ to their poor souls.

The Law.

The gleanings of Ephraim, was better then the vintage of Abiezer, the law of
life and reconciliation, is better then the law of death and condemnation, the
one accuses before the bar of Justice, the other excuses before the thron of
grace, the one arraignes before the throne of Gods tribunal, the other acquits
before the mercy seat, the one condemns the soul and conscience of sin,
iniquity, and transgression, the other frees the soul from sin, iniquity,
and transgression; the one is the cause of curse and execration, the other the
cause of bliss and benediction; the one affrights, amazeth, and consternateth,
the other comfort, refreshes and consolates: one made the children of
Israel flee from mount Sina, the other makes us approach near to Mount Sion.
Heb. 12. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. For ye are not come to the mountain that
might be touched, and that burned with fire, not unto blackness and
darkness, and tempest; which voice they that heard, entreated that the word
should not be spoken to them any more, for they could not endure that which was
commanded; and if so much as a beast touch the mountain it shall be stoned or
thrust through with a dart: And so terrible was the sight, that Moses said, I
exceedingly fear and tremble: But ye are come unto Mount Sion, and unto the
City of the living God, and heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company
of Angels, to the general assembly, and Church of the first borne, which are
written in heaven, and God the judge of all, and to spirits of just men made
perfect: and to Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant, and to the blood of
sprinkling that speaks better things then that of Abell.

O ye prisoners of hope, weigh, consider and ponder, whether the Law of sin
and death, is like to the law of peace and life, has it revealed redemption to
bondmen? Adoption to slaves of hell and children of the devil? reconciliation
to those that shook and quivered in my presence? justification to those that
were found unrighteous in my sight? sanctification to those who have been
unholy before me? and glorification to those that were shut out from the
blessed fruition and communion of my Kingdom? what mention has it made of the
death of the Lord of life, and the incomparablenesse thereof, of the blood of
my dearly beloved son, and the richness thereof; of the cross of the
prince of glory, and the conquest thereof? If I speak of rest to my restless
prisoners, it is by the Gospel of Adoption, If I speak of peace to Captives,
it is by my word of reconciliation; If I speak of grace to them that are bound
in the black chains of darkness, it is by my message of grace and and
salvation. Is the voice of my servant Moses, like the voice of my beloved son
no, he was slow of speech, my son is swift to deliver my mind of grace to my
people, he was not eloquent, but my beloved he has the rarest sentences of
grace and bounty, Aaron his brother spoke for him to Pharaoh but my beloved for
all in matter of Mediation, and to al in the matter of reconciliation, he was
unwilling to speak to and for my people, but my beloved has been willing to
speak for my chosen and Adopted. John 17.9. I pray for them, I pray not for
the world, but for them which thou have given me. Heb. 5.7. Who in the days of
his flesh offered up prayers and supplications with strong crying and tears
unto him that was able to save him from death, and was heard in that he feared.
I gave to Moses the law of terrors to terrify them that are wilful sinners,
the law of horror to smite a horror into them that are incorriggable
transgressors, of severe equity to pronounce woe and misery to them that live
in sin and iniquity; I have honored my son above my servant. Heb. 3.5, 6.
And Moses verily was faithful in all his house as a servant; for a testimony
of those things which were to be spoken after, but Christ as a Son over his
own house, whose house are we, if we hold fast the confidence and the
rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end. Heb. 5.5. So also Christ glorified
not himself to be made an high Priest, but he that said to him, thou art my
son to day have I begotten thee. The Son by eternal generation is above the
son by Adoption. I thought non worthy in heaven above, in the earth below, o
under the earth worthy to deliver my mind, my will, my pleasure to my people,
but him whom I have made king and Lord over my people: there is none fit ot
declare the words of eternal life, but the fountain and welspring of life,
the words of peace Atonement and reconciliation; but he that by his blood has
purchased peace, atonement and reconciliation, the words of liberty, freedom
and redemption, but he that acquired by his death, liberty, freedom and
redemption. Apoc. 5.9.10. And they sung a new song, saying, thou art worthy to
take the book, and to open the seals thereof, for thou wast slain, and have
redeemed us to God by thy blood out of every kindred, and tongue, and people,
and nation, and has made us unto our God, Kings, and Priests, and we shall
reign on the earth. The words of protection, justification and sanctification
by his death, blood and righteousness, since he has protected his, justified
them through righteousness, and sanctified them thorough his words. John
17.17. he has spoken of peace, that procured peace. John 14.26. But the
comforter which is the holy Ghost, whom my Father will send in my name, he
shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance,
whatsoever I said unto you. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you,
not as the world gives, give I it unto you, let not your hearts be troubled,
neither let it be afraid. Words of life and victory, that obtained life and
victory. Apoc. 1.18. I am he that lives, and was dead, and behold I am alive
for evermore, Amen; and I have the keys of hell and death. Words of joy and
consolation, being the precious river and welspring of consolation. John 16.22.
And ye now therefore have sorrow, but I will see you again, and your heart shall
rejoice, and your joy no man takes from you. Who can speak words of my
gracious and glorious presence but Jmmanuell my presence? who can speak words
of life, but him that is the spring of eternal life, and Lord of life by
conquest from the dead? or who can speak words of liberty, freedom and
redemption, but him that I have appointed to be the deliverer of my people? the
Doctors have wondered at his sentences, the people admired at his gracious
speeches, and the Churches delectation was in the rarenss of his voice. Cant.
5. the last His mouth is most sweet, yea he is altogether lovely; this is my
beloved, and this is my friend, O daughters of Jerusalem! If he speak from the
throne of my grace and bounty, his words are only grace and bounty; If he
speak from the throne of mercy and pity, he speaks nothing but of grace and
pity: is it not thus recorded. Mat. 12.18, 19, 20. Behold my servant whom I
have chosen, my beloved in whom my soul is well pleased; I will put my spirit
upon him, and he shall show judgment unto the, Gentiles: he shall not strive,
nor cry, neither shall my man hear his voice in the streets: a bruised reed
shall he not break, and smoking flax shalhe not quench, till he send forth
judgment unto victory. His words are life to the lifelesse, grace to the
graceless, pity to the pitiless, and truth to the hopeless; his words are
freedom to the bound, health to the sick, healing to the wounded, binding to
the broken, and riches to the poorest under heaven. The words of Achitophel
were like the words of an Oracle. But the words of my beloved are Oracles: his
words surpasses the words of Solomon, he spoke of the nature of trees, of
plants, of herbs, and of all sublunarie things from the Cedar in Lebanon to
the Hysop upon the walls: The words of Christ are of grace, of mercy, of peace,
of truth from the highest mercy to the deepest miseries: all were happy that
might stand at the footsteps of Solomon, to hear his wisdom, but they are
happy that may stand at the feet of Christ to hear the wisdom of Christ;
the Queen of Sheba came from the South to hear the wisdom of Solomon; The
Prisoners of Hope departs from the bar of Justice to hear of the riches and
glory of Christ; Solomon was the wonder and admiration of the times because of
his wisdom and discretion: Christ the wonder and admiration of his Churches
because of his speeches and declaration. My soul, he that is thy peace, thy
rest, thy love, thy mercy; he shall be thy co^mander: he that is thy prince of
glory, thy Lord of life, he is thy gracious protector, he that is thy vine,
thy head, etc thy bridegroom, he shall be thy leader and rule: for grace and
peace came by him when the Law came by Moses. Ioh. 1.17. Redemption,
Justification and Reconciliation came by him when Condemnation adjudication
came by Moses, Consolations comforts joys and springs of solace came by him,
when terrors, horrors, fears and servitude came by Moses. Therefore thou shall
glory and express the praise of glory concerning the words of freedom and
liberty. Romans 8.2. For the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus has made
me free from the law of sin and death.

2. The Law of the Spirit of life

It has been said of Paradise; that it was the rarest place in the habitable
world: in respect of Altitude, in respect of Amaenetie, in respect of
Profunditude, and in respect of Jucunditie: the same may be spoken concerning
the Spirit of life and glory; it is extolled in respect of Altitude, since it is
in Christ who was placed in the high and heavenly places, of Amaenetie, since it
is the delight of the beloved Saints and peculiar, of Profunditude, since, it
sounds the lowest and deepest misery, of Jucunditie, since it makes the
drooping soul most joyous and cheerful. Therefore the same that was the joy
and glory of the blessed Apostle, is the joy and glory of the drooping soul;
joying and glorying in the words of the Apostle. Romans 8.2. For the Law of the
Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the Law of sin and
death.

The Law of the Spirit of life. Precious are the gifts and graces which come
from the Father of everlasting light, rare are the treasures which come from
the Lord of life and peace, rare and precious is the Law of life which is from
and of the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus. What is so jucundious?
what is so amaenious? or what is so joyous? as the spirit of Adoption? which
seals the soul up to the day of eternal Redemption; or what can be so
pleasant, so delightsome or joyful as the spirit that consolates the soul in
the midst of all distresses? or what can be so rare, so wonderful and
admirable as the law of of the spirit of life? that frees us from the law of
sin and death, the seal of the spirit does rejoice thee in the day of thy
Adoption, the disconsolated are consolated in the day of Consolation, the
wanting and vacuous are filled with joys in the day of impletion, and the soul
is filled with all fullness and sweetness in the day of liberation, hence
comes in our joyfullnesse and fulness; that as we receive our peace from the
Prince of peace, our righteousness from the Lord of righteousness; so we
receive the law of life from the spirit of life in Christ Jesus. If thou have
the revelation of the mystery of the Kingdom it is by the spirit. Mat. 16.11.
He answered and said unto them, because it is given unto you to know the
mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, but to them it is not given. If to thee is
given to know the deep and profound things of God, it is by the spirit. 1 Cor.
2.10. But God has revealed them unto us by his spirit, for the spirit
searches all things, yea the deep things of God. If to thee is given to know
the mind of God before the world was, it is by the spirit. Ephesians. 4.7. But to
every one of us is given grace according to the gifts of Christ. Ephesians. 3.5.
That to other Generations has not been known to the sons of men is now
revealed to the Apostles and prophets by the spirit. So if there is a
revelation of the mystery of glory to Babes and Sucklings and denied to the
learned Doctors and Rabbis of the world it is by the spirit. Mat. 11.
25.26.27. At that time Jesus answered and said, I thank thee O Father Lord of
Heaven and Earth, because thou have hide these things from the wise and
prudent, and have revealed them to Babes, even so Father for so seemed good to
thy sight. All things are delivered unto me of my Father, and no man knows
the son, but the Father, neither knows any man the Father but the son,
and he to whom soever the son will reveal him. None can write the law of God
in the hearts of the Saints but the spirit of Christ, as none can seal to the
Conscience the everlasting love of God the Father, and the precious treasures
of Jesus Christ, but the spirit of glory: as none can give the spirit of
oration to them that cannot pray, the spirit of consolation, to them that sit
in mourning weeds but the spirit of Comfort: so none can write the mind of God
in the conscience, or the will of Christ in the spirit of the Saints, but the
spirit of assurance or obsignation. Hence it is recorded by the Apostle. 2 Cor.
3.3. Ye are our Epistles, written in our hearts, which is known and read of
all men manifest to be the epistle of Christ, etc.

The same spirit that reveals unto the Saints the unsearchable riches of
Christ, that engraves the heavenly and gracious mind of the Father in the
consciences of the Redeemed; the same quickens the soul by the mighty power of
life and vivification, when we lay dead in sins and trespasses, when we were
trodden in our bloods by the Horsemen of Hell and Death, when we were involved in
the depth of the gulf of miseries, then by the same spirit of him who raised
Jesus from the dead, we were quickened, therefore not without cause is he called
the spirit of life.

First, In the respect of Christ?

Secondly, In respect of the life that the Saints receive through unio^ by the
spirit.

Thirdly, In respect of that life the Saints receive through Faith, Love, and
hope by the spirit in the act of communion.

When our Lord was in the grave, neither hell, nor death, nor law, nor justice,
nor all the force of the creature could retain him: for he showed himself the
Lord of life by rising from the dead Apoc. 1.18. I am he that lives and was
dead, I am alive forever more, Amen, and have the keys of Hell and death. Lord
over sin by the blood of his cross. Col. 2.14.15 Blotting out the hand writing
of ordinances which was against us, which was contrary to us, and took it out
of the way, nailing it to his cross, and having spoiled principalities and
powers, he made a show of them openly, triumphing over them all. Conqueror over
the Divill by the power of his death. Heb. 2.24. For as much then as the
children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself took part of the
same, that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death; that
is the Devil. Victorer over the law and over all accusations by his
intercession. Romans 8.33, 34. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
Elect? it is God that justifies, who is it that condemns? It is Christ that
died, yea rather that is risen again; who is even at the right hand of God:
who also makes intercession for us. Triumpher over Captives, and leading
captivity captive by the power of his assention. It was impossible our Lord
should be retained by the bonds of death, the barts of hell, and the power of
the Devil: not only because it has been the determinate counsel of the
Father, not to leave his soul in grave, nor suffer his holy one to see
corruption. Acts 2.27 Because thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither
will thou suffer thy holy one to see corruption. Because of that pity he had
to his beloved Spouse, his dearest members, and his tender branches; Ephesians.
2.6. And has raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly
places in Christ Jesus, because of the dignity of himself, being King of his
Church Lord of life, and Mediatur of the Covenant Acts 2.24. Whom God has
raised up; having gloosed the pains of death because it was not possible he
should be houlden of it. But also because of the mighty and infinite power of
the spirit of glory, which raised up our Lord of life and Prince of glory. O my
soul! consider, consider what the spirit of life has done for thy foul! Had
not our Lord been raised from the dead by the spirit of life; sin would have
crushed thy conscience to the lowest gulf of misery; the Devil like a roaring
Lion would have devoured thee, the law of terrors would have bound thee to the
bar of eternal justice to eternity death would have delivered thee to the
second death forevermore, and all evils would have ceased upon thy spirit for
ever and ever. The^ might thou have said with the Psalmist, The sorrows of
death had compassed thee, and the evils of hell had found thee, thou foundest
woe and sorrow then might thou have spoken with Hezekiah; That thou wast
forsaken as a Shepards Tent, that justice would have been as a Lion to break
all thy bones, thou might have mourned as a Dove, and chattered as a Crain
to the days of eternity. Saying That thou should behold his gracious face
no more, behold his gracious countenance no more, but remain in everlasting
chains under darkness for evermore.

Should thou have been so happy as Jonah? no, he was but in the belly of
the Whale, but thou should have been in the belly of hell, he was in the
depth of the sea, but thou should have bee^ in the depth of the bottomless
pit, the waves of the sea and the bellows thereof encompassed him, but the
waves of greatest sorrows and bellows of exceeding wrath should have
encompassed thee; he was heard out of the belly of the Whale and his prayer
came into his holy temple, but thy prayer should have been shut out from his
glorious presence and should not have appeared before the throne of grace, a
Goard was provided for him to hide his head from the heat of the Sun, but no
shelter nor shadow had bee^ provided for thee to hide thy soul from
everlasting burnings. Where had been the glorying of the Saints, had our Lord
not been raised from the dead? we should have had no cause to glory in the
blood and death of his cross, no cause of triumphing in a glorious
presentation, in a hapy reconciliation, in an absolute abolition of the hand
writings which were written against us. Where had been our redemption from
death, and the fear thereof, from the grave and the sting thereof, from out of
the hands of the Devil, and and the slavery thereof, from the law and the
execration thereof? where had been our royal Robes of Righteousness? our
garments of glorious salvation and justificatio^ in his glorious presencs? if
the holy one had seen corruption: the branches of the rarest vine should have
withered, the members to the head of purest gold would have perished, and the
spouses to our blessed and dearest Bridegroom would have been clothed with
shame and reproah for ever. But blessed, thrice blessed be that name is blessed
forevermore, since, he has raised the head and the members, the branches and
the vine, the bridegroom and the spouses together. He that left not our Lord
in the grave has not left the Redeemed of the Lord in the pit of destruction,
he that suffered not the son of the bosom to see corruption, will not suffer
the sons by adoption to be swallowed up by everlasting perdition. Therefore
you sons and daughters of men, we will not only glory in Christ's incarnation,
in Christ's crucifixtion, in his grave, burial and glorious assention, but also
in his victorious and triumphous Resurrection. The risse of the son of
righteousness is more to us then the sun of morning light, that delights the
eye and sense of sublunaries, this the souls of distressed consciences: that
causes the herbs, plants and trees to rise out of the earth, this causes the
branches spouses and members of Christ to rise out of the lowest pit, that
removes darkness and brings in a light Diurnal, this removes darkness
and brings in a light eternal. That is the plenitude above, and the riches
of the earth beneath, this is the riches of the Church Militant, and the
plenitude of the Church Triumphant. Therefore will we glory in the spirit of
life, according to the Text Romans 8.2. For the law of the spirit of life in
Christ Jesus has made me free from the law of sin and death.

The spirit of life.

Sweet and pleasant is the expression of Job, Will the wild Ass roar when he
has grass? or will the Ox low when he has fother? or will the dead soul
mourn for life? when it has the spirit of life? Noe, it will joy it self in
the spirit of joy, and consolate it self in the spirit of consolation,
triumphing with the Apostle, because the spirit of life has freed it from the
law of sin and death: according to the Text. Romans 8.2. For he law of the
spirit of Life^ in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the law of sin and
death.

Secondly, It is called the spirit of life, since that the spirit is the cause
of union with the Lord Jesus, by which the Saints receive both life spiritual
and life eternal. My prisoners of Hope, and Bond men to the throne of mercy:
know and consider, that it is not in your powers to enjoy union with me and
Jesus Christ whom I have sent, the spot of your sin, the blott of your
transgressions, and the impurity of your iniquities has prevented, the
exactness, rigidnesse and perfection of my law most pure has hindered, the
eternity, the infinite and the purity of my divine justice lets. Could your
darkness bring it self to my glorious light? I dwell in the light
unaccesable. 1 Timothy 6.16. Who only has immortality, dwelling in the light whom
no man has seen, nor can see, to whom be honor, and power everlasting amen.
Can your impurity reach my infinite and eternal purity? I am a God that can
behold no iniquity. Haback. 1.13. Thou art of pu rer eyes then to behold
evil, and can not look on iniquity; wherefore look thou upon them that
deal^ trechearously, and hold thy tongue when the wicked devoureth the man
that is more righteous then he. Can thy death atting and touch my life and
being from eternity to eternity.

I am alone the fountain of living waters. Jer. 2.13. For my people have
committed two evils, they have forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and
hewed them out Cisternes, broken Cisternes that can hold no water. Or can your
lowness and profunditie: reach the highness of my sublimitie? I dwell in the
high and the holy place. Isaiah 57.15. For thus says the high and lofty one,
that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is holy; J dwell in the high and holy
place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the
spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones. Could Dives
pass the gulf of hell to the bosom of Abraham? No, can a bird without wings
reach the hight of the sun? No, can a man without eyes behold the highest
orbs? No, or can thy soul that is involved in the law of horrid iniquity
unite it self to me? No, this way of union was not found in the habitable
world, but in my habitation of glory: this was not found in the depths below,
but in the heights above: this was not found in thy breasts and invention, but
in my breasts of heavenly compassion: well says the scripture. Man knows not
the price thereof, neither is it found in the land of the living, the depth
says it is not in me, and the sea says it is not in me, God understands the
way thereof, and he knows the place thereof. Therefore this was my wisdom
to give this Glory to my beloved son, John 17 22. and the glory which thou
gave me, J have given them, that they may be one even as we are one. That by
his blood he might make them which are afar off nigh to me. Ephesians. 2.13. But
now in Christ Jesus, ye who sometimes were far off, are made nigh by the
blood of Christ. That by the death of his cross he might make of two one.
Ephesians. 2.15. Having abolished in his flesh the enmity, even the law of
Commandments, contained in Ordinances, for to make in himself of twain one
new man: so making peace. And that he might bring them to me that never knew
the riches of my grace. Ephesians. 2.18. For through him we both have an access by
one spirit unto the father. Until I came to live in my people to make the^ a
habitation and dwelling place, till I made them habitations of glory for the
spirit of my glory, they were as far from me, as my dwelling place is from
the lowest hell, as the clearest light is from the greatest darkness, and the
bar of my Justice from the throne of mercy. But my spirit gives them a being
in the heavenly places, my spirit removed all the letts betwixt me and my
people, my spirit gives them to enjoy a being real in me and in the dearest of
my breast 1 These. 1.1. Paul and Silvanus and Timotheus to the Church of
Thessalonica, which is in God the Father; and in the Lord Jesus Christ: grace
be unto you, and peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ. Hence
all the branches, receive their life from the vine Christ Jesus; hence also the
members receive their vital motion from their head Christ Jesus, hence the
spouse receives her being from the bridgroome Jesus Christ through and by the
spirit of life, therefore comes in the glorying and expression of my people
according to the text; For the law of the spirit of life in Christ, has made
me free from the law of sin and death.

Thirdly, because of the life of Faith, and love, and hope which is given thee
by the Spirit of life.

It was not the shadow of Peter that healed the sick and weak, but the
overshadowing grace from the throne of eternal mercy: it was not the
handkerchiefes and neckcloathes of Paul that drove out devils, but the
omnipotent power of the eternal mediator; it was not the water in Baptism
that washes away sin, but the blood of Christ: so it has not been in the
purity and strength of the sons of death to free themselves from the Law of
sin and death; but in the power of the law of life according to the text.
Romans 8.2. For the Law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus has made me from
the law of sin and death. You that have been Prisoners without hope, as by
the blood of my Testament, I have sent you out of the pit where there is no
water, so by the law of my life I have freed you from the law of sin and death.
I have made you to live the life of faith, when I hide my face, the light of my
dearest love and gracious countenance, when I covered my self with darkness,
and wrapped my self in a clowd; when I seemed to bid farrwell, as though I would
see you no more, then I made you to live by faith which was in me, when as my
servant Jonas was in the depth of the Sea, in the gulfes beneath, environed in
the mighty waters, and in the belly of the devouring whale, I made him to call
upon my name, and to look toward my holy Temple: when thou wast in the depths
of the sea of miseries, in the ocean of miserable iniquity, notwithstanding I
have made thee look to the throne of my grace and bounty, and highest mercy:
when I suffered thee to be mocked, scoffed, derided, scorned, to be stoned,
deprived of bread convenient, shutt out from amongst the dearest and nearest
friends, bringing thee to the gates of deepest miseries, and to the prison
where thou should have lost thy liberty; notwithstanding, I have made thee
live by faith which is in me, I have brought thy faith into Christ; there thou
live, there thou delightest, there thou restest, there thou dwell, there
thou joyest, and there abidest; as the seat of the Eagle is upon the rock
undervaluing all inferior places, so thy habitation is in Christ the rock of
righteousness and thou undervaluest all sublunarie and inferior things. As I
have made the promises yea and Amen to the praise of my glory; so I have made
thee to rest upon those promises to eternal glory. As I am become thy most
benignous and gracious Father in my Covenant to perpetuity, so will I make
thee live by love through my Covenant to Eternity. If I have taken up my rest,
my contentment, my acquiescence and complacencie through atonement: If I have
filled the son of my love with the treasures of hidden wisdom and science,
the treasures of pure and unspotted righteousness, it is because thou might
live by faith which is in me: at that time thou may answer the words of my
faithful Apostle. Gal. 2.20. I am crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live,
yet not I, but Christ lives in me, and the life which I now live in the flesh,
is by the faith of the son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me.

If thou had been with Noah in the Arc, thou would have lived above the
waters. If with Daniel, in the Lyonsden, thou would have lived by the
strength of the Lion of the Tribe of Judah. If with Shadrech, Meshech and
Abednego in the fiery furnace, thou would have lived by the fire of love
and by my promise of deliverance out of the fire. Isaiah 43.2. When thou
passest thorough the waters, I will be with thee, and through the rivers, they
shall not overflow thee, when thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be
burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. Out of the eater comes meat,
and out of the strong comes sweetness: from love comes love to Christ again,
We love him because he loved us first. 1 Ioh. 4.19. and out of the strongnesse
of Christ comes the pleasantness and sweetness of the Saints. Ephesians. 3.20.21.
Now unto him that is able to do exceedingly and abundantly above all we ask
or think, according to the power that works in us, unto him be glory in the
Church by Christ Jesus throughout all ages world without end Amen. Hence they
are filled with glorious expressions, expressing the love of Christ in their
freedom and liberation according to the text. Rom 8.2. For the law of the
spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the law of sin and
death. Till I appeard in the rare expression of my love, thou lovedst the
vanities, the treasures, the glory, the riches and power of the Creature before
me; till I powered out the savor of my sweet ointments, and caused my
frankincence to smell in thy nostrills, thou love thy self above me, till I
let my fingers drop the myrhe, the sweet distilling mirhe; thou sattest at rest
and soughtest not after me, but in the day of the effusio^ of my sweet
oyntme^ts I made thee love me. Cant. 1.2, 3. Let him kiss me with the kisses
of his mohth, for his love is better then wine, because of the savor of thy
good ointments, thy name is as ointment poured forth, therefore do the virgins
love thee: in the time of the distillations of my mithe, I made thee seek
after me. Cant. 5.4 5, 6. My beloved put in his hand into the hole of the
door, and my bowels were moved for him. I rose up to open to my Beloved, and
my hands dropped with Myrrh, and my fingers with sweet smelling myrrh upon the
handles of the locks. I opened unto my beloved, but my beloved had with-drawne
himself and was gone, my soul failed when he spoke, I sought him, but I could
not find him, I called him, but he gave me no answer. Assuredly thou did
account of the treasures of the mountains, above the riches of the heavenly
places, the riches of the seas, above the riches of the sea of sure mercies,
thou did value the riches of Kingdoms, above the riches of my heavely
kingdom, and thou did prize the earthly jewel^s above the jewel of jewels
and the precious jemmes, above the precious stone, the foundation of my
Redeemed, when my love appeared above women, then thou did love me above
women; when my love appeared to thee above riches, treasure, honors, kingdoms
and provinces, then thou lovedst me above Kingdoms and provinces, above
riches, treasures and honors, thou wast not sick of love till my love made
thee sick of love. Cant. 5.8. I charge you O daughters of Jerusalem, if ye
find my beloved, tell him that I am sick of love. Thou wast not overpowred
with the overpowrings of my Love, till I overpowred thee with my precious love;
can the waters from below water the fruitful and barren soil without me? or
can the rain drop showers from the clouds without me? or can the soul have
the overflowings of love without my spirit? no. Romans 5.5. And hope makes not
ashamed because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost,
which is given unto us. Can thou know that supereminent love of my son
without I show my grace supereminent? no. Ephesians. 2.6, 7. And has raised us up
together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus; that in
the ages to come, he might show forth the exceeding riches of his grace, in his
kindness toward us through Christ Jesus. Ephesians. 3.19. And to know the love of
Christ, which passes knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the fullness
of God. Or could thou have known the height, the depth, the length or
breadth of my dearest faviour without my spirit? No, Ephesians 3.16.17, 18. That he
would give you according to the riches of his glory, to be strenghened with
might by his spirit in the inner man: that Christ may dwell in your hearts by
faith that ye being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to comprehend
with all saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth and height, and to
know the love of Christ which passes knowledge. Hence thy experience
witnesses, that the spirit of life is thy life of love and freedom. Romans 8.2.
For the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has made thee free from the
law of sin and death.

What is the light of the Candle to the light of the Moon? or the light of of
the Moon to the light of the son? or what is the light of the Sun to
Christ the son of glorious righteousness? when by the light of his glorious
countenance he shines upon the soul by giving to it the life of faith in God.
Acts 26.18. To open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and
from the power of Satan to God, that they may receive the forgiveness of
sins and inheritance amongst them which are sanctified, through faith that is
in me. The life of love in Christ. Ephesians. 1.15. Wherefore I also after I heard
of your faith in the Lord Jesus, and love unto all the saints. And the life of
hope in the promise. 2 Cor. 1.20. For all the promises of God in him are yea,
and in him Amen: nuto the glory of God by us. Heb. 11.1. Now faith is the
substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen. Hence we
glory not only in the spirit of life but in the law of the spirit of life. Romans
8.2. For the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has made me free from
the law of sin and death. I gave to thee the life of faith, faith is my
gift. Ephesians. 2.10.8. For we are his workmanship created in Jesus Christ unto
good works, which God has before ordained, that we should walk in them. For
by grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your selves: it is the
gift of God. I gave to thee the life of love, when I gave the son of love.
Joh. 3.16. for God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten son,
that whosoever believes one him should not perish, but have everlasting lif. I
gave to thee the life of hope, when I gave to thee the lively hope through the
resurrection from the dead 1 Pet. 1.3. Blessed be God and the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundance mercy, has begotten us
again to a lively hope, by the resurection of Jesus Christ from the dead. When
I have made mine to walk in sheep skins, and Goats skins in dens and caves
of the earth for my names sake, I gave them hope of everlasting righteousness
reigning by grace unto eternal life. Romans 5. last. For as sin has reigned
unto death, even so might grace reign through righteousness unto eternal
life by Jesus Christ our Lord. When I gave them neither favor Love, nor
Footsteps in or amongst the Creature, I have given to them a City whose maker
and builder is my self. Heb. 11.16. But now they desire a bettter Country,
that is an heavenly; wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God, for
he has prepared for them a City. When I made them undergo Shipwracks,
Stonings, Defamie, Reproach, Disdain, Contempt, Malice, Wrath, Envy,
Backbitings, Slanderings, Scornings, by them that under the profession of my
praise and glory; are enemies to the throne of my praise and glory. I gave them
hope in the eternal weight of my glory. 2 Cor. 4.17.18. For our light
afflictions whcih is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory, while we look not one things that are seen, but one
things that are not seen, for the things which are seen are temporal, but the
things which are not seen are eternal. Hence they expect a new heaven and a
new earth, in which is righteousness. 2 Pet. 3.13. We wait for a new heaven
and a new earth, in which is Righteousness. Hence they expect the light of my
presence, and pleasures for evermore Psalm. 16. last. Thou will show me the
path of life, in thy presence is fulness of joy, at thy right hand there are
pleasures for evermore. Hence they look for the Crown of glory, the Crown of
life, and the Crown of righteousness. 2 Timothy 4.8. Hence forth is laid up for
me a Crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me
at that day, and not to me only, but unto them also, that love his appearing.
And not without cause, since I have not only given unto them my oath and
promise, but the law of the spirit of my life to free them from the law of sin
and death. Heb. 6.18, 19. That by two immutable things in which it was
impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong consolation, who have fled
for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us. Which hope we have as an
Ancor of the soul, both sure and steadfast, and which enters into that within
the veil. Romans 8.2. For the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus has
freed them from the law of sin and detah.

The Father has given to Christ the highest sublimitie, and shall I cease to
mention so great a dignity? as the plenitude of sentence to conceiveme^t is
mystical, so Christ's kingly dignity is unutterable, though the rationalls
cannot behold the Sun with full spectation, yet the Sun must not hinder them
from beholding, though of Christ the Lord of life we make no full dimention,
yet the excellency of the law of life must not hinder us from declaring; hence
admirable has been the expression of life from the law of life, since by that
we are freed from the law of sin and death. Romans 8.2. For the law of the
Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has made us free from the law of sin and
death.

The law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus.

It was said of Jonathan and Saul that they were lovely and amiable in their
life's, and were not divided in their deaths. It may be said of Christ that he
was Amiable and lovely being the Lord of life, and that his love was not
separated from his death; for in his death he abolished sin totally, overcame
the devil victoriously, and stopped the mouth of the accusing law wonderfully,
in his life we enjoy eternal life, a life spiritual in the heavenly places.
Romans 8.2. For the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus has made us free
from the law of sin and death.

The rareness or pretiousnesse of the covenant consists in three things.

First, In the freeness of the Covenant.

Secondly, in the eternity of the Covenant.

Thirdly, in the place or collocation of the Covenant.

The rareness of this Covenant or law of life in Christ is in that it is a
free covenant or law of life in Christ: The effects of my covenant are free, I
became a God freely to mine in covenant. What beauty? what glory? what
splendour? what righteousness? what holiness? what performances have I seen
in them? the best of their righteousness were menstruous clothes and defiled
garments. Isa. 64 6. But we are all as an unclean thing, and all our
righteousness are as filthy rags, and we all do fade as a leaf, and our
iniquities like the wind have taken us away. The purest of their robes are no
better then rattered rags of the old Adam, the rarest of their purities,
impurities, of their righteousness, unrighteousness, and of their godliness,
ungodliness. It was I that washed them from their blood in the blood of my
dear son, when they were involved in their blood. Apo. 1.5. And from Jesus
Christ who is the faithful witness, and the first begotten of the dead, and
the prince of the Kings of the earth, unto him that has loved us, and washed
us from our sins in his own blood. It was I that clothed them in the robes
of pure righteousness, when they were cast out naked to the shame of their
faces. Ezekiel. 16.8. Now when I passed by thee, and looked upon thee, behold thy
time was the time of love, and I spread my skirt over thee, and covered thy
nakedness, yea I swear unto thee, and entered into a covenant with thee says
the Lord God, and thou becamest mine. It was I that looked upon mine in the
days of shame and reproach, when neither men nor Angels did regard them. Eze.
16.5.6. No eye pitied thee to do any of these unto thee, to have compassion
upon thee, but thou wast cast out in the open field to the loathing of thy
person in the day that thou wast borne: and when I passed by thee, and saw thee
polluted in thine own blood, yea I said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood
live; Had they obtained mercy, before I by mercy became their God and Father by
covenant? No, Hosea 2. the last. And I will sow her unto me in the earth, and I
will have mercy upon her that had not obtained mercy, and I will say to them
which were not my people, thou art my people, and they shall say thou art my
God, Were they my people before I said they shall be my people? No. Romans 9.25,
26, As he says also in Osea, I will call them my people, which were not my
people, and her beloved which was not beloved, and it shall come to pass that
in the place where it was said unto them ye were not my people, there they
shall be called the Children of the living God. Or were they espoused to me for
ever, before I espoused them to me for ever. Hos. 2.19. And I will betroth thee
unto me in righeousnesse, and judgment, and in loving kindness, and in
mercy. Let mine behold the freeness of my love in the pardon of sin through
the Covenant of grace and mercy. If I had not pardoned their sins, had I not
cast them out of my presence as I cast Adam out of Paradise? Had I not cast
them out from the communion of my glory of blessedness, as I cast out my Angels
from the fruition of my glory and happiness? Had I not caused hell to swallow
them as the earth did Corah, Dathan and Abiram? when all the fountains were
shut, I opened to them a precious fountain in the sides of my dearest Son. I
gave the blood of the most pure, spotless, and undefiled, without spot,
wrinckle, and unstained, incomparable, inestimable and unutterable, though I
judge the worth of his blood above the worth of a Thousand worlds, above the
price of ten thousand jewels, above the riches of all the celestial wights,
yet I gave that for mine, that they by that might be cleansed, and I might see
sin no more, that they by that might be re^onciled, and I might remember
sin no more, hence have I blotted out their sins and iniquities as the
thickest cloud. Isay 44.22. I have blotted as a thick cloud thy transgressions,
and as a cloud thy sins, return unto me, for I have redeemed thee. Hence I
deleted their transgressions for my names sake. Isay 43.25. I, even I am he,
that blotteth out thy transgressions for my own sake, and I will not remember
thy sins. Hence I cast all their sins into the bottom of the sea. Micah
7.18.19. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and p^sseth by
the transgression of the remnant of his heritage, he retains not his anger
for ever, because he delights in m^rcy? he will turn again, he will have
compassion upon us, he will subdue our iniquities, and thou will cast all
their sins into the d^^th of the Sea.

In my Covenant of free grace I have given Christ to be mediator, what is more
precious the^ gold? or what is more excellent then light? or what is of greater
value then his intercession in the behalf of my redeemed Is it a small matter
for the son of a King to mediate in the behalf of traiterous and rebellious
subjects? or it is a small matter that he that is King of Kings should become
mediator in the behalf of poor distressed sinres? As I have commended my
highest love that he should shed his blood for sinful wretches. Romans 5.8. But
God commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ
dyed for us. So I have commended my dearest love that he should be mediator
for woeful transgressions. 1 Timothy 2.5. For there is one God and one Mediator
between God and man, the man Christ Jesus. Whilst neither Angels Cherubins
nor celestial wights were able to present my people one how er spotless in my
sight and pure presence, he is able to the days of eternity to present all the
prisoners of my hope entire before the light of my countenance, for he has
washed them in his blood most pure and undefiled. He has set them before me
in the heavenly places, and they are in his breast without spot presented, I can
behold none but the son of my love, being the God and father of love. I can
behold none but the Lord of Righteousness, since I am the God and Father of
Righteousness: when I look upon him who was my delight before the world was,
how can I choose but delight in them who were sons of wrath and children of the
devil. When I cast mine eye upon him that was the Complacencie of my breast
and bosom, I cannot choose but have effection toward them who have been
distant from my bosom. Whilst I fix mine eye upon the mediator of the
Covenant, I will not hearken to the clamours of the world, the roarings of the
devil, the accusations of the Law, the terrors and complaints of the
conscience, nor to any evils whatsoever. I will alone hearken to his plea and
Mediation, (he says) my death is sufficient to redeem and ransom mine from
eternal death, my blood incomparable to remove all iniquities, my passion able
to remove thy terrible indignation, had I not made a full and entire
reconciliation, had I not obtained the throne of grace and mercy, had I left
either sin, spot, wrinckle, stain, blemish, or defilement unremoved, had not
the value of my blood been above all bloods, the worth of my death above all
deaths, and price of Atonement above all Atonements, then thy wrath, thy fury,
and indignation might have broken out against my chosen as the inundation of
the mighty waters, but now I know thou love mine, whom I have purchased, and
delightest in mine whom I have ransomed. My mediation surpasses the mediation
of Aaron, that was the son of man, this by me the son of God, hence I sit
at the right hand of God to make intercession for mine. Romans 8.34. Who is he
that condemns, it is Christ that dyed, yea rather that is risen again, who
is even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us. Aaron
entered into the holy of holiest below, but I enter into the holy of holiest
into the heavenly places. Heb. 9.24. But Christ is not entered into the holy
places made with hands, which are the figures of the true, but into heaven it
self, now to appear in the presence of God for us. Aaron was anointed with
oil made with the confection of the Apothicary, but I was anointed with the
oil of gladness above my fellows. Heb. 1.9. Thou have loved righteousness,
and hated iniquity, therefore God even thy God has anointed thee with the
oil of gladness above thy fellows. Aaron he only killed beasts for burnt
offerings, for peace offerings and heave offerings, but I was slain for the
peace of my people, that I might bring mine to enjoy everlasting fruition and
communion of my Fathers love and glory. Acts 2.23. Him being delivered by the
determinate council and foreknowledge of God, yea have taken, and by wicked
hands have crucified and slain. Aaron dyed and another succeeded in his place,
but I live for ever to make atonement and entercession for my reconciled. Heb.
7.2.5. wherefore he is able to the uttermost to save them which come unto God
by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them. Aaron neither
entered into the land of Canaan, nor brought others into the land of Canaan. But
I have entered into my Fathers kingdom and provided that for the children of
the kingdom. John 14.2, 3. In my Fathers house are many mantions, if it were
not so I would have told you, I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go,
and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you unto my self;
that where I am, there you may be also. Aaron had the names of the Children of
Jsrael engraven in precious stones, and wore them upon his breast that he
might present their names and cause in the presence of my Father I have the
names of mine engraven upon my breast, that I may ever present the cause of the
Israel of God in my Fathers presence: hence it is said of of me, that I might
appear in the presence of God for mine. Heb. 9.24. For Christ it not entered
into the holy places made with hands which are figures of the true, but into
Heaven it self now to appear in the presence of God for us. ut supra

Secondly, The Father has given. Christ to be the object of Faith through the
Covenant^, according to that thy eye beholds, so is thy mind affected,
according to that the ear hears, so is the spirit delighted, according to
that thou conceivest of Christ, so thy soul imbraceth. The lowest thoughts
thou have it as heigh as the heavenly mantion, and the heighest thought thou
have is as heigh as Christ Lord and Mediator, thou know or no mercy, no
grace, no bounty, no pity, no love, no joy, no rest, no hope, no promise, no
glory, nor no felicity without Christ: rest is no rest, if Christ be not thy
rest, hope is no hope, if Christ be not thy hope, felicity should be no
felicity, If Christ be not thy felicity, and all things are nothing if Christ
be not all things. If thou injoyest light diurnall is it not from the sun in
the midst of the planets? If thou injoyest rain from the clouds, is it not
from the rain therein contained? If thou injoyest hope, rest and felicity, is
it not because it is in Christ comprehended? all the rivers of the vallie wants
water, but Christ's river. Psalm. 46.4. There is a river, the streams thereof
shall make glad the City of our God. All the Fountains of the world are empty,
but Christ's Fountain. John 4.14. But whosoever drinks of the water that I
shall give him shall never thirst, but the water that I shall give him, shall
be in him a well of water springing up to eternal life. And all the springs
upon the earth are vacant or void, but Christ's overflowing sprinsg. Psalm. 36.9,
10. For with thee is the fountain of life, in thy light we shall see light. Who
from the beginning of the world ever heard of reconciliation, but through him?
was not he the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world? who amongst the
prisoners of hope ever heard of deliverie without him? was not he the promised
deliverer? Isaiah 59 20. And the Redeemer shall come to Sion, and unto them
that turn from transgression in Jacob says the Lord. Who amongst the poor
and bruised of the Saints? ever heard of riches and liberty of the Saints
without him? is he not the anointed of the Lord? Luke 4.18. The spirit of the
Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach the Gospel to the poor,
he has sent me to heal the broken hearted to preach deliverance to the
Captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are
bruised. Did Moses hear of mercy, clemency, bounty, patiencie and of verity in
the rock? and do not we of the same in the rock Christ? yea, he is the
rarest object. Does the sun draw the Comets and Meators from below above? and
the Loadstone draw the needle distant to it? and does not Christ the Son of
beauty and the precious stone of glory, draw the soul in misery to his highest
mercies? Joh. 12.32. And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men
after me. Hosea 2.14. Therefore behold I will allure her, and bring her into
the wilderness, and speak comfortably unto her. Not only the savor of his
ointments allures us, not only his sweet distilling Myrrh affects us, but his
strength of operation draws us. Virtue and strength went from Christ, whereby
the woman was healed, and the virtue and dignity of Christ is that whereby the
soul is fixed. Hence says the Scripture. John 1.14. And the word was made
flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only
begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth. Hence, it does not only choose
Christ to be its Vine of sweetness, its shepherd because of his tender care
and pity, the Lord its rightousnesse because he alone wrought righteousness,
but also its object of delight and delectation; since he is the only object of
delight and delectation. Hence is the Churches delight and delectation. Ostende
faciem tuam, sonet vox tua in auribus meis: vox enim tua dulcis, and facies tua
decora. O my soul pitch thou alone upon the treasures of his wisdom, the
storehouse of his mercy, the plenitude of heavenly blessings, upon his abundant
grace truth, righteousness, goodness, clemency, merit, death, and
satisfaction, upon his glory, peace, rest and reciliation, upon his liberty
from slavery, his freedom from bondage, and everlasting redemption, upon his
hope, bliss, felicity and eternal benediction. If thou brayest as the heart
brayeth after the rivers of water, it shall be after Christ. Psalm. 42.1, 2. As
the heart pants after the water brooks, so pants my soul after thee my
God, my soul thirsts for God, after the living God, when shall I come and
appear before God. If thou thirsts, as the thirsty land it shall be after
Christ. Psalm. 63.1. O God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee, my soul
thirsts for thee, my flesh longth for thee in a dry and thirsty land where no
water is. If thou wishest after any in heaven above or in the earth below, for
him shall thou wish. Psalm. 73.24, 25. Thou shall guide me with thy council,
and afterward receive me to thy glory. Whom have I in heaven but thee, and
there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee. He is thy meat, thy
drink, and thy all things, thy water, thy wine, thy fire, and all things, thy
being thy welbeing, thy life, and thy althings. Hence shall thou rejoice in the
power of the law of life, since Christ in that is become thy life. Romans 8.2. For
the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has made thee free from the law
of sin and death.

Thirdly, The father has given the Lord Jesus Christ to be the shepherd of
his flock through his Covenant of life and mercy.

Elkanah gave to Penninah and her children portions, but to Hannah he gave a
double portion, Abraham gave to the sons of Keturah gifts, but to Jsaack he
gave the possession, though to others the Father gives riches and honors,
notwithstanding he gives to his everlasting Beatification. Not only in
condonation of transgression, in peace of conscience through Christ's
intercession, but also by giving them into the hands of the great shepherd of
his sheep, that they might enjoy an eternal tuition and protection. All we
were wandering sheep, we had lost the image of God, and bear the Image of the
devil, deprived of the title of eternal life, being bound with chains to
eternal death, bound to bear the burden of iniquity, to undergo the
dreadful and terrible sentence of the moral law, we were blind without
sight, naked without clothing, spoiled and bereft of all the rare and noble
enjoyments which we enjoyed: poor silly sheep wandering upon the craggie
mountains of iniquity, the rocks of misery, the desert and wilderness of
calamity. Was the groat lost? and not we amonst the lost? were the sheep gone
out of the way, and we not gone astray? Notwithstanding, such has been my
tender mercy, my superemenent grace, my yearning bowels of compassion toward
you: That I have sent the great and gracious shepherd of Israel, to seek the
lost sheep of the house of Israel, the Lord of life, to seek the sons of
death, and the son of my love, to call and seek the Children of wrath. Eze.
34.16. I will seek that which was lost, and bring again that which was driven
away, and will bind up that which was broken, and will strengthen that which
was sick, but I will destroy the fat and the strong, I will feed them with
judgment. Rather then mine should rest upon the lofty mountains of impurity,
my beloved shall seek them up by the word of reconciliation, rather then mine
should abide upon the craggie rocks of iniquity, my beloved shall seek the^ up
by the word of great salvation. Rom 10.7, 8. But the righteousness which is of
faith, speaks on this wise, Say not in thine heart who shall ascend up into
Heaven, (that is) to bring down Christ from above, or who shall descend into
the deep (that is to bring up Christ again from the dead. But what says it?
the word is neigh the even in thy mouth and in thy heart, that is the word of
faith which we preach. There is no such Shepherd as the Shepherd of Israel he
loves his sheep to the death. Has it been recorded that any King has laid
down his life for rebellious Subjects? Has it been inrowled that any
Bridegroom has lost his life for his Bride? or any Shepherd has laid down
his life for his sheep? but my beloved, the King of my Church and chosen, the
Bridegroom to his beloved spouses, and the great shepherd of his sheep has
laid down his life for his wandering sheep. John 10.18. No man takes it from
me, but I lay it down of my self, I have power to lay it down, and I have
power to take it again, this commandment have I received of my father. He is
the careful shepherd of my flock: neither the heat of the day, nor the cold
of the night hindered Jacobs care of Labans flock: the heat of my wrath, fury
and indignation, nor the coldness of the effections of his peculiar, can
prevent his care over my scattered and dispearsed flock. Were the shepherds
careful of their flock in the day of Christ's coming? and will not Isreal's
shepherd be careful of his flock after his coming? he is not only as a
father to mine to carry them in his arms. Cant. 2.6 His left hand is under my
head and his right hand does embrace me. As an Eagle that bears them upon his
wings. Deuteronomy. 32.11.12. As an Eagle stireth up her nest, fluttereth with her
wings, spreads abroad her wings, takes them, bears them upon her wings. So
the Lord alone did lead him, and their was no strange God with him, But as a
shepherd who carries his upon his shouldiers to the fould of grace and glory.
John 10.16. And other sheep I have which are not of this fold, them also J must
bring, and they shall hear my voice, and there shall be one fold and one
shepherd. Whilst mine are subject to chances and all evils, he is their
defender, whilst they are subject to go astray, he is their gatherer, hence he
answers my Commission. Mat. 15.24. But he answered, and said, J am not sent,
but unto the lost sheep of Jsrael. The poorest and meanest of his flock by him
are sustained, the strongest and fatest of his flock by him are supported, he
leads them by his precious promises, clothes them with his heavenly grace, and
gives them a rich inheritance amongst his Saints. Ephesians. 1.18. The eyes of your
understanding being opened, that ye might know what is the hope of his
calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints. If
they are scorched by the heat of tribulations, he is their cloud of
preservation, if they want light in the darkest night, he is their fire by
night for consolation. Isaiah 4.6. And there- shall be a tabernacle for a
shadow in the day time from the heat, and a place of refuge, and for a cover
from storm and from rain. For thou have been a strength to the poor, a
strength to the needy in his distress; a refuge from the storm, a shadow from
the heat, when the blast of the terrible ones is as a storm against the wall.
His sheep are near to him through union. John 27.23. J in them, and thou in
me, that they may be made perfect in one: and that the world may know that thou
have sent me, and have loved them as thou have loved me. They are dear to him
through redemption. 1 Pet. 1.18.19. For as much as ye know that ye were not
redeemed with corruptable things as silver and gold from your vain
conversation, received by tradition from your fathers: but with the precious
blood of Christ, as a Lamb without blemish and without spot. They are precious
to him through donation. John 17.9.10. J pray for them, J pray not for the
world, but for them which thou have given me, for they are thine, and all mine
are thine, and thine are mine, and I am glorified in them. And they are
gracious in his sight and presence through acceptance. Ehes. 1.6. To the
praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the
beloved, They are precious Jewels in his account and estimation, they are his
tender flock in his account and computation, are their deaths precious in his
sight, and are not their lives precious in his presence? Is the vine tender
ever its branches? the King loving to his Subjects? the spouse acceptable to
the bridegroom? and are not his flock precious and dear to the great
shepherd of Israel? neither the Foxes by their cunning, the Wolves by their
ravening, the Lions by their roaring, the Tigers by their devouring shall be
able to pluck them out of his hand. John 10.28.29. And I give unto them
eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them
out of my hand, my father which gave them me is greater then all, and no man is
able to pluck them out of my fathers hand. As they have been acquired by an
eternal power, purchased by an infinite value, so they are conserved by an
eternal power and omnipotency: to the Kingdom of bliss and felicity. 1
Pet. 1.5. Who are kept by the power of God, through faith unto salvation, ready
to be revealed in the last time. Ephesians. 1.19. And what is the exceeding
greatness of his power, to us ward who believe, according to the working of
his mighty power. O my soul, be certainly assured that nothing shall befall
thee but that which shall be good for thee. If death, the sting of that is
removed, if life, thy life is written in the book of life, If peril,
conservation by the hope in Christ, If famine, thou have the bread of life, if
want of water, thou have the fountain of living water, if sickness, thou have
healing to the wings of Christ, if temptation, thy faith shall be to thee more
precious then gold that is tried in the fire, if want of freedom, thou have
liberty through redemption, if loss of the love of the nearest in thy bosom,
thy Lord and shepherd is nere and dear to thee, and if want of defense, thy
Mediator will be thy sun and shield Psalm 84.11. For the Lord God is a
sun and shield, the Lord will give grace and glory, no good thing will he
with hold from them that walk uprightly. Romans 8.28. And we know that all
things work together for good to them that love God, to them that are the
called according to his purpose. Oh! my soul if thou gloriest thou shall glory
in such a shepherd, is he not the great shepherd able to make thee perfect in
every good work? Heb. 13.20.21. Now the God of peace that brought again from
the dead our Lord Jesus, that great shepherd of the sheep, through the blood
of the everlasting Covenant: make you perfect in every good work, to do his
will, working in you that which is well pleasing to you through Jesus Christ to
whom be glory for ever, and ever amen. Has he not fountains above all
fountains? springs surpassing all springs? and pastures more pleasant then all
pastures Ezekiel. 34.23. And I will set up one shepherd over them, and he shall
feed them, even my servant David. He shall feed them, and he shall be their
shepherd, 14.15. verse. I will feed them in a good pasture, and upon the high
Mountains of Israel Shall their fold be, there shall they lie in a good fold,
and in a fat pasture shall they feed upon the Mountains of Israel, I will feed
my flock, and I will cause them to ly down says the Lord God. His voice will
I hear, his word will I obey, to his call I will subject, I know the
difference between his voice and the voice of strangers, they set up man's
inventions, making linsey woolsy garments, and set up man's posts by Christ's
posts: they advance man's rightteousnesse, set up legal doings and popish
performances, they throw the Lord Jesus Christ out of his thron, and pluck him
out of his chair, and set up the creature worse then nothing. But the voice of
Christ is to speak of the praise of his own righteousness, of the
pretiousnesse of his own blood, of the triumph of his own death, of his love
to his beloved Church, of the nearness of that union the saints have with his
father, and of the pity he has to the broken spirits. Mat. 11.28. Come unto
me all ye that labor and are heavy laden: and I will give you rest. And of
the gift of eternal life to his adopted. John 17.2. And thou have given him
power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life, to as many as thou
have given him. Of the praise, of the glory, of the honor, of the dominion, of
the power, and of the love of his Father. John 17.23. I in them, and thou in
me, that they may be made perfect in one, and that the world may know that
thou have sent me, and have loved them as thou have loved me. Of the
revelation, teaching, direction, convincement and comfort of the spirit. John
15.26. But when the comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the
father, even the spirit of truth which proceeds from the father; he shall
testify of me. Therefore as thou give praise because he is thy mediator,
thy King, thy Bridegroom, thy vine, and thy beloved: so thou shall give
praise, since he is become thy eternal, careful, dear and loving shepherd:
rejoicing in the law and covenant of life in Christ that is blessed, yea a
thousand times blessed for evermore. Rehearsing the words concerning the Law of
life in Christ Jesus. Romans 8.2. For the law of the spirit of life in Christ
Jesus, has made thee free from the law of sin and death.

Secondly, In respect of Eternity.

The Celestial body is more excellent then other bodies, in four respects.

First, Because it is a Cause Universal.

Secondly, Because it is carried about with a circuler motion.

Thirdly, Because of heavenly light, and fourthly, because it is incorruptible.

So the Covenant or law of free grace, is not only excellent, because the
light of the fathers countenance shines in that Covenant, because it is
conferred upon the sons of misery and calamity, because it is the cause of
all divine graces and mercies given to the Saints, but also since it is
everlasting and eternal. My Covenant is not as the small dew upon the tender
herbs, not as the fading leaf and withering herb, not as the frail life of
the sublunarie creatures. I made the first Covenant with Adam, and it was
momentanie, I have made the second in Christ, and it is to perpetuity; when I
espoused mine to me to the praise of my glory, I espoused them to me for ever
through my mercy. Isa. 54.7, 8. For a small moment have I forsaken thee, but
with great mercy will I gather thee, in a little wrath I hide my face from thee
for a moment, but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy upon thee, says
the Lord thy Redeemer. Whence once I become their God, I am their God to
eternity, when once I become their Father, I am their Father to perpetuity, as
there is no end of the blood of the covenant of my grace, as there is no end of
the death of the Covenant of my peace so there is no end of my loving kindness
in the covenant of grace and peace. Though I have made a covenant it is not l
ke the first covenant I made in mount Sinai. Ier. 31.31. Behold the day is come
says the Lord, that I will make a new covenant with the house of Jsrael and
with the house of Judah Not according to that I made with their Fathers, etc.
Hence my people may glory in my Covenant, had I made a Covenant with them to be
their God to day, and their enemy to morrow, to blot out their sins to day,
and to remember them to morrow, to write my law in their hearts to day, and
blot it out to morrow, to give righteousness, peace, rest, grace, truth, hope,
joy, peace, love, reconciliation, redemption, and Adoption to day, and to take
these away to morrow, my people should not had cause of glorying in the
eternity of my favor: but now have they great cause of glorying in my covenant:
since it is as fast as the day and the night, though all things fade and wax
old as a garment, though the heavens should depart as a scroule, though the
hills should flee, and the mountains be removed; notwithstanding this covenant
must needs stand for ever. Jsay 54.10. For the mountains shall depart, and the
hills shall be removed, but my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither
shall the Covenant of my peace be removed says the Lord, that has m^rcy on
thee. Had I made the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, the planets like the fading
herb, grass or trees, where had been their rareness? If I had made the gold,
the gemms, the precious Jewels like the dross of iron: where had been their
richness? If I had made my second covenant of peace, of grace, of love and
mercy like the first of terrors, of dreads, of horrors and decaying, where had
been the pretiousnesse? But my people glory not only because I have made a
Covenant, but because I have made a covenant everlasting, they glory not only
in righteousness, but in everlasting righteousness, not only in treasures,
but in eternal treasures, not only in life, but in eternal life, not only in
peace but in perpetual peace, and atonement. So they glory not only in the
covenant of life and peace: but also that it is the etarnal covenant of life
and peace. Hence they glory with the Apostle. Romans 8.2. For the law of the
Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has made us free from the law of sin and of
death.

Thirdly, Because it is placed in Christ.

The Sun is placed in the midst of the planets, from whence all the planets
receive their purest lights, the heart is placed in the midst of man, that all
the parts from thence might receive their vital motion: the law of life and
grace is placed in Christ Jesus, that from thence the Churches might receive
their happiness. Happy, O thrice happy are the Churches tha they have such a
Lord, and such a law, not of sin and death, but of grace and life. Romans 8.2.
For the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has made them free from the
law of sin and death.

The earth was undecked and undorned, till I adorned the earth with beauty, the
heavenly orbs were not beautified, till I beautified them with the Splendour of
the Sun, of Moon and Planets. The old law was inglorious by curse, execration
and condemnation; but I have made a new, glorious through life, hope and
benediction. In whose hand is it blessed? if not in the hand of the blessed
mediator, in whose breast is it happi^^ if not in the breast of him that is a
gracious Redeemer? and in whom can that be glorious? except in him that is King
of Kings, and Prince of glory: It would not have stood with the glory of my
wisdom, If I should have made my covenant of life with the slaves of the
devil, bondslaves to hell, and children of death: it would not have stood with
the honor of my wise disposement, should I have placed my second covenant in
them that brake my first, and have shot their arrows as far distant from
the throne of my grace as the highest place is from the lowest hell. I should
have lost the dignity of my grace, had I made it with Angels who pitied not
the prisoners of my hope, neither could they answer the require and severity of
my Justice. As I have placed the purest light in the lightest Sun, and the
rarest virtue in the purest gemmes, so I have placed my law of absolute and
entire purity in the Son of my rarest excellency. I have made my Covenant to
Christ. Gal. 3.16. Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises made, he
says not, and to seeds: as of many, but as of one, and to thy seed which is
Christ. I have made my Covenant with Christ, since none could satisfy my
justice or fulfill my righteousness but him alone. I made my Covenant in
Christ. 2 Cor. 1.20. For all the promises are in him, yea, and in him Amen,
unto the glory of God by us. I made him the Covenant of life and Salvation.
Isay 42.6, 7. I the Lord have called thee in righteousness, and will hold
thine hand, and will keep thee, and give thee for a Covenant of the people,
for a light of the Gentiles, to open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners
from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the prison house. He
was the Character of my person, and the effulgencie of my glory, he was the
appointed King, and the Lord commander of my purchased and acquired, the
Mediator to and for my Redeemerd and Reconciled, the prince of the kings of
the earth, the first begotten from the dead, and the only one and beloved of
the bosom: therefore my covenant is to him, with him, and in him. I took up my
habitation in him from eternity to eternity, my dwelling and delectation is in
him from the beginning to the ending: hence, my Covenant of eternity rests in
the bosom of eternity, from whence should the espoused have their Commands but
from their bridegroom, I have not married them to the law, but to Christ. Rom
7.4. Wherefore my brethren, ye also are become dead to the law, by the body of
Christ, that ye should be married to another, even to him who is raised from
the dead, that we should bring forth fruit unto God. From whence should the
subjects have their ordinance but from their King? I have not made Mos^s their
king, but Christ King of his Church. Psalm. 45.11. So shall thy King greatly
desire thy beauty, for he is thy Lord and worship thou him. From whence should
the redeemed of the Lord have their rules and precepts but from Christ? I have
not made Moses their Prophet, but Christ their Prophet. Deuteronomy. 18.18. I will
raise them up a Prophet from among their brethren, like unto thee, etc. O my
soul, if I glory, I will not glory in that which is written in tables of
stone, but in that which is written in the fleshly tables of thy heart, not in
that which is the ministry of death, but in that which is the ministry of life;
not in the ministry of condemnation, but in that which is the ministry of
salvation, not in that which gendreth to bondage, but in that which tends to
liberty, not in that which has a veil and darkness, but in that which has
light and glory; not in that which disconsolates and discomforts the drooping
conscience, but in that which consolates and comforts the drooping spirit. Thou
gloriest in the pretiousnesse of his riches, in the rareness of his promises,
in the beauty of his righteousness, and shall thou not glory in the
pretiousnesse, rareness and riches of the law of life in Christ? did David
desire the waters of Bethlehem above all waters? did Abraham desire a son
above the Land of Canaan? and shall thou not desire this law of life above all
laws? if others pitch their tents by Sinai, thou shall pitch thy tent by Sion,
if others follow Moses, thou shall follow Christ, if others delight in that
which drives them from God, thou shall delight in that which draws thee near
to God. The law of sin and death has not freed thee from the law of sin
and death, the law of curse or execration, has not freed thee from the law of
death and condemnation, the law of terrors and horrors has not freed thee
from the law of terror and horror, but the law of life by which thou art dead to
the law that thou may live unto God. Gal. 2.19. For I through the Law am
dead to the Law, that I might live unto God. Hence thou therefore shall hearken
to the Commission of the Father. Mat. 17.5. While he yet spoke, behold a bright
cloud overshadowed them, and behold a voice out of the cloud, which said, this
is my beloved son in whom I am well pleased hear ye him. Who has the words
of eternal life but he? John 6.68. Then Simon Peter answered him, Lord, to
whom shall we go? thou have the words of eternal life. Into whose lips has
grace been infused but into his? Psalm 45.2. Thou art fairer then the children
of men, grace is powered into thy lyps, therefore God has blessed thee forever.
Or who has the words of peace and reconciliation but he? Ephesians. 2.17. And came
and preached peace to you which were affarre off, and to them which were nigh,
Hence will I glory in the glorying expression of the Apostle Paul Romans 8.2. For
the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has freed them from the law of
sin and death.

Has freed me.

Israel had ten portions in the King, when Judah and Benjamen had but two, but
it cannot be spoken according to that tenor of the saints beloved, for they
have a like inheritance in God and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, since they
are chosen by one Lord, redeemed by one Christ, sealed by one spirit of life,
enjoying the law of life being freed from the law of sin and death. Romans 8.2.
For the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has freed me from the law
of sin and death.

Christ is then operative in the soul, when by faith he is particularly
applied.

The transcient passage of the beauty or splendour of an object, is through the
eye unto the mind, the passing consolable delectation which is in Christ, is
through a Christians application to the soul, in Christ are treasures passing
the treasures hid in the sands, the emenency and superemency of all heavenly
and divine compassions; passing the compassions of human generation, the
excelency, yea, the superexcellency of worth, merit, and value, passing all the
valuable things which are wrapped up in the breast of things terrestiall. But
what are those treasures passing treasures, the eminency, the superemency of
those heavenly and divine compassions, the excellency the superexcellency of
that his merit, worth and value without a special or particular applyment. The
comfort of the eye is in seeing, of the ear in hearing, of man in moving, the
comfort of the soul is in applying. What joy is there to a Rebel to think
there is a Kingdom, and yet out of that he shall be banished? what comfort is
there to a man to know there are rich treasures wrapped in our mother earth, and
he of those shall be deprived? or what joy or comfort can come to the soul or
conscience though there are all excellencies wrapped within Christ's bosom, if
they of him shall not be enjoyed? other creatures were before man was created,
light overspread the earth, before light in the sun was placed: but comfort to
the faithful does not arise before that Christ by faith is applied. Our sad
hours, our doleful days, our gloomsome times are then removed: when the
vertuall efficacy of Christ through faiths application is received: our comfort
till we come to heavens City, our joy till we come to heavens felicity, and our
solid refreshment till we come to heavens glory is through faiths applying
Christ ours all in all. Though the waves of iniquity do roar, the floods of
transgression fall, the wind of bitter affliction blow heard upon us, yet if
once by applying we cast anchor into Christ: solid joy does inviron the heart
and conscience, as light does incompasse the body of a rational, then the
terrible, the dreadful, the i^efull God against sin and transgression
appears most bounteous, most benignous, most clementious through his marvilous
compassion, then the covenant of eternal grace and mercy puts to repulse the
law of death and misery, then the worth and merit of Christ pleads redemption
from the foul black jaws of the Devil, reconciliation between the God of
infinite purity, and man who through sin has procured an infinite misery,
and justification in the sight of our heavenly and compassionate father. Anchor
being cast in Christ, all becomes a Christians his wisdom, his death, his
blood, his power, his spirit, and his Kingdom. If the Bridgroome be the Brides
by combination: then his lands, his livings, his jewels, his gold, his silver,
is hers. If Christ be ours, then his heavenly benedictions, his spiritual
blessings, his superabundant, and heavenly treasure are become ours also. All
are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods, 1 Cor. 3.22. O my soul
apply whole Christ particularly, that thou may enjoy him fully. Was he
deprived of all, before Pilate, accused of the Soldiers buffited, of the high
Priests disdained, and not for thee? he endured that which thou should have
sustained, he suffered for that which had deserved, Oh what did he sustain?
Oh what has he not sustained? Oh what did he suffer? Oh what has he not
suffered! did he not undergo the burden of thy sin which was insufferable,
by a strength and power invincible? at what time the veil of the temple
rented, at that time the heavens opened, at what time the earth trembled, at
that time through his satisfaction he removed thy trembling estate and
condition, at what time the light of the sun was obscured, at that time the
merit of thy Savior shined, the glory of the sun of righteousness, and the
beauty of the sun which is collocated in the midst of the planets at one time
were darkened, in which time Christ stood in thy place, and for thy sake has
suffered.

What might I mention concerning Christ, the more the mind conceives, the more
the tongue relates, the more the soul by faith apprehends, the more the
mind is elevated. The Moon is below the sun, the sun below Saturnee,
Saturn below the Primum Mobile, the Vegitive creature is be low the sensitive,
the Sensitive below the Rational, and the Rational below him that lives by
faith in the Lord Jesus. How divine is such a Christian in contemplation? how
heavenly in Mediation? how rare i^ declaration? how sweet in conversation?
never a speech comes from such a Christian, but it is inflamed with the fire of
the Holy Ghost, hence all his words are in extolling Christ's righteousness,
advancing Christ's goodness, valuing Christ blood, Christ has drawn his mind
to a high pitch of conceivement: has the sun the power of exalation, the
splendour of a Diamond in the drawing of the affection, and is there not enough
in Christ which draws the Christian to high meditation. Though thy mind did
rest like the Cock upon the dunghill of this world, though thy affection was
as fast enclosed in the creature as a mould in the earth, yet from so low a
condition a Christian is brought, when once Christ by his virtue in the
conscience takes possession, then not honors, but Christ's honor, not riches,
but Christ's riches, not righteousness but Christ's righteousness, alone for a
Christians presentation, the eye is distant from the sun, the eye
nevertheless by the light thereof is drawn to behold his beauty, though Christ
is distant from a Christian, yet by his efficacy he draws the eye of faith to
behold his glory, what only to behold the glory of his victory tryumphant, the
glory of his mediation delectant, and not the glory of his session magnificent?
applying faith is never below the throne of grace and glory, it is never below
the seat of Gods eternal mercy, where there is not faiths applycation, death
of spirit has domination, our life by Christ's treasures of wisdom, by the
virtue of his death and rising again from the dead: is through faiths
applycation. Let a Christian observe the death of spirit in the hearts of
Justiciaries, and inquire the reason, why it is so? and he shall find that it is
because they apply not whole Christ to their consciences. Some thing they will
have of their own righteousness in Justification, some thing of their own
performances in matter of reconciliation, let us speak of Christ freely and
bouldly, and they stand as people agashed, and amazed. I deny not that they
have a name to live; But as sure as the sun shines in Europe when it is come
to the Meridian, so sure are they dead, yea as a tree twice plucked up by the
roots, through the hand of the workman. He that has the life of faith, he
applies all the excellencies of Christ unto himself, what says such a
believing christian? has Christ redeemed others, and not me? reconciled
others, and not me? justified others, and not me? Surely if any be redeemed, if
any justified, if any reconciled, then I am one of that number. Through
applying faith the soul is sick of love, at the very sight of his riches, of
his wisdom, of his righteousness, of his graces and consolations, it cries
out, O my beloved, my well beloved, where rests? where remains? where abides
my welbeloved? is the love of a woman so to her husband, of a father to a
child, of a subject to his Prince, comparable to that love of the soul to
Christ? who has found in Christ all the kinds of sweetest consolations, this
applyment of Christ makes the soul desire more of Christ, he who has felt the
sweetness of the honey comb, he desires to taste of the sweetness of that
again, he who has seen the light of the sun, desires to see it again, he
that once has tasted of the sweetness in Christ through application, desires
to taste thereof again. Hence are the outcries of such believers. O that I
might feel the virtue of Christ's blood in my conscience more efficatiously,
that doht purge my conscience from dead works to serve the living God, The
blood of Christ, which through the eternal spirit was offered without blame to
God, shall purge your consciences from dead works, to serve the living God.
Heb. 9.14. O that I might feel more effectually the power of that
reconciliation which once upon the cross he fully perfected and finished: that
he would give me to understand more fully that I have all my sins pardoned and
remittted. Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation by faith in his blood,
to demonstrate his righteousness, by the forgiveness of sins which are past
through his long suffering. Romans 3.25. O that I might be more assured that
Christ's righteousness is mine, then should I enjoy the sweetest peace of
conscience, since I should be fully assured that God with me should be well
pleased, and that I should be found worthy to abide in the City of our God for
ever: there to praise and honor him for ever more. They washed and made white
their robes in the blood of the lamb, therefore they are before the throne of
God, and worship him day and night. Apoc. 7.14.15. O that I might be
replenished with the fulness of his grace, then should my empty pitcher be
filled with joy, and my mournful heart with consolation, and ye are now in
heaviness. But I will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and your
joy shall no man take from you. John 16.22. O that I might have his spirit to
dwell in me, then should I be able to call and cry Abba Father, to make my
petitions strongly to my heavenly father, to know assuredly that I am one of
those who are purchased with the precious blood of Jesus Christ. Ye are not in
the flesh, but in the spirit, if the spirit of God dwell in you, but if any man
have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his. Romans 8.9. O that I might
feel the mighty power of the death of my savior and redeemer, then should I
dye to sin, and live to righteousness, as the Phoenix by the Sun is
consumed, and by virtue of the beams thereof is revived: so if I feel the
power of the death of my Redeemer, death shall be abolished and the life of
righteousness in me by the life of Christ renewed. Ye are buried by Baptism
into his death, that like as Christ is raised from the dead unto the glory of
his father, so we also may walk in the newnes of life. Romans 6.4. O that I
might feel the mighty operation of Christ's mediatio^, then should I behold God
most propitious and clementious, then should my faith cleave fast to the mercy
seat for mercy, and to the throne of grace for grace, thereby should I rejoice
abundantly, the singing birds would not so rejoice when winter is gone, and
summer does approach; as I shall rejoice in receiving delectation from Christ's
mediation: then should I not run from God with Adam, but have access to God
as Ester had to Ahashuerosh. By whom also through faith, we have access unto
his grace, by which we stand and rejoice under the hope of the glory of God.
Romans 5.2. O my soul give glory to God thy heavenly Father, and to Jesus Christ
thy gracious Redeemer, and to the holy Spirit who seals unto thee sure
mercies which will never fail thee in the greatest extreamities. Gods eternal
favor in Christ established, the efficatiousnesse of Christ's merits and value,
the sealing thereof is not in thine own power, but in the power of the holy
Spirit. He that looks upon the Creature, he concludes that the Creature made
not it self, but it was made by the hand of the Creator, he that minds how
great a matter it is to have the eternal love of God, and the merit of Christ
to his conscience sealed, will conclude it is not of himself, but through the
work of the Spirit, who is our sealer; And ye are scaled by the holy spirit of
promise, who is the earnest of our inheritance, to the obtaining of Redemption
unto the praise of his glory. Ephesians. 13.14. but to draw unto a conclusion,
least many lines may be offensive unto thy patience, Christian Reader, only
choose thou Christ O my soul, that when thy heart fails thee, he may be thy
strength and thy portion for ever, is not thy Savior better then ten
thousands, all things are valued, but his value is invaluable, all things are
esteemed, yet his worth is inestimable, many things are uttered, yet his
excellency is unutterable. Am I not ravished when he is my contemplation? Am I
not overjoyed when he is my Meditation? does not my valley abound with
pleasure when the virtue of his grace takes in me possession? is the morning
sun so joyous to a traviller, as Christ is to me: when I think of him in the
morning, he is more to thee O my soul then riches, then honors, then gold,
the^ silver, yea then precious stones? if thou had a kingdom, and wast not
assured of his kingdom, what would that profit thee? if thou had a world, if
thou had no interest in that blood which purchased the world to come, what
would that avail thee? if thou had all the joys and pleasures under heaven,
if thou had not the joy of his spirit, what would that benefit thee? if thou
had all the gay apparel in the world, if thou had not Christ's
righteousness to defend thee from the wrath of God, what fruit would that
bring unto thee? if thou had all to plead for thee, if thou had not Christ
to excuse thee in the day of the Lord, what joy could possess thee? it is good
for thee to rest where Christ is, so shall he be to thee a resting place, it is
good for thee to dwell where he is, for there are joys for evermore. O my
soul fear not what man can do unto thee, if they take away thy name,
remember thy name is ingraved upon his breast, he bare thy name upon the
cross, he bears thy name now in the sight of thy gracious Father. Though thy
name is extinguished, yet not extinguished, though not remembered, yet remembered
evermore. Let Justiciaries cast their Arrows by day, and their fiery dars by
night, yet know that through thy savior thou art able to repulse the fiery
darts of Satan, much more theirs. Let them take away thy life, thy life is hid
with Christ in God. Col. 3.3. For ye are dead and your life is hid with Christ
in God. Let them conclude that thou art vain glorious, thy glorying expression
shall be of Christ thy Lord of life and righteousness, since if any in heaven or
earth are bought to God by our Lord of life and glory, then thou art one of
that company, whilst thou as a poor pilgrim wanderest toward heavens City,
make thou a heavenly dimention of his glory; Worthy is the Lamb, who was
slain to receive power, and riches, and strength, and wisdom, and honor,
and glory, and blessing, and to him that sits upon the throne, and unto the
Lamb, be ascribed blessing, and honor, and glory, and strength for ever and
ever, Amen. Revel. 5.13.13.

From the law of sin and death.

O my people! what have I done for you? as Reconciliation to God my Father
through my blood and death is the greatest mercy, as my Adoption by my Spirit
of glory is the highest love, so my Redemption from the law of sin and death
by the Law of the Spirit of life is the freest bounty. Have you not come short
of my glory and the glory of my Father Romans 3 23. For all have sinned and are
come short of the glory of God. Have you not been under the curse and
execration of the morrall law? Gal. 3.10. For as many as are of the the works
of the law are under the curse: for it is written, cursed is every one that
continues not in all things which are written in the book of the Law to do
them Have not your Spirit been silenced, and your mouths stopped before my
Fathers presence. Romans 3.19. Now we know that what things soever the Law
says, it says to them that are under the Law, that every mouth may be
stopped, and all the world may become guilty before God. Has not Moses accused
you before the bar of justice? John 5.45. Do not think that I will accuse
you to the Father, there is one that accuses you even Moses in whom ye trust.
Was not the same Law that was made for ungodly, wicked and incorrigable siners
made for you? 1 Timothy 1.10. For whoremongers, for them that defile themselves
with mankind, for menstealers, for liars, for perjured persons, and if there
be any other thing that is contrary to sound doctrine. But I have delivered
you from the law of Condemnation by the law of Salvation, from the law of
execration, by the Law of benediction, from the Law of accusation, by the law
of life and reconciliation, and from the law of adjudication, by the law of
hope and Redemption. When that I saw that ye were come short of all
righteousness, fulfilled al righteousness. Romans 10.4. For Christ is the end of
the law for righteousness sake, to every one that believes. When I saw that
you were accursed, I became a curse for you, having undertaken to die the
cursed death of the Cross. Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse
of the law, being made a curse for us: for it is written, cursed is every one
that hangs upon a tree. I saw that you could not stand just in the sight of
my Father, I gave you another righteousness by faith which is in me. Phil.
3.9. And being found in him, not having mine own righteousness, which is of
the law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which
is of God by faith. Now as you are not the sons of death, but children of
life, so you are under the law of life: Now as you are not the children of
servitude, and bondage, but the children of liberty and Adoption: and are under
my law of liberty and Adoption. Gal. 4.1.2. Now I say that the heir as long as
he is a child, differs nothing from a servant though he is Lord of all, but
is under Tutours and Governors: until the time appointed of the Father. Gal.
5.1. Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free,
and be not entangled again in the yoke of bondage. Now are you not children
of unbeleefe and diffidence, since I dwell in your hearts by faith which is by
me. Ephesians. 3.16.17. That he would grant you according to the riches of his
glory, to be strengthened with might by his spirit in the inner man, that
Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, being rooted and grounded in love.
Now you are not slaves of hell and wrath, but the dearest and choysest ones
through my grace and tender compassion, therefore you are not under the law,
but under grace. Romans 6.14. For sin shall not have dominion over you, for ye
are not under the law, but under grace. Therefore you shall walk as my
dearest, my choicest and my redeemed, as my peculiar, my jewels and reconciled?
Do I make my branches stately through my union? do I make mine fruitful
through my blessed Communion? and do I not make mine subjective through the
law of life and benedicton? Now they will live the life of faith in me, the
life of love through me, the life of obedience by me. I have not given them the
rule of mercy and peace; to walk contrary to the rule of mercy and peace. I
have not given them the law of faith, to call in question the faithfulness of
my Fathers love, and the pretiousnesse of my dearest blood. So I have not given
to them the fruits of the Law of life, that they should walk as a dead people,
but that they should live by my fountains of living waters, by my nearest
union and richness of communion through spirit of life and Adoption; ever
triumphing, rejoicing and glorying in my law of life; by which they are freed
from the law of sin and death, according to the text Romans 8.2. For the law of
the spirit of life in Christ Jesus has freed them from the law of sin and
death.

JOHN 16. verse 22. And ye now therefore have sorrow, but I will see you
again, and your hearts shall rejoice, and your joy no man takes from you.


THe sad complaint of Israel, (was) mine eyes runs down with water, because
the Comforter is far from me, he that should releeve my soul will not look
upon me, my bowels are troubled, the enemy has prevailed over me: this is the
relation of the Israel of God, mine eye powers down with waters, my comforter
is not far from me, he that will releeve my soul will look upon me, my
bowels are refreshed, the chariots of hell has not prevailed against me,
therefore though I am possessed with sorrow, because I possess not what I shall
possess; nevertheless, I shall see his face, my heart shall rejoice, and my
joy shall no man take from me.

And ye now therefore have sorrow.

What the Saints beloved? are they not delivered from the power of darkness
and translated into the kingdom of my dear son? have they not the spirit of
joy and delightful solace? are they not crowned in Sion with everlasting joy
upon their heads? do they not rejoice in the garments of Salvation and perfect
robes of righteousness? Have they not the oil of joy and gladness in stead
of the garments of heaviness? and shall they not sing praise for ever and ever
more unto me which am blessed for evermore? notwithstanding they are invirond
with great sorrow and heaviness. Who lives amongst Tigers, Wolves, Lions and
Bears, if not they? who are counted the basest of the creature, the vilest of
the earth, the terror to the sons of men, and the scumme of the world, if not
they? who encounters with the Devil, makes war with the flesh, fights against
sin and all evils, if not they? if the roaring Lion the devil seek to
devour them, do they not seek to me the Lion of the Tribe of Judah? if the
flesh does burden them, say they not with Paul who shall deliver them from the
power of death? if sin does defile them, do they not desire to be washed in my
precious blood? and if the law of terror affright them, do they not fly to the
law of life in Christ Jesus? mine would sin no more, offend no more, but
praise me evermore: Since I have made them new creatures, formed them according
to my Image, and made them conformable to my mind and pleasure. (True it is) I
embrace them, I love them, and I delight in them to days everlasting: yet my
divine pleasure has been to hide my face for a moment, to obscure my self for
the twinkling of an eye, as though I would take my leave or farwell of them:
notwithstanding, I have done it for their consolation, to show my might and
power in conservation, and my superemenent bounty and love in their beatitude
and glorification. I that hid my glory, I that gave them not a footstep for
habitation, have given to them my heavenly mantion, and though I deprived them
of my personal presence, yet my blessed presence shall shine upon them in my
heavenly City. What though for a moment they do not possess me in the
fullness of communion, in the blessedness of my beatification, in the
plenitude of hope and benediction, Yet I will see them again, their heart
shall rejoice, and their joy shall no man take from them.

But I will see you again.

If I come to mine, who am my Churches King of glory, I will bring her to the
habitation of my heavenly glory, if I the loving bridegroom come to my beloved
Church and choysest Spouse, I will make her glad with my heavenly and gracious
countenance, I will remove away her tears though thousands, her forrowes
though infinite, and her Lamentations though as the sands upon the sea shore,
then she that was wrapped in the dust below, shall sing glory and praise to me
on high, for I that take away all tears, will wipe away tears from her face,
For I will see her again, her heart shall rejoice, and her joy shall no man
take from her.

I will.

What I will? it was my pleasure to exercise mine under tribulations,
tentations, and trials, afflictions, calamities and miseries, under penury,
shame and reproach, under bonds, fetters and chains, under shipwreck, death
and tortures, that their faith might be much more precious then gould, their
love then the purest gould, their patience answer my commmission concerning
patience, and that they might prize my deliverie and redemption, when I shall
deliver and redeem them from tribulation. For I will see them again, their
heart shall rejoice, and their joy shall no man take from them.

I will see you again.

This was Joseph's charge, see my face no more unless you bring your younger
brother with you, this was the charge of David to Abner, thou shall not see my
face unless thou bringst with thee Micall Saules daughter: This is the charge
of the drooping spirits to the watchmen of Israel, let us hear your voice no
more, let us see your face no more, unless you tell us where we may behold the
countenance of our beloved: whilst the watchmen says they see him not, Christ
says he will see his own. I will see them again, their hearts shall rejoice
and their joy shall no man take from them. Have I not looked upon you when no
eye beheld you? have not I respected you when none respected you? when neither
Levit nor Priest had compassion on you in the day of your wounds, then I healed
you by my death, blood and righteousness. I exalted you by my resurrection,
assention and mediation, and I comforted you by my adoption, union and
justification, as my father beheld his Israel in Egyptian tyranny, to give
them delivery: So I beheld you in bond-slaverie, to give you my richest
bounty. As I have looked upon you being the morning star that first rose in
your hearts: so I will shine upon you as the morning sun that first appeared
in your souls. For I will see you again, your heart shall rejoice, and your
joy shall no man take from you.

I will see you,

The face of Esau was dear in the eyes of Jacob, he counted it as the face of
an Angel, the face of Jesus Christ is dear in the sight of the saints, they
count it more gracious then the countenance of all the Angels. was there an
acceptance of Jacobs presents, a safety of the lambs, the children and the
aged through Esaus favor? and is there not an acceptance of the offerings of
the Saints, and a deliry from death and destruction by the face and favor of
Jesus Christ? therefore they are ravished with the joy of my countenance,
saying O joy of joys! O solace of solaces! O consolation of consolations! that
flows from me their dearest Lord that brought them! when I shall see them
again, my countenance. will be to them most dear and precious. What sun like
me that am the son of righteousness? what star like me that am the morning
star? the stars are darkness, the sun is dimnesse, the moon is
obscurity, when I appear in glory, heaven should be no heaven if my
countenance should not be in heaven, the celestial places should be a denn of
Dragons, if I had not been in the celestial places. If glory be in the soul,
it is because I am the hope of glory, if glory be in the heavenly place, it is
because I am the prince of glory. What beauty has the firmament without the
sun, moon, and stars? what ornament has the earth without grass, herbs,
trees and plants? or what excellencies has the soul without my gracious
countenance? therefore my dearest servants wait for the time of my appearings
Is not my countenance more dear to them then the face of Esau was to Jacob?
since in the sight thereof there are pleasures for evermore, deliverie from the
black chains of darkness, righteousness to eternal life, hope of the
fruition of my felicity, and praises from the beginning of my grace unto
eternity, For I will see them again, and their hearts shall rejoice, and
their joy no man shall take from them.

And your hearts shall rejoice.

In the day of Tire, it was said of Tire, that she was the fame and glory of
the world, because her delights were the delights of paradise, she walked in
the midst of the stones of fire, she had every precious stone as the Topaze,
the the Carbuncle, the Sapphire, the Onix: in the day of the Churches glory, it
may be said of the Church, that her delights surpasses the delights of
paradise, that she walks triumphing in the midst of fiery tribulations, and
that Christ her precious stone is more to her then all precious stones, he that
is to her the choysest stone of delightment, is to her the stream of rare
contentment.

O what city like the city of our God? O what streams are like the streams
that refresh the city of our God? as the fountain is only delectable, so the
streams are absolutely delightful, for my joys are the joys of my people,
my rivers of solace their sole delight, and my fountain surpassing all the
fountains under heaven, if they want comfort, I make them rejoice in the robes
of purest righteousness. Isai. 61.10. I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my
soul shall be joyful in my God, for he has clothed me with the garments of
salvation, he has covered me with the robes of righteousness, as a
bridegroom decketh himself with ornaments, and as a bride adorneth her self
with her jewels. If they want solace, I make them to enjoy the holy Ghost the
comforter, John 16.7. Nevertheless, I tell you the truth, it is expedient for
you that I go away, for if I go not away, the comforter will not come unto
you; but if I depart, I will, send him unto you. If they are clothed with the
garments of heaviness, I give to them the oil of joy and gladness. Isa.
61.1. The spirit of the Lord is upon me, because the Lord has anointed me to
preach good tidings unto the meek. To appoint unto them that mourn in Sion,
to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garments
of praise for the spirit of heaviness, that they might be called the trees of
righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that he might be glorified. And if
they are crowned with sorrow and lamentation, I cause everlasting joy to spring
out of the wells of salvation, Isa. 12.3. Therefore with joy shall ye draw
water out of the wells of salvation. Shall my people hang down their heads like
bulrushes, lowre like the Hypocrites, and wear sackcloth and mourning weeds?
No, I would have my people dwell by my fountains, my waters are not bitter as
the waters of Marah, I would have mine refresh themselves with my rivers, my
waters pass the waters of Abanah and Pharpar rivers of Damascus. Have I not
left to them the words of full consolation? John 17.13. And now I come to thee,
and these things I speak in the world, that they might have my joy fulfilled
in themselves, Have I not removed their fears and perturbations? John 14.1.
Let not your hearts be troubled, ye believe in God, believe also in me. Have
not I wished them to rejoice through exhortation? Phil. 4.4. Rejoice in the
Lord always, and again I say rejoice. What is my bloody cross, my victorious
death, my comfortable resurrection, and my powerful mediation But joy to the
drooping? what is the covenant of my freest grace, my highest love, my richest
mercy, and tender compassions but comfort to the mourning? What is the spirit
of adoption whereby mine call my father Father, the spirit of obsignatio^
whereby mine enjoy an inheritance among them which are sanctified, the spirit of
sanctification, whereby mine are sanctified in the day of their Communion with
me their vine and royal bridegroom; but consolation to the lamenting? as my
springs of grace are in the throne of my grace, so I have filled them with the
fruits of my grace, as the fountain of my love is in the throne of love, so
have I filled mine with my dearest love, when I dwell in their hearts by faith
which is in me, when I rule in their consciences by peace which is from me,
when I shall lodge in their souls through my spirit of glory, I shall change
their garments of lamentation into garments of salvation, their mourning weeds
into glorying expression, and their sighs and groans unutterable into the
sweetest oration. For I will see them again, and their hearts shall rejoice,
and their joy shall no man take from them.

The rivers that flowed from paradise are not comparable to the streams that
makes glad the city of our God, those were water, these welsprings of living
water, those flowed from the earthly paradise, these from the heavenly and
celestial paradise, by some of them was Bdelium and the Onix stone, in these
are eternal glory, nearenesse of union, and the fruition of eternal life and
felicity, those were appointed to water the Garden of Eden, these are ordained
to water and refresh the Church of Christ beloved, those were placed in
paradise by the wisdom and love of God the Father, these were placed and
appointed in the Church of Christ redeemer: therefore they admire at the love
of God the Father, and the superemenent grace of Christ Mediator. Saying they
shall hear the thing they never heard, they shall see the things they never
saw, and they shall understand the things they never understood. Their joy in
that day shall not be from the influence of the stars, my influence excels
the influence of all stars, they shall not enjoy the comfort of the Moon, but
the comfort of me whose glory is above Sun and Moon. What shall mine enjoy
in that day? they shall fully see the throne of grace, fully behold all the
hidden, unutterable and unsearchable excellencies that are in me. What shall
they possess, when they shall possess me that fills all in all things? what
shall they comprehend, when they shall be comprehended and environed with my
glorious presence and the light of my countenance? therefore though the heavens
and the earth should be silent, the moutaines and the valleys should be still,
yet mine will glory in me their loving prince and effectionate bridegroom.
Since I will see them again, their hearts shall rejoice, and their joy shall no
man take from them.

And your joy no man takes from you.

O the love of our loving and glorious father! O the kindness of our Lord our
dear and gracious Redeemer! if mine admire at my love, my love is admirable
love, if mine contemplate of my grace, my grace is superemenent grace, when
they were in the vast and roaring wilderness, I allured them, and brought them
into a wilderness, and there I spoke comfortably unto them. Hosea 2.14.
Therefore behold I will allure her, and bring her into the wilderness, and
spoke comfortably unto her. When mine were tossed like a ship with the roaring
waves, reeling like a drunken man, were welneigh dashed in pieces by the
craggie rocks and shelves, I laid a foundation for them of precious Stones and
Saphires. Isa. 54.11. O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest and not comforted,
I will lay thy stones with fair colors, and lay thy foundation with Saphirs.
When they wanted joys, I gave them joys firmer then the earth upon its
center, more fixed then the fixed stars, more stable then the sublunarie
creatures. Is my righteousness, everlasting righteousness? and is not my comfort
everlasting? is my dear hearts blood of an eternal value? and is not my
consolations eternal? is my communion and blessedness for ever and ever? and
are not my joys for ever and ever? If mine have life, their life is hid in me,
if mine have peace, then their peace is treasured in me, if mine have joy,
their joy is joy in me. Has the mists taken away the light of the Sun? No:
Has the mortality of the body taken away the immortality of the soul? No: Or
can any take away the consolation of my Redeemed? No: Had I not given to my
Redeemed everlasting righteousness, eternal life, an inheritance immutable,
then their joy had been momentanie and transitory: but because I have given
them an everlasting righteousness. Dan. 9.24. Seaventy weeks are determined
upon thy people, and upon thy holy city, to finish the transgressions, and to
make an end of sins, and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in
everlasting righteousness, and to seal up the vision and prophecy, and to
annoint the most holy. Eternal life. John 10.28. And I give unto them eternal
life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of
mine hands. An inheritance immortal and immutable. 1 Pet. 1.4. Therefore their
joy is not transitory and momentanie. After once I bring my redeemed to the
inheritance immortal and incontaminate, they shall sing nothing but praise,
honor, glory, power, might, truth, mercy, strength and thanksgiving to my
Father blessed for ever; and to me blessed for ever more. They shall know of no
sin in the flesh, they shall not hear the accusations of the law before the
tribunal seat of justice, they shall not hearken to the temptations of the
devil, they shall not feel the burden of sin, nor be affrighted at the
fears of death and hell, but they shall enjoy an immediate communion and
fruition of my glory to everlasting. For I will take away their heavines, their
heart shall rejoice and their joy no man takes from them.

JOHN 15.12. This is my Commandment, that ye love one another as I have loved
you.


RAre is the Sun in respect of beauty, light and operation, rare are the
precious jewels in respect of richness, virtue and estimation: so rare is the
love of Christ to us through gifts, graces and communication, as the myrrh and
the drops thereof, as the sweet rain and the showers thereof, as the bedewing
dew and the overspreading thereof, so is the influence of Christ's freest grace,
and the expression of his dearest love, according to the text. John 15.12. This
is my Commandment, that ye love one another as I have loved you.

Nothing is so precious as Christ's blood, nothing so victorious as his death,
nothing is so pure as his righteousness; so nothing is so tender as the love
of our dearest Lord that bought us; who has left the highest throne of glory
for the bondslaves of miseries? but the prince of glory? who has stood
between light and darkness, betwixt heaven and hell, betwixt eternal
justice, and the children of unrighteousness: but the Lord our righteousness?
1 Pet. 3.18. For Christ also has once suffered for sin, the just for the
unjust, that he might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh, but
quickened by the spirit. Who has been surety for mine in respect of the
acquirie of Redemption, to make up the breach of union, to answer the
righteousness for justification, to atchieve glorious communion,
beatification, bediction, felicity and the fruition of my presence; but he
that shall stand for ever mediator and intercessour in my presence? or who
has endured that mocking, that buffeting, that scorning, that arraigning, that
condemning but he in whom there is no condemnation but eternal life and
salvation. Act. 4.12. Neither is there Salvation in any other, for there is no
other name under heaven given among men whereby we must be saved. He has laid
down his life for them that were deprived of the hope of life, he spilt his
dearest blood for them that were involved in their blood, he has ventured his
death for the lives of them that were the children of death, had a child of
wrath died for a child of wrath, that should not have been excellent, had a
child of death, dyed for a son of death that should not have been
superexcellent, but for the beloved of the father to die for miserable catives
and captives, that is transcendent. The death of me the Lord of life is more
then a thousand Lords, the death of me the prince of peace is more then the
death of ten thousand princes, the death of me who am King of Kings is more
then the death of all the Kings and Monarchs under heaven. I looked and behold
the Angels hid their faces, all creatures hid their heads: Since none could make
up the breach of union, a glorious presentation in my fathers presence, conquer
death through death, overcome the devil through power, blot out impurity
through righteousness, remove sin through blood, make peace through
atonement, and by grace and glory bring the poor soul to eternal glory. Isay
59.16. And he saw that there was no man, and wondered that there was no
intercessour, therefore his arm brought salvation unto him, and his
righteousness it sustained him. 2 Cor. 3. last. But we all with open face,
beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image
from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. Out of my love I give
rare gifts and graces to my Saints and servants. Who has opened the treasures
of wisdom and knowledge? if not I; who has broken open the treasure-house of
heaven, opened the throne of grace, unlocked the mercy seat? if not I; who
has placed the heavenly minds in the heavenly places, blessed the people,
delivered from the curse with spiritual blessings, and made them that have
tasted my love attain to the height of my love? but I. I power my water upon
the thirsty; I give my bread to the hungry, my cloth of righteousness to the
naked, and my dearest mercy and love to the lovelesse. I power out my spirit
upon my servants, show my visions to the young, and give my dreams to the old.
Acts 2.17. And it shall come to pass in those days says the Lord, I will
power out my spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall
prophecy, and your young men shall see visions, and your old men shall dream
dreams. My gifts are not of gold, but of that which is more precious then the
gold of Ophir, my gifts are not jewels, gemmes, and precious stones. But that
which is more rich then jewels, gemmes and precious stones. My gifts are not
earthly treasures, morrall righteousness, worldly, wealth, and things terren
and sublunarie: but heavenly treasures, and heavenly righteousness, celestial
wealth, and things sublime, and heavenly. Hence mine receive abundance from me,
the the fullness of the Godhead dwelt in me bodily. Collosians 2.6. verse For
in him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily. Hence mine receive
grace and truth from the fullness of grace and truth: as I have spoken, and
mine confess. John 1.16. And of his fullness have we all received and grace
for grace. Out of my love, I will not forsake mine in the midst of all their
tribulation and temptations, though the heaven should frown, and the earth
should lowre, the conscience should terrify, justice should amaze, death
should trouble, sin should burden, the Devil should roar, the flesh should
assault, all evils should environ: notwithstanding I will not forsake my
peculiar: though principalities, though powers, though death, though famine,
though peril, though sword, though hell, though law, though sin, though the
grave, and all evils should beset mine, yet will I not leave them. I love them
in wants as if they had abundance, in tribulation as if they were free from
tribulation, in temptation as if they were free from temptation, And in sheep
skins and goats skins as if they had cloth of gold beset with the rarest
jewels. What if they are stoned for my name sake? what if they be banished for
my testimony? what if they should be wracked for the witness of the word of my
truth? what if they had not a hole with the fox nor a nest with the birds? yet
I will not shut them out of my presence. Have I not given a testimony
concerning them. Heb. 11.36, 37, 38, 39. And others had trial of cruel
mockings and scourgings, yea, moreover of bonds and imprisonment, They were
stoned, they were sawne asunder, were tempted, were slain with the sword, they
wandered about in sheep skins, and goats skins, being destitute, afflictet,
tormented: of whom the world was not worthy. They wandered in the deserts, and
in mountains, and denns and caves of the earth. And all these have obtained a
good report through faith, received not the promise. When Paul and Silas my
servants were in prison, did I not make them sing songs of my dearest love?
When Peter was in prison, was not the Angel of my presence by him? when my
servant Steeven was stoned, did I not make his face to shine as an Angel? and
when my servants were in the fire furnace, have I not delivered them from the
furnace of fiety afflictions? I am the rock, when there is no rock, I am the
refuge, when there is no refuge, and I am their hope and horn of salvation,
when there is neither hope nor horn of salvation. Hence mine may conclude with
my servant. Psalm. 18.18. They prevented me in the day of my calamity, but the
Lord was my stay. Out of my love I have loved them freely. I regarded neither
their righteousness, their holiness, their performances, neither their
prayers, their doings, nor their excellencies, neither their purity, their
innocence, nor their integrity, I have loved my redeemed, and my justified
freely, I have respected my reconciled freely, and I regarded my adopted and my
glorified freely.

Though thousands should have presented to me the virtue of the son the moon
and stars, the riches of seas of mountains and of the valleys, or the free
will of the freewillers: notwithstanding I would refuse it. If I lay down my
life for my sheep, is it not out of the freeness of my love? John 10.11. I am
the good shepherd, the good shepherd gives his life for his sheep. If I give
my life for my Church, is it not out of my tender and dear affection? Ephesians.
5.25. Husbands love your wives, even as Christ also loved the Church and gave
himself for it. If I give to mine the riches of hidden treasures, the glory of
the heavenly mantions, and the sure and firm mercies which are treasured in my
breasts, is it not love of my tenderest care and love? Hence out of my love, I
express my dearest and tenderest love given to mine, which eye cannot see,
which ear cannot hear, nor mind conceive. 1 Cor. 2 9 But as it is written,
Eye has not seen, ear heard, neither has entered into the heart of man, the
things which God has prepared for them that love him. I have loved them so
dearly, that I will be their glory in grace, their eternal glory, and their
expression of glory, who was their hope and glory. Col. 1.27. To whom God would
make known what is the riches of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles,
whsch is Christ in you the hope of glory. Who makes them to rejoice under the
the hope of glory? If not I. Romans 5.1.2. Therefore being justified by faith, we
have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom also we have access
by faith into this grace, wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of
God. Who makes them pass one from glory to glory? If not I. 2 Cor. 3. last But
we all with open face, behoulding as in a glass, the glory of the Lord, are
changed into the same Image, from glory to glory: even as by the spirit of the
Lord. Am I not their glory and crown of life? Am I not their glory and crown
of righteousness? Am not I their glory and crown of mercy. Psalm. 103.3, 4.
Who forgiveth all thine iniquities, and heals all thy diseases, who redeemeth
thy life from destruction, who crowns thee with loving kindness, and tender
mercies. The glory of my love is tied to the sweetness of my peace, the glory
of my grace to my acceptance: Ephesians. 1.6. To the praise of the glory of his
grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the beloved. The praise of my glory
to the choice of my election. Ephesians 1.12. That we should be to the praise of
his glory who first trusted in Christ. The assurance and seal of my redemption
to the praise of my glory. Ephesians. 1.14. Which is the earnest of our
inheritance, until the redemption of the purchased possession: unto the praise
of his glory. The collocation in the heavenly places to the honor of my
superemenent grace. Ephesians. 2.6.7. And has raised us up together, and has made
us sit together in Heavenly places in Christ Jesus, that in the ages to come he
might show the exceeding riches of his grace in his kindness toward us
through Christ Jesus. What beatitude? What communion? What benediction? What
frution? What felicity? Or what glory can any enjoy without me the
effulgencie, the character and glory of my father? has the rivers waters
without the fountains? No, Has the air light without the Sun? no, or can
any possess glory without my glory? no. Hence I have told my choice and
dearest ones. John 17.22. And the glory which thou gave me, J have given
them, that they may be one even as we are one. And because I have given them
this first glory, they sing of my second glory, worshipping me that lives for
ever, and falling down be fore my throne of glory. Apoc. And when those beasts
gave glory and honor and thanks to him that sat on the throne, who lives for
ever and ever. The four and twenty Elders fall down before him that sat on
the throne and worship him that lives for ever and ever; and cast their
Crowns before the throne, saying, Thou art worthy O Lord, to receive glory,
and honor, and power, for thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure
they are and were created. And they sing not only of my love in word, but also
in deed. Answering my command, loving one another as I have loved them. John.
15.12. This is my Commandment that ye love one another as J have loved you.

The Philosopher says, that the first moveable is moved by Angels, and all
secundarie motions are moved by the first motion or moveable, it is affirmed by
the spirit of glory, that the love of the saints to God the Father and of each
toward each other, is from that love the Father has showed toward them. Joh.
1.4.10.12. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us: and
sent his son to be the propiciation for our sins. No man has seen God at
any time, if we love one another, God dwells in us, and his love is
perfected in us. If they are dear in affection, is it not through my union?
they are dear members, precious branches, and loving spouses, since I have
joined the members to me their head, I have ingrafted them into me their vine,
and I have espoused them to me their bridegroom, if they enjoy fellowship one
with another, it is not through my Covenant? I have not only given them
communion with my Father to enjoy fellowship with my Father, communion with my
self ^o enjoy an inheritance in my treasures, but I have given mine communion
and fellowship one with another; that they might have joy and delectation each
with other. 1 John 1.3. That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto
you, that ye also may have fellowship with us, and truly our fellowship is with
the father, and with his son Jesus Christ. Has the air light and not from
the sun? has the hand and foot motion and not from life? and has mine
fellowship, and not through my fellowship? as I have given them the glory of
eternal fruition, the honor of perpetual conservation. John 17.11. And now I
am no more in the world, but these are in the world, and I come to thee holy
father, keep through thine own name, those whom thou have given me, that they
may be one as we are. So I have given mine the glory of union, hence I have
made them one as I and the father are one. John 17.22. And the glory which thou
gave me, I have given them, that they may be one, even as we are one. I am
not only glorified in mine by faith that is in me, by hope which is by me, by
affection toward me, but also by their love toward my choicest people. John
17.10. And all mine are thine, and thine are mine, and I am glorified in them.
When I sit Lord and King of the conscience, is there not peace and sweetness?
when I sit Lord commander of the will? is there not peace and lowliness? when
I sit only overswayer over the affection, is there not the tenderest and
dearest delectation? so when I throw out the black King of death and
darkness, is there not love, delight and delectation? when I reign king of
peace and love in the spirit, I remove envy, hatred, malice, wrath, fury,
debate, strife, backbiting, slanderings, whisperings, grudgings, repinings,
murmurings, for when I fill mine with joys above all sorrow, with loves above
all loves, and with my rest above all rests, are they not amiable? when they
apprehend my death victorious, my resurrection triumphous, my mediation
efficatious, and my cross glorious: are they not peaceable? my Father dwells
in them, his love abides in them, and rules in them; does not his free love
remain in the conscience? does not his rich love abide in the heart? and his
strong love in the affections? hence comes in the witness of the spirit. 1
John 4.17. Herein is our love made per^^ct, that we may have boldness in the
day of Judgment? because as he is, so are we in this world. Therefore my
people are a quiet people, for they are of the kingdom of my peace and
patience. Apoc. 1.9. I John who also am your brother and companion in
tribulation, and in the kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ: was in the Isle
that is called Patmos, for the word of God, and for the testimony of Jesus
Christ. I turn Lions into Lambs, Tigers into Sheep, Woolves into Doves, and
Serpents and Ravenous Beasts into Turtles, therefore they feed together
without killing and slaying one another. Isay 35.9.10. No Lion shall be there,
nor no ravenous beast shall go up thereon, it shall not be found there, And
the ransomed of the Lord shall return and come to Sion, with songs and
everlasting joy upon their heads. They shall obtain joy and gladness, and
sorrow and sighing shall flee away. Isay 65.25. The Wolf and the Lamb shall
feed together, and the Lion shall eat straw like the bullock, and the dust
shall be the Serpents meat, they shall not hurt nor destoy in all my holy
Mountain, says the Lord. I will neither admit of wolves, of Tigers, or
ravenous beasts, of Lions or devouring dogs to join with my people and
peculiar. Mine shall not fight with sword or spear, with shield nor buckler,
with Helmet nor Habergion, they shall not overcome hell, death, the devil and
all evils with the heels of great horses: but with my dearest blood, and the
word of my Testimony. Apoc. 12.11. And they overcame him by the blood of the
lamb, and by the word of their testimony: and they loved not their lives unto
the death. I know the power of my love binds them, the power of my grace
constraines them, the power of my mercy leads them, to learn meekness of me
their Lord and master. Mat. 11.29. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me,
for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest unto your souls. As
my kingdom is not meat, drink, or cloth: but joy, and peace, and love by the
holy Ghost: so my people, the inhabitants and dwellers in my kingdom are not
discordious, contentious, quarrelous: but loving, peaceable and joyous. Romans
14.17. For the kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness, and
peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. I have redeemed them from the earth and made
them the first fruits to my Father? I have set them in the heavenly places,
have I taken away all enmity betwixt my Father and them: that they should not
live in wrath and discention. It is my gracious pleasure that mine should love
one another, as I have loved them. I would have their affections so dear,
their loves so tender, that they should out of their dearest affection, and
tenderest love live one with another. What shall the Citizens of my heavenly
Jerusalem be as strangers? what shall they that are of my Fathers family be as
Alians? or they that be so near to me as members to the body branches to the
vine, as the espoused to the bridegroom, live as a people Alienated and
estranged? No. Where is their care over each other? where is their glorying in
each other? when they neither see nor behold the sweet and gracious disposition
of each other? wherein am I glorified whilst their affections are as far
remote as their habitations, and their loves as far distant as their
dwellings. What breaches? what discontents arises, when the world makes war,
the legalists slanders, and the Angels of light casts false and bitter
aspersions, my love has been so dear and tender toward them, that I have
made them temples of the Spirit of glory, in which I might express my glory:
Did my father fill the Temple with his glory? and do not I fill mine with my
glory? whilst I in them am the hope of glory. Col. 1.27. To whom God would make
known what is the mystery of this glory among the Gentiles, which is Christ in
you the hope of glory. I have made them a dwelling place, a habitation of
dwelling by my spirit. Ephesians. 2.21, 22. In whom all the building fitly framed
together, grows unto an holy Temple in the Lord, in whom you also are builded
together for an habitation of God through the Spirit. I have made them
Tabernacles fit for my love and favor. John 17. last. And I have declared unto
them thy name, and will declare it, that the love wherewith thou have loved me,
may be in them, and I in them: And shall not mine live as my choysest and
dearest ones? what difference between the children of Sinai, and the children
of Sion? what difference between the daughters of the bondwoman, and the
daughters of Jerusalem? if they live not as my Saints at Jerusalem? Oh what
honor? what glory have mine attained? and grace have they achieved? whilst of
them in record it is recorded. Acts 2.44. And all that believed were together,
and had all things common, the last verse. Praiseing God and having favor with
all the people: and the Lord added to the church daily such as should be saved.
I have loved mine with an everlasting love, hence I pass by their sins, their
weakness, their infirmities, and all their evils. Though they were tossed like
the lofty and roaring waves of the sea: I gave to them a rich and sure
foundation. Isaiah 54.11.10. O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not
comforted, behold I will lay thy stones with fair colors, and lay thy
foundations with Saphirs, and I will make thy windows of Agates, and thy gates
of Carbuncles, and all thy borders of precious stones. Though they were left as
a widow forsaken, and as a virgin relinquist, I have not left them nor forsaken
them. Isay 54.6.7. For the Lord has called thee as a woman forsaken, and
grieved in spirit, and a wife of youth when thou wast refused says thy God,
For a small, moment have I forsaken thee but with great mercies will I gather
thee, Though they were not accounted worthy of a being upon the face of the
earth, I have given them a heavenly habitation. 2 Cor. 5.1. For we know that if
our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of
God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. And shall not mine
love mine for ever? I will not have my bruised quast, I love the smoking flax,
and the bruised reed, I will not have my broken disesteemed, my wounded
despised, my sick neglected, my prisoners not visited, my feeble unrefreshed,
my poor begging bread, and my distressed consciences uncomforted. To what end
do I commit them to my Churches care, to belie, slander, backbite, and speak
evil of my people? No, to frown, lowre, and pet against my weak ones? No,
that they might break, bruise and tread under foot my weakest servants? No,
but that they should refresh, comfort, solace and refocilate my weak ones, and
my poorest servants: as their names, their lives, their liberties, their
consciences are dear to me: so I will have their names, lives, liberties, and
deaths precious in my peoples sight.

What rarer then the influences of my grace from my superemenent grace? Yet
that have I bestowed upon my jewels, what is purer then the garments of my
salvation? Yet that have I given to my choicest ones? and what more precious
then my dearest blood? yet that I give to my dearest saints. As I cause the
sweet influence of the Plejades to rest upon and in the plants of the field, so
I cause the sweet influence of my grace to rest and abide in my peculiar
people, and shall not mine distribute their goods, make known their gifts, and
spend their lives each for other? 1 John 4.10.11. In this was manifest the love
of God toward us, bacause that God sent his only begotten son into the
world, that we might live through him, herein is love, Not that we loved God,
but that he loved us, and sent his son to be the propiciation for our sins,
Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another. I have loved
mine with a faithful love, am I not that faithful witness? I witness
faithfully, are my promises yea and Amen, and am not I yea and Amen? do I
sanctify mine with my truth? and am I not the truth it self: If mine have
infirmities and failings, I tell it not in the gates of Gath, nor in the
streets of Askelon, I carry not the failings of my people from the throne of
my grace to the bar of my justice, but I free them from the bar of justice,
and accquite them before the throne of grace. And shall not mine love mine,
with a faithful love, and an entire affection? what in word, in tongue, in
looks, in shadows? No, But in sincerity of spirit, and faithfulness of
heart, not speaking evil of mine, as Doeg did of David, not uncovering the
shame of mine as Ham of Noah, but speking graciously of mine as Jonathan of the
Lords anointed. Answering my Commission. 1 John 3.18 My little children let us
not love in word neither in tongue, but in deed and in truth. I have loved mine
freely. They were vessels of wrath, bound under the chains of hell, death and
darkness, under the black claws of that roaring Lion the Devil, not
withstanding, I looked upon them in mercy, I regarded not the multitude of
their performances, the beauty of their righteousness, and the excellency of
their gifts, I made the beggar to sit amongst Princes. 1 Samuel 2.9. He raises
up the poor out of the dust, and lifts up the beggar from the dunghill, to
set them amongst Princes, and to make them inherit the throne of glory: For
the pillars of the earth are the Lords, and he has set the world upon them, I
make the ofscurings of the earth through my blood, Kings and Priests to God my
father, Apoc. 1.5.6. And from Jesus Christ who is the faithful witness, and
the first begotten from the dead, and the Prince of the Kings of the earth unto
him that has loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood. And
has made us Kings and Priests unto God and his father, to him be glory and
dominion, for ever and ever Amen. I made the distressed valleys of death and
darkness, to enjoy an inheritance amongst my sanctified by faith that is in
me. Acts 26.18. To open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light,
and from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive the forgiveness of
sins, and inheritance amongst them that are sanctified by faith that is in
me. And shall mine not love mine? in sheep skins and goats skins, as if they
wear the cloth of gould beset with Diamonds? if they were upon the dunghill, as
if they were the greatest, the honorable the richest, and the noble. Shall
they not eye the weak, the meanest and the poor of my redeemed flock, as
well as the fat, and lusty of my flock beloved? Jam. 2.3, 4, 5. And ye have
respect to him that wearrch the gay clothing, and say unto him sit thou hear
in a good place. And say to the poor stand thou there, or sit here under my
footstool, are ye not partial in your selves, and are become judgers of
evil thoughts. Hearken my beloved brethren: has not God chosen the poor of
this world, rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom which he has promised to
them that love him. I have loved mine so dearly, that I have laid down my life
for mine, I might have reasoned and said, these are Rebels against my glory,
Traitors against the throne of my grace, Transgressors of my divine and
purest law, they have undervalued my word of gracious reconciliation, they have
despised the word of my sanctification, and they have disrespected the doctrine
of free and plentious redemption. Who have advanced their own righteousness
above my righteousness? if not they, Who has set their posts by my posts? if
not they, Who has disesteemed the blood of my covenant? if not they, and shall
not mine love mine to the death? yea, if I the great shepherd, the tender
Bridegroom, the pleasant vine and King of my Church have laid down my life for
my Church, shall not the sheep, the spouse, the branches and subjects of my
kingdom lay down their lives for each other? O my people, I am the searcher
of the hearts and tryer of the raines, I walk in the midst of the golden
Candlesticks, to see what love is or should be in the midst of my people. I see
my sick not visited, my poor debased, my naked unclothed, my hungry and
thirsty not satisfied, my dearest Jewels slandered, my precious servants
defamed, and those that speak the truth disdained. In stead of patience,
prudence, gentleness, mildness, and gratiousnesse of spirit, there is
backebiting, lying, crying and slandering in every corner of the City. But have
they not cause to tender one another dearly? are they not fellow Citizens and
of the household of of my father? Ephesians. 2.19. Now therefore ye are no more
strangers and forreners, but fellow citizens with the saints and of the
household of God. Are they not my branches whom I esteem most dearly. John
15.5. I am the vine, ye are the branches, he that abides in me, and I in him,
the same brings forth much fruit, for without me ye can do nothing. Are they
not they that are called to communion with me that am their dear Lord and
Master. 1 Cor. 1.9. God is faithful, by whom ye were called unto the
fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord. They are not base but noble, all
the Kings and Monarchs under heaven are not comparable to one of the Kings
that I have made to God my Father through my blood most precious. They are
Kings of earthly Kingdoms, mine of heavenly and celestial Kingdoms: They are
Kings by a Royal progeny, mine are Kings through my blood undefiled, they
have crowns of pure gold and precious stones, mine have crowns of life and
righteousness, they have guards of men to attend them, mine guards of Angels
and the beloved saints. Heb. 1 last. Are they not all ministering Spirits; sent
forth to minister for them who shall be heiers of Salvation. Their cloth is
better then the cloth of gol^ their riches better then the riches of jewels,
and their wealth more excellent then the wealth hid in the sands. Though the
devil would devour them, I will save them, though the flesh make war with
them, I will support them, though death would destroy them, I will give them my
salvation. Haback. 3.13. Thou wentest forth for the Salvation of the people,
even for Salvation with thine anointed, thou woundest the head out of the house
of the wicked, by discovering the foundation unto the neck Selah. I am their
King, and shall not I command them? their Bridegroom, and shall not I will
them? their loving Mediator, and shall I not wish them to love on another? I
know, if I command them to endure bounds, chains and imprisonments for my
sake, that they will obey me, I know if I command them to endure poverty for my
poor, penury for my distressed, misery for my afflicted, that they will
subject to me. My voice is as dear to them as heaven, my commands as
acceptable as my joys; and my wishes. As my love, my glory and my
righteousness. Therefore they will answer my command of love: as it is
recorded. John 15.12. This is my commandment, that ye love one another, as I
have loved you.

A CONFESSION OF OUR FAITH, According to the Order of the GOSPEL.
First.
WE believe that Jesus Christ is the Eternal Son of God, who was with the
Father before the world was; Appointed by an Eternal Election Mediator,
Redeemer and Reconciler of all those whom the Father out of his Eternal and
free love had ordained unto Eternal Life. John 1.14. And the word was made
flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only
begotten Son of the Father full of grace and truth. John 1.18. No man has
seen God at any time, the only begotten Son which is in thy bosom of the
Father, he has declared him. John 17.3. And this is life Eternal, that they
might know thee the only true God and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

Secondly.
WE believe that it was the Fathers divine pleasure to or daine Jesus Christ
to be King over his Church, and peculiar, and the sole and only Prophet from
which the Church should receive all her treasures of Divine and rarest
wisdom. Ephesians. 1.21, 22, 23. Far above all principality, and power, and
might, and dominion, and every name that is named not only in this world, but
also in the world to come. And has put all things under his feet, and gave him
to be head over all things to the Church which is his body, the fullness of him
that fills all in all. Deuteronomy. 18.18. I will raise them up a Prophet from among
their brethren like unto thee, and will put my words in his mouth, and he shall
speak unto them all that I shall command him. Col. 1.3. We give thnnkes to God
and the Father of Jesus Christ our Lord praying always for you.

Thirdly.
WE believe that the Church of Jesus Christ was freely chosen and selected out
of the free and eternal love of the Father resting in the bosom of Jesus
Christ: to the end that it might be partaker of all the heavenly treasures of
divine grace and righteousness, made conformable to the will of God the
heavenly Father, and to the mind of Jesus Christ the blessed and glorious
Redeemed. Ephesians. 1.4, 5. According as he has chosen us in him before the
foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before him
in love, having predestined us unto the Adoption of Sons by Jesus Christ to
himself, according to the good pleasure of his will. 2 Pet. 1.4. Whereby are
given unto us exceeding great and precious promises, that by these you might be
partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the
world through lust. Romans 8.27. And he that searches the hearts knows what is
the mind of the spirit, because he makes intersession for the Saints
according to the will of God.

Fourthly.
WE believe that Jesus Christ the Lord of life and salvation laid down his
life in special for her according to the absolute and divine appointment of
the Father, to the intent that he might confirm upon her the supereminent
riches of glory, the exceeding riches of mercy, and the marvilous dispensation
of his marvilous Kindness which proceeds alone from his free and divine
pleasure. Acts 20.28. Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the
flo^ke over which the Holy Ghost has made you overseers, to feed the Church
of God, which he has purchased with his own blood. Romans 8.32. He that spared
not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how should he not with him
freely give us all things? Ephesians. 5.25. Husbands love your wives even as Christ
loved the Church, and gave himself for it. Apoc. 5.9.10. And they sang a new
song, saying; thou art worthy to take the book, and to open the seals
thereof, for thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God out of every
kindred, tongue, and people, and nation, and has made us unto our God Kings
and Priests, and we shall reign on the earth. Col. 1.27. To whom God would
make known what is the riches of the glory of this mystery among the Gentills
which is Christ in you the hope of glory. Ephesians. 2.7. That in ages to come he
might show the exceeding riches of his grace, in his kindness toward us
through Christ Jesus.

Fifthly.
WE believe that the Church which has been redeemed by the precious blood of
our Lord and Master, that she has received the spirit of Adoption, Glory,
Sanctification and obsignation: to the intent that she might be absolutely
assured of everlasting glory of God the Father, the precious riches of grace in
Jesus Christ, and the promises which are in Christ yea and Amen. Unto the
praise and glory of the Father. Romans 5.2. By whom also we have access by faith
into this grace, wherein we stand and rejoice in hope of the glory of God. 1
Cor. 1.30. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus who of God is made unto us
wisdom, and righteousness, and Sanctification and Redemption. 2 Cor. 1.20.
For all the promises of God in him are yea, and in him Amen unto the glory of
God by us.

Sixthly.
WE believe that Jesus Christ having paid an Eternal price and ransom to his
Father in the behalf of his Church and peculiar, therefore the price in it
self being eternal, infinite and unmeasurable, does comprehend in it self a
remedy for the miseries of All mankind whatsoever. Mat. 20.28. Even as the
son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to mimister, and to give a
ransom his life for many. 1. Tim. 2.6. Who gave himself a ransom for all to
be testified in due time.

Seventhly.
WE believe that the Gospel of Jesus Christ is a Gospel universal, and is to
be preached, amongst all creatures whatsoever: to the intent that the Father of
eternal love and mercy might single out his people out of the world, show
forth the dignity of his own Son, manifest the marvilous riches of his own
glory, and leave the Creature without excuse. Mat. 28.19. Go ye therefore and
teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost. Col. 1.23. If ye continue in the faith, grounded and
settled and be not moved away from the hope of the Gospel which ye have heard,
and which was preached to every creature which is under heaven: whereof I am
made a Minister. Ephesians. 2.12. That at that time ye are without Christ, being
Aliens from the common wealth of Israel, and strangers from the Covenant of
grace, having no hope. And without God in the world. 1 John 5.10. He that
believes me the son of God, has the witness in himself, he that believes
not God, has made him a lier, because he believes not the record that God
gave of his Son. John 3.18.19. He that believes one him, is not condemned,
but he that believes not is condemned already, because he has not believed
in the name of the only begotten son of God. And this is the condemnation that
light is come into the world, and men loved darkness more then light, because
their deeds were evil.

Eighthly.
WE believe that the Church being called by the word of life and salvation to
participate of the glorious riches of Christ, is bound by an everlasting bond
of love, and favor to yield all loyal obedience and subjection to Jesus
Christ her Lord and Master. 1 Cor. 1.9. God is faithful, by whom ye were
called unto the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Romans 12.1, 2. I
beseech you therefore brethren by the mercies of God, that ye present your
bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God which is your reasonable
sacrifice, and be not conformed to this world, but be transformed by the
renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is that good and acceptable and
perfect will of God.

Ninthly.
WE believe that the Church of Jesus Christ is presented glorious in the
sight of God her heavenly Father through union with Jesus Christ, and her
interest in her royal robes of righteousness. Phil. 3.9. And being found in
him, not having mine own righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is
thorough the faith of Christ: the righteousness which is of God by faith. Isay
61.10. I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my God,
for he has clothed me with he garments of Salvation, he has covered me
with the robe of righteousness as a bridegrorme decketh himself with
ornaments, and as a bride adorneth her self with her Jewels.

Tenthly.
WE believe that neither sin, the Law, nor Justice is any cause of her
chastisement; only the free and dear love of her dear Father; to the end
that he might teach her the way to glory, weaken the power of the flesh, and
make her live by faith and love before him all her days. Heb. 12.6. For whom
the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges every son whom he receives.
Apoc. 3.19. As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten, be zealous therefore and
repent. Psalm. 119.6, 7. Then shall I not be ashamed, when I shall have respect
to all thy commandments: I will praise thee with uprightness of heart, when I
shall have learned thy righteous judgments. 2 Cor. 12.7. And least I should be
exalted above measure through the abundance of revelations, there was given to
me a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet me, least I should
exalted above measure. 1 Pet. 1.6, 7. wherein ye greatly rejoice, though now
for a season if need be ye are in heaviness through manifold temptations,
that the trial of your faith being much more precious then of gold that
perishes, though it be tried with fire, might be found unto praise, and
honor, and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ.

Eleventh.
WE believe that although her God and father is in every place, and beholds all
things, and by consequence sees sin as it is in the flesh: not withstanding,
having presented her just by the act of Reconciliation through the blood of the
Son of God. Justified her through the none imputation of iniquity, and made
her stand in Christ for ever through union with him; hence she stands in his
sight for ever without spot or wrinckle. Heb. 4.13. Neither is there any
creature that is not manifest in his sight, but all things are naked and open
unto him with whom we have to do. 2 Cor. 5.17. Therefore if any man be in
Christ, he is a new creature. Old things things are past away, behold all
things are become new. Col. 1.22. In the body of his flesh through death, to
present you holy, and unblamable, and unreproveable in his sight. Ephesians. 5.27.
That he might present to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinckle or any such thing, but that it should be holy and without blemish.

Twelfe.
WE believe, that though in the days of Adam we with Adam stood under the old
Covenant; yet that Covenant is wholly abolished, and that now enjoying the law
of faith, mercy and peace; we stand for ever under that covenant which has
been proposed in Christ, hence it comes to pass, that we are freed absolutely
from the law of sin and death, and are brought under the Law of freedom and
life. Jer. 31.32.33. Not according to the Covenant that I made with their
Fathers in the day when I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land
of Egypt, which Covenant they brake, although I was a husband unto them says
the Lord. But this shall be the Covenant that I will make with the house of
Israel after those days says the Lord, I will put my law in their inward
parts, and write it in their hearts, and I will be their God, and they shall be
my people. Heb. 8.6. But now has he obtained a more excellent ministry, by how
much also he is the Mediator of a better Covenant which was established upon
better promises. Romans 8.2. For the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus
has made me free from the law of sin and death.

Thirteenth.
WE believe that the Saints are to be a dear, a tender, and a loving people,
from the love that is given them in and through Jesus Christ, and are bound to
walk in the bond of Love, to the intent that they may show themselves children
of light, hold forth the love of Jesus Christ, and the glory of God their
heavenly and dearest Father. John. 15.12. This is my Commandment that ye love
one another as I have loved you. John 17.22. And the glory which thou gave
me, I have given them that they may be one; even as we are one.

Fourteenth.
WE believe that the expressions of this love stands not only in in the
communion of gifts, but also of goods, insomuch that is it possible they are to
live in one body as one common wealth; nothing differing from the state of the
Churches in the City of Jerusalem. Acts 2.44, 45. And they that believed were
together, and had althings common, and sold their possessions and goods, and
parted them to all men as every man had need.

Fifteenth.
THe Saints are to be a quiet peaceable and loving people, since they are of the
Kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ, God has called them to peace, having
given them a command to have peace with all, and love toward all men. And he
shall judge among the nations, and shall rebuke many people, and they shall
beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruning hooks,
Nation shall not lift up swords against Nation, neither shall they learn war
any more. Isay 65.25. The Wolf and the Lamb shall feed together, and the
Lion shall eat straw like the bullock, and dust shall be the serpents meat,
they shall not hurt nor destroy in all my mountains says the Lord. Apoc.
13.10. He that leads into captivity shall go into captivity, he that kills
with the sword, must be killed with the sword; Here is the patience and the
faith of the Saints. Apoc. 12.11. And they overcame him by the blood of the
Lamb, and by the word of their testimony, and they loved not their lives unto
the death.

Sixteenth.
WE believe that those that are to enter into a Churches estate, are to make
known to the Church their experience of the Spirit and faith in Jesus Christ,
insomuch that none are to be admitted into a Churches state but such as are
cordial in their faith, and experementall through communion with the Lord
Jesus. Acts 8.37. And Philip said, if thou beleevest with all thine heart, thou
may, and he answered and said, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of
God. Acts 10.47. Can any man forbid water, that these should not be baptized
which have received the holy Ghost as well as we. Acts 9.26, 27. And when Saul
was come to Jerusalem, he assayed to join himself unto the Disciples, but
they were all afraid of him, and believed not that he was a Disciple, but
Barnabas took him and brought him to the Apostles, and declared unto them how
he had seen thk Lord in the way, and that he had spoken to him, and how he
had preached boldly at Damascus in the name of Jesus, etc.

Seventeenth.
WE understand that although their ought to be an especial love of the
Saints one toward another, notwithstanding, they are to show themselves
loving, courteous, and gentle to all that are without; not reproaching but
praising, praying and blessing God for all that hate them. Mat. 5.44, 45, 46.
But I say unto you, love your Enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to
them that hate you, and pray for them which dispitefully use you, and persecute
you. That ye may be the children of your Father which is in Heaven: for he
makes his Sun to rise on the evil, and on the good, and sends rain on the
just, and on the unjust. For if ye love them which love you, what reward have
ye? Do not even the Publicans the same?

FINIS.
TRust ye not in a friend, put ye not confidence in a guide: keep the doors
of thy mouth from her that lies in thy bosom. Therefore I will look unto the
Lord: I will wait for the God of my salvation, my God will hear me. Isa.
50.6, 7. I gave my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to them that plucked
off the hair: I hid not my face from shame and spitting. For the Lord will
help me, therefore shall I not be confounded: therefore have I set my face
like a flint, and I know that I shall not be ashamed.

WE judge no man. If any man is contrary minded, God shall reveal it
according to his Divine Love and rarest Mercy in the beloved.


