A PROPOSAL Humbly offered to the PARLIAMENT, For suppressing of POPERY.
Right Honorable,
TO you who are not only the principal Patriots of your Country, but the sole
Protectors of our lives and fortunes, under (Almighty God and our most Gracious
Sovereign now reigning) whom, God of his goodness preserve and protect in
health and prosperity, spite of all Romish Treasons whatsoever. At your feet
(Right Honorable) these subsequent Proposals are humbly laid, with that due
reverence and humility as is due to so great an Assembly; and with an integrity
every way equivolent to the justness and equity of the present Case, now
depending betwixt the inhuman Blood-thirsty Romanists (for Catholics I dare
not presume to call them) and the honest, loyal, well meaning, and truly
faithful Protestants in England. But by the way, let us request your Honors
not to misconstrue the method of our proceeding, since we do not desire to
render the Papists odious; could we our selves secure our own safety, we have
that candid construction-for them, which, possibly, they never deserved, nor
ever may, I pray God we may be mistaken: we design no tumults, nor will spit
out any frothy language, that may encourage any so to do, since this is our
principle, to beseech your Honors for redress, which if your Honors do, we
shall be beyond measure thankful; if not, we are confident Almighty God will
protect us.

We need not inform your Honors of the prodigious growth of Popery, or the
dismal effects thereby occasioned, former experience has sufficiently
convinced us of their hellish designs; and that the same things (and woeful
Tragedies) may be acted again, we have as great reason to fear, as your Honors
to prevent. In a word, your Honors are humbly desired to take these few
following proposals into consideration, as you tender the welfare, not only of
your King and Country, but consequently of your selves.

Setting aside the Succession to the Crown (a thing not fit for inferior
subjects to intermeddle withal) which we shall leave, Let us humbly request,
with your Honors leave and permission, these few things following. viz.

First, Unity; That what God has not set up in his Church may be pulled down,
and those things taken out of the way which have been (and possibly may be)
always bones of contention amongst persons truly learned and pious: For
certainly, it can neither be prejudicial to the Church, to yield in those
things which Dissenters account sinful, and which the Church it self calls but
indifferent; and therefore no more than chips in Porridg, not worth contending
for. This, your Honors know, is the ready way to unite all in affection, and
what the consequence will produce, your Honors are best able to conceive,
especially when Popery is so prevalent, and their faction so potent amongst us,
as now it is.

Your Honors are not unsensible of what great concern Unity will be amongst
us, and chiefly that of Religion; in which respect (with your Honors
approbation) we humbly conceive, with all modesty be it spoken, no more
probable course can be propounded than the aforegoing Proposal, which doubtless
with His Majesty's consent, may be happily effected to the eternal glory of the
Nation.

This main (and indeed chief) business being obtained, we with your Honors
permission further request,

That in respect the bringing in, and introducing of Popery, will in all
probability, not only put a period to our fortunes, but our lives to boot (for
Fire and Faggot will never be forgotten as long as a true English Protestant
survives) we therefore, on our bended Knees, supplicate your Honors, That
Smithfield may never appear in Flames, except on the Fifth day of November
Annually. Your Honors know it is an old Proverb no less usual than useful,
That the burnt Child dreads the Fire; and it now alone lies in your bosom to
prevent, what we with dread fear, though we hope God Almighty will never suffer
our Enemies to effect.

To induce your Honors to so pious a deed, we need urge no further Arguments
than the infallible losing your own Estates and Fortunes; for the Cannon-Law of
the Church of Rome absolutely determines, That not only a private person, but a
Prince, being a Heretic (as they term all Protestants, without exception, to
be) incurs by his default, Caput Vergentis, de Hereticus, in a General Council.
Crimen lesae Majestatis divinis, as their own Authors affirm, whereupon it is
no more sin to kill such a Heretical Prince than a Dog, as well as confiscate
his Estate: And if Princes are thus served, what must their Subjects expect?

Multitudes of the like decrees I could mention unto your Honors, but I
suppose your Honors are not ignorant in this case, what your selves, as well
as we must depend on, if ever such blood-thirsty Villains get the upper hand,
which God forbid. We therefore humbly request your Honors, by the kindness you
have for your selves and peculiar Families, as well as the whole Nation, that
you would herein gratify our humble and modest request.

Your Honors are not ignorant of what an eminent Divine told us of late, viz.
That those persons who already had the impudence to deny a Popish Plot, would
never boggle to effect their Treason upon the first opportunity that offers.
And since His Majesty's life (which we value insinitely beyond our own private
concerns) stands on so ticklish a point, as to be in a manner subject to the
blood-thirsty Sword of every daring Russian, we have the greatest reason in the
World to beseech your Honors to take a timely care to prevent so eminent a
mischief, which, for ought we know, will not only ruin us, but strike a great
blow toward the utter subvertion of all the Protestants in Europe.

And now let us humbly request your Honors, to consider, whether any thing can
possibly be fitter propounded for the present times, at this season, than what
is here humbly laid at your feet, viz. The strengthening of the Nation at home
by a perfect and entire union amongst our selves, and suppressing all
appearances of Popery, a name which makes all loyal English Protestants
tremble. This may it please your Honors, is humbly offered you for your
serious perusal, in behalf of all Loyal Protestants; by a

Loyal Subject to the King, and a faithful Servant to his Countries interest J.
B.

Printed, and are to be Sold by Richard Janeway in Queens head Alley in
Paternoster Row. 1680.


